MISS FEEEIEE'S NOVELS 



" I write but of familiar stuffe, 
Because my stile is lowe ; 
I fear to wade in weightie works, 
Or past my reach to rowe." 

Gbobge Tubbebville. 




THE INHEEITANGE 



BY THE AUTHOR OF "MAERIAGE" 



"Si la noblesse est vertu, elle se perd par tout ce qui n'est ] 
vertueux ; et si elle n'est pas vertu, c'est peu de chose." 

La BBUYfiRE. 



dBtiinbuxQl! ffitfitton 







IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOLUME L 



LONDON 
RICHARD BENTLEY & SON 

^ubltsl^etg in ©rtJinarg to "^zx iWajestg t]^e <J|ueen 

1882 



PR. 

I/./ 



Printed by R, & R. Clark, Edinburgh. 



THE INHERITANCE. 



CHAPTER I. 

" strange is it, that our bloods 
Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together, 
Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off 
In differences so mighty." 

AlVs Well that Ends Well. 

It is a truth, universally acknowledged, that there is 
no passion so deeply rooted in human nature as that 
of pride. Whether of self or of family, of deeds done 
in our own bodies, or deeds done in the bodies of 
those who lived hundreds of years before us— all find 
some foundation on which to build their Tower of 
Babel. Even the dark uncertain future becomes a 
bright field of promise to the eye of pride, which, like 
Banquo's bloody ghost, can smile even upon the dim 
perspective of posthumous greatness. 

As the noblest attribute of man, family pride had 
been cherished time immemorial by the noble race of 
Rossville. Deep and incurable, therefore, was the 
wound inflicted on all its members by the marriage of 

VOL. I. B 



2 THE INHERITANCE. 

the Honourable Thomas St. Clair, youngest son of the 
Earl of Rossville, with the humble Miss Sarah Black, 
a beautiful girl of obscure origin and no fortune. In 
such an union there was everything to exasperate, 
nothing to mollify, the outraged feelings of the Ross- 
ville family, for youth and beauty were all that Mrs. 
St. Clair had to oppose to pride and ambition. The 
usual consequences, therefore, were such as always 
have, and probably always will, accompany unequal 
alliances, viz. the displeasure of friends, the want of 
fortune, the world's dread laugh, and, in short, all the 
thousand natural ills that flesh is heir to when it fails 
in its allegiance to blood. Yet there are minds fitted 
to encounter and to overcome even these — minds 
possessed of that inherent nobility which regard 
honour as something more than a mere hereditary 
name, and which seek the nobler distinction, open to 
all, in the career of some honourable profession. But 
Mr. St. Clair's mind was endowed with no such 
powers; for he was a man of weak intellects and 
indolent habits, with just enough of feeling to wish 
to screen himself from the poverty and contempt his 
marriage had brought upon him. After hanging on 
for some time in hopes of a reconciliation with his 
family, and finding all attempts in vain, he at length 
consented to banish himself, and the object of their 
contumely, to some remote quarter of the world, upon 
condition of receiving a suitable allowance so long as 
they should remain abroad. The unfortunate pair, 
thus doomed to unwilling exile, therefore retired to 



THE INHERITANCE. 3 

France, where Mr. St. Clair's mind soon settled into 
that state which acquires its name from the character 
of its possessor, and, according to that, is called forti- 
tude, resignation, contentment, or stupidity. There, 
too, they soon sunk into that oblivion which is some- 
times the portion of the living as well as the dead. 
His father's death, which happened some years after, 
made no alteration in his circumstances. The patri- 
mony to which he expected to succeed was settled on 
his children, should he have any, and a slender life 
annuity was his only portion. 

The natural wish of every human being, the weak- 
est as well as the wisest, seems to be, to leave some 
memorial of themselves to posterity — something, if 
but to tell how their fathers thought or fought, at 
least to show how they talked or walked. This 
wish Mr. and Mrs. St Clair possessed in common 
with others ; but year after year passed away, 
and it still remained ungratified, while every year it 
became a still stronger sentiment, as death seemed 
gradually clearing the way to the succession. At the 
time of his marriage Mr. St. Clair had been the 
youngest of five sons ; but three of his brothers had 
fallen victims to war or pestilence, and there now 
only remained the present Earl and himself, both 
ahke childless. 

At length, when hope was almost extinct, Mrs. St. 
Clair annoimced herself to be in the way of becoming 
a mother, and the emigrants resolved upon returning 
to their native land, that their child might there first 



4 THE INHERITANCE. 

see the light. Previous to taking this step, however, 
the important intelligence was communicated to Lord 
Rossville, and also their intention of immediately 
proceeding to Scotland, if agreeable to him; at the 
same time expressing a wish that he would favour 
them with his advice and opinion, as they would be 
entirely guided by him in their plans. 

Lord Rossville was a man who liked to be con- 
sulted, and to overturn every plan which he himself 
had not arranged; and as Mr. St. Clair had spoken 
of taking shipping from Bordeaux, where they then 
were, and so going by sea to Scotland, Lord Rossville, 
in his answer, expressed his decided disapprobation of 
such a scheme, in Mrs. St. Clair's situation, and in 
stormy winter weather. But he enclosed a route by 
way of Paris, which he had made out for them with 
his own hand, and directed them, upon their arrival 
there, to signify the same to him, and there to remain 
until he had resolved upon what was next to be done, 
as he had by no means made up his mind as to the 
propriety, or at least the necessity, of their returning 
to Scotland. The packet also contained an order for 
a sum of money, and letters to some friends of his 
own at Paris, who would be of service to Mrs. St. 
Clair. So far, all was kind and conciliating, and the 
exiles, after much delay, set forth upon their journey, 
according to the rules prescribed by the Earl; but, 
within a day's journey of Paris, Mrs. St. Clair was 
taken prematurely ill, and there, at an obscure village, 
gave birth to a daughter, which, as Mr. St. Clair 



THE INHERITANCE. 5 

sensibly remarked, though not so good as a boy, was 
yet better than nothing at all. As the Salique law 
was not in force in the Rossville family, the sex of 
the child was, indeed, a matter of little consequence, 
save in the eyes of those sturdy sticklers for man's 
supremacy. Its health and strength were, therefore, 
the chief objects of consideration, and, although boi'n 
in the seventh month, it was a remarkably fine thriving 
baby, which Mrs. St. Clair, contrary to the common 
practice of mothers, ascribed entirely to the excellence 
of its nurse. 

They had been fortunate enough to meet with a 
woman of a superior class, who, having recently lost 
her husband and her o^vn infant, had readily adopted 
this one, and as readily transferred to it that abundant 
stock of love and tenderness which those dealers in 
the milk of human kindness always have so freely 
to bestow on their nursling for the time. Mrs. St. 
Clair's recovery was tedious, and her general health 
she declared to be so much impaired that she could 
not think of encountering the severity of a northern 
climate. Instead of prosecuting their journey, there- 
fore, they retired to the south of France, and, after 
moving about for some time, finally settled there. 
This was not what the Earl had intended, for, 
although pride still opposed his brother's return to 
Scotland, he had, at the same time, wished to have 
the family somewhere within the sphere of his obser- 
vation and control — the more especially as, having 
lately separated from his lady, his brother's child 



6 THE INHERITANCE. 

might now be regarded as presumptive heiress to the 
family honours. He had purposed, and indeed 
pressed, to have the little Gertrude transmitted to 
him, that she might have the advantage of being 
trained up under his own eye, but to this Mrs. St 
Clair would not consent. She declared, in the most 
polite but decided manner, her determination never 
to part with her child, but promised that, as soon as 
her health was sufficiently re-established, they would 
return to Britain, and that Lord Eossville should have 
the direction and superintendence, if he pleased, of 
the young heiress's education. But some obstacle, 
real or pretended, always arose to prevent the accom- 
phshment of this plan, till, at length, Mr. St. Clair 
was struck with a palsy, which rendered it impos- 
sible for him to be removed. Dead to all the pur- 
poses of life, he lingered on for several years, one 
of those melancholy mementoes, who, with a human 
voice and human shape, have survived everything 
human besides. 

At length death claimed him as his own, and his 
widow lost no time in announcing the event to the 
Earl, and in craving his advice and protection for 
herself and daughter. A very polite, though long- 
winded, reply was received from Lord Eossville, in 
which he directed that Mrs. and Miss St. Clair should 
immediately repair to Eossville Castle, there to remain 
until he should have had time and opportunity fully 
to digest the plans he had formed for the pupillage of 
his niece. This invitation was too advantageous to 



THE INHEKITANCE. 7 

be refused, even although the terms in which it was 
couched were not very alluring either to the mother 
or daughter. With a mixture of pleasure and regret, 
they therefore hastened to exchange the gay vine- 
yards and bright suns of France for the bleak hills 
and frowning skies of Scotland. 



CHAPTER II. 

' ' Hope well to have, hate not past thought ; 
For cruel storms fair calms have brought : 
After sharp showers the sun shines fair, 
Hope comes likewise after despair." 

RrcHARu Alison. 

Many years had elapsed since Mrs. St. Clair had left 
her native land, and those who had known her then 
could scarcely have recognised her now, so completely 
had the tout ensemble changed its character. The 
blooming hoyden, with her awkward habits and pro- 
vincial dialect, had been gradually transformed into 
the beautiful woman, graceful in her movements, and 
polished, though elaborate in her manners. Though 
noAv long past her meridian, she was still handsome, 
and to superficial observers could be caj^tivating ; but 
the change was merely outward, proceeding from no 
innate delicacy of thought or ennobling principle of 
action. It Avas solely the result of nice tact, knowledge 
of the world, and long intercourse with foreigners. 
The mind remained the same, although the matter 
had been modified. 

In her early days her pride and ambition had been 
excited by making what was considered a splendid 



THE INHERITANCE. 9 

alliance, and it was not till her understanding was 
thoroughly rij)ened that she made the mortifying 
discovery that high birth, when coupled with personal 
insignificance, adds no more to real distinction than a 
flaming sign does to an ill-kept inn. It was this dis- 
appointment which, operating on a naturally proud 
and violent temper, had brought into play all the 
worst qualities of her nature, and made her look upon 
the world as indeed a stage, where all the men and 
women were merely players. To act a grand and 
conspicuous part, and regain the station her husband's 
pusillanimity had lost, was therefore now her sole aim. 
It rarely happens that one artificial mind can suc- 
ceed in forming another — we seldom imitate what we 
do not love. There is something in human nature 
which recoils from an artificial character even more 
than from a faulty one, and where the attempt fails, 
the revulsion generally produces a character of a 
totally different stamp. Mrs. St. Clair had spared no 
pains to render her daughter as great an adept in dis- 
simulation as she was herself ; but all her endeavours 
had proved unsuccessful, and Miss St. Clair remained 
pretty much as nature had formed her — a mixture of 
wheat and tares, flowers and weeds. There existed 
no sort of sympathy or congeniality of mind between 
the mother and daughter — there seemed little even of 
that natural affection which often supplies the want 
of kindred feeling, or similar tastes, and which serves 
to bind together hearts which no human process ever 
could have brought to amalgamate. Without any 



10 THE INHERITANCE. 

point of resemblance in their characters or ideas, there 
was consequently little interchange of thought, and 
when Gertrude did address her mother, it was more 
from the overflowings of an open heart and buoyant 
spirits than from any reciprocity of feeling. 

"How I wish I had Prince Houssain's glass," ex- 
claimed she, as they drew near the borders of Scotland, 
" that I might take a peep at the people I am going 
amongst — a single glance would suffice to give me 
some idea of them, or, at least, to show whether they 
are the sort of persons it will be possible for me to 
love." 

" You have formed very high and somewhat pre- 
sumptuous ideas of your own powers of discrimination, 
it seems," said Mrs. St. Clair, with a disdainful smile ; 
" but I should humbly conceive that my knowledge 
and experience might prove almost as useful as your 
own observations or theories are likely to do." 

" I beg your pardon, mamma, but I did not know 
you had been acquainted with the Kossville family." 

" I am not personally acquanted with any of them 
— I never was — I never would have been, but for 
you ; it is upon your account I now stoop to a recon- 
ciliation, which otherwise I would have spumed as I 
have been spurned." She spoke with vehemence, 
then in a calmer tone proceeded : " It is natural that 
you should vnsh to know something of the relations 
you are going amongst, since there is nothing more 
desirable than a previous knowledge of those whom 
it is necessary we should please. But it is only from 



THE INHERITANCE, 11 

report I can speak of the Rossville family, though 
even from report we may form a tolerably accurate idea 
of people's general character. Report, then, says that 
Lord Rossville is an obstinate, troublesome, tiresome, 
well-behaved man ; that his sister, Lady Betty, who 
resides with him, is a harmless, dull, inquisitive old 
woman ; then there are nephews, sister's sons, to one 
of whom you are probably destined; there is Mr. 
Delmour, a weak, formal parliamentary drudge, son 
of Lord Somebody Delmour, and nephew to the Duke 
of Burlington, and his brother, Colonel Delmour, a 
fashionable, unprincipled gamester ; and Mr. Lyndsay, 
a sort of quakerish, methodistical, sombre person — all, 
of course, brimful of pride and prejudice. Neverthe- 
less, beware how you contradict prejudices, even 
knowing them to be such, for the generality of people 
are much more tenacious of their prejudices than of 
anything belonging to them; and should you hear 
them run out in raptures at such a prospect as this" — 
pointing to the long bleak line of Scottish coast — "even 
this you too must admire; even this cold shrubless 
tract of bare earth and stone walls, and yon dark 
stormy sea, you will perhaps be told (and you must 
assent), are fairer than the lilied fields and limpid 
waters of Languedoc." 

Miss St. Clair remained silent for a few moments 
contemplating the scene before her ; at last she said, 
"Indeed, mamma, I do think there is something fine 
in such a scene as this, although I can scarcely tell in 
what the charm consists, or why it should be more 



12 THE INHERITANCE. 

deeply felt than scenes of greater beauty and grandeur ; 
but there seems to me something so simple and majestic 
in such an expanse of mere earth and water, that I feel 
as if I were looking on nature at the beginning of the 
creation, when only the sea and the dry land had been 
formed." 

"Kather after the fall, methinks," said Mrs. St. 
Clair, with a bitter smile, as she drew her cloak round 
her ; " at least, I feel at present much more as if I had 
been expelled from Paradise than as if I were enter- 
ing it." 

The scene was indeed a dreary one, though calcu- 
lated to excite emotions in the mind true to nature 
in all her varied aspects ; and more especially in the 
youthful heart, where novelty alone possesses a charm 
sufficient to call forth its admiration. The dark 
lead -coloured ocean lay stretched before them, its 
dreary expanse concealed by lowering clouds, while 
the sea-fowl clamouring in crowds to the shore an- 
nounced the coming storm. The yet unclothed fields 
were black with crows, whose discordant cries mingled 
with the heavy monotonous sound of the waves as 
they advanced with sullen roar and broke with idle 
splash. A thick mist was gradually spreading over 
every object — an indescribable shivering was felt by 
every human thing which had bones and skin to feel 
— in short, it was an east wind ; and the effect of an 
east wind upon the east coast of Scotland may have 
been experienced but cannot be described. 

"This is dreadful!" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, as 



THE INHERITANCE. 13 

her teeth chattered in her head, and her skin began 
to rise into what is vulgarly termed goose-skin. 

"You do look ill, mamma — you are quite a pale 
blue, and I certainly feel as I never did before ;" and 
Miss St. Clair pulled up the windows, and wrapped 
her roquelaire still closer. The French valet and 
abigail, who sat on the dicky, looked round with 
pitiful faces, as though to ask, '^Qu'est-ce que cela?" 
Even the postilion seemed affected in the same 
manner, for, stopping his horses, he drew forth a 
ponderous many-caped greatcoat, and buttoning it 
up to his nose, with a look that bade defiance to the 
weather, he pursued his route. The air grew colder 
and colder ; the mist became thicker and thicker ; 
the shrieks of the sea-fowl louder and louder ; till a 
tremendous hail shower burst forth, and dashed with 
threatening violence against the windows of the car- 
riage. The undaunted driver was compelled to bend 
his purple face beneath its pitiless pelting, while he 
urged his horses as if to escape from its influence. 

"This is Scotland, and this is the month of May !" 
exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, with a groan, as she looked 
on the whitened fields, and her thoughts recurred to 
the smiling skies and balmy vernal airs of Languedoc. 

" Scotland has given us rather a rude welcome, I 
must confess," said her daughter; "but, happily, I 
am not superstitious ; and, see ! it is beginning to 
smile upon us already," 

In a fcAv minutes the clouds rolled away ; the sun 
burst forth in all his warmth and brilliancy; the 



14 THE INHERITANCE. 

tender wheat glittered in the moisture ; the lark flew 
exulting aloft ; the sea-fowl spread their white wings, 
and skimmed over the blue waters ; the postilion 
slackened his pace and put off his greatcoat : such 
is Scotland's varying clime — such its varying scenery .' 



CHAPTER IIL 

' ' My father's house ! 

Send me not thence 

Dishonour' d, but to wealth, to greatness rais'd." 

Sophocles. 

It was on a lovely evening that the travellers reached 
their destination near the western coast of Scotland. 
The air was soft, and the setting sun shed his purple 
light on the mountains which formed the background 
of the Rossville domains. The approach wound along 
the side of a river which possessed all the character- 
istic variety of a Scottish stream — now gliding silently 
along, or seeming to stand motionless in the crystal 
depth of some shaded pool, now chafing and gurghng, 
with lulling sound, over its pebbly bed ; while its steep 
banks presented no less changing features. In some 
places they were covered with wood, now in the first 
tints of spring — the formal poplar's pale hue and the 
fringed larch's tender green mingling with the red 
seared leaf of the oak and the brown opening bud of 
the sycamore. In others, gray rocks peeped from 
amidst the lichens and creeping plants which covered 
them as with a garment of many colours, and the 
wild rose decked them with its transient blossoms. 
Farther on the banks became less precipitous, and 



16 THE INHERITANCE. 

gradually sank into a gentle slope, covered with 
smooth green turf, and sprinkled with trees of noble 
size. The only sounds that mingled with the rush of 
the stream were the rich full song of the blackbird, 
the plaintive murmur of the wood pigeon, and the 
abrupt but not unmusical note of the cuckoo. Ger- 
trude gazed with ecstasy on all around, and her heart 
swelled with delight as she thought this fair scene 
she was destined to inherit; and a vague poetical 
feeling of love and gratitude to Heaven caused her to 
raise her eyes, swimming in tearful rapture, to the 
, Giver of all good. But it was merely the overflowing 
of a young, enraptured, and enthusiastic mind ; no 
deeper principle was felt or understood — no trembling 
mingled with her joy— no dark future cast its shadow 
on the mirror imagination presented to her; but visions 
of pomp and power, and wealth and grandeur — visions 
of earthly bliss — swam before those eyes which yet 
were raised from earth to heaven. She was roused 
from her reverie by a deep sigh, or rather groan, from 
her mother, who leant back in the carriage, seemingly 
overcome by some painful sensation either of mind or 
body. Miss St. Clair was accustomed to hear her 
mother sigh, and even groan, upon very slight occa- 
sions, sometimes upon no occasion at all ; but, at pre- 
sent, there was something that betokened an intensity 
of suifering too sincere for feigning. 

" You are ill, mamma ! " exclaimed she, in terror, 
as she looked on her mother's pale and agitated coun- 
tenance. 



THE INHERITANCE. 17 

It was some moments ere Mrs. St, Clair could find 
voice to answer ; but at length, in much emotion, she 
said — 

" Is it surprising that I should feel at approaching 
that house from which my husband and myself were 
exiled — nay, were even denied an entrance? Can 
you imagine that I should be unmoved at the thoughts 
of beholding that family by whom we were rendered 
outcasts, and whom I have only known as my bitterest 
enemies V 

Mrs. St. Clair's voice and her colour both rose as 
she enumerated her injuries. 

" Oh ! mamma, do not at such a time suffer your 
mind to dwell upon those painful recollections ; it is 
natural that melancholy thoughts should suggest them- 
selves : but ah ! there is the castle," cried the 

young heiress, forgetting all her mother's wrongs as 
the stately mansion now burst upon their view ; and 
again her heart exulted as she looked on its lofty 
turrets and long range of arched windows glittering 
in the golden rays of the setting sun. In another 
moment they found themselves at the entrance; a 
train of richly-liveried servants were stationed to re- 
ceive them. Mrs. St. Clair's agitation increased ; she 
stopped and leant upon her daughter, who feared she 
would have fainted; but making an effort, she followed 
the servant, who led the way to the presence of his 
Lord, when, quickly recovering her self-possession, 
she advanced, and gracefully presented her daughter, 
saying — 

VOL. I. n 

/' 



18 THE INHERITANCE. 

" To your Lordship's generous protection I commit 
my fatherless child." 

Lord Eossville was a bulky, portentous -looking 
person, Avith nothing marked in his physiognomy 
except a pair of very black, elevated eyebrows, which 
gave an unvarying expression of solemn astonishment 
to his countenance. He had a husky voice, and a 
very tedious elocution. He was some little time of 
preparing an answer to this address, but at last he 
replied, — 

"I shall, rest assured, madam, make a point of 
fulfilling, to the utmost of my power and abilities, the 
highly-important duties of the parental office." 

He then saluted his sister-in-law and niece, and 
taking a hand of each, led them to a tall, thin, gray old 
woman, with a long, inquisitive-looking nose, whom 
he named as Lady Betty St. Clair. 

Lady Betty rose from her seat with that sort of 
deliberate bustle which generally attends the rising 
up and the sitting down of old ladies, and may be 
intended to show that it is not an everyday affair 
with them to practise such condescension. Having 
taken off her spectacles. Lady Betty carefully deposited 
them within a large work-basket, out of which pro- 
truded a tiger's head in worsted-work, and a volume 
of a novel. She next lifted a cambric handkerchief 
from off a fat sleepy lap-dog which lay upon her 
knees, and deposited it on a cushion at her feet. She 
then put aside a small fly-table, which stood before 
her as a sort of out-work, and thus freed from all 



THE INHERITANCE. 19 

impediments, welcomed her guests, and after regard- 
ing them with looks only expressive of stupid curiosity, 
she motioned to them to be seated, and replaced her- 
self with even greater commotion than she had risen 
up. Such a reception was not calculated to call forth 
feelings of the most pleasurable kind, and Gertrude 
felt chilled at manners so different from the bland 
courtesy to which she had been accustomed, and her 
heart sank at the thoughts of being domesticated with 
people who appeared so dull and unpleasing. The 
very apartment seemed to partake of the character of 
its inmates ; it had neither the solid magnificence of 
ancient times, nor the elegant luxury of the present 
age ; neither was there any of the grotesque orna- 
ments of antiquity, nor the amusing litter of fashion- 
able baubles for the eye to have recourse to. Lady 
Betty's huge work-basket was the only indication that 
the apartment was inhabited ; an air of stiff propriety 
— of splendid discomfort — reigned throughout. 

The usual, and more than the usual, questions were 
put by the Earl and his sister, as to time and distance, 
and roads and drivers, and inns and beds, and weather 
and dust ; and all were answered by Mrs. St. Clair in 
the manner most calculated to conciliate those with 
whom she conversed ; till, in the course of half-an- 
hour. Lord Eossville was of opinion that she was one 
of the best-bred, best -informed, most sensible, lady- 
like women he had ever conversed with — and his 
Lordship was not a person who was apt to form hasty 
opinions upon any subject. 



20 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lord Eossville's character was one of those whose 
traits, though minute, are as strongly marked as 
though they had been cast in a large mould. But, 
as not even the powers of the microscope can impart 
strength and beauty to the object it magnifies, so no 
biographer could have exaggerated into virtues the 
petty foibles of his mind. Yet the predominating 
qualities were such as often cast a false glory around 
their possessor — for the love of power and the desire 
of human applause were the engrossing principles of 
his soul. In strong, capacious minds, and in great 
situations, these incentives often produce brilliant 
results ; but in a weak, contracted mind, moving in 
the narrow sphere of domestic life, they could only 
circulate through the thousand little channels that 
tend to increase or impair domestic happiness. As 
he was not addicted to any particular vice, he con- 
sidered himself as a man of perfect virtue ; and 
having been, in some respects, very prosperous in his 
fortune, he was thoroughly satisfied that he was a 
person of the most consummate wisdom. With these 
ideas of himself, it is not surprising that he should 
have deemed it his bounden duty to direct and 
manage every man, woman, child, or animal who 
came within his sphere, and that, too, in the most 
tedious and tormenting manner. Perhaps the most 
teasing point in his character was his ambition — the 
fatal ambition of thousands — to be thought an 
eloquent and impressive speaker ; for this purpose, he 
always used ten times as many words as were necessary 



THE INHERITANCE. 21 

to express his meaning, and those, too, of the longest 
and strongest description. Another of his torment- 
ing pecuharities was his desire of explaining every- 
thing, by which he always perplexed and mystified 
the simplest subject. Yet he had his good points, 
for he wished to see those around him happy, pro- 
vided he was the dispenser of their happiness, and 
that they were happy precisely in the manner and 
degree he thought proper. In short. Lord Rossville 
was a sort of petty, benevolent tyrant ; and any 
attempt to enlarge his soul or open his understand- 
ing would have been in vain. Indeed, his mind was 
already full, as full as it could hold, of little thoughts, 
little plans, little notions, little prejudices, little 
whims, and nothing short of regeneration could have 
made him otherwise. He had a code of laws, a code 
of proprieties, a code of delicacies all his own, and 
he had long languished for subjects to execute them 
upon. Mrs. St. Clair and her daughter were therefore 
no small acquisitions to his family ; he looked upon 
them as two very fine pieces of wax, ready to receive 
whatever impression he chose to give them ; and the 
humble confiding manner in which his niece had 
been committed to him had at once secured both to 
mother and daughter his favour and protection. 
Lady Betty's character does not possess materials to 
furnish so long a commentary. She was chiefly 
remarkable for the quantity of worsted -work she 
executed, which, for a person of her time of life, 
was considered no less extraordinary than meritorious. 



22 THE INHEEITANCE. 

She was now employed on her fifth rug ; the colours 
were orange and blue; the pattern an orange tiger 
couchant picked out with scarlet upon an azure 
ground. She also read all the novels and romances 
which it is presumed are published for the exclusive 
benefit of superannuated old women and silly young 
ones — such as " The Enchanted Head," " The Invisible 
Hand," " The Miraculous Nuptials," etc. etc. etc. She 
was now in the midst of " Bewildered Aff'ections; or, 
All is not Lost," which she was reading, uncon- 
sciously, for the third time, with unbroached delight. 
Lastly, she carefully watched over a fat, pampered, 
ill-natured lap-dog, subject to epilepsy; and asked 
a great many useless questions, which few people 
thought of answering. 

These were the only members of the family who 
appeared, but Lord Eossville mentioned that two of 
his nephews were on a visit in the neighbourhood, 
and might be expected the following day. 

" Since you are now, madam," said he, addressing 
Mrs. St. Clair, "become as it were incorporated in 
the Eossville family, it is proper and expedient that 
you should be made acquainted with all its members. 
I do not mean that acquaintance which a personal 
introduction conveys, but that knowledge which we 
acquire by a preconceived opinion, founded upon the 
experience of those on whose judgment and accuracy 
we can rely. I shall, therefore, give you such infor- 
mation regarding the junior members of this family 
as observation and opportunity have aff'orded me, 



THE INHERITANCE. 23 

and which, I flatter myself, may not prove altogether 
unacceptable or unavailing." The Earl paused, 
hemmed, and proceeded. " The senior of the two 
juvenile members to whom you will, in all probability, 
be introduced in the course of a very short period, 
is Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Delmour of the 19 th 
Dragoons, youngest son of the late Lord George Del- 
mour, who was second son of James, Duke of Bur- 
lington, by the Marchioness of Eflenford, widow of the 
deceased Charles Chaloner, Marquis of Effenford, who 
died at an early period, leaving one son, the present 
Augustus, Marquis of Effenford, married to the h^dy 
Isabella Cardington, daughter of the Duke of Litch- 
field, and one daughter, the present much -admired 
Countess of Lymington ; on the other hand, WiUiam 
Henry, the present Duke of Burlington, espoused the 
only daughter of that illustrious statesman, John, Earl 
of Harleigh, by whom he has issue one son, the Marquis 
of Haslingden, now abroad on account of the delicate 
and precarious state of his health. Thus it happens, 
and I hope I have made it sufficiently clear, that cer- 
tain members of this family are at the same time united, 
either by consanguinity, or by collateral connection of 
no remote degree, with many — I might say with most 
— of the illustrious families in the sister kingdom. 

" My sister, the Lady Augusta Delmour, widow of 
the late Lord George Delmour, at present resides in 
the metropolis with her three daughters — one of whom 
is, I understand, on the eve of forming a highly hon- 
ourable and advantageous alliance with the eldest son 



24 THE INHERITANCE. 

of a certain baronet of large fortune and extensive 
property in the southern extremity of the island ; but 
of this it might not be altogether delicate to say more 
at present. Colonel Frederick Delmour, then — the 
subject of our more immediate consideration — is in 
himself a gentleman of figure, fashion, accomplish- 
ments, and of very distinguished bravery in his highly 
honourable profession. He has already had the honour 
of being twice shghtly wounded in the field of battle, 
and in being made very honourable mention of in the 
despatches from the Earl of Marsham to His Royal 
Highness the Commander-in-Chief. In these respects, 
the dignity and untarnished honour of the noble 
families to which he belongs have suffered no diminu- 
tion in his person; but it is to his elder brother " — and 
he now turned towards Miss St, Clair — " that we — 
that is, the Duke of Burlington and myself — look as to 
one who is to add still greater lustre to the coronets 
with which he is so intimately connected. To all 
the natural advantages, accomplishments, and acquire- 
ments of his brother, he unites address and abilities 
of the highest order, by means of which he has already 
acted a most distinguished part in the senate, and bids 
fair to become one of the first — if not the first, states- 
men of this, or, indeed, of any age." The Earl paused, 
as if overcome with the prophetic visions which crowded 
on his mind. 

"What time of night is itf asked Lady Bettj^ 
The Earl, recalled from his high anticipations, and 
reminded of the lapse of time, resumed his discourse. 



THE INHEEITANCE. 25 

but in a less lofty tone. " The junior member of this 
family, whom I have now to present to you, is Edward 
Lyndsay, Esquire of Lynnwood, in this county, only 
child of the late Edward Lyndsay of Lynnwood, 
Esquire, and my youngest sister, the deceased Lady 
Jane St. Clair. The late Mr. Lyndsay was descended 
from an ancient and highly respectable family, but, 
by certain ancestral imprudences, was considerably 
involved and embarrassed during his life, — in so 
much, that he was under the necessity of accepting 
a situation in one of our colonial settlements, whither 
he was accompanied by Lady Jane. Both, I lament 
to say, fell victims, in a short period, to the pestilential 
effects of the climate, leaving this young man, then an 
infant of three years and a-half old, to my sole pro- 
tection and guardianship. How these duties were 
discharged it is not for me to say; only, in justice 
to myself, I deem it right and proper to state, that, 
at the expiry of the minority, the estate then was — 
(I say nothing of the means or management — let these 
speak for themselves — I simply deem it due to myself 
to state, that the estate was then) — free. If it is so 

no longer " and the Earl bowed, and waved his 

hands in that significant manner which says, " I wash 
my hands of it." But his Lordship took a long time 
even to wash his hands, for he still went on — "There is, 
perhaps, no greater or more insuperable impediment to 
radical improvement in youth — and it is, I lament to 
say, one of the most distinguishing characteristics of 
the age in which we live — than a disregard for the 
warning voice of those who have, with honour, advan- 



26 THE INHERITANCE. 

tage, and dignity, arrived at that period of life wlien 
they are entitled to the meed of, at least, experience. 
Had Mr. Lyndsay followed the path which, with 
infinite consideration, I had marked out for him, he 
might now, by the instrumentality of those great and 
noble family connections he possesses, have been on 
the high road to honour, wealth, distinction, and self- 
approbation. As it is, he has chosen, contrary to my 
recommendation, to decline the highly advantageous 
situation offered to him in our Asiatic dominions, 
assigning as his sole reason, that he was satisfied with 
what he already had, and meant to devote himself to 
the management and improvement of his own estate. 
A young man in his situation in life, scarcely yet 
twenty-six years of age, highly educated, as I made it 
a point he should be, and possessed of an ancient 
family estate, by no means great, and, I much fear, 
not wholly unencumbered, to refuse a situation of 
such honour, emolument, and patronage ! Mr. Lynd- 
say may be a good man ; but it was my most anxious 
wish and endeavour to have made him more — I would 
have made him — had he submitted to my guidance 
and control — I would have made him a (jreat man ! " 

The solemn and dignified silence which followed 
this was happily broken by the announcement of 
supper. The evening wore slowly awaj^, for each 
minute seemed like a drop of lead to Miss St. Clair, 
who was more of an age and temperament to enjoy 
than to endure. At length it was ended, and she 
retired to her apartment with mingled feelings of 
pleasure and disappointment. 



CHAPTER IV, 

" life ! how pleasant in thy morning, 
Young Fancy's rays thy hills adorning ! 
Cold-pansing caution's lessons scorning, 
We frisk away, 
Like school-boys at th' expected warning, 
To joy and play. 



Burns. 



The following morning Gertrude rose early, impatient 
to take an unmolested survey of what she already 
looked upon as her own. The suite of public rooms 
engaged but little of her attention ; she had already 
settled in her own mind that these must be com- 
pletely new furnished, and with this sweeping resolu- 
tion she passed quickly through them, merely stop- 
ping to examine the few pictures they contained. An 
open door, an almost dark passage, and a turnpike 
stair, at length presented themselves as stimulants to 
her curiosity, and tempted her to diverge from the 
straight line she had hitherto followed. It was the 
original part of the building, to which a modern Gothic 
front had been affixed, and she soon found herself 
in all the inextricable maze of long narrow passages, 
leading only to disappointment — steps which seemed 



28 THE INHERITAT^CE. 

to have been placed only, as if on purpose, to make 
people stumble — and little useless rooms, which looked 
as if they had been contrived solely for the pastime 
of hide-and-seek. At length she entered one she 
guessed to be Lord Eossville's study, and was hastily 
retreating, when her eye was caught by an old- 
fashioned glass door, opening upon a shrubbery. She 
tried to open it, but it was locked ; the prospect from 
without was alluring, and she felt unwilling to turn 
away from it ; the windows were but a little distance 
from the ground, and, having opened one, and smelt 
the violets that grew beneath, her next impulse was 
to spring lightly through it into the garden. As she 
inhaled the fresh morning air, fraught with the sweets 
of early summer, where "the scent comes and goes 
like the warbling of music," and looked on the lovely 
landscape as it shone in the deep calm radiance of the 
morning sun, her heart exulted in all the joyousijess 
of youth and health in the brightness of creation. 
She had wandered to a considerable distance, Avhen, 
having gained the top of an eminence, she stood to 
admire the effect of some cottages situated on the green 
shelving bank which overhung the river. " What a 
pretty picturesque thing a cottage is," thought she to 
herself ; " how gracefully its smoke rises from amongst 
the trees, and contrasts with the clear atmosphere 
around. When thi3 is mine, I will certainly have 
some pretty cottages built in sight of the castle, and 
have the good people to dance on the green sward 
before their doors in an evening when their work is 



THE INHERITANCE. 29 

done. Oh, how easy it must be to be good when one 
has the power of doing good !" 

Ignorant of herself and of the nature of the human 
heart, Gertrude believed that to will and to do were 
one and the same; .as yet untaught that all vague 
baseless schemes of virtue, all vain romantic dreams 
of benevolence, are as much the cobwebs of imagina- 
tion as the air -built castles of human happiness, 
whether of love, glory, riches, or ambition. 

The beauty of the morning — the interest each 
object excited — the song of the birds — the smell of 
the opening flowers — the sound of the waters, all 
combined to lull her visionary mind into an Elysium 
of her own creating, and as she walked along, in all 
the ideal enjoyment of her Utopian schemes, she 
found herself at the door of one of those cottages 
whose picturesque appearance had charmed her so 
much at a distance. A nearer survey, however, soon 
satisfied her that the view owed all its charms to 
distance. Some coarse, lint-haired, mahogany-faced, 
half -naked urchins, with brown legs and black feet, 
were dabbling in a gutter before the door, while some 
bigger ones were pursuing a pig and her litter, seem- 
ingly for the sole purpose of amusement. 

"What a pity those children are all so ugly!" 
thought Miss St. Clair; "it would have been so 
delightful to have had them all nicely dressed, and 
have taught them myself ; but they are so frightful, 
I could have no pleasure in seeing them." However, 
she overcame her repugnance so far as to accost them. 



30 THE INHERITANCE, 

" Would not you like to be made nice and clean, and 
have pretty new clothes?" 

"Ay !" answered one of them with a broad stare, 
and still broader accent. 

" And to go to school, and be taught to read, and 
write, and work?" 

" Naw ! " answered the whole troop with one voice, 
as they renewed their splashing with fresh vigour. 
Miss St. Clair made no further attempts in that 
quarter, but she entered the cottage, carefully picking 
her steps, and wrapping her garments close round 
her, to prevent their contracting any impurities. The 
smoke, which had figured so gracefully out of doors 
had a very different effect within, and she stood a few 
minutes on the threshold before she could summon 
courage to penetrate farther. At length, as her eyes 
got accustomed to the palpable obscure, she discovered 
the figure of a man, seated in a wooden chair by the 
fire, in a ragged coat and striped woollen nightcap. 
"He is ill, poor creature," thought she, and quickly 
advancing, she wished him good morning. Her salu- 
tation was respectfully returned, and the man, making 
an effort to rise, invited her to be seated with con- 
siderable courtesy. 

*'I am afraid you are ill," said Gertrude, declining 
the invitation, and looking with compassion on his 
lean sallow visage. 

" Oo, 'deed he's very ill, my*leddy," cried a voice 
from behind, and presently advanced a stout, bloom- 
ing, broad-faced dame, clad in a scanty blue flannel 



THE INHERITANCE. 31 

petticoat and short-gown. She was encompassed by 
a girr or hoop supporting two stoups,^ a piece of 
machinery altogether peculiar to Scotland. Having 
disengaged herself from this involvement or convolve- 
ment, she dropt a curtsey to her guest, and then, 
wiping down a chair, pressed her to be seated. 

"The gudeman's really extraordinar ill, my leddy," 
continued she, in a high key. "I'm sure I kenna 
what to do wi' him ; it was first a sutten doon cauld, 
an' noo he's fa'n in till a sort o' a dwinin like, an' 
atweel I dinna think he'll e'er get the better o't." 

"Have you any doctor to see him?" inquired Miss 
St. Clair. 

" Oo, 'tweel he's had doctors eneugh, an' naething's 
been spared on him. I'm sure he's pitten as muckle 
doctor's stuff o' ae kind an' anither in till himsel' as 
might hae pushened him twenty times ower ; but weel- 
a-wat, I think the mair he taks the waur he grows." 

"Perhaps he takes too much medicine." 

"'Deed I'll no say but he may, but ye ken, my 
leddy, what can he do? — he maun tak what the 
doctor sends him — the things canna be lost; but 
'tweel he's very sweered to tak them whiles, tho' I'm 
sure muckle money they cost, an', as I tell him, they're 
dear morsels." 

"Perhaps if he were to leave off the medicines, 
and try the effect of fresh air, and good milk, and 
soup, which I shall endeavour to procure for him " 

^ A stoup is neither a bucket, nor a pitcher, nor a jar, nor 
an anything but a stoup. 



32 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I'm sure we're muckle obliged to you, my leddy, 
but he need nae want for fresh air, he can get eneugh 
o' that ony day by gawen to the door; but there's 
nae gettin him to stir frae the chimley lug; and, 
'deed, I canna say he wants for milk or broth either, 
for ane o' the young gentlemen up bye spoke to my 
Lord for us, and he's really no to mean for his meat 
if he wad tak it ; as I tell him whiles, my certy, mony 
a ane wad be glad to hae't for the takin." 

" Is there anything else, then, in which I can be 
of use to you ?" inquired Miss St. Clair, now address- 
ing the invalid, "is there anything you particularly 
wish for f 

The man held up a ragged elbow — "Gin your 
leddyship has an auld coat to spare," said he, in a 
hesitating voice. 

"An auld coat!" interposed his dame; "oo, what 
could pit an auld coat in your head, Tam 1 I'm sure 
there's a hantel things mair needfu' than an auld coat 
— no that he wad be the waur o' a coat neither, for 
he has naething atween that puir dud on his back an' 
his marriage ane, and his Sabbath-day suit in the 
kist there." 

" Pray let me know what things are most wanted 
for your husband's comfort," said Miss St. Clair, " and 
I shall make a point of sending them — a bit of carpet, 
for instance " looking upon the damp clay floor. 

"Wud ye like a bit carpet, Tam, the leddy asks?" 
roared his wife to him ; then, without waiting for an 
answer — 



THE INHERITANCE. 33 

"Oo, 'deed he disna ken what he wud like; an' 
he's ne'er been used till a carpet, an' I daur say it 
wud just be a disconvenience till him, noo that he 
canna be fashed wi' ony thing — no but what he might 
pit up Avi' a bit carpet, I'se warran', if he had ither 
things that are a hantel mair needfu'," 

"A more comfortable chair, then, I may surely 
send," said Gertrude, still persisting in her benevolent 
attempts. 

" The leddy's for sendin' ye anither chyre, Tam," 
again shouted his tender helpmate; the husband 
nodded his assent ; — " but, 'tweel, he's sutten sae lang 
in that ane, I doot it's no worth his while to chynge 
't noo; and I dinna think he could be fashed wi' 
anither chyre — no but what we micht pit up wi' 
anither chyre or twa, if we had awthing else wise- 
like." 

*' I am sorry there is nothing I can think of that 
would be acceptable to you " 

"Oo, I'll no say that, my leddy," briskly inter- 
rupted the hostess ; " there's a hantel things, weel-a- 
wat, we hae muckle need o'; for ae thing — but I 
maist think shame to tell't — an it's really nae faut o' 
mine neither, my leddy, but it's just sae happent, 
wi' ae thing an' anither, I hae ne'er gotten a steek o' 
the guidman's dead claise ready — and noo to think 
that he's drawin' near his end, I'm sure I canna tell 
the vexation it's cost me." Here the dame drew a 
deep sigh, and wiped her eyes with the corner of her 
apron, then proceeded — "Siena a discreditable like 

VOL. I. D 



34 THE INHERITANCE. 

thing to hae said, an' sic a comfort as, nae doot, it 
wad be to him to see awthing ready and wise-like 
afore he gaed out o' the world. A suit o' gude bein 
comfortable dead claise, Tammes," appealing to her 
husband, " wad set ye better than aw the braw chyres 
an' carpets i' the toon. No but what if ance ye had 
the tane ye micht pit up wi' the tither ; but wad nae't 
be a bonny-like thing to see you set up wi' a braw 
carpet, and a saft chyre, an' to think ye had nae sa 
muckle as a wise-like windin' sheet to row ye in 1" 

A great deal of the pathos of this harangue was 
of course unintelligible to Miss St. Clair; but she 
comprehended the main scope of it, and, somewhat 
shocked at this Scotch mode of evincing conjugal 
affection, she put down some money and withdrew, 
rather surprised to find what different ideas of com- 
fort prevailed in different countries, and a good deal 
disappointed in the failure of her benevolent inten- 
tions. 



CHAPTER V. 

" What kind of catechising call you this ?" 

Miuih Ado about Nothing. 

Time had passed unheeded, and chance, rather than 
design, led Miss St, Clair to retrace her steps, when, 
as she drew near the castle, she was met by one of the 
servants, who informed her that he and several others 
had been sent in search of her, as it was long past 
the breakfast hour, and the family had been some 
time assembled. Ashamed of her own thoughtless- 
ness, she quickened her steps, and, desiring the servant 
to show the way to the breakfast-room, without wait- 
ing to adjust her dress, she hastily entered, eager to 
apologise for her transgression. But the dread solemn- 
ity that sat on Lord Rossville's brow made her falter 
in her purpose. With the tea-pot in one hand, with 
the other he made an awful wave for her to be seated. 
Lady Betty was busy mixing a mess of hot rolls, cream, 
and sugar for her epileptic lap-dog. An impending 
storm sat on Mrs. St. Clair's face, but veiled under an 
appearance of calm dignified displeasure. Gertrude 
felt as if denounced by the whole party — she knew 
not for what, unless for having been twenty minutes 
too late for breakfast, and, in some trepidation, she 



36 THE INHEKITANCE. 

began to apologise for her absence. Lord Eossville 
gave several deep sepulchral hems, then, as if he had 
been passing sentence upon a criminal, said, — 

" I am not averse to postpone the discussion of 
this delicate and painful investigation. Miss St. Clair, 
until you shall have had the benefit of refreshment." 

Gertrude was confounded — " My Lord !" exclaimed 
she, in amazement, "I am very sorry if anything 
has occurred " — and she looked round for an explan- 
ation. 

Lord Eossville hemmed — ^looked still more appall- 
ing, and then spoke as follows : — 

" You are doubtless aware. Miss St. Clair, that, in 
all countries where civilisation and refinement have 
made any considerable progress, female delicacy and 
propriety are — are ever held in the highest estimation 
and esteem," 

His Lordship paused ; and as no contradiction was 
offered to this his proem, he proceeded — 

" But you must, or certainly ought, to be likewise 
aware, that it is not merely these virtues themselves 
which must be carefully implanted and vigilantly 
watched over, in the young and tender female — for 
even the possession of the virtues themselves are not 
a sufficient shield for the female character. It was a 
maxim of Julius Caesar's, unquestionably the greatest 
conqueror that ever lived, that his wife must not only 
be spotless in herself, but that she must not even be 
suspected by others; a maxim that, in my opinion, 
deserves to be engraven in letters of gold, and certainly 



THE INHERITANCE. 37 

cannot be too early, or too deeply, imprinted on the 
young and tender female breast." 

His Lordship had gained a climax, and he stopped, 
overpowered with his own eloquence. Mrs. St. Clair 
made a movement expressive of the deepest attention, 
and most profound admiration. 

" Such being my sentiments — sentiments in which 
I am borne out by the testimony of one of the greatest 
men who ever lived — it is not surprising that I should 
feel, and feel deeply too, the glaring indiscretion you 
have, I grieve to say, already committed, since your 
entrance within these walls." 

Then after another solemn pause, during which 
Miss St. Clair sat in speechless amazement, he re- 
sumed with more than senatorial dignity. 

" I wish to be correctly informed at what hour you 
quitted your apartment this morning, Miss St. Clair f 

"Indeed, my Lord, I cannot tell," answered Ger- 
trude, with perfect naivete. " I had forgot to wind 
up my watch, and I did not hear any clock strike ; 
but, from the appearance of the morning, I am sure 
it was early." 

•' And what, may I ask, was the mode or manner, 
Miss St. Clair, by which you thought proper to quit 
my house at so untimely and unusual an hour?" 
demanded the Earl, in a voice of repressed emotion. 

Gertrude blushed. *' I am afraid I was guilty of a 
transgression, my Lord, for which I ask your pardon ; 
but, allured by the fineness of the morning, and the 
beauty of the scenery, I was desirous of getting out to 



38 THE INHERITANCE. 

enjoy them, and having in vain tried to make my 
way through a door, I was tempted to escape by a 
window." 

Miss St. Clair spoke with so much simplicity and 
gentleness, and there was so much sweetness and even 
melody in her voice and accent, that any other than 
Lord Rossville would have wished her offence had 
been greater, that her apology might have been longer. 
Not so his Lordship, who possessed neither taste nor 
ear, and was alive to no charm but what he called 
propriety. At the conclusion of his niece's acknow- 
ledgment, the Earl struck his forehead, and took two 
or three turns up and down the room, then suddenly 
stopping — 

"Are you at all aware. Miss St. Clair, of the glar- 
ing — the — I must say — gross impropriety of such a 
step in itself — of the still more gross construction 
that will be put upon it by the world ? The simple 
fact has only to be told, and one inference, and but 
one, will be drawn. You have quitted the apart- 
ment assigned to you under my roof at a nameless, 
untimely, consequently unbefitting hour ; and you 
rashly, wantonly, and improperly precipitate yourself 
from a window — and what window ? why, the window 
of my private sitting-room ! A young female is seen 
issuing from the windoAv of my study at a nameless 
hour in the morning — the tale circulates — and where, 
I ask, am I r ' 

"Where was youl " asked Lady Betty. 

Mrs. St. Clair put her handkerchief to her face. 



THE INHERITANCE. 39 

" I am very sorry, my Lord, that I should have done 
anything to displease you — if I have done wrong " 

" If you have done wrong ! Good heavens ! is it 
thus you view the matter, Miss St. Clair 1 What I 
think wrong! Who that has proper feelings of 
delicacy and propriety — who that has a due regard 
for character and reputation, but must view the 
matter precisely as I do ? Such a step — and at such 
an hour!" 

And his Lordship resumed his troubled walk 

Unacquainted with her uncle's character, and ignor- 
ant of the manners and customs of the country, Ger- 
trude was led to believe she had committed a much 
more serious offence than she had been aware of, and 
she was at length wrought up to that degree of distress 
which the Earl deemed necessary to mark her contri- 
tion. Softened at witnessing the effect of his power, 
which he imputed to the fine style of his language, he 
now took his niece's hand, and addressed her in what 
he intended for a more consolatory strain. 

"I have considered it my duty — a painful one, 
doubtless, but, nevertheless, my duty — to point out 
to you the impropriety you have — I hope and believe, 
— inadvertently committed. As a member of my 
family, and one for whose actions the world will 
naturally consider me responsible, it is necessary that 
I should henceforth take upon myself the entire 
regulation of your future manners and conduct in 
life. You, Madam"— to Mrs. St. Clair— "have dele- 
gated to me the authority of a parent, and I should 



40 THE INHERITANCE. 

ill merit so important a trust were I to shrink from 
the discharge of the functions of the parental office." 

Miss St. Clair's blood ran cold at the thoughts of 
being subjected to such thraldom. 

"But before dismissing this subject — I trust for 
ever — let me here state to you my sentiments with 
regard to young ladies walking before breakfast — a 
practice of which, I must confess, I have always dis- 
approved. I am aware it is a practice that has the 
sanction of many highly respectable authorities who 
have written on the subject of female ethics ; but, I 
own, I cannot approve of young ladies of rank and 
family leaving their ajjartments, at the same hour 
with chamber-maids and dairy-maids, and walking 
out unattended at an hour when only the lower 
orders of the people are abroad. Walking before 
breakfast, then, I must consider as a most rude, 
masculine habit — as the Right Honourable Edmund 
Burke observes, ' An air of robustness and strength is 
highly prejudicial to beauty ' (that is, as I apprehend, 
female beauty), 'while an appearance of fragility is 
no less essential to it;' — and certainly nothing, in my 
opinion, can be more unbecoming, more unfeminine, 
than to behold a young lady seat herself at the break- 
fast-table with the complexion of a dairy-maid and the 
appetite of a ploughman. At the same time, I am an 
advocate for early rising, as there are, doubtless, many 
ways in which young ladies may spend their mornings, 
without rambling abroad ; and you will find, by look- 
ing in your dressing-room, that I have made ample 



THE INHERITANCE. 41 

provision for your instruction, and amusement, and 
delight. Let morning walks, therefore, from hence- 
forth have an end." And he pressed his niece's hand 
with that air of pompous forgiveness so revolting from 
one human being to another. Luckily, his Lordship 
was here summoned away ; but ere he left the room 
he signified his intention of returning in an hour to 
show the ladies what was most worthy of observation 
in the castle and demesnes. 

Absurd as this scene may appear, few will deny 
the undue importance which many people attach to 
the trifles of life, and how often molehills are magni- 
fied into mountains by those with whom trifles are 
indeed "the sum of human things." 



CHAPTER YL 

" By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir ; 
My old bones ache : here's a maze trod indeed 
Throngli forth-rights and meanders ! by your patience, 
I needs must rest me." The Tempest. 

" True as the dial to the sun, 
Even though it be not shined upon." 

Lord Rossville returned at the hour appointed to 
do the honours of his castle. But, as most of my 
readers have doubtless experienced the misery of 
being shown a house where there was nothing to be 
seen, and can tell "how hard it is to climb" from 
the second sunk story to the uppermost garrets, I 
shall not be so unmerciful as to drag them up stairs 
and down stairs to my Lady's chamber, and into all 
the chambers except his Lordship's own, which he 
was too decorous to exhibit. Neither shall I insist 
upon their hearing everything explained and set forth, 
even to the Dutch tiles of the dairy, the hot and 
cold pipes of the washing-house, the new invented 
ovens, the admirably-constructed larder, the inimitable 
baths, with all the wonder-working, steam -going 
apparatus of the kitchen. Here Mrs. St. Clair ac- 
quitted herself to admiration, for to see judiciously 



THE INHERITANCE. 43 

requires no small skill in the seer, and there are few 
who see things precisely as they ought to be seen. 
Many see too much — many too little. Some see only 
to find fault — some only to admire; some are, or 
pretend to be, already acquainted with everything 
they are shown ; some are profoundly ignorant, con- 
sequently cannot properly appreciate the inventions 
or improvements exhibited. Some are too inquisitive 
— some too indifferent ; but it is as impossible to 
describe the vast variety of seers as of mosses, neither 
is it easy to point out the innumerable rocks on which 
a seer may strike. A treatise, illustrated by a few 
memorable examples or awful warnings, might pos- 
sibly be of some use to the unskilful beholder. But, 
as in most other arts and sciences, much must depend 
upon natural genius. Mrs. St. Clair was so happily 
endowed that she was enabled to see everything as 
it was intended to be seen, and to bestow her admira- 
tion in the exact proportion in which she perceived it 
was required, through all the intermediate degrees, 
from ecstatic rapture down to emphatic approval. 
With Miss St. Clair it was far otherwise ; she had no 
taste for poking into pantries, and chimneys, and 
cellars, or of hearing any of the inelegant minutiae 
of life detailed. It seemed like breaking all the 
enchantments of existence to be thus made to view 
the complicated machinery by which life, artificial 
life, was sustained ; and she rejoiced when the survey 
was ended, and it was proposed after luncheon to 
take a drive through the grounds. Gertrude flattered 



44 THE INHERITANCE. 

herself that here she would at least enjoy the repose 
of inactivity, and be suffered to see as much as 
could be seen, from a carriage window, of the beauties 
of nature. But Lord Eossville's mind was never in 
a quiescent state in any situation ; there was always 
something to be done or to be seen : the windows 
were to be either let do^vn or drawn up ; the blinds 
to be drawn up or pulled down ; there was something 
that ought to be seen, but could not be seen ; or there 
was something seen that ought not to have been seen; 
thus his mind was not only its own plague, but the 
plague of all who had the misfortune to bear him 
company. 

In vain were creation's charms spread before his 
eyes. There is a mental blindness, darker than that 
which shrouds the visual orb, and nature's works 
were to Lord Rossville a universal blank, or rather 
they were a sort of account -book, in which were 
registered all his own petty doings. It was here he 
had drained — there he had embanked ; here he had 
planted — there he had cut down ; here he had built 
a bridge — there he had made a road; here he had 
levelled — there he had raised, etc, etc. etc. To all 
that his own head had planned he was feelingly alive ; 
but for the " dread magnificence of Heaven," he had 
neither eye, ear, nor soul, and must, therefore, be for- 
given if insensible to its influence. Mrs. St Clair 
was not much more highly gifted in that respect, but 
she could speak, if she could not feel, and she ex- 
patiated and admired till Lord Eossville thought her, 



THE INHERITANCE. 45 

mthout exception, the cleverest woman he had ever 
met with. 

"Since you are so great an enthusiast in the 
beauties of nature, my dear madam," said he, address- 
ing his sister-in-law, "we shall extend our drive a 
little farther than I had purposed, that I may have 
the pleasure of showing you, at a single coup d'ceil, 
the whole extent of the Rossville possessions in this 
county, while, at the same time, you will embrace 
some other objects, in which I am not wholly uncon- 
cerned. Benjamin" — to the servant — "to Pinnacle 
Hill," and to Pinnacle Hill the horses' heads were 
turned. "Pinnacle Hill," continued the Earl, "is a 
very celebrated spot ; it is a purchase I made from 
Lord Fairacre some years ago ; it is much resorted to 
by strangers, as commanding, with few exceptions, 
one of the finest views in Scotland." 

Mrs. St. Clair hated fine views, and she tried to 
get off by pretending scruples about encroaching so 
much on his Lordship's time, goodness, and so forth 
— but all in vain ; to Pinnacle Hill they were driven, 
and, after being dragged up as far as horses could go, 
they were (as, indeed, the name implied) obliged to 
alight and ascend on foot. With considerable toil 
they reached the top, and scarcely were they there 
when the wind, having changed to the east, its never- 
failing accompaniment, a raw mist, began to gather 
all round. But Lord Rossville was insensible even to 
an east wind — ^his bodily sensations being quite as 
obtuse as his mental ones ; and, having got to the top 



46 THE INHERITANCE. 

of the Pinnacle, h'e faced him round, and, in the very 
teeth of the enemy, began to point out what was and 
what was not to be seen. 

" Here you have a very commanding view, or would 
have had, if the atmosphere had been somewhat 
clearer ; as it is, I can enable you distinctly to trace 
out the boundary line of the Rossville estate. Observe 
the course of the river in the direction of my cane — 
you see it plainly here — there it disappears amongst 
the Millbank woods — now it takes a turn, and you 
have it again to your left — you follow me ?" 

"Perfectly, my Lord," rephed Mrs. St. Clair, 
although she saw nothing but a wreath of mist. 

"Undoubtedly, that must be the river we see," 
said his Lordship, doubtingly ; " but, at the same time, 
we never can rely with perfect security upon the 
watery element ; it has many prototypes, which a,re 
not easily detected at a distance — a bleachfield, for 
instance, has not unfrequently been mistaken for a 
piece of water ; and we read of a very singular decep- 
tion produced upon sand in the eastern countries, and 
termed the mirage." 

" Water is, indeed, a deceitful element," said Mrs. 
St. Clair, hoping, by this affirmative, to get to the 
lee-side of the discussion. 

"On the other hand, it is a most useful and in- 
valuable element ; without water, where would be our 
navigation — our commerce — our knowledge — our arts? 
— in one word, water may be termed the bulwark of 
Britain." 



TIIE INHEEITANCE. 47 

"It may indeed," said Mrs, St, Clair, her teeth 
chattering as she spoke ; " to water we owe our ex- 
istence as a nation, our liberties, civil and religious," 
and she retreated a few steps, on the faith of having 
settled the matter. 

"Pardon me there, my dear madam," said the 
Earl, retaining his original footing ; " that is, perhaps, 
going a little too far; strictly speaking, we cannot 
with propriety be said to owe our existence to water, 
since, had we not been an island, a highly-favoured 
island, we should certainly have formed part of the 
vast continent of Europe; and with regard to our 
liberties, the Magna Charta, that boast of Britain, 
was unquestionably procured, and, I trust, will ever 
be maintained, on terra Jirma." 

Mrs. St. Clair could almost have given up the 
game at this point — to stand on the very pinnacle of 
a pinnacle, in the face of an east wind, and be talked 
to about bulwarks and Magna Chartas ! it was too 
much. 

" How very cold you look, mamma," said Miss St. 
Clair, compassionating her mother's feelings. 

"Cold !" repeated Lord Eossville, in a tone of sur- 
prise and displeasure; " impossible — cold in the month 
of May ! the day would be too hot, were it not for 
this cooling breeze." 

This was worse and worse. Mrs. St. Clair groaned 
internally, as she thought, " How will it be possible 
to drag out existence with a man who calls a piercing 
east wind a cooling breeze !" 



48 THE INHERITANCE, 

Lord Eossville raised his cane, and resumed his 
observations at great length upon the ravages com- 
mitted by the river on his friend and neighbour Bog- 
hall's property. Mrs. St. Clair wished the Boghall 
acres in the bottom of the Red Sea, though even from 
thence Lord Rossville might, perhaps, have fished 
them up, as a thorough-bred tormentor, like a first- 
rate magician, can call spirits, even from the vasty 
deep, to torment his victims. 

" Here," continued the Earl, taking his sister-in-law 
by the hand, and leading her to the utmost verge of 
all she hated, a bleak exposed promontory ; " here we 
command a no less charming prospect in a different 
style : — observe that range of hills." 

"Superb!" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, with an 
aguish shudder. 

*' Why, yes — the hills themselves are very well — 
but do you observe nothing, my dear madam, that 
relieves the eye from what a friend of mine justly 
calls a boundless continuity of shade V 

Mrs. St. Clair almost cracked her eyeballs straining 
in the direction pointed out, but, like sister Anne, 
coidd see nothing to the purpose. 

" I suspect you are looking rather too high ; nearer 
the base, and allow your eye to run along by the point 
of my cane — there, you must have got it now." 

There are, perhaps, few everyday situations more 
tormenting to a delicate mind than that of being 
called upon to see what you cannot see ; you must 
either disappoint the views of the view-pointer, or you 



THE INHERITANCE. 49 

must sacrifice your conscience (as it is much to ba 
feared too many do), by pretending that you have at 
last hit the mark, whether it be a puff of smoke, indi- 
cative of a town, a white cloud of the ocean, or a 
black speck of an island. 

"Ah! I think I discover something now," cried 
Mrs. St. Clair, quite at a loss to guess whether the 
white mote in question was a church steeple, or a 
ship's mast, or any other wonderful object of the 
same nature, which generous, long-sighted people vnll 
always make a point of sharing with their less gifted 
friends. 

" And you think the effect good 1" 

"Admirable — inimitable !" 

"Why, the situation was my own choice; there 
was a committee appointed to make choice of the 
most favourable site, and they fortunately fell in with 
my views on the subject, and, indeed, paid me the 
compliment of consulting my feelings on the occasion : 
— a public monument, I conceive, ought, undoubtedly, 
to be placed in a conspicuous and elevated situation ; 
but more especially when that situation happens to 
be in the very grounds of not only the original pro- 
poser and principal heritor in the county, but likewise 
the personal friend of the illustrious dead to whom 
this tribute is decreed — for I am proud to say our 
renowned patriot, the great Lord Pensionwell, was 
(with the excellent Lord Dunderhead) the associate 
of my youthful years — the friend of my maturer age." 

"Happy the country," said Mrs. St. Clair, now 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE INHEKITANCE. 

driven almost to frenzy, " whose nobles are thus 
gifted with the power of reflecting kindred excellence, 
and perpetuating national virtue on the broad basis 
of private friendship." 

Mrs. St. Clair knew she was talking nonsense, but 
she also knew who she was talking to, and was sure 
it would pass. Lord Eossville, to be sure, was a little 
puzzled, but he saw it was meant as a compliment, 
and contained a fine sounding sentiment, and it was 
therefore well received. Fortunately, the rain now 
began to fall, and every object being completely 
shrouded in mist, his Lordship was obliged to give 
in ; but he comforted himself, and thought he com- 
forted his companions, by promising to return, when 
the weather was more propitious, to repeat and com- 
plete their enjoyment. 



CHAPTER VIL 

" Most musical, most melancholy !" 



Milton. 



Dinner passed heavily, for, although its arrangements 
were faultless, there was a want of that ease which 
is the essence of good cheer. The evening entertain- 
ment was still worse, for Lord Eossville piqued him- 
self upon his musical talents, and Miss St. Clair, whose 
taste and execution were both of a superior order, was 
doomed to the tortures of his Lordship's accompani- 
ment. His false chords — his overstrained cadences— 
his palsied shakes — his tones, half and whole, grated 
upon her ear, and she felt that music and melody were 
sometimes very dijfferent things. He affected to despise 
all music except that of the great composers, and 
chose for the subject of his execution Beethoven's 
" Synfonia Pastorale." " Here," said he, as he placed 
it before his niece and himself, "observe the great 
point is to have your mind duly impressed with the 
ideas these grand and characteristic movements are 
designed to express. Here we have, in the first place, 
'The Prospect;' — we must, of course, infer that it is 
a fine or pleasing prospect, such, for example, as we 
viewed to-day, that the great composer intended to 



52 THE INHERITANCE. 

represent ; let your movements, therefore, be graceful 
and aerial — light and shade, hill and dale, wood and 
water; then follows 'The Eivulet,' — that, I need 
scarcely inform you, must be expressed by a gentle, 
murmuring, liquid, trickling measure. Next we have 
the 'Village Dance,' brisk, gay, and exhilarating — 
rustic, but not vulgar. As a powerful contrast to 
these simple scenes now bursts upon us ' The Storm,' 
awful, sublime, overpowering as the conflict of the 
element — howling winds, descending torrents, hail, 
thunder, lightning, all must be conveyed here, or the 
mighty master's aim is rendered abortive. To soothe 
the mind after this awful explosion of genius we 
wind up the whole with the ' Shepherd's Song,' 
breathing the soft accents of peace and pastoral inno- 
cence — and now da capo." 

Miss St. Clair might well shudder at the prospect 
before her, and her tortures were exquisite when she 
found her ear, taste, feeling, science, all placed under 
the despotic sway of his Lordship's bow and foot; but, 
at length, her sufferings were ended by the sound of 
supper. "Ha!" exclaimed he, starting up, "it seems 
we take no note of time here." This was a favourite 
jeu de mot of the Earl's, and, indeed, it was suspected 
that he sometimes allowed himself to be surprised for 
the pleasure of repeating it. 

Supper was nearly over, when the trampling of 
horses, barking of dogs, ringing of bells, and all the 
usual clamour which attends the arrival of a person of 
distinction, caused a sensation in the company. Lady 



THE INHERITANCE. 53 

Betty asked what that was, while she took her favourite 
on her lap, and covered it with her pocket-handker- 
chief, from beneath which, however, issued ever and 
anon, a low asthmatic growl. 

" It is Colonel Delmour, my Lady," answered the 
pompous maitre d'hotel, who had despatched a mes- 
senger to inquire. 

"It is an extraordinary and somewhat improper 
time of night, I think " 

But his Lordship's remarks were stopped by the 
entrance of the party in question. Merely touching 
his uncle's hand as he passed him, and scarcely 
noticing Lady Betty, Colonel Delmour advanced to 
Mrs. and Miss St Clair, and paid his compliments to 
them with all the graceful, high-bred ease of a man of 
fashion ; then calling for a chair, he seated himself 
by his cousin, seemingly regardless of one having 
been placed by Lord Rossville's orders on the other 
side of the table. Colonel Delmour was strikingly 
handsome, both in face and form, and he possessed 
that high hereditary air of fashion and freedom which 
bore the impress of nobility and distinction. There 
might, perhaps, be something of hauteur in his lofty 
bearing ; but it was so qualified by the sportive gaiety 
of his manners, that it seemed nothing more than that 
elegant and graceful sense of his own superiority, to 
which, even without arrogance, he could not be insen- 
sible. He talked much, and well ; and in that general 
way which allowed every one to take a part in the 
conversation, without suffering any one, not even the 



54 THE INHERITANCE. 

Earl, to monopolise it. Altogether, his presence was 
like sunshine upon frost-work, and an air of ease and 
gaiety succeeded to the dulness and constraint which 
had hitherto prevailed. Lady Betty had three times 
asked, " What brought you here at this time of night?" 
before Colonel Delmour answered. At last, he said — 

" Two very powerful motives, though scarcely fit 
to be named together — the first was my eagerness to 
do homage here," bowing gracefully to Miss St. Clair ; 
"the other was to avoid the honour of driving Miss 
Pratt." 

"I thought Mr. Lyndsay was to have retui-ned 
with you," said the Earl. 

"I offered him a seat in my curricle, which he 
wanted to transfer to Miss Pratt, but I could not 
possibly agree to that arrangement, so he remains like 
a -preux chevalier to escort her in a hackney-chaise, and 
also, I believe, to attend a Bible meeting, or a charity 
sermon, or something of that sort. It is more, I 
suspect, as a paymaster than a protector that his 
services are required, as he discovered it would cost 
her, I can't tell how many shillings and sixpences; 
and though I would willingly have paid her expenses, 
yet, really, to endure her company for a nine-mile 
tUe-h-tete was more than my philosophy dreamt of." 

Much depends on the manner in which things are 
said as to the impression they convey to the unreflect- 
ing mind. Colonel Delmour's voice and accent were 
uncommonly pleasing, and he had an air of gay good- 
humour that gave to his words rather the semblance 



THE INHERITANCE. 55 

of airy levity than of selfishness or ill-nature. Even 
when he carelessly sketched on the table-cloth a cari- 
cature of Mr. Lyndsay with a large Bible under his 
arm, handing Miss Pratt, with a huge bandbox in 
hers, into a hackney-chaise, Gertrude could not resist 
a smile at their expense. 

"Miss Pratt coming here to-morrow ! " exclaimed 
the Earl, in a tone expressive of anything but pleasure ; 
" that is somewhat an unexpected " and his Lord- 
ship made an effort as if to bolt some word too hard 
for utterance. Then addressing Mrs. St. Clair, though 
with a very disturbed look, "As, in all probability, 
madam, that lady's visit is designed out of compli- 
ment to you and your daughter, it is necessary, pre- 
vious to her arrival, that you should be aware of the 
degree of relationship subsisting between Miss Pratt 
and the members of this family." 

Lord Rossville's air, looks, manner, hems, all por- 
tended a story ; it was but too evident that breath 
was collecting and reminiscences arranging for the 
purpose, and the pause that ensued was prophetic, 
not, alas ! of its end, but of its beginning. But 
Colonel Delmour seemed quite aware of the danger 
that was impending, and just as his uncle had opened 

his mouth with " Miss Pratt's great-grandfather " 

he interposed. 

"I beg pardon, but I cannot think of devolving 
the task of being Miss Pratt's chronicle upon you ; as 
I was guilty of introducing her to the company, mine 
be the punishment of becoming her biographer. " Then 



56 THE INHERITANCE. 

with a rapidity which left the Earl with his mouth 
open, and Miss Pratt's great-grandfather still vibrating 
on his tongue, he went on — 

" Miss Pratt, then, by means of great-grandfathers 
and great -grandmothers (who, par parentMse, may 
commonly be classed under the head of great bores), 
is, somehow or other, cousin to all families of distinc- 
tion, in general, throughout Scotland, but to this one, 
from its local advantages, in particular. I cannot 
pretend to show forth the various modifications of 
which cousinship is susceptible, first, second, and third 
degrees, as far as numbers and degrees can go. And, 
indeed, I have already committed a great error in my 
outset by having introduced Miss Pratt by herself 
Miss Pratt, when I ought to have presented her as 
Miss Pratt and Anthony Whyte. In fact, as Whit- 
tington without his cat would be nobody in the 
nursery, so neither would Miss Pratt be recognised in 
the world without Anthony Whyte. Not that there 
exists the same reciprocal attachment, or unity of 
fortune, between the aunt and the nephew which dis- 
tinguished the master and his cat; for Anthony 
Whyte is rich, and Miss Pratt is poor; — Anthony 
Whyte lives in a castle, Miss Pratt in a cottage ; — 
Anthony Whyte has horses and hounds. Miss Pratt 
has clogs and pattens. There is something so unin- 
teresting, if not unpromising, in the name that" — 
addressing himself to Miss St. Clair — "you, at present, 
•will scarcely care whether it belongs to a man or a 
cat, and will be ready to exclaim, 'What's in a namef 



THE INHERITANCE. 57 

but do not expect long to enjoy this happy state of 
indifference — by dint of hearing it repeated day after 
day, hour after hour, minute after minute, upon every 
possible and impossible occasion, it will at length take 
such hold of your imagination, that you will see the 
mystic letters which compose the name of Anthony 
Whyte wherever you turn your eyes — you will be 
ready to 'hollow out his name to the reverberate 
rocks, and teach the babbling gossips of the air to cry 
out'— Anthony Whyte !" 

"What's all that nonsense !" asked Lady Betty. 

"I have been rather prosy upon Miss Pratt and 
her adjunct — that's all," answered Colonel Delmour, 
slightly ; " and must have something to put aAvay the 
sound of Anthony Whyte" — and he hummed a few 
notes — "Do, Miss St. Clair, join me in expelling those 
hideous names I have invoked for your gratification — 
you sing, I am sure." 

But Gertrude was afraid to comply, for no one 
seconded the request. Lord Eossville, indeed, looked 
evidently much displeased ; but it was no less mani- 
fest that his nephew neither thought nor cared for 
anybody's feelings but such as he was solicitous to 
please ; and, before the party broke up, he had con- 
trived to make a very favourable impression on the 
only person present whose favour he was anxious to 
obtain. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

" Her tongue runs round like a wheel, one spoke after another ; 
tliei-e is no end of it. You would wonder at her matter to hear 
lier talk, and would admire her talk when you hear her matter. 
All the wonder is, whilst she speaks only thrums, how she 
makes so many different ends hang together." 

Richard Fleckno, 1658. 

Many visitors arrived the two following days from 
various quarters, though all from similar motives, viz. 
to see the young heiress and her plebeian mother. 
But amongst all the varieties of life, how few can 
even serve "to point a moral or adorn a tale." 

The most distinguished of those individuals were 
Lady Millbank and her daughters, who drove up in 
all the , bustle and parade of a barouche and four, 
splendidly emblazoned, with drivers and riders in the 
full pomp of blazing liveries, and, in short, the usual 
6clat of an equipage which at once denotes wealth and 
grandeur. The ladies were in the same style with 
their outward bearings, — tall, showy, dashing person- 
ages, with scornful looks and supercilious manners. 
They surveyed Miss St. Clair from head to foot with 
a bold stare ; and, after making some trifling remarks 
to her, turned their whole artillery against Colonel 
Delmour, who received their addresses with a sort of 



THE INHEKITANCE. 59 

careless familiarity, very different from the refined 
attentions he displayed towards his cousin. 

"Good heavens !" exclaimed one of the ladies, who 
had stationed herself at a window, " do look at this, 
Colonel Delmour ! " 

And at the piercing exclamation the whole party 
hastened to ascertain the cause. The phenomena aj)- 
peared to be a hackney-chaise of the meanest descrip- 
tion, which was displacing the splendid barouche, to 
the manifest mirth of the insolent menials who stood 
lounging at the door. 

"Who oan that be, I wonder V asked Lady Betty. 

Mrs. St. Clair turned pale with terror lest it 
should be any of her bourgeois relations forcing their 
way. 

" I conclude it must be our cousin Miss Pratt," said 
the Earl, in some agitation, to Lady Millbank ; and, 
while he spoke, a female head and hand were to be 
seen shaking and waving to the driver with eager 
gesticulation. 

"And Mr. Lyndsay, I vow!" exclaimed Miss 
Jemima Mildmay, throwing herself into a theatrical 
attitude of astonishment. 

The hack-chaise, with its stiff, rusty horses, had 
now got close to the door, and the broken, jingling 
steps being lowered, out stepped a young man, who 
Avas immediately saluted with shouts of laughter from 
the party at the window. He looked up and smiled, 
but seemed nowise disconcerted; as he stood patiently 
waiting for his companion to emerge. 



60 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I hope they are to perform quarantine," said 
Colonel Delmour, 

*' I vote for their being sent to Coventry," said Miss 
Augusta. 

"I prepare to stand upon the defensive," said Miss 
Maria, as she seized a smelling-bottle from oflF the 
table. 

At length Miss Pratt appeared, shaking the straw 
from her feet, and having alighted, it was expected 
that her next movement would be to enter the house ; 
but they knew little of Miss Pratt who thought all 
was done when she had reached her destination. Much 
yet remained to be done, which she would not trust 
either to her companion or the servants. She had, in 
the first place, to speak in a very sharp manner to the 
driver, on the condition of his chaise and horses, and 
to throw out hints of having him severely punished, 
inasmuch as one of his windows would not let down, 
and she had almost sprained her wrist in attempting 
it — and another would not pull up, though the wind 
was going through her head like a spear ; besides 
having taken two hours and a quarter to bring them 
nine miles, and her watch was held up in a triumphant 
manner in proof of her assertion. She next made it 
a point to see with her own eyes every article pertain- 
ing to her (and they were not a few) taken out of the 
chaise, and to give with her own voice innumerable 
directions as to the carrying, stowing, and placing of 
her bags, boxes, and bundles. All these matters being 
settled. Miss Pratt then accepted the arm of her com- 



THE INHERITANCE. 61 

panion, and was now fairly on her way to the drawing- 
room. But people who make use of their eyes have 
often much to see even between two doors, and in her 
progress from the hall door to the drawing-room door 
Miss Pratt met with much to attract her attention. 
True, all the objects were perfectly familiar to her, 
but a real looker, like a great genius, is never at a loss 
for subject; things are either better or worse since 
they saw them last ; or if the things themselves should 
happen to be the same, they have seen other things 
either better or worse, and can, therefore, either im- 
prove or disprove them. Miss Pratt's head, then, 
turned from side to side a thousand times as she went 
along, and a thousand observations and criticisms about 
stair-carpets, patent lamps, hall chairs, slab tables, etc. 
etc. etc., passed through her crowded brain. At length 
Miss Pratt and Mr. Lyndsay were announced, and 
thereupon entered Miss Pratt in a quick, paddling 
manner, as if in all haste to greet her friends. 

" How do you do, my Lord ? no bilious attacks, 
I hope, of late ! — Lady Betty, as stout as ever I see ; 
and my old friend Flora as fat as a collared eel. — Lady 
Millbank, I'm perfectly ashamed to see you in any 
house but your own ; but everything must give way 
to the first visit, you know, especially amongst kins- 
folk," taking Mrs. St. Clair by the hand, without 
waiting for the ceremony of an introduction. 

While this, and much more in the same strain, was 
passing with Miss Pratt at one end of the room, Mr. 
Lyndsay had joined the younger part of the company 



62 THE INHEKITANGE. 

at the other, and been introduced by Colonel Delmour 
to Miss St. Clair. There was nothing so striking in 
his appearance as to arrest the careless eye, or call 
forth instant admiration; yet his figure, though not 
much above the middle size, was elegant, his head 
and features were finely formed, and altogether he 
had that sort of classical tournure, which, although 
not conspicuous, is uncommon, and that air of calm 
repose which indicates a mind of an elevated cast. 
Still, seen beside Colonel Delmour, Mr. Lyndsay might 
have been overlooked. He had nothing of that bril- 
liancy of address which distinguished his cousin ; but 
he had what is still more rare, that perfect simplicity 
of manner which borrows nothing from imitation; 
and, as some one has well remarked, few peculiarities 
are more striking than a total absence of all afi'ecta- 
tion. Scarcely allowing time for the introduction. 
Miss Millbank began in a tone intended to be very 
sympathetic, 

" How dreadfully you must have been bored to-day 
with la pauvre Pratt ! Good heavens ! how could you 
inflict such a penance upon yourself? Did you not 
find her most shockingly annoying and dreadfully 
tiresome ? " 

"Annoying and tiresome to a certain degree, as 
everybody must be who asks idle questions," answered 
Mr. Lyndsay, with a smile, which, though very sweet, 
was not without a meaning. 

The rebuff", if it was intended for such, was how- 
ever lost upon his fair assailant. 



THE INHERITANCE. 63 

" Then, good heavens ! how could you bore yourself 
with her ? " 

"She was my mother's friend and relation," replied 
he, calmly. 

" Of all descriptions of entail, that of friends would 
be the most severe," said Colonel Delmour. 

"0 heavens! what a shocking idea!" exclaimed 
the three Miss Millbanks, in a breath, 

"What's the shocking idea, my dears !" demanded 
Miss Pratt, as she pattered into the midst of the 
group. "I'm sure there's no shocking realities here, 
for I never saw a prettier circle," darting her eyes all 
round, while she familiarly patted Miss St. Clair, and 
drawing her arm within hers, as she stood by the 
window, seemed resolved to appropriate her entirely 
to herself. Gertrude's attention was no less excited 
by Miss Pratt, who had to her all the charms of 
novelty, for though there are many Miss Pratts in 
the world it had never been her fortune to meet with 
one till now. 

Miss Pratt then appeared to her to be a person 
from whom nothing could be hid. Her eyes were not 
by any means fine eyes — they were not reflecting eyes ; 
they were not soft eyes; they were not sparkling 
eyes ; they were not melting eyes ; they were not 
penetrating eyes; neither were they restless eyes, 
nor rolling eyes, nor squinting eyes, nor prominent 
eyes— but they were active, brisk, busy, vigilant, im- 
movable eyes, that looked as if they could not be sur- 
prised by anything — not even by sleep. They never 



64 THE INHERITANCE. 

looked angry, or joyous, or perturbed, or melancholy, 
or heavy ; but morning, noon, and night they shone 
the same, and conveyed the same impression to the 
beholder, viz. that they were eyes that had a look — 
not like the look of Sterne's monk, beyond this world 
— but a look into all things on the face of this world. 
Her other features had nothing remarkable in them, 
but the ears might evidently be classed under the 
same head with the eyes; they were sometliing re- 
sembling rabbits' — long, prominent, restless, vibrating 
ears, for ever listening, and never shut by the powers 
of thought. Her voice had the tone and inflections 
of one accustomed to make frequent sharp interroga- 
tories. She had rather a neat, compact figure, and the 
tout ensemble of her person and dress was that of 
smartness. Such, though not quite so strongly de- 
fined, was the sort of impression Miss Pratt generally 
made upon the beholder. Having darted two or 
three of her sharpest glances at Miss St. Clair — 

"Do you know, I'm really puzzled, my dear, to 
make out who it is you are so like — for you're neither 
a Eossville nor a Black; and by -the -bye, have you 
seen your uncle, Mr. Alexander Black, yet ? What a 
fine family he has got. I heard you were quite smit- 
ten with Miss Lilly Black at the Circuit ball t'other 
night, Colonel Delmour. But you're not so ill to 
please as Anthony Whyte. That was really a good 
thing Lord Punmedown said to him that night : 
Looking at the two Miss Blacks, says he to Anthony, 
with a shake of his head — 'Ah, Anthony,' says he, 



THE INHERITANCE. 65 

'I'm afraid two Blacks will never make a White!' 
ha! ha! ha! Lord Eossville, did you hear that? 
At the Circuit hall Lord Punmedown said to Anthony 
Whyte, pointing to the two Miss Blacks — *I fear,' 
says he, ' two Blacks will never make a White.' ' No, 
my Lord,' says Anthony, 'for you know there's no 
turning a Blackamoor white !' ha ! ha ! ha ! 'A very 
jair answer,' says my Lord. Lady Millhank, did you 
hear of Lord Punmedown's attack upon Mr. Whyte 
at the ball — the two Miss Blacks " 

"I black-ball a repetition of that Ion mot" said 
Colonel Delmour. 

** You will really be taken for a magpie if you are- 
so black and white," said Miss Millhank. 

" 'Pon my word, that's not at all amiss — I must let- 
Anthony Whyte hear that. But, bless me. Lady Mil^ 
bank, you're not going away already ? — won't you stay 
and take some luncheon % — I can answer for the soups 
here. I really think, my Lord, you rival the Wh3^e 
Hall soups. " But disregarding Miss Pratt's pressing in- 
vitation, Lady Millhank and her train took leave, and 
scarcely were they gone when luncheon was announced. 

" Come, my dear," resumed the tormentor, holding 
Gertrude's arm within hers, " let you and I keep to- 
gether — I want to get better acquainted with you — 
but I wish I could find a likeness for you " — looking 
round upon the family portraits as they entered the 
eating-room. 

*' They must look higher who would find a simili- 
tude for Miss St. Clair," said Colonel Delmour. 

VOL. I. F 



66 THE INHERITANCE. 

Miss Pratt glanced at the painted ceiling repre- 
senting a band of very fat, full-blown rosy Hours. 
" Ah ha ! do you hear that, my Lord 1 Colonel 
Delmour says there's nothing on earth to compare to 
Miss St. Clair, and that we must look for her likeness 
in the regions above. Well, goddess or not, let me 
recommend a bit of this nice cold lamb to you — very 
sweet and tender it is — and I assure you I'm one of 
those who think a leg of lamb looks as well on a table 
as in a meadow :" — then dropping her knife and fork 
with a start of joy — " Bless me, what was I thinking 
of ? — that was really very well said of you, Colonel — but 
I've got it now — a most wonderful resemblance ! See 
who'll be the next to find it out?" 

All present looked at each other, and then at the 
pictures. 

Lord Eossville, who had been vainly watching for 
an opening, now took advantage of it, and with one 
of his long-suppressed sonorous hems, bespoke him as 
follows : — 

" Although I have not given much of my time or 
attention to the study of physiognomy, as I do not 
conceive it is pne likely to be productive of benefi&ial 
results to society ; yet I do not hesitate to admit the 
reality of those analogies of feature which may be, and 
undoubtedly are, distinctly traced through successive 
generations — the family mouth, for example," point- 
ing to along-chinned, pinky-eyed female, with a pursed- 
up mouth hanging aloft, '* as portrayed in that most 
exemplary woman, the Lady Janet St Clair, has its 



THE INHEKITANCE. 67 

prototype in that of my niece," turning to Gertrude ; 
"while, in the more manly-formed nose of Robert, 
first Earl of Rossville, an accurate physiognomist 
might discern the root, as it were " 

" My dear Lord Rossville ! " exclaimed Miss Pratt, 
throwing herseK back in her chair, "I hope you're 
not going to say Miss St. Clair has the nose of Red 
Robby, as he was called — root, indeed ! — a pretty 
compliment ! If it was a root, it must have been a 
beetroot. As Anthony Whyte says, it's a nose like 
the handle of a pump-well ; and as for Lady Janet's 
mouth, he says it's neither more nor less than a slit 
in a poor's-box." 

" Mr. Anthony Whyte takes most improper liberties 
with the family of St. Clair if he presumes to make 
use of such unwarrantable, such unjustifiable — I may 
add, such ungentlemanly — expressions towards any 
of its members," said Lord Rossville, speaking faster 
in the heat of his indignation ; " and it is mortifying 
to reflect that any one allied to this family should 
ever have so far forgot what was due to it as to form 
such coarse, and vulgar, and derogatory comparisons." 

" One of them is rather a flattering comparison," 
said Mr. Lyndsay ; " I'm afraid there are few mouths 
can be represented as emblems of charity." 

"Very well said, Mr. Edward," said Miss Pratt 
nowise disconcerted at the downset she had received. 
"Shall I send you this nice rib in return? — Lord 
Rossville, let me recommend the rhubarb tart to you. 
Miss Diana, my dear — I beg your pardon. Miss St. 



68 THE INHERITANCE. 

Clair, but I'll really never be able to call you any- 
thing but Diana — for such a likeness ! What have 
you all been thinking of, not to have found out that 
Miss St. Clair is the very picture of the Diana in the 
Yellow Turret?" 

Lord Rossville, in a tone of surprise and dis- 
pleasure, repeated, — 

"The Diana in the Yellow Turret ! impossible !" 

" Impossible or not, I can assure you it's the fact. 
Mrs. St. Clair, have you seen the Diana? — come 
with me, and I'll show it you — come, my dear, and 
see yourself as a goddess — come away — seeing's be- 
lieving, my Lord." And she jumped up, almost 
choking in her eagerness to display the discovery she 
had made. 

" Miss Pratt ! " cried the Earl, in a tone enough to 
have settled quicksilver itself, "Miss Pratt, this be- 
haviour of yours is — is — what I cannot possibly permit 
— the Yellow Turret is my private dressing-room, 
and it is surely a most improper and unwarrantable 
liberty " 

" I beg you ten thousand pardons, my dear Lord 
Rossville ! I really had quite forgot the change you 
have made in your dressing-room ; but, at any rate, I 
would have figured every creek and corner of yours 
fit to be seen at all times. There's Mr. Whyte — ^his 
dressing-room is a perfect show, so neat and nick- 
nacky ; his silver shoe-horn would be an ornament to 
any drawing-room." 

"Miss Pratt, this is really 1 ," and his 



THE INHERITANCE. 69 

Lordship hemmed in a manner which showed the 
greatest discomposure. 

"As we cannot be gratified with a sight of Mr. 
Whyte's shoe-horn," said Colonel Delmour, "it would 
certainly be some solace to be allowed to behold your 
Lordship's goddess ; I had forgot that picture, it is 
so long since I have seen it ; but I should certainly 
wish to prostrate myself at her shrine now." And he 
looked to Miss St. Clair as he spoke, in a manner to 
give more meaning to his words than met the ear. 

The Earl was much embarrassed. He was pro- 
voked at the irreverent and indecorous manner in 
which Miss Pratt had been going to rush into his 
dressing-room ; and he was piqued at the insinuation 
she had thrown out of its not being fit to be seen. 
He therefore wavered betwixt his desire of punishing 
her presumption by exclusion, or vindicating his own 
character by instant and unpremeditated admission. 
After maturely weighing the matter, he decided upon 
the latter mode of proceeding, and said, — 

" Although I have certainly no idea of permitting 
my private apartments to be thrown open whenever 
idle or impertinent, or, it may be, ill-disposed curiosity 
might prompt the wish, yet I do not object to gratify 
either my own family and friends, or even the public 
in general, with a view of them, when the request is 
properly conveyed, and at a proper and reasonable 
hour ; for, if there is a time for everything, it should 
likewise be remembered there is a manner for every- 
thing ; and although I do not consider a gentleman's 



70 THE INHERITANCE. 

dressing-room as the most elegant and delicate exhibi- 
tion for ladies, yet, upon this occasion, if they are so 
inclined" — bowing all round — "I shall be happy to 
conduct them to my private apartments." 

" The sooner the better," cried Miss Pratt, while 
the very ribbons on her bonnet seemed to vibrate 
with impatience. "Come, my dear, and see yourself 
as a goddess;" and again seizing Miss St. Clair, away 
she pattered full speed. 

"There's a broom where a broom shouldn't be," 
darting her eyes into the dark comer of a passage as 
she whisked through it ; then, peeping into a closet 
— " and for all the work he makes, I don't think his 
maids are a bit better than other people's." 



CHAPTER IX. 

•' What doth he get who ere prefers 
The scutcheon of his ancestors ? 
This chimney-piece of gold or brass ; 
That coat of arms blazon'd in glass ; 
When these v/ith time and age have end, 
Thy prowess must thyself commend ; 
True nobleness doth those alone engage, 
Who can add virtues to their parentage." 

Mildmay Fane, Earl of Westmoreland. 

Upon entering the turret, the first thing that caught 
Miss Pratt's eye was a shaving-glass, which she asserted 
was by no means the proper size and shape for that 
purpose, being quite different from the one used by 
Anthony Whyte, which was broader than it was long, 
while Lord Eossville's was longer than it was broad. 
A dispute, of course, ensued, for the Earl would not 
be bearded upon such a subject by any woman — 
when, suddenly giving him the slip in the argument, 
she exclaimed, "But, bless me, we're forgetting the 
Diana — and what a bad light you've put her in ! 
There's a great art in hanging pictures ; Mr. Whyte 
brought a man all the way from London to hang his ; 
and I'll never forget my fright when he told me the 
hangman was coming. Now I see her where I stand 



72 THE INHERITANCE. 

— Mrs. St. Clair, come a little more this way — there 
now — was there ever such a likeness?" 

"Astonishing !" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, in amaze- 
ment. 

"Diana never had such incense offered to her 
before," said Colonel Delmour. 

"The resemblance, if, indeed, there is a resem- 
blance," said the Earl in manifest displeasure, "is 
extremely imperfect; the portrait represents a con- 
siderably larger and more robust-looking person than 
Miss St. Clair ; it has also something of a bold and 
masculine air, which, I own, I should be sorry to per- 
ceive in any young lady in whom I take any interest, 
since nothing, in my opinion, derogates so much from 
female loveliness as a forward or presuming carriage." 

" My dear Lord Rossville ! how anybody, who has 
eyes in their head, can dispute that resemblance — just 
turn round, my dear, and show yourself," — to Miss 
St Clair, who, ashamed of the scrutiny, had turned 
away, and was conversing with Colonel Delmour a 
little apart, Mr, Lyndsay contemplated the picture 
with a thoughtful air, and occasionally stole a glance 
at Gertrude, but said nothing. 

" How do you account for such an extraordinary 
likeness V inquired Lady Betty of Mrs. St. Clair, as 
she stood, with her fat Flora under her arm, staring 
at the picture. 

" I am quite at a loss — if this picture is an ideal 
creation of the painter's imagination." 

" It's not that, I can assure you," interrupted Miss 



THE INHEKITANCE. 73 

Pratt. " The original was a real flesh-and-blood living 
person, or I've been misinformed," — with a look of 
interrogation to Lord Eossville. 

" If one of the family, however remote the resem- 
blance, as Lord Eossville justly remarked, does some- 
times revive, even at distant periods, in the person 

of ;" but Mrs. St Clair did not get leave to finish 

her sentence, 

" Oh, if Diana had been a St. Clair, there would 
have been no wonder in the matter, you know!" 
again dashed in the intolerable Pratt; "but the 
truth of the matter is, she was neither more nor less 
than bonny Lizzie Lundie, the huntsman's daughter. 
Much I've heard about Lizzie Lundie, and many a 
fine song was made upon her, for she was the greatest 
beauty in the country, high or low. There's one of 
the songs that's all the fashion now, that I remember 
singing when I was young, but they've changed the 
name from Lundie to Lyndsay," and Miss Pratt, in a 
cracked and unmusical voice, struck up, 

" Will you go to the Hielands, Leezy Lyndsay," etc. 

Lord Eossville seemed somewhat disconcerted at this 
abrupt disclosure of his Diana's humble pedigree, and 
anxious to account for Lizzie Lundie, the huntsman's 
daughter, being permitted a place amongst the nobles 
of the land, and that too in his private apartment, 
he therefore made all possible haste to atone for this 
solecism in dignity, and having hemmed three times 
began — 



74 THE INHEEITANCE, 

"Since this picture has attracted so mvich atten- 
tion, and called forth so much animadversion, it is 
proper, and, indeed, necessary, that some elucidation 
should be thrown on the circumstances to which it 
owes its birth." 

And again the Earl paused, hemmed, and looked 
round like a peacock spreading its plumage, and 
straining its neck in all directions, before it can even 
lift the crumb that has been thrown to it — while 
Miss Pratt, like a pert active sparrow, taking advan- 
tage of its attitudes, darts down and bears off the 
prize. 

"Oh, the story's soon told, for there's no great 
mystery about it. The late Lord there " — pointing to 
a picture of a fat chubby gentleman in a green coat, 
hunting-horn, and bag-wig — "was a second Nimrod in 
his young days, and had a perfect craze for dogs and 
horses, and he brought a famous painter here from 
some place abroad, I forget the name of it now, to 
take the beasts' likenesses — as old Lady Christian 
used to say, it was a scandal to think of dogs sitting 
for their pictures — ha ! ha ! ha ! In particular, there 
was a famous pack of hounds to sit, and the painter, 
chancing to see Lizzie one day with them about her, 
was struck with the fancy of doing her as a Diana ; 
and it was really a good idea, for I think she's the 
outset of the picture — Anthony Whyte says he would 
give a hundred guineas merely for her head and 
shoulders." 

Mrs. St. Clair had changed colour repeatedly dur- 



THE INHERITANCE. 76 

ing this piece of biography, and seemed not a little 
mortified at discovering that her daughter's beauty 
claimed no higher original than the huntsman's 
daughter. Upon a more close inspection, she there- 
fore declared that although there might be something 
in the tout ensemble to catch the eye at first sight, yet, 
upon examination, it would be found the features and 
expression were totally different. 

But Lord Rossville, resolved not to be baulked of 
his story, now commenced a more difiiise narrative of 
the circumstances to which Lizzie Lundie owed her 
posthvmious fame, concluding with his most unqualified 
dissent as to the possibility of there being the slightest 
resemblance except in the colour of the hair. But to 
do Miss Pratt justice, the resemblance was very re- 
markable. The Diana's features were on a larger 
scale, and her countenance had a less soft and intel- 
lectual cast than Miss St. Clair's ; her figure was also 
more robust than elegant, her complexion rather vivid 
than transparent, and her air rather bold than digni- 
fied ; but there was the same long-shaped, soft, dark- 
blue eyes, the same Grecian nose and mouth, the same 
silky, waving, dark ringlets, curling naturally around 
the open ivory forehead, forming altogether that rare 
and peculiar style of beauty where the utmost dehcacy 
of feature is yet marked and expressive, and the strong- 
est contrasts of colour are blended into one harmoni- 
ous whole. 

"Pray, what became of this divinity?" inquired 
Colonel Delmour. 



76 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I'm sure I can't tell you ; I think the story was 
that she had been crossed in love with some gentle- 
man, and that she married a Highland drover, or 
tacksman, I can't tell which, and they went all to 
sticks and staves." 

" How provoking," said Colonel Delmour, as he still 
stood contemplating the picture, " that so much beauty 
should have been created in vain." 

"How do you know that it was created in vain?" 
said Mr. Lyndsay. 

" Considering how very rare a thing beauty, perfect 
beauty, is, there certainly seems to have been rather 
a lavish expenditure of it on the huntsman's daughter 
and drover's wife." 

" Colonel Delmour, don't you remember what the 

poet says on that : 

' There's many a flower that's born to grow unseen, 
And waste its beauty on the senseless air. ' " 

" However rare beauty may be," said Mr. Lyndsay, 
passing over Miss Pratt's quotation, "your desire of 
confining it to the higher orders is rather too arbi- 
trary." 

" They certainly can better appreciate it," returned 
Colonel Delmour; "there is a refinement of taste re- 
quisite to admire such beauty as that," and he glanced 
from the Diana to Miss St, Clair. " How could one of 
the canaille possibly comprehend the fine antique cast 
of those features, the classical contour of the head, 
the swan-like throat, the inimitable moulding of the 
cheek; would not a pair of round white eyes, and 



THE INHERITANCE. 77 

blowzy red cheeks, with a snub nose, and a mouth 
from ear to ear, have been quite as well bestowed 
upon the drover 1 " 

"I daresay he could not talk so scientifically on 
the subject as you do," said Mr. Ljmdsay ; " but, for 
all that, he might have been as fond of his wife, and 
as proud of her too, as either you or I could have 
been." 

" Impossible — that is, supposing she had been of 
my own rank and station — not Venus herself could 
have won me to a mdsalliance." 

"Suppose the huntsman's daughter had been as 
perfect in mind and manner as in person " 

"The idea is absurd — the thing is impossible," 
interrupted Colonel Delmour, impatiently. 

" It is certainly difficult to conceive refinement of 
manners in a person of low birth ; but why may not 
a noble mind be conferred on a peasant as well as on 
a prince V 

" What !" cried Colonel Delmour, indignantly, " do 
you really pretend to say that the offspring of a clown 
or a mechanic — animals who have walked the world 
in hob-nailed shoes, or sat all their lives cross-legged, 
with their noses at a grinding-wheel, can possibly 
possess the same lofty spirit as the descendants of 
heroes and statesmen ? The very thought of being so 
descended must elevate the mind, and give it a con- 
scious superiority over the low -bom drudges of the 
earth." 

" Then you must feel yourself greatly superior in 



78 THE INHERITANCE. 

mind to Virgil, Horace, Shakespeare, Milton, Spenser, 
and a long et ccetera of illustrious names, down to the 
present day, who, if not absolutely low-born, have yet 
no pretensions to high birth. For my own part, I 
think it is rather humbling than elevating to reflect 
on the titled insignificance of this very family, who, 
though possessed of honours, wealth, and power for 
centuries, has never produced one man eminent for 
his virtues or his talents — nor, if we may trust to 
painters, one female celebrated for such beauty as this 
poor huntsman's daughter." 

" You see her as a goddess, remember," said Colonel 
Delmour, ironically; "perhaps in her blue flannel 
jupon, unsandalled feet, 'and kerchief, in a comely' 
cotton gown, carrying a mess to the dogs, she would 
have had fewer attractions even for your noble 
nature." 

"There is a taste in moral as well as in corporeal 
beauty," said Mr. Lyndsay, "and I can love and 
admire both for their own intrinsic merits without 
the aid of ornament. You, Delmour, must have them 
in court dress, with stars and coronets; but with 
beauty such as that," and his eye unconsciously rested 
on Gertrude, " had the mind, principles, and manners 
corresponded to it, I could have loved even Lizzie 
Lundie — perhaps too well" 

" Had the huntsman's daughter been an angel and 
a goddess in one," replied Colonel Delmour, warmly, 
" I never could have thought of her as my wife — there 
is degradation in the very idea." 



THE INHERITANCE. 79 

All this while Miss Pratt had, as usual, been 
gabbling to the rest of the party, in a manner which 
prevented their hearing or joining in this argument. 
Miss St. Clair, indeed, had contrived to pick up a 
little of it, and warmly adopted Colonel Delmour's 
sentiments on the subject. 

" I wonder what became of Lizzie's family, for I 
think always I heard she had a daughter as great a 
beauty as herself — I've a notion it was a daughter of 

hers Mrs. St. Clair, are you well enough 1 — Bless 

my heart, she's going to faint !" 

All crowded round Mrs. St. Clair, who seemed, 
indeed, on the point of fainting — the windows were 
thrown open — water was brought — smelling-bottles 
applied — till, at length, she revived, and, with a faint 
smile, avowed that she had been indisposed for some 
days, and was subject to spasms of that nature. Lord 
Rossville bent over his sister-in-law, as she sat at the 
open window, with the utmost solicitude; he felt 
really interested in her, for she had listened to him 
with the most unceasing attention, and without once 
interrupting him — a degree of deference he was little 
accustomed to in his own family. At length she de- 
clared herself perfectly recovered, and, supported by 
his Lordship and her daughter, she retired to her own 
apartment. 

" That was an unlucky remark of yo<irs, Colonel, 
about low marriages," whispered Miss Pratt ; "I really 
think it was that that overset her — though I suspect 
Lizzie Lundie had something to do with it too ; very 



80 THE INHERITANCE. 

likely some relationship there, for you know the 
Blacks are not just at the top of the tree," — with a 
knowing wink, — " that, and the smell of Lord Eoss- 
ville's boots and shoes together, was really enough to 
overset her ; " but Miss Pratt was now left to gabble 
to herself, for the rest of the party had dispersed. 



CHAPTER X. 

" I cannot blame theo, 
Who am myself attach'd with weariness, 
To the dulling of my spirits." 

Tempest. 

"How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seem to me 
all the uses of this world," is a feeling that must be 
more or less experienced by every one who has feeling 
enough to distinguish one sensation from another, and 
leisure enough to weary. There are people, it is well 
known, who have no feelings, and there are others 
who have not time to feel ; but, alas ! there are many 
whose misfortune it is to have feeling and leisure, and 
who have time to be nervous, have time to be dis- 
contented, have time to be unhappy, have time to 
feel ill-used by the world, have time to weary of 
pleasure in every shape ; to weary of men, women, 
and children ; to weary of books, grave and witty ; to 
weary of authors, and even of authoresses ; and who 
would have wearied as much of the wit of a Madame 
de Stael as of the babbles of Miss Pratt. 

In this disposition, perhaps the only solace is to 
find some tangible and lawful object of which to 
weary — some legitimate source of ennui, and then 

VOL. I. G 



82 THE INHEEITANCE. 

"sweet are the uses of adversity," when they come 
even in the questionable shape of a Miss Pratt. In 
the hum-drum society of a dull county, what a relief 
to the weary soul to have some person to weary of ! 
To have a sort of hag-fox to turn out, when fresh game 
cannot be had, is an enjoyment which many of my 
readers have doubtless experienced. Such was Miss 
Pratt — everybody wearied of her, or said they wearied 
of her, and everybody abused her, while yet she was 
more sought after and asked about than she would 
have been had she possessed the wisdom of a More, 
or the benevolence of a Fry. She was, in fact, the 
very heart of the shire, and gave life and energy to 
all the pulses of the parish. She supplied it with 
streams of gossip and chit-chat in others, and subject 
of ridicule and abuse in herself. Even the dullest 
laird had something good to tell of Miss Pratt, and 
something bad to say of her ; for nothing can convey a 
more opposite meaning than these apparent synonyms. 
But there was no one to whom Miss Pratt was so 
unequivocal a pest as to Lord Rossville, for his Lord- 
ship was a stranger to ennui ; perhaps cause and effect 
are rarely combined in one person, and those who 
can weary others possess a never-failing source of 
amusement in themselves. Besides, the Earl was in- 
dependent of Miss Pratt, as he possessed a wide range 
for his unwearying wearying powers in his own 
family; for he could weary his steward, and his 
housekeeper, and his gamekeeper, and his coachman, 
and his groom, and his gardener all the hours of 



THE INHERITANCE. 83 

the day, by perpetual fault-finding and directing. 
Perhaps, after all, the only uncloying pleasure in life 
is that of finding fault. The gamester may weary of 
his dice ; the lover of his charmer ; the bon-^ivant of 
his bottle ; the virtuoso of his virtti ; but while this 
round world remains with all its imperfections on its 
head, the real fault-finder will never weary of finding 
fault. The provoking part of Miss Pratt was that 
there was no possibility of finding fault with her. As 
well might Lord Eossville have attempted to ad- 
monish the brook that babbled past him, or have read 
lectures to the fly which buzzed round his head. For 
forty years Lord Eossville had been trying to break her 
in, but in vain. Much may be done, as we every day 
see, to alter and overcome nature : Ponies are made to 
waltz ; horses to hand tea-kettles ; dogs to read ; birds 
to cast accounts ; fleas to walk in harness ; but to re- 
strain the volubility of a female tongue is a task that 
has hitherto defied the power of man. With so much 
of what may be styled dissonance in similarity, it 
may easily be imagined that Lord Eossville and Miss 
Pratt, even when most in unison, produced anything 
but harmony. Yet they only jarred — they never 
actually quarrelled, for they had been accustomed to 
each other all their lives ; and while she laid all the 
rebufis and reproofs she received to the score of bile, 
he tolerated her impertinence on account of blood. 

The softness and suavity of Mrs. St. Clair's manners 
formed so striking a contrast to the sharp, gnat-like 
attacks of Miss Pratt, that Lord Eossville became 



84 THE INHERITANCE 

every day more attached to his sister-in-law's com- 
pany, and she soon found herself so firmly fixed in 
his good graces that she ventured to request permis- 
sion that she and her daughter might be allowed to 
visit her relations, with whom she had hitherto only 
communicated by letter. 

" Certainly, my dear madam," replied the Earl ; 
" nothing can be more proper and reasonable than that 
you should recognise and visit the different members 
of your own family, who, I am happy to think, are all 
persons of unblemished reputation and respectable 
stations in life, which respectability is in a fair way 
of being increased by votes which, I understand, an 
uncle and brother of yours have lately acquired in 
the county ; and as there is every appearance of our 
having a warmly- contested election shortly, their 
political influence, if properly directed, cannot fail of 
proving highly beneficial to them. I therefore give 
my unqualified assent as to the propriety of your visit- 
ing your own family, as soon as we can arrange the 
proper time, mode, and manner of doing so ; but, with 
regard to the daughter of the Honourable Thomas St. 
Clair, I must candidly acknowledge to you, my dear 
madam, I have not yet brought my mind to any fixed 
determination on that point — your own good sense 
will naturally point out to you the very peculiar situa- 
tion in which she stands. Miss St. Clair is at present 
to be viewed as the heiress presumptive to the titles, 
honours, and estates of this family ; but, observe, 
although presumptive, she is by no means heiress ap- 



THE INHEKITANCE. 85 

parent — for there is a wide and important distinction 
betwixt these apparent synonyms." Here his Lord- 
ship entered into a most elaborate explanation of 
these differences of distinction. " And now, my dear 
madam, I am sure you will agree with me that, in a 
situation of such peculiar delicacy, every step which 
Miss St Clair takes ought to be weighed with the 
utmost nicety and deliberation, since what might be 
befitting the heiress presumptive might be deemed 
derogatory to the heiress apparent ; and what dignity 
demands of the heiress apparent, the world might 
censure as an undue assumption of consequence in 
the heiress presumptive." 

Mrs. St. Clair, though choking with indignation 
at this round-about insinuation that her family was 
scarcely fit to be associated with by her own daughter, 
yet repressed her indignation, and as she did not con- 
sider it of much consequence that she should accom- 
pany her on her first visit, she readily yielded the 
matter with a good grace. But no sooner had she 
done so than the Earl, as was often his custom, im- 
mediately tacked about and took the opposite side 
of the argument. The result was that Mrs. and Miss 
St. Clair should immediately proceed to visit the re- 
spective members of the Black family, and the Earl's 
travelling chariot-and-f our, with all appliances to boot, 
was ordered out for the occasion. It was with a thrill 
of delight Mrs. St. Clair took her place in it, and 
drove off in all the 6clat of rank and stata 



CHAPTER XI. 

" Pictures like these, dear madam, to design, 
Ask no firm hand, and no unerring line. 
Some wandering touches, some reflected light, 
Some flying stroke alone can hit 'em right." 

Pope. 

Fearful anticipations mingled with Mrs. St. Clair's 
natural affection, as she thought of the meeting with 
her own family. Its only members consisted of a 
brother — who, partly by industry, partly by good 
fortune, had become the proprietor of a large tract of 
unimproved land in the neighbourhood ; two unmar- 
ried sisters residing in the county town ; and an old 
uncle from the East Indies, a half-brother of her 
mother's, reported to be enormously rich. When she 
had left home her brother was a mere raw, unformed 
lad, but he was now an elderly man, the husband of 
a woman she had never seen, and the father of a 
numerous family. After quitting the noble domain 
of Rossville, the country gradually assumed a less 
picturesque appearance — rocks, woods, and rivers 
now gave way to arable land, well-fenced fields, and 
well -filled barnyards; while these in turn yielded 
to vast tracts of improvable land, thriving belts of 



THE INHERITANCE. 87 

young plantation, ringstone dikes, and drains in all 
directions. 

It was in the midst of this scenery that Bellevue 
stood pre-eminent. It was a showy, white-washed, 
winged-house, situated on the top of the hill, com- 
manding an extensive view of "muirs and mosses 
many, 0," with traces of cultivation interspersed, and 
which by many was considered as a very fine — and by 
all was styled a very commanding — prospect. A dazz- 
ling white gate, with spruce canister lodge, opened 
upon a well-gravelled avenue which led to the mansion, 
surrounded by a little smiling lawn, with a tuft of 
evergreens in the centre. On one hand appeared a 
promising garden wall; on the other a set of com- 
modious-looking farm-offices; everything was in the 
highest order — all bespoke the flourishing gentleman- 
farmer. The door was opened by a stout, florid foot- 
boy in flaunting livery, whose yellow locks seemed to 
stifi"en at sight of the splendid equipage that met his 
view. The interrogatories, however, at length recalled 
him to a sense of duty ; and upon the question being 
put for the third time, whether his master or mistress 
were at home, he returned that cautious answer, 
which marks the wary, well-tutored, though perplexed 
menial, i.e., that he was not sure, but he would see. 
After an interval of about five minutes, during which 
much opening and shutting of doors was heard, and 
many a head was seen peeping over blinds and from 
behind shutters, the prudent Will returned with an 
invitation to the ladies to alight; and, leading the 



88 THE INHERITANCE. 

way, he conducted to a well-furnished, but evidently 
uninhabited drawing-room, where he left them with 
an assurance that his mistress would be there in a 
minute. Many minutes, however, elapsed, during 
which the visitors were left to find amusement for 
themselves, which was no easy task where the mate- 
rials were wanting. In such circumstances a fire is a 
never-failing resource — if bad we can stir it, if good 
we can enjoy it ; but here was no fire, and the bright 
handsome stove was only to be admired for itself, and 
the profusion of white paper which filled it. The 
carpet was covered, the chairs were in their wrappers, 
the screens were in bags — even the chimney-piece, 
that refuge of the weary, showed only two handsome 
girandoles. There were two portraits, indeed, large 
as life, hanging on each side of the fireplace, in all 
the rawness of bad painting, glaring in tints which 
Time himseK could never mellow. The one, it might 
be presumed, was Mr. Black, in a bright -blue coat, 
pure white waistcoat, and drooping Fall of Foyers- 
looking neckcloth, holding a glove, and looking very 
sensible. The other, it might be inferred, was Mrs. 
Black, sitting under a tree, in a yellow gown and ill 
put on turban, smiling with all her might ; and both 
evidently bent upon putting all the expression they 
possibly could into their faces, by way of getting a 
good pennyworth for their money. 

At length the door opened, and Mrs. Black, in ptv- 
pria persona, entered, followed by a train of daughters. 
She was rather embonpoint, with a fine healthy colour, 



THE INHERITANCE. 89 

clear blue eyes, and an open, good-humoured expression 
of countenance — forming, altogether, what is expres- 
sively termed a comely woman, which, if it mean 
something less than beauty, is often more attractive. 
She had evidently been dressing for the occasion, as 
her gown seemed scarcely yet out of the fold, but 
looked like a thing apart from her, and had that in- 
expressible air of constraint which gowns will have 
when gowns are made things of primary importance. 

Mrs. Black welcomed her guests in a manner which, 
if it had nothing of the elegance of ton, was yet free 
from affectation or pretension. She expressed her 
regret that Mr. Black should be from home ; but she 
had sent in search of him, and hoped he would soon 
cast up. Mrs. St. Clair, resolving to be delightful, sat 
with her sister-in-law's hand in hers, and, with a face 
of the most affectionate interest, was presently deep 
in inquiries as to the state of her family, the number 
of her children, their ages, sexes, names, pursuits, and 
so forth. The amount of the information she received 
was this : — Mrs. Black was the mother of eleven chil- 
dren living, and two dead ; — her eldest daughter (who 
had just gone to take a walk) was going to be married, 
and her youngest to be weaned. It was thought a 
very good marriage for Bell, as Major Waddell had 
made a handsome fortune in the Company's service, 
and was very well connected in the county, being 
cousin -german to Sir William Waddell of Waddell 
Mains, and very likely to succeed to him, if he was 
spared. He was also related to the Bogs of Boghall, 



90 THE INHEKITANCE. 

and the present Boghall had married a daughter of 
Lord Fairacre's, and their son was going to stand for 
the county. Major Waddell, to be sure, was a good 
deal older than Bell ; but he had kept his health well 
in India, and though not a beauty, was very well — at 
least he pleased Bell, and that was everything. Due 
congratulations were here ofFered by Mrs. St. Clair, 
with the customary remarks of its being a pleasant 
and desirable thing for the first of a family to form 
a respectable connection ; that any disparity of years 
was on the right side, etc. etc. etc. ; concluding with 
a request to be favoured with a sight of the young 
people. Mrs. Black's eyes beamed delight as she 
pulled the bell, and gave orders for the children to be 
brought, observing, at the same time, that they were 
sad romps, and seldom fit to be seen. Miss St. Clair, 
meanwhile, was engaged with her cousins, pretty, good- 
natured -looking girls, one of whom talked much of 
balls, and officers, and poetry; but as the children 
entered, she sighed, and said, there was an end of all 
rational conversation. The young Masters and Misses 
Black had all evidently been preparing for exhibition. 
They were fine, stout, blooming, awkward creatures, 
with shining faces, and straight-combed, though re- 
bellious-looking, hair; while a smart cap, red eyes, 
and sour face bespoke the sufferings of the baby. 
Altogether, they formed what is politely called an un- 
common fine family; they all made bows and curtseys, 
walked with their toes in, stood with their fingers 
in their mouths — and, in short, were a very fine family. 



THE INHERITANCE. 91 

Of course they were much commended and caressed 
by their new relations, till the entrance of Mr. Black 
turned the attention into another channel. Mr. Black 
was the only one of the family on whom the pheno- 
menon of a chaise-and-four had produced no visible 
effect ; — he entered ill-dressed, overheated, and with a 
common, even vulgar air — though, in reality, he was 
rather a good-looking man. Mrs. St. Clair had ex- 
pected something of a scene at meeting with her 
brother ; but he seemed to have no thoughts of any- 
thing of the kind, for he received his sister with that 
look and manner of plain hearty welcome which 
showed that anything of fine feeling would be com- 
pletely thrown away. Yet his greeting was sufficiently 
affectionate in its own blunt, homely kind. 

" It is a long time since you and I have met, Sally," 
said he, as he seated himseM beside his sister, with a 
child on each knee ; " but you have kept your looks 
well — to be sure you haven't had so large a share of 
the evils of life as I have had," — looking round with 
evident pride and exultation on his offspring, and 
affecting to sigh at the same time. Mrs. St. Clair 
shook her head, and sighed too ; but her sigh was a 
much better got-up sigh than her brother's : it said, 
or was intended to say, " Heaven only knows what I 
have suffered for that one ! " 

Mrs. Black seemed to understand it, for she said, 
with a look of sympathy, — 

" I am sure an only child must be a great misfor- 
tune, and we have great reason to be thankful, Mr. 



92 THE INHEEITANCE. 

Black, that so many of ours have been spared." Then 
beckoning one of her daughters, she whispered some 
instructions to her, accompanied with a key. The 
young lady left the room, and in a few minutes the 
yellow-haired laddie entered, bearing a massive silver 
tray, conveying the richest of cakes and the strongest 
and sweetest of wines. As Miss St. Clair threw back 
her bonnet to partake of the hospitalities, her uncle 
regarded her with more earnestness than good-breed- 
ing, then glanced all round on his own offspring. 

" I'm trying if I can make out a likeness betwixt 
your daughter and my brats," said he to his sister ; 
"but I don't think she has much of a Black face." 

"She is thought to resemble her father's family 
more than mine," replied Mrs. St. Clair, — colouring 
deeply, and looking rather displeased. 

" None of them that I have ever seen," returned 
Mr. Black; — "her father, if I remember right, had 
light hair and a flat face, and " 

"There is no end to arguing upon resemblances," 
interrupted Mrs. St. Clair, rising hastily ; " the general 
expression is sometimes very strong, when every fea- 
ture is different ;" — and she was preparing to depart, 
when one of the children, who was looking out at a 
window, exclaimed, "Here's Bell and the Major!" — 
and to depart in the face of Bell and the Major was 
declared to be impossible ; so Mrs. St. Clair, though 
fretting at the delay, was obliged to await the entrance 
of the lovers. 

Fortunately Miss Bell had no toilette duties to 



THE INHEEITANCE. 93 

perform, for she was dressed for the Major in a 
fashionable gown made by Miss Skrimpskirt of 
Tattleton, from a pattern of Miss Gorewell's in 
Edinburgh, who had got it from Miss Fleecewell of 
London, who had had hers direct from Madame 
Chefdoeuvre of Paris. Miss Bell, therefore, felt no 
disheartening doubts as to her appearance ; but firmly 
relying on the justness of her proportions, and the 
orthodox length of her waist, and breadth of her 
shoulders, and strong in the consciousness of being 
flounced and hemmed up to the knees, she boldly 
entered, followed by her betrothed. Miss Isabella 
Black was really a very pretty girl ; she had a pretty 
figure, pretty features, pretty hair, a pretty com- 
plexion, a pretty bonnet, a pretty shawl, pretty boots, 
and a pretty watch. But over all this prettiness was 
diffused an intolerable air of folly, affectation, and 
conceit, which completely marred the efiect of her 
charms. 

Major Waddell was a very passable sort of person 
for a nabob; — he had a dingy bronze complexion, 
tawny eyes, tolerable teeth, and a long, wrinkled, 
smirking, baboonish physiognomy. 

" Why, Bell, we were afraid you had run away 
with the Major," said Mr. Black, facetiously, address- 
ing his daughter on her entrance. 

"That is a very odd speech, I think, papa, to 
one in my situation," said Miss Bell, aflfecting to look 
much disconcerted. 

"Come, come, here are no strangers, so there 



94 THE INHEEITANOE. 

need be no secrets — it is pretty well known that if 
you don't run away with the Major, the Major will 
run away with you some of these days." 

Here Mr. Black laughed, and Mrs. Black laughed, 
and all the Masters and Misses Black laughed loud 
and long, — while in the general laugh the fair bride, 
as if overwhelmed with confusion, took her cousin 
aside and whispered — 

" This is a very awkward scrape I am brought 
into by papa's bluntness. It certainly was my in- 
tention to have announced the matter to my aunt 
and you at a proper time, but not just at present ; so 
I must request as a particular favour that you will 
say nothing about it at Eossville ; it is so very un- 
pleasant to be the talk of the whole county upon an 
affair of this kind that the Major and I had resolved 
to have it kept as quiet as possible. It was only 
yesterday he communicated it to Sir William Waddell, 
and he has not yet mentioned it to Lord Fairacre, or 
any of his other relations." 

Mrs. St. Clair was too impatient to be gone to 
allow any further latitude for the lovers to show oflF, 
but was again in the midst of leave-taking. Much 
was said about having a longer visit — of taking a 
family dinner — of spending a few days — of leaving 
Miss St. Clair to spend a little time and get acquainted 
with her cousins ; and Mrs. St. Clair could only dis- 
engage herself from this well-meant hospitality by 
promising to take the earliest opportunity of repeat- 
ing her visit. " I trust I may be excused from re- 



THE INHERITANCE. 95 

turning this visit," said Miss Bell, with a look of 
modest importance, " as in my situation I go nowhere 
at present," 

Escorted by Mr, Black and the Major, and followed 
by the whole family, Mrs. and Miss St, Clair resumed 
their places in the carriage, and were soon driven 
beyond the precincts of Bellevue. Their next desti- 
nation was to the house of the Miss Blacks, in the 
county town, and there they were accordingly driven. 



CHAPTER XIL 

" Lulled in the countless chambers of the braiu 
Our thoughts are linked by many a hidden chain. 
Awake but one, and lo ! what myriads rise ! 
Each stamps its image as the other flies ! 
Each, as the various avenues of sense, 
Delight or sorrow to the soul dispense. 
Brightens or fades ; yet all, with magic art. 
Control the latent fibres of the heart," 

PleasiM-es of Memory, 

There are few minds so callous as to revisit the 
scenes of their childhood without experiencing some 
emotion. And whether these scenes lie in the crowded 
city, amidst all the coarse and ordinary objects of 
vulgar life, or in the lonely valley, with its green hills 
and its gliding stream, the same feelings swell the 
heart as the thoughts of the past rush over it ; for 
they speak to us of the careless days of our child- 
hood, of the gay dreams of our youth, of the transient 
pleasures of our prime, of the faded joys of our old 
age. They speak to us of parents now sleeping in 
the dust, of playfellows in a far distant land, of 
companions altered or alienated, of friends become as 
strangers, of love changed into indifference. They 
speak to us, it may be, of time misspent, of talents 



THE INHERITANCE. 97 

misapplied, of warnings neglected, of blessings de- 
spised, of peace departed. They may speak to us, 
perchance, of God's holy law slighted, of His precepts 
contemned, of Himself forsaken ; of hearts, alas ! not 
purified and renewed by that grace whose aid they 
never sought, but, like the wasted volcano, parched 
and blasted in their own unholy fires. Fairer scenes 
all may have viewed than those on which their eyes 
first opened, but in them we behold only the inani- 
mate objects of nature, Avhich, however they may 
charm the senses or fill the imagination, yet want 
that deep and powerful interest which seems en- 
twined with our existence, and which gives " a local 
habitation and a name " so powerful a mastery over 
us. 

Something, too, there is of solemn thought in re- 
turning to a father's house — whether that father's arms 
are open to receive his long-absent child, or whether 
the eye that would have welcomed, and the tongue 
that would have blessed us, are now mouldering in 
the grave. Ah ! many are the wild tumultuous waves 
that roll over the human mind, and obliterate many 
of its fairest characters — its fondest recollections. 
But still the indelible impression of a parent's love 
remains impressed upon the heart. Even when steeped 
in guilt or seared in crime, one spot — one little spot — 
will still be found consecrated to the purest, the 
holiest, of earthly affections. 

It was with these mingled emotions Mrs. St. Clair 
found herself at the door of that mansion she had 

VOL. I. H 



98 THE INHERITANCE. 

quitted thirty-three years ago. It was the house in 
which she had first seen the light — where her parents 
had dwelt, and where she had left them surrounded 
hy a numerous family, but all were gone save the 
brother she had just seen, and two sisters, now its 
sole tenants. Even the most artificial characters still 
retain some natural feelings, and as Mrs. St. Clair 
crossed the threshold of her once hapj^y home, and 
the thoughts of the past rushed over her, she ex- 
claimed with a burst of anguish, — 

"Would to God I had never left it!" and, throw- 
ing herself upon a seat, she wept without control. 

There is something in real emotion that always 
carries conviction along with it. Although well- 
accustomed to the ebullitions of her mother's charac- 
ter, Miss St Clair saw and felt the depth of her 
present feelings, and sought by her tender and affec- 
tionate sympathy to soften her sense of sorrow. But, 
with a look and gesture, expressive only of abhorrence, 
her mother repelled her from her. At that moment 
a lady approached, and, throwing herself into her 
arms, Mrs. St. Clair sobbed in bitterness of spirit, 
Avhile her sister mingled her tears with hers. Miss 
Black was the first to regain her composure, and she 
said in a voice which, though still tremulous with 
emotion, was yet soft and sweet, — 

"I love those feelings, my dear Sarah; they are so 
natural. You miss all those you left behind, and you 
are thinking what a happier meeting this might have 
been, had it pleased God to have spared them to us ; 



THE INHERITANCE, 99 

but I trust there is a happy meeting yet in store 
for us." 

" Oh, no, no !" sobbed Mrs. St. Clair almost convul- 
sively, as she leant her head on her sister's shoulder. 

"My dear Sarah," said Miss Black in a tone of 
tender reproach, accompanied by an affectionate 
embrace; "but come, let me take you to our poor 
Mary, who cannot go to you." 

Mrs. St. Clair raised her head, and made an effort 
to subdue her emotion as she suffered herself to be 
led to the apartment where her youngest and favourite 
sister was. When she had left home she had left 
her a lovely romping child of five years old, with 
laughing blue eyes and curling flaxen hair ; and this 
image of infant beauty she had ever treasured in her 
memory, though reason had told her the reality had 
long since fled. But, alas ! reason can but imperfectly 
picture to us the slow and silent ravages of time ; 
and at sight of her sister Mrs. St. Clair felt as much 
shocked as though the change had been the meta- 
morphose of an instant instead of the gradual progress 
of years of suffering and decay. Imagination, indeed, 
could not have pictured to itself aught so affecting as 
the contrast thus presented by a glance of the mind. 
Mrs. St. Clair thought only of the gay, rosy, frolic- 
some creature, whose fairy form seemed even yet to 
bound before her eyes, or hang round her neck in 
infantine fondness ; and on that self-same spot where 
last she had parted from her she now beheld her a 
monument of premature decay — pale, motionless, and 



100 THE INHERITANCE. 

paralytic. For a moment she shrunk from the half 
living, half beatified looking being, with that instinct- 
ive horror with which the worldly mind recoils from 
all that reminds it of perishable nature. A faint 
streak of red tinged her sister's sallow cheek, and a 
tear glistened in her soft -blue eye, and her heart 
seemed to swell — perhaps with some almost forgotten 
feelings of humiliation at her own infirmities. But 
when Mrs. St. Clair again looked, the slight hectic had 
fled, the tear was dried, and the sigh was checked. 

"God's will be done, my sister!" said she, with a 
look and accent of meek and holy resignation. Mrs. 
St. Clair could not speak, but she threw herself on 
her sister's neck and wept. 

Gertrude, meanwhile, had stood aloof — her heart 
oppressed with sorrow, and her eyes filled with tears, 
as she contrasted her mother's feelings towards her 
sisters with those she had testified towards her ; and 
the painful conviction that she was not beloved forced 
itself upon her in all the bitterness such a discovery 
was calculated to excite. At length the agitation of 
the meeting between the sisters began to subside, and 
Miss Black, approaching her niece, tenderly embraced 
her, and led her to her sister. " Here is a stranger 
who has been too long overlooked," said she; "but 
once seen she will not be soon forgotten;" and she 
gently untied her bonnet, and looked on her with eyes 
of delighted afi'ection. Her Aunt Mary sweetly wel- 
comed her, and also regarded her with an expression 
of love and tenderness, such as Gertrude felt she 



THE INHERITANCE. 101 

never had read even in her mother's eye. There was, 
indeed, little resemblance between Mrs. St. Clair and 
her sisters, either in mind or appearance. Elizabeth, 
the eldest, belonged to that class who can neither 
be called handsome nor ugly, but are yet sometimes 
thought both. She had regular features, and a mild, 
sensible countenance ; but she was pale and thin, and, 
to casual observers, had altogether an air of medi- 
ocrity, which, in fact, was rather indicative of the 
consistency and uniformity of her character. She was 
a Christian in all things ; and its simple, unostentatious 
spirit pervaded all her looks, words, and actions, and 
gave to them a charm which, in her station, no 
worldly acquirements could have imparted. Her 
sister was many years younger, and in spite of sick- 
ness and suffering still retained traces of great beauty. 
Every feature was perfect ; but the dim eye, the pale 
cheek, and the colourless lip could now only claim 
pity where once they had challenged admiration. 
Yet neither pain nor sickness had been able to chase 
the seraphic expression which beamed on her counte- 
nance like sunshine amid ruins. It was the look of 
one already purified from all earthly passions, but who 
stUl looked with love and tenderness on the frailties 
of her fellow-mortals. 

Mrs. St, Clair seemed httle gratified by the fondness 
her sisters testified for her daughter. She remained 
silent and abstracted, with her eyes fixed on the 
memorials of former daysj for everything remained 
in the same primitive order as when she had left them ; 



102 THE INHERITANCE. 

and everything told some long -forgotten tale, or 
roused some sad though slumbering recollection. She 
fixed her eyes on some foreign shells which decorated 
the old-fashioned chimney-piece, — and what a train of 
associations did these mute and insignificant objects 
conjure up ! They were the gift of one who had 
loved her in early youth, and who had brought them 
to her — (all that he had to bring) — from afar ; and 
dearly had she prized them, for then she had loved 
the giver. But he was a poor and friendless orphan 

boy and she became the wife of an Earl's son. 

All may choose their own path in life, but who 
can tell to where that path may lead ? " The lot," 
indeed, " is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing 
thereof is of the Lord." Mrs. St. Clair had chosen 
that of ambition, and for thirty years she had dragged 
.out life in exile, poverty, and obscurity; while the 
one she had forsaken — that of faithful and disin- 
terested affection — would have led her to the sum- 
mit of fame, wealth, and honour. The poor despised 
sailor-boy had distinguished himself for his skill and 
bravery, and in the honourable career of his profes- 
sion had won for himself a noble fortune and a 
name that would descend to posterity. This Mrs. St. 
Clair knew, for she had heard of his heroic exploits 
with feelings of the bitterest regret and self-reproach; 
and it was those feelings which spread their gloom 
over her countenance as she looked on the tokens of 
his youthful love, and thought of the valiant, high- 
minded being she had bartered for a shadow of great- 



THE INHEKITANCE. 103 

ness. She withdrew her eyes, and they fell upon a 
venerable family Bible, from whence she had been 
accustomed to hear her mother read a chapter morn- 
ing and evening to her family. She recalled, as 
though it had been yesterday, the last evening she 
had passed in her father's house. The figure of her 
mother was before her; her voice sounded in her 
ears; the words recurred to her then as they had 
often done since. It was the last chapter of Eccle- 
siastes, unrivalled for its beauty and sublimity by 
aught that prophet ever spoke or poet wrote, begin- 
ning with that touching exhortation — "Remember 
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the 
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou 
shalt say I have no pleasure in them;" — and ending 
with that awful assurance, " For God shall bring every 
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether 
it be good or whether it be evil." Mrs. St. Clair 
uttered an involuntary groan, and closed her eyes. 

"You see much to remind you of the days that 
are gone, my dear sister," said Miss Black tenderly ; 
" but when the first impression is over, you. will love 
to look upon those relics, as we do, for the sake of 
those who loved us." 

"Never! ah never!" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, 
starting up, and going to the window ; " every thing 
here is torture to me — the very air suffocates me." 

She threw open the window and leant out, but it 
was only to behold other mementoes of days past and 
gone. She looked upon the little garden, the scene 



104 THE INHERITANCE. 

of many a childish gambol : it lay in the full blaze of 
a meridian sun, and all was fair and calm. An old 
laburnum tree still hung its golden blossoms over a 
rustic seat at one corner of the garden, and the time 
since she had sat there and decked herself in its 
fantastic garlands seemed as nothing. She remem- 
bered, too, when, after a long childish illness, her 
father had carried her in his arms to the garden, with 
what ecstasy she had breathed the fresh air, and 
looked on the blue sky, and plucked the gaudiest 
flowers. "It was on such a day as this," thought 
she; "the air is as fresh now as it was then, the 
sky is as fair, the flowers as sweet ; — but my father 
— ah! were he still alive, would he thank Heaven 
now as he did then for having preserved his child ! " 

And again the bitter drops fell from her eyes as 
she turned sickening from the view. The chord of 
feeling had been stretched too high to regain its 
ordinary pitch without an effort; — it is sometimes 
easier to break the chain than to loosen it. Mrs, St. 
Clair felt her mind untuned for ordinary communing, 
and she therefore took an abrupt leave of her sisters, 
with a promise of returning soon when her nerves 
should be stronger. Hurrying through the crowd, 
collected around the splendid equipage, she threw 
herself into it as if afraid of being recognised, and 
called impatiently to her daughter to follow. The 
postilions cracked their whips ; the crowd fell back ; 
and the proud pageant rattled and glittered along till 
lost to the gaze of the envying and admiring throng. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

' ' Nothing is lost on him who sees, 
With an eye that feeling gave, 
For him there's a stozy in every breeze, 
And a picture in every wave." 

Song. 

Mrs. St. Clair and her daughter proceeded for some 
time in profound silence. The former seemed plunged 
in painful meditation, the latter felt grieved and mor- 
tified at her mother's caprice and unkindness to her. 
The first thing which roused Mrs. St. Clair was the 
view of Rossville Castle, rising proudly above the 
woods which embosomed it; and, as she looked, 
gradually her brow cleared, her eye brightened, and 
her countenance regained its usual expression. 

" Gertrude, my love," said she, taking her daughter's 
hand, " I have almost forgot you to-day. But your 
own heart will enable you to conceive what mine must 
have suffered;" and she sighed deeply. 

" Yes," answered Miss St. Clair in some agitation, 
" I can conceive that you have felt much — but I can- 
not conceive why Oh ! mamma — what had I done 

that you should have shook me from you like a 
venomous reptile f 

"My dear Gertrude! what an idea! that is the 



106 THE INHERITANCK 

mere coinage of your brain. How can you allow your- 
self to be so carried away by your imagination'? 
Come, my dear, let us have no more such foolish 
fancies. Strange, indeed, it would be" — continued 
she, as the park gate was thrown open to receive them 
— "in any one to cast off like a reptile the fair heiress 
of this princely domain." 

But however strange her daughter felt, it was so, 
and she remained silent. Mrs. St. Clair resumed. 

^^ Apropos, Gertrude, when you are lady of Eoss- 
ville, you must build me a little tiny cottage on yon 
lovely green bank, where I may live quietly as a 
humble cottager, while you play the great lady. 
Come, promise me, Gertrude, that I shall have a croft 
from you — a but and a ben — a cow's grass and a 
kaQ-yard," 

There was something so forced and unnatural 
in her mother's sudden gaiety, that Miss St. Clair, 
accustomed as she was to all the inequalities of her 
temper, felt almost frightened at it, and she was at 
a loss how to reply. 

"So you won't promise me, Gertrude, even a 
humble independence for my old age ? Perhaps you 
are right to be cautious. Lear's daughters spoke him 
fair, and after all turned him out of doors, and why 
should I expect more from you?" 

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Miss St. Clair, bursting 
into tears, "do not kill me with such cruel words." 

"Is it so cruel, then, in a mother to crave a pittance 
from the bounty of her child?" 



THE INHERITANCE. 107 

" It is cruel to doubt that I would give you all — 
yes, were all this mine to-morrow, I could not be more 
mistress of it than you shall be." 

" So you think at present, Gertrude, but you know 
not as I do the mutabihty of the human mind. You 
will form other ties — other connections; you will 
marry, and your mother will be forgotten — perhaps 
forsaken; — you will marry," cried she with increased 
violence, " you will marry, and I shall be left to starve; 
you will fall a prey to the artifices of a Colonel 
Delmour — a needy, desperate spendthrift. I see 
already he is paying court to the future heiress, and, 
once the wife of that designing, extravagant man, you 
will have nothing to bestow." 

Shocked and amazed at her mother's violence, Miss 
St. Clair sought to tranquillise her by assurances that 
she was mistaken in supposing Colonel Delmour had 
any such views, when Mrs. St. Clair interrupted her, 
— " Promise me, then, that you will never become his 
wife." 

There is always something revolting to an open 
ingenuous mind in being fettered by promises; but 
there was something more than even that natural 
repugnance to make Gertrude shrink from thus bind- 
ing herself to her mother's will, and she remained 
silent ; but the deep blush that burned on her cheek 
spoke more eloquently than words. Mrs. St. Clair 
regarded her with a piercing look ; then exclaimed, 
in a transport of anger: "And is it even so — and all 
that I have done, and suffered, is " then, suddenly 



108 THE INHEKITANCE. 

stopping, she added, in a milder tone, — "Gertrude, 
my wish is to save you from the dangers with which 
you are already surrounded; promise me, at least, 
that you will not marry until you have attained the 
age of twenty-one — that you will never marry without 
my consent, and until you have provided for my old 
age." 

" Mamma," said Miss St, Clair, with a calmness and 
self-possession which bespoke her determination, "I 
here promise that I will not marry, without your con- 
sent, before the age of twenty-one, and until I have 
provided for you as becomes my mother ; more I can- 
not — I dare not — I will not — promise." 

"Then with that I must be satisfied," said Mrs. 
St. Clair, as the carriage stopped at the Castle door ; 
and having alighted, she entered the house, while her 
daughter stood some minutes on the lawn, inhaling 
the mild freshness of a west wind laden with the 
balmy sweets of opening buds and blossoms. In- 
sensibly she strolled on ; and gradually the impression 
of the unpleasant scene she had just had with her 
mother wore away beneath the calming influence of 
nature's charms — the clear cloudless sky ; the lulling 
flow of the river ; the bright green woods in all the 
luxuriance of early summer. 

Miss St. Clair wandered on till she reached a little 
secluded spot she had not yet seen. On the top of a 
green knoll that rose gradually from the river stood 
part of an ancient building of an irregular and pictur- 
esque form, but now almost covered with ivy. Some 



THE INHERITANCE. 109 

cherry, or what, in the language of the country, are 
called geen trees, grew almost close to it ; — they were 
now white with blossoms, and formed a fanciful con- 
trast to the emblems of age and decay with which 
they were combined. The ground betwixt the river 
and the ruin appeared to have been originally a garden, 
or orchard ; and some old apple trees still remained, 
whose mossy trunks and shrivelled branches bore 
evidence of their antiquity, while here and there a 
cluster of rich pink blossoms showed that 

" Life was in the leaf, for still, between 
The fits of falling snow, appear'd the streaky green." 

Some aged weeping willows dipt their silvery foliage 
in the dark waters, as they glided slowly and silently 
along. It was a scene where the contemplative mind 
might have mused over the mournful record of time, 
and things, and people, past and gone, with their 
joys and their sorrows, — where the youthful imagi- 
nation might have pictured to itself some ideal 
paradise yet to be realised. 

"Ah!" thought Gertrude, "how willingly would 
I renounce all the pomp of greatness to dwell here 
in lowly affection with one who would love me, and 
whom I could love in return ! How strange that I, 
Avho could cherish the very worm that crawls beneath 
my foot, have no one being to whom I can utter the 
thoughts of my heart — ^no one on whom I can bestow 
its best affections ! " She raised her eyes, swimming 
in tears, to heaven ; but it was in the poetical enthu- 
siasm of feeling, not in the calm spirit of devotion. 



■ 



no THE INHERITANCE. 

She was suddenly roused by hearing some one 
approach, and presently Colonel Delmour, forcing his 
way through some wild tangled bushes, hastened 
towards her with an appearance of the greatest 
delight. At sight of him, the thoughts of her 
mother's warning rushed to her recollection — the dis- 
like she had expressed, the suspicions she harljoured, 
the promise she would have exacted — all seemed 
to give him a sort of inexplicable interest in her eyes. 
She coloured deeply, and the consciousness she had 
done so added to her confusion. 

" I have to apologise to you," said Colonel Del- 
mour, "for thus literally forcing my way to you. 
Lyndsay and I were practising archery when I 
descried you ; to see you, and not to fly to you, was 
impossible, had Briareus himself opposed my passage ; 
so, leaving Edward master of the field, I winged my 
way to you like one of my own arrows — but I fear I 
startled you 1 " 

Miss St. Clair felt as though she were acting in 
direct disobedience to her mother in thus meeting, 
even accidentally, with the man she had just heard 
denounced by her. In great embarrassment she 
begged he would resume his exercise, and she was 
moving away when Colonel Delmour caught her 
hand, and in a low tone said, — 

"Do not stir from hence, unless you wish to 
encounter Miss Pratt's observations; she is beating 
about here ; I saw her as I came along, but I trust 
she will lose scent Do remain till that danger is past." 



THE INHEKITANCE. Ill 

Almost equally averse to encounter Miss Pratt at 
any time, but more particularly at present, she suffered 
Colonel Delmour to seat her on a little mossy knoll, 
and throwing himself on the grass at her feet — 

" Be this your throne, and behold your subject," 
said he in a haK serious, half sportive tone; then 
raising his eyes to hers, he repeated — 

' ' Le premier jour qu'on aime on se plait en secret 
A mettre au rang des rois I'objet que Ton adore ; 
Et s'il 6toit un rang plus eclatant encore 
Ce seroit la celui que le coeur choiseroit. " 

Miss St. Clair tried to reply in a strain of badinage, 
but the words died on her lips, and colouring still 
more deeply, she remained silent. At that moment 
Mr. Lyndsay appeared, but ere he had time to address 
her, the shrill voice of Miss Pratt was heard, and 
presently she broke in : 

" Ah, ha ! so you are all here ! — Upon my word, 
here's a meeting of friends. It puts me in mind of 
a scene in a play, where all the lovers meet to run 
away with pretty Mistress Anne Page, and the one 
cries mum, and the other cries budget." 

"Two excellent words," said Colonel Delmour, 
looking much provoked ; " of course you understand 
their meaning — be silent and be gone." 

"Two very impertinent words in my opinion," 
said Miss Pratt, seating herself beside Gertrude ; 
" and, to tell you the truth, I've no great notion of 
your mums. There's a family in this county all so 
tongue-tied, that Anthony Whyte calls their house 



112 THE INHERITANCE. 

the Mummery — and by-the-bye, Mr. Edward, I really 
think you may cry mum any day ; you're grown very 
silent of late." 

"A proof I am growing wiser, I suppose," 
answered he laughingly, "according to some great 
authority, who, I think, says most men speak from 
not knowing how to be silent." 

" The saying of some dull blockhead, I suspect," 
said Colonel Delmour, still evidently out of humour. 

"Indeed, I think so too, Colonel," cried Miss 
Pratt ; " anybody can hold their tongue, but it's not 
everybody that can speak." 

" Not every body that ought to speak, or, at least, 
ought to be listened to," said Colonel Delmour, con- 
temptuously turning from her, and addressing some 
words in French in a low tone to Gertrude, while 
Miss Pratt gabbled on — 

" Bless me ! what a tear I've got in my gown ! 
there's really an ill luck attends this gown ; I never 
have it on without its meeting with some accident — 
that's all I've got by hunting after you youngsters ; " 
and in the twinkling of an eye her huswife was out 
— her thimble on her finger, and her needle flying 
through all the intricacies of a very bad cross tear. 

" What's this we were talking about 1 Oh, about 
people holding their tongues ! I really wish these 
birds would hold theirs, for I'm perfectly deaved with 
their chattering — sh, sh," shaking her parasol at a gold- 
finch. " I really think young people should be made 
to hold their tongues, and only speak when they're 



THE INHERITANCE. 113 

spoken to — was that a fish that leapt in the water 
just now? — what a pity but one of you had had a 
fishing-rod in your hands instead of these senseless 
bows and arrows ! it would have been some amuse- 
ment to have seen you hook a nice three -pound 
weight caller trout — and really old people should be 
cautious of speaking ; they're sometimes rather slow, 
you know — not but what I can listen to anybody. 
Bless me ! how the wind's blowing these blossoms 
about — I'm like to be blinded with them." 

"Come, you shall listen to me, then," said Mr. 
Lyndsay, as he caught some of the falling blossoms, 
" while I apostrophise them in some pretty lines of 
Herrick's — 

'TO BLOSSOMS. 

• Fair pledges of a fruitful tree, 
Why do ye fall so fast ? 
Your date is not so past ; 

But you may stay here yet a while, 
To blush and gently smile ; 
And go at last. 

• What were ye born to be, 
An hour or half s delight, 
And so to bid good night ? 

'Twas pity nature brought ye forth, 
Merely to show your worth, 
And lose you quite. 

• But you are lovely leaves, where we 
May read how soon things have 
Their end, though ne'er so brave ; 
And after they have shown their pride 
Like you a while, they glide 

Into the grave. ' " 
VOL. I. I 



114 THE INHERITANCE. 

Miss Pratt testified great impatience while the 
verses were repeating; but the purpose was answered 
— the time was passed while the fracture was repair- 
ing ; and, afraid of more poetry — for which she had 
a mortal antipathy — she readily assented to Miss St. 
Clair's proposal of returning home. 

"I can tell you one thing, my dear," whispered 
she to Gertrude, "that mum should be the watch- 
word here to-day ; — a certain person," with a wink at 
Colonel Delmour, "is but a younger brother, and 
not the thing. He can be very pleasant when he 
pleases ; but take my word for it he's not to ride the 
ford upon. But, bless me, I had no notion it was so 
late, and I've a bit of lace to run upon my gown before 
dinner!" — and away ran Miss Pratt to her toilet, 
while Gertrude retired to her chamber, to ruminate 
on the events of the day. 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

" Keep, therefore, a true woman's eye, 
And love me still, but know not why ; 
So hast thou the same reason still 

To dote upon me ever." 

Old Madrigal. 

That " she who deliberates is lost " is a remark that 
has been so often verified, that although there are 
innumerable instances of women deliberating to be 
saved, yet when a lover suspects the object of his 
wishes to be debating the question of " To love or not 
to love," he feels pretty secure that it will be decided 
in his favour. At least so felt Colonel Delmour, as he 
marked the thoughtful cast of Miss St. Clair's counte- 
nance when she entered the drawing-room before 
dinner. She had, indeed, that day deliberated more 
than she had ever done in the whole course of her 
life before, though her deliberations had not yet 
assumed any distinct form. By nature tender and 
aflfectionate in her disposition, she was likewise high- 
spirited and impatient of unjust control; and the 
situation in which she was now placed was calculated 
to call forth all the latent energies of her character. 
" n y a quelquefois dans le cours de la vie, de si chers 



116 THE INHERITANCE. 

plaisirs et de si tendres engagements que I'on nous 
defend, qu'il est naturel de desirer du moins qu'ils 
fussent permis." 

Miss St. Clair certainly could not help wishing that 
she had not been forbidden to love her cousin ; for, 
although he had not absolutely declared himself her 
lover, he had said more than enough to convince her 
that he was deeply in love, and that the happiness of 
his life hung upon her decision. When she thought 
of her mother's prejudice against him, so unjust, so 
unaccountable, it seemed next to impossible for her 
to remain in a state of indecision. She must either 
adopt her mother's sentiments, and hate, fly, abjure 
him ; or she must yield to her own inclinations, and 
listen to him — look on him, and love him. In this 
state of mental embarrassment, it was impossible for 
any one so ingenuous to conceal what was passing in 
her mind. But those who were most interested in 
observing her construed her behaviour each accord- 
ing to their own wishes. In her constrained manner 
and averted eyes, whenever Colonel Delmour addressed 
her, Mrs. St. Clair flattered herself she saw sjonptoms 
of that distrust and dislike she had endeavoured to 
inculcate ; while he for the present felt satisfied in 
the consciousness that he was at least not an object 
of indifference. 

But it was impossible for any ruminations to be 
carried on long in the presence of Miss Pratt, whose 
own ruminations never lasted longer than till she had 
made herself mistress of the dresses of the company 



THE INHERITANCE. 117 

or the dishes on the table. Having finished her 
scrutiny of the former she addressed Mrs. St. Clair : 

" You were very soon home to-day, I think ; you 
must really have paid fashionable visits to your friends 
— to be sure your sisters' is not a house to stay long 
in. Poor Miss Mary ! what a pretty creature she was 
once, and as merry as a grig ; but she has taken rather 
a religious turn now ; — to be sure, when people have 
not the use of their legs what can they do 1 I'm sure 
we should be thankful that have all our faculties." 

"Except the faculty of being religious," said Mr. 
Lyndsay, with a smile. 

"A certain degree of religion I think extremely 
proper," said Miss Pratt in a by-way-of serious manner ; 
— " but I'm just afraid it's rather overdone — not that 
I mean to say anything against the Miss Blacks, for 
I assure you I have a very high respect for them ; — 
and old Mr Eamsay ! how did you find him ? — in a 
tolerable tune, I hope ?" 

" I was afraid of trespassing too far on Lord Ross- 
ville's goodness, by detaining his carriage and servants, 
and therefore delayed visiting my uncle till another 
opportunity." 

"That was being extremely considerate, indeed," 
began his Lordship, but as usual, was cut short by 
Miss Pratt. 

" Bless me ! what's the use of carriages and servants 
but to wait 'i If you had played your cards well you 
would have gone first to your uncle — an old man in a 
night-cap, worth good seventy thousand pounds, and as 



118 THE INHERITANCE. 

cross as two sticks, is not to be sneezed at, as Anthony 
Whyte says; but there's the gong — Oh, Lord Eossville, 
I wish you would really get a bell, for I declare there's 
no hearing one's self speak for that gong — or what 
would you think of a trumpet ? Bells and gongs are 
grown so common that Anthony Whyte's going to 
get a trumpet." 

*' Being already provided with a trumpeter, it is 
quite proper that Mr. Whyte should have a trumpet," 
said Colonel Delmour. 

" Considering with what deadly intentions we 
assemble at the dinner -table," said Mr. Lyndsay, " I 
really think a warlike instrument a much more appro- 
priate sjonbol than a peaceful, fasting, matin-sounding 
bell — indeed, the organ of destructiveness is always 
so strong with me at this hour, and I feel so much of 
the fee, fa, fum about me, that I can scarcely ask you 
to trust yourself with me," and he good-humouredly 
gave his arm to Miss Pratt, as she was pattering away 
to the dining-room, with rather a discomfited look, by 
herself ; " and now for the pride, pomp, and circum- 
stance of glorious war," as the party seated themselves 
at the splendid board. But Miss Pratt's mortification 
never could be made by any possible means to endure 
much longer than the shock of a shower-bath ; and 
by the time the dishes were uncovered, Eichard was 
himself again. 

"Colonel Delmour, what's that before you? — I 
think it looks like fricasseed chicken ; I'll thank you 
for some of it;" and Colonel Delmour, with the most 



THE INHERITANCE. 119 

indifferent air as to Miss Pratt's wants, and talking 
all the while to Miss St. Clair, sent her a part which 
did not suit her taste. 

"Just take that back," said she to the servant, 
"with my compliments to Colonel Delmour, and I'll 
be obliged to him for a wing. Colonel, don't you 
know it's the fashion now, when you help game or 
poultry, to ask : 'Pray, do you run or fly f meaning 'Do 
you choose leg or wingl' There was a good scene at 
Anthony Whyte's. One day fat Lady Puffendorf was 
there — you know she's so asthmatic she can hardly 
walk — so when she chose chicken, 'Pray, ma'am,' says 
Anthony, 'do you run or fly f Of course a fine titter 
ran round the company. Lord Kossville, did you 
hear that? Colonel Delmour, remember I fly." 

"I shall have great pleasure in assisting your 
flight," said he, with an ironical smile ; " pray when 
may we expect to see Miss Pratt take wing." 

"Is that, that you may have a shot at me with 
your bow and arrow 1 I thought, indeed, you looked 
as if you were rather bent upon wounding hearts than 
harts to-day — you understand the difference, don't 
you, Miss St. Clair 1" who only coloured a reply, and 
even Colonel Delmour seemed disconcerted. " Well, 
never mind — mum's the word you know," with a pro- 
voking wink; "only, I advise all young ladies who 
value their hearts to cry budget to gentlemen with 
bows and arrows." Lord Eossville's ideas, fortunately, 
never could keep pace with Miss Pratt's tongue ; he 
had now only overtaken her at the "run and fly," 



120 THE INHERITANCE. 

and was busy preparing, with all the powers of his 
mind, a caveat against the use of cant terms — to 
begin with a quotation from Lord Chesterfield, and 
to be followed up by a full declaration of his own 
sentiments on the subject. In short, his mode of 
proceeding was something like bringing out a field- 
piece to knock down a fly, which, in the meantime, 
had perched itself on the very mouth of the cannon ; 
unconscious of the formidable artillery that was pre- 
paring against her, she buzzed away. 

"Let me help you to some asparagrass, my Lord ?" 
helping herself largely in the meantime ; " very fine 
it is, though rather out of season now — it has been 
long over at Whyte Hall. But who can help aspara- 
grass with asparagrass-tongs ! Anthony Whyte says, 
if ever he's prevailed upon to go into Parliament, it 
will be for the sole purpose of bringing in three bills 
for the relief of the rich. One of them is to be an 
act for the suppression of asparagrass-tongs ; another 
is to make it felony for a cook to twist the legs of 
game, or force a turkey to carry its head imder its 
wing ; and a third is " 



But here Lord Rossville's indignation got the better 
of his good-breeding, and even overcame the more 
tardy operations of his mind, and before Anthony 
Whyte's third bill could be brought forward, he ex- 
claimed, " Mr, Anthony Whyte bring bills into Parlia- 
ment ! Pray, Miss Pratt, have you any authority for 
supposing, or insinuating, that Mr. Whyte has the 
most distant shadow of an idea of attempting to pro- 



THE INHERITANCE. 121 

cure a seat in Parliament 1 If he has, I can only say 
I have been most grossly misinformed ; if he has not, 
it is highly improper in you, or any of his relations or 
friends, who the world will naturally conclude are in 
his confidence, to start such a supposition ; — it is a 
serious, a very serious, matter to tamper with a gentle- 
man's name in politics, more particularly in the 
troublesome and factious times in which we live." 
Even Miss Pratt was for an instant discomfited by 
the solemn indignation of this address; but she 
quickly rallied, and whispering to Mr. Lyndsay — 
"He's very bilious to-day; his eyes are like boiled 
gooseberries, honest man!" — she resumed: "Bless 
me, Lord Rossville ! one would think I had spoken 
high treason, but I was only joking; Mr. Whyte, I 
can assure you, has too much good sense to think of 
going into Parliament; if he had had a mind that 
way he might have been in long ago ; I'm told, from 
pretty good authority, he might carry the county any 
day he liked." 

Here the Earl absolutely gasped in the attempt to 
bring up words long and strong enough to immolate 
the presumption of Miss Pratt and Anthony Whyte. 
"I can assure you, both Lord Punmedown and Sir 
Thomas Turnabout spoke seriously to Mr. Whyte 
about it some time ago. * Anthony,' says my Lord, 
'if you wish to sit you've only to stand.' Nothing 
could be stronger than that, you know. 'Faith, my 
Lord,' says he, ' I beheve I would have to lie in the 
first place.' Very good, wasn't it ? Anthony's always 



122 THE INHERITANCE. 

ready with his answer; I assure you if he was in 
Parhament he would keep his own." 

"Is there anybody talked of in opposition to 
Eoberti" asked Colonel Delmour, as if he had not 
even deigned to hear Miss Pratt. " Apropos — I had a 
letter from him this morning." 

" Indeed ! " exclaimed the Earl with great earnest- 
ness. "I am rather surprised that such a piece of 
information should have been only communicated to 
me in this accidental manner — I have been anxiously 
looking for letters from Mr. Delmour for some days ; 
what does he say with regard to the sitting of Parlia- 
ment, and does he point at any probable time for 
coming north?" 

" I merely glanced at his letter," answered Colonel 
Delmour, with an air of indifference; "it seemed 
filled as usual with politics, and I am no politician." 

"I am not so sure about that," said Miss Pratt in 
an under tone, and with a most provoking significant 
look. 

"But you shall hear what he says. Smith" — 
turning to his servant — "you vtdll find some letters 
upon the writing-table in my dressing-room; bring 
them here." 

"I hope you don't leave your love-letters lying 
about that way. Colonel ?" cried the incorrigible Pratt. 
" I assure you, if I was a young lady, I would take care 
how I corresponded with you — you're not like Anthony 
Whyte, who keeps all his letters like grim death." 

The letters were brought, and Colonel Delmour, 



THE INHERITANCE. 123 

taking his brother's from amongst them, glanced his 
eye over it, and read in a skimming manner — "Ani- 
mated and protracted debate — admirable speech — legs 
two hours and a quarter — immense applause — 197 of 
majority — glorious result — opposition fairly discom- 
fited," etc. etc. ; he then read aloud — 

" Pray, inform the Earl there is no longer a doubt 
as to the dissolution of Parliament next session ; we 
must therefore prepare to take the field immediately. 
Lord P. and Sir J. T. intend to oppose us, I under- 
stand, and to bring forward some tool of their own, 
but I have little fear as to the result. I now only 
wait the passing of the road bill, and the discussion 
on the resumption of cash payments, to be off for 
Scotland ; my uncle may therefore expect me in the 
course of a few days, when I trust we shall be able to 
make a tolerable muster. P.S. — I see a Major Wad- 
dell has lodged claim for enrolment; do you know any- 
thing of him'? " 

"Major Waddell!" repeated the Earl, putting his 
hand to his forehead in a musing attitude, as if en- 
deavouring to recollect him. 

"Major Waddell," said Mrs. St. Clair, in her softest 
manner, "is a gentleman of large fortune, lately re- 
turned from India — heir, I understand, to Sir William 
Waddell, and upon the point of marriage with a niece 

of mine ; his vote, I am sure " Luckily, before 

Mrs. St Clair could commit herseK and Major Wad- 
dell's vote, Miss Pratt dashed in — " Ay ! Miss Bell 
Black going to be married to Major Waddell ! Ton 



124 THE INHERITANCE. 

my word she has fallen upon her feet ! That will be 
a disappointment to many a one, for I assure you the 
Major's a prize ; and I know three ladies he was sup- 
posed to be looking after — he even went so far as to 
present one of them with a very handsome Paradise 
plume ; that I know to be a fact, for I was staying in 
the house at the time, and there was a great debate 
whether she should have accepted it before he had 
made his proposals. Ay ! I was told that Miss Bell 
had said lately in a company that she never would 
marry any man who couldn't give her silver tureens 
and corners. He's very well connected too. Let me 
see, his mother was a Bog, and his father a Waddell 
of the Waddell Mains family ; so he has good blood 
both ways," 

All this was very agreeable to Mrs. St. Clair ; it 
was giving consequence to her family, which was an 
advantage to herself. Miss Pratt's pribble-prabble 
was therefore music to her ear, and while she gave 
her whole attention to that, Colonel Delmour con- 
trived to render his conversation no less interesting 
to her daughter, whose deliberations, like Othello's 
doubts, were gradually assuming a more decided form. 
For in love, as in jealousy, it will commonly be found 
that, "to be once in doubt is once to be resolved." 

As the ladies rose from table, Lord Rossville, who 
had evidently been struggling for some time to give 
utterance to some exquisite idea, called Miss Pratt, 
just as she had reached the door. They all stopped, 

"Miss Pratt," said his Lordship, making an effort 



THE INHEEITANCE. 125 

to subdue any appearance of risibility, " Miss Pratt, I 
think your friend who received the present of a plume 
from Major Waddell will have no great cause to plume 
herseK upon that — as, from your account, it can no 
longer be a feather in her cap." 

The Earl was too much elated with this sally to 
think of Lord Chesterfield, and he indulged himself 
in a laugh tolerably loud and intolerably long. 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! very good, indeed ! " cried Miss 
Pratt. *' I must let Anthony Whyte and Lord Pun- 
medown hear that — very well, indeed ! Poor Miss 
Kitty Fansyflame, as you say, it will be no great 
feather in her cap now, poor soul ! ha ! ha ! ha ! Lady 
Betty, did you hear that?" then pinching Gertrude's 
arm, she whispered, " As Anthony Whyte says, it's a 
serious matter when Lord Eossville makes a joke — 
honest man — ha ! ha ! ha ! — very fair, indeed." And 
Miss Pratt kept up a running laugh all the way to the 
drawing-room. 



CHAPTEE XV. 

" The pilot best of winds does talk, 
The peasant of his cattle, 
The shepherd of his fleecy flock, 
The soldier of his battle. " 



Ariosto. 



The expected dissolution of Parliament was all in 
favour of the growing attachment of the cousins. 
Gertrude, indeed, tried, or thought she tried, to avoid 
receiving the attentions of Colonel Delmour ; hut in 
the thousand minute, and almost imperceptible, oppor- 
tunities which are for ever occurring where people 
dwell under the same roof, he found many occasions 
of insinuating the ardour and sincerity of his passion, 
yet in a manner so refined and unobtrusive that it 
would have seemed downright prudery to have dis- 
claimed his attentions. 

Lord Eossville was, or, what was the same thing, 
fancied he was, so overwhelmed with business, that, 
contrary to his usual practice, he now always retired 
immediately after tea to his study, there to con over 
the map and count over the roll of the county, and 
to frame the model of a circular letter which was to 
surpass all the circular letters that ever had issued 
from a circular head. 



THE INHEEITANCE. 127 

Mrs. St Clair was busy too; she had begun to 
canvass with her brother and her uncle, to bespeak 
their votes, and had written to offer a visit to the lat- 
ter the following day, by the Earl's desire. Lady 
Betty sat, as usual, at her little table, with her rug, 
her novel, and her fat favourite. Miss Pratt gabbled 
and knotted. Mr. Lyndsay read. Colonel Delmour 
and Gertrude alone seemed unoccupied, but "how 
various their employments whom the world deems 
idle." "You are in an uncommon quiescent state to- 
night, Delmour," said Mr. Lyndsay, closing his book 
and rising; "neither music, nor billiards, nor ennui 
— most wonderful ! " 

" Etre avec les gens qu'on aime, cela suffit ; rever, 
leur parler, leur parler point, aupres d'eux tout est 
egal," replied he, casting a look towards Gertrude, 
but affecting to address Miss Pratt. " Is it not so. 
Miss Pratt?" 

"To tell you the truth. Colonel," answered she 
with some asperity, "when people speak French to 
me, I always lay it down as a rule that they're speak- 
ing nonsense ; I'm sure there's words enough in plain 
English to say all that anybody has to say." 

" Ah ! but they are too plain — that is precisely my 
objection to them; for you, I am sure, are aware," and 
again he stole a glance at Miss St. Clair, " ' combien 
de choses qu'on n'aper^oit que par sentiment, et dont 
il est impossible de rendre raison ! ' Now, the French 
is the language of sentiment ; the English of reason — 
consequently it is most unreasonable in you, my dear 



128 THE INHERITANCE. 

Miss Pratt, to insist upon my expressing my senti- 
ments in a plain, reasonable manner; but come — since 
you profess to be insensible to sentiment — try whether 
you cannot prevail upon Miss St. Clair to give us 
some music." 

"Music!" reiterated Miss Pratt; "fiddlesticks! 
for any sake let us have one night of peace and rest 
— for I declare Lord Rossville makes a perfect toil of 
music; but, indeed, it's the same everywhere now — 
there's not a house you go into but some of the family 
are musical. I know one family where there's five 
grown-up daughters that all play upon the harp, and 
such a tuning, and stringing, and thrumming goes on 
that I declare I get perfectly stupid. Not only that, 
but, as Anthony Whyte says, you used to be aware of 
your danger when you saw a piano or a fiddle in a 
house; but now you have music in all shapes, and 
such contrivances ! — there's musical glasses, and musi- 
cal clocks, and musical snuff"-boxes, and now they've 
got musical work-boxes. The t'other day, when I 
was at Lady Restall's, I happened to want a thread in 
a hurry, and was fljdng to her work-box for it. ' Stop, 
stop,' says she, ' and I'll give you something better than 
a thread ;' so she locks up her box and sets it a-going, 
and, to be sure, I thought it never would have done — 
tune after tune — and * Isn't that a lovely waltz V says 
she, and ' Isn't that a sweet quadrille 1 ' Thinks I, my 
friend, if you were mine, I would soon stop your mouth, 
and make you mind your own business." 

"But I hope you got your thread?" inquired Lady 
Betty. 



THE INHERITANCE. 129 

" Yes, yes, I got my thread at last ; but isn't it a 
hard case that one can't get a black silk thread, if it 
was to save their life, without getting half-a-dozen 
tunes into the bargain? But that's not the most 
ridiculous part; for says she, 'I've commissioned a 
walking-cane for my Lord from Paris' (you know Lord 
Restall can't walk the length of his toe without a 
stick), ' and it is to play three waltzes, two quadrilles, 
a hornpipe, and the Grand Turk's March ; it will be 
such an amusement,' says she, * when he's walking with 
his friends, to set his stick a-going.' Thinks I, he'll 
be clever if ever he sets it a-going about my ears. 
Miss St, Clair, my dear, have you no nice, nacky, 
little handy work, that you could be doing at while 
we sit and chat 1 " 

"That is a proper reproof for my idleness," said 
Gertrude, rising to fetch her work. 

"How I detest the stupid vulgar industry of work- 
ing ladies," said Colonel Delmour ; " come, let me lead 
you to the music-room ;" and he took her hand. 

" What are you going to play ? " asked Lady Betty. 

" Tibbie Fowler," answered Miss Pratt. " Miss St. 
Clair, my dear, did you ever hear Tibbie Fowler?" 
and, in her cracked voice, she struck up that celebrated 
ditty. Colonel Delmour, with an expression of dis- 
gust, immediately hurried Miss St. Clair to the adjoin- 
ing room, leaving Miss Pratt to carol away to Lady 
Betty and fat Flora. 

Much has been said of the powers of music ; and 
all who have ears and souls will admit that its in- 

YOL, I, K 



130 TIIE INHERITANCE. 

fluence has not been exaggerated even by its most 
enthusiastic votaries. In every heart of sensibility 
nature has implanted a chord which, if rightly touched, 
will yield fine issue, whether to the loftier or the 
gentler passions of the mind — whether that chord 
vibrates responsive to the pealing organ, the spirit- 
stirring drum, or the nightingale's soft lay. Some 
there are, indeed, to whom music is merely a science, 
an assemblage of fine concords and discords; and 
who, possessed of all that skill and knowledge can 
impart, are yet strangers to those " mystic transports," 
whose movements are in the soul, and which constitute 
the true charm of melody. But Colonel Delmour could 
not be said to belong to either of those classes, or 
rather, he partook somewhat of both ; he was passion- 
ately fond of music, and sang with much taste and 
expression ; but, it might be doubted whether his was 

'• Le chant qui se sent dans I'ame." 

Be that as it may, he had hitherto, in the various flirta- 
tions in which he had been engaged, found music a 
most useful auxiliary, and by much the safest, as well 
as the most elegant, medium for communicating his 
passion. If the fair one proved propitious, what had 
been sung could easily be said ; if the contrary, what- 
ever her private thoughts might be, she could not 
accuse him of more than singing a song. It was there- 
fore an invariable rule with Colonel Delmour to use 
other men's verse, as well as other men's prose, instead 
of his own. For similar reasons, he also preferred 



THE INHERITANCE. 131 

declaring his passion either in French or Italian ; and 

having read all the lighter works in these languages, 

and being gifted with a good memory and a ready wit, 

he was seldom at a loss for expressions suited to each 

particular case. The words he selected for the present 

occasion were those beautiful ones — 

'• Felice chi vi mira 
Ma peu felice chi per voi sospira," etc., 

when suddenly Miss Pratt burst in with *' Wisht ! 
wisht! there's somebody coming that will make us 
all change our note, I'm thinking;" and while she 
spoke, a spattered chaise -and -four, with horses in a 
foam, drove up, which was recognised by its bearings 
to be that of Mr. Delmour. All was bustle and sensa- 
tion ; the family, with the exception of Lord Eossville, 
had dropped in one by one to the music-room, where 
Mr, Delmour was ushered in. He was what many 
would have called a very fine-looking man — tall and 
straight, with handsome, regvdar features, although 
somewhat resembling Lord Eossville both in person 
and manners. He paid his compliments rather with 
the well-bred formality of the old school than with 
the easy disengaged air of a man of fashion, and 
totally devoid of that air of emp-essement towards 
Miss St Clair which had marked the attentions of his 
brother from their first meeting. In fact, Mr. Del- 
mour seemed little engrossed with any of the party, 
but looked round as if in search of a far more interest- 
ing object, and then anxiously inquired where Lord 
Eossville was. But ere an answer could be returned 



132 THE INHERIT ANCE. 

the Earl himself entered, and mutual pleasure was 
testified by the uncle and nephew at sight of each 
other. 

"Although, upon ordinary occasions, I confess I 
am no friend to what are termed unexpected plea- 
sures," said his Lordship ; *' yet, in the present instance, 
my dear Robert, I own I do not feel my pleasure at 
your arrival at all diminished by the unexpectedness 
of your appearance. At the same time, it would not 
have been amiss, perhaps, to have apprised me of your 
intention at this important time." 

"Impossible!" replied Mr. Delmour eagerly; "quite 
impossible ! In fact, I set off the instant the House 
rose, which was on Friday morning at half- past five, 
after a most interesting debate on the Paper Currency, 
which, I am happy to tell you, we carried by a ma- 
jority of eighty-five. " 

" Bravo ! " exclaimed the Earl, " And our Road 
Bill?" 

"Is passed; but how stands the county? Have 
you felt its pulse at all ? I understand a brisk canvass 
has commenced in a certain quarter. I got a hint of 
that from Lord Wishton, which, in fact induced me to 
set off without a moment's delay. " 

" You acted wisely and well," said the Earl; "delays 
are always dangerous — more especially upon occasions 
such as the present. " 

" It's high time you had begun to canvass, if you 
expect to succeed in your election, I can tell you," 
interposed Miss Pratt, with one of her sharp, pithy 



THE INHERITANCE. 133 

glances at Colonel Delmour and Gertrude, who kept a 
little apart ; and to judge by the blush and the smile 
which occasionally flitted over her beautiful features, 
as she sometimes bent her head to his whispers, the 
conversation was of rather a more interesting nature 
than what was carrying on between the uncle and 
nephew. 

Miss Pratt's remark did not hit either of them, and 
the latter resumed: "I am told the opposite party 
give out they can already reckon upon twenty-nine 
votes ; that, I suspect, is a ruse de guerre ; but still it 
shows the necessity of our taking the field immedi- 
ately." 

" Precisely my own sentiments!" exclaimed Lord 
Eossville, with delight ; "as you justly observe, there 
is not a moment to lose." 

" Something might yet be done to-night," said Mr. 
Delmour, looking at his watch. 

"Something lias been done already," replied his 
Lordship, with an air of conscious importance; "but 
it is now almost supper time, and you must be much 
fatigued with your long and rapid journey ; I must 
therefore vote for an adjournment." 

As the servant at that moment announced supper, 
this was a very bright sally for the Earl, though it 
did not produce all the effect he had expected. 

" Mr. Delmour, you will conduct Miss St. Clair to 
the supper room;" and Colonel Delmour, with in- 
finite reluctance, was obliged to relinquish her hand 
to his brother. With no less unwillingness did she 



134 THE INHERITANCE. 

bestow it, and her chagrin was not lessened at find- 
ing herself placed between the uncle and nephew at 
supper, and condemned to hear, without being able to 
listen to their conversation, which now, in spite of 
Miss Pratt's desultory gabble, continued to flow in the 
same political channel Gertrude heard, with weari- 
ness, the whole preliminaries of an active canvass 
fully discussed across her, and while her imagination 
yet dwelt with delight on the melodious accents and 
impassioned sentiments which had so lately been 
poured into her ear, and found entrance to her heart, 
she mentally exclaimed : " How imjiossible would it 
be ever to love a man who can only talk of votes, 
seats, rolls, and qualifications ! " 



CHAPTER XVL 

" Certainly it is heaven upon earth to have a man's mind move 
in charity, rest in Providence, and turn upon the poles of truth." 

Lord Bacon. 

"Well, what do you think of our member?" was 
Miss Pratt's first salutation to Gertrude, as they met 
next morning in their way to breakfast ; then, with- 
out waiting a reply — "I thought you looked very 
wearied last night, and no wonder, for I declare my 
back was like to break with their politics. I've a 
notion you don't think he's likely to be any great 
acquisition as a member of the family, whatever he 
may be to the county — He! he! he! I must tell 
Anthony Whyte that — he will be so diverted; — but 
come, my dear," taking her arm, " we're too soon for 
breakfast yet, so we may just scent the morning air, 
as what do you call the man's ghost says in the 
play ; but you should have something on your head — 
you must not get that pretty white skin of yours sun- 
burnt ; but we'll not go farther than the portico. 
I looked into the room as I passed, and there was 
nobody there but Lord Rossville, sitting as usual 
watching the tea-pot like a clocking-hen. It's a great 
pity that he will make the tea himself. I declare I'm 



136 THE INHEKITANCE. 

like to choke sometimes before I can get a drop, and, 
after all, it's really just water bewitched. It's a thou- 
sand pities, honest man ! that he will think he can 
do everything better than anybody else. But here 
comes Edward Lyndsay from his walk ; I daresay he 
has been at some good turn already. Good morning, 
Mr. Edward ; where have you been strolling to this 
fine morning ? Miss St. Clair and I are just taking a 
little chat here, in the sun, till the breakfast's ready ; 
for, as Anthony Whyte says, I don't like to descend to 
vacuity. What do you think Miss St. Clair says of 
our member ? — That she does not think him any great 
acquisition as a member of the family, whatever he 
may be as member for the county; isn't that very 
good?" 

Gertrude was about to disclaim the witticism, 
when Mr. Lyndsay saved her the trouble. 

" So good," replied he, " that I am surprised you 
should give the credit of it to anybody else. Miss St. 
Clair, I am sure, is incapable of making such a 
remark." 

" Is that meant as a compliment to you or me, my 
dear 1 " — addressing Gertrude. " But I wish you would 
explain, Mr. Edward; what makes you think Miss St. 
Clair incapable of saying that?" 

"Because, as a physiognomist, I pronounce Miss 
St. Clair incapable of making so ill-natured a remark 
upon one of whom she has as yet had no opportunity 
of forming an opinion." 

" And what do you call that remark of your own, 



THE INHERITANCE. 137 

pray, Mr. Edward ?" interrupted Miss Pratt, with con- 
siderable pique; "for my part, I think it is as ill- 
natured a one as ever I heard." 

" You wished to hear the truth," said he, with a 
smile ; " it is not my fault if it is not agreeable." 

"To tell you the truth, Mr. Lindsay, it's not by 
speaking what you call the truth upon every occa- 
sion that people will ever make friends to themselves 
in this world. I never knew any of your plain-spoken 
people that didn't make twenty enemies for one 
friend. I know nobody that likes to have what you 
call the truth told them; do you, my dearf — to 
Gertrude. 

"Yes," answered Gertrude; "I think I should like 
to hear the truth from an amiable person ; but the 
reason it is so disagreeable, I suppose, is because 
people are always so cross when they speak what 
they call the truth, that it seems as if they only used 
it as a cloak for their own ill-humour and caprice, or 
a thousand other deadly sins." 

" Well, I'm sure, if you've a mind to hear the 
truth you could not be in better hands, my dear, 
than your cousin's for it. But there's that abomin- 
able gong again — we must really fly, for Lord Eoss- 
ville will be out of all patience;" and off pattered 
Miss Pratt, leaving her companions to follow her 
nimble steps. Nobody had yet appeared at the 
breakfast-table but Lord Rossville and Mr. Delmour, 
who had resumed the subject of the election with 
renewed vigour. Miss Pratt, seeing his Lordship so 



138 THE INHERITANCE. 

engrossed, had seized upon the tea-pot, and was 
enjoying the luxury of filling her cup by stealth. 
Mr. Lyndsay seated himself by Gertrude ; it was the 
place Colonel Delmour usually occupied, and she 
looked a little disappointed at seeing it filled by 
another. He did not appear to notice it, but con- 
tinued the conversation : — 

"I perfectly agree with you in what you were 
saying of the use or abuse of truth," said he ; " but 
even that is not so dangerous as the delusions of 
falsehood and flattery, commonly called politeness 
and admiration." 

" These are hard words to give to very agreeable 
things," answered Gertrude. 

" My quarrel is not with the things themselves," 
said he, "but with their counterfeits." 

" Yet, if every one were to tell another exactly 
what they thought of them, I daresay we should be 
all scratching each other's eyes out." 

"Not if ours was the charity that thinketh no 
evil." 

" Oh ! tnat is to say if we were all angels." 

" No ; it is to say if we were all Christians," Ger- 
trude stared with some surprise, for her idea of a 
Christian, like that of many other people's, was, that 
all were Christians who were born in Christendom, 
had been baptized, learnt their creeds, and went now 
and then to church. 

" I flatter myself I am a Christian," said she ; " and 
yet I cannot help thinking there are people in the 



THE INHERITANCE. 139 

world who are very tiresome, very impertinent, and 
very disagreeable ; yet I don't think it would be a 
very Christian act were I to tell them so." 

"Certainly not," answered Mr. Lyndsay, with a 
smile ; " you may think them all those things ; but if 
you think of them, at the same time, in the spirit of 
kindness and Christian benevolence, you will pity 
their infirmities, and you will have no inclination to 
hurt their feelings by telling them of faults which 
you cannot mend," 

"But if I were asked — or sujjpose I were to ask 
you to tell me my faults f 

" I should certainly endeavour to do it to the best 
of my ability." 

"Well, pray, begin; I should like to have my 
character drawn in a Christian-Hke manner," said she, 
laughing, 

" Yes ; but I must have many sittings before I can 
attempt it. I am not one of those nimble artists who 
can take striking likenesses in five minutes." 

" So much the better ; for they are always hideous 
performances ; but how long will you take to make a 
good full-length portrait of me, for I really long to see 
myself in my true colours — as a mere mortal — not as 
a goddess 1" 

"You run no such risk with me, I assure you," 
said he; "but as to the time, that must depend 
upon circumstances and opportunities — perhaps in a 
year." 

"A year !" exclaimed Gertrude. " Oh heavens ! I 



140 THE INHEEITANCE. 

shall die of impatience in a month — to be a whole 
year of hearing a single fault !" 

"I did not say so," replied Mr. Lyndsay; "as 
errors, like straws, you know, always float on the 
surface, I shall be able to pick up plenty of them, I 
have no doubt, very soon — (if I have not got hold of 
one or two already), — but you would not have me 
pronounce upon your character from them? Many 
pearls of great price may lie hid below." 

" Which, I'm afraid, you will never discover," said 
Gertrude, laughing; "so, if my picture is not to be 
drawn till then, I fear I shall be wrinkled, and old, 
and ugly, before you have found a single gem to deck 
me with." 

"I hope not," answered he; "you say you love 
truth and sincerity ; these are jewels in themselves, 
and their light may lead even my darkened eyes (as 
you seem to think them) to discover more. But to 
drop metaphor, and speak in plain terms — why, since 
we both profess to like truth, should we not agree to 
speak it to each other?" 

"With all my heart," answered Gertrude; "but 
we must settle the preliminaries, draAv up the code of 
laws, and swear to observe them. In the first place, 
then, we must make a solemn vow, on all occasions 
to speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, coute 
qu'U coute; in the second place, that nothing so said 
is to give mortal offence to the one party or the 
other; in the third, that hoAvever disagreeable we 
may think each other, we are to make a point of 



THE INHERITANCE. 141 

declaring it, in the civilest and most Christian -like 
manner imaginable ; in the fourth place " 

"Beware," said Mr. Lyndsay, interrupting her, "of 
coming under any engagements, since Lord Bacon 
says, ' It asketh a strong wit and a strong heart to 
know when to tell the truth;' and you know not what 
a savage man you have to deal with. No, let it be a 
discretionary compact, with mutual confidence its only 
guarantee;" and he held out his hand. Gertrude 
gave him hers, and as she did so she was struck for 
the first time with the bland and beautiful expression 
of his countenance. "I never can fear you," said she, 
with a smile ; — but the conversation was broken off 
by the entrance of the rest of the family, and the 
consequent matin greetings that ensued. Colonel 
Delmour was the last who entered, and a shade of 
displeasure darkened his brow at finding the seat he 
considered as exclusively his own occupied by another. 
Gertrude observed his chagrin, and felt secretly 
flattered by it. The only vacant seat was one by 
Miss Pratt, who had hitherto restrained her tongue 
for the benefit of her ears, both of which had been 
on the full stretch, the one to pick up certain little 
political pieces of information, which it had reason to 
suppose were not intended for it ; the other to make 
itself master of what was going on at the opposite 
side of the table, betwixt Miss St. Clair and Mr. 
Lyndsay. 

It was wonderful how well these two members 
contrived to execute their respective offices, though 



142 THE INHERITANCE. 

certainly the chief merit was due to their mistress, 
who had trained these, her faithful servants, to such 
perfection in their calling, that each of them, singly, 
could perform the work, and more than the work, of 
any ordinary pair of ears in the kingdom. What the 
industrious ear had collected, the active brain was not 
long of concocting, nor the nimble tongue of circulat- 
ing. *'You look very grave this morning, Colonel," 
said she, addressing her neighbour; "I wish you had 
been here a little sooner, it would have done your 
heart good to have seen and heard the fine flirtation 
that's been carrying on over the way " — with a signifi- 
cant nod to the opposite side of the table. " I can 
tell you, Mr. Edward and a certain fair lady have 
been looking very sweet upon each other; it's not 
often he takes a flirting fit, but I'm really glad to see 
your godly people can be just like their neighbours 
sometimes, and come as good speed too when they 
set about it. What do you think 1" — ^lowering her 
voice — " she's going to sit to him for her picture — 
a full length, with pearls in her hair ; and what do you 
think?" — still lower — "he's to make her a present of 
the pearls — I've a notion his mother's, for I know she 
had a very fine set. He did not seem inclined (to 
tell the truth) to part with them so soon, for I heard 
him say something about a year ; but, says she, with 
her pretty winning smile, what's the good of keeping 
things till one's old, and bald, and toothless, and can't 
enjoy them 1 So much for French ease — who would 
expect that to look at her ? But, my gracious 1 



THE INHERITANCE. 143 

Colonel, do you see what you've done? spilt your 
whole cup of coffee upon my good new gown; I 
wonder how you contrived it ! — and you're going to 
pour the cream upon me next," — pushing her chair 
from him with the greatest velocity — " 'Pon my word, 
one would think you did it on purpose." 

Colonel Delmour made no attempt to ^^ndicate 
himseK from so foul an insinuation; but, with his 
shoulder turned to the offended fair, lounged over the 
Morning Post, as if quite unconscious of her presence. 
But, although he despised her too much to deign to 
express his disbelief of her communication, he was 
secretly provoked at the good understanding that 
seemed to exist between the cousins. He had too 
high an opinion of himself to have any fear of Lynd- 
say as a rival ; but he had his own private reasons 
for wishing to have him kept at a distance, at least 
till he had secured, beyond a doubt, the affections of 
Miss St Clair. Besides, he was one of those who 
disliked all interference with whatever object he chose 
to appropriate to himself, be it horse, hound, or heart 
He therefore determined to put a stop to this grow- 
ing intimacy, and to seize the first opportunity of 
bringing matters to an isaue. 

In the presence of Colonel Delmour and Miss Pratt, 
it was seldom Mr. Lyndsay had an opportunity of 
being duly appreciated, for in their company he was 
generally silent Not that he had such a respect for 
their conversation as induced him to play the part of 
a mere listener ; on the contrary, he gave little atten- 



144 THE INHEEITANCE. 

tion to either of them ; but he was not a person to 
interrupt, or watch for a pause, or in any way seek to 
attract the notice of the company. The unobtrusive 
qualities of his mind, therefore, did not strike upon 
the fancy with the same glare as the more dazzling 
characteristics of Colonel Delmour ; and where, as in 
the minute occurrences of domestic life, there are few 
or no opportunities of displaying the loftier and nobler 
attributes of mind, it can only be by slow and imper- 
ceptible degrees such a character gains upon the affec- 
tions. A single sentence might have summed up his, 
in the brief but comprehensive words of an eloquent 
writer — for of Lyndsay it might truly be said, that 
" he set an example of all the moral virtues without 
pride, and dared to be conspicuous for all the Chris- 
tian graces without false shame." ^ 

But Gertrude saw nothing of all this ; she saw 
only that a gloom hung upon Colonel Delmour's brow 
which she would fain have dispelled; and for that 
purpose she would have lingered beyond the rest 
of the party to have given him an opportunity of 
expressing his disquiet ; but she was called away by 
her mother to prepare for a visit to her uncle, Mx^ 
Adam Ramsay. 

1 Tour to Alet, etc. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

" He's a terrible man John Tod, John Tod ; 
He's a terrible man John Tod. 
He scolds in the house, 
He scolds at the door. 

He scolds on the very high road, John Tod ; 
He scolds on the very high road, John Tod. 

" He's weel respeckit, John Tod, John Tod ; 
He's weel respeckit, John Tod ; 
Wi' your auld strip^iit coul. 
You look maist like a fule ; 

But there's nouse in the lining, John Tod, John Tod ; 
But there's nouse in the lining, John Tod. " 

Old Song. 

The day was hot even to sultriness, and neither Mrs. 
St. Clair nor her daughter were inclined to converse 
beyond a passing remark now and then on the heat, 
dust, road, sun, etc. Both, indeed, were too agree- 
ably occupied with their own meditations for any 
interchange of thought The former was busy re- 
volving how she was to carry uncle Adam and his 
seventy thousand pounds by a coup de main ; and, as 
a preliminary step, had provided herself with a French 
musical snufF-box and a dozen of embroidered cambric 
pocket-handkerchiefs. But Mrs. St Clair little knew 
the person she had to deal with when she thought to 
VOL. I. L 



146 THE INHERITANCE. 

propitiate him by any such sacrifices. Mr. Adam 
Ramsay was a man of a fair character, strong un- 
derstanding, but particular temper, and unpleasing 
manners — with a good deal of penetration, which 
(as is too often the case) served no other purpose 
than to disgust him with his own species. He had 
left home penniless, at an early period of life, to push 
his fortune in the world, and after having toiled and 
broiled for fifty years, he had returned to what was 
now become a stranger land, laden with wealth, which 
ho had no longer even the wish to enjoy. He felt 
that he had lived in vain. He had no one to love — 
no one to share in his possessions; and that only 
cordial which can give a relish even to the dregs of 
life was not his : the treasures he had laid up were 
all of this world ; and to a childless, cynical old man, 
perhaps great wealth is even more galling than great 
poverty. Yet there were good points in his character, 
and perhaps, had he been a husband and father, and 
had his heart been kept alive to the tender charities 
of hfe, he might have proved an amiable man, and an 
agreeable member of society. He possessed strong 
natural afi"ections, which, though they had lain long 
dormant, were not yet extinct. It was said that in 
early youth he had loved and been beloved by one as 
poor and as friendless, and somewhat lower in degree 
than himself, and that it was in the hope of gaining 
affluence for her that he had crossed the seas and 
sought his fortunes in a foreign land. But many are 
the disappointments that precede the fulfilment of 



THE INHEKITANCK 147 

our hopes, and many a year rolled on, and found Mr. 
Eamsay as poor as at the first, till, despairing of ever 
being abler to return and claim his bride, he wrote to 
release her from her promise of awaiting his return. 
The fortune at length was made, but too late — the 
gay dreams of youth were fled for ever ! His mistress 
had married, and was dead ; and the sanguine adven- 
turous stripling was grown into the soured, misan- 
thropic old man. Such was the outline of uncle Adam's 
story, and little more remains to be said of him. 

He lived much alone; had all the habits of a recluse, 
and all the little peculiarities which are supposed to 
belong to single gentlemen of a certain age. In par- 
ticular, he had an extreme dislike to receiving those 
delicate attentions which are sometimes so assiduously 
rendered to the rich and the childless. Not Timon 
himseK was more tenacious in this respect than uncle 
Adam, or more disposed to buffet all whom he sus- 
pected of a design to prey upon his hoards. The 
house he now inhabited was one he had taken as a 
temporary residence on his first arrival ; and although 
he had bought a fine estate with a suitable mansion 
in the immediate vicinity, and every day had purposed 
taking possession of it, yet each revolving term found 
him sitting in the self-same parlour, in the self-same 
chair, and in the self-same frame of mind. It was at 
this suburban villa that the handsome equipage of 
the Earl of Rossville now stopped. It was a small, 
vulgar, staring red house, with a plot of long bottle- 
green grass in front, and a narrow border of the 



148 THE INHERITANCE. 

coarsest of flowers (or rather flowering weeds, inter- 
spersed with nettles), growing thin and straggling from 
a green, slimy-looking soil, and covered with dust from 
the road, from which it was only separated by a rail- 
ing. Mrs. St. Clair reddened with shame as she 
marked the contemptuous air with which the con- 
sequential footman rapped on the humble door — for 
bell or knocker there was none. The door was 
speedily flung open to its farthest extent by a fat, 
rosy, stamping damsel, in a flaming gown and top- 
knots, who testified the greatest alacrity in doing the 
honours of the entrance. 

" What a habitation for a man with seventy thou- 
sand pounds ! " exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, as she en- 
tered ; but there was no time for pursuing her obser- 
vations, for she was the next minute in the little 
parlour of uncle Adam. It was a small close room, 
with a meridian sun streaming full into it, and calling 
forth to view myriads of " dancing motes that people 
the sunbeams," while innumerable hosts of huge flies 
buzzed and revelled in all the luxury of its heat, and 
an expiring fire, with its usual concomitants of dust 
and ashes, seemed fast sinking beneath the influence 
of the god of day. A small dining-table, and a few 
haircloth chairs stuck against the walls, comprised 
the whole furniture of the room, A framed table of 
weights and measures, an old newspaper, and a parcel 
of dusty parchments, tied with a red tape, formed its 
resources and decorations. Altogether it wore the 
comfortless aspect of a bad inn's worst parlour — a 



THE INHERITANCE. 149 

sort of place where one might pass five minutes while 
changing horses, but where there was no inducement 
even for the weary traveller to tarry. 

Mr. Eamsay sat by the side of the expiring fire, 
seemingly contemplating the gaists and cinders which 
lay scattered over the hearth ; but he had somewhat 
the air of a man prepared (rather unwillingly) to re- 
ceive company. He was above the middle size, with 
high, stooping shoulders, sharp, cross-looking elbows, 
projecting far beyond his back, a somewhat stormy 
blue face, and little pale eyes, surmounted by shaggy 
white eyebrows. His ordinary headpiece, a striped 
woollen night-cap, had been laid aside for a capacious 
powdered peruke with side curls, and a large queue. 
To complete the whole, he was left-handed, which 
gave a peculiar awkwardness to his naturally ungainly 
deportment He welcomed Mrs. St. Clair with a 
mixture of cordiality and awkwardness, as if he wished 
to be kind, but did not know very well how to set 
about it. She had too much manner, however, to 
allow him to remain under any embarrassment on that 
score ; and was squeezing uncle Adam's somewhat re- 
luctant hand, and smiling on his rugged visage, and 
uttering a thousand soft and civil things to his rather 
averted ear, when suddenly she stopped, for she felt 
that all was thrown away : her uncle had fixed his 
eyes on Gertrude, and regarding her with visible 
emotion, seemed unconscious of every other object. 

"Who is that?" at length demanded he, in an 
asritated voice. 



150 THE INHEEITANCE. 

" Pardon me, my dear uncle," replied Mrs. St. Clair; 
"but, in my happiness at seeing you, I forgot that my 
daughter was likewise a stranger to you." 

"Your daughter!" exclaimed Mr. Eamsay, "it's 
not possible !" 

"Why so, my dear uncle 1" asked Mrs. St. Clair, 
with a smile, and in full expectation of a gallant com- 
pliment on her own youthful appearance. 

"She's the very picture of ; but you'll no 

mind Lizzie Lundie — bonny Lizzie Lundie." He gave 
a sort of growling sigh, and a pause followed. Visions 
of former days seemed to crowd into the old man's 
mind, and he went on as if communing with himself. 
" I little thought when I parted frae her, fifty year 
come Martinmas, that I had ta'en my last look o' 
Lizzie ; and as little did I think, when I heard she 
was gane, that I should ever live to see her like in 
this warld — no that she just matches Lizzie neither;" 
and something like a tear gleamed in his eye, as 
he continued to gaze on the image of his youthful 
fancy. Gertrude's style of dress was sueh as helped 
to heighten the illusion : owing to the heat of the 
day she had thrown off her bonnet, and the band that 
confined her hair wore almost the appearance of the 
snood which had been the prevailing fashion for 
damsels of Lizzie's degree in her day ; her tliroat also 
was uncovered, and the whole contour of the head was 
thus displayed at once in all the simplicity of nature, 
and one more strikingly beautiful could scarcely be 
conceived. 



THE INHERITANCE. 151 

Confused by the blunt admiration thus expressed 
for her, Gertrude looked to her mother, and, struck 
with the deadly paleness of her countenance, she 
hastily exclaimed, "Mamma, you are ill ;" and Mrs. St. 
Clair, gasping for breath, sank almost lifeless in her 
daughter's arms. " Air — air," was all she could arti- 
culate ; and that certainly was the one thing needful 
in uncle Adam's apartment, for the atmosphere was 
indeed suffocating. The door and window were in- 
stantly thrown open ; Gertrude held a glass of water 
to her mother's pallid lips ; and Mr. Ramsay stuffed 
a bunch of southernwood into her powerless hand. 
At length these restoratives appeared to produce 
their effects, and Mrs. St. Clair slowly revived. Due 
apologies were of course made and accepted ; the un- 
common heat of the day was much commented on, 
and the closeness of the room delicately hinted at. 
Some refreshments, not of the choicest description, 
were now brought in by the great, awkward, heavy- 
footed maid-servant. And Mr. Ramsay, taking a glass 
of wine, drank a welcome to his niece on her return to 
Scotland, " and to the bonny creature you've brought 
with you," added he, again fixing his eyes on Gertrude. 
" After all," continued he, "the thing's not impossible; 
Lizzie was a relation of ours — a distant one to be 
sure ; let me see — Lizzie's father and my father were 
cousin-germains' bairns ; but that'll no do, for it's by 
the other side o' the hooss — it was by my father." 

Mrs. St. Clair's colour rose to the deepest crimson, 
and she seemed struggling to subdue her feelings. At 



152 THE INHERITANCK 

length, making an eftbrt at self-control, she said, with 
affected pleasantry : "I have no doubt my daughter 
has great reason to be flattered at the resemblance 
you have discovered for her ; but, my dear uncle, you 
know there are certain prejudices — certain notions 
that some people entertain — in short, the thing to be 
talked of amongst ourselves is very well ; and it is 
very flattering to me that my daughter's looks should 

aff'ord you pleasure — but I own I 1 should be 

sorry — I would rather that a report of such a resem- 
blance were not to reach the Rossville family ; they 
now consider my daughter as one of themselves ; and 
their pride might be hurt, you know, and a prejudice 
created, that might prove highly detrimental to 
Gertrude's best interests." 

" Set them up with their pride ! " cried Mr. 
Ramsay — all softer emotions giving way to indigna- 
tion; "their pride hiirt, indeed, at being compared 
to Lizzie Lundie ! There's no a Eossville or a St. 
Clair among them that e'er I saw was fit to tie Lizzie 
Lundie's shoe — the Queen upon the throne might 
have thought it an honour to be compared to Lizzie ; " 
— and the little chamber seemed as though it would 
not contain him in his wrath, as he paced up and 
down its narrow bounds, with his hands crossed 
behind his back : all shyness and embarrassment had 
vanished in this burst of passion, and uncle Adam 
stood revealed in his own character. Then suddenly 
stopping — *' And what would ha'e come o' ye if Lizzie 
Lundie had been what I ance thought she would ha'e 



THE INHERITANCE. 153 

been — my wedded wife? What would your Ross- 
villes ha'e done then 1 Would you ha'e thought it a 
disgrace then, that your daughter should ha'e been 
likened to your uncle's wife 1 " 

*' Oh ! this is too much ! " exclaimed Mrs. St Clair, 
bursting into tears. 

" What's too much 1 " cried he, continuing to walk 
up and down in great discomposure. Then suddenly 
stopping, and softening at sight of his niece's distress 
— "Come, come; what's a' this for? — wae's me, ye 
ha'e suffered little in the warld, if the hasty word o' 
an auld man can set ye off this way ; ye'll ken me 
better by- and -bye than to mind a' that I say;" — 
then patting Gertrude on the shoulder, as she hung 
over her mother — "It's you that has made us cast 
out, and it's you that maun make us 'gree." 

Gertrude took her mother's hand, and put it in 
her uncle's ; he took it kindly, and Mrs. St Clair, as 
soon as she found voice, said : "Excuse me, my dear 
uncle, I am ashamed of my weakness ; but my nerves 
are now so shattered, and my spirits are not what 
they once were. I have a difficult part to play, and 

it is not surprising if In short, dependent as I am 

on the relations of my cliild — and that dear child's 
interest so much at stake too — you cannot wonder if 
I am sometimes driven — if I sometimes stoop — if I 
should sometimes tremble " 

Mrs. St Clair seemed at a loss to finish, but her 
uncle saved her the trouble — "Ay, ay, you have a 
proud thrawn pack to deal wi', I believe." 



154 THE INHEKITANCE. 

" Then you understand, my dear uncle, the reason 
of my wishing that " 

" Ay, ay — ye needna be feared for me ; but I maun 
aye think the likeness maist wonderful — most wonder- 
ful — most wonderful," repeated he two or three times, 
as he contemplated, and severally enumerated every 
feature, summing up the whole with — " Since I saw 
Lizzie Lundie I've never seen the woman that I 
thought worth the looking at till now," At that 
moment a smart female figure, feathered and furbe- 
lowed, entered the little yard, and approached the 
house. " There's ane o' the fule tribe," cried he ; 
" my bonny niece. Miss Bell Black. I ne'er see that 
craatur that I dinna wish myself blind, and deaf, and 
doited." And thereupon entered Miss BelL 



CHAPTEE XVIII. 

" He had a sowrc behaviour, and a tongue immoderately free 
and full of taunting." — Livy. 

"What's brought you here, Miss Bell?" was his 
salutation on entering; but nowise daunted with 
what, indeed, she was well accustomed to, she boldly 
shook hands with all around, and then showing a 
small basket — "I have brought you some very fine 
strawberries, uncle; they are the first we have had 
in our garden; and I assure you I have had much 
ado to keep them from the children for you ; " — and 
with a consequential air, she disclosed some dozen or 
two of very so-so looking strawberries. 

"You had very little to do, then," said Mr. 
Eamsay. "I wadna gi'e a bawbee for a' the berries 
in your garden ; so ye may just tak' them back to whar 
ye brought them frae ; or stay, since ye ha'e robbed 
your brithers and sisters o' them, puir things, there's 
a barber's bairn twa doors aff that wad maybe be 
glad o' them — it's lying in the mizzles." 

"'Pon my word, uncle," said Miss Bell in great 
indignation, "I have something else to do than to 
pick strawberries for barber's brats, indeed," But 
uncle Adam, going to the door, called the maid, and 



156 THE INHEKITANCE. 

giving her the strawberries, directed her to "carry 
the berries to Rob Eattray's bairn, and to ask how he 
was." Miss Bell prudently turned a deaf ear to the 
message, and was apologising with all her powers of 
eloquence to Mrs. St. Clair and her daughter for not 
having been to visit them, " But the truth is," said 
she, with a well got-up air of modesty, " that, in my 
situation, visiting is out of the question. If I were to 
go to one place I should have to go everywhere, and 
the Major has so many connections in the county, 
who, of course, would expect me to come to them, 
that it would be extremely unpleasant, in my situa- 
tion, where the thing is so well known. This, I 
assure you, is the only place I ever go to, as I think 
it a positive duty" — (lowering her voice) — "to pay 
attention to my uncle, poor man, and I am the only 
one of the family who understands his ways, and can 
manage him." Mr. Ramsay having for the moment 
appeased the antipathy he bore his niece by the insult 
he had offered her, was now restored to something 
like good-humour. " Weel, Miss Bell," said he, " what 
have you made of your nawbob — your swain — your 
loveyer — your what-do-ye-call-him 1" 

"If you mean the Major," said Miss Bell with 
dignity, " he walked into town with me, and is gone 
to look at a pair of carriage-horses that are for sale at 
the White Bear just now ; I suppose he Avill be here 
in a little;" — then drawing back from the window 
with a face of alarm, as a carriage passed — 

" I really wish, uncle, if you mean to remain here, 



THE INHERITANCE. 157 

you would get a blind for your window, for everybody 
is seen in this room, and in my situation, it is not 
very pleasant, I assure you, to be exposed to every- 
body that passes ; — that was the Boghall carriage that 
passed just now, and they must think it very odd to 
have seen me sitting here when I declined an invita- 
tion to dinner there for to-morrow, upon the plea that 
I went nowhere at present," 

"Then what brings you here, if you're no fit to be 
seen?" demanded uncle Adam in a most wrathful 
accent. 

"I must confess, my dear uncle," said Mrs. St. 
Clair, glad of an opening for expressing her senti- 
ments, and, at the same time, softening the tone of 
the conversation, "this house does not seem quite 
suitable for you." 

"What ails the house?" asked he sharply. 

" I beg pardon, I understood (perhaps I was mis- 
informed) that you were the proprietor of a charming 
place in this neighbourhood." 

"Weel?" This was put in so startling a manner, 
that Mrs. St. Clair's courage failed her, and she feared 
to reply ; — not so Miss Bell. 

" Well ! to think of anybody in their senses living 
in this little, vulgar, shabby hole, when they have 
such a house as Bloom Park standing empty. I assure 
you, uncle, it has a very odd appearance in the eyes 
of the world." 

" Miss Bell Black, you that's such a wise, sensible, 
weel-informed woman, that ken's awthing, will you 



158 THE INHERITANCE. 

just ha'e the goodness to tell me what are the eyes of 
the warld, and whar do they stand 1 For muckle I 
ha'e heard of the eyes o' the warld, but I ha'e never 
been able to see them yet;" and Mr. Ramsay fixed 
his upon her, while he advanced his face almost close 
to her, and put his hands on his knees, in a manner 
that seemed to say, " Answer me this before you stir." 

Miss Bell hesitated a little. " Why, I can only tell 
you, uncle, that Lord Fairacre was quite confounded 
when the Major told him you had never taken posses- 
sion of Bloom Park yet, and said it was most extra- 
ordinary that you should continue to live in a house 
that was hardly good enough for a dog-kennel ; and 
Boghall, who was present, said he did not believe the 
whole house was the size of his kitchen; and the Major 
himself I know thinks " 

"And so these are the eyes of the world!" cried 
Mr. Ramsay, with a sort of growling, sardonic laugh ; 
"pretty eyes they are, to be sure, to drive a man out 
of his ain house ! — The tane a poor silly spendthrift, 
the t'ither a great gormandising swash, and the third 
— but how comes the warld to have but three eyes ? 
— can you no mak' out a fourth 1 I beg your pardon, 
I suppose your ain was to be the fourth, and that mak's 
a' right, for then ye can gi'e the warld twa faces : 
Fairacre's and Boghall on the tae face, Major Waddell 
and Miss Bell Black on the t'ither;" — then in a lower 
key, and muttering to himself, "Spendthrifts and 
ne'erdoweels on the tae side ; fules and tawpies on the 
t'ither — a true picture o' the warld." 



THE INHERITANCE. 159 

Any other than Miss Bell would certainly have 
given in here ; but Miss Bell was one of those gifted 
mortals who are quite invulnerable to the shafts of 
envy, hatred, or malice, when it is their interest to be 
so ; and though she did look a little hot and discon- 
certed for a few minutes, she quickly rallied, and re- 
sumed — 

" I assure you, uncle, whatever you may think, the 
opinion of the world is not to be despised," 

" Miss Bell Black, I have lived rather longer in the 
world than you have done, and I've seen rather mair 
o't than you're ever likely to see ; and I would nae 
gi'e that," snapping his fingers, "for either it's gude 
word or it's ill; it canna say that ever I oppressed 
them that were beneath me, — or cringed to them that 
were aboon me, — or that I ever wranged ony creature 
o' a bodle, — or that I ever said the thing I didna 
think ; and if either you or you're warld think I'm to 
be dictated to in my ain house, you're much mistaken." 

" Well, uncle, I can only say I think it is a great 
pity that so fine a place as Bloom Park should be 
standing empty ; and since you seem resolved not to 
live at it yourself, there's many a one, I assure you, 
would be glad to take it off your hands. The Major 
has been looking at Elm Grove ; but I think there is 
no comparison between Bloom Park and it" 

"What then?" demanded Mr. Ramsay. 

" Oh, nothing. Only if you had any thoughts of 
letting it, it is such a paradise, that " 

" I could be at nae loss for an Adam and Eve to 



160 THE INHEKITANCE. 

put in it," interrupted her uncle ; "your nawbob and 
you for instance" — with a growling grin; — "but I 
can tell you ye'll no play your gambols there if I can 
help it." 

Miss Bell looked very indignant as she replied: "As 
to that, the Major cares very little about the matter ; 
if I am pleased, that is all he is anxious about, and 
the rent is no object ; but I find it very difficult to 
get a place to suit us in every respect — but here is 
the Major himself," — and the Major was presently 
ushered in. Mr. Eamsay received him with tolerable 
civility, and Mrs. St. Clair, desirous of receiving his 
vote at the approaching election, was preparing the 
way by a soft speech about nothing. But Miss Bell 
never permitted the Major to speak to, or look at, or 
listen to anybody else when she was present, and she 
therefore called him off with — " Well, Major, did you 
see the carriage -horses, and what do you think of 
them ?" 

" They seem good serviceable horses — not particu- 
larly handsome," replied he. 

"What colour?" — I'll thank you for a glass of 
water. Major." 

"Pray, allow me to put a little wine in it." 

" The least drop — and you think they will do 1 — 
Oh ! not so much." 

" That is not for me to decide," replied the Major, 
with a bow — which was graciously acknowledged with 
a smile. "Perhaps you will take a look of them your- 
self?" 



THE INHERITANCE. 161 

"Why, in my situation," — in a modest key — "I 
hardly think I should like to go to the White Bear — 
Major, will you take this glass?" 

"But I shall desire the ostler to bring them up 
here, 'tis but a step from the stables " 

" I'm for none of your horses brought to my door," 
cried Mr. Eamsay; "it will be through the town I'm 
setting up my chaise next, and a bonny hullybaloo 
there'll be," and he paced the room in great perturba- 
tion at the bare supposition of such a thing. 

"My dear sir " began the Major, but he was 

cut short with — 

"Now I'm for none of your horses at my door." 

"Bless me, uncle!" cried Miss Bell, "I think you 
may be very well pleased to get the credit of a carriage 
at such an easy rate." 

" Great credit, to be sure ! to get the credit of being 
an auld ostentatious fule." 

"Such nonsense, uncle! — at any rate, I thought 
you did not care what the world said of you." 

" You thought ! " repeated uncle Adam, with the 
most sovereign contempt ; " and what entitles you to 
think ? — but ye need sae nae mair aboot it — there's to 
be nae horses brought to my door. If ye maun ha'e 
horses ye maun gang to the horse-market for them, 
like other folk ; I'm no to ha'e my house turned into 
a White Bear." 

" My dear sir " said the Major. 

"In my situation" — interrupted Miss Bell, — "it 
would have a very odd appearance in the eyes of the 

VOL. I. M 



162 THE INHERITANCE. 

world " But here Mrs. St. Clair interposed, by 

offering to chaperon her niece to the White Bear in 
Lord Rossville's carriage, hoping to be repaid for this 
civility by securing the Major's vote. The oflfer, after 
a little affected demur, was accepted, and the Major 
was despatched to have the horses in readiness. 

" I really think, uncle, you might dispense with a 
fire now," remarked Miss Bell, as she rose to depart. 

"Do ye ken naething else I could dispense wi'?" 
demanded Mr. Eamsay, with a look and emphasis that 
might have made a tortoise fly; not so Miss Bell, 
who still lingered in the desperate hope of showing 
her consequence, and proving her influence over uncle 
Adam and his seventy thousand pounds. 

"Well, uncle, when are we to see you at Belle- 
vuel" 

"I would prefer my claim for a visit," said Mrs. 
St, Clair, with her most winning smile; "but Lord 
Rossville intends himself to have the pleasure of call- 
ing upon you, and " 

"In hopes of getting my vote," interrupted Mr. 
Ramsay, impatiently ; " but he may just save himself 
the trouble — I'm no gaun to be hunted out o' my 
senses by your election hounds. I'll gi'e my vote to 
wha I like, or maybe I'll keep it to mysel'; but 
there's ae thing I can tell you, it's no to be had for 
the asking." 

Mrs. St. Clair prudently received this rebuff in 
silence ; but Miss Bell plucked up fresh spirit at wit- 
nessing another's discomfiture, and taking her uncle 



THE INHERITANCE. 163 

by the breast of the coat, and drawing him back, she 
began in an undertone of voice, as if desirous of not 
being overheard, — 

"By-the-bye, uncle, talking of votes, there's one 
thing that I feel very anxious about, and that is, that 
the Major and you should concert something together 
as to your votes ; it would be extremely awkward, I 
think, if you were to take different sides, and have a 
very odd appearance in the eyes of the world." 

Whatever uncle Adam's thoughts might be, his 
looks portended a storm ready to burst forth; but 
as Gertrude turned towards him to wish him good 
morning, his features relaxed, and his frown gradually 
softened into something like a smile. 

"The eyes of the world !" repeated he ; "I would 
na gi'e a glisk of thae bonny een of yours for aw the 
eyes o' the world put thegither, — and dinna you, my 
dear, let the eyes o' the world scare you, as they ha'e 
done mony a ane, frae your ain happiness. Now, fare 
ye weel, my dawtie," patting her shoulder, "an' I'll 
say to you what I wadna say to mony — I'll aye be 
glad to see you, come when ye like — fare ye weeL 
Gude morning to you. Miss Bell ; and ye may tak' the 
eyes o' the world on your back, and muckle gude may 
they do ye;" — and with a laugh of derision, uncle 
Adam saw his visitors drive off, and returned to his 
little dusty, sunny parlour, elate with the triumph of 
having defied the world and its eyes. 

But before parting with Mr. Ramsay, we must here 
observe that he is not the only one who has attempted 



164 THE INHEKITANCE. 

to walk as if uncontrolled by the scan of that dread 
power, commonly called the eyes of the world. Few, 
if any, however, have ever arrived at entire emanci- 
pation from its influence, which extends more or less 
over all mankind. Uncle Adam flattered himself that 
he was one of the happy few who had escaped from 
its thraldom ; but, alas ! poor man, its yoke was still 
upon him, and, unconscious of his chains, he hugged 
himself in his freedom. He cared not, indeed, that 
the world should call him a miser ; he cared not that 
the world should call him a churl ; he cared not that 
the world should call him odd ; he cared not that the 
world should say he lived in a mean house, or wore a 
shabby hat, or an old-fashioned wig ; but he cared lest 
the world should think he cared for the world — or 
should say that he was vain, or proud, or ostentatious, 
or expensive ; and it was this which made him often 
deny himself many a little comfort, many a harmless 
gratification, many an innocent desire he had in com- 
mon with that world he so much despised. To be 
free from the eyes of the world has been the aim of 
many, but the attainment of few. Man is not born 
to be free, and when all restraint is laid aside, the 
wickedness of the human heart displays itself in the 
most hideous forms. 'Tis to the Christian alone that 
such freedom belongs, and he only can say, " Je, crains 
Dieu et n^ai point d' autre crainte." 



CHAPTER XIX 

" A merry going out often bringeth a mournful return ; and 
a joyful morning a sad evening." — Thomas a Kempis. 

During their progress to the White Bear, Miss Bell 
indemnified herself for the mortifications she had 
received from her uncle by expressing herself in 
terms of the greatest pity and contempt for him. 

"Poor man!" said she, "I really feel for him, — 
for you must know it is alleged I am his great 
favourite ; and when that is the case, of course one 
will put up with a great deal. Indeed, for my part, 
I know his temper so well I never should think of 
being affronted at anything he could say ; but I own 
I am sometimes afraid of the Major — a man of his 
rank is not to be tampered with ; and he has such a 
high spirit there is no saying how he might resent 
anything the least like disrespect to me, though I 
know my poor uncle is far from meaning anything 
of the kind. It is entirely his manner, for I have 
been told he speaks very handsomely of me behind 
my back ; and when that is the case, one should not 
mind what is said to their face. However, in my 
situation, it is certainly not pleasant, and when I am 
a manied woman, the thing must be put a stop to." 



166 THE INHEEITANCE, 

Here Mrs. St. Clair put a stop to that subject by 
introducing the one uppermost in her thoughts, that 
of the election, and requesting her niece to use her 
influence with her lover on the occasion. But Miss 
Bell, like all fools, had her share of cunning, as well 
as of consequence ; and she was aware that the more 
doubts and difficulties she could attach to the Major's 
vote, the more the Major's importance and her own 
importance would be increased; and she therefore 
made answer, — 

"Why, really aunt, to tell you the truth, the 
Major has a very difficult part to act; and it will 
require no small management, I assure you, both in 
him and me, to avoid giving off"ence to one side or 
the other. Connected as he is with the Fairacre and 
Boghall families, it will be a strong step in him to 
give his vote to the opposite party. At the same 
time, I know I have only to say the word to secure 
him for my friends ; but, as I said to him, the world 
might reflect upon me, were I to make use of my 
influence in so important a matter. Besides, you 
know, aunt, I can say nothing till the Major has 
been waited upon by Lord Eossville, and has been 
paid proper attention to by the family ; and it would 
also be right, I think, if some of the ladies were to 
be introduced to his sister, Mrs. Fairbairn, a very 
sweet woman, who lives a little way from this." 
But here the carriage drove up to the Wliite Bear, 
where neither the Major nor the horses were to be 
seen ; but they were told both would be forthcoming 



THE INHERIT ANCE, 167 

presently. There was nothing for it, therefore, but 
to wait patiently in the midst of the usual assemblage 
that is to be seen lounging at an inn door — hostlers, 
drivers, stable-boys, beggars, waiters, travellers, etc. 
etc. etc. 

"This is very unpleasant," said Miss Bell. "I 
wonder how the Major could think of exposing a 
person in my situation in this manner. I am sure I 
would rather have gone without carriage-horses than 
have had all these people's eyes upon me. There is one 
man, I declare he stares in such a manner I don't 
know where to look ; I wonder what he means ! I 
really wish he would bestow his attention on some- 
body else; — but, perhaps, cousin, he's one of your 
French beaux 1 " 

Mrs. St. Clair and Gertrude both looked in the 
direction pointed out by Miss Bell, and both were 
struck by the appearance of the person in question, 
or rather by the earnest scrutinising look with which 
he regarded the party ; for, although handsome, there 
was nothing very striking either in his dress or figure 
— nothing that was even indicative of the station to 
which he might be supposed to belong. He was a 
man seemingly turned of thirty, but might be more, 
with fair but sunburnt complexion, light hair, hand- 
some, though rather hawk nose, and keen bright blue 
eyes. Taken singly, his features had no peculiarity 
in them; but there was something in the general 
expression of the countenance of rather a marked 
and unpleasing character. 



168 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I have surely seen that face before," said Mra 
St. Clair, endeavouring to recollect when and where. 

"I'm sure he won't forget some of ours," said Miss 
Bell ; " for I really never saw anything so impudent 
as the manner in which he stares ; and such a shabby- 
looking creature, all covered with dust ! I daresay 
he is just off the top of some coach ; I'm sure if the 

Major catches him staring so impudently at me 

but here comes the Major and the carriage-horses — 
don't they look very well?" and then ensued a col- 
loquy between the lovers. 

"How do you like your steeds, Isabella?" 

" Not mine. Major — you know I have nothing to 
do with them ; but what do you think of them your- 
self?" 

"My thoughts must be guided entirely by your 
taste." 

"Very gallant, indeed!" — and so forth in the 
usual style of some such silly pair. 

The stranger all the while kept his station, after 
asking a question of one of the servants; but his 
looks, which, at first, had wandered from one or 
other of the party, finally rested on Gertrude, with 
an expression which it was impossible to comprehend 
or define.. It was neither admiration, nor curiosity, 
nor pleasure, nor any of the common emotions which 
a stranger might be supposed to entertain, but his 
countenance assumed a sort of smile of exultation no 
less strange than offensive. In some displeasure at 
so rude and persevering a gaze, Gertrude raised her 



THE INHERITANCE. 169 

hand to pull down the blind, when, suddenly spring- 
ing forward, he laid his hand on the door of the 
carriage. 

" What insolence !" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair. The 
stranger looked at her for a moment, with a bitter, 
contemptuous smile, then said — 

"I would speak with you, madam." 

"Speak, then — say what is your business?" an- 
swered she somewhat impatiently. 

" You would not wish me to declare it in the 
presence of these ladies, I am sure," replied the man, 
with a still more familiar look and manner. Miss 
Bell's body and soul were both half out of the opposite 
side of the carriage, as she leaned over communing 
with the Major. Mrs. St. Clair therefore answered 
haughtily — 

"You can have nothing to say to me that my 
daughter may not hear." 

"Indeed!" exclaimed the stranger in an ironical 

tone ; " is she then " Mrs. St. Clair involuntarily 

bent her head towards him, and the rest of the 
sentence was whispered in her ear, when, uttering a 
half-stifled shriek, she sank back, pale, trembling, and 
convulsed. 

"What's the matter?" cried Miss Bell, turning 
round. 

"Mamma has been frightened by that strange- 
looking man," answered Gertrude, in a low voice. 

"Bless me!" cried Miss Bell, "such nonsense — to 
be frightened for any man when the Major is here ;" 



170 THE INHERITANCE. 

— then in a loud key — "Major, I wish you would ask 
that person what he wants V 

"Not for the world!" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, 
suddenly starting up in the most extreme agitation — 
"I knoAV him — I have seen him before — I — I must 
speak to him myself," gasped she, as she motioned to 
have the carriage door opened. 

" Oh mamma !" cried Gertrude, taking her mother's 
trembling hand to detain her — "you are unable — 
allow me ;" but her mother seemed not to hear her, as, 
with the assistance of the servants, she alighted, and, 
with an unsteady step, drew near the stranger, who 
had withdrawn a few paces from the carriage, apart 
from the bystanders. 

" Good gracious !" exclaimed Miss Bell, in a whisper 
to Gertrude; " I see my aunt is terrified at the thoughts 
of involving the Major with that man, and, to be sure, 
if he had only seen how he stared at me, I daresay 
he would have knocked him down, so it's better she 
should speak to him herself, as I am under her protec- 
tion at present, you know." 

Gertrude made no reply, and Miss Bell, too much 
interested in her carriage-horses to bestow her atten- 
tion on any mere human concerns, quickly returned 
to the discussion of hoofs, tails, manes, etc. Mrs. St. 
Clair, meanwhile, having exchanged a few words with 
the stranger, returned to the carriage, still bearing 
visible signs of great mental disquiet. 

* ' So, aunt, you have very soon disposed of your beau," 
began Miss Bell, no less deficient in common observa- 



THE INHERITANCE. 171 

tion than in delicacy. "Dear me, are we driving 
away, and nothing settled about the carriage-horses 
yet; and where's the Major 1 Major! Major! stop, 
driver, for the Major; and presently the Major's 
willow-green visage presented itself, panting with the 
exertion of running after the carriage. 

" I can make nothing of that fellow," said he, ad- 
dressing Mrs. St. Clair; "he seems a most confounded 
insolent dog. If I had been a justice of the peace I 
should certainly have committed him." 

"I think you would have done quite right," said 
Miss Bell ; " and I really think, aunt, you were a great 
deal too soft with him. What did he say to you, 
Major?" 

" Oh, he was confoundedly impertinent, and if I had 
had my bamboo I should certainly have laid it across 
his shoulders." 

" Well, I dare say it was better that you got out to 
speak to him yourself than that the Major should 
have taken him in hand ; but he would have deserved 
it," said Miss Bell, " if it had only been for his im- 
pudence in staring at me in the manner he did — but, 
by-the-bye, did not you say you knew him, aunt 1 " 

Mrs. St. Clair's colour had undergone many varia- 
tions during this conversation, and Gertrude thought 
she read torture in every feature and lineament of her 
countenance. But in a voice which she vainly tried 
to render firm and composed, she replied, "I have 
seen him before, only once, and that under circum- 
stances of distress in my husband's " Here her 



172 THE INHEKITANCE. 

emotion choked her utterance, and Miss Bell and the 
Major, who were no nice observers, ascribed her agita- 
tion to the only legitimate source of a widow's tears, 
the remembrance of her departed lord ; and not being 
at all in a mood to sympathise in any such sorrowful 
feelings. Miss Bell proposed to alight and walk home 
with her lover, which was readily acceded to by her 
aunt. " I trust I shall soon have the pleasure of pre- 
senting Mrs. Waddell to you," said the Major in a half 
whisper to Mrs. St. Clair. 

"Upon my word, Major, you are too bad," said his 
fair, affecting to turn away in displeasure. 

"Have you bespoke your cousin's good offices on 
the occasion, my love?" asked the inamorato, in still 
softer accents. 

"No — I really, Major — you know there is no 
hurry " 

" I beg your pardon — I know just the reverse," re- 
plied the gallant Major ; but Mrs. St. Clair, sick of 
their vulgar airs, here wished the happy pair good 
morning; and making a sign to the servant, the 
carriage bounded away, leaving them far behind. 
Gertrude naturally expected that her mother would 
now give some explanation of the strange mysteri- 
ous scene that had taken place, though she had too 
much delicacy to express any curiosity on the subject; 
but Mrs. St. Clair remained silent and abstracted 
during the whole drive, and was only roused from 
her musings by the sudden stopping of the carriage, 
as it drew up at the castle. 



THE INHERITANCE. 173 

"Home already!" exclaimed she, looking round 
as if awakened from a dream; then, in a languid 
oppressed voice, "Gertrude, I am ill — but I want 
no attentions," waving her off; "they can do me 
no good." Colonel Delmour, who had been loung- 
ing on the lawn with his dogs, was now hastening 
towards them. "Gertrude," continued she, grasping 
her daughter's hand, — "be silent on the events of 
this day, as you value my life." Gertrude shuddered, 
but the next moment her hand was pressed in that 
of Colonel Delmour, as he assisted her to alight, and 
her mother's fearful words were almost driven from 
her thoughts by the raptures he expressed at her 
return. His words were too delightful not to be 
listened to, and she loitered a few minutes on the 
steps, " Is it possible," thought she, as she looked on 
her lover, " that this elegant, graceful being can belong 
to the same species with an uncle Adam or a Major 
Waddell!" Colonel Delmour saw that he had lost 
nothing by her absence, and as her mother turned to 
call her, he ventured to whisper somewhat of a more 
serious import than he had yet done; — Gertrude 
blushed, smiled, and was gone. 



CHAPTER XX. 

" "What silence hides, that knowest thou." 

Dante. 

On joining her mother in her apartment, Gertrude 
found her walking to and fro in that manner which 
plainly indicates great mental disquiet. She continued 
to pace backwards and forwards for some time, as if 
lost in thought; then suddenly stopping, she said, some- 
what abruptly — "Gertrude, do you remember your 
nurse 1" 

"Ah ! mamma, can I ever forget her !" replied her 
daughter, tears springing to her eyes at the remem- 
brance of all the care and tenderness she had experi- 
enced for years from the faithful creature. 

" Yes, I know you were very fond of her, and she 
of you. Well, the stranger who caused me so great 
an alarm to-day — was her husband." 

" Her husband, mamma !" repeated Gertrude. " I 
thought he had been dead many years agol" 

•' I thought so too ; but unfortunately it is not so 
— I say unfortunately, for he is likely to prove a 
troublesome appendage to us — those sort of people are 
always unreasonable ; and he seems to think his wife's 
care and attention to you, and her long services in the 



THE INHERITANCE. 175 

family, give him a claim upon our gratitude, Avhich I 
fear I shall not find easy to answer. In short, he 
seems a needy, rapacious man, urgent for money, which 
I have not to give, and yet am loth to refuse." 

"It is certainly my duty to do something for him, 
mamma," answered her daughter; "but, you know, I 
have nothing in my own power — all I can do is to 
speak to my uncle for him " 

" No, no," cried Mrs. St. Clair impatiently, " that 
will never do;" and she resumed her pacing up and 
down. 

"Why may I not ask Lord Eossville to assist him, 
mamma 1 " inquired Gertrude, in some surprise. 
"Surely the husband of my nurse, of one whom I 
loved so dearly, has a right to expect something from 
usf' 

"Something — yes, something; but what is that 
something to be ? How much money have you got at 
present, Gertrude?" 

Her daughter named the sum, which was a very 
trifling one. "Good heavens ! what shall I do?" ex- 
claimed her mother, -with the look and accent of 
despair ; " how shall I ever be able a raise a sufficient 
sum " 

"Dear mamma! why should you distress yourself so 
much about it ? — only suffer me to speak to my uncle." 

" Gertrude, you will drive me mad ! have I not 
told you that it would be destruction to me to breathe 
a syllable of this matter to any human being?" 

"Destruction, mamma!" repeated her daughter in 



176 THE INHERITANCE. 

astonishment, not unmixed with terror at her mother's 
vehemence. 

" Bring me what money you have — every sous, and 
no questions ; you will perhaps know all soon enough," 
murmured she, throwing herself into a chair, as if 
exhausted with the violence of contending emotions ; 
then rousing herself as her daughter was leaving the 
room to obey her, — " and fetch me your ornaments, 
Gertrude — all of them — quick, no more words ;" — and 
she waved her hand impatiently for her to be gone. 
Gertrude was too well acquainted with her mother's 
imperious manner to attempt any remonstrance, but 
she could not conceal the astonishment and reluctance 
with which she set about obeying her. Having col- 
lected all the money and the few jewels she possessed, 
she brought them to her mother. 

"Surely, mamma," said she, "it cannot be neces- 
sary for me to give my ear-rings and bracelets to my 
nurse's husband ! The money he is welcome to ; but 
really I am churlish enough to grudge him my 
trinkets." 

"Keep them, then," said Mrs. St. Clair, pushing 
them from her with contempt — "keep the paltry 
baubles, since it is too great a sacrifice to part with 
them even to a parent." 

" Oh, mamma, what cruel words ! I spoke in jest 
— take them — take all — everything that I have;" and 
she drew the rings oflf her fingers, and unclasped those 
in her ears. 

" No, no," said her mother, in the same cold, bitter 



THE INHERITANCE. 177 

tone, " keep your precious gewgaws — you surely would 
not give your pearl necklace to save me from ruin ? — 
that would be too much, indeed ! " 

Mrs, St. Clair well knew how to turn to her own 
purposes the quick generous temper of her daughter. 

Stung to the soul by her mother's reproaches, Ger- 
trude burst into tears ; she besought her forgiveness 
— she implored her to take the baubles, till at length 
she prevailed, and what Gertrude would, in other cir- 
cumstances, have considered a sacrifice, she now looked 
upon as a privilege ; so differently do things appear 
according to the state of our minds. 

" To show that I do not exact more from you than 
I do from myself," said Mrs. St. Clair, going to her 
jewel-case, "I too must part with all I possess ;" and 
she took out all her own ornaments, and began putting 
them up along with those of her daughter. Gertrude 
assisted with a good grace, for she was still in a state 
of excitement. She saw all her elegant and fashion- 
able bijouterie — all the cherished tokens of remem- 
brance — all thej little gifts she had received from far 
distant friends and companions, one by one, folded 
up, and she still felt only joy in the thought that she 
had parted with them for her mother ; but she could 
not suppress a sigh when she came to an old-fashioned 
hair-brooch, in the form of a heart, set round with 
garnets — "That was the gift of my dear nurse," 
said she timidly, " and she made me promise that I 
never " 

"Would part with it," subjoined Mrs. St. Clair. 
VOL. I. N 



178 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Well, keep your promise and your locket, Gertrude, 
it is of little value — it can make no difference ; surely 
he would not grudge you that." 

"He !" repeated Gertrude indignantly — "it is not 
for him, it is for you — but why ?" — she stopped, and 
looked inquiringly in her mother's face. 

" Gertrude, it is natural that your curiosity should 
be excited by what you have seen and heard, and the 
time may come — perhaps too soon, when it will be 
amply gratified ; but when it is, I tell you that it will 
— it must be at the expense of my life. Now speak, 
ask what you will, and I will answer you, but it 
must be on these terms." 

"Oh ! mamma, what a wretch you must think me," 
said Gertrude, again giving way to her tears — "head- 
strong, perverse, disobedient, you may have found 
me, but surely I do not deserve such killing words. 
Would that I could share in your distresses, whatever 
they are, if by sharing I could lessen them." 

Mrs. St. Clair shook her head, and sighed deeply. 
" I believe you, Gertrude — I know you are superior 
to the meanness of mere curiosity, and I think I may 
rely on your affection — may I not 1 " 

Her daughter answered by throwing herself into 
her mother's arms, and Mrs. St. Clair pressed her to 
her bosom with emotions of tenderness and affection, 
such as she had never before displayed. When she 
regained her composure, she said — 

" Now, my love, we understand each other ; you 
are aware that my reserve proceeds from no distrust 



THE INHERITANCE. 179 

of you. I feel that your forbearance is the result of 
your affection for me ; henceforth all that you have 
to do is to prove your sincerity by your silence. You 
have only to promise that you will never disclose what 
you have witnessed, or what you may yet witness, in 
my conduct that may seem strange and mysterious, 
and that you will never reveal what I have now told 
you about that man ; neither his name, nor his con- 
nection with us, must you ever breathe, as you value 
my life." 

Gertrude promised — solemnly promised, and her 
mother again tenderly embraced her, declaring her- 
self satisfied. 

"You know not what a load it takes from my 
mind to find you thus prudent, tractable, and con- 
fiding, with feeling enough to participate in my 
vexations, with delicacy to repress all idle curiosity, 
with affection to assist me in my difficulties. May 
Heaven reward you, Gertrude, for all you have done 
and will do for me ! And now," continued she, 
as she finished the packet she had been making up, 
"I am going to give you yet a stronger proof of the 
trust I place in you. This packet must be delivered 
to-night to the person for whom it is destined. I 
have promised to meet him at the temple, near the 
end of the lime avenue, next the deer-park, at eleven 
o'clock, and you must accompany me ; the family will 
then be at supper ; I shall plead a headache — alas ! 
no vain pretext ! "—and she pressed her daughter's 
hand to her throbbing temples — "as an excuse for 



180 THE INHERITANCE. 

retiring to my room ; you will of course attend me, 
and we shall then find no difficulty in stealing out 
unperceived. I know all you would say, Gertrude," 
continued she in a quick, impatient tone, as she read 
her daughter's disapprobation in the glow that mantled 
on her cheek ; " but there is no alternative — it must 
be so ; yet if you repent your promise, I am ready to 
release you from it, though my ruin should ensue. 
Speak, do you wish to be free ? " 

Gertrude could not speak, but she gave her 
mother her hand in token of her submission, then 
turned shuddering away. Her mother again caressed 
her. 

"Be composed, my love — all will yet go well. 
Let us dress for dinner," continued she, as her maid 
entered for the purpose of preparing her toilet. 
Then whispering, "Try to look cheerful, my love; 
remember looks may betray a secret as well as words ; 
put some flowers in your hair, and make yourself at 
least look gay for my sake — do, my sweetest ! " 

Gertrude sighed, and they separated. 



CHAPTER XXL 

" Plus sonat quam valet." 

' ' More sound than sense. " 

Seneca. 

It would have argued ill for Gertrude if she could 
have obeyed her mother's injunctions, and looked the 
thing she was not. Time and suffering may teach us 
to repress our feelings; but the young and untried 
heart can with diflBculty learn to conceal them. The 
most ingenuous and upright mind may practise self- 
control ; but it is only the artful and the mean who 
will ever stoop to dissimulation. Agitated and per- 
plexed, in vain she strove to appear tranquil and 
disengaged — the very attempt served only to defeat 
the purpose. The more she thought of her mother's 
strange mysterious behaviour — and of what else 
could she think? — the more bewildered she became 
in the maze of her own fancy ; till at length, despair- 
ing of regaining self-possession from her own secret 
communings, she hastened to seek it in company, and 
quickly dressing herself, she descended to the drawing- 
room. 

It required no great share of penetration to discover 
that something more than common was passing in 



182 THE INHERITANCE. 

her mind; her varying colour, her clouded hrow, 
her thoughtful yet wandering eye, so different from 
the usual open, bland expression of her countenance, 
plainly indicated the state of her feeUngs. 

Lord Eossville, Mr. Delmour, and Mrs. St. Clair 
were at the farther end of the room in earnest con- 
versation. She was giving such an account of her 
visit to Mr. Eamsay, and her meeting with Major 
Waddell, as suited her own purposes ; and she dilated 
so much upon the difficulties and importance of their 
votes, and the management that would be requisite to 
secure them, that she at last succeeded (no very diffi- 
cult matter) in completely mistifying, at least, one of 
her auditors. In short, she convinced Lord Eossville, 
and almost persuaded his nephew, that the whole issue 
of the election depended on her and her family. 

" I have a strange headstrong set of beings to deal 
with, " said she ; " but I think, with a little address 
and a good deal attention, we shall prevail at last." 

" On such an occasion," said his Lordship, " neither 
ought to be wanting, my dear madam. I flatter my- 
self we are none of us deficient in the former qualifica- 
tion, and the latter depends entirely upon ourselves. 
To-morrow Mr. Delmour and I shall make a point of 
waiting upon such of your relatives and connections 
as" — Mr. Delmour here took out his memorandum 
book, and began to write down the names of Major 
Waddell, Mr. Eamsay, and Mr. Black in his Hst for the 
following day. " I wish we could secure your uncle," 
said he to Mrs. St. Olair ; — then turning to Lord Eoss- 



THE INHERITANCE. 183 

ville — " I find he is the purchaser of the superiorities 
of Deaf knows, which, with Tonglands and Kilspindie, 
might, with ease, be split certainly into four ; but I 
think, probably, into five qualifications ; — these on our 
side would make it quite a hollow business. Don't 
you think so 1" 

" Why, in all human probability, it would," replied 
his Lordship ; — " at the same time, we must be cautious 
how we admit or mistake mere probabilities for ab- 
solute certainties ; in all such cases there must ever 
be contingences, which it is impossible, or, at least, ex- 
tremely difl&cult, to foresee or guard against. It is a 
matter of doubt with me whether Mr. Ramsay has 
yet been infeft in these lands of Kindyford and Caul- 
fauld, and whether there is not a wadset on the lands 
of Ogilface and Haggiescape? In all likehhood our 
opponents are using every means to bring some such 
corps de reserve into the field. Also, I understand, 
there were two new claims preferred for enrolment on 
the lands of Stonykirk and Kilnettles at the last meet- 
ing of freeholders ; and we may reasonably conclude 
that the roll will be still farther augmented by the 
adverse party — that is, if it is possible for them to 
do so." 

While this colloquy, and much more of the same 
kind, was carrying on at one end of the room, the 
other presented Lady Betty, spread out in full dress 
on a sofa, with Flora by her side, and Colonel Del- 
mour and Mr. Lyndsay at a little distance, engaged in 
some debate. Gertrude, on entering, almost uncon- 



184 THE INHERITANCE. 

sciously seated herself at one of the windows, apart 
from everybody ; but she was immediately joined by 
her cousins. Colonel Delmour remarked, with secret 
satisfaction, the agitation of her look and manner. 

He imputed it entirely to the declaration he had 
ventured to make, which he thought had probably 
given rise to some discussions betwixt her mother and 
her, and which he had no doubt would end, as all such 
discussions between mother and daughter generally do, 
in favour of the lover. 

But this was not precisely the time when he wished 
his pretensions to be publicly known — and he was 
rather desirous that Miss St. Clair's emotions should 
pass unobserved. 

Colonel Delmour's manner, however, although 
guarded and respectful, nevertheless carried with it 
that nameless something which made even the object 
of his professed idolatry feel he had gained an ascend- 
ency over her, and that the worshipped was also the 
worshipper. While he leant on the back of her chair 
Mr. Lyndsay once or twice addressed some remark to 
her, but, absent and occupied, she scarcely seemed to 
hear him. 

"Is it to-day that you would have me begin to 
sketch your portrait?" said he, with a smile. 

" No — not to-day," replied she, in some confusion. 

" And why not 1 To paint from nature, one must 
take nature in all her various moods and aspects." 

"But I don't love stormy cloudy pictures," said 
Gertrude, with a sigh. 



THE INHERITANCE. 185 

Colonel Delmour looked reproachfully at her, as 
he whispered, " Strange, that this day, which has been 
the brightest in my life, should seem cloudy to you. 
Ah, Gertrude ! why do we not view it with the 
same eyes?" 

Gertrude blushed deeply, but remained silent. 

" What o'clock is it 1 " inquired Lady Betty. 

"Seven minutes to six," said Miss Pratt, as she 
entered, and tripping past Lady Betty, joined the 
group in the window. " Anything new going on 
here ? — It's changed days with you. Colonel, to be in 
the drawing-room before dinner ; we seldom used to 
see you till the first course was going away." Survey- 
ing Gertrude from head to foot, *' What's come over 
you to-day, my dear 1 You're not looking like your- 
self. I think you've got too many of these passion- 
flowers in your head. Mr. Edward, you must not 
take your cousin's picture to-day, or else she must 
part with some of these passion-flowers ; I really don't 
thijik they're becoming; just let me take out that 

one " and she was preparing to lay her hands 

upon it, when hers were seized by Colonel Delmour. 

" Bless me, Colonel, don't be so violent ; I'm sure 
I wasn't going to take off Miss St. Clair's head ; — they 
may well be called passion-flowers, for they really 
seem to have put you in a fine passion ; and you've 
crumpled all my rufi", and squeezed one of my fingers 
to the bone," 

Colonel Delmour, colouring a little at the transport 
of indignation he had given way to, affected to laugh 



186 THE INHERITANCE. 

it off, and, releasing Miss Pratt's hands from his grasp, 
said in a low whisper — 

" I beg pardon if, in the ardour of my passion, I 
did press your hands too — too tenderly — impute the 
blame " 

" I don't know what you mean. Colonel Delmour," 
cried Miss Pratt aloud, as she stroked down her ruff 
and caressed her injured finger, with every appear- 
ance of ill -humour; "but I know you've left your 
marks upon me in a pretty manner. I didn't know 
Miss St. Clair's head had been your property, or, I 
assure you, I wouldn't have offered to touch it ; but I 
know if she's wise, she'll take care how she trusts you 
with her hand, after seeing how you've used mine," 
and she held up a red angry-looking finger, and shook 
her ruff — "and only look at my ruff!" 

"What's the matter with your ruffl" asked Lady 
Betty ; "it looks very neat, I think." 

"Neat ! it was more than neat, but Colonel Del- 
mour has spoiled the seat of it, and I'll have to get 
it all goffered over again." 

"By-the-bye, Miss Pratt," said Colonel Delmour, 
"since you denounce me as the destroyer of your 
ruff — it is a deed for which I merit the thanks of all 
pious, well-disposed persons in general, and of the 
kirk- session in particular. I read a history of ruffs 
t'other day, which harrowed up my soul, and made 
my young blood to freeze. I assure you, ever since I 
have been initiated into the shocking mysteries of 
ruff-making, Hamlet's horror at sight of his father's 



THE INHERITANCE. 187 

ghost has been nothing compared to mine when I 
behold a stiff well-appointed ruff, so completely is it 
associated in my mind's eye with hoofs and horns, 
blackness and brimstone ;" — then going to the library, 
he presently returned with an ancient folio in his 
hand, and, turning over the leaves, he read as follows, 
with an air of ludicrous horror and dismay: "The 
Anatomie of Abuses, containing a Discoverie or brief 
Summarie of such Notable Vices and Imperfections 
as now raigne in many Counteries of the World, etc. 
etc. etc. By Phillip Stubbes, 1583. 

"... They have greate and monsterous ruffes, 
made either of cambricke, lawne, or els of some other 
of the finest cloth that can be got for monie, whereof 
some be a quarter of a yarde deepe, yea, some more, 
very fewe lesse : So that they stande a fulle quarter 
of a yarde (and more) from their neckes, hanging over 
their shoulder pointes insteade of a vaile. But wot 
ye what? the deivill, as he, in the fuUnesse of his 
malice, first invented these greate ruffes, so hath he 
now found out also two greate pillars to beare up and 
maintaine this his kingdome of pride withal. The 
one arche or pillar, wherebye his kingdom of greate 
ruffes is under propped, is a certain kinde of liquide 
matter which they call starch, wherein the deivill 
hath willed them to washe and to drie their ruffes 
well, which being drie, wili then stand stiffe and 
inflexible aboute their neckes. The other pillar is a 
certaine device made of wiers crested for the purpose, 
whipped either over with golde thred, silver, or silke, 



188 THE INHERITANCE. 

and this he calleth a underpropper. Beyond all 
this, theye have a farther fetche, nothynge inferior to 
the reste, as namely, three or four decrees of minar 
ruffes placed in gradatim, one beneathe another, and 
all under the Mayster Deivill RuflFe, sometimes they 

are " 

" Such nonsense ! " exclaimed Miss Pratt. " I really 
never heard the like of it. I wonder how you have 
patience to Hsten to it. Lady Betty. I really think 
Miss St Clair might show more sense than to laugh 
at such ridiculous stuff There's the gong, that's 
better worth attending to;" and away walked Miss 
Pratt and her ruff. 

The politicians were also roused at the sound ; and 
as they broke up, Mrs. St. Clair said to Lord Ross- 
ville — 

" Rest assured, my Lord, nothing shall be wanting 
on my part to gain the suffrages of my family ; and I 
have little doubt of accomplishing it, since your Lord- 
ship has thus kindly and considerately give me a carte 
blanche, as it were, for my actions upon the occasion. 
I feel most deeply the value of the confidence you 
have thus reposed in me." 

Lord Rossville had done no such thing as give or 
dream of giving Mrs. St. Clair a carte blanche for her 
actions ; — but he loved to hear himself commended, 
whether for what he had done, or for what he had 
not done ; and he therefore allowed it to pass, in the 
belief that he was indeed all that was kind, wise, and 
considerate. Gertrude, as a matter of course, was 



THE INHERITANCE. 189 

again placed between Lord Eossville and Mr, Del- 
mour, and condemned, during a tedious dinner, to hear 
the same political jargon carried on. Mr. Delmour 
now and then changed the conversation, indeed, out 
of compliment to her, and talked of the views, the 
weather, the races, and such subjects as he seemed to 
think suited to a female capacity ; but it was evidently 
an effort to descend to such things, and Gertrude felt 
only provoked that he should even attempt to be 
agreeable. 

When they rose from table her mother made a 
si2;n for her to follow her to her own room. 



CHAPTEE XXII. 

*' Never in my breast 
Did ignorance so struggle with desire 
Of knowledge, . . . 
As in tliat moment ; nor — dar'd I 
To question, nor myself could aught discern." 

Caky's Dante. 

" You are a poor dissembler, Gertrude," said Mrs. St. 
Clair, after having shut the door of her chamber, and 
carefully examined each lurking recess; "your looks 
have already betrayed to the family that something 
is wrong ; even stupid Lady Betty asked me at dinner 
whether you were well enough. It is therefore 
obvious you are suffering either from mental disquiet 
or bodily indisposition, and it must be your part to 
play the invalid this evening." Then seeing her 
daughter about to express her dislike of the deception, 
"It is easily done — you have only to remain here, 
and leave it to me to account for your absence in the 
drawing-room;" — then, with a profound sigh, "the 
headache and the heartache are both mine, God 
knows ! but if you will only affect to bear the one for 
me you will assuredly alleviate the other." 

Gertrude felt that she was become a mere tool in 
her mother's hands, and that it was in vain to contend. 



THE INHERITANCE. 191 

She therefore yielded a passive assent to remaining a 
prisoner for the rest of the evening. 

Various were the conjectures, and numberless the 
remedies, called forth by Mrs. St. Clair's communica- 
tion of her daughter's indisposition. The heat of the 
day — the drive — the roads — the dust — the dinner — 
Uncle Adam and his airless room, — all these, and many 
more, were each assigned as a sufficient cause for 
headache, and eau-de-Cologne, aromatic vinegar, and 
all the thousand perfumed specifics, down to Lady 
Betty's home-made double -distilled lavender water, 
were recommended and accepted. As for Lord Eoss- 
ville, he made it quite a matter of life and death — 
"A fever commonly began with a headache. Was 
there any disposition to shivering on the part of the 
patient ? — any thirst — any fever — any bile ? How were 
the eyes 1 how was the tongue ? how was the pulse ? 
A little blood taken in time was perhaps the most 
effectual antidote. He possessed some knowledge of 
medicine himself; and, in short, Mrs. St. Clair only 
prevented him from going to prescribe for his niece 
in person, by assuring him that she felt a great dis- 
position to sleep, and had requested that she might 
not be disturbed. It was therefore finally settled 
that if Miss St. Clair was no better by to-morrow 
morning she was then to be given up to his Lord- 
ship's direction. 

Colonel Delmour suspected there was some decep- 
tion in the case, and was at no loss, as he thought, 
to fathom the mystery. He believed their mutual 



192 THE INHERITANCE. 

attachment had been discovered by Mrs. St Ciair» 
and that Gertrude was suffering persecution on his 
account; but he felt httle apprehension as to the 
result; he knew enough of human nature to be 
aware that, to a romantic ardent nature such as hers, 
a little opposition would have rather a good effect, 
and that there is sometimes no surer way of creating 
an interest in one party than by exciting a prejudice 
in another. 

Meanwhile, the object of all this solicitude sat at 
her window, "watching the coming on of grateful 
evening mild." It was at that lovely season when 
day and night are so imperceptibly blended into each 
other, that night seems only a softer, sweeter day. 
There were none of those magnificent masses of clouds 
which in this climate generally form the pomp and 
circumstance of a fine sunset. The sky was cloudless 
and serene, and a soft, silvery moon shone in one 
quarter of the heavens, while the mellow golden lustre 
of the sun gradually melted away in the other. 

'* When the last sunshine, with expiring ray, 
In Summer twilight weeps the close of day, 
Who hath not felt the softness of that hour 
Steal o'er his heart like dew-drops on the flower ?" 

Then came the deeper blue of the silent night, with 
her "solemn bird and glittering stars." 

But Gertrude was withdrawn from the contempla- 
tion of these consecrated things by the entrance of 
her mother. She threw herself on a chair and sighed 
heavily ; then starting up — 



THE INHERITANCE. 193 

" Prepare yourself, Gertrude ; in a few minutes we 
must set forth ; — fetch your green travelling cloak, it 
will completely cover your dress, and conceal your 
figure, should we unfortunately meet any one, which 
Heaven forbid !" 

Gertrude brought her cloak, and did as she was 
directed, while her mother wrapped herself in a similar 
disguise, and both awaited in trembling expectation 
the signal for sallying forth. At length the gong 
sounded — voices were heard as the family passed 
through the hall to the supper-room — the doors were 
shut, and all was silent 

" Now is the time," said Mrs. St Clair in a voice 
almost inarticulate from agitation. ' ' Yet stay — should 
it by any unforeseen mischance ever reach Lord Ross- 
ville's ears that we were seen leaving the house to- 
gether at such an hour — no, that will never do — 
Gertrude, you must go first, and I will follow." 

" Oh no, no !" cried her daughter, turning pale with 
terror ; " why should that be ■? — surely that can make 
no difference." 

" No difference in reality, but much in appearance," 
said Mrs. St Clair impatiently. " Your stealing out 
to take a ramble by moonlight, however silly, would not 
sound very improbable, and my following you would be 
perfectly natural; but both going out together is quite 
unaccountable, and must not be. Go ! make haste ! " 

" Oh, mamma ! do not, I beseech you — do not ask 
me to go alone. I cannot — indeed, I cannot;" and 
she sank upon a chair. 

VOL. I. O 



194 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Ridiculous!" exclaimed her mother in a tone of 
suppressed anger ; " of what are you afraid V 

" I know not, I cannot tell. I am going I know 
not where — to meet — I know not whom — and at 
midnight. No, I cannot — I will not go;" and she 
threw back her cloak, and shook off her hat, with 
gestures of impatience and indignation. 

"Obstinate — unfeeling — ungrateful wretch!" ex- 
claimed Mrs. St. Clair, giving way to her passion ; " is 

it for you that I suffer — that I Why do I not 

give you up to your fate at once? — why? — but I 
will be obeyed. I command you on your peril to 
obey me." 

Gertrude threw herself on the floor at her mother's 
feet. "ELill me — trample on me," cried she in an 
accent of despair ; " but my soul revolts from these 
mysteries. Oh! my mother!" continued she in 
broken accents, " is it you who commands me thus to 
steal from my uncle's house at midnight — disguised 
and alone — to meet a low-born, needy, desperate 
man?" 

Mrs. St. Clair remained silent for a few moments, 
as if struggling with her feelings ; she then spoke in 
a voice of unnatural calmness — 

" Be it so. My entreaties — my prayers — my com- 
mands are in vain ; the die is cast by your hand, and 
my doom is fixed. I told you that my life depended 
upon your unreserved obedience — and The for- 
feit shall be paid." 

Gertrude looked on her mother's face — every 



THE INHERITANCE. 195 

feature was convulsed with powerful and fearful 
emotion; then every idea vanished but that of her 
mother dying — dead — and she the cause. All per- 
sonal fear — all lofty feeling fled : the right chord 
was touched, and her whole frame vibrated with 
emotion. She clung to her mother's knees ; she sued 
for pardon ; she vowed the most implicit obedience, 
the most devoted submission to her will ; she called 
Heaven to witness that henceforth she would do all 
that was required of her ; she prayed that she might 
be tried once, only once more. She spoke with all 
the ardour and sincerity of powerful emotion, but it 
is not with a throbbing heart and a burning brow 
that the mastery is obtained ; if vows made in pain 
are void, those formed under the influence of excited 
feehng are no less vain and fleeting. Mrs. St. Clair's 
features gradually relaxed, and, in a more natural 
voice, she said — 

"I forgive you, Gertrude — I forgive your doubts, 
your fears, however injurious to me. Go, then ; but 
ere you go, reflect on what you have undertaken — 
remember you have vowed unqualified obedience — 
there is now no middle course; you are either my 
preserver or my destroyer," She poured out a glass of 
water, and held it to her daughter's trembling lips. 
" Now listen to my instructions : — Glide quickly and 
softly along till you reach the south turret stair ; be 
cautious in descending it, and making your way along 
the old passage to the west door, which is seldom 
locked ; when there, you have only to cross the lawn 



196 THE INHERITANCE. 

— keep by the river side, and wait me at the ivy 
bridge ; fear nothing — I will follow you immediately." 

Gertrude again muffled herself in her cloak, and, 
with a beating heart, went on her way as fast as 
terror and agitation would permit. She groped her 
way down the little turnpike stair, and along a dark 
passage, in an old part of the house, to a door which 
opened upon the lawn. But there all things stood 
disclosed in the light of a full moon, and calm, cloud- 
less sky, and her heart almost failed her as she 
marked her own dark shapeless shadow stealing along 
on the silvery path. She soon gained the bank of the 
river, and there, in the deep shade of the rocks and 
trees, she felt secure, at least from discovery, if not 
from danger. A few steps more and she reached 
the bridge, where she was to await her mother. 

At another time she would have been charmed 
with the romantic loveliness and grandeur of the 
scene. Rocks, trees, and waterfall, all gleamed in 
the pale pellucid light — not a leaf was stirring, and 
the solemn stillness was only broken by the rushing 
of the river, and the whooping of the owls. But to 
enjoy the tranquillity of nature requires that there 
should be some sympathy between the mind and the 
scene; and Gertrude's feelings were but little in 
unison with the calm, the holy majesty of moonhght. 
Scarcely daring to breathe, every instant seemed an 
age, till she beheld her mother advance with a quick 
but agitated step. 

" We are late," said she in a low tone ; " let us 



THE INHEKITANCE. 197 

make haste ;" and taking her daughter's arm, they 
proceeded together in silence for a considerable dis- 
tance till they came within sight of a temple situated 
on the summit of the bank. 

"It was there I appointed to meet him," said Mrs. 
St. Clair ; and as she spoke the figure of a man was 
seen approaching towards them. "Wait here, Ger- 
trude," cried she, waving her daughter back, as she 
would have clung to her. " I shall be within sight 
and call of you. Do not stir from hence, and remem- 
ber your promise." 

And disengaging herself from her she hastily 
advanced to meet the stranger. It was not in human 
nature not to have felt the most intense curiosity at 
this moment ; and Gertrude certainly experienced it 
in no common degree, when she beheld her mother's 
meeting with this mysterious man. Although beyond 
the reach of hearing what passed, their gestures told 
a tale of no common import. After remaining a few 
minutes in deep and earnest conversation, she saw 
Mrs. St. Clair offer him a packet, which she guessed 
was the one containing the money and jewels. She 
then saw the person reject it, as if with scorn, and 
even turn away from it, as Mrs. St. Clair seemed to 
press it upon him. This dumb show lasted some 
minutes, till at length he snatched it from the hand 
she held out to him, and threw it upon the ground, 
and made some steps towards the place where Ger- 
trude stood. Mrs. St. Clair caught him by the arm ; 
she seemed to be arguing, imploring, supplicating. 



198 THE INHERITANCE. 

Now she clasped her hands, as if in an agony ; then 
she raised them, as if in solemn appeal to Heaven, 
and Gertrude caught the sound of her voice, in tones 
of the deepest anguish. At length she seemed to 
prevail. Having herself lifted up the packet he had 
so contemptuously cast away, she again offered it to 
him, and it was accepted. They now advanced to- 
gether till within a few paces of Gertrude, when Mrs. 
St. Clair quitted her companion and approached her 
daughter. The shade of the trees covered her face, 
but her voice was expressive of the utmost agitation. 

"Gertrude, my love," said she in a low tone, 
" Lewiston wishes to see you, to talk with you, as the 
husband of your nurse, and a sort of confidential 
person in the family; he thinks he has a right to 
address you in his own way. I dare not refuse 
Gertrude — he will converse with you alone." 

Mrs. St. Clair placed her hand on her daughter's lips, 
as she saw an indignant refusal ready to burst forth — 

" Oh, Gertrude ! dearest Gertrude ! as you value 
my life, as you value your own happiness, do not 
refuse — do not provoke him. I am in his power — 
one hasty word, one contemptuous look, may undo me. 
Oh, Gertrude ! for the love you bear to me, for the 
love you bore your nurse, for the love of Heaven — be 
calm and patient. Speak — tell me I may trust you !" 

And she led her a few steps towards the stranger. 
Gertrude started with terror, as the moonbeams now 
fell on her mother's face, and showed it wild, and even 
ghastly, from excessive emotion. 



THE INHEBITANCK 199 

" Compose yourself, mamma," said she ; " I will do 
— I will be all your desire." 

There was no time for more, for the stranger, as 
if impatient of delay, had now joined them ; he held 
out his hand to Gertrude with an air of familiarity, 
which at once roused her indignation, and had almost 
thrown her off her guard, when a look from her 
mother subdued her. With a blush of wounded 
pride she suffered him to take it, and Mrs. St. Clair 
walked apart. He surveyed her for some minutes 
without speaking, while her cheek burned, and her 
heart swelled at the indignity to which she was thus 
subjected. At length he said abruptly — 

*' Do you remember your nurse ? " 

" Perfectly." 

" How old were you when she died 1 " 

"I was nine years old." 

" You were very fond of her, were you not ? " 

" I loved her as my mother," answered Gertrude 
in a voice of deep emotion, 

"That was well — you are aware that I was her 
husband, consequently, have some claim to a share 
of your affection. Do you think you will be able to 
bestow any of it upon me?" 

Gertrude's spirit was ready to burst forth at the 
insolent freedom of this address, but she repressed it, 
and answered coldly — 

"As the husband of my nurse I am willing to 
assist you as far as I am able, but I have little in my 
power at present." 



200 THE INHERITANCE. 

"True, but the time will come when you will 
have much." 

"When I have," answered Gertrude, wishing to 
end the conference, "the claims of my nurse's hus- 
band shall not be forgotten;" and she was moving 
away, 

" Stop," cried he, " not so fast — the claims of your 
nurse's husband are not so easily settled as you seem 
to suppose. I wish to put a few more questions to 
you, young lady, before we part. How am I to be 
assured that you will ever have it in your power to 
assist me in the world ? " 

" I can give you no assurance," said Gertrude ; 
" all that I can say is — if ever it is in my power to 
befriend you, for the sake of your wife, I shall be 
ready to do it." 

"Only for the sake of my wife!" repeated he 
with a smile. " We shall see how that is when the 
time comes, whether I shall not have something to 
say with you for my own sake," 

In silent displeasure Gertrude turned proudly 
away, when he caught her cloak to detain her. 

" Well, we shall settle that afterwards ; but if you 
play your cards well, you will one day have something 
in your power, or the deuce is in it. The worst of it 
is, that day may be a while of coming, and your friends 
may starve in the meantime ; but your uncle is a pretty 
old boy, and you are sure of succeeding." 

Gertrude was choking with indignation, but she 
remembered her promise, and remained silent. 



THE INHERITANCE. 201 

"What are your plans for the future?" demanded 
he abruptly. 

" I am not in the habit of communicating my plans 
to strangers," answered she haughtily. 

"But I have a right to know your plans," said he 
fiercely ; " I insist upon an answer to my question. 
What are your plans for the future V 

Gertrude was terrified. "I am ignorant of your 
meaning," said she faintly. 

" I mean, in the event of your uncle's death, what 
would you do 1 Would you marry or remain single 1 
and has your mother attempted to influence you in 
favour of anybody 1 Answer me that ; does she wish 
you to marry or not ? — say " 

"It is impossible for me to answer — I do not 
know — I cannot tell," answered Gertrude, almost 
overcome with the contending emotions of terror 
and indignation. 

"Are you sure of thaf? Is there no Colonel 
Delmour in the case, ready to swindle the heiress 
out of her estates ? But that won't do ; you must 
beware how you entangle yourself there ; you must be- 
ware how you commit yourself — or, by Jupiter! 

Come, I must know how the land hes ; I must know 
how you stand afi"ected to those fortune-hunters who 
are looking after you;" and he would have taken her 
hand with an air of familiarity, which now completely 
threw her off her guard. Uttering a piercing cry, 
which echoed through the woods, she flew wildly past 
him, and cast herself into her mother's arms. 



CHAPTER XXIIL 

" Since in the toils of fate 
Thou art enclos'd, submit, if thou canst brook 
Submission." 

^SCHYLUS. 

When Gertrude awoke the following morning from 
a feverish and disturbed sleep, her mind, like the 
broken fragments of a mirror, presented only dis- 
jointed and distorted images, which she vainly endea- 
voured to arrange and combine into one connected 
whole. Hideous dreams were mingled with no less 
hideous realities, and confusion only became worse 
confounded in the attempt to separate them. At 
length she opened her eyes, and beheld her mother 
sitting by her. 

"Oh! mamma," cried she, "speak to me — tell me 
what has happened — last night. Was it — oh ! was it 
all a dream 1" 

"Compose yourself, Gertrude," answered Mrs. St. 
Clair; "whatever it was it is now past — think of it 
no more." 

" Impossible — I can think of nothing else ! I must 
Imow — I implore you to tell me at least this much — 



THE INHEKITANCE. 203 

last night — Mr. Lyndsay — oh ! tell me, did he not 
rescue me from the grasp " 

" Gertrude," interrupted her mother in great agita- 
tion, " of what use is it to talk or think of what is 
past? It is distressing to yourself — to me." 

" It was then even so ! I now remember it all — 
their high words — their threatening language — and 
that man " 

" Hush, Gertrude, hush ! " again interposed her 
mother ; "you know not what you say." 

" Yes — I know it all — he dared to assert that he 
had a right over me — he, the husband of my nurse, to 
dare to claim a right over me ! " and her voice was 
almost choked, at the thoughts of having been sub- 
jected to such an indignity. 

"But, mamma, surely this was — this must have 
been a dream; I know it was," and she gasped as 
she spoke. "When he appealed to you — you — oh ! 
— you said it was so ; I know I must have dreamt 
that" and she looked wildly and eagerly in her 
mother's face ; but Mrs. St. Clair remained silent. 

" Oh ! you did not — you could not speak of engage- 
ments — of entanglements — of — I know not what — yet 
strange and dreadful words of that import still ring 
in my ears. Tell me — only tell me it is all a dream." 

"Gertrude, this is agonising to yourseK — to me. 
Eepress — in mercy repress those feelings." 

" I will — I will," cried her daughter, in increasing 
agitation ; " only say you did not so traduce me as to 
sanction the horrible belief that I could be so base — 



204 THE INHERITANCE. 

SO vile — oh ! how it degrades me even to utter it — as 
to have plighted myself to a menial." 

"Compose yourself, Gertrude; I cannot talk to 
you while you are in this state." 

" Well, I will — I am composed," making a violent 
effort to appear calm, while her frame trembled with 
the violence of her emotion. "Now only say that 
you, my mother, did not so calumniate me — but no, 
you cannot," cried she, again giving way to the im- 
petuosity of her feelings. "It is no dream — I heard 
it all. I heard you — you, my mother, assert that man 
had a claim to me, and — I believe I was mad at that 
moment — did I not throw myself at my cousin's feet 
and implore him to save me — did I not cling to him 
in agony, while that man would have torn me from 
him?" 

" Gertrude, I would have spared you the repetition 
of your folly — your madness — I would have spared 
you the painful recollection of your broken promise, 
your injurious distrust of me ; I warned you of the 
consequences of disregarding my injunctions — my 
entreaties — my commands — but all were disregarded. 
What right have you, then, to upbraid me for having 
told you the truth 1 " 

" No, you did not tell me the truth ; you did not 
tell me you were leading me to insult — to degradation." 

" Say not that I led you ; but for your own pride 
and folly all would have been Avell ; had you remem- 
bered my warning, and not provoked the person it 
was your interest as well as mine to have conciliated, 



THE INHERITANCK 205 

nothing of all this would have happened ; but your 
absurd outcry reached Mr. Lyndsay, who, unfor- 
tunately, had been enticed by the beauty of the night 
to take a moonlight ramble, and who hastened to the 
spot unhappily at the same moment when the other 
advanced ; but the worst is over. Mr. Lyndsay is a 
nobled-minded, honourable man, and we have nothing 
to fear from him; he has promised to be for ever 
silent on the subject." 

"But what — oh ! what must he think of me ! " ex- 
claimed Gertrude, in an accent of the deepest dejection. 

"Be assured he thinks nothing injurious of you." 

" Yet that man dared to assert that my father had 
given him a right to me — he, the husband of my 
nurse ! No, I will not — I cannot for an instant live 
under such a sense of degradation ; I must seek Mr. 
L3nidsay ; I must tell hiri it is false ! " And she 
attempted to rise, but sank back on her pillow over- 
whelmed with the force of her emotions. 

" For Heaven's sake, Gertrude, do not give way to 
these transports ! " cried her mother. " Everything 
is now settled; the object of your alarm is already 
many miles distant — never more, I trust, to return ; 
why then dwell upon what is past when it can be 
productive of no good ? Come, my love, for my sake 
try to forget it all" 

" Forget it ! " repeated Gertrude ; " forget that I 
have been exposed to insult — to degradation, and by 
my mother ! — that I never can forget." 

''No, do not forget it," cried Mrs. St, Clair, burst- 



206 THE INHERITANCE. 

ing into tears ; " treasure it in your heart's core ; let 
all my love, and care, and tenderness be forgotten; 
let your duty, your obedience, your promises be for- 
gotten ; but do not forget this one unfortunate action ; 
record it, proclaim it, and then let me end a miserable 
existence. Shall I summon Lord Eossville and the 
family," said she, with affected calmness, putting her 
hand to the bell, " to hear you denounce your mother?" 

Time had been when this appeal would have pro- 
duced its intended effect upon Gertrude ; but her 
feelings had been already excited to their utmost, 
and she felt too wretched herself to have much sym- 
pathy to bestow on the author of her wretchedness ; 
she therefore remained silent. Mrs. St. Clair repeated 
the question. 

" I have not deserved this," replied Gertrude coldly; 
"but I am still willing to obey you. What would 
you have me do t " 

Mrs. St. Clair embraced her, and would have coaxed 
and soothed her, but she shrank from these demon- 
strations of affection, and again coldly asked what re- 
mained for her to do. 

" I would have you appear, if possible, at breakfast, 
my love; if you do not. Lord Rossville will insist upon 
sending for medical advice, and will make a talk and 
a bustle about you, which may excite speculation and 
surmise, and anything of that sort had better be 
avoided at present; you will therefore oblige me, 
my dearest, if you will endeavour to look and be as 
much yourself as possible ; and now, I shall leave 



THE INHERITANCE. 207 

you to make your toilet, while I change my dress, 
for I have not been in bed all night. I have watched 
by you, Gertrude, and that not for the first time." 

Gertrude was touched by this proof of her mother's 
solicitude, and all the recollected proofs of her mar 
temal anxieties for her in her childish days rushed to 
her heart, and with the returning tide brought back 
something of tenderer, kindlier feelings. Yielding, 
as she always did, to the impulse of the moment, she 
received her mother's embrace, and the scene ended 
in a reconciliation. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

"There is no resource where there is no understanding." 

St. Therese. 

Mrs. St. Clair and her daughter descended together 
to the breakfast-room, but at the thoughts of meeting 
her cousin after what had so recently occurred, 
Gertrude's agitation almost overcame her, and she 
seated herself at the table without daring to lift her 
eyes. Many were the inquiries with which she was 
of course assailed, but Miss Pratt's observations, as 
usual, predominated. 

*' I'm afraid, my dear, there's more than a common 
headache the matter with you; you put me very 
much in mind of Anthony Whyte when he was taking 
the influenza ; he had just a little pink spot on the 
top of one cheek, and all the rest of his face as white 
as the tablecloth; and your eyes, too, seem very heavy, 
just like his — he never looked up for two days." The 
little pink spot had gradually increased with Miss 
Pratt's remarks; but making an effort to look up, 
Miss St Clair raised her eyes, and encountered not 
Mr. Lyndsay's dreaded gaze, but that of Colonel Del- 
mour, fixed upon her with anxious scrutiny. Lyndsay 



THE INHERITANCE. 209 

was not present, nor was there even a place reserved 
for him. Miss Pratt seemed to read what was pass- 
ing in her thoughts. 

" So you've lost one of your beaux, you see 1 Mr. 
Edward went off this morning, it seems ; it must have 
been a sudden thought, for he said nothing of it 
yesterday ; and, by-the-bye, what became of him at 
supper last night? I wonder if he had a headache 
too ? — they say there's a sympathy in bodies as well 
as in minds sometimes; Colonel Delmour, do you 
believe that?" 

" I have heard there is in souls a sympathy with 
sounds," replied Colonel Delmour, with an ironical, 
contemptuous air ; " but my soul is, I grieve to say, 
so lost to all that is edifying and delightful, it can 
rarely boast any sympathy with the sound of Miss 
Pratt's voice, by which means, unhappily, one half of 
her dulcet notes fall powerless on my dull spirit. 
May I beg to know what I am called upon to 
believe?" 

"There's an old saying. Colonel, that there's none 
so deaf as them who won't hear ; and I suspect that's 
your case sometimes," retorted Miss Pratt, in a very 
toothy manner, though affecting to turn the laugh 
against her opponent. The entrance of the post- 
bag here attracted Miss Pratt's attention. It was 
Lord Eossville's enviable prerogative to open it him- 
self, and to dole out the letters in the most cautious 
and deliberate manner to their respective destinations 
— a measure which very ill accorded with the mercu- 

VOL. I. P 



210 THE INHERITANCE. 

rial powers of Miss Pratt, who, in spite of his Lord- 
ship's precautions in holding the mouth of the bag as 
close as he possibly could, always contrived to dart 
her eyes down to the very bottom of it, and to antici- 
pate its contents long ere the moment of delivery 
arrived. Like all weak important people. Lord Eoss- 
ville loved power in any form or substance in which 
it presented itself, even in that of a leather bag, which 
he grasped with the air of a Jupiter holding his 
thunderbolt, and lingered over it as though it had 
been another Pandora's box. Although his Lordship, 
for upwards of forty years, had been in the daily, nay 
hourly, practice of declaring that he would not be 
hurried — that he would take his own time, etc. etc., 
nevertheless, in the very teeth of this assurance, Miss 
Pratt did still persist in her attempts to accelerate 
the Earl's movements, which, of course, had invariably 
the effect of protracting them. On the present oc- 
casion it seemed doubtful whether the letters were 
ever to see the light, as, upon Miss Pratt remarking 
that it would be much better if there was no bag at 
all, for then people would get their letters at once, 
without being kept on the tenter-hooks this way, his 
Lordship closed its mouth, and, opening his own, 
commenced a very elaborate harangue on the impro- 
priety, irregularity, and inconvenience of such a 
mode of proceeding. Meanwhile, Gertrude gradually 
regained her composure, and was even able to receive 
Colonel Delmour's assiduities with something like 
pleasure. At length, Miss Pratt having knocked 



THE INHEKITANCE. 211 

under, for, as she observed in an underhand way, 
there was no disputing with a man who held the key 
of the post-bag, the contents were duly distributed, 
and she received her portion, which kept her silent 
for a few minutes. 

Gertrude trembled as a letter was handed to her ; 
but her alarm subsided when she saw it was directed 
in a feeble, affected-looking female hand, and sealed 
with a fat bouncing heart, skewered with an arrow, 
motto, "jCa peine est douce" The contents corre- 
sponded with these exterior symbols, and were as 
follows : — 

" Bellevue, July 

"Ma chere Cousine — From what passed in 
your presence, you will, I suspect, not be very much 
surprised to hear that a certain person, who shall be 
nameless, has carried his point, and that I have at 
length been prevailed upon to name TJmrsday next as 
the day when I am to enter upon a new state of exist- 
ence ! Hh hien ! my dear coz — I hope your time is 
coming, and when it does, most fervently do I pray 
that you may prove as fortunate in your choice as I 
have done in mine. The Major is indeed all that I 
could wish — far, very far beyond my poor deserts; 
and I should consider myself as the most ungrateful 
of women if I did not look upon myself as the Tnost 
fortunate of my sex ! That being the case, I certainly 
feel less than I should otherwise do at taking this 
most important and solemn step; but the certairdy 
that I am bestowing myself upon one who is in every 



212 THE INHERITANCE. 

respect worthy of my warmest admiration, esteem, and 
affection, supports me ; and be assured, my dear cousin, 
it is the only thing that can support the spirits at such 
a time. How much, alas ! are they to be pitied who 
do not possess that certainty, without which, believe 
me, all the advantages of hirtli and fortune are nothing 
— for without that, I assure you, the Major's rank, 
fortune, connections, manners, etc. etc. etc., never 
would have influenced me. Such being the state of 
affairs here at present, I am very desirous that you, 
ma chere cousine, should participate in my feelings, 
and also take a lesson for what, rest assured, will one 
day he your own faie. I therefore request, as a parti- 
cular favour, that you will give us the pleasure of your 
company to pass the intervening days with me, and 
to officiate as bridesmaid upon a certain occasion. 
The Major unites with me in this request, so it will 
be a double disappointment if anything should prevent 
you. Papa and mamma also join in the wish that my 
nuptials should be graced with your presence. The 
Major offered to drive down for you any day in the 
gig — {apropos, I must tell you he admires you very 
much — but I am not jealous) ; — ^but I own at present, 
I think that would be making the thing rather public, 
and besides — shall I confess my weakness ? — I feel par- 
ticularly timid at the thoughts of the Major risking 
himself in a gig at present — only conceive my situa- 
tion, if anything should happen to him ! ! ! I trust 
you will be at no loss for an opportunity, and that I 
shall soon have the pleasure of seeing you here, and 



THE INHERITANCE. 213 

of making you better acquainted with my l&rd and 
master to be. Adio mia cara, Isabella. 

"Pray, have you heard any more of your leau? 
The Major thinks he must be a sJp^J. I. 0. B. 

"Excuse haste, but the Major is sitting by me, and 
says he is ready to quarrd mth you, for engrossing so 
much of my time. I. C. B." 

In great disgust at the vulgar, affected familiarity 
of this performance, Gertrude handed it to her mother 
in silence, resolved in her own mind to return a brief 
denial to Miss Bell's invitation. Not so Mrs. St 
Clair, who thought nothing could be more hpropos 
than this proposal. She was desirous of removing 
her daughter from the observation of the family until 
her mind should have regained its usual tone, and she 
knew nothing would be so likely to effect that as 
change of scene and necessity of exertion. It would 
require a little management, perhaps, to obtain Lord 
Rossville's consent ; but in the present state of affairs 
that would be easily obtained ; and having settled all 
this, she put the letter in her reticule, with an air 
that said, This requires consideration. 

Miss Pratt now made known the contents of her 
despatch, which was a pressing invitation to spend a 
few days at old Lady M'Caw's, to meet Mrs. Chatwell 
and the Miss Knowalls — just a nice little female party. 
It was a pleasant thing for old friends to meet, and 
talk over old stories now and then, etc. etc. etc. 

" So, Miss Pratt, we are going to lose you then, it 



214 THE INHEEITANCE. 

seems ?" said the Earl, in an accent of agreeable sur- 
prise, and a visage beaming with delight. 

" Indeed, it's not very well bred, my Lord, to run 
away in this manner," replied Miss Pratt ; " but it's 
an old promise of mine to Lady M'Caw, honest woman, 
and I would not like to disappoint her, especially as 
she is so good as say she'll send the carriage for me 
to-morrow morning. However, I shall make out my 
visit to you yet ; and if I can get hold of Anthony 
Whyte, will bring him with me." 

Lord Eossville's countenance fell at this assurance. 
He had been anxiously waiting the termination of 
Miss Pratt's visit, that he might give a dinner to some 
of the stateliest of the neighbouring grandees ; a thing 
which could not be got up with good effect while that 
lady was his guest. Her light frothy babbles discon- 
certed his heavy sonorous speeches ; her brisk famili- 
arity detracted from the dignity of his manner; — it 
was as impossible for him to be the dignified noble- 
man with Miss Pratt at his elbow, as it would have 
been with an ape on his shoulder. However, it was 
a great point gained to have got her fairly off the 
field, and he flattered himself, with a little manage- 
ment, he might contrive to exclude her till it suited 
his time to receive her again. Contrary to his usual 
practice, but in conformity with the vulgar proverb, 
he therefore resolved to make hay while the sun shone, 
and straightway set about issuing his cards immediately. 
In this complacent mood, Mrs. St. Clair found little 
difiiculty in obtaining his consent to Gertrude's visit 



THE INHERITANCE. 215 

to Bellevue, which she took care to insinuate would 
prove highly advantageous in a political point of 
view — a bait which the Earl instantly caught at. He 
even declared his intention, and that of Mr. Delmour, 
to pay-their respects to the worthy family, at Bellevue 
the following day; and finally it was settled that 
they should accompany Mrs. and Miss St. Clair there, 
leaving the latter to officiate at her cousin's nuptials 
— an office which, in the present state of the political 
contest, was not deemed derogatory even for the 
heiress presumptive of Rossville. 

Colonel Delmour seemed somewhat chagrined at 
first hearing of this arrangement ; but upon reflection 
he began to discover that it might rather advance his 
purpose to have the object of his pursuit withdrawn 
for a while from the watchful eyes of her guardians ; 
and he secretly resolved to be a daily visitor at Belle- 
vue while she remained. As for Gertrude, whatever 
repugnance she felt at first to the proposal, she soon 
yielded to her mother's solicitations, for she was a 
stranger to that selfishness which is obstinate in trifles. 

Miss Pratt's departure was hailed as a joyful release 
by the whole party, with the exception, indeed, of 
Lady Betty and Mr. Delmour. The one was too 
stupid, and the other too much engrossed, to have 
any discrimination in their choice of company ; with 
the one words were words, and Miss Pratt's words 
were as good, if not better, than other people's words ; 
with the other, Miss Pratt was Miss Pratt, and one Miss 
was very much like another during a contested election. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

" They who love you for political service, love you less than 
their dinner ; and they who hate you, hate you worse than the 
devil." — Wesley. 

The whole Black family were evidently prepared for 
the reception of their visitors ; and as they were all 
good-looking, and well-dressed, the tout ensemble was 
highly prepossessing. Indeed, had it been otherwise, 
they would still have found favour in the eyes of 
Lord Rossville and his nephew, who, in each and all 
of the human beings now assembled, even to the baby, 
beheld simply a vote or the article or particle of a vote. 
The Earl therefore parsed and prosed away to good 
Mrs. Black, who sat listening to him with the most 
perfect reverence and admiration. Had the speaker 
been their neighbour, old Mr. Longlungs, she might per- 
haps have thought him rather long-winded ; but it was 
still the golden age of innocence with Mrs. Black, for it 
never once occurred to her that it was possible for an 
Earl to be as tiresome as a commoner. She therefore 
hung enamoured on his Lordship's accents ; but when 
he condescended so far as to take one of the children 
on his knee, and to drink the healths of the whole 
family in what he declared to be the very best Malm- 



THE INHERITANCE. 217 

sey Madeira he had ever tasted, the conquest of Mrs. 
Black was completed ; and she secretly vowed in her 
heart that she would never rest night or day, till, by 
hook or by crook, she had secured Mr. Black's vote 
for him. And then, as he seemed so taken with them 
all, there was no saying but he might get a company 
for Bob, and give his business to Davy. And with 
these splendid visions, Mrs. Black's comely good- 
humoured face beamed upon the Earl with an expres- 
sion he was little accustomed to on the countenances 
of his auditors. 

Mr. Delmour, on his part, was not idle, having 
talked very sensibly with Mr. Black on 

" Russet lawns and fallows gray, 
Where the nibbling flocks do stray ;" 

that is, in plain prose, on the rearing and feeding of 
cattle, succession of crops, etc. etc. He next addressed 
himself to a very pretty particle of a vote in the person 
of Miss Lilly Black, who had made some faint and 
inefficient attempts to discover whether he wrote 
poetry, till, growing bolder as she advanced, she at 
length popped the question whether he would not 
write something in her album. Mr. Delmour pro- 
tested, with the most perfect truth, that he never had 
written a verse in his life ; but to soften the disap- 
pointment added, with a bow and most expressive 
look, that if ever he was to be so inspired, it must be 
on the present occasion. Miss Lilly blushed, and had 
no doubt that Mr. Delmour was over head and ears 
in love with her already ; and having read every novel 



218 THE INHEErrANCE. 

in the circulating library at Barnford, Miss Lilly was 
ready to be fallen in love with at a moment's warn- 
ing. 

Mrs. Major Waddell to be was the only one of the 
family then at home who did not appear. She said 
that, in her situation, it was extremely unpleasant to 
be stared at by strangers, and as Lord Rossville and 
Mr. Delmour must know perfectly well how she was 
situated, they would easily understand her reasons for 
declining all introductions in her present situation. 
Miss Bell, however, secretly flattered herself that her 
absence would be too striking to be passed over in 
silence, and that Lord Eossville would make a point 
of seeing her ; great was her mortification, therefore, 
when the whole party drove off, with the exception of 
Gertrude, who was left behind. The bride-elect de- 
scended to the drawing-room in hopes of hearing that 
the Major and she had formed the principal subject 
of conversation ; but there she found Mrs. Black try- 
ing to remember all that Lord Eossville had said 
about the line of the New Canal, and Mr. Black 
already anticipating the arrival of a couple of pure 
Merinos, which Mr. Delmour was to procure for him 
from his uncle the Duke of Burlington; Miss Lilly 
was expressing her wonder to Miss St. Clair whether 
it was really true that Mr. Delmour did not write 
poetry, and the children were squabbling over the 
remains of the cake. 

"I hope there was no particular allusion to the 
Major and me," said Miss Bell, seeing it in vain to 



THE mHERITANCE. 219 

wait for any voluntary communication; in my situ- 
ation such things are not very pleasant." 

"There was no mention made of you whatever, 
Bell," was the reply. 

"I assure you I'm very happy to hear it," said Miss 
Bell, in evident displeasure, to which she could only 
give vent by turning the children out of the room for 
making a noise, which they, of course, redoubled out- 
side the door, till dragged shrieking away by their 
maid. 

Miss St. Clair already felt the discomforts of her 
situation — seated in a dressed drawing-room for the 
day, with Mrs. Black and her daughters, who seemed 
to have renounced all occupation for that of being 
company to their guest ; and " labour dire it is and 
weary woe," in such cases, whether to the entertainer 
or the entertained. 

Gertrude felt too strange, too much out of her own 
element, to give free scope to her mind ; she felt she 
was amongst those who did not understand her, nor 
she them ; the tone of their minds was pitched in a 
totally different key, and their ideas, tastes, and habits, 
she was convinced, never could assimilate with hers. 
At length Miss Lilly produced her album for the 
amusement or admiration of her cousin, and turned 
over page after page, emblazoned with miserable 
drawings of dropsical Cupids with blue aprons, doves 
that might have passed for termagants, stout calico 
roses, heart's -ease that was eye-sore, and forget-me- 
nots that ought to have been washed in the waters 



220 THE INHERITANCE. 

of Lethe. All these had, of course, appropriate lines, 
or lines that were intended as sucL Beneath a rose, 
which bore evident traces of having been washed with 
a sponge, was written in a small dieaway hand, scarcely 
visible to the naked eye, Cowper's pretty verses, 

" A rose had been washed, just washed in a shower," etc. 

A bunch of heart's-ease, which might have served for 
a sign-post, was emblematic of a sonnet to a violet, 
beginning, 

•'Sweet modest flower that lurk'st unseen," eta 

But the forget-me-nots had called forth an original 
effusion addressed to Miss Lilly B., as follows : — 

" Forget thee, sweet maid ? — ah, how vain the request! 
Thy image fond memory has stamped on my heart ; 
And while life's warm pulses beat high in my breast, 
Thy image shall ne'er from that bosom depart ! 

" The moon she is up, and the sun he is down ; 
The wind too is hush'd, and silent's the riU ; 
The birds to their little nests long since have flown ; 
But when will forget my sad bosom to thrill ! 

" Forget thee ! — ah ! who that has ever beheld 
Thy eye of sky-blue, and thy locks of pure gold, 
Thy cheek " 

"Oh ! you really mustn't read that," cried Miss Lilly, 
putting her hand affectedly on the place ; "it is only 
some nonsense of Lieutenant O'Brien's." 

"Pray allow me to proceed," said Gertrude, a 
little amused at the wretchedness of the rhymes. 



THE INHERITANCE. 221 

"Oh, indeed I can't !" said Miss Lilly, affecting to 
be ashamed. 

"I assure you, I am in great pain for your cheek," 
said Gertrude ; " I'm afraid it must have swelled in 
order to rhyme to 'beheld.' " 

" Oh, no ! I assure you it wasn't my cheek but 
his heart that swelled," said Miss Lilly, in perfect 
simplicity. 

"The Captain has a great genius for poetry," said 
Mrs. Black. 

"Very great," said Miss Lilly, with a gentle sigL 
"I am certain that address to the moon we saw in 
the newspaper was his writing." 

"It's very well for people to write poetry who 
can't afford to buy it," said Miss Bell, with a dis- 
dainful toss ; " the Major has bought a most beauti- 
ful copy of Lord Byron's works, bound in red morocco 
— rather too fine for reading, I think ; but he said he 
meant it to lie upon my sofa-table, so I couldn't find 
fault." 

" To be sure, Bell, as you say, it's a better business 
to buy poetry than to write it," said Mrs. Black. 

Gertrude had read and could appreciate Petrarch 
and Metastasio ; it may therefore be conceived how 
much she admired Lieutenant O'Brien's effusions. 

" There's nothing more worth reading," said Miss 
Lilly, as her cousin continued to turn over the leaves 
of the book ; " that is only some dull stupid stuff Aunt 
Mary copied for me ; I've a good mind to tear it out, 
it is just like a sermon ; " and she was preparing to 



222 THE INHERITANCE. 

execute her threat, when Gertrude begged leave to 

read the offending lines before they were committed 

to the flames : — 

" When I look back, and in myself behold 

The wandering ways that youth could not descry ; 

And mark the fearful course that youth did hold, 
And melt in mind each step youth stray'd awry ; 

My knees I bow, and from my heart I call, 

Lord ! forget these faults and follies all. 

" For now I see how void youth is of skill, 
I see also his prime time and his end ; 

1 do confess my faults and all my ill. 
And sorrow sore for that I did offend ; 

And with a mind repentant of all crimes 
Pardon I ask for youth ten thousand times. 

" Thou that by power to life did'st raise the dead ; 
Thou that of grace restor'st the blind to sight : 
Thou that for love thy life and love outbled ; 

Thou that of favour mad'st the lame go right ; 
Thou that can'st heal and help in all essays, 
Forgive the guilt that grew in youth's vain ways." 

Lord Vaux 

"I like the verses," said Gertrude; "and should 
be glad to have them; something tells me," added 
she, with a sigh, as she read them over again, " that 
they may some day be applicable to myself." 

" God forbid, my dear ! " said Mrs. Black, -with a 
look of horror — " God forbid that any of us should 
■ever be brought to such straits as that, and I see no 
good in putting such dismal thoughts into young folks' 
heads ; — but if you would like to put off your bonnet 
before dinner, it's time you were thinking of it " 

"For there comes the Major," cried Miss Bell. 



CHAPTEE XXVL 

" Une froideur ou une incivilite qui vient de ceux qui sont 
audessus de nous, nous les fait hair, mais un salut ou un 
sourire nous les reconcilie." — La Bkuyere, 

The following day brought Colonel Delmour, and 
Gertrude watched, with some solicitude, the effect "her 
relations would produce upon him. But he was upon 
his guard, and none but a nice observer could have 
detected supercilious contempt in the lofty ease of 
his manner. But there is an ease which causes only 
constraint in the minds of others, and such was 
Colonel Delmour's. He was much too elegant and 
high-bred to have anything of the familiar ease, so 
often a concomitant of the vulgar; but he had as 
little of that open simplicity of manner which is the 
characteristic of a noble ingenuous mind. It was 
that sort of ease which implies conscious superiority 
in its possessor, and consequently produces the oppo- 
site feeling in those less gifted mortals with whom it 
comes in contact. Such was the sort of undefinable 
sensation it created in the Black family, from the 
eldest to the youngest. 

Simple Mrs. Black's profound and earnest inquiries 
after Lord Rossville, her hopes that he had not been 



224 THE INHERITANCE. 

the worse of his ride, that he had got home before 
the hearty shower, etc. etc. etc., were all answered in 
a general way, and with an air of indifference which, 
as Mrs. Black afterwards declared, said very little for 
his natural affection. Even Miss Bell had an instinct- 
ive feeling that her airs would be all thrown away 
upon him, and though she did drop her carbuncle 
brooch (a present from the Major) upon the carpet, 
Colonel Delmour never so much as moved his chair 
or assisted in looking for it ; while Miss Lilly turned 
over her album in vain, and in answer to her usual 
question of whether he was fond of poetry, he returned 
so brief and decided a negative as put a complete stop 
to all proceedings on that subject. The only one who 
made no attempts at display was the third daughter, 
Anne, a sensible, mild -looking girl, who, from her 
quiet, unobtrusive manners, was generally overlooked, 
and who now pursued her work in her usual calm 
way, careless alike of notice or neglect. 

Colonel Delmour certainly was at no pains to gain 
the good graces of the family. He saw at once they 
were not the sort of people likely to acquire any 
influence over Miss St. Clair, consequently he had no 
motive to make him wish to ingratiate himself with 
them. And to have been at the trouble of making 
the agreeable to such a set of plebeians, would have 
required some very strong stimulus to one whose 
ruling principle was selfishness, and who never cared 
to please unless to serve his own purpose. He stayed 
long, in hopes Mrs. Black and her daughters would 



THE INHERITANCE. 225 

have had the tact to discover that they were great 
bores in their own house ; but no such discovery was 
made ; on the contrary, Mrs. Black redoubled her 
efforts to entertain her visitor ; she made many apo- 
logies for Mr. Black being from home, and asked Bell 
what had come over the Major — just as the Major 
entered. The case was now desperate ; scarcely able 
to conceal his ill-humour, he merely noticed the intro- 
duction of Major Waddell by a slight and somewhat 
haughty bow, and took his leave. 

"Well, cousin," cried Miss Bell, as he drove off, 
" I really cannot say a great deal for your Colonel ; I 
think I never saw so iU-bred a man." 

"I can't just say that, Bell," said her mother. 
"I'm sure he was nowise indiscreet, and we must 
make allowance for him, for you know we were all 
strangers to him, and I daresay he was just a little 
shy and strange at first ; but that'll wear off." 

"It's the oddest thing that he should not like 
poetry," said Miss Lilly, " for he is so . hand- 
some." 

" I don't think much of his looks," said Miss Bell ; 
" he is a great deal too tall," eyeing the Major, who 
was the Apollo Belvidere in her opinion, and who 
was at least a head shorter. 

" I think our Bob must be as tall by this time," 
said Mrs. Black : " but I wish he may have taken the 
breadth with him, poor fellow." 

"I don't think he has the manners of a man who 
has seen much of the world," resumed Miss Bell again, 

VOL. I. Q 



226 THE INHERITANCE. 

looking at her lover; "no general conversation; has 
he ever been abroad, I wonder 1 " 

"Come now," said the Major, turning up his 
bronzed visage, gilded with a strong yellow beam of 
delight ; " are you not rather too severe 1 Colonel 
Delmour is surely a fine -looking man, and much 
admired, I understand, by the ladies." 

" I beg you will make some exceptions, Major ; but 
perhaps I have a very bad taste," with a conscious 
smile. 

"I'm afraid you have, indeed," returned the Major, 
with a laugh of perfect ecstasy. " I'm very much 
afraid of it, indeed. What do you say to that, Mr& 
Black? Miss St. Clair, don't you think your cousin 
discovers a very bad taste in her choice of some 
things?" 

Gertrude felt too much disgusted with the vulgarity 
and ill-breeding of her relations to be able to reply ; 
indeed, the only one she could with truth have made 
must have been a cordial assent, and she recoiled from 
their familiarity with a hauteur foreign to her nature. 
Mrs. Black observed her displeasure, but mistook the 
cause. 

"You must excuse our freedom, my dear," said 
she ; "but you see we make no stranger of you; we 
just look upon you as one of ourselves, and forget 
sometimes that your friends and relations are not 
ours ; but there-'s one thing I can tell you," continued 
she, with a significant smile and a half whisper, "that 
though the Colonel's not just so taking as his brother, 



THE INHERITANCE. 227 

we all think a great deal of him, and are all much 
pleased to think that — you know" — and Mrs. Black 
smiled still more significantly. "I assure you Mr. 
Black thinks a great deal of him ; he says he's really 
a pleasant, sensible, gentlemanly, well-informed young 
man." 

Still Gertrude's countenance did not clear up, to 
Mrs. Black's great surprise; for, like many other 
excellent wives, she thought her husband's opinion 
carried the greatest possible weight with it, and that 
Miss St. Clair must needs be much flattered to hear 
that her intended was so much approved of by Mr. 
Black. For the Earl, to advance his favourite politi- 
cal schemes, had dropped some ambiguous mysterious 
hints of the projected alliance between his nephew 
and niece, which Mrs. Black had easily manufactured 
into an approaching marriage. Rather at a loss what 
to make of Miss St. Clair, and the coolness with which 
she listened to the praises of her supposed lover, Mrs. 
Black now proposed that the young people should 
take a walk, and show their cousin something of 
Bellevue — there was the burn, and the Hawkhill, and 
the new plantation, and there was the poultry-yard — 
if Miss Gertrude was fond of poultry, the Bellevue 
poultry were reckoned the finest in the country side ; 
and loaded with Mrs. Black's directions and suggest- 
ions, the party set forth. No party, perhaps, ever 
set out upon a walk without some difl"erence of opinion 
as to the road to be taken ; but on the present occa- 
sion the matter was soon settled by Miss Bell, who 



228 THE INHERITANCE. 

remarked to the Major that it was so long since she 
had seen his sister Mrs. Fairbaim, that, if her cousin 
had no objections, she should like much to walk as 
far as the Holm. 

"I have not seen your sweet little namesake. 
Major, since he has had the measles, and I quite long 
to see him, dear little fellow ! and although it is an 
understood thing" — addressing Gertrude — "that, in 
my situation, I go nowhere, yet the Major's sister, 
you know, is an exception, and she is such a sweet 
domestic woman, she scarcely ever stirs from home ; 
it is quite a treat to see Mr. and Mrs. Fairbaim in 
their own family — it is really a beautiful sight." 

The Major was, of course, all joy and gratitude 
for this proposal, and highly flattered by the interest 
expressed for his little name -son in particular, and 
the eulogy bestowed on the family in general. As 
for Gertrude, she cared little where she went. When 
people are imcomfortable they flatter themselves any 
change must be for the better, and there is rehef even 
in variety of wretchedness. Forward, then, they set 
for the Holm. 

The road was not of the most picturesque descrip- 
tion; but, indeed, it would not have been easy to 
have found any such in the environs of Bellevue. 
But, at length, after skirting many a well-dressed 
field, covered with flourishing crops of oats, pease, 
beans, potatoes, etc. etc. etc., they entered upon the 
sheep farm, which, although it had nothing of the 
romantic or beautiful to charm the eye, yet, like all 



THE INHERITANCE. 229 

spots of unsophisticated nature, was not without 
attractions to those who love nature even in her 
simplest scenes. 

The ground was hilly, covered with a carpet of 
close, short, sweet herbage, except here and there, 
where still remained patches of heath and broom, or 
a whin bush and a wild rose scented the breeze, their 
prickly stems decked with " small woolly tufts, spoils 
of the vagrant lamb." 

The air was pure and fresh, "nimble and sweet," 
and Gertrude stood inhaling it with delight as she 
felt her spirits rise under its exhilarating influence. 
The Major and Miss Bell had walked on before, Miss 
Lilly had left the party for higher ground, which com- 
manded a view of the county town where Lieutenant 
O'Brien was quartered, and Gertrude, to her great 
relief, was left alone with her cousin Anne. 

" If there were but deer bounding instead of sheep 
bleating here," said she, " I could fancy myself upon 
the very ' Braes o' Balquither,' which you were sing- 
ing about last night;" and she hummed the air — 
"No, I can't make it out — pray sing it to me again;" 
and Anne sang some verses of that sweet simple ditty — 

" Will ye go, lassie, go, 

To the Braes o' Balquither, 
Where the blaeberries grow 
'Mang the bonnie bloomin' heather. 

" Where the deer and the roe, 
Lightly boundin' thegither, 
Sport the lang simmer day 
'Mang the Braes o' Balquither. 



230 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I will twine thee a bow'r, 

By the clear silver fountain, 
And I'll cover it o'er 
Wi' the flowers o' the mountain. 

' ' I will range through the wilds, 
And the deep glens, sae dreary, 
And return wi' their spoils 
To the bower o' my deary. 

" ITow the summer is in prime, 

Wi' the flowers richly blooming, 
And the wild mountain thyme 
A' the moorlands perfuming. 
Will ye go," etc. etc. 

"Who would not be a hunter's love," said Ger- 
trude, "to realise so sweet a picture !" 

"Ah!" said her companion in a mournful tone, 
" if poverty were there represented as it is in reality, 
this world would be a paradise, and we might all be 
happy." 

" So, then, you think poverty the only evil in lifel" 
asked Miss St. Clair. 

" No. I spoke idly ; — not the only one ; but " 

she blushed, and the tears stood in her eyes, as in a 
low voice she added, " but the only one I have ever 
known ;" then, as if ashamed of having said so much, 
she turned away her head. 

For a moment Gertrude was at a loss to under- 
stand her cousin's meaning ; but it presently struck 
her that she must have formed some attachment 
where poverty was the obstacle ; and she would have 
continued the conversation in hopes of gaining her 



THE INHERITANCE. 231 

confidence, but at that moment the Major and Miss 
Bell, having retraced their steps in search of their 
companions, interposed. 

" We thought we had lost you ! " exclaimed the 
lady. " Major, will you give my cousin your other 
arm? — the descent is very steep now." 

Gertrude declined the proflFered aid, which she 
thought more likely to encumber than accelerate her 
movements; and, besides, she wished to renew the 
conversation with Anne, but in vain. The lovers, 
having exhaused their silly talk for the present, were 
now glad of a little variety, and they kept all close 
together till they reached the Holm. 



CHAPTER XXVIL 

" The great use of delineating absurdities is, tliat we may 
know how far human folly can go ; the account, therefore, 
ought, of absolute necessity, to be faithful." — Johnson. 

The first appearance of the Holm was highly pre- 
possessing. It was a large, handsome-looking house, 
situated in a well-wooded park, by the side of a broad 
placid river, and an air of seclusion and stillness 
reigned all round, which impressed the mind with 
images of peace and repose. The interior of the 
house was no less promising; there was a spacious 
hall and a handsome staircase, with all appliances to 
boot ; but as they approached the drawing-room, all 
the luxurious indolence of thought inspired by the 
tranquillity of the scenery was quickly dispelled by 
the discordant sounds which issued from thence, and, 
when the door was thrown open, the footman in vain 
attempted to announce the visitors. In the middle 
of the room all the chairs were collected to form a 
coach and horses for the Masters and Misses Fairbairn. 
One unruly -looking urchin sat in front, cracking a 
long whip with all his might ; another acted as guard 
behind, and blew a shrill trumpet with all his strength ; 



THE INHEKITANCE. 233 

while a third, in a night -cap and flannel lappet, 
who had somewhat the air of having quarrelled with 
the rest of the party, paraded up and down, in soli- 
tary majesty, beating a drum. On a sofa sat Mrs. 
Fairbairn, a soft, fair, genteel-looking woman, with a 
crpng child of about three years old at her side, 
tearing paper into shreds, seemingly for the delight 
of littering the carpet, which was already strewed 
with headless dolls, tailless horses, wheelless carts, etc. 
As she rose to receive her visitors it began to scream. 

"I'm not going away, Charlotte, love — don't be 
frightened," said the fond mother, with a look of 
inefi'able pleasure. 

"You no get up — you shan't get up," screamed 
Charlotte, seizing her mother's gown fiercely to de- 
tain her. 

" My darling, you'll surely let me go to speak to 
uncle — good uncle, who brings you pretty things, you 
know;" — but, during this colloquy, uncle and the 
ladies had made their way to the enthralled mother, 
and the bustle of a meeting and introduction was got 
over. Chairs were obtained by the footman with 
some difficulty, and placed as close to the mistress of 
the house as possible, aAvare that otherwise it would 
not be easy to carry on even question and answer 
amid the tumult that reigned. 

" You find us rather noisy, I am afraid," said Mrs. 
Fairbairn, with a smile, and in a manner which evi- 
dently meant the reverse ; " but this is Saturday, and 
the children are all in such spirits, and they won't 



234 THE INHERITANCE. 

stay away from me. Henry, my dear, don't crack yonr 
whip quite so loud — there's a good boy ; that's a new 
whip his papa brought him from London, and he's so 
proud of it ! William, my darling, don't you think 
your drum must be tired now ? If I were you I would 
give it a rest. Alexander, your trumpet makes rather 
too much noise — one of these ladies has got a head- 
ache ; wait till you go out, there's my good boy, and 
then you'll blow it at the cows and the sheep, you 
know, and frighten them. Oh ! how you'll frighten 
them with it ! " 

" No, I'll not blow it at the cows ; I'll blow it at 
the horses, because then they'll think it's the mail- 
coach." And he was running off, when Henry jumped 
down from the coach-box 

"No, but you shan't frighten them with your 
trumpet, for I shall frighten them with my whip. 
Mamma, aren't horses best frightened with a whip?" 
and a struggle ensued. 

" Well, don't fight, my dears, and you shall both 
frighten them," cried their mamma. 

"No, I'm determined he shan't frighten them; I 
shall do it," cried both together, as they rushed out 
of the room, and the drummer was preparing to follow. 

"William, my darling, don't you go after these 
naughty boys ; you know they're always very bad to 
you. You know they wouldn't let you into their 
coach with your drum." Here William began to cry. 
"Well, never mind, you shall have a coach of your 
own — a much finer coach than theirs ; I wouldn't go 



THE IXHETIITANCE. 235 
into their ugly dirty coach ; and you shall have " 



Here something of a consolatory nature was whispered, 
William was comforted, and even prevailed upon to 
relinquish his drum for his mamma's ivory workbox, 
the contents of which were soon scattered on the 
floor. 

"These boys are gone without their hats," cried 
Mrs. Fairbairn in a tone of distress. "Eliza, my 
dear, pull the bell for Sally to get the boys' hats." 
Sally being despatched with the hats, something like 
a calm ensued in the absence of he of the whip and 
the trumpet ; but as it will be of short duration, it is 
necessary to take advantage of it in improving the 
introduction into an acquaintance with the Fairbairn 
family. 

Mrs. Fairbairn was one of those ladies who, from 
the time she became a mother, ceased to be anything 
else. All the duties, pleasures, charities, and decencies 
of life were henceforth concentrated in that one grand 
characteristic; every object in life was henceforth 
viewed through that single medium. Her own mother 
was no longer her mother ; she was the grandmamma 
of her dear infants, her brothers and sisters were mere 
uncles and aunts, and even her husband ceased to be 
thought of as her husband from the time he became a 
father. He was no longer the being who had claims on 
her time, her thoughts, her talents, her affections ; he 
was simply Mr. Fairbairn, the noun masculine of Mrs. 
Fairbairn, and the father of her children. Happily 
for Mr. Fairbairn, he was not a person of very nice 



236 THE INHERITANCE. 

feelings or refined taste ; and although at first he did 
feel a little unpleasant when he saw how much his 
children were preferred to himself, yet in time he 
became accustomed to it, then came to look upon Mrs. 
Fairbairn as the most exemplary of mothers, and 
finally resolved himself into the father of a very fine 
family, of which Mrs. Fairbairn was the mother. In 
all this there was more of selfish egotism and animal 
instinct than of rational affection or Christian 
principle ; but both parents piqued themselves upon 
their fondness for their offspring, as if it were a feel- 
ing peculiar to themselves, and not one they shared 
in common with the lowest and weakest of their 
species. Like them, too, it was upon the bodies of 
their children that they lavished their chief care and 
tenderness, for, as to the immortal interests of their 
souls, or the cultivation of their minds, or the improve- 
ment of their tempers, these were but little attended 
to, at least in comparison of their health and personal 
appearance. 

Alas ! if there be " not a gem so precious as the 
human soul," how often do these gems seem as pearls 
cast before swine ; for how seldom is it that a parent's 
greatest care is for the immortal happiness of that 
being whose precarious, and at best transient existence 
engrosses their every thought and desire ! But per- 
haps Mrs. Fairbairn, like many a fooUsh ignorant 
mother, did her best, and had she been satisfied with 
spoiling her children herself for her own private 
amusement, and not have drawn in her visitors and 



THE INHERITANCE. 237 

acquaintances to share in it, the evil might have 
passed uncensured. But Mrs. Fairbairn, instead of 
shutting herself up in her nursery, chose to bring her 
nursery down to her drawing-room, and instead of 
modestly denying her friends an entrance into her 
purgatory, she had a foolish pride in showing herself 
in the midst of her angels. In short, as the best 
things, when corrupted, always become the worst, so 
the purest and tenderest of human affections, when 
thus debased by selfishness and egotism, turn to the 
most tiresome and ridiculous of human weaknesses, — 
a truth but too well exemplified by Mrs. Fairbairn. 

''I have been much to blame," said she, addressing 
Miss Bell, in a soft, whining, sick-child sort of voice, 
"for not having been at Bellevue long ago; but dear 
little Charlotte has been so plagued with her teeth I 
could not think of leaving her, for she is so f-ond of 
me she will go to nobody else ; she screams when her 
maid ofi"ers to take her, and she won't even go to her 
papa." 

" Is that possible 1 " said the Major. 

" I assure you it's very true — she's a very naughty 
girl sometimes," bestowing a long and rapturous kiss 
on the child. "Who was it that beat poor papa for 
taking her from mamma last night ? Well, don't cry 
— no, no, it wasn't my Charlotte. She knows every 
word that's said to her, and did from the time she 
was only a year old." 

"That is wonderful!" said Miss Bell; "but how 
is my little favourite Andrew 1" 



238 THE INHEKITANCE. 

"He is not very stout yet, poor little fellow, and 
we must be very careful of him." Then turning to 
Miss St. Clair—" Our little Andrew has had the 
measles, and you know the dregs of the measles are 
a serious thing — much worse than the measles them- 
selves. Andrew — Andrew Waddell, my love, come 
here and speak to the ladies." And thereupon 
Andrew Waddell, in a night-cap, riding on a stick, 
drew near. Being the Major's namesake. Miss Bell, 
in the ardour of her attachment, thought proper to 
coax Andrew Waddell on her knee, and even to open 
her watch for his entertainment. 

" Ah ! I see who spoils Andrew Waddell," cried 
the delighted mother. 

The Major chuckled; Miss Bell disclaimed, and 
for the time Andrew Waddell became the hero of the 
piece ; the Mains of the measles were carefully pointed 
out, and all his suflFerings and sayings duly reca- 
pitulated. At length Miss Charlotte, indignant at 
finding herself eclipsed, began to scream and cry with 
all her strength. 

"It's her teeth, darling little thing," said her 
mother, caressing her. 

"I'm sure it's her teeth, sweet little dear," said 
Miss Bell. 

"It undoubtedly must be her teeth, poor little 
girl," said the Major. 

"If you will feel her gum," said Mrs. Fairbairn, 
putting her own finger into the child's mouth, "you 
will feel how hot it is." 



THE INHERITANCE. 239 

This was addressed in a sort of general way to the 
company, none of whom seemed eager to avail them- 
selves of the privilege, till the Major stepped forward, 
and having with his forefinger made the circuit of 
ivliss Charlotte's mouth, gave it as his decided opinion 
that there was a tooth actually cutting the skin. Miss 
Bell followed the same course, and confirmed the in- 
teresting fact — adding, that it appeared to her to be 
"an uncommon large tooth." 

At that moment Mr. Fairbairn entered, bearing in 
his arms another of the family, a fat, sour, new-waked- 
looking creature, sucking its finger. Scarcely was the 
introduction over — " There's a pair of legs ! " exclaimed 
he, holding out a pair of thick purple stumps with red 
worsted shoes at the end of them, " I don't suppose 
Miss St, Clair ever saw legs like these in France; 
these are porridge and milk legs, are they not, Bobby f 

But Bobby continued to chew the cud of his own 
thumb in solemn silence. 

"Will you speak to me, Bobby?" said Miss Bell, 
bent upon being amiable and agreeable ; but still 
Bobby was mute. 

" We think this little fellow rather long of speak- 
ing," said Mr. Fairbairn; "we allege that his legs 
have ran away with his tongue." 

" How old is he ? " asked the Major. 

"He is only nineteen months and ten days," 
answered his mother, " so he has not lost much time ; 
but I would rather see a child fat and thriving than 
have it very forward." 



240 THE INHERITANCE. 

"No comparison!" was here uttered in a breath 
by the Major and Miss Bell, 

"There's a great difference in children in their 
time of speaking," said the mamma. "Alexander 
didn't speak till he was two and a quarter; and 
Henry, again, had a great many little words before 
he was seventeen months ; and Eliza and Charlotte 
both said mamma as plain as I do at a year ; but girls 
always speak sooner than boys ; as for William Pitt 
and Andrew Waddell, the twins, they both suffered 
so much from their teething that they were longer of 
speaking than they would otherwise have been ; indeed, 
I never saw an infant suffer so much as Andrew Wad- 
dell did ; he had greatly the heels of William Pitt at 
one time, till the measles pulled him down." 

A movement was here made by the visitors to 
depart. 

"Oh! you mustn't go without seeing the baby," 
cried Mrs. Fairbairn. "Mr. Fairbairn, will you pull 
the bell twice for baby 1 " 

The bell was twice rung, but no baby answered 
the summons. 

"She must be asleep," said Mrs. Fairbairn; "but 
I will take you up to the nursery, and you will see 
her in her cradle." And Mrs. Fairbairn led the way 
to the nursery, and opened the shutter, and uncovered 
the cradle, and displayed the baby. 

"Just five months — uncommon fine child — the 
image of Mr. Fairbairn — fat little thing — neat little 
hands — sweet little mouth — pretty little nose — nice 



THE INHERITANCE. 241 

little toes," etc. etc. etc., were as usual whispered 
over it. 

Miss St. Clair flattered herself the exhibition was 
now over, and was again taking leave, when, to her 
dismay, the squires of the whip and the trumpet 
rushed in, proclaiming that it was pouring of rain ! 
To leave the house was impossible, and, as it was 
getting late, there was nothing for it but staying 
dinner. 

The children of this happy family always dined at 
table, and their food and manner of eating were the 
only subjects of conversation. Alexander did not 
like mashed potatoes, and Andrew Waddell could not 
eat broth, and Eliza could live upon fish, and William 
Pitt took too much small-beer, and Henry ate as much 
meat as his papa ; and all these peculiarities had 
descended to them from some one or other of their 
ancestors. The dinner was simple on account of the 
children, and there was no dessert, as Bobby did not 
agree with fruit. But to make amends, Eliza's sampler 
was shown, and Henry and Alexander's copy-books 
were handed round the table, and Andrew Waddell 
stood up and repeated — "My name is Nerval," from 
beginning to end, and William Pitt was prevailed 
upon to sing the whole of " God save the King," in 
a little squeaking mealy voice, and was bravoed and 
applauded as though he had been Braham himself. 

To paint a scene in itself so tiresome is doubtless 
but a poor amusement to my reader, who must often 
have endured similar persecution. For who has not 

VOL. I. R 



242 THE INHERITANCE. 

suffered from the obtrusive fondness of parents for their 
offspring? and who has not felt what it was to be 
called upon, in the course of a morning visit, to enter 
into all the joys and the sorrows of the nursery, and 
to take a lively interest in all the feats and peculi- 
arities of the family 1 Shakespeare's anathema against 
those who hated music is scarcely too strong to be 
applied to those who dislike children. There is much 
enjoyment sometimes in making acquaintance with 
the little beings — much delight in hearing their art- 
less, unsophisticated prattle, and something not un- 
pleasing even in witnessing their little freaks and 
wayward humours ; but when a tiresome mother, in- 
stead of allowing the company to notice her child, 
torments every one to death in forcing or coaxing her 
child to notice the company, the charm is gone, and 
we experience only disgust or ennui. 

Mr. and Mrs. Fairbairn pursued to its utmost ex- 
tent this fatal rock on which so many parents make 
shipwreck of their senses ; and so satisfied were they 
with themselves and their children, so impressed with 
the idea of the delights of their family scenes, that 
vain would have been any attempt to open the eyes 
of their understanding. Perhaps the only remedy 
would have been found in that blessed spirit which 
"vaunteth not itself, and seeketh not its own." 

The evening proved fine; and Gertrude rejoiced 
to return even to Bellevue, 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

" II y en a peu qui gagnent a etre approfondies." 

La Bruyere. 

"What a sweet woman your sister is!" said Miss 
Bell, who at present beheld every objeet connected 
with the Major tinged with "Love's proper hue." 

"I am very glad you like her," replied the delighted 
lover ; " and I flatter myself the longer your know 
her the more you will be pleased with her." 

" Oh, I have no doubt of that," said the lady. 

"You will find her always the same," continued 
the Major. 

"That is deHghtful!"said Miss Bell; "and what 
a charming family she has — it is really quite a treat 
to see them. I assure you I don't know when I have 
passed so pleasant a day." 

" I trust you will pass many such," returned the 
Major, brightening still more. " I flatter myself my 
sister and you will be sisters indeed." 

While this colloquy was carrying on betwixt the 
lovers. Miss St. Clair tried to bring her cousin Anne 
back to the subject of their morning's conversation ; 



244 THE INHEEITANCE. 

but Anne seemed either afraid or ashamed of having 
said so much, and rather shunned any renewal of the 
subject. Gertrude did not think the worse of her 
upon that account, but rather gave her credit for that 
delicacy of mind which made her shrink from making 
a confidante of one who, although a relation, was in 
fact almost a stranger to her. 

" It would be folly in me, my dear cousin," said 
she, "to make a parade of oflfering to assist you at 
present in any way. I am neither old nor wise 
enough to advise, and I am quite as poor and as 
powerless as you can possibly be ; but if ever the time 
should come when I have either wisdom or power — 
both I can never hope to have together," said she 
with a smile, — " promise that you will then riddle me 
right, and tell me why poverty is the greatest misfor- 
tune in the world." 

They were here interrupted by a band of young 
Blacks, who, having descried them from the window, 
had rushed out to meet them, all breathless with 
haste, to hear where they had been, and to proclaim 
that Bob and Davy were arrived ; and upon advancing 
a little farther, Bob and Davy presented themselves 
in propriis personis. Bob and Davy were two tall 
good-looking youths, dressed in all the extremes of 
the reigning fashions — small waists, brush-heads, stiff 
collars, iron heels and switches. Like many other 
youths they were decidedly of opinion that dress 
" makes the man, and want of it the fellow," and that 
the rest was "mere leather and prunella," Perhaps, 



THE INHERITANCE. 245 

after all, that is a species of humility rather to be 

admired in those who, feeling themselves destitute 

of mental qualifications, trust to the abilities of their 

tailor and hairdresser for gaining them the good -will 

of the world. 

And who can tell whether there may not be more 

true lowliness of mind in a mop-head and high-heeled 

boots than has been lodged in many a pilgrim's scal- 

lopped hat and sandalled shoon 1 Be that as it may, 

it was evident that Bob and Davy rested their claims 

to distinction solely on the outward man, and that 

the sentiment of Henry the Fifth was by no means 

theirs, — 

" It yearns me not that men my garments wear, 
Such outward things dwell not in my desire," etc. 

Introduced to their cousin, and the first cere- 
monials over. Bob and Davy each began to play his 
part. Bob, being a military man, talked of parades, 
reviews, mess -dinners, and regulation epaulettes — 
while Davy, the writer's apprentice, was loud upon 
Edinburgh belles, playhouse rows, Assembly Rooms, 
and new quadrilles. 

*' We are to be reviewed on the 27th," said Bob, ad- 
dressing his cousin. " Gunstown is only about thirty 
miles from this. I hope you will do us the honour 
to come and look at us — we shall give a ball and 
supper after it; my mother and the girls will of 
course be there. Bell, you will be at our turn-out, 
won't you?" 

" I wonder how you can ask such a question. Bob, 



246 THE INHEEITANCE. 

of a person in my situation," said Miss Bell, with 
dignity. 

" What a famous deal of fun we had in Edinburgh 
last winter," said Davy ; " I was very often at three 
balls in a night. You dance gueydrills of course; 
country-dances are quite exploded now in Edinburgh 
— they call them kitchen dances there ; there's nothing 
goes down now but waUfsays and queydrills. By-the- 
bye, I daresay we could make out a queydrill here. 
Bell, do you dance queydrills 1 " 

"I never heard of a person in my situation 
dancing," replied Miss Bell, with an air of contempt. 

" Ay, that's always the way whenever you Misses 
get husbands, you grow so confoundedly stupid ; but 
I shall not suffer my wife to give herself such airs, 
I can tell you. I shall make a point of her dancing 
every night." 

The brothers had come on purpose to be present 
at the celebration of the nuptials, which they merely 
thought of as Bell's going off — a consummation to be 
devoutly wished for in a family of eleven, and an 
event indissolubly united in their minds with new 
coats, white gloves, wedding favours, bridesmaids, 
capital dinners, jovial suppers, dances, flirtations, and 
famous fun. Such being Bob and Davy, it may be 
inferred they were no great acquisitions to the family 
party, though they certainly were additions to it. 
Under the mistaken idea of being too genteel to do 
anything for themselves, there was a constant ringing 
of bells, and calHng for this, that, and t'other ; and if 



THE INHERITANCE. 247 

the hapless foot-boy could have cut himself into a 
thousand pieces, and endowed each particular piece 
with locomotive powers, all would scarcely have 
sufficed to answer the demands made upon him. 
Then, without any bad temper, there was a constant 
jangling and jarring from mere vacancy of mind, and 
want of proper pursuit. They were all warmly 
attached to each other in a disagreeable way; and, 
upon the strength of that attachment, thought they 
might dispense with all the ordinary rules of polite- 
ness, and contradict and dispute with each other upon 
the most trifling occasion. In short, it was not a 
pleasant dwelling-place ; there was neither the peace 
and tranquillity which the true spirit of Christianity 
diffuses amongst its votaries, nor the refined courtesies 
which spring from cultivated minds and elegant habits. 
Anne, indeed, was an exception ; but she was so quiet 
and pensive that she was completely sunk in the 
commotion that prevailed. 

Miss St. Clair suffered particularly from the assi- 
duities of the two beaux, being both bent on engaging 
her in a flirtation ; but their attentions were received 
with so much coldness, at times even amounting to 
hauteur, that at length they discovered that their old 
flames Cecy Swan and Clemmy Dow were much 
prettier girls, and to Cecy Swan and Clemmy Dow 
they accordingly betook themselves. 

Heartily tired of Bellevue and its inhabitants, 
Gertrude longed impatiently for the marriage day, 
that she might return to Kossville. She felt anxious. 



248 THE INHERITANCE. 

too, about her mother, and the thoughts of the 
mystery in which she was involved disquieted her, 
and rendered her situation doubly irksome. Uncon- 
sciously she cherished the desire of penetrating that 
dread secret, although, with the natural thoughtless- 
ness and gaiety of youth, her mind was often diverted 
from the contemplation of it ; yet there were times 
when it gained an almost overwhelming ascendency 
over her, and she thought she could have easier have 
endured any known evil than have submitted herself 
to this unknown fear. In Colonel Delmour's company, 
indeed, every painful idea was suspended, and she 
gave herself up to the charms of his brilliant con- 
versation and varied powers of pleasing with a 
complete forgetfulness of everjrthing, save the con- 
sciousness of loving and being beloved, while at the 
same time, with all the delusion of passion, she yet 
closed her eyes against the light of conviction. But 
his visits became too frequent and too long not to 
call forth some animadversion in the family, who had 
been led by Lord Eossville to look upon her as the 
affianced bride of the elder brother. 

But all were too busy with the substantials of 
marriage to have much time to bestow on the empty 
speculations of love. Mr. Black had settlement's to 
read over and sign, etc. Mrs. Black had the innumer- 
able departments of mother and housekeeper to fill — 
duties which are always trebled tenfold upon such 
momentous occasions. 

All the powers of Bob and Davy's minds were 



THE INHERITANCE. 249 

exerted to the decoration of their persons; but all 
the emanations of their genius had proved insufficient 
to enlighten the understanding of the Barnford tailor. 
Bob's coat was sent home when too late for alterations 
at least half an inch too long, while Davy's waistcoat 
was as much too short. The young ladies' gowns 
pleased better, and the children were charmed with 
their respective suits and sashes. As for Miss Bell, 
she was like some bright planet, the centre of its own 
system, round which all inferior orbs revolve. She it 
was to whom all must look for bridecake, and gloves, 
and favours, and all such minor consolations as fall to 
the lot of the single on such occasions. But no one's 
cup, however it may froth and mantle, is ever full, 
even to the overflowing. Miss Bell's certainly seemed 
to foam to the very top, but it could still have held 
a little more. Many were the wedding presents she 
had received from kindred and friends, according to 
their various means, till her chamber might have vied 
with the shrine of some patron saint. But amidst all 
the votive offerings there was none from Uncle Adam, 
although she had settled in her own mind that Uncle 
Adam could not possibly avoid presenting her with 
something very handsome, whether in plate, jewels, 
or specie, and her only doubt was, which of the three 
she would prefer. However, time wore on, and Uncle 
Adam was only to be seen in his usual attitude, with 
his hands in his pockets, as if strictly guarding his 
money, and with a face of the most hopeless sourness. 
Miss Bell, notwithstanding, still kept up under the 



250 THE INHERITANCE. 

expectation that Uncle Adam would surprise her in 
his own rough queer way some day, when she was 
not thinking of it. When that day would be it 
would have been difficult to say, as there was no 
day in which she was not fully prepared for the 
surprise. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

"Bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will 
come in to dinner." — Shakespeare. 

The day previous to the marriage the bustle that 
reigned in and around Bellevue was increased to that 
intense degree which attends all great events as they 
approach towards their consummation. Uncle Adam, 
Miss Black, and Mr, and Mrs. Fairbairn were expected 
at dinner, and during the whole day the steam of the 
soups, pies, pasties, etc. etc., which issued from Mrs. 
Black's kitchen and penetrated to the very interior of 
the drawing-room, might (as some one has parodied 
it) have created a stomach beneath the ribs of death. 
To Gertrude the commotion caused by what is called 
giving a dinner was something new. The total houle- 
versement of all orders of the community where much 
was to be done without the proper means, where a 
sumptuous banquet was to be prepared by the common 
drudges of the kitchen, and where every servant had 
double their usual portion of work to perform, besides 
being thrown out of their own natural sphere of action. 
Then there was the running backwards and forwards, 
the flying up stairs and the rushing down stairs, the 
opening and shutting of doors, or rather, I should say, 



252 THE INHERITANCE. 

the opening of doors, as the shutting is an evil seldom 
to be complained of upon any occasion, unless, indeed, 
when the call of " shut the door" is answered with a 
slam which shakes the house to its foundation. Added 
to all this was the losing of Mrs. Black's keys, with 
the customary suspicions attached to every individual 
of having somehow or other got them about them — 
suspicions only to be removed by repeated raisings 
and shakings of the party suspected, and even then 
not completely effaced, till the keys were found as 
usual in some place where somebody must surely have 
put them, and where nobody would ever have thought 
of looking for them. 

Then the nurserymaid was transformed into the 
cook's assistant, and the children were committed to 
a girl who could not manage them, and they broke 
loose, and overran the house, and resisted all author- 
ity. But doubtless many of my readers must have 
witnessed similar scenes, and endured similar perse- 
cutions, pending the preparations for a dinner, which, 
like worthy Mrs. Black's, was to be about three times 
as large and as elaborate as was necessary. But many 
are the paths .to the temple of Fame, and hard it is 
to climb by any of them. Mrs. Black was chiefly 
emulous of a character for her dinners, and probably 
laboured infinitely harder to stuff a dozen dull bodies 
than the Author of Waverley does to amuse the whole 
world. It was for this she thought by night and 
toiled by day; but, strange to say, she had an en- 
joyment in it too, though when that was, it would 



THE INHERITANCE. 253 

have been difficult to determine, for the anticipation 
was care and fatigue, the reality was ceremony and 
anxiety, the retrospect was disappointment and pro- 
vocation. 

Uncle Adam was the first of the guests who 
arrived, and Miss St Clair was the only one of the 
family ready to receive him. She was in the draw- 
ing-room when he entered, and the habitual vinegar 
expression of his long triangular visage relaxed into 
something like a smile at sight of her ; he even seated 
himself by her side, and entered into conversation 
with a degree of complacency very unusual with him. 

Emboldened by his good -humour, Gertrude ven- 
tured to admire a very fine camellia japonica, which, 
together with a piece of his favourite southernwood, 
decorated the breast of his coat. 

" I ken naething aboot the things mysel'," said he, 
hastily tearing it out of the button-hole^ as if ashamed 
of wearing anything to be admired ; then stuffing it into 
her hand — " Ha'e, tak' it, my dear ; it cam' frae that 
place up bye" — pointing in the direction of Bloom 
Park. "I'm sure they need nae ha'e sent it to me. 
Whatca'yeitr 

Gertrude repeated the name. 

" It's a senseless-like thing, without ony smell," — 
applying the southernwood to his nose as he spoke ; 
" but I daresay there's plenty o' them, and I've nae 
use for them, so you may gang up bye when you like, 
and tak' what you like." 

Gertrude thanked him, and as she adjusted the 



254 THE INHERITANCE. 

japonica in her dress, the old garnet brooch, now her 
only ornament, fell out, and in his gallantry the old 
man stooped to pick it up. But no sooner had he 
taken it in his hand than he uttered an exclamation 
of astonishment, and turning it over and over, ex- 
amined it with the deepest interest. 

" Wha's aught this?" inquired he. 

" It is mine," replied Gertrude, in some surprise. 

"Yours !" repeated he ; "yours ! and whar did ye 
get it? tell me the truth, whar did ye get it ?" 

" I got it from my nurse ; she gave it to me when 
she was dying, and I have kept it for her sake." 

"And did she no tell you whar she had got itf 

" I think she said she had got it from her mother." 

"From her mother! it was ance my mother's — it 
was mine, and I gi'ed it to Lizzy wi' my ain hands 
whan last we parted, and she promised to keep it till 
her dying day ; there's our initials " — pointing to the 

back — " and the very year we parted." Then, after 

a long pause — " What was the name o' your nurse, 
and whar did she come frae ?" 

" Her own name was Marianne Lamotte ; her hus- 
band's Jacob Lewiston, and she came from America ; 
her father was French; but, I believe, her mother 
was Scotch, for she used to sing me many an old 
Scotch song, which she said she had learned from her." 

" I canna mak' it oot," said Mr. Ramsay thought- 
fully ; " but it disna signify ; though I could, it wadna 
bring back life and time ;" and with a sigh he tendered 
the brooch. 



THE INHERITANCE. 255 

"Pray, keep it," said Gertrude; "it seems you 
have a better right to it than I have. I valued it 
merely for the sake of my nurse; but it is a still 
dearer memorial to you, and therefore I willingly 
part with it." 

" No, no," said he, rejecting the hand that offered 
it; "what wad I do vn'tl At your age, you may 
please yoursel' wi' thae kind o' dead toys, but I'm 
ow'r auld noo to ha'e ony enjoyment in sic things ; the 
young may tak' pleasure in thae romantic gew-gaws ; 
ye like to look back whan ye ha'e nae far to cast your 
eye ; but at threescore and ten it's a dreigh sight to 
see the lang and weary road we ha'e wandered. No, 
no, there's nae pleasure to the aged in sic mementoes ; 
they canna bring back youthfu' days and youthfu' 
hearts, and they are the only jewels o' life." 

Gertrude could not urge it, but from a feeling of 
dehcacy towards her uncle's painful reminiscences, she 
put aside the trinket, and resolved never again to 
wear it in his presence. It is rarely that feelings 
raised above the ordinary pitch can be long indulged 
in this strange world, where the most opposite emo- 
tions are constantly coming in contact, and where the 
mind is for ever in a state of ebb and flow, 

Mr. Ramsay's nature had been softened, and all its 
best ingredients called forth, at sight of the love-token 
of his early days, and the mournful associations which 
followed in its train ; but the gentler current of his 
soul was speedily checked by the entrance of the 
various members of the family, as they came severally 



256 THE INHEEITANCE. 

dropping in, fresh from their toilets, and last, if not 
least, Uncle Adam's antipathy. Miss Bell. 

Squeezing herself on the little sofa between Miss 
St. Clair and him, she exclaimed, " What a beautiful 
flower that is, cousin ! where did you get it 1 " 

" Mr. Eamsay was so good as to give it to me," 
answered she. 

" Indeed ! I suppose, then, it is from Bloom Park, 
uncle ? You have charming greenhouses there, I 
understand — that is what I regret so much at Thorn- 
bank. You know the Major has taken that in the 
meantime ; but I don't think it will answer, as there 
are no hothouses, and the Major has been accustomed 
to such charming fruits in India, that I'm afraid he 
will miss his pines sadly." 

"I suppose there will be plenty o' gude neeps," 
said Mr. Eamsay; "neeps like succur — he can take 
ane o' them when he's dry." 

Miss Bell reddened, but aflfecting not to hear, re- 
turned to the charge. 

" Thornbank is no great distance from Bloom Park, 
uncle, — quite an easy walk, I should think." 

" I never measured it," was the laconic reply. 

Finding it was not by way of Bloom Park she was 
likely to arrive at Uncle Adam's pocket. Miss Bell 
now went more directly to the point. 

"Do you know, uncle, I could be almost jealous of 
my cousin for having got that beautiful japonica from 
you, while poor I have not so much as a single leaf 
from you by way of keepsake." 



THE INHEEITANCE. 257 

Mr. Ramsay, with a bow and a sardonic smile, here 
presented her with the piece of southernwood he held 
in his hand. 

*' Well, uncle, I assure you I shall value this very 
much, and lay it up with the rest of my wedding 
presents ; and, by -the -bye, I have never showed you 
all the fine things my kind friends have presented to 
me. Good old Mrs. Waddell of Waddell Mains has 
presented me with a most beautiful antique silver cup, 
which, it seems, was the Major's christening bowL" 

"It will be ancient enough then, nae doot," ob- 
served Uncle Adam. 

" My excellent aunts have sent me a very hand- 
some teapot, and " 

"A fool and his money's soon parted; they had 
very little to do to send ony such thing." 

"Why, surely, uncle, you know it is the custom, 
all the world over, for persons in my situation to 
receive presents, and " 

" Miss Bell Black, I've seen something mair o' the 
world than you've done ; and I can tell ye some o' its 
customs that ye maybe dinna ken yet ; in Russia, for 
instance, the present to persons in your situation 
is " 

"Oh! for Heaven's sake !" — interrupted Miss Bell, 
with an instinctive dread of the knout — "don't set up 
these bears as models for us ! the customs of our own 
country surely ought to guide us on these occasions." 

" It's a very senseless custom, in my opinion," said 
Mr. Ramsay. "It's like casting pearls before swine 
VOL. I. S 



258 THE INHERITANCE. 

to be lavishing presents on a woman that's at the 
very pinnacle o' human happiness and grandeur ; it's 
you that should male' presents to puir single folk that 
hae nae Major Waddells to set them up wi' Ingee 

shawls, and carbuncles, and fans — and oo, I can 

compare ye to naething but a goddess the noo ; let me 
see, which o' them is't 1 A Juno 1 Na, I'm thinkin' 
it'll rather be a Vainuss." 

Here Uncle Adam was so tickled with his own jeio 
de mot that he laughed till the tears ran down his 
cheeks. The insult was too broad even for Miss Bell, 
who walked away in silent indignation ; then recover- 
ing himself, he pointed after her to Gertrude, and 
said, — 

" That creature's folly's just like dust — drive it out 
o' ae thing, and it just jlees to anither." 

Miss Black was the next of the party who arrived, 
and Gertrude, attracted by her mildness and good 
sense, would fain have exchanged the gall and vinegar 
of Uncle Adam for her more pleasing converse. But 
the obstreperous mirth of the children, and the noisy 
tattle of Bob and Davy, effectually precluded any 
interchange of speech beyond the ordinary salutations 
of meeting. The Fairbairn family (including the 
Major) were now waited for with outward impatience 
by Mr. Black, with inward anxiety by Mrs. Black. 
Mr. Black openly avowed his hunger; Mrs. Black 
vainly endeavoured to disguise her apprehensions that 
the beef would be roasted to a cinder (a thing Mr. 
Black could not endure), and that the rice (Avhich 



THE INHEEITA.NCE. 269 

the Major was so particular about) Avould be all in a 
lump, instead of being — as well -boiled rice ought to 
be — each and every particular grain separate by itself. 
All this, and much more, poor Mrs. Black revolved 
in her own mind, as she sat, like a second Mrs. Blue 
Beard, ever and anon calling to the children to look 
out and see if they saw anybody coming. 

At length the Fairbairn coach was descried and 
loudly proclaimed. The bell was rung — the dinner 
was ordered. Bob and Davy were ordered out of two 
arm-chairs they had taken possession of. Mrs. Black 
smoothed her gown, and put on a ceremonious face, 
while Mr. Black hastened to the door to be ready 
to receive Mrs. Fairbairn with due respect. But no 
Mrs. Fairbairn was there ; in her stead, however, was 
Miss Becky Duguid, her cousin; and the cause of 
Mrs. Fairbaim's absence was accounted for by reason 
of poor little Charlotte having been very cross all 
day, and her mamma thinking there was a tooth com- 
ing ; and she would not leave her mamma, and her 
mamma could not leave her, etc. etc. etc. All this was 
duly set forth by Mr. Fairbairn on one hand, while 
Miss Becky was making her own personal apologies 
on the other. She was really such a figure, she was 
quite ashamed to appear ; but she had no idea of 
coming, for it had been all settled that she was to 
stay with Charlotte while Mrs. Fairbairn was away ; 
and at one time Charlotte had agreed to let her mamma 
go ; and her mamma had dressed herself, and was 
all ready to set out ; and then she took a crying fit 



260 THE INHERITANCE. 

when the carriage was at the door, and so her mamma 
was obliged to give up the point and stay at home ; 
and then Mr. Fairbairn had insisted on her coming in 
Mrs. Fairbairn's place, just as she was. Miss Becky's 
apologies were of course met with protestations that 
there was no occasion for any, that she was perfectly 
well dressed, that it was merely a family dinner, an 
easy party, none but friends, and so forth. But, to 
tell the truth, Miss Becky's dress did require an 
apology, for the marks of children's fingers were upon 
her gown; her cap looked as if it had been sat upon, 
and her shawl even bore symptoms of having served 
to play at bo-peep ! In short, Miss Becky had the tout 
ensemble of a poor elderly maiden aunt; and such, 
indeed, was her history and character, as it is, alas ! 
of many others; but a slight sketch may serve to 
describe the genus, and serve as a tolerably faithful 
picture of Auntimony. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

" How liappy is the blameless vestal's lot !' 



Pope. 



Miss Becky Duguid, as a single woman, had vainly 
expected to escape the cares and anxieties of the 
married state. She had heard and seen much of the 
indifference or the ill -humour of husbands, of the 
troubles and vexations of children ; and she thought 
from these evils I am at least free ; I can go where 
I like, do what I like, and live as I like. But poor 
Miss Becky soon found her mistake. Brothers and 
sisters married; nephews and nieces sprung up on 
all hands, each and all expecting to be distinguished 
by Aunt Becky's bounty, while every parent levied 
the most unconscionable taxes upon her time and 
capabilities. 

" Aunt Becky will give me this," said one ; "you 
know she has no use for money." 

"Aunt Becky will do that," said another; "for 
she has always plenty of time." 

" Aunt Becky will go there," cried a third ; " she 
likes a long walk." 



262 THE INHERITANCE. 

But even the labours imposed upon her by her 
own relations were nothing compared to the constant 
demands made upon her by the world in general, i.e. 
by the whole circle of her acquaintances ; — all under 
the idea that, as a single Avoman, she could have 
nothing to do but oblige her friends. When in town, 
her life was devoted to executing commissions from 
the country — inquiring the character of servants, 
hiring governesses and grooms, finding situations for 
wet nurses, getting patterns of pelisse cloths from 
every shop in town, trying to get old silks matched 
with new, gowns made, gauzes dyed, feathers cleaned, 
fans mended, etc. etc. etc. The letters always begin- 
ning — "As I know you do not grudge your trouble, 
and will be walking about at any rate, I must beg 
the favour, when you are quite at leisure," and so 
and so; and ending with — "As I find I am really 
in want of the things, and the carrier leaves town 
on Thursday, I trust you will contrive to have every- 
thing ready by that time." But one of the letters, 
dropped by Miss Becky in the course of her peram- 
bulations, will best illustrate this part of her personal 
narrative. 

" My dear Miss Becky — I take this opportunity of 
letting you know we are all tolerably well at present, 
and trust you continue to enjoy your usual good health. 
I return the tea you sent last, as we all think it very 
inferior to that you sent formerly; and as there has 
been rather a fall upon the price of teas, there can be 



THE INHERITANCE, 263 

no reason for such a falling off in the quality ; and 
unless Candytuft can give something very superior at 
the same price, I would just return it, and try some 
other shop, and have nothing more to do with Candy- 
tuft. Eliza and Jane, with their best love, take this 
opportunity of sending in their old black velvet 
pelisses, which they wish you to consult Yellowleys 
the dyer about ; they have been told that black 
velvet can be dyed either grass green or hr'ujht crim- 
son, and if Yellowleys can warrant their standing, 
they would prefer having them done a good rich 
crimson; but if not, they must just put up with a 
full green, as much on the grass, and off the bottle, 
as possible. 

" I am sorry to tell you your proUgSe, Jenny Snod- 
grass, has turned out very ill. I find her lazy and 
idle, dirty, disobliging, and insolent, and not at all 
the person I was led to expect from your character of 
her. I must, therefore, trouble you to be on the look- 
out for another. You know it is not much I require 
of my servants ; but there are sovu things it is impos- 
sible to dispense with, and which I must make a point 
of. Of course she must be perfectly sober, honest, 
conscientious, and trustworthy, and in every respect 
unexceptionable in her morals. She must be stout, 
active, cleanly, civil, obliging, quiet, orderly, good- 
tempered, neat-handed, and partimlarly tidy in her 
person. All that I require of her is to be an excellent 
worker at her needle, a thoraugh washer and ironer, 
and a generally useful and accommodating servant, 



264 THE IXHEEITANCE. 

Margaret sends her affectionate remembrance, and 
when you are at leisure requests you will order a 
pair of stays for her from Brisbane's as soon as pos- 
sible, as she is in great want. She sends a pair of 
old ones for a pattern, but they don't fit ; you must 
tell him they are both too tight and too short, and the 
shoulder-straps too narroio by a full straw-breadth. 
The old busk, she thinks, may do, or if it should be 
too shoii, perhaps you may be able to get it exchanged 
for one longer. As Flint the gunsmith's is no great 
distance from Brisbane's, John would be much obliged 
to you when you are there, if you would step to him, 
and tell him that he is going to send his gun to have 
the lock mended, and to be sure to have it done in 
the most complete manner, and as soon as he possibly 
can, as the shooting -season is coming on. When 
done, he may send it to you, with a couple of pounds 
of gunpowder, and a bag of small shot, No. 5. As 
the holiday time is coming on, we may look for the 
boys some of these days, and (if it is not putting you 
to any inconvenience), as the coach stops, you know, 
at the Blue Boar, perhaps you will have the goodness 
to have your Nanny waiting at the office for them ; 
and if you can manage to keep them till Monday it 
will be adding to the favour ; but they will require 
constant watching, as you know what romps they are. 
I do not expect to be confined before the 29th at 
soonest ; so if you can manage to come to us bettvixt 
and the 20th, it will be very agreeable to us all, I 
assure you. I was in hopes I should not have had any 



THE INHERITANCE. 265 

more to trouble you with at present, but upon hearing 
that I was writing to you, Tom begs me to say that 
he wishes very much to get some good fly-hooks for 
trout-fishing, four red cocks' hackle-body, four black 
green plover's-tuft, with a light starling's-wing body, 
and four hroion woodcocks'-wing, and hare's-foot-body. 
I hope you will be able to read this, as I assure you it 
has cost me some labour to write it from Tom's diction. 
He desires me to add you will get them best at Phin's, 
fishing-rod-maker, at the east end of the High Street, 
fifth door up the second stair on the left hand; you 
will easily find it, as there is a large pasteboard trout 
hanging from the end of a fishing-rod for a sign. He 
also wants a pirn of fishing-line and a few good stout 
long-shanked hait-\io6ks,. If you happen to see your 
friend Miss Aiken, you may tell her the turban you 
ordered for me is the very same of one she made for 
me two years ago, and which I never liked. I have 
only worn it once, so perhaps she will have no objec- 
tions to take it back, and make me a neat, fashionable 
cap instead. I am afraid you will think us very 
troublesome, but I know you do not grudge a little 
trouble to oblige your friends. Mr. Goodwilly and 
the young people unite with me in best wishes ; and 
I remain, my dear Miss Duguid, 

" Yours most sincerely, 

" Grace Goodwilly. 

"P.S, — Ehza and Jane beg you will send them 
some patterns of summer silks, neither too light nor 



266 THE INHEEITANCE. 

too dark, both figured and plain, with the different 
ividths and prices, and also that you would inquire 
what is the loivest price of the handsomest ostrich 
feathers that can be had ; and if you happen to see 
any very pretty wreaths you might price them at the 
same time, as they are divided between feathers and 
flowers ; those you sent from Trashbag's were quite 
soiled, and looked as if they had been worn. Mr. 
Good willy takes this opportunity of sending in a 
couple of razors, which he begs you will send to 
Steele the cutler's, at the back of the Old Kirk Stile, 
to be sharpened immediately, as that is a thing he can- 
not want, Margaret bids me tell you to desire Bris- 
bane not to put magic laces to her stays, and to be 
sure that the stitching is stout and firm. Any day 
that you happen to be passing Seaton the saddler's, 
Mr. Goodwilly begs you will have the goodness to 
inquire what would be the lowest price of new stuffing 
the side saddles, and new lackering the carriage- 
harness. I think it as well to send in my turban, 
that you may try Miss Aiken, and I shall think her 
extremely disohUging if she refuses to take it back, as 
it will be money thrown into the fire if she does not, 
for it shall never go upon my head. 

" Yours with much regard, 

"G. G. 

"P.S. — I find it will be necessary to send Jemima 
in to Bain the dentist, to get some of her teeth taken 
out, as her mouth is getting very croivded. I would 



THE INHERITANCE. 267 

take her myself, but cannot stand these things; so 
must beg the favour of you to go Avith her, and see it 
done. I fear it will be a $ad business, poor soul ! as 
there are at least three that must come out, and great 
tusks they are ! Of course, it is not every one I would 
trust her with for such an operation : but I know I can 
rely upon your doing everything that can he done. 
Will you ask that good-for-nothing creature. Heel- 
piece, if the children's shoes are ever to be sent 
homel 

"Yours in haste." 

Sometimes Miss Becky betook herself to the coun- 
try, but though she often found retirement there was 
seldom rest. Whenever a gay husband was leaving 
home, Miss Becky was in requisition to keep his dull 
sickly wife company in his absence — or, vice versa, 
when a young wife wished to amuse herself abroad, 
" that good creature, Becky Duguid," was sent for, to 
play backgammon with her old ill-natured husband ; 
and when both man and wife were leaving home, then 
Becky Duguid was called upon to nurse the children 
and manage the servants in their absence. Invita- 
tions abounded, but all to disagreeable scenes or dull 
parties. She was expected to attend all accouchements, 
christenings, deaths, chestings, and burials; but she 
was seldom asked to a marriage, and never to any 
party of pleasure. " Oh, Miss Becky doesn't care for 
these things; she would like better to come to us 
when we're in a quiet way by ourselves," was always 



268 THE INHERITANCE. 

the come off. "I don't know what the cares of the 
married life are," Miss Becky would sometimes say, 
and oftener think ; " but I'm sure I know what the 
troubles of the single state are to a stout, healthy, 
easy-tempered woman like me. What is it to be the 
wife of one crabbed old man to having to divert all 
the crabbed old men in the country ? And what is it 
to be the mother of one family of children to having 
to look after the children of all my relations and 
acquaintances ? " 

But Miss Becky's reflections (like most people's 
reflections) came too late to benefit herself. She was 
completely involved in the toils of celibacy before she 
was at all aware of her danger, and vain now would 
have been the attempt to extricate herself. Such was 
Miss Becky Duguid, walking in the vain show of liberty, 
but, in reality, fettered hand and foot by all the tender 
charities of life. As such, it may be guessed, she 
formed no very brilliant addition to the Bellevue party. 
Indeed, such is the force of habit, she now felt quite 
out of her element, when seated at her ease, without 
any immediate call on her time and attention; for 
even her little doings carried their sense of importance 
along with them; and perhaps Mrs, Fry never felt 
more inward satisfaction at the turning of a soul from 
darkness to light than did poor Miss Becky when 
she had triumphantly despatched a box full of well- 
executed commissions. 

Dinner passed off uncommonly well ; everything 
was excellent. Uncle Adam behaved with tolerable 



THE INHERITANCE. 269 

civility; the Major's black servant did wonders; the 
room was hot, the party was large, the dishes were 
savoury, the atmosphere was one ambrosial cloud of 
mingled steams ; the ladies' complexions got high ; 
but at length, toasts having gone round, the signal 
was made, and all was over ! 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

" Busk ye, busk ye, my bonny bride. 

Busk ye, busk ye, my winsome marrow ; 
Busk ye, busk ye, my bonny bride, 
And let us to the Braes of Yarrow. 

" There will we sport and gather dew, 

Dancing while lav'rocks sin^ in the morning ; 
There learn frae turtles to prove true ; 
Oh, Bell, ne'er vex me mth thy scorning !" 

Allan Ramsay. 

Bright shone the morning of Miss Bell's nuptials, 
and all things looked auspicious. The collation stood 
ready, for Mrs. Black, like Lady Capulet on a similar 
though less happy occasion, had been astir from the 
second crowing of the cock. 

The guests were assembled, the clergyman had 
arrived, the family were all in full dress ; the Major, 
in his cat's-eye brooch and London coat (the envy of 
Bob and Davy), looked the gay bridegroom from top 
to toe. Nothing was wanting but the beauteous bride, 
and, at the proper moment, decked in India muslin — 
a full dressed head, done up with a profusion of beads, 
and braids, and bands, and bows — a pocket-handker- 
chief at her face. Miss Bell was led in. 

The solemnity deepened; the clergyman cleared 



THE INHERITANCE. 271 

his voice ; the children were admonished by a reprov- 
ing look that it was time to put on their grave faces ; 
the clatter of Bob and Davy was hushed, and all 
the little disjointed groups were broken up, till at 
length the whole company was regularly formed into 
one large formal, silent, solemn circle. Miss Bell was 
now on the verge of becoming Mrs. Major Waddell — 
a metamorphose which could not be expected to take 
place without some commotion. 

Persons of fine feelings naturally shed tears upon 
these momentous occasions, and persons of ordinary 
feelings think they ought to do so too. In short, 
the thing is always done, or appears to be done ; and 
not to be outdone, Miss Bell sobbed aloud, and had 
even the vulgarity to blow her nose — although, as 
Bob and Davy afterwards declared, that was all in 
the eye. 

Dr. Johnson has remarked of the Episcopal marriage 
service that it is too refined — that it is calculated 
only for the best kind of marriages ; whereas there 
ought to be a form for matches of an inferior descrip- 
tion, probably such as that which now took place 
betwixt Major Andrew Waddell and Miss Isabella 
Black. That objection certainly does not apply to 
the Presbyterian form, which depends entirely upon 
the officiating clergyman ; and, accordingly, is suscep- 
tible of all the varieties of which the mind and 
manners of man are capable — from the holy meekness 
and simplicity of the Evangelical jxastor, to the hum- 
drum slipshod exhortations of the lukewarm minister 



272 THE INHERITANCE. 

or the dull dogmas of the worldly-wise doctor. It 
was a person of the latter description who now per- 
formed the ceremony in a manner which even Dr. 
Johnson would scarcely have deemed too good for the 
parties. 

Mrs. Major Waddell having received the congi-atu- 
lations of the company then withdrew, according to 
etiquette, to change her nuptial-robe for a travelhng 
habit, and speedily re-entered, arrayed in a navy-blue 
riding-habit (the Major's favourite colour), allowed to 
sit uncommonly well ; a black beaver hat and feathers, 
yellow boots, gold watch, and brooch containing 
the Major's hair, set round with pearls. Altogether, 
Mrs. Major Waddell looked remarkably well, and 
bore her new honours with a happy mixture of dignity 
and affability. 

The company were now conducted to the banquet, 
which, though neither breakfast, dinner, or supper, 
was a happy combination of all. There was, of 
course, much cutting, and carving, and helping, and 
asking, and refusing, and even some pressing, and 
Will the foot-boy broke a decanter, and Black Csesar 
spilt a very elaborate trifle; but, upon the whole, 
everything went on prosperously. Mrs. St. Clair 
took care to seat herself by the Major, and aware 
that when people are very happy they are commonly 
very weak, she seized her opportunity, and easily 
cajoled him out of his vote. And now the trampling 
of steeds and crush of wheels announced the bridal 
equipage; and the Major, his lady, and Miss Lilly, 



THE INIIEEITANCE. 273 

who was to accompany them, prepared to depart. 
The lady, according to custom, was hurried, or 
appeared to be hurried, into the small carriage -and - 
four that awaited her. Miss Lilly followed ; but as 
she took leave of Miss St. Clair, she whispered, "I 
should like very much to correspond with you, if 

" but here Lilly was dragged away by her father, 

with a reproof for keeping the young people waiting. 
The happy party were now seated, the door was shut, 
the smiles, and bows, and kissing of hands was 
renewed, the Major's black servant skipped on the 
dicky; "Go on," was pronounced, the drivers cracked 
their whips, the carriage set off with a bound, and 
was soon rattling through the streets of Barnford, 
where many a gazing eye and outstretched neck 
hailed it as it passed. 

A great philosopher has asserted that "upon all 
such joyous occasions our satisfaction, though not so 
durable, is often as lively as that of the persons prin- 
cipally concerned ;" but, upon the present occasion, 
there certainly Avas little sympathy in Mrs. Major 
Waddell's feelings and those of her friends and 
acquaintances. While she rolled on, supremely blest, 
they solaced themselves with commiserating her hap- 
less fate. " Quite a mercenary marriage, poor thing ; 
a sad sacrifice; a man old enough to be her grand- 
father, has met with seventeen refusals, fortune come 
in of the telling, liver like a plum -pudding, false 
teeth, dreadful temper," etc. etc., were buzzed from 
one end of the town to the other ; but, happily, none 

VOL. I. T 



274 THE INHERITANCE, 

of their stings penetrated the ear of the bride, who 
sat in all the bliss of pompous ignorance. 

Though births, marriages, and deaths occur every 
day, still they continue to excite an interest beyond 
the ordinary events of life. The former and the 
latter, indeed, though apparently more important 
occurrences, certainly do not engage the attention or 
occupy the minds of the great mass of mankind (or, 
at least, of womankind) so much as the less solemn 
act of marriage. Whether these, being performed 
without our own consent asked or obtained, afford 
less scope for animadversion, or that marriage is a 
state in which all are inclined to sympathise — the 
married from fellow-feeling, the single from feelings 
which the moralist or the metaphysician may declare, 
but which it is no part of my business to investigate, 
I shall, therefore, leave the point to be discussed by 
those who are more competent, and return to the 
company. 

It is no easy matter for a party in full dress to 
pass away the morning when the business for which 
they assembled is over, and where there is nothing 
to gratify any one of the five senses; it is then people 
feel, in its fullest extent, the pains and penalties of 
idleness. As soon as their respective carriages drew 
up, the guests therefore dropped off, and, as the last of 
them wheeled out of sight, Mrs. Black thanked her 
stars she had seen all their backs, 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

" Thou wilt be like a lover presently, 
And tire the hearer with a book of words." 

Much Ado about Nothing. 

It was with pleasure Gertrude hailed the stately turrets 
of Eossville, as she beheld them rising above the rich 
masses of wood which surrounded them; and again 
her heart bounded with delight as she thought, " All 
this will one day be mine — mine to bestow " 

She did not finish the sentence even to herself, but 
the image of Colonel Delmour rose to her view, and 
she felt that even the brilliant destiny that awaited 
her would be poor and joyless unless he were to par- 
take of it. On alighting, Mrs. St. Clair hastened to 
Lord Rossville to report to him the success of her 
canvass, and Gertrude soon found herself, she knew 
not how, strolling by the banks of the river with 
Colonel Delmour by her side. 

It is universally allowed that, though nothing can 
be more interesting in itself than the conversation of 
two lovers, yet nothing can be more insipid in detail 
— just as the heavenly fragrance of the rose becomes 
vapid and sickly under all the attempts made to retain 
and embody its exquisite odour. Colonel Delmour 



276 THE INHEPJTANCE. 

certainly was in love — as much so as it was in his 
nature to be ; but, as has been truly said, how many 
noxious ingredients enter into the composition of what 
is sometimes called love ! Pride, vanity, ambition, self- 
interest, all these had their share in the admiration 
which Colonel Delmour accorded to the beauties and 
the graces of Miss St. Clair. In any situation in Hfe 
his taste would have led him to admire her ; but it 
was only as the heiress of Rossville his pride would 
have permitted him to have loved her. But he was 
aware of the obstacles that stood in the way of his 
wishes, and deemed it most prudent not to oppose 
himself openly to them at present. He was conscious 
of the odium he would incur were he to enter the 
lists as the rival of his brother, knowing, as he had 
all along done, that that brother was the destined 
husband of the heiress of Rossville. His aim, there- 
fore, was to secure her affections in a clandestine 
manner, leaving it to his brother to make his pro- 
posals openly, and when they had been rejected he 
would then come forward and prefer his suit. This 
manoeuvre would, to be sure, expose Gertrude to the 
whole weight of her uncle's displeasure, and probably 
bring much persecution upon her, but with a character 
such as hers that would only tend to strengthen her 
attachment, and Colonel Delmour was too selfish to 
prize the happiness even of the woman he loved 
beyond his own; or rather, like many others of the 
same nature, he wished that her happiness should be 
of a reflected nature, emanating solely from himself. 



THE INHEEITANCE. 277 

Having bewailed the necessity he was under of leaving 
Eossville the following day, he then gave way to the 
most vehement expressions of despair at the thoughts 
of leaving one a thousand times dearer to him than 
life, and that, too, without the only solace that could 
soften the anguish of separation — the belief that his 
feelings were understood, the hope that they might 
one day be mutual. 

Gertrude remained silent, but there was a deep 
struggle in her breast; her mother's prejudice, her 
uncle's plans, made her feel the dangers and diffi- 
culties of their attachment, while they at the same 
time served to heighten it. Colonel Delmour saw 
what was passing in her mind, and that he must now 
bring the matter to a decision. 

With all the impassioned sophistry of which he 
was master he contrived to draw from Gertrude an 
indirect acknoAvledgment that he was not perfectly 
indifferent to her, and he then urged the necessity 
there was for carefully concealing their attachment 
for the present 

" Can this be right ? " thought Gertrude, and her 
conscience told her no ; but averse as she was to every 
species of dissimulation and deceit, she was equally a 
stranger to the meanness of suspicion, and to suspect 
the man she loved was not in her nature — love and 
suspicion were the very antipodes of her mind. She 
therefore quickly banished the slight suggestion that 
had arisen, though she could not so easily reconcile to 
herself the idea that she was acting a clandestine part 



278 THE INHERITANCE. 

in thus deceiving by not disclosing to her mother 
what had passed. But Colonel Delmour besought 
her with so much earnestness to withhold the com- 
munication for the present, and she dreaded so much 
to encounter her mother's violence and prejudice, that 
perhaps, on the whole, she was not sorry for an excuse 
to indulge undisturbed yet a while in " Love's young 
dream." Had Mrs. St. Clair ever been the friend of 
her daughter, Gertrude would not have acted thus; 
for her nature was open and ingenuous, and she 
would have disdained every species of concealment 
and duplicity. But the whirlwind and the tempest 
are not more baleful in their effects on the material 
world than tyranny and violence are destructive of 
all the finer qualities of the mind with which they 
come in contact. They must either irritate or deaden 
all those free-born affections of the soul which, like 
the first vernal shoots, possess a charm in their fresh- 
ness alone which art and cultm-e would in vain seek 
to impart. 

When the lovers reached the Castle, it was within 
a few minutes of the dinner hour, and Gertrude flew 
to her room, where she found her mother waiting for 
her. 

"Where have you been, child?" cried she, in no 
very complacent tone. " Lord Eossville has been 
asking for you at least a dozen times, and no one 
could give any account of you." 

" I have been walking by the river, mamma," replied 
her daughter in some confusion. 



THE INHERITANCE. 279 

" I wish you Avould leave ofl" these idle rambles of 
yours, I am quite of the Earl's opinion that the less 
young ladies indulge in solitary rambles the better." 

"Mamma, I was not " alone, Gertrude would 

have added, though in some little trepidation, but Mrs. 
St. Clair interrupted her. 

"Come — come, there is no time to waste in ex- 
cuses — you will be late as it is, so make haste ; you 
ought to have remembered there is to be company 
here to-day, to whom Lord Rossville wished to present 
you in due pomp — perhaps to serve some little poli- 
tical purpose ; but no matter — he is a generous, noble- 
minded man in spite of his little peculiarities. He 
was anxious to have seen you to-day for two purposes, 
which I am commissioned to fulfil ; the first is, that 
you are to bestow your attention exdusivehj upon Mr. 
Delmour ; the next is, to decorate you with a splendid 
gift for the occasion. Luckily you are in looks to do 
credit to my work. See, here is what your kind, 
generous uncle presents you with;" and opening a 
jewel-case, she displayed a set of costly pearls. A 
pang shot through Gertrude's heart as she thought, 
" "Would he have bestowed these upon me if he had 
known that I am acting in opposition to his wishes ? 
Oh ! why am I compelled thus to play the hypo- 
crite T' And she sighed and shrank back as her 
mother would have decked her in oriental magnifi- 
cence. Mrs. St. Clair looked at her with astonishment 

" What is the matter, Gertrude ? — this is a strange 
time to sigh, when adorning with gems which even 



280 THE INHERITANCE. 

the future Countess of Eossville might be proud to 
wear." 

Gertrude passively extended her arm to have the 
costly bracelets clasped on it ; but Mrs. St. Clair knew 
not that to those who had just been plighting hearts, 
even Golconda's mines would have seemed poor and 
dim — at that moment Gertrude felt that wealth and 
honours were but as "painted clay." 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

" Is tliere place to write above one lover's name, 
With honour in her heart ? " 

Old Play. 

Meanwhile the carriages were beginning to draw 
up in rapid succession, and Lord Rossville, though 
fretting inwardly at his niece's delay, yet received 
the company with much outward serenity. He felt 
that he was master of his own person and manners, 
and all the dignity and urbanity for which he flattered 
himself he was so celebrated had now full scope in 
the absence of Miss Pratt. His step was firmer, his 
chest was broader, his nose was higher, his language 
was finer, his sentences were longer, his periods 
were rounder — in short, Richard was himself again. 

Already had he uttered many sensible and even 
some witty sayings to such of his guests as had 
arrived ; while his mind was busy concocting a pun 
to be applied to Sir Peter Wellwood, when he should 
appear. But, alas for the insecurity of the best laid 
schemes of human wisdom ! Sir Peter and Lady 
Wellwood were anounced ; and — horror of horrors ! 
— who should enter with them but Miss Pratt ! Who 
can paint the Earl as he stood pierced with severe 



282 THE INHEKITANCE. 

amazement '? Not Celadon, when he beheld his 
Amelia struck a blackened corse, gazed with more 
marble aspect than did his Lordship at sight of the 
breathing form of Miss Pratt. The half-formed pun 
died on his lips — a faint and indistinct notion of it 
floated through his bewildered brain ; it was to have 
been something about a Well and a Wood, or a Wood 
and a Well ; but the Earl's wits were in a wood ; and 
he could certainly have wished Miss Pratt in a well. 
In vain did he even attempt to say something of 
Wellcome ; the words clove to the roof of his mouth, 
and his looks did not make up for the deficiencies of 
his tongue. But Miss Pratt had not been looked at 
for fifty years to be disconcerted at that time of life 
by the looks of any man living, and she therefore 
accosted him in her usual manner. 

"Well, my Lord, you see I've been better than 
my word ; I daresay you didn't think of seeing me 
to-day ; and, to tell you the truth, I didn't think of 
it myself; but Sir Peter and Lady Wellwood hap- 
pened to call, en passant, at Lady M 'Caw's, and as 
they were so good as offer me a seat in their carriage 
I thought I couldn't do better than just come and 
make out the rest of my visit to you. Lady Betty, 
Lady Mildmay, Lady Restall," etc. etc. etc. ; and in a 
moment Miss Pratt was buzzing all round the room. 

At sound of the gong, Mrs. St. Clair had hastily 
put the last finish to her daughter's dress, and hurried 
her to the drawing-room. As they entered all eyes 
were turned towards them. Lord Rossville was 



THE INHERITANCE. 283 

struck Avith the surpassing beauty of his niece, and 
attributing it entirely to the effect of his pearls, he 
advanced from the circle in which he was standing, 
and taking her hand with an air of gratified pride, 
led her towards the company. He was in the act of 
presenting her to a Dowager- Marchioness, for whom 
he entertained a high veneration, when, at that 
moment, Mr. Lyndsay entered from the opposite side 
of the room. Their eyes met for the first time since 
that eventful midnight scene in the wood — a slight 
suffusion crossed his face, but in an instant the colour 
mounted to her very temples, and in answer to the 
Marchioness's introductory remarks, she stammered 
out she knew not what. The consciousness of her 
confusion only served to increase it ; she was aware 
that the eyes of the company were upon her, but she 
felt only the influence of Colonel Delmour's. 

Lord Rossville attributing his niece's embarrass- 
ment solely to awe and respect for himself and his 
guests, was beginning to reassure and encourage her 
in a manner which would have increased her confusion 
tenfold, when fortunately dinner was announced. 
Amid the usual bustle of fixing the order of proces- 
sion, with all the accompanying ceremonies necessary 
to be observed in walking from one room to another, 
Gertrude was recovering her presence of mind, when, 
as Miss Pratt passed, leaning on the arm of her ally, 
Sir Peter, she whispered, " Ay ! these are pearls of 
great price, indeed ! So, so ; somebody has come 
good speed. Love, like light, will not hide, ah, ha ! " 



284 THE INHEIUTANCE. 

and with an intolerable tap of her fan, and a signifi- 
cant chuckle, on she pattered, while again Gertrude's 
cheeks were dyed with blushes. At that moment 
Colonel Delmour, who had heard Miss Pratt's remarks, 
accidentally trod upon her gown in such a manner as 
almost to tear away the skirt from the body. 

"Was there ever the like of thisi" cried she, red- 
dening with anger. " My good Plowman's gauze ! 
Colonel Delmour, do you see what you've done?" 
But Colonel Delmour, without deigning to take the 
least notice of the injury he had inflicted, passed on 
to offer his arm to one of the Miss Mildmays. 

Miss Pratt's only solace, therefore, was the sym- 
pathy of Sir Peter, to whom she detailed all the mis- 
chief Colonel Delmour had done her, first and last, 
concluding with a remark which, though in an affected 
whisper, was intended to reach his ear — that, indeed 
it was no wonder he came such bad speed at the 
courting — she had need to be both a bold woman and 
a rich one, Avho would choose such a rough wooer. 
This disaster, however, had the effect of a quietus 
upon Miss Pratt for some time, and Lord Kossville 
got leave to expand to his utmost dimensions, un- 
checked by any interruptions from her. 

None of the company now assembled seemed to 
have any particular part to play in the great drama 
of life ; they were all commonplace, well-bred, eating 
and drinking elderly lords and ladies, or well dressed, 
talking, smiling, flirting masters and misses. Gertrude 
was as usual appropriated by Mr. Delmour, who paid 



THE INHERITANCE. 285 

her much attention, and some very pretty compliments 
in a gentlemanly but somewhat business-like manner. 
Colonel Delmour sat, on the other hand, silent, thought- 
ful, and displeased, neglecting even the common at- 
tentions Avhich politeness required. 

Mr. Lyndsay was on the opposite side of the table, 
and upon his asking Miss St. Clair to drink wine with 
him, Colonel Delmour turned his eye quickly upon 
her, and again a deep blush mantled her cheeks, — 
something, perhaps, of wounded pride at the suspicion 
implied in his glance, or it may be of that shame 
natural to the ingenuous mind at the sense of mystery 
and concealment. Whatever its cause, its effect was 
sufficiently visible on Colonel Delmour; he turned 
pale with suppressed anger, bit his lip, nor addressed 
a single word to her during the whole of dinner. 

There is only this difference betwixt a summer and 
a winter party, that in winter the company form into 
one large cluster round the fire, and in sunmier they 
fall into little detached groups, and are scattered all 
over the apartment. Upon entering the drawing- 
room, Gertrude had unconsciously seated herself apart 
from everybody at an open window, where she thought 
she was contemplating the beams of the setting sun 
as they glowed upon the hills and glittered through 
the rich green foliage of some intervening elms. But, 
in fact, she was ruminating on the various occurrences 
of the day, and the awkward predicament in which 
she found herself placed with Mr. Lyndsay. 

She was roused from her reverie by some one 



286 THE INHEKITANCE. 

putting their hands before her eyes, and presently 
the dreaded accents of Pratt smote her ear, as she 
struck up, "As pensive I thought of my love, eh?" 
Then, drawing in a chair, she seated herself close by 
Miss St, Clair, and taking her hand with an air of 
friendly sympathy and perfect security, she began — 

" I'm sure it must be a relief to you to have got 
away from the dinner-table to-day. I really felt for 
you, for I know by experience what my gentleman is 
when he is in his tantrums ; did you see how he was 
like to tear me in pieces to-day for nothing but because 
I happened to see how the land lay between a certain 
person and you ? Just look at my good Plowman's 
gauze," turning round. "I assure you, my dear, I 
was very much afraid at one time that you would 
have been taken in by him ; for I saw that he made a 
dead set at you from the first, and he can be very agree- 
able when he chooses ; but take my word for it he's a 
very impertinent, ill-bred, ill-tempered man for all that. " 

Colouring with confusion and indignation, Gertrude 
had sat silently enduring the obloquy lavished on her 
lover, from utter inability to interrupt her; but at 
this climax she made a movement to extricate herself, 
which, however, was in vain. 

Miss Pratt again seized the hand which had been 
withdrawn, and with a significant squeeze, resumed — 
"You needn't be afraid of me, my dear, your secret's 
safe with me ; and, to tell you the truth, I've suspected 
the thing for some time. I only wish you had looked 
about you a little ; there's Anthony Whyte has never 



THE INHEKITANCE. 287 

SO much as seen you yet ; if he would but make up 
his mind to marry, what a husband he would make ! 
very different from our friend the Colonel, to be sure ; 
many's the sore heart his wife will have, and many a 
sore heart he has given already with his flirtations, for 
he's never happy but when he's making love to some- 
body or other, married or single, it's all the same to him." 

"Miss Pratt," cried Gertrude, in great emotion, as 
she again tried to disengage herself from her, " I can- 
not listen to " 

" Well, my dear, it's very good of you to stand up 
for him," with a pat on the shoulder ; "for it's seldom 
ladies take such a lift of their cast lovers ; but it's as 
well you should know all you've escaped;" then 
lowering her voice to a mysterious whisper, " Just to 
give you one single trait of him, which I know to be 
a fact — what do you think of his owing Edward 
Lyndsay seven thousand pound for his game debts f 
That I can pledge myself for. I was staying in the 
house with them both at the time. I was upon a 
visit to Lady Augusta in London, and I had good 
access to see what went on ; and I saw rather more too 
than what they thought of. Edward Lyndsay was 
just of age then ; and he was invited there to be pre- 
sented and introduced by the Delraours, for, you 
know, they're at the very top of the tree in London. 
I suspect there was a scheme for getting Edward to 
one of the misses — but it wouldn't do. Well, the 
Colonel was to take charge of him, and bring him 
into fashion by Avay of —for he's a great deal older 



288 THE INHERITANCE. 

you know, and was very soon old in the ways of the 
world; he's no such chicken, for, as young as he 
looks, he must now be a man between thirty and 
forty." Miss Pratt knew to an hour his age, and 
that he was just thirty. " Well, the Colonel was by 
way of introducing him into the fashionable circles, 
and a fine set or else not he initiated him into ; he 
even took him to the gaming-table, where he lost 
some money ; but what do ye think of his having to 
pay seven thousand pound and upwards for the 
ColoneU — seven thousand pound gambled away in 
one night, and not a shilling to pay it ! The conse- 
quence was, he must have sold out and been ruined 
for ever, if Edward Lyndsay had not advanced the 
money ; and, to this day, I'll be bound for it, he has 
never touched one halfpenny of principal or interest. 
Where was it to come from? He lives far beyond 
his income — anybody may see that, — with his curricle 
and his fine horses, and his groom and his valet ; while 
there's the person that he owes all that money to keeps 
no carriage, and rides all over the country without so 
much as a servant after him ; and my gentleman can't 
go to a neighbour's house without having a retinue 
like a prince after him. But the provoking thing is, 
there's Lord Rossville and many other people crying 
out upon Edward for his extravagance and folly in 
having muddled away his money, and not living as he 
should do, and making no figure in the world, when I 
know that he's just pinching and saving to make up 
the money and clear his estate from the debt he con- 



THE INHEKITANCE. 289 

tracted upon it for his pretty cousin there ! I once 
gave Lord Eossville a hint of how matters stood, but 
he's so infatuated with these Delmours, I thought he 
would have worried me. There's nothing they can do 
that's wrong ; not that he's very fond of the Colonel, 
or likes his company, but he's proud of him because 
he's the fashion, and has made a figure ; and so he 
goes on telling everybody what great characters the 
Delmours are. I assure you it's all I can do to keep 
my tongue within my teeth sometimes ; but Colonel 
Delmour's a man I wouldn't like to provoke. What 
do you think of his having the impertinence to tell 
me 1 — that, if he found me meddling in his affairs, he 
would pull Anthony Whyte's nose for him ! I should 
like to see him offer to lay a finger on Anthony 
Whyte ! But that's just a specimen of him. Oh, he's 
an insolent, extravagant, selfish puppy ! But are you 
well enough, my dearf 

Gertrude had made many ineffectual attempts to 
stop the torrent of Miss Pratt's invective; but that 
lady was no more to be stopped in her career than a 
ship in full speed, or a racer on the course. At length, 
uttering an exclamation, she abruptly extricated her- 
self from her grasp, and quitted the room. 

There was commonly a mixture of truth and false- 
hood in all Miss Pratt's narrations ; but it must be 
owned the present formed an exception, perhaps a 
solitary one, to her ordinary practice. She had for 
once told a round unvarnished tale, with merely a little 
exaggeration as to the sum; and for once she had 

voi. L u 



290 THE INHERITANCE. 

spoken from actual knowledge, not from mere conjec- 
ture. Miss Pratt had, by some means or other best 
known to herself, contrived to lay her hands upon a 
letter of Colonel Delmour's, which had led her into 
the secret of the money transaction — a transaction 
which, from honour and delicacy on the one side, 
pride and shame on the other, would otherwise have 
been for ever confined to the parties themselves. 

In vain did Gertrude strive to still the tumult of 
her mind in the silence of her own chamber ; in vain 
did she repeat a thousand times to herself — "Why 
should I for an instant give ear to the paltry gossip 
of a person I despise ? How is it that I can be guilty 
of injuring the man I love by yielding the shadow of 
belief to the calumnies of a Miss Pratt ? No, no, I do 
not — I will not believe them. Shame to me for even 
listening to them ! False — fickle — mercenary — a 
gamester. Impossible ! " 

Alas ! Gertrude believed it was impossible because 
she loved ; because all the affections of a warm, gener- 
ous, confiding heart were lavished on this idol of her 
imagination, which she had decked in all the attri- 
butes of perfection. And yet, such is the delusion of 
passion, that, could she even have beheld him bereft 
of all those virtues and graces with which her young 
romantic heart had so liberally invested him, even 
then she would not have ceased to love. Ah ! what 
will not the heart endure ere it will voluntarily sur- 
render the hoarded treasure of its love to the cold 
dictates of reason or the stern voice of duty ! 



CHAPTEE XXXIV. 

" Oh ! how hast thou with jealousy infected 
The sweetness of aJHfiance ! " 

Shakespeare. 

It was so long ere Gertrude could compose herself 
sufficiently to return to the drawing-room that when 
she did she found the gentlemen had already joined 
the party. In some confusion she took the first seat 
that offered, which happened to be part of a sofa on 
which one of the Miss Millbanks was lounging, and 
on the back of which Mr. Lyndsay was leaning. But 
it was not till she had seated herself that she was 
aware of his vicinity. To add to her embarrassment, 
Miss Pratt crossed from the opposite side of the room, 
and took her seat alongside of her. 

" I was just going to look for you, my dear," said 
she, in one of her loud, all -pervading whispers; "I 
was afraid you wasn't very well; but upon saying 
that to Mrs. St Clair she said she daresay'd you were 
just taking an evening ramble, for that you're a great 
moonlight stroller, like some other people," with a 
significant smile at Mr. Lyndsay, and again Gertrude 
felt the colour mount to her cheeks. She raised her 
eyes, but met his fixed on her with such an expression 



292 THE INHEEITANCE. 

of deep and thoughtful inquiry as redoubled her con- 
fusion ; and, scarcely knowing what she said, she 
uttered an exclamation at the heat of the room. 

" Are you too hot, my dear f cried her tormentor, 
taking a fan out of her pocket, and rising as she 
spoke ; " then here's work for you, Mr. Edward ; sit 
you down there and fan Miss St Clair ; not that I 
want to make a coolness between ye," added she, in a 
half whisper, loud enough to reach Colonel Delmour, 
who stood by the fire sipping his coffee; "but I 
really don't think the room's hot; it must just be 
coming in from the cold air that makes you feel the 
room warm. You would do well, Mr. Edward, to 
give this fair lady a lecture on her moonlight rambles. 
I " 

" It is insupportable ! " cried Gertrude, starting 
up, unable longer to endure Miss Pratt's mal b/propos 
observations. 

"It is very hot," said Lyndsay, scarcely less em- 
barrassed than herself. " Shall we seek a little fresh 
air at the window?" And offering his arm, he led 
her towards one, and threw it open. Gertrude's 
agitation rather increased than diminished. 

" Oh, what must you think of me ! " at length 
she exclaimed, in a low voice of repressed anguish. 

"Were I to tell you," replied Mr. Lyndsay in 
some emotion, "I fear you would think me very pre- 
sumptuous," 

" Impossible ! " said Gertrude, with increasing agita- 
tion as she advanced on this perilous subject — " I feel 



THE INHEEITANCE. 293 

that I must ever " She stopped; her mother's 

caution, her own promises recurred to her, and she 
felt that her impetuosity was hurrying her beyond the 
bounds prescribed. Both remained silent, but Lynd- 
say still held her hand, and looked upon her with an 
expression of no common interest. He was, however, 
recalled to other considerations by the approach of 
Mr. Delmour, when, relinquishing her hand, he made 
some remark on the heat of the room having been too 
much for Miss St. Clair. 

" It is only in the sphere of my fair cousin herself," 
said Mr. Delmour, with a bow and a smile ; " the fire 
of her eyes seldom fails to kindle a flame wherever 
their influence is felt." 

Gertrude scarcely heard this flat, hackneyed com- 
pliment ; but she felt the taunt implied, when Colonel 
Delmour, who was always hovering near her, said 
with asperity — 

"Such fires, however, are sometimes mere ignes 
fatui, which shine only to deceive." 

"A cruel aspersion upon glowworms and ladies' 
eyes," said Mr. Ljoidsay — " since both may, and cer- 
tainly do, shine without any such wicked intention." 

"Were it not that the thing must be," said Mr. 
Delmour, with a bow to Miss St. Clair — "I should 
imagine it would be difficult to overheat this room ; 
it is large, not less I take it than forty by thirty, 
lofty, prodigious walls, and a north-west exposure ; if 
it were well lighted, indeed, that might have some 
effect, but at present it is rather deficient; there 



294 THE INHERITANCE. 

ought to be at least a dozen lamps, instead of those 
pale ineffectual wax candles; but, in fact, it is not 
every one who knows how to light a room. In a 
well-lit room there ought not to be a vestige of shade ; 
while here, in many places, for instance where we 
are standing, it is absolute darkness visible." 

"Yes, it is a sort of a Pandemonium light," said 
Colonel Delmour scornfully. 

" The mind is its own place, you know, Delmour," 

said Mr. Lyndsay; "and in itself " he stopped 

and smiled. 

"Go on," cried Colonel Delmour in a voice of 
suppressed anger; "pray, don't be afraid to finish 
your quotation." 

Mr. Lyndsay repeated, — "can make a heaven of 
hell, a hell of heaven." 

Colonel Delmour seemed on the point of giving 
way to his passion ; but he checked himself, and 
affected to laugh, while he said — "A flattering com- 
pliment implied, no doubt ; but if I am the Lucifer 
you insinuate, I can boast of possessing his best attri- 
butes also, for I too bear a mind not to be changed 
by place or time, and in my creed, constancy still 
ranks as a virtue." He looked at Gertrude as he 
pronounced these words in an emphatic manner. 

"What are you all doing in this dark corner?" 
asked Lady Betty, as she advanced with Flora under 
her arm. 

"We came here to be cool," answered Mr. Lynd- 
say, "and we are all getting very warm." 



THE INHERITANCE. 295 

" That is most extraordinary," said her Ladyship ; 
"but did any of you lift the third vokime of 'The 
Midnight Wedding'?" 

"We'll thank you to pull down that window," 
cried Miss Pratt, "I wonder what you're all made 
of, for we are perfectly starving here — sit a little more 
this way, Sir Peter — your moonlight days and mine 
are both over. Indeed, as Anthony Whyte says, I 
never see anything but a swelled face and a flannel 
lappet in the moon." Then going to Mr. Lyndsay, 
she touched his elbow, and beckoned him a little 
apart. 

"So, I wish you joy, the cat's out of the bag ; but 
take care what you're about, for a certain person," 
pointing to Colonel Delmour, " will be ready to bite 
your nose off. 'Pon my word, you quiet people always 
play your cards best after all," And with a friendly 
pat on the back Miss Pratt whisked away, and the 
next minute was bustling about a whist party with 
Lord Rossville and Sir Peter. 

The arrangement of their table was always a work 
of delicacy and difficulty ; the Earl was fond of whist, 
and so was Miss Pratt, and for upwards of thirty 
years they had been in the occasional habit of play- 
ing together in the most discordant manner imagin- 
able. Miss Pratt played like lightning; the Earl 
pondered every card as though life depended on the 
cast. Every card, every spot of a card, out or in, 
was registered in Pratt's memory, ready at a call 
The Earl was a little confused, and sometimes com- 



296 THE INHERITANCE. 

mitted blunders, which were invariably pointed out 
and animadverted upon by Miss Pratt, whether as 
his antagonist or his partner. Then she had the 
impertinence to shake her head, and hem, sigh, and 
even groan at times ; and to sum up the whole, when 
they played together, she had the assurance to insist 
upon taking the tricks, which was an usurpation of 
power beyond all endurance. 

While the seniors of the company were arranging 
themselves at their several card parties, the younger 
part repaired to the music-room, where Gertrude was 
urged to sing by all present, except Colonel Delmour, 
who preserved a moody silence. Teased into com- 
pliance she at length seated herself at the harp, and 
began to prelude. 

"You accompany Miss St. Clair, Frederick?" said 
Mr. Delmour to his brother in a tone of inquiry. 

"Miss St. Clair has found out that I am a bad 
accompaniment," answered he in a manner which only 
Gertrude could imderstand. " To one who sings so 
true, so perfectly free from all falsetto, it must be a 
severe penance to find herself clogged with me, who 
am a perfect novice in that art, as in every other." 

"I prefer singing alone," said Gertrude, vainly 
tr3dng to conceal her agitation at this insulting 
speech. 

"It is extremely mortifying," said Mr. Lyndsay, 
instantly attracting the attention to himself, "that I 
am seldom or never asked to sing ; it is difficult to 
account for this insensibility on the part of my friends 



THE INHEEITANCE. 297 

in particular, of the world in general ; but I am re- 
solved to remain no longer silent under such con- 
tumely. Miss St. Clair will take me under her 
patronage ; my ■vvrongs shall be heard in full bravura 
this very night ; where shall I find words vast enough 
to express my feelings ? " And he turned over the 
music, while he hummed Guarini's "Bring me a 
hundred reeds of decent growth to form a pipe," etc. 
— then selecting the beautiful arietta : — 

" lo t'amer6, fin clie sapra di Flora, 
Coi baci i fiori accarezzar el monte 
E sul mattin la rugia rosa Aurora, 
Vedi molte stille, fecondar le piante, 
lo t'amer6, io t'amer6, io t'ainer6 ! " 

he placed it before Miss St. Clair, saying, " Will the 
mistress allow her protdg4 to choose for herself and 
himl" 

Gertrude, though in some degree restored to self- 
possession, could only bow her acquiescence ; but the 
state of her feelings was such as prevented her doing 
justice either to herself or her accompaniment. She 
was scarcely sensible of the beauty of his style of 
singing. Neither was it then she was struck with 
the singularity of having lived so long under the 
same roof without being aware that he possessed a 
skill and taste in music which, with most people, 
would have formed a prominent feature in their cha- 
racter, and which they would long ere then have 
found an opportunity of displaying. But Lyndsay 
did nothing for display, and now his talents were 



298 THE INHERITANCE. 

merely brought out when they could be of service to 
another, Gertrude, however, saw nothing of all 
this ; she saw nothing but that Colonel Delmour had 
disappeared upon Mr. Lyndsay taking his station by 
her. The song ended, she hastily relinquished her 
seat to another lady, and it was occupied in rotation 
till carriages were announced, and the party broke 
up. Gertrude availed herself of the bustle of de- 
partures to make her escape to her own chamber; 
but as she passed through the suite of apartments, 
she found Colonel Delmour in one of the most remote, 
pacing up and down with every mark of disquiet. 
She would have retreated, but quickly advancing, he 
seized her hand; then, in the same cold ironical 
manner he had hitherto practised, he requested that 
Miss St. Clair would honour him so far as to endure 
his presence for a few moments. 

"I know nothing Colonel Delmour can have to 
say to me," answered Gertrude, roused to something 
like indignation; "unless, indeed, to apologise for 
his behaviour." 

" Apologise ! " repeated he with vehemence. " No, 
that certainly is not my purpose, unless Miss St. 
Clair will first deign to account for hers; but the 
thing is impossible ; however I might distrust others, 
I cannot disbelieve the evidence of my own senses " 

" I am ignorant of your meaning ; I cannot listen 

to such frantic expressions " and she sought to 

Avithdraw her hand from him. 

" Frantic ! Yes, I am frantic to seek that ex- 



THE INHERITANCE. 299 

planation from you which I have a right to demand, 
and will demand from another quarter." 

" For mercy's sake ! tell me what is the meaning 
of this?" cried Gertrude, in great emotion. "Why 
am I subjected to hear such violent — such insulting 
language, and from you?" And the tears burst from 
her eyes. 

Colonel Delmour gazed upon her for a few minutes 
in silence, then in a somewhat calmer tone, and heav- 
ing a deep sigh, he proceeded — 

"But a few hours ago, and tears from your eyes 
would have been as blood from my own heart ; and 

even yet, deceived and injured as I am " he stopped 

in much agitation ; then again giving way to his 
passion — "But you ask me why your are subjected 
to such language 1 — your own heart might have spared 
you that question." 

"I have not deserved this, I will not endure it;" 
and Miss St. Clair again sought to leave the room. 

" Then why have I deserved — why must I endure 
to be mocked and deluded with hopes you never 
meant to realise ? Yes, that cold-blooded, systematic, 

puritan Lyndsay dares to love you, and you but 

he shall answer for this to me." 

For a moment Gertrude regarded him with a look 
of the most unfeigned astonishment, which only gave 
way to the deep blush that dyed her cheeks ; but it 
was not the blush of shame or confusion, but the glow 
of indignation, and, with an air of offended dignity, 
she said — 



300 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Since you believe me capable, after what passed 
to-day, of loving another, you might well treat me as 
you have done ; but what am I to think of one who 
could, for a single instant, suspect me of such base — 
such monstrous duplicity ?" 

"Gertrude," cried Colonel Delmour, in great 

agitation, " Gertrude, I am a wretch if you but 

why those blushes — that confusion at sight of him ? 
Why that air of intelligence that attends your 

intercourse, and Did I not hear you myself, when 

you withdrew with him to the window, ask, with all 
the solicitude of the most heartfelt interest, what he 

must think of you 1 he ! What would his thoughts 

signify to you if your affections were mine?" 

Gertrude felt almost despair as she thought of 
the impossibility of clearing herself from suspicions, 
which she was aware there was but too much reason 
to attach to her, and she remained silent, while 
Colonel Delmour's eyes were fixed upon her with an 
expression of the most intense anxiety. At length, 
with a deep sigh, she said — 

*' That there exists a mutual cause of embarrass- 
ment betwixt Mr. Lyndsay and me, I do not deny ; 
but it is one which involves the interest of a third 
person, and I dare not divulge it even to you ; that, 
and that only, is the cause of the confusion you 
witnessed, and of the words you overheard. More I 
cannot — dare not say ; I am pledged to silence." 

"By himf demanded Colonel Delmour im- 
petuously. 



THE INHERITANCE. 301 

"No — by another; but that other I may not 
name." 

Colonel Delmour still looked doubtingly. 

"And how long is this mysterious connection to 
continue 1" 

" Heaven only knows ! But do not — do not ask 
me further." 
* And as she bent her head dejectedly forward, the 
string of pearls which hung from her neck attracted 
her lover's eye, and again his wavering suspicions 
were roused as he remembered the conversation 
repeated by Miss Pratt. 

"And these precious baubles!" cried he, pointing 
contemptuously to them — "Do they form part of the 
mysterious chain which links your fate so indissolubly 
with that of Mr. Lyndsay?" 

" I see I am doubted — disbelieved ; it is degrading 
to be thus interrogated ! " and with an air of dis- 
pleasure, foreign to her natural character, she rose to 
quit the room. 

" Gertrude," cried Colonel Delmour, detaining her, 
"you know not — you cannot conceive, how my heart 
is racked and tortured. I will — I must have my 
doubts ended one way or other ere we part — perhaps 
for ever. Tell me then — are not these the gift of that 
of Edward Lyndsayl" 

"The gift of Edward Lyndsay!" repeated Ger- 
trude, in the utmost amazement. "What an idea !" 
and she almost smiled in scorn. " The pearls are a 
present I received not many hours since from Lord 



302 THE INHERITANCE. 

Kossville. I thought little of them then," added she, 
with a simple tenderness, which carried conviction 
even to Colonel Delmour, " for I had just parted from 
you." 

"Gertrude, dearest Gertrude, can you forgive meV 
and he poured forth the most vehement reproaches 
on himself, mingled with such expressions of love to- 
wards her as failed not to obtain pardon. He related 
to her what had passed with Miss Pratt relative to 
the pearls, and in so doing served a double purpose, 
by clearing himself from the charges that had been 
brought against him by that lady. This trait of her 
served to show Gertrude how little dependence ought 
to be placed on her report, and she felt as though she 
too had been guilty of injustice towards her lover in 
even listening to her malicious insinuations. 

Though somewhat pained, yet, on the whole, she 
was not displeased at what had passed. Like many 
others she cherished that fatal mistake that jealousy 
is the offspring of love rather than the infirmity of 
temper, and, as such, its excesses were easily forgiven. 
In short, this was a lovers' quarrel ; a first quarrel 
too; and, consequently, it served rather to heighten 
than diminish the mutual attachment. 

Delmour was to set off early the following morn- 
ing; and Gertrude, too much agitated to return to 
the company, took farewell of him, and hastened to 
her own apartment to hide her parting tears. 



CHAPTEH XXXV. 

"Quoique ces personnes n'aient point d'interet a ce qu'ils 
disent, il ne faut pas conclure de la absolument qu'ils ne men- 
tent point." — Pascal. 

Mr. Lyndsay was neither a weak nor a vain man, 
and he was too well acquainted with the nature of 
Miss Pratt to attach much credit to anything she said. 
He was aware that, without absolutely speaking false- 
hood, she very rarely spoke truth; that, like many 
other people, she failed in repeating precisely what 
she heard, not so much from design as from confusion 
of brain, redundancy of fancy, imperfect organic con- 
struction, or, in short, some one or all of the causes 
which seem to render simple repetition infinitely more 
difficult than the most compound multiplication or 
addition. Much might be said upon this subject, but 
few readers are fond of digressions, especially Avhen 
of a moral or didactic nature ; the cause of Miss Pratt's 
observations must therefore be left to the construc- 
tion of the world, which is seldom disposed to be over- 
charitable in its conclusions. 

Mr. Lyndsay, indeed, was little in the habit of 
attending to her words, being possessed of that envi- 



304 THE INHERITANCE. 

able power of mental transmigration, which placed 
him, when even within her grasp, quite beyond the 
influence of her power. He had, however, been struck 
with the mystical fragments of speech she had bestowed 
on him the preceding evening; he was aware how 
little dependence was to be placed upon them, but 
like the spider, her webs, even though wove out of 
her own intellectual resources, must still have some- 
thing to cling to, and he resolved to lose no time in 
demolishing those cobwebs of her imagination. He 
therefore accosted her the following morning as, 
according to custom, she stood airing herself at the 
hall-door, and, without allowing her time to spread 
her wings and fly oflF in any of her discursive flights, 
he gravely begged to know the meaning of the words 
she had addressed to him the evening before. 

"My words !" exclaimed she in some astonishment 
at being, for the first time in her life, asked for words. 
" My words ! what are you going to make of my words, 
my dear 1" 

"Not much ; but I confess I am rather curious to 
know in what way I am thought to have played my 
cards so well, as " 

" Oh, I know where you are now ; but if you want 
to take me in, Mr. Edward, that won't do ; they say 
'Daylight peeps through a small hole,' and 'Love, like 
smoke, will not hide ;' so you needn't trouble yourself 
to go about the bush with me ; but you needn't be 
afraid; mum's the word; mum and budget, ha, ha, ha! 
— do you remember that? It's mum with you, it 



THE INHERITANCE. 305 

seems, and budget with a certain gay Colonel, for he's 
off the field. Ay ! you've really been very sly ; but 
what will my Lord and his member say to it, think 
you?" 

" It would be affectation in me to pretend that I do 
not understand your allusions, groundless and absurd 
as they are," said Lyndsay ; " but I do assure you, 
upon my word of honour " 

" Bow wow, my dear, don't tell me of your words 
of honour in love affairs ; I'll rather trust to my own 
eyes and ears than to any of your words of honour. 
I declare you're as bad as Anthony Whyte. I thought 
he would have raised the country at the report of his 
marriage with Lady Sophia Bellendean. He certainly 
did pay her some attentions, but he never went the 
lengths that people said, though it wasn't for want 
of good encouragement." 

"Well, but as I have never presumed to pay 
attentions, and cannot boast of having received any 
encouragement, any report of that kind must have 
originated in some mistake, and would place both 
parties in an awkward predicament." 

" Fiddle faddle ! Really, my dear, when the lady 
doesn't deny it, I don't think it sets you very well to 
be so discomposed about it ; ay, you may look, but 
I assure you it's the case, that she as much as con- 
fessed it to me last night ; now ! " 

"Confessed what?" asked Mr. Lyndsay in amaze- 
ment. 

"Just that the Colonel had got his offset. Oh! 

VOL. I. X 



306 THE INHERITANCE. 

how I enjoy that ! — and that a certain person," with 
a bow, "was her humble servant." 

" Impossible ! your ears have deceived you." 
" My ears deceive me, indeed ! what would they 
do that for ? You surely don't think I'm deaf ? and 
if I am, I'm sure I'm not blind? You lovers seem 
always to think other people have lost their senses as 
well as yourselves, but it's only love that's blind, my 
dear." 

" Miss Pratt, I beg you will listen to me seriously, 
while I assure you, in the most solemn manner, that 
you are under a complete delusion. For myself, I 
can only be honoured by such a supposition ; but it is 
injurious, it is insulting to Miss St. Clair to have it 
imagined that she has already bestowed her regards 
upon me, who am, in fact, still almost a stranger to 
her." 

Mr. Lyndsay spoke with that air of truth and 
sincerity that would have carried conviction to any 
other mind. 

"As to that, it doesn't take a lifetime to fall in 
love, and your sudden love is always the strongest ; 
many a one has been over head and ears before you 
could say Jack Eobinson. I really don't see why you 
should take it so much to heart when the lady puts 
up with it so quietly ; but more than that, I happened 
to hear something last night, I may as well tell you 
what it was, if it was only to save you telling any 
more fibs to me about it. I happened to be taking a 
turn through the rooms last night, just to cool myself 



THE INHERITANCE. 307 

a little after losing seven points, all owing to your 
good uncle's obstinacy — ^when I came to the what- 
do-ye-call-it-room there, the door was open, and there 
I heard the Colonel say, in a voice like any Hon," rais- 
ing hers in imitation, *You love that — that' — (no 
matter what) — ' that Edward Lyndsay,' says he, ' and 
you've deceived and bamboozled me. I know that 
you've given your affections to him; but he shall 
answer for it ; ' and so he went on like any madman. 
I didn't hear so well what she said, for you know 
she doesn't speak very loud; but I heard her say 
that she couldn't and wouldn't endure such insolence, 
and that he had no right to speak to her in that way. 
But just then Lord Rossville was calling me to go and 
play the game over again with him ; and, at any rate, 
you know I wouldn't have stayed to listen." 

"All that is nothing to the purpose," cried Mr. 
Lyndsay, in some little emotion ; " at least the only 
purpose is to show how little dependence you ought 
to place on any of your senses, since they must all 
have beguiled you in this matter. You will therefore 
act a prudent part for yourself, and a more delicate 
one towards Miss St. Clair, if you refrain from making 
any such comments in future ; be assured you will only 
render yourself highly ridiculous " 

" Oh ! you needn't be afraid ; I'm not going to 
trouble my head about the matter," returned Miss 
Pratt, reddening with anger; "but you'll not easily 
persuade me that I've lost my senses because I happen 
to have a Httle more penetration than my neighbours." 



308 THE INHERITANCE. 

And away pattered the offended fair, rather confirmed 
than shaken in her preconceived notions on the subject. 

Disbelieving, as he certainly did, the greater part 
of Miss Pratt's communications, still it was not in 
nature that Mr. Lyndsay should have felt altogether 
indifferent to them. Although not a person to yield 
his affections Hghtly, he certainly had been charmed 
with Miss St. Clair's beauty and grace, with the 
mingled vivacity and softness of her manners, and 
with the open naif cast of her character. There was 
all to captivate a mind and taste such as his; but 
there was still something wanting to render the charm 
complete. Firm in his own religious principles, he 
vainly sought in Gertrude for any corresponding senti- 
ments. Gertrude was religious — what mind of any 
excellence is not ? but hers was the religion of poetry, 
of taste, of feeling, of impulse, of any and every- 
thing but Christianity. He saw much of fine natural 
feeling ; but in vain sought for any guiding principle 
of duty. Her mind seemed as a lovely, flowery, path- 
less waste, whose sweets exhaled in vain; all was 
graceful luxuriance, but all was transient and perish- 
able in its loveliness. No plant of inmiortal growth 
grew there ; no " flowers worthy of Paradise." 

Mr. Lyndsay had discernment to trace the leading 
features of his cousin's mind, even through the veil 
which was cast over it by Lord Eossville's tjrranny 
and Mrs. St. Clair's artifice. He saw her ardent, en- 
thusiastic, and susceptible, but rash, visionary, and 
unregulated ; he feared she was in bad hands, even in 



THE INHERITANCE. 309 

her mother's ; but he dreaded still more lest Colonel 
Delmour should succeed in gaining her affections. He 
suspected his design; and, from his previous knowledge 
of his habits and principles, was convinced that such 
an union would be the wreck of Gertrude's peace and 
happiness. 

Since that strange and mysterious adventure in the 
wood he had felt a still deeper interest in her, and he 
wished, if possible, to gain her friendship and confi- 
dence, that he might endeavour to save her from the 
snares with which she was beset. In short, Lyndsay's 
feelings towards her were compounded into one which 
could not have been easily defined; it was neither 
love nor friendship, yet partook of the nature of both 
— for it had somewhat of the excitement of the one, 
with the disinterestedness of the other. 

The mutual embarrassment of the cousins was not 
lessened when they next met, and they seemed, by a 
sort of tacit agreement, to avoid each other, which 
Miss Pratt set down as a proof positive that there 
was a perfect understanding between them ; but she 
was highly provoked that, with all her watching and 
spying, she never could detect stolen glances, or soft 
whispers, or tete-a-tUe walks, or private meetings, or 
any of those various symptoms which so often enable 
single ladies to anticipate and settle a marriage before 
it has been even thought of by the parties themselves. 

Not daring, however, to give utterance to her 
thoughts where she was, and unable any longer to 
keep her discovery pent up within her own bosom, she 



310 THE INHERITANCE. 

availed herself of the opportunity of a free cast, as 
she called it, to make out her visit to Lady Millbank ; 
and there she accordingly betook herself with her 
budget — containing, in strict confidence, all the par- 
ticulars of Colonel Delmour's refusal, his impertinent 
perseverance, his frightening Miss St. Clair into hys- 
terics by his violence, etc. etc. etc. Then came the 
history of Mr. Lyndsay's acceptance, her own bright 
discoveries, a full and minute description of the 
pearls, well garnished with conjectures as to how it 
would all end when Mr. Member came to poll, and 
found another elected and returned. Some of these 
dark sayings she had even dared to throw out to Lord 
Eossville; but his Lordship's thoughts were so en- 
grossed by the realities of electioneering that he had 
none to throw away upon it metaphorically. 

Miss Pratt's departure was as usual a relief to the 
whole party ; but to none so much as to Miss St. 
Clair and Mr. Lyndsay, who soon found themselves 
conversing together, if not with their former ease, 
with more than their former interest in each other. 
She could not be insensible to the quiet elegance of 
his manners, and the superiority of his conversation, 
but yet she failed to do him justice ; for, solely occu- 
pied with one engrossing object, she merely sought 
in any other wherewithal to lighten the tedium of 
his absence. Two different pictures had been pre- 
sented to her in the characters of the cousins — the 
one rich, varied, and brilhant in its colouring; the 
other correct and beautiful in its outline. The one 



THE INHEKITANCE. 311 

attracting instant admiration — the other appreciated 
only by the careful and discriminating. Had perfec- 
tion itself now been placed before her, it had failed 
to captivate the heart, over which a dazzled imagina- 
tion had cast its deceitful hues. The idol of that 
heart had gained an absolute ascendency over her 
affections, and on it she looked, not with the steady 
eye of sober truth, but with the fascinated gaze of 
spell-bound illusion. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

" Many, like myself, are sick of this disease : that when they 
know not how to write, yet cannot refrain from writing." 

Erasmus. 

The following letters were put into Gertrude's hand 
one morning. The first she opened was sealed with 
an evergreen leaf ; motto, Je ne change qu'en mourant. 
"I am inexpressibly pained to think what an 
opinion my dearest cousin must have formed of me, 
from having allowed so much time to elapse ere I 
commenced a correspondence from which, believe me, 
I expect to derive the most unfeigned and heartfelt 
delight. But you, my dear friend, whose fate it has 
been to roam, ' and other realms to view,' will, I am 
sure, make allowance for the apparent neglect and 
unkindness I have been guilty of, which, be assured, 
was very far from designed on my part. Indeed, 
scarce a day has elapsed since we parted that I have 
not planned taking up my pen to address you, and to 
attempt to convey to you some idea, however faint, 
of all I have seen and felt since bidding adieu to 
Caledonia. But, alas ! so many of the vulgar cares 
of life obtrude themselves even here, in 'wilds un- 



THE INHERITANCE. 313 

known to public view,' as have left me little leisure 
for the interchange of thought. 

" Were it not for these annoyances, and the want 
of a congenial soul to pour forth my feelings to, I 
could almost imagine myself in Paradise. Apropos, 
is a certain regiment still at B,, and have you got 
acquainted with any of the officers yet ? You will 
perhaps be tempted to smile at that question ; but I 
assure you there is nothing at all in it. The Major 
and Bell (or Mrs. Major Waddell, as she wishes to be 
called in future, as she thinks Bell too familiar an 
appellation for a married woman) are, I think, an 
uncommon happy attached pair — the only drawback 
to their happiness is the Major's having been particu- 
larly biHous of late, which he ascribes to the heat of 
the weather, but expects to derive the greatest benefit 
from the waters of Harrowgate. For my part, I am 
sure many a 'longing lingering look' I shall cast 
behind when we bid adieu to the sylvan shores of 
Winander. I have attempted some views of it, which 
may serve to carry to you some idea of its beauties. 
One on a watch-paper, I think my most successful efi'ort. 
The Major has rallied me a good deal as to who that 
is intended for ; but positively that is all a joke, I do 
assure you. But it is time that I should now attempt 
to give you some account [oi my travels, though, as I 
promise myself the delight of showing you my journal 
when me meet, I shall omit the detail of our journey, 
and at once waft you to what I call Lake Land. But 
where shall I find language to express my admiration ! 



314 THE INHERITANCE. 

" One thing I must not omit to mention, in order 
that you may be able to conceive some idea of the 
delight we experienced, and for which we were in- 
debted to the Major's politeness and gallantry. In 
order to surprise us, he proposed our taking a little 
quiet sail, as he termed it, on the lake. All was 
silence ; when, upon a signal made, figure to yourself 
the astonishment and delight of Mrs, Major and my- 
self, when a grand flourish of French horns burst 
upon our ears, waking the echoes all round; the 
delightful harmony was repeated from every recess 
which echo haunted on the borders of the lake. At 
first, indeed, the surprise was almost too much for 
Mrs. Major, and she became a little hysterical, but 
she was soon recovered by the Major's tenderness and 
assurances of safety. Indeed he is, without exception, 
the most exemplary and devoted husband I ever 
beheld ; still I confess (but that is entre nous), that to 
me, the little taste he displays for the tuneful nine 
would be a great drawback to my matrimonial feli- 
city. 

" After having enjoyed this delightful concert, we 
bade a long adieu to the sylvan shores of Ulls Water, 
and proceeded to Keswick, or, as it is properly deno- 
minated, Derwent Water, which is about three miles 
long ; its pure transparent bosom, studded with num- 
berless Avooded islands, and its sides beautifully varie- 
gated with elegant mansions, snow-white cottages, 
taper spires, pleasant fields, adorned by the hand of 
cultivation, and towering groves that seem as if 



THE INHERITANCE. 315 

impervious to the light of day. The celebrated Fall 
of Lodore I shall not attempt to depict; but figure, if 
you can, a stupendous cataract, rushing headlong over 
enormous rocks and crags, which vainly seem to oppose 
themselves to its progress. 

"With regret we tore ourselves from the culti- 
vated beauties of Derwent, and taking a look, en 
passant, of the more secluded Grassmere and Rydall, 
we at length found ourselves on the shores of the 
magnificent Winander. 

" Picture to yourself, if it be possible, stupendous 
mountains rearing their cloud-capped heads in all the 
sublimity of horror, while an immense sheet of azure 
reflected the crimson and yellow rays of the setting 
sun as they floated o'er its motionless green bosom, 
on which was impressed the bright image of the sur- 
rounding woods and meadows, speckled with snowy 
cottages and elegant villas ! I really felt as if inspired, 
so much was my enthusiasm kindled, and yet I fear 
my description will fail in convejdng to you any idea 
of this never-to-be-forgotten scene. But I must now 
bid you adieu, which I do with the greatest reluctance. 
How thought flows upon me when I take up my pen ! 
how inconceivable to me the distaste which some people 
express for letter-writing ! 

" Scribbling, as they contemptuously term it. How 
I pity such vulgar souls ! You, mj dear cousin, I am 
sure, are not one of them, I have scarcely left room for 
Mrs. Major to add a P.S. Adieu ! Your affectionate 

"Lilly." 



316 THE INHERITANCE. 

Mrs. Waddell's postscript was as follows : 

" Ma chere Cousine — Of course you cannot ex- 
pect that I, a married woman, can possibly have much 
leisure to devote to my female friends, with an ador- 
ing husband, who never stirs from my side, and to 
whom my every thought is due. But this much, in 
justice to myself, I think it proper to say, that I am 
the happiest of my sex, and that I find my Waddell 
everything generous, kind, and brave ! 

"Isabella Waddell." 

The perusal of this letter was a severe tax upon 
Gertrude's patience, as it has doubtless been upon all 
who have read it ; though tempted to laugh at it, she 
was, however, too generous to expose it to ridicule, 
and therefore hastened to commit the fair Lilly's 
lucubrations to the flames. 

Poor Miss Lilly, like many other misses, had long 
aimed at the character of an elegant letter-writer, and 
this epistle she looked upon as one of her happiest 
efforts ; she had studied it ; she had meditated upon 
it ; she had written a scrawl of it ; she had consulted 
her journal upon it — ^in short, she had composed it. 
One may compose a sermon, or an essay, or an any- 
thing, save a letter ; but when a letter is composed, 
all persons of taste must feel it is an odious composi- 
tion. To speak with the pen is the art of letter- 
writing, and even a confused, vulgar, natural letter, 
flowing direct from the brain, or, it may be, from the 
heart, of one of uncultivated intellect, is more pleasing 



THE INHEEITANCE. 317 

than the most studied and elaborate performance from 
the same scource. But in letter-writing, as in con- 
versation, many seem to study to make themselves 
tiresome, who, had they allowed their pens and their 
tongues to take their natural course, might have re- 
mained at least inoffensive. Yet many have lived to 
write good plain matter-of-fact letters, who have spent 
the early years of their life composing sentences, and 
rounding periods, and writing descriptions from the 
false ideas they entertain on this subject But enough 
of condemnation on this, after all, venial transgression. 
The other letter was in a different strain, as 
follows : — 

"My dear Cousin — I feel encouraged to the 
liberty I am going to take by the kindness you 
showed me when at Bellevue. Your good -will may 
now be the means of rendering me an essential 
service, and I would feel myself to blame 'if false 
diffidence should hinder me from unbosoming myself 
to you. I was several times on the point of explain- 
ing myself to you, but thought I could more easily do 
it in writing, and now that I take up my pen, I wish 
I had rather spoken to you when I had so many 
favourable opportunities. But why am I so wavering 
and foolish, when I ought with confidence to look to 
Him who has promised to direct the Christian's path, 
and who has promised that He will never leave nor 
forsake those who put their trust in Him, and acknow- 
ledge Him in all their ways ? I must now trust to 
your patience, while I tell my tale. A mutual attach- 



318 THE INHERITANCE. 

ment has subsisted between William Leslie and myself 
from our earliest years ; but he is poor, and on that 
account, and that only, it is not sanctioned by my 
parents — of course, you will believe that I never 
would enter into so sacred a connection without their 
consent. I love and reverence them too much, and, 
above all, I fear God, but fain would I hope that, had 
he a competency, their prejudices (for prejudices I 
must call them) would be overcome. William's choice 
was early pointed to the Church, and his clerical 
education has for some time been completely finished, 
but hitherto all his efforts to procure a living have 
proved ineffectual My father might assist him, but 
he is very lukewarm in the cause, as both my mother 
and he declare they cannot bear the idea of seeing 
me the wife of a poor minister. But I have learnt 
that poverty is a comparative thing, and that a com- 
petence to some is riches, while to others wealth seems 
little better than splendid want. It is true riches 
will be denied me, but the greater blessings of peace 
and mutual aflfection may, by the blessing of God, be 
my happy lot. Even when called upon to endure 
hardship and privations our souls will not be cast 
down, for with one heart and one faith we will cheer- 
fully bear the crosses of this life, looking forward to 
the inseparable and everlasting happiness of that 
which is to come. 

" ' Better is a dinner of herbs where love is,' than 
to sit in the joyless ease of indifference amidst heart- 
less grandeur, or to drink the bitter cup of variance. 



THE INHEKITANCE. 319 

Ah ! my dear cousin, God only can put gladness in 
the heart, and 'tis not by the world or the things of 
the world. If, as I believe, religion be indeed the 
soul of happiness, then may I reasonably hope for 
that peace which the world cannot give, with one 
whom I have known and loved from my earliest 
years, and whose faith and practice are those of a 
follower of Jesus Christ 

"This attachment is no phantom of a heated 
imagination. Our mutual love is now a principle — 
it cannot be extinguished, but it may be sacrificed to 
a still more sacred claim. I again repeat, I never 
will marry without the consent and blessing of my 
parents, but were my dear William provided for, 
I think their pride would yield to their stronger 
feehng of afi'ection for me. Yet I almost blush to 
trouble you with my selfish concerns, though I know 
you will befriend me if you can. The church of 
Clearbum is in Lord Eossville's gift ; the present in- 
cumbent is old and infirm, and an assistant and 
successor is to be immediately appointed. I do not 
ask you to recommend William Leslie, because you 
ought not to recommend one to fill so sacred an office 
who is utterly unknown to you; but if you would 
name him to Lord Eossville — if you would request of 
him to inquire into his character and qualifications of 
those who can judge of them, and then if you will 
support him with your influence, you will confer a 
heartfelt obligation on your faithful and aff'ectionate 
cousin, Anne Black." 



CHAPTER XXXVII 

"With a great understanding as a round orb that tumbles 
hither and thither, able to guess at the depth of the great sea." 
Hindoos' Description of their Ood. 

To feel and to act were with Gertrude commonly one 
and the same thing, reflection seldom was allowed 
to interpose its cooling influence, and scarcely had 
she finished reading the letter when she flew to Lord 
Eossville to ask (and she had no doubt to obtain) 
the boon solicited. She found the Earl alone in his 
study, surrounded with papers and parchments, and 
looking, if possible, even more than usually por- 
tentous. 

"I am come, my Lord, to ask — to beg a favour, " 

she began, almost breathless from haste and emotion. 

"Miss St Clair, this is rather an interruption; 
but be seated — be seated — and be composed. You, 
and indeed all who have any claims upon my time, 
influence, or assistance, will ever find my ear open to 
the voice of proper solicitation; therefore, I again 
repeat, be composed, and allow this flow of spirits 
to subside ere you commence," 

There is nothing less likely to promote its end 
than a recommendation to be cool and composed 



THE INHERITANCE. 321 

when one is all ardour and eagerness ; but this was 
one of Lord Rossville's methods of tormenting his 
victims. He was always composed himself, even 
when in anger — that is, he was always heavy, dull, 
and formal ; and no subject could warm him so as 
to make him neglect the slow, pompous formation of 
his sentences. His body was heavy; his nerves 
were tough ; his blood was thick ; he was a dull 
man; but, like many other men, he deceived himself, 
for he thought his dullness was self-command, and 
that he had the same merit in being composed as one 
whose perceptions are lively, whose blood flows 
rapidly, and whose ready imagination comprehends 
whole sentences such as his Lordship composed, ere 
they were half pronounced — one, in short, who 
thought and spoke with natural feeling and animation. 
Different, indeed, was Lord Rossville's composure 
from that of one who " hath learned to rule his own 
spirit," for he had a temper to rule but no spirit. 
He had a sluggish, obstinate, thick-headed, pragma- 
tical temper, incapable of hurrjdng him into the 
ebullitions of passion, 'tis true, but not the less 
troublesome and tormenting to those who opposed it. 
But this desideratum — for it was mere absence of 
animal heat that kept his Lordship cool — was more 
than compensated by what he deemed the masculine 
tone and nervous energy of his language, heightened 
as it was by gesticulation suited to the subject. 

" Be composed," repeated he again, after a pause, 
his own composure becoming more and more heavy. 

VOL. I. Y 



322 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Oh, it is nothing ; I only feel a little afraid lest 
you should think me too presuming when I ask — but 
I believe the petition itself will plead its own cause 
better than I can do ; and she put her cousin's letter 
into his Lordship's hands, with very sanguine antici- 
pations as to the result. 

Lord Rossville persued it in silence ; but his looks 
became darker at every line, and his head shook, or 
rather trembled, from beginning to end. 

"A most wild, dangerous, and improper letter," 
said he, when he finished it, vainly endeavouring to 
speak quicker. " I am pained to think that such a 
letter should have been addressed to you — that such 
a letter should have been presented by you to me." 
And his Lordship walked up and down the room in 
composed discomposure, while Gertrude remained 
aghast and motionless at seeing her church in the air 
thus vanish like the baseless fabric of a vision. " Is 
it possible, Miss St. Clair," — asked he, his hand slowly 
rising, "is it possible that you had perused this 
letter?" pointing with his obstinate-looking fingers to 
the paper in question — " And is it possible that, hav- 
ing read, you can also sanction and approve and assist 
a young female in setting up her own judgment in 
opposition to the known will and intention of her 
parents, and to the opinion and approval of the world 
in general 1" 

"Although my cousin is so unfortunate as to differ 
from her parents on that subject," said Gertrude 
timidly, " she declares that she will not disobey them." 



THE INHERITANCE. 323 

" Not disobey them 1 Good heavens ! Miss St. 
Clair, what do you term disobedience?" The dignity 
of this appeal was interrupted by a cough. " / have 
lived longer in the world, and have seen rather more 
of mankind than you have done, and I do not hesitate 
to say that the principles contained in this letter, if 
acted upon by the bulk of mankind (and it is only by 
generalising principles that we can fairly bring them 
to the test), must eventually prove highly destructive 
to the present order of things, inasmuch as they are 
totally subversive of all filial obedience and parental 
authority." 

Gertrude was much at a loss to answer this tirade, 
which confounded, without in the smallest degree con- 
vincing her. Again, however, she tried to urge some- 
thing in extenuation ; but it was, as Jeremy Taylor 
expresses it, treading on the corns of his Lordship's 
mind to attack any of his opinions or prejudices, and 
it was resented accordingly. 

"I own I am distressed, mortified, shocked. Miss 
St. Clair, that a letter containing such sentiments 
should be advocated by you ; sentiments fraught with 
so much mischief — principles destructive of the mutual 
relationship of parent and child; wild, fantastical, 
new-fangled notions, setting at defiance all proper 
doctrines of religion, and only calculated to disturb, 
and finally abolish, all orders of society ; and yet it is 
such — such — I say I should consider myself as acting 
a most highly culpable part were I to lend the smallest 
countenance or sanction to such measures." And he 



324 THE INHERITANCE. 

walked up arid down the room, his shoes creaking at 
every step. " Mr. Black is a sensible, well -principled 
man, and obviously views the matter in the same light 
as I do, and as, indeed, all persons of a right way of 
thinking should do. A young female to presume to 
judge for herself in opposition to the wishes of her 
parents, to the opinion of the world, to the general 
voice of mankind, and to seek to — to assume the 
mask of religion, in order to — to stifle the voice of 
duty — it is lamentable, it is deplorable, it is monstrous ! 
What was it but by such steps as these the established 
order of things in a neighbouring country were gradu- 
ally undermined, and at length finally overthrown? 
It was by such steps as these " (knocking the letter 
slowly with his knuckles) "that the altar and the 
throne, religion and — and — and loyalty, and — and 
sound morality, all that were formerly held sacred, 
fell sacrifices to these very levelling principles;" and 
he threw the letter from him with all the energy of 
virtuous indignation. 

Gertrude could scarcely refrain from smiling at 
the idea of Anne Black's marriage endangering Church 
and State ; and something of that sort she ventured 
to express. 

"I beg pardon, my Lord," said she; "but, even 
supposing my cousin's marriage were to take place, I 
cannot perceive any bad consequences that would 
result from it, unless to herself." 

"You do not perceive — you do not perceive the 
pernicious effects of such an example operating on 



THE INHEEITANCE. 325 

young females in the same sphere ? Operating, too, 
under my sanction and countenance — and — and — and 
— and / to become the patron of rebellious undutiful 
children ! — the conniver at low and improper and 
clandestine connections ! Were such a precedent 
once established where is it to end 1 You yourself, 
I shall suppose, for the sake of illustrating my argu- 
ment — ^you presuming upon my license in this instance, 
deem yourself authorised to select, choose, and — and 
— and declare, that you will select and choose, nay, 
that you have selected and chosen, a — a partner for 
yourself, not only without my concurrence, but in 
direct opposition and contradiction to my will and 
authority. I ask. Would not such behaviour on your 
part be — I do not scruple to say — monstrous ?" 

Gertrude was not prepared for this digression, but 
she saw by his Lordship's bend that an answer was 
expected, and in some trepidation she replied — 

" I hope it never will be my misfortune to differ 
from your Lordship on this subject. But if it should 
" she stopped in much agitation. 

"You hope it will never be your misfortune to 
differ from me," repeated his Lordship, with a very 
dissatisfied look; "that is a style of language, Miss St. 
Clair, I own, which does not satisfy me. On that 
subject I can allow no differences. No young lady, 
of a right way of thinking, ought or can have a differ- 
ent opinion on so important a point from those whom 
it is her duty to reverence and obey." 

His Lordship paused, and seemed to be revolving 



326 THE INHERITANCE. 

some mighty matter in his mind; and Gertrude, 
trembling to what this might lead, rose, and taking 
up her cousin's letter, was preparing to leave the room, 
when her uncle motioned with his hand for her to 
resume her seat ; then in a slow, solemn tone, spoke 
as. follows : — 

" It certainly formed no part of my original plan 
with regard to you, that, at this early stage of your 
existence, you should have been made acquainted 
with the plans I had formed and laid down for your 
final disposal ; but, from what has passed, I am in- 
clined to think that, in deviating from my former 
purpose, I shall do wisely and well." He then pro- 
ceeded in the same prolix manner to unfold to Ger- 
trude the future web of her life, as spun and wove by 
his Lordship's own hand — or rather head. 

Gertrude heard, without surprise, but not without 
emotion, that she was the destined wife of Mr. Del- 
mour, and in that light was considered by him, and 
by all the members of the family, and by all the free- 
holders in the county, and her heart glowed with 
resentment at the thoughts of any one having thus 
dared to appropriate her without her own consent. 
Scarcely could she listen with patience while Lord 
Rossville detailed, in the most minute yet guarded 
manner, his plans with regard to her future establish- 
ment, as if afraid of making her too happy, or raising 
her expectations too high. Thus, after having settled 
everything regarding her marriage, with more than a 
lawyer's punctilio, he hastened to undo his own work 



THE INHERITANCE. 327 

in the same breath, by adding that it was not his in- 
tention that the marriage should take place until she 
had attained the age of twenty-one, at soonest ; per- 
haps not even then, as he was no advocate for early 
alliances ; that is, too early. " There was a time for 
all things, and that time must be regulated by cir- 
cumstances ; but, in the meantime " 

" In the meantime, my Lord," cried Gertrude, with 
great emotion, " I must be allowed to disclaim any 
engagement with Mr. Delmour." 

The Earl regarded her for some moments with the 
greatest astonishment, and seemed as if wholly bereft 
of the power of expressing the indignation which 
swelled in his bosom, almost to suffocation, at this act 
of overt rebellion. At length he found words, though 
ideas were still wanting. 

" What am I to understand from this most extra- 
ordinary speech, Miss St. Clair 1" interrogated he, 
with some difficulty. 

Gertrude, in much emotion, but with the utmost 
gentleness of manner, repeated her words. 

"Allowed to disclaim any engagement with Mr, 
Delmour ! a most extraordinary proposal at such a 
time ! — at a time when so much is at stake ; a most 
improper, nay, a most indelicate proposal in the pre- 
sent posture of affairs." 

His Lordship cleared his voice, hemmed, coughed, 
and proceeded : " You cannot be ignorant, Miss St. 
Clair, of the very important contest at present carry- 
ing on in this county, a contest which is of vital im- 



328 THE INHERITANCE, 

portance to the power and consequence of this family, 
and, I may add, of some interest to the country at 
large; as, in these times of anarchy and rebellion, 
when the Throne and the Government are assailed 
on all sides by factious and turbulent demagogues, it 
is of the utmost importance that our representation 
in Parliament be sound, loyal, and patriotic, if we 
expect that our religion and laws may be preserved 
and handed down unimpaired to our posterity." 

Her assent seemed to be expected to this opening 
speech ; but Gertrude could make none. 

The Earl went on — 

" You are probably not aware of the motives which 
have actuated me in thus developing my schemes and 
intentions to you, and to the world in general, at this 
period; and in doing so, I certainly have deviated 
from my original plan ; but we must all occasionally 
be regulated by circumstances; and I think I have 
only to state to you that the success of this most 
important political contest depends very considerably 
upon the understanding that Mr. Delmour will eventu- 
ally, and in all probability, one day become, through 
your instrumentality, the lawful possessor of the 
family estates in this county, to grant your hearty 
concurrence in the proposed arrangement; in one 
word, I could not with propriety offer Mr. Delmour 
as the representative of this county (he having little 
more than a nominal interest in it at present), unless 
— as the — as the, in all likelihood — the intended hus- 
band of the presumptive (observe, I say presurnptive, 
not apparent) heiress of Eossvillo " 



THE INHEKITANCE. 329 

His Lordship was so much pleased with the elo- 
quence and brilliancy of his harangue, that as he went 
on he gradually spoke himself into good humour, and 
by the time it was ended he had almost forgot the 
origin of his elocution. Gertrude remained silent, 
struggUng with contending feelings. On the one 
hand was the fear of betraying her secret predilection 
for Colonel Delmour; on the other, her scorn and 
detestation of everything resembling duplicity and 
deceit. At length her natural love of truth and can- 
dour prevailed, and mustering courage she said, — 

"Much as it pains me to oppose you, my dear 
uncle, yet I should be still more unworthy your aflFec- 
tion were I to leave you in an error. Forgive me " 
— she paused, her heart throbbed, and her colour 
rose — " forgive me, I will not deceive you. I cannot 
sanction the engagement you have formed for me ; I 
never can be the wife of Mr. Delmour." 

This was something so far beyond what Lord 
Eossville could have anticipated that it was some 
time ere the fact could find admittance to his brain, 
choked up as it always was with his own notions. 
While the process of conviction was carrying on he 
therefore sat as if petrified. At length the light began 
to penetrate the dim opaque of his understanding; 
but his Lordship had, as usual, recourse to other 
people's words till he could muster his own forces. 

" Never can be the wife of Mr. Delmour !" repeated 
he in the tone of one who was not quite sure whether 
he were asleep or awake. " Not sanction the engage- 



330 THE INHERITANCE. 

ment I have formed for you ! What — what in the 
name of Heaven am I to understand from such lan- 
guage, Miss St. Clair ? " 

The understanding seemed so perfectly obvious 
that Gertrude felt much at a loss how to make it 
clearer. The question was again repeated. 

"Excuse me, my Lord, but Mr, Delmour is not 

the person I but, indeed, I do not know how to 

express myself in a manner less likely to offend. I 
would say that I wish to be left free ; that I might he 
allowed to choose in so important " 

" You wish to be left free ! You wish to be allowed 

to choose in so important ! hem ! Eeally, Miss St. 

Clair, I am too much astonished at the — the — the — 
the — the — the — what shall I call it 1 the unwarrant- 
able levity of such a proposal, to answer it as it ought. 
You wish to be left free to choose ! and that in a 
point of such vast, such vital importance ! aston- 
ishing ! Are you aware in what capacity it is that a 
suitable alliance is formed for you ? That it is not a.s 
simple Miss St. Clair, and daughter of the Honourable 
Thomas St. Clair, but as niece to the Earl of Eossville, 
and presumptive heiress to the title and estates thereof, 
with the exception of the Barony of Larchdale, which 
by deed of entail of Alexander, first Earl of Eossville, 
devolves upon the heirs-male of the family; and there- 
fore it is to consolidate these properties, that they may 
be again reunited in the persons of your mutual heir 
or heirs — an arrangement which has Mr. Delmour's 
entire approbation. I say that under these circum- 



THE INHERITANCE. 331 

stances, there is not, there cannot — there must not, 
be a choice in the matter; but, indeed, I am very- 
much at a loss to know what to understand by such an 
expression. / certainly have not been accustomed to 
hear of young ladies of family and fortune and dis- 
tinction choosing for themselves in their matrimonial 
course, / can only say, for my own part, I — I — had 
no choice." Gertrude could scarcely restrain a smile 
at hearing Lord Eossville quote himself as a pattern 
to be followed instead of a rock to be shunned ; but 
such is the blindness of human nature; we are all 
but too apt to hold ourselves up as guides when we 
ought to be satisfied to serve as beacons. 

"Allowed to choose! — I — I — and pray, Miss St. 
Clair, supposing for one moment it was so — where, I 
ask — where would you — where could you find such 
another gentleman as Mr. Delmour — a gentleman of 
birth and fashion, of fine address, of appearance, of 
accomplishments, possessing a first-rate understanding, 
of which he has already given undoubted proofs to the 
world by having been appointed one of the Financial 
Committee, which, for so young a man, I consider as 
a very distinguished mark of pre-eminence ? A man of 
fine person, of sound principles, of devoted loyalty, of 
high political consideration ; but who, notwithstanding 
all those advantages, yet submits himself in this case 
solely to my guidance and management ; I ask again, 
where could you find such another perfect gentleman %" 

" I acknowledge Mr. Delmour's good qualities, my 
Lord, so far as I can pretend to judge of them upon so 



332 THE INHERITANCE. 

slight an acquaintance," answered Gertrude hesitat- 
ingly ; "but pray forgive me if I still repeat that I must 
be allowed to consider myself as perfectly disengaged." 

"Miss St. Clair," cried the Earl, now absolutely 
gasping, "I can only say, that — that if you persist 
— if you presume to rej)ort yourself throughout the 

county as — as — as disengaged — I " the pulse of 

life seemed to stand still, and " nature made a pause, 
an awful pause, prophetic of its end." The clenched 
hand was slowly uplifted — then descended with a 
weight that shook the table. " I cannot answer for 
the consequences ! " This is a threat which always 
forms a happy climax to an argument, from its vague- 
ness, and consequently its sublimity. 

At that moment the party in question entered, 
his hands full of open letters, and with an air of 
bustle and business, not at all calculated to fascinate 
a romantic imagination such as Gertrude's. He was 
beginning some rather formal and complimentary 
apology for his interruption, when she rose, and in 
some confusion stammered out a few words in reply, 
then bowing to the Earl, was retiring, when Mr. Del- 
mour begged to know whether she had any friends in 
the western extremity of the county, as he was afraid he 
should be under the necessity of setting off for that 
quarter immediately, and should be much honoured 
by being the bearer of Miss St. Clair's commands. 

Gertrude disclaimed all interest in that part of 
the county, and scarcely able to express the common 
civilities of parting, hastily withdrew. 



CHAPTER XXXVIIL 

* ' My love's so true, 
That I can neither hide it where it is, 
Nor sho\7 it where it is not." 

Dryden's All for Love. 

In every generous mind there is a spring, which, if 
touched rightly, yields fine issues, but if struck by 
an unskilful hand, produces only discord. So it was 
with Gertrude ; affection would have led her, reason 
might have guided, but mere authority could never 
control her. To one of an independent spirit nothing, 
therefore, could be more irksome than the situation 
in which she was placed. She felt that, to be approved 
of, she must cease to act, cease to think, cease to feel, 
cease to love, but as directed by the will of her mother 
and uncle. A spirit such as hers could not at once 
be thus subdued; and no one who has anything 
noble in their nature can be subdued but by their 
own will, their understanding acknowledging the 
fitness of their submission. The Christian, indeed, 
has his spirit subdued to yield obedience, contrary to 
his own ideas, to those who are placed over him by 
nature. But Gertrude's principles were not derived 
from this high and unerring standard; and though 



334 THE INHERITANCE. 

she gave a general assent to the doctrine that children 
owed obedience to their parents, yet it was with so 
many limitations that the principle only wanted 
sufficient temptation to be set aside. 

With regard to her uncle, his right to control her 
seemed very doubtful ; and, indeed, the authority of 
imcles commonly comes in a very questionable shape, 
and is, perhaps, only to be considered as binding 
when the uncle has received authority from a living 
parent, or has early and long supplied the place of a 
departed one. As for aunts, they are in general 
accustomed to dictate, but are seldom so unreasonable 
as to expect to be obeyed. Yet love and tenderness, 
almost maternal, have sometimes given them a power 
over a young and affectionate heart, which all the 
violence of improper authority never could have 
obtained. These would have subdued a mind such 
as Gertrude's, but those gentle weapons were un- 
known and unused either by Lord Eossville or Mrs. 
St. Clair. Authority with the one, artifice with the 
other, were the means used to gain their different 
purposes with one whom opposite methods would 
have rendered submissive as a child and open as 
noonday. 

Gertrude's first impulse was to hasten to her 
mother, and relate to her all that passed betwixt 
Lord Eossville and her. She expected to encounter 
reproaches ; but Mrs. St. Clair seemed almost frantic 
at her daughter's disclosure, and absolutely shook 
with terror while she listened to Gertrude's account 



THE IXHERITANCE. 335 

of what had passed. But ere she had time to express 
her sentiments on the subject a message was brought 
from the Earl, requesting her presence for half an 
hour in his study. It was easy to guess at the subject 
in hand, and Mrs. St. Clair, though in great agitation, 
instantly obeyed the summons. Gertrude waited 
with impatience for nearly an hour and a half ere the 
conference was ended and her mother appeared. 
When she did, she read vexation and discomfiture in 
her countenance. She was, however, too prudent to 
express her feelings, but contented herself with say- 
ing that she had found Lord Rossville in great dis- 
pleasure against his niece, and had left him quite 
immovable as to the proposed alliance and declared 
engagement; and this was all Gertrude could draw 
from her mother. She therefore sat down to answer 
the unfortunate letter that had been the innocent 
cause of this premature Maircissement, which she did 
by lamenting her present inability to aid her cousin 
in any shape, but concluding with the warmest assur- 
ances of regard and promises of assistances should it 
ever be in her power to befriend her. She was then 
preparing to dress for dinner, when the following note 
was presented to her : — 

"The Earl of Rossville presents compliments to 
Miss St. Clair, and while matters remain in their 
present unpleasant position, and until some arrange- 
ment of an amicable nature has taken place, it is his 
wish and expectation that Miss St Clair should con- 



336 THE INHERITANCE. 

fine herself to her own apartment — it may he presumed 
from indisposition. 

''Rossville Castle, 2dth Aug. 18—." 

His Lordship, when he perused this masterpiece 
of a billet, had fondly imagined it would speak 
daggers to the soul of his niece, and he piqued him- 
self not a little at the finesse of punishing her in this 
exemplary manner, and at the same time keeping her 
transgression a secret from the rest of the family, 
whom he wished to remain in ignorance of this de- 
fiance of his power. Gertrude, of course, complied 
with this embargo, and left to her mother to give 
what name she pleased to her disorder. A week 
elapsed, and Gertrude still remained in durance, but 
she bore her imprisonment with great heroism, and 
its languid hours were enlivened by a packet received 
through some unknown channel from Colonel Del- 
mour. It affected to be merely a parcel of music; 
but it contained a letter full of all that love-letters 
are usually full of — hopes, fears, lamentations, vows, 
reproaches, raptures, despair. It may be supposed 
this did not tend to render Gertrude more compliant 
to her uncle's wishes, and his Lordship was beginning 
to feel much at a loss how to proceed, when all the 
combustible particles of his composition were roused 
into action, and he hastened to array himself in all 
his honours and take the field in full force. The 
report of his niece's engagement with Mr. Ljmdsay 
had, by the ingenuity of Miss Pratt, quickly circulated 



THE INHERITANCE. ^7 

througliout the county, and had resounded and rever- 
berated from all the corners of it, before the last echo 
reached the dull ear of Lord Rossville ; but when it 
did, it produced all the effect of a thunderbolt upon 
his senses. Not that he could all at once give credit 
to such a monstrous supposition, but it was quite bad 
enough that the thing should be said, or for one 
instant believed. As soon as he recovered so far as 
to be able to ruminate, he therefore resolved upon his 
plan of proceeding ; and, as the first step, summoned 
his niece to his presence. For some minutes he 
regarded her with a look which he vainly expected 
would cause her to sink to the ground ; for the Earl 
thought of expression, as Glendower did of spirits, 
that he had only to call them, and they would come. 
After waiting in vain for the effects he had antici- 
pated, his Lordship found he must have recourse to 
his voice ; not that he was averse to using that, but 
having witnessed the magic influence of a Siddons 
and a Kean, he had no doubt but that he too could 
look unutterable things; and he had intended first 
to kill with the lightning of his eye, and then to 
revive with the gracious sound of his voice. All this 
he had intended ; but how often are the best inten- 
tions frustrated ! 

Gertrude was quite ignorant of these intentions, 
and in her uncle's persevering stare saw nothing but 
a stare, which being always a disagreeable thing, she 
sought to avoid by casting down her eyes. Still 
having somewhere read that women can see even with 

VOL. I. Z 



338 THE INHERITANCE. 

their eyes shut, Lord Rossville flattered himself that 
his piercing gaze would penetrate through the eyelids 
of his niece, and he waited a little longer in hopes of 
seeing her at his feet 

At length she raised her eyes, but it was to exclaim 
at seeing a hawk dart past the window in pursuit of 
a dove. The Earl now spoke. 

"Miss St. Clair, look at me." 

Gertrude obeyed, and did look, but with an ex- 
pression which seemed to say, and what then 1 

" Look at me, Miss St. Clair, if, indeed, it is pos- 
sible for you to meet my eye, after what has recently 
come to my knowledge. Miss St. Clair, this is neither 
a subject nor a time for trifling, and I will have neither 
equivocation nor prevarication. I ask you again — and 
I warn you to be cautious how and in what manner 
you frame your reply — I ask you again, are you will- 
ing to be restored to my favour and protection upon 
the terms I proposed, namely, that you consider your- 
self as engaged, and as having been for some time 
past engaged, to Robert Burlington Delmour, Esquire, 
Member of Parliament, the heir-male of this family ; 
and do you consent that the nuptials be solemnised 
at such time as I shall deem proper ?" 

" My Lord, I grieve that I cannot obey you ; but 
I will not deceive you. Mr. Delmour has my good 

wishes ; my aff'ections " she stopped and coloured 

deeply ; then added, in a low voice, " are not mine to 
bestow ! " 

Lord Rossville was struck dumb at this daring 



THE INHEEITANCE. 339 

avowal, which seemed to mock the thunderbolt he 
held in his hand, ready to hurl when the proper 
moment came. 

"Miss St. Clair," gasped he at length, "are you 
aware of the construction that may be put upon such 
language ? — that it amounts, in the ordinary language 
of the world, to an avowal or confession of a very par- 
ticular, I may add, improper nature ? Miss St, Clair, 
what am I to understand from such a declaration? 
— a declaration which, in the eyes of the world, 
would be considered as tantamount to an express, and 
direct, and explicit declaration of a prior and illegal 
attachment, unsanctioned by me ? " 

Gertrude bowed her head, either to hide her blushes 
or to testify her assent. The Earl resumed — 

"Miss St. Clair, my delicacy would have spared you 
this — to you humiliating, to me distressing avowal; 
but you have thrown aside the disguise which — which 
— which — but I must now inform you that I am no 
stranger to this most improper, unaccountable, and 
unjustifiable transaction ; and that, as the preliminary 
step towards gaining my forgiveness for this, I must 
say, unpardonable offence, I must insist upon a com- 
plete and total renunciation of all farther intercourse 
with the party implicated." 

" My Lord," said Gertrude, trying to repress her 
tears, " I can only repeat what I have already said — 
I am sensible of your goodness, I grieve that I should 
have offended you; but I never will renounce the 
right of choosing for myself; that choice is made 



340 THE INHERITANCE. 

— would it were one more pleasing to your Lord- 
ship." 

"Miss St. Clair, I will not hear another syllable," 
cried the Earl, with an energy unparalleled in the 
annals of his life and conversation, "I here lay my 
positive injunctions upon you to refrain from speak- 
ing, thinking, or acting any farther in this most faulty 
and improper transaction, and I shall, at the same time, 
signify to the other party concerned, that, from this 
time, he likewise must cease to presume to consider 
you in any other light than that which the present 
relationship by blood warrants. I here positively 
annul and pronounce void whatsoever engagement, 
contract, deed, or instrument whatever, by which this 
clandestine, and, consequently, unlawful and improper 
correspondence has been " 

" No, my Lord," cried Gertrude, in her turn roused 
by such opprobrious epithets, " you cannot annul the 
affections of the heart. I am not a slave to be thus 
bought and sold," exclaimed she, giving way to her 
long-suppressed tears. 

"Miss St. Clair, such language — such sentiments 
— are no less unbecoming for you to utter than they 
are improper for me to hear. I will listen to nothing 
more of the kind, but it is proper you should be made 
acquainted with what you have to expect from me 
should you persist in this obstinate, and infatuated, 
and destructive course in which you have begun. 
You are then to learn, that, in the event of your per- 
sisting in your headstrong and unaccountable refusal 



THE INHEKITANCE. 341 

to fulfil the engagement I have contracted for you 
with the heir-male of this family, it is my firm resolu- 
tion, and final determination, instantly to withdraw 
from you my countenance ; alienate from you and 
your heirs every sixpence of property, heritable and 
personal, which it is in my j)ower to dispose of ; and 
farther, there is good reason to believe that it will 
bear a question whether I am not at liberty, under 
the deed of Simon, second Earl of Eossville, to dis- 
pone and bequeath the ivliole of the lands and estates 
according to my will and pleasure. At all events, 
the right of tying them up for an indefinite term of 
years is undoubted, and shall most unquestionably be 
put in force. You have therefore to choose betwixt 
an annual income of £20,000, to which you are at 
present presumptive heiress (that is, eventually), or to 
sink at once into comparative poverty, and insignifi- 
cance, and obscurity." 

"My choice is made, my Lord," said Gertrude, 
instantly calmed into the most perfect composure. 

"Then, Miss St. Clair, you know, and are fully 
aware of the consequences." 

Gertrude only bent her head in silent acquiescence, 
and, rising to leave the room, the Earl rang the bell 
with rather more of energy than was his custom, and 
as she retired, she heard him desire that Mr. Lyndsay 
might attend him immediately. 



CHAPTEK XXXIX. 

"The man scarce lives who is not more credulous than he 
ought to be, and who does not upon many occasions give credit 
to tales which not only turn out to be perfectly false, but 
which a very moderate degree of reflection and attention might 
have taught him could not well be true." — Adam Smith. 

There is nothing tends so much to brace the nerves 
and keep up the tone of the spirit as the sense of having 
been treated with injustice. For some time, therefore, 
Gertrude felt as though she had gained a triumph by 
the sacrifice she had made to her lover ; she exulted 
in the thought of thus proving to him the sincerity 
and the devotedness of her affection, and delighted 
her fond and simple fancy by imagining how much 
dearer she would be to him as the (for his sake) poor 
Gertrude St. Clair than she ever could have been as 
the heiress of Rossville. But the first glow of en- 
thusiasm over, she sighed as she thought, " Yet how 
sweet would have been the pleasure of bestowing upon 
him all that I now see ; these noble woods — this far- 
spreading domain, I had hoped to have made him 
master of ! They tell me he is expensive, that is, he 
has a magnificent taste, and loves show and splendour, 
and pictures, and fine horses, and everything that is 



THE INHERITANCE. 343 

beautiful Ah! how happy I should have been in 
the means of gratifying him, and of making him so 
happy — oh ! so happy, that he should have had nothing 
to wish for ; yet all these he will sacrifice for me, for 
he has often declared my affection was all the world 
to him. What signifies, then, the loss of wealth to 
those who can be rich in mutual love?" Thus com- 
muned Gertrude with herself, and at eighteen who 
would not have done the same 1 

Meanwhile the Earl was somewhat at a loss what 
course to pursue with the other supposed offender, 
Mr. Lyndsay. His Lordship, unknown to himself, 
had that sort of intuitive respect for his nephew 
which weak minds, however against their grain, must 
always feel towards strong ones, but he still trusted 
to his powers of expression, and therefore arranged 
his aspect, as nearly as he could, into that cast with 
which he imagined Brutus had passed sentence on his 
sons. But looks were as much thrown away upon 
Mr. Lyndsay as they had been upon Gertrude ; that 
gentleman testified no sort of emotion whatever at 
beholding his Lordship's brows bent full upon him, 
and the Earl again found himself reduced to the 
vulgar method of explaining himseK in words. He 
then entered upon a speech, which, for intricacy of 
design and uselessness of purpose, might have vied 
with the far-famed labyrinth of Crete. Poor Mr. 
Lyndsay toiled after him in vain, quite unable even 
to conjecture where his Lordship was driving, and 
what was to be the issue of his tortuous harangue. 



344 THE INHERITANCE. 

At length the Earl emerged from the dim eclipse, iii 
which, shorn of his beams, he had so long shed dis- 
astrous twilight, if not upon nations, at least upon in- 
dividuals, and the truth burst upon Lyndsay's almost 
benighted senses. For a moment a strange glow of 
delight came over his heart at hearing himself called 
upon to renounce all claim to the hand and affections 
of Miss St Clair, but it as quickly faded as he thought 
of the diflference of their views and sentiments, and he 
smiled in scorn at his own credulity for having for 
an instant given ear to such a delusion. " It is im- 
possible for me to relinquish what I never possessed," 
said he in answer to the Earl's appeal ; " nor can I 
even flatter myself it is in my power to obtain. This 
is some of Miss Pratt's idle rumours, which have found 
their way to your Lordship's ear ; believe me, they are 
quite unworthy of a moment's consideration." 

But it was in vain to hold this language to Lord 
Eossville ; it was seldom an idea found entrance into 
his head, and when once there it was no easy matter 
to dislodge it; it became not the mere furniture of 
the head, to be turned or changed at will, but seemed 
actually to become a part of the head itself, which it 
required a sort of mental scalping or trepanning to 
remove. In vain, therefore, was Mr. Lyndsay's denial; 
the Earl remained steadfast in his belief, and rejected 
the idea of Miss Pratt with the greatest contempt 
He " was perfectly informed of the whole from author- 
ity it was impossible to question." He then went over 
the same ground he had taken with Gertrude — the 



THE INHERITANCE. 345 

loss of his countenance — the breaking of the entail — 
the tying up of the property, etc. etc. " Were I, as 
you imagine, honoured with Miss St. Clair's partiality," 
said Lyndsay, " I must frankly tell you that all you 
have now said would not have the slightest influence 
upon me. I hope it never will have upon the man 
who is so fortunate as to gain her affections. Much 
as he may value your Lordship's favour, and the Eoss- 
ville estates, I trust he will never put either of them 
in competition "vvith Miss St. Clair." 

This was past answering. Lord Rossville took 
two or three turns through the room before he could 
trust himself to reply, then spoke — 

•* Mr. Lyndsay, I can only impute this tergiversa- 
tion of yours (to call it by no harsher name) to a very 
mistaken and destructive sense of honour ; but what 
will you say, sir, when I inform you, that not many 
minutes have elasped since, in this very ajiartment, 
and on this very spot, I received, from the lips of the 
young lady herself, the open and avowed acknowledg- 
ment of her — her — her — what shall I call it? her 
highly improper attachment to, and engagement with 
yourself?" 

'* Impossible ! " exclaimed Mr. Lyndsay, his face 
flushing with a variety of contending emotions ; "she 
did not — she could not say so." 

Mr. Lyndsay knew his uncle to be a weak, tire- 
some, conceited man ; but he also knew him to be a 
man of perfect veracity — one who, at least, always 
intended to speak the truth. Such an unqualified 



346 THE INHERITANCE. 

assertion, therefore, as that he had just made could 
not fail to be heard by him with some emotion, how- 
ever mingled with incredulity. 

Lord Eossville, in great displeasure that his word 
should be doubted, repeated his nephew's last words 
with more than usual pompous indignation, then 
added — "I should deem it derogatory to myself to 
insist further upon this subject. I can only repeat, 
and that upon the honour of a peer, that I have 
received from Miss St. Clair the avowal of her clan- 
destine attachment to you, and farther heard her 
assert and maintain her right to make such a choice." 

" Enough, my Lord," cried Mr. Lyndsay ; " 'tis in 
vain to attempt to answer such assertions at present 
— but I shall endeavour to furnish you with some ex- 
planation of this mystery ere long." And he hastily 
withdrew, despairing of any elucidation from Lord 
Rossville. Yet how or where to find it he knew not, 
still less could he form any plausible conjecture as to 
the truth ; there was none to whom he could apply, 
for there was no one on whose judgment or principles 
he could place any reliance. At one time he thought, 
was it possible Gertrude could be playing false, and 
using his name as a cover to some clandestine engage- 
ment — the stranger? — Colonel Delmourl — but the 
next minute he checked the idea as unworthy of her, 
of himself. Whatever her faults might be, duplicity 
certainly was not of the number; there was an air 
and expression of candour and openness in her coun- 
tenance, manners, words, which placed her above the 



THE INHERITANCE. 347 

meanness of suspicion. At length he resolved to seek 
her himself, and try whether he could not penetrate 
this mystery. 

Gertrude had remained standing at the window of 
one of the public rooms she had to pass through in 
leaving Lord Eossville's apartment; she had been 
gazing with a vague mingled feeling of pride and 
regret at the lovely scene that lay before her in all 
the glowing tints of autumn, when she was roused 
from her reverie by the entrance of Mr. Lyndsay. 
He accosted her with an inquiry after her health, and 
then one of those awkward silences which everybody 
has felt, ensued. At length, as she turned to quit 
the room, he spoke. 

" Once, my dear cousin," said he, " you conferred 
upon me the privilege of a friend — that of speaking 
the truth to you." 

"It is one you have hitherto made little use of," 
replied she ; then deeply colouring as the thoughts of 
the midnight rencontre rushed to mind, she added, 
" I have, perhaps, no right to expect that Mr. Lyndsay 
should do what circumstances must have rendered so 
disagreeable a task for him." 

" You wrong yourself and me by such a supposi- 
tion," said he. " However inexplicable some things 
may appear, a few words of truth, I am very sure, 
will set all to rights." 

" No !" exclaimed Gertrude, in much agitation; " in- 
explicable I must still remain to you ; ask me nothing ; 
I cannot, indeed, I cannot answer any questions." 



348 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Gertrude," said Mr. Lyndsay, with great emotion, 
*'it is essential to my happiness, perhaps to yours, 
that we should understand each other." He paused; 
then, by a strong effort, proceeded, " You will call it 
folly, presumption, madness, when I tell you that 
Lord Rossville, under the influence of some unaccount- 
able delusion, has called upon me to resign all pre- 
tensions to your favour — to your hand " He 

stopped, and Gertrude, overwhelmed with surprise 
and confusion, remained silent. 

"Had I dared to aspire to it," continued he in 
increasing agitation, " I know no earthly motive that 
would have induced me to relinquish my claims ; but, 
Gertrude," and he would have taken her hand, but, 
roused to self-possession, she saw there was only one 
course she could now pursue ; she must throw herself 
upon the generosity of her cousin — she must confide 
to him the secret of her attachment to Colonel 
Delmour; noble and disinterested as he was, she 
knew him to be incapable of abusing her confidence, 
and with a mixture of embarrassment and simplicity, 
she disclosed to him the situation in which she 
stood. 

Mr, Lyndsay heard her with the deepest interest, 
while she lamented the misunderstanding that had 
occurred with her uncle, and avowed that her affec- 
tions were no longer her own to bestow ; but when, 
with faltering tongue and downcast eyes, she named 
Colonel Delmour as the object of her choice, a shade 
of anguish overcast his face. 



THK INHERITANCE. 349 

"'Tis then as I feared!" exclaimed he. "Ah! 
Gertrude, would I could have saved you from 
this!" 

" Saved me ! " repeated Gertrude, colouring deeply 
with shame and displeasure as she turned away. 

"Forgive me, my dear cousin," cried he, "I did 
not mean to offend you — I spoke too abruptly ; but I 
cannot retract what I have uttered. Did not you 
promise to hear, and to bear the truth from mef 

"I was ignorant then that, under the name of 
truth, I was to be called upon to give ear to detrac- 
tion, and detraction against the absent." 

Lyndsay looked upon her more in sorrow than in 
anger, while he answered, "Yet, if you saw one in 
whom you were interested on the brink of a precipice, 
would any consideration withhold you from giving 
them warning of their danger ? from saving them, if 
you possibly could? But do not injure me so far; 
do not suppose me so base as to have said to you what 
I have not said — what I will not again repeat to 
Colonel Delmour himself. I have warned him that I 
would do all in my power to save you from ever 
becoming his, if that is detraction " 

" Be it what it may," cried Gertrude, " I will hear 
no more; already I have heard too much;" and her 
voice quivered with emotion. "I will go to Lord 
Rossville ; I will clear up this error, be the conse- 
quences to myself what they may;" and rejecting 
Lyndsay's effort to detain her, she flew to Lord Ross- 
ville, and, in all the excitement of wounded feeling, 



350 THE INHERITANCE. 

acknowledged Colonel Delmour as the object of her 
preference. 

It was some time ere the Earl could open his eyes 
to this flood of new light ; but when he did, long and 
tiresome was the scene that ensued. This was worse 
and worse — to have chosen the wrong brother ; 'twas 
strange, 'twas passing strange; and a parallel was 
drawn betwixt the two brothers, that, in his Lord- 
ship's estimation at least, might have rivalled that of 
Hamlet. In vain was he denounced ; even had she 
credited the aspersions cast upon him, they would 
have now come too late ; they might grieve, but they 
could not change her heart At length, the whole 
concluded with her being discarded from her uncle's 
presence and protection. Mrs. St Clair was next 
summoned, and a long consultation ensued. Her 
anger and dismay were at least equal to the Earl's, 
though caused by different views of the same subject 
How to dispose of the offender was the next question. 
To permit her to bask in the light of his Lordship's 
countenance, even while under excommunication, would 
never do ; yet to confine her to her apartment, or dis- 
card her utterly, would be making the matter public. 
And as he had no doubt he would ultimately prevail, 
he was anxious, he said, that the flame of rebellion 
should not be seen until he had fairly extinguished it 
In this emergency the only course Mrs. St Clair 
could suggest was, that her daughter and she should 
pay a visit to her sisters. To this his Lordship at 
first objected; but, upon hearing that they lived in 



THE INHERITANCK 351 

the most retired melancholy manner, and that it 
would be a perfect act of penance for Gertrude to 
reside there, he consented. Under pretence of change 
of air therefore, for Miss St. Clair's cold, it was settled 
that they should immediately depart ; and the neces- 
sary arrangements having been made, for the sake of 
appearances, and, as he expressed it, to stifle any 
unpleasant surmises to which this hasty removal 
might have given birth, they were escorted to the 
carriage by the Earl himself ; he actually handed in 
Mrs. St. Clair, but only appeared to assist Gertrude, 
thus preserving the beautiful unity of his design to 
the last. 



CHAPTER XL 

" II ne faut pas croire que la vie des Chretiens soit une \'ie 
de tristesse, on ne qiiitte les plaisirs que pour d'autres plus 
grands. " — Pascal, 

To the worldly mind there is always something de- 
pressing in the transition from grandeur to mediocrity. 
This Mrs. St. Clair and her daughter experienced 
upon entering the simple dwelhng of the Miss Blacks. 
The one loved the pomps and the luxuries of high 
life, the other its elegancies and refinements; and 
both had lost their reUsh for the humbler sphere 
which they were now entering. They were received 
by the sisters with an affection and tenderness which 
seemed to flow from a better source than mere worldly 
politeness ; there was an openness of character, a calm, 
sweet gentleness of manner, which could not fail to 
please ; but there was, at the same time, a difference 
of tastes, principles, and pursuits betwixt them and 
their visitors which no courtesy of manner or cor- 
diality of reception could entirely do away. The 
Miss Blacks were no vain professors of that religion 
which all pretend to honour with their lips, while 
with many their heart is far from it; their time, 
their talents, their fortune, their hearts, were devoted 



THE INHERITANCE. 353 

to its service ; and in devoting the heart to God how 
various and comprehensive are the duties which it em- 
braces ! Different portions, indeed, had been assigned 
them, but both were labourers in the same vineyard. 

" Thousands at His bidding speed 
And post o'er land and ocean without rest : 
They also serve who only stand and wait. " 

MlIiTON. 

The Word of God was the rule of their faith and 
practice; they believed, and they obeyed. Yet, im- 
pressed as they were themselves with the importance 
of those divine truths, they were aware that it is not 
by the mind but with the heart that man believeth 
unto salvation; and they sought rather to make 
Christianity loved and desired than to prove it by 
reasoning and disputation. As the glories of the 
firmament are reflected in the placid bosom of some 
deep unruffled stream of the valley, so did Divine 
truth shine in them with a clear yet subdued light ; 
while that charity which " vaunteth not itself, is not 
easily provoked, thinketh no evil," was visible in the 
deportment of its votaries, and shed an indescribable 
charm over the tone of their conversation. Without 
neglecting their own avocations, or sacrificing their 
own pursuits, they nevertheless endeavoured, by 
every means in their power, to render their house 
agreeable to their visitors, and to promote, if not 
mirth and revelry, at least cheerfulness and amuse- 
ment. Still there was something in her sisters with 
which Mrs. St. Clair could not assimilate ; she felt 

VOL. I. 2 A 



354 THE INHERITANCE. 

their faith and their practice a reproach to herself, 
and she turned with aversion from their excellence, 
as Lucifer did from the sunbeams, only because of 
their brightness. Thus it is with true Christian 
piety, which seldom fails to be an offence to some 
part of the world, which denounces as zealots and 
fanatics all who rise above their own low standard. 
It was otherwise with Gertrude; though not suffi- 
ciently enlightened to be above imbibing prejudices, 
she was yet too liberal-minded and candid to retain 
them; and she had not lived many days with her 
aunts ere she arrived at the conviction that all re- 
hgious people are not necessarily fools, hypocrites, 
or bigots. The unvarying mildness and gentleness of 
her aunts, their charity to all, their indulgence to- 
wards young people, could not fail to gain her aflfec- 
tions; and though their sentiments were totally 
different from hers, and what she deemed very out-of- 
the-way, still the fruits were so fair that she could 
not but apply to them Pope's often misapplied maxim, 

" They can't be wrong whose life is in the right." 

But it was a species of virtue Gertrude felt no in- 
clination to imitate ; all her ideas of virtue were those 
of imagination ; she loved to expatiate in thought on 
deeds of romantic, sentimental excellence ; her money 
and her tears and her emotion were always ready to 
bestow ; but when she herself was brought into con- 
tact with real genuine human wretchedness, she shrank 
with horror and disgust from the encounter. The 



THE INHEKITANCE. 355 

dirtiness of the houses, the coarseness of the people, 
the ugliness of the children, were all revolting to her 
fine-spun notions of the beauty of benevolence, and 
she longed to discover some fair specimens of elegant 
woe, some interesting vestiges of human calamity, on 
whom to lavish the ardent sensibility of her warm 
and generous but unrenewed heart ; in short, her re- 
ligion was the religion of impulse and feeling, and, as 
has been finely said, " Virtue requires habit and re- 
solution of mind as well as delicacy of sentiment, 
and, unfortunately, the former qualities are sometimes 
wanting where the latter is in the greatest perfection." 
Alas ! it is not in this world that charity assumes the 
fair and graceful form with which painting and sculp- 
ture in all the richness of their imagination have 
so often decked it ! 

Although the Miss Blacks lived, according to the 
wordily phrase, out of the world, they nevertheless 
had a society which even Mrs. St. Clair and her 
daughter felt it no degradation to mix in. Their 
doors were open to all, for they practised hospitality 
towards all, though their chosen friends were those 
whose faith and practice most closely resembled their 
own. 

William Leslie, the innocent cause of Gertrude's 
present disgrace, was a frequent visitor, and could 
not fail to make a favourable impression on her from 
his interesting appearance, and the modesty and pro- 
priety of his manners. From the delicacy of his 
features he looked even younger than he was, and 



356 THE INHEEITANCE. 

may be represented in the words of an ancient and 
somewhat quaint description, as " seeming much about 
twenty years of age, brown-haired, tall, of a sweet 
face, and of a most neat composure." She felt as 
much interest in the success of that attachment as 
the engrossing influence of her own would admit of 
her taking in any subject foreign to it. But to the 
disquiet of absence was now added a sort of restless 
anxiety to receive renewed assurances of aff"ection 
from her lover ; not that she doubted his fidelity, or 
for a moment believed it could be shaken by any 
vicissitude of fortune that might befall her, but still, 
as she knew Lord Rossville had communicated to 
him what had passed, it would have been gratifying 
to have been assured that his faith was unshaken. 
She saw by the papers that his regiment was still in 
England; perhaps, then, he meant to come himself 
and bear her through the storm to which her attach- 
ment to him had exposed her ; and day after day, 
hour after hour, Gertrude waited, till waiting degene- 
rated into watching, and watching turned into the 
sickness of hope deferred. Mrs. St. Clair read what 
was passing in her daughter's mind, and tried to take 
advantage of it by prevailing on her to renounce the 
man who, at such a crisis, could leave her in doubt 
but for a single moment as to the nature of his senti- 
ments; but 'tis long ere the young and generous 
heart can believe in anything so monstrous as the 
deceit of the object beloved, and Gertrude, even while 
she felt the anxieties of doubt, yet rejected almost 



THE INHERITANCE. 357 

with horror the idea of his unworthiness. In vain 
did her aunts endeavour to lead her thoughts to 
better things, or even to direct her mind to other 
sources of occupation. 

Gertrude, under the influence of a wayward and 
domineering passion, could listen only to its voice; 
and the voice of the charmer, charm it ever so wisely, 
fell unheeded on her ear; she felt almost provoked 
at their calmness and placidity as contrasted with her 
own uneasy thoughts and unsettled habits, and she 
secretly sighed at the insipid monotony of her life. 



CHAPTER XLL 

"In hope a king doth go to wai-, 
In hope a lover lives full long, 
In hope a merchant sails full far, 
In hope just men do suffer wrong ; 
In hope the ploughman sows his seed, 
Thus hope helps thousands at their need ; 
Then faint not, heart, among the rest. 
Whatever chance, hope thou the best." 

Richard Alisojt. 

Hitherto the weather had been fine, and though 
fine weather in any town, but more especially in a 
little dull, dirty, provincial one, never appears to less 
advantage, still it was a relief to Gertrude to saunter 
alone in her aunt's little garden, and sometimes to 
extend her rambles to the neighbouring fields; but 
two days of incessant rain deprived her even of this 
resource, and she found herself shut up in the same 
apartment with her mother and her aunts, unable to 
take any interest either in their occupations or con- 
versation. Where people's hearts are in unison, a 
very small space indeed suffices for their bodies; 
but where there is no blending of tastes and pursuits, 
social intercourse necessarily becomes irksome and 
oppressive, and we sigh for even the joyless freedom 



THE INHERITANCE. 359 

of solitude. In the narrow dull streets of Barnford 
there was little to amuse or attract ; but Gertrude sat 
at the window most part of the morning, gazing she 
knew not at what. Perhaps there are few stronger 
proofs of aberration of intellect than that of a person 
looking out of a window where there is nothing to 
be seen ; and at another time she would have smiled 
in scorn at the idea of ever being reduced to so pitiful 
a resource. Certainly the objects upon which she 
looked with vacant eye were not of the most attract- 
ive order. An old gentlewoman sat knitting; her 
hands at one side of her body, her head at the other, 
in the manner usually practised by expert knitters. 
This old gentlewoman, then, sat knitting a large, thick 
shaped, white lamb's -wool stocking, with wires and 
quills, like those "upon the fretful porcupine," stuck 
in her girdle, and which her well-trained fingers ever 
and anon exchanged and adjusted in a manner which 
none but a knitter could comprehend or explain. It 
is a galling thing to those whose hands will not move 
a finger without the intervention of the head thus to 
behold other hands performing all the intricacies of 
heel and toe, apparently by their own free will and 
accord. There are few servants who do not require 
to be occasionally looked after ; but these trusty and 
vigilant members never appeared to relax in their 
labours, though the eyes of their mistress never were 
once directed towards them, but seemed to be in 
active observance of all that was to be seen beyond 
the sphere of her own dwelling. Much might be said 



360 THE INHERITANCE, 

upon this subject ; but doubtless my readers love a 
well-knit story as much as a well-knit stocking ; and 
it would be like letting down a stitch to enter upon 
a long digression at present. 

At the next house a great washing was going on ; 
maid-servants, with pinned-up sleeves, crimson arms, 
and loose caps, came occasionally to the door to dis- 
charge tubs full of soap-suds, while a roaring infant 
was dandled at the window by a little dirty dog-eared- 
looking minx, with her hair en papillote. On the 
other side of the knitting lady nothing was visible to 
the naked eye ; but the sound of an old cracked jing- 
ling spinnet was heard unceasingly practising Barba- 
does' Bells and Nancy Dawson. Below was a shop, 
and over the half-door leant the shopmaster, with 
a long, sharp, raw nose, looking as anxiously as ever 
did Sister Anne to see if there was anybody coming. 
Now and then the street was enlivened with the 
clank of a pair of pattens ; at another time a spat- 
tered cow was driven reluctantly along, lowing most 
plaintively. There was also an occasional cart shak- 
ing the houses in its progress, as it rumbled over 
the rugged pavement. A hoarse, shrieking ballad - 
singer made an attempt to collect an audience, by 
vociferating — 

' ' Bright Chanticleer proclaims the dawn, 

And spangles deck the thorn ; 
The lowing herds now quit the lawn ; 

The lark springs from the corn. 
Dogs, huntsmen, round the window throng, 

Fleet Towler leads the cry ; 



THE INHEEITANCE. 361 

Arise, the burden of my song, 
This day a stag must die. 
With a hey, ho, chevy ! 
Hark forward, hark forward, tantivy ! 
Hark, hark, tantivy ! 
This day a stag must die. This day," etc. 

But his only listeners were a boy going to school and 
a servant -girl bound on a message which required 
despatch. These were sounds of hopeless misery ; but 
the blowing of a horn — with what is it not fraught 
to the watching heart and listening ear? Gertrude 
strained her eyes, but a long coach, covered with red 
cloaks and umbrellas, was just setting off — there was 
not even the hopes and fears of an arrival to agitate. 
The day was beginning to close in; dinner had 
been ordered, and Gertrude, with a deep sigh, was 
turning from the window, when again the sound of 
wheels was heard; she turned; a carriage was in 
sight ; it approached in the dubious straggling manner 
of one uncertain of its destination ; the glasses were 
up and dimmed with rain — but, oh ! agitation un- 
speakable ! as it stopped for a moment opposite the 
window, Gertrude recognised the well-known Delmour 
crest ! For some moments she saw, heard nothing ; 
all was silent tumult in her mind, as she thought, 
" He is come ! — even now he seeks me !" She looked 
up ; the carriage had moved on a few doors, but there 
it stood ; she saw the hind wheels, but she could see 
no more, save that it seemed to be causing a little 
bustle ; heads were j)ut out from the opposite windows, 
and two or three people came out of their dwellings, 



362 THE INHERITANCE. 

and crossed the street to it. Every instant seemed 
an age to Gertrude, and some minutes elapsed, when 
again it was set in motion. It turned — she saw the 
horses' heads — they were almost at the door ; there 
was no longer doubt — it was soon reality ; the carriage 
drew up ; a loud knock at the door startled even the 
Miss Blacks ; the bustle of an arrival was heard below. 
What was said Gertrude heard not — a mist was before 
her eyes, a rushing sound in her ears. The door was 
thrown open, and in an instant the whole illusion 
vanished as if by the touch of some fell enchanter, 
for in pattered — Miss Pratt. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

"How convenient it proves to be a rational animal, who 
knows how to find, or invent, a plausible pretext for whatever 
it has an inclination to do !"— Franklin. 

" My dear Miss Black, this is really too much ! Now, 
don't let me disturb you; but what do you think? 
I've got into a fine scrape, thanks to my pretty madam 
of a maid. Miss Mary, I hope you feel youself get- 
ting stouter ; this is sad weather for rheumatism, Mrs. 
St. Clair. Miss Gertrude, my dear, are you well 
enough 1 But, as I was saying, I really never was in 
such a situation in my life before. I've been staying 
for the last week at old General Crabtree's; poor man ! 
the gout really does not improve his temper, and the 
house is small ; and altogether, to tell you the truth, 
I was glad of an excuse to get away ; so when our 
friend, Mr. Delmour, who's there for a day or two on 
his political purposes, proposed sending in his carriage 
to get something done to the lamps, I thought I would 
just take the opportunity of coming in, having a little 
business of my own at this time — but what do you 
think ? Upon coming to my own house, lo and 
behold ! it's hard and fast locked up, and that light- 
headed tawpee is off to a sick mother, or a brother 



364 THE INHKRITANCE, 

from the sea, or some such sham, and I'm left to shift 
for myself — without a hole to put my head in. If 
she had had but the sense to have left my key I 
could have made a shift " 

At that instant Miss Black's servant entered with 
a large key, bearing to be the key of Miss Pratt's 
house, which, she said, had been sent by Mrs. Duns- 
mure, the grocer, with whom Babby Braidfoot had 
deposited it at her departure. 

" That's my key, is it 1 " asked the owner, regard- 
ing it with a very bitter look ; " and much the better 
I'll be of that, to be sure," taking it with great reluc- 
tance. "I'll find cold quarters there, I think, for 
anybody just come off a journey." 

Miss Black was too sincere to make speeches, or 
express pleasure she did not feel ; but she took advan- 
tage of the first pause aflbrded by Miss Pratt, to 
express her wish that she would remain with them, 
and to assure her of a hearty welcome to such accom- 
modation as they had. 

" My dear Miss Black, this is really kind ! a friend 
in need is a friend indeed. Well I may say that ! 
But are you sure it's not putting you to any incon- 
venience ? I know I may depend upon your telling 
me honestly. To be sure, nobody need mind me, for, 
I thank my stars, I am easily put up ; I'm not one of 
those who can only sleep in their own beds ; I can lie 
in any bed, if it's not too hard, and is well made, and 
has plenty of pillows, and enough of blankets. Well, 
since you insist upon it, I'll just take the liberty of 



THE INHEEITANCE. 365 

having my bits of things brought out here ; they can 
easily be moved afterwards. Then, my dear" — to the 
servant-girl — " will you just tell the coachman to take 
out my luggage 1 He must get somebody to help him 
with the largest trunk ; and tell him to keep the small 
one with the right end upmost. And do you hear, 
my dear, will you take care in carrying up the band- 
boxes; and there's a large green bag, see that it's 
well fastened at the mouth; and there's a pair of 
stout walking shoes in one of the pockets, and my 
work-bag and a little brown paper parcel in the 
other ; and there's a little basket in the corner, and 
that's alL Well, this is really comfortable," drawing 
in her chair, " for a person just come off a journey," 
taking ojff her shoes, and holding up her feet to the 
kindly influence of a blazing fire ; " and what's 
more, it is really kind," seizing Miss Mary's hands, 
and giving them a most emphatic squeeze, as much 
as to say — " And there is your reward," The servant 
now entered to say everything had been taken out, 
and the coachman begged to know " if there was any 
word." This, Miss Pratt well knew, was in other 
words craving a douceur, and she looked a little 
blank as she answered, " No word ; he is just to take 
the carriage, as his master desired him, to Springwell 
the coachmaker's, in the High Causeway, and show 
him what's to be done to the carriage ; and he's just 
to leave it there, and make the best of his way home, 
with my compliments." Then, as if communing with 
herself, " If I had been at home, I would have given 



366 THE INHEKITANCE. 

him something this wet day — not that he's come so 
far as to need it, for it's but scrimp six miles ; but, 
to be sure, the day's bad." 

Miss Black here resolved these doubts by giving 
orders for the coachman to have some refreshment. 

" Well, that is really very humane of you, my dear 
Miss Black ; but I've my doubts whether it's right to 
give other people's servants anything. Indeed, it's a 
principle with me never to give them money" — with 
a look, as much as to say, " Am I not right 1 " 

"When people give trouble," said Mrs. St. Clair, 
who was rather in a bad humour, and consequently 
very sensible in her remarks, "they ought to give 
something besides." 

" I beg your pardon, Mrs, St. Clair ; I know 
many people who set their faces against allowing 
their servants to take money — many ; they think it 
makes them greedy and rapacious, and I think so too. 
Indeed, I'm satisfied it's a wrong thing to give other 
people's servants money ; but I think I ought to give 
my pretty light-headed Mrs. Babby a month of the 
tolbooth as a reward for her behaviour." 

Dinner, which had been retarded by Miss Pratt's 
arrival, was now announced. " Bless me ! is it that 
time of day 1 " — ^looking at her watch. " I declare it's 
twenty minutes past five ; " then forcing on her shoes 
— " You must excuse my sitting down in my pelisse, 
for, I assure you, I little thought of dining in any- 
body's house but my own to-day." Then, having 
taken her station at the table — "Barley-broth," 



THE INHERITANCE. 367 

peeping into the tureen, "and a very good thing it 
is, when well made, and this is very nice, clear, and 
strong; it's a great favourite of mine. Miss Mary, let 
me recommend the broth to you. Miss St. Clair, 
my dear, you don't look as if you were hungry, that's 
with not being out to-day. I wish Anthony Whyte 
could see you just now, for he says an elegant female 
at dinner ought always to look as if she did not care 
whether she were eating or not ; I really think you 
would please him there." 

" I am sure I seldom care whether I sit down to 
dinner or not," said Mrs. St. Clair, with a sigh ; though, 
by-the-bye, she generally contrived to pick up the best 
of what was going. 

" My dear Mrs. St. Clair ! did you ever try to go 
without your dinner 1 " 

"I daresay I have, frequently." 

" I beg your pardon, but really I think you must 
be mistaken there ; take my word for it, nobody that 
has tried it once will ever try it again, I speak from 
experience. I once tried to go without my dinner, 
but I can tell you it was anything but agreeable ; in 
short, it will not do, let people say as they will. What 
nice-looking whitings; that's one of Mr. Whyte's 
favourite dishes, nicely crisped with bread crumbs; and 
this is a Bellevue chuckie, I'm sure, fat and fair. I 
declare it's a treat to me to sit down to such a diimer ; 
for I'm perfectly sick of the sight of turtle soup and 
great fat venison. I was really wearying to get to 
my own house for a little, if it was only to refresh 



368 THE INHEEITANCK 

myself with a drop plain barley-broth and a bit 
boiled mutton; and what a pleasant thing for a 
few friends to meet this way, instead of these great 
hubbleshews of people one sits down with now, Avhere 
there's no carrying on anything like rational conver- 
sation. Mrs. St. Clair, allow me to help you. Miss 
Mary, you're doing very Httle. Miss St. Clair, my 
dear, take a httle wine with me to cheer you this bad 
day. Is this elder-flower wine, Miss Black? Upon 
my word, it's very little inferior to Anthony Whyte's 
Frontiniac. 'Here's a health to them that's awa,'" — 
with a significant look and an attempt at the tune. 
"By-the-bye, what did you think when you saw Mr. 
Delmour's carriage stop ? I doubt you were a little 
disappointed, ehl" 

Gertrude felt too miserable even to be moved by 
Miss Pratt's ill-timed jests, and she remained pale, 
cold, and silent. To attempt to carry on anything 
resembling conversation in Miss Pratt's company was 
impossible ; yet to endure her idle tattle for a whole 
evening was a sacrifice too great even for Miss Black's 
patience and good breeding. It was in vain to have 
recourse to music, as she then fastened herself upon 
some one of the company, and carried on her colloquy 
in loud whispers, even more annoying to a nice-toned 
ear than open declamation. The only eff'ectual mode 
of silencing her, then, was by reading aloud; and 
although she highly disapproved of that manner of 
passing the time, and indeed remarked what a wear- 
ing-out thing it was for the reader, and how much 



THE INHERITANCE. 369 

easier it was for all parties just to sit and chat, yet 
her objections were politely waived ; and Miss Mary, 
taking up a volume of Mackenzie, read the exquisitely 
beautiful story of La Eoche, which served as a pre- 
lude to the solemn acts of devotion with which the 
evening closed 



VOL. T. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

" I play the torturer by small and small, 
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken." 

Shakespeare. 

The sacred emotions which had been raised in Ger- 
trude's soul had, while they lasted, shed their soothing 
influences on her heart ; but when these ceased, she 
felt gladness only that the day was done, and that she 
should now be alone. Hurrying to her chamber, she 
took out the often -perused letter of her lover — the 
only one she had ever received from him, but that 
one, did it not stand for a thousand 1 There was all 
that the warmest, tenderest passion could dictate — 
there was every assurance of devoted, unchanging, 
everlasting attachment ; and again and again she re- 
peated that to doubt was base — was dishonourable ; 
but even while she repeated it, a vague secret doubt 
nevertheless lurked in her mind unknown to herself. 
She was roused from her contemplation by a knock 
at her door; and ere she had time to reply to the 
summons, Miss Pratt's head, in a night-cap, presented 
itself, with "May I come in?" And taking it for 
granted (as people generally do on those occasions), 
she immediately entered. "So, I guessed you would 



THE INHERITANCE. 371 

not be in a hurry to go to your bed — young people all 
like to sit up late ; and, indeed, I'm not over-fond of 
very early hours myself, so we'll just have a little 
chat," carefully extinguishing her candle. *' This is a 
nice, snug little room, and I daresay you'll sleep as 
sound here as in your fine silk bed at Rossville — and, 
by-the-bye, how long is it since you left the Castle, 
and how came your uncle to part with you ? " 

Contrary to Miss Pratt's usual manner she waited 
for an answer, and Gertrude replied that they had 
left Rossville almost three weeks since, and there she 
stopped. 

"And your uncle made no objections to your com- 
ing here? Of course you could not have come, in- 
deed, if he had opposed it ; and I suppose you're to 
make some stay in that case ? " 

Gertrude replied that there was no time fixed for 
their departure, and Miss Pratt for a moment looked 
as if a little bafiled ; but, quickly recovering, she seized 
Gertrude's hand, and trying to look tender — 

"My only reason for asking, my dear, is, that 1 
really don't think you agree with this town, you don't 
look so well as when I saw you at RossviUe ; I wish 
all may be quite right," patting the hand which was 
withdrawn from her with something of a look of dis- 
pleasure. But the ice was now broke, and she plunged 
boldly in. "My only reason, indeed, for supposing 
there was anything wrong is that I've received a 
most extraordinary letter since I saw you from Lord 
Rossville, really a most impertinent letter," rummag- 



372 THE INHERITANCE. 

ing her pockets, and dragging out from each recep- 
tacle a vast collection of letters, notes, memoranda, 
etc. etc., amongst which she picked for some time, but 
to no purpose, for the missive in question ; then, with 
a look of alarm — " Bless my heart ! I wish I mayn't 
have lost it ! " — shaking herself most vehemently. 
" It would really be an awkward thing, for, 'pon my 
word, it's a letter not fit to be seen by anybody; 
what he could mean by writing such a letter to me of 
all people ! In short, the substance of it was this, 
that Lord Eossville had heard with inexpressible 
astonishment and pain (or some such roundabout 
phrase), that Miss Pratt had presumed to circulate 
certain reports of a clandestine, and consequently im- 
proper nature, regarding certain juvenile members of 
his family, which reports — and so he went on, you 
laiow his style ; but the short and the long of it was 
this, that I was not to say black or white about any 
of his juvenile members, and that I was to contradict 
everything I had said, or might have said, or had 
heard, or might have inferred, previous to this period 
— but I can give you no idea of the way it was worded ; 
but what do you think he can mean 1 " 

Gertrude well knew what he meant ; but, shocked 
at her uncle's absurdity, and at the publicity he was 
thus giving to her attachment, she remained silent. 

" Such a fancy to take into his head, that I, of all 
people in the world, should have set any such reports 
agoing ! So far from that, I'm the very person that 
has put a stop to them, for I can't tell you all the 



THE INHEEITANCE. 373 

nonsensical stories that were going about. One said 
you was positively engaged to the Colonel ; another 
had it that you were to be married the 27th of next 
month to the member, and that cards for a grand 
ball to the county, on the 31st, were making out 
already in Mrs. Delmour's name ; a third had it that 
the brothers were on the point of fighting a duel for 
you, when Lord Rossville got word of it, and threatened 
to disinherit them, and send you to a French nunnery; 
and in the meantime he has sent you here, as the next 
thing to it; but, in short, I can't tell you half the 
nonsense that was going, and everybody came to me 
for the truth; but they made little of me, for my 
uniform answer was that, to my certain Tcnowledge, 
neither the one brother nor the other would ever be 
the husband of Miss St Clair; that it was quite a 
diflFerent person frpm either of them that would be 
her choice — so I leave you to judge if that was spread- 
ing reports ! But I see how it is ; Lord Rossville, 
honest man, has seen over his nose at last, and he's 
mad at my having had more penetration than him- 
self ; and to be sure it was a most extraordinary piece 
of blindness in him not to have seen how the land 
lay long ago. But bless my heart ! there's twelve 
o'clock. I'm afraid you're sitting up too late, my 
lamb, you're looking very white ; go to your bed as 
fast as you can. Good-night, good-night, my dear ! " 
and, lighting her candle, she was hastening oflF, when 
Gertrude, roused into displeasure said — 

"Ere you go, suffer me once for all. Miss Pratt, to 



374 THE INHEKITANCE. 

assure you that you are in an error in everything 
relating to me, and that Mr, Lyndsay never " 

" Never can be anything to you," interposed the 
incorrigible Pratt, with an incredulous smile. "Very 
well, that's enough. I'm quite convinced from what 
I saw that Mr. Lyndsay's nothing to you, no, no !" — 
in the tone and manner used by false nurses to way- 
ward children when assuring them of some monstrous 
falsehood. 

Gertrude turned from her in silent indignation as 
she repeated her good-nights, and was softly closing 
the door, when, popping in her head again — 

" Oh, by-the-bye, I wish you joy of being quit of a 
certain disappointed lover ; he's fairly off, his brother 
tells me, at last ; a fair wind and a good voyage to 
him, and I wish him better luck another time. Now 
go to sleep, my dear." 

"Gone!" repeated Gertrude to herself, in an 
agony, as the door at length closed on her tormenter. 
" Gone ! without one word. For him I am driven 
from my uncle's house, for him I have renounced all, 
and he neglects and abandons me!" And she gave 
way to the long-suppressed anguish of her heart, and 
for a while experienced all that agony of spirit of 
which her ardent and enthusiastic nature was suscep- 
tible. But hers was not a mind long to suffer despair 
to have dominion over her ; it is not the first stroke 
of grief, however heavy it may fall, that can at once 
crush the native buoyancy of youthful spirits; it is 
the continuance of misery which renders its weight 



THE INHERITANCE. 375 

insupportable, and where there is even the possibility, 
there is generally the wish to escape from its pressure. 
So it was with Gertrude ; the first burst of grief over, 
the dreadful surmise which she had at first hugged to 
her bosom with frantic eagerness, she now cast from 
her with scorn and indignation. That there was 
deceit somewhere she could not doubt, but that deceit 
was not with Colonel Delmour; it was impossible 
that he should have quitted England without writing 
to her; but surrounded as she was by his enemies 
how could she suppose his letters would now be per- 
mitted to reach her 1 Lord Rossville and her mother 
both so violently opposed to him, both acting in con- 
cert, and carrying on a constant correspondence with 
each other, though the contents of the letters were 
kept a profound secret from her: all these circum- 
stances she revolved in her mind, till, from the first 
faint suspicions, they gradually grew into proofs strong 
as holy writ. Her heart felt lightened by the dis- 
covery, and in the morning she took her place at the 
breakfast-table with her nerves braced and her eyes 
kept from tears by the determination of rising supe- 
rior to all the petty artifices that might be practised 
against her. Breakfast was but just over, when the 
return of the renegade Babby Braidfoot was formally 
announced to Miss Pratt, who immediately left the 
room for the purpose, as she said, of giving her a good 
hearing.^ 

^ A good hearing in Scotland signifies the very reverse of 
what it expresses, and means neither more nor less than a down- 
right scold. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

' ' On met tout en cBUvre pour assortir les fortunes, on ne se 
met point en peine d' assortir les'cojurs." — Massillon. 

" Our morals are corrupted and vitiated by our admiration of 
wealth. " — Cicero. 

While this was carrying on Mrs. Black was announced, 
and presently entered, her blooming good-humoured 
face expressive of even more than usual satisfaction, 
which, after the usual greetings had been exchanged, 
she hastened to communicate. The sum and substance 
of Mrs. Black's intelligence was this, that her daughter 
Lilly, having gone with the Major and Mrs. Waddell 
to Harrowgate, had there made a conquest of a 
wealthy young London merchant, who had made his 
proposals, and that the whole party were now on 
their way down, and were to be at Bellevue the fol- 
lowing day to dinner. Due congratulations, of course, 
ensued, but Gertrude was too much surprised at this 
sudden revolution in the fair Lilly's affections to be 
able to express hers in proper form. Mrs. Black, 
however, was so well satisfied herself that she took it 
for granted everybody else was the same; and she 
proceeded to enlarge upon the merits of this most 
excellent match, as she termed it Mr. Larkins was 



THE INHERITANCE. 377 

in good business (it was an old established house, 
Larkins, Barlow, and Company), of a most respectable 
family, and himself an uncommon clever, genteel, 
handsome young man ; indeed, had it been otherwise, 
the Major and Bell never would have countenanced 
anything of the kind ; she only wished (with a deep 
sigh) that some other folks were in the way of making 
as prudent and feasible a connection. This was evi- 
dently in allusion to her daughter Anne ; and Miss 
Black mildly replied that it was indeed agreeable 
when parents and children were agreed upon so 
important a point, but that it was not surprising 
they should often view it in very different lights. 
" Parents," said she, *' complain that children are apt 
to be led away by romantic notions, which can lead 
only to disappointment, while children lament that 
parents look only to wealth and worldly aggrandise- 
ment in their estimate of happiness, and I fear there 
is often but too much justice in the reproaches of 
both parties." 

" I think it is the duty of all parents to prevent 
their children from marrying, only to become beggars," 
said Mrs. Black. 

" I think so too," answered her sister ; " but I fear 
worldly-minded parents too often confound what 
they consider poverty with beggary." 

"There is not much to draw between them, I 
think," said Mrs. Black. 

" Undoubtedly beggary implies poverty, but what 
by many is called poverty does not necessarily in- 



378 THE INHEEITANCK 

elude beggary," replied Miss Black. " Wealth itself 
may, and often has proved insufficient to save the 
vain, the selfish, and the extravagant from beggary ; 
but Christian principles, virtuous habits, and an inde- 
pendent mind will ever preserve even the poor from 
becoming burdensome to others." 

" It's very easy speaking," said Mrs. Black, with 
some pique; "but everybody knows that, in these 
times, it's not little that supports a family; what 
with taxes and servants' wages, and children's school- 
ing and outfit in the world, it's a very serious matter 
become." 

" All these things are, or ought to be, proportioned 
to the means aff"orded," replied Miss Black. " If the 
poor will live like the rich, and educate their children 
in the same style, beggary, or, at least its sister, de- 
pendence, must ensue ; but if they would live accord- 
ing to what they have, and not according to what they 
think they ought to have, poverty would not be the 
hideous bugbear it is so often represented." 

"In my opinion," said Mrs. St. Clair, who thought 
she had an interest in the question ; " in my opinion, 
poverty is the most intolerable evil in life, and has, I 
am convinced, the most demoralising influence upon 
society." 

"Poverty, like beauty, is perhaps not easily de- 
fined," said Miss Black ; " and I believe the ideas 
people entertain on the subject are even more various 
than the discrepancy of taste that prevails as to per- 
sonal charms ; some would call it poverty not to be 



THE INHERITANCE. 379 

able to keep two or three carriages and a score of 
idle horses and servants," 

" You know that's nonsense," said Mrs. Black. 

*' That's an extreme case," said Mrs. St. Clair. 

" Then where is the boundary that separates wealth 
and poverty 1" asked Miss Black. "What is the pre- 
cise meaning of a poor marriage 1" 

Both ladies hesitated, but Mrs. Black took the 
lead. "I certainly would think any daughter of mine 
had made a poor hand of herself who could not afford 
to go as well dressed, and give as good and full dinners, 
as she has been accustomed to in her father's house." 

Mrs. St. Clair could not repress a smile in scorn at 
the vulgar simplicity of her sister-in-law's notions. 

"But supppose," said Miss Black, "(as we cannot 
have everything), that she is willing to wear a less 
costly gown, and have fewer dishes on her table than 
you, my dear sister, in your liberality, bestow upon 
your hospitable board ; if, as an equivalent, she is rich 
in the virtuous principles, intellectual endowments, 
and rational aflFection of him she has chosen as the 
companion of her earthly pilgrimage V 

"All that," said Mrs. St. Clair, "sounds very fine, 
my dear Elizabeth, and very logical to those who have 
not seen so much of the world as I have done ; but 
be assured, a young woman of any refinement must 
be completely wretched under the cares and drudgery 
and privations attendant upon a poor marriage. For 
example, there are certain luxuries, as you call them 
in this country, though in France they are mere 



380 THE INHERITANCE. 

necessaries, matters of course, such as a carriage, 
wax-lights, French wines, a suitable establishment, 
handsome mirrors, society that is not company, these 
things, and many more of the same sort, I certainly 
consider as absolute parts of that exquisitely combined 
essence we call happiness, at least to a person of deli- 
cate taste and refined habits." 

"Such airs!" thought Mrs. Black to herself. 
" French wines, and wax-candles, every day, indeed ! 
Set her up ! I wonder what entitles her to such ex- 
travagance ! " 

"Poverty has really been gently handled by both 
of you," said Miss Black, laughing ; "I don't suppose 
there ever was so fair a picture drawn of the squalid 
phantom before. You, my dear sister," to Mrs. Black, 
" merely represent him as not having his cheeks stuffed 
out like a plump Dutch Burgomaster ; and you, Sarah, 
quarrel with him for not having all the airs and graces 
of an epicurean petit-mattre. Now, although I am too 
old to fancy that love — wedded love, at least — can 
live upon smiles and flowers, yet I do believe there is 
a species of attachment which can exist without being 
stall-fed on the one hand, or tricked out in foreign 
luxuries on the other, and which could be happy even 
in mediocrity." 

" I never mentioned such a word as stall-fed," said 
Mrs. Black, a little ruffled — "but I'm astonished, 
Elizabeth, that anybody come to your time of life, 
and who has kept a house so long, can think that 
people can live upon deaf -nuts now-a-days." 



THE INHKEITANCE. 381 

" The rich are, at least, free from the vulgar sordid 
cares of life," said Mrs. St. Clair bitterly, — "which, I 
repeat, to a mind of any refinement must be wretched- 
ness." 

" I wonder what she calls the vulgar sordid cares 
of life ?" thought Mrs. Black. 

"To a mind of any feeling and refinement," said 
Miss Black, "I believe it would be far greater 
wretchedness to be linked to a vulgar sordid spirit, 
even had its master all that rank and riches can 
bestow, than it would be to endure privations with 
a mind congenial to its own — to such a mind, there 
are cares which love only can sweeten." 

" There can be little peace where there's not 
plenty," said Mrs. Black; — "but it's lucky every- 
body's not of your way of thinking, or the country 
would soon be swarming with beggars, and we would 
be perfectly ate up." 

Gertrude could not quite repress a smile as she 
looked at Mrs. Black's jolly person, and thought how 
groundless such an apprehension was on her part. 

" There is little cause for alarm on that account," 
said her sister-in-law — " as your sentiments are much 
more popular than mine; besides, I am not so un- 
reasonable as to insist upon everybody's marrying for 
love, whether they will or not. Many people, I 
believe, are quite incapable of forming a disinterested 
attachment, or having even a preference for one per- 
son more than another, except, according to worldly 
motives — a fine house, fine clothes, a carriage, pre- 



382 THE INHEKITANCE. 

cedence ; in short, some one of the thousand paltry 
baits which catch the vulgar mind ; to talk to such 
of the superiority of virtue and talent would be as 
absurd as to insist upon the blind seeing or the deaf 
hearing; on the other hand, there are those who, 
with taste, feeling, and refinement, have neither pride, 
vanity, nor ambition; it is surely, therefore, the 
height of tyranny to insist upon their placing their 
happiness in the indulgence of those things — upon 
their sacrificing all their purer, better feelings, to gratify 
the pride and prejudices of others." 

" I really wonder to hear a woman of your sense 
speak such nonsense," said Mrs. Black, affecting to 
look cool in the face of a very high complexion. 

" Such sentiments can only tend to the subversion 
of all proper principle," said Mrs. St. Clair, with 
solemnity, "to the encouragement of low and de- 
pending alliances, contracted under the high-sounding 
names of disinterested attachment, congenial souls, 
intellectual superiority, and such fulsome phrases, as 
can only lead to the annihilation of all ranks and 
degrees of society. A weak romantic girl has only 
to find a congenial soul in her dancing-master, or to 
prove her disinterested attachment to her father's 
footman, and, according to your doctrine, she has 
done nobly — she has proved herself superior to the 
vulgar allurements of pride, ambition, and what not. 
Oh! it is an admirable, a beautiful theory!" and 
Mrs. St. Clair trembled with virtuous indignation. 

" Pardon me, Sarah, you cannot disapprove of such 



THE INHERITANCE. 383 

connections more than I do ; but a poor marriage, and 
a low one, I consider as very different things, although 
I suspect many people are but too apt to confound 
them. Undoubtedly a gentlewoman, who has the feel- 
ings and ideas of one, will only unite herself with a 
gentleman, — with one who has had the education, 
and who has the manners and habits of one, who 
exercises the profession, and is accustomed to the 
society of such ; for there can be no solid happiness 
in a union where all the advantages of birth and edu- 
cation are renounced on one side ; and I am far, very 
far, from upholding those who violate the established 
orders of society, who fly in the face of parental duty, 
and sacrifice all that is dear and respectable in feeling 
to the indulgence of their own selfish passion. On 
the contrary, I will venture to affirm that connections 
formed without the consent of parents are so far from 
being productive of domestic happiness that they are 
generally marked with disappointment, misfortune, and 
sorrow." 

"There's really no knowing what you would be 
at," said Mrs. Black, with an air of perplexity; for 
Mrs. Black, like many other people, carried her pre- 
judices all on one side, and nothing puzjsled her so 
much as when she met in argument with a person of 
an unbiassed judgment and a liberal mind; and so 
indissolubly united in her imagination were the ideas 
of a poor being a low marriage on the one hand, and 
a rich being a genteel one on the other, that to separ- 
ate them was utterly impracticable. The coarsest 



384 THE INHERITANCE. 

booby, with twenty thousand a year and a title, would 
have struck Mrs, Black with awe, or at least respect ; 
while the most elegant mind or person, destitute 
of the trappings of wealth or the insignia of grandeur, 
would have been wholly overlooked. 

The entrance of Miss Pratt soon turned the tide 
of the conversation, for she had learned from her 
" pretty Miss Babby," that there was not a morsel of 
coal or a crumb of meat in the house ; and the coals 
you bought on the street were always bad, and there 
was no getting meat— everybody knew that — unless 
on a market day; and, in short, it ended in Miss 
Pratt consenting to remain Miss Black's guest for 
another day, until her mansion should be duly pre- 
pared and stocked for her reception. In the mean- 
time she set forth, as she pretended, on her business, 
which, in fact, was that of interfering in that of every 
other person. 

Mrs. Black also departed; but as she was really 
good-natured in the main, she consented that her 
daughter Anne should spend the evening with her 
aunts, even at the risk of meeting William LesHe, 
who, along with some other of their friends, was 
expected. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

"Even as some sick men will take no medicine unless some 
pleasant thing be put amongst their potions, although perhaps 
it be somewhat hurtful, yet the physician suifereth them to 
have it. So, because many will not hearken to serious and 
grave documents, except they be mingled with some fable or 
jest, therefore reason willeth us to do the like." 

SiE Thomas Moke. 

" Speak nobly of religion, but let it be well timed ; for people 
avoid those who are perpetually preaching." 

Ganganelu's Letters. 

Miss Pratt's visit would have been reckoned rather 
ill-timed by most people, as the Miss Blacks had 
invited some of their OAvn friends to spend the even- 
ing with them, and the pleasure, if not the harmony, 
of the party bid fair to be disconcerted by her 
audacious tattle. But they were too tolerant and en- 
during to allow any considerations of that kind to 
stand in the way of their hospitality, though well 
aware of Miss Pratt's enmity against all whose creed 
and practice in matters of religion differed from her 
own; for Miss Pratt, like too many people, deemed 
her own the only proper standard of religious and 
moral excellence. She had her bed of iron for the 
soul, as Procrustes had for the body, with this differ- 
VOL. L 2 



386 THE INHERITANCE. 

ence, that she was far more lenient towards those 
who fell short of her measure than of such as went 
beyond it. 

Not that Miss Pratt carried her hostility so far as 
to decline having any intercourse with, or receiving 
any favours from, these wild people, as she called 
them. On the contrary, she was always happy at an 
opportunity of meeting with such of them as she 
thought she could turn to any account by taking her 
beggars off her hands, and she was always ready to 
make use of their time, money, and old clothes to 
save her own. However, she took every occasion of 
letting it be known that she had met with a great 
want of charity amongst those very people who make 
such a phrase about it, as they had refused to recom- 
mend to the Destitute Society Anthony Whyte's 
nurse, a decent, respectable woman, and Anthony 
Whyte a subscriber too ! But Miss Pratt was not 
bitter in her resentment; and, upon hearing of the 
party which was expected, she expressed much satis- 
faction, and resolved to be uncommonly pleasant, and 
at the same time serious too in her conversation, out 
of compliment to the Miss Blacks. Mrs. St. Clair 
liked company of any kind better than none ; and to 
Gertrude, in the present state of her mind, all com- 
pany and all scenes were alike. Hers was a state of 
passive endurance, not of actual enjoyment. She 
was roused, however, by a visit from Mr. Delmour 
and Mr. Lyndsay. The latter held out his hand to 
her, with a look Avhich seemed to say, "Have you 



THE INHEKITANCE. 387 

forgiven me V but colouring deeply, she turned away, 
and bestowed her whole attention upon his com- 
panion. Mr. Delmour was secretly flattered by the 
air of profound attention with which (for the first 
time) she listened to every word he uttered, in the 
hope that something would lead to the subject upper- 
most in her thoughts but farthest from her tongue ; 
but nothing was said which had the slightest reference 
to Colonel Delmour, and her countenance betrayed 
her extreme vexation when the gentlemen rose to 
take leave. Upon hearing that they were both to be 
in attendance at a county meeting in town, which, of 
course, was to conclude with a dinner, Miss Black in- 
vited them to return in the evening, which they 
promised to do, and departed. It was evident from 
Mr. Delmour's manner he knew nothing of what 
had passed ; but Gertrude had paid no attention to 
his manner, nor once thought of the very flattering 
construction he might put upon hers. As for Lynd- 
say, she scarcely noticed him at all — it only struck 
her after he was gone that he was more than usually 
silent, and that his features wore a more pensive cast 
than common; but what was Mr. Lyndsay to her? 
and she listened with weariness and chagrin to the 
eulogium her aunts pronounced upon him. 

Evening came ; and Miss Pratt, in a grave gown, 
bottle-green gloves, a severe turban, and a determined 
look of strong good sense, seemed to say, " I'll show 
you what a rational, respectable, wise-like character I 
am ; I'll confound you all, or I'm mistaken !" And 



388 THE INHERITANCE. 

she took her ground, as usual, as though she had been 
mistress of the mansion, and prepared to do all its 
honours accordingly. 

Even in the Christian world there are great varie- 
ties, there are narrow minds as well as great minds, 
there are those who pin their faith upon the sleeve of 
some favourite preacher, others who seem to think sal- 
vation confined within the four walls of the particular 
church in which they happen to sit. But, as has been 
well said by the liberal-minded Wesley, " How little 
does God regard men's opinions ! What a multitude 
of wrong opinions are embraced by all the members of 
the Church of Eome, yet how highly favoured have 
many of them been !" ^ 

And who has not their imperfections? who has 
not their besetting sini their thorn in the flesh? 
Even the best of Christians ; but piety to God, and 
the desire to benefit their fellow -creatures, is, and 
must be, the universal characteristic of the Christian 
of every church. The few friends assembled were cer- 
tainly favourable specimens of what is termed the reli- 
gious world ; they were persons of agreeable manners, 
enlarged minds, and cultivated tastes; the conversa- 
tion was animated and interesting, in spite of Miss 
Pratt's attempts to turn it into her own low channel 
by relating the bits of gossip she had picked up in her 
morning perambulations, and which she thought to 
set off with some trite moral reflection. There was 
occasionally music from both gentlemen and ladies, 
^ Wesley's "Journal." 



THE INHERITANCE. 389 

which even Gertrude's fastidious ear acknowledged to 

be fine in its way, for all knew what they were saying 

or doing; and there were no mawkish attempts at 

singing in an unknown tongue ; there was no " poetry 

strangled by music;" but "airs married to immortal 

verse," 

" Untwisting all the chains that tie 
The hidden soul of harmony." 

Ah ! who can hear the divine strains of a Handel, or 
the dear familiar songs of their native land, without 
feeling their souls elevated, or their hearts melted 
into love and tenderness ! Both were sung by differ- 
ent members of the company with much taste and 
feeling, but by none so much as by Mary Black, who, 
with seraphic sweetness, sang the inspired strain, 

" How beautiful are the feet of those 
Who bring the glad tidings of faith to man ! " 

" Everything that Miss Black sings must be charm- 
ing," said Mr. Delmour, with his /ac?e gallantry ; "but 
if I may be permitted to offer an opinion, I should 
say there is perhaps something rather too sectarian 
in sacred music, unless upon solemn occasions ; and I 
should be apprehensive that, were a taste for it to 
become general, it would prove destructive to every 
other species of composition — I may add, even to the 
fine arts in general." Mr. Delmour had a genteel 
horror at everything he deemed approaching to what 
he thought Methodism, though a most zealous sup- 
porter of the church in so far, but no farther, than it 
was connected with the state. 



390 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Pardon me," said Miss Mary Black; "but it 
appears to me that such apprehensions are groundless; 
the blessing of God and the applause of posterity- 
seem to have perpetuated the fame of genius devoted 
to religious subjects more than the fame of those men 
who abused their noble gifts by dedicating them 
solely to the service of their fellow-creatures." 

" As instance ? " asked Mr. Delmour, with an in- 
credulous smile. 

"True," said Mr. Lyndsay, "it certainly has been 
so in many instances. Milton is undoubtedly the 
first poet of our country, and what was his theme ? 
He sang in noble strain of Him 

* Unspeakable, who sit'st above these beavena 
To us invisible, or dimly seen 
In these Thy lowest works. ' 

The greatest poet of Germany was Klopstock, and his 
subject the Great Messiah ; and of his deathless work 
it has been well observed, that 'when music shall 
attain among us the highest powers of her art, whose 
words will she select to utter but those of Klopstock?' 
The noblest bards of Italy were Dante and Tasso; 
Metastasio has had recourse to sacred subjects for his 
operas ; Eacine for his Athalie ; Young, in his " Night 
Thoughts," sang to Him who — 

' From solid darkness struck that spark, the sun,' 

invoking him to 'strike wisdom from his soul.' The 
amiable and elegant Cowper casts all his laurels at 
the feet of his Saviour : 



THE INHERITANCE. 391 

' I cast them at thy feet— my only plea 
Is, what it was, — dependence upon thee.'" 

"You are really eloquent, Lyndsay," said Mr. 
Delmour, with an ironical smile ; " but in the fervour 
of your zeal you have entirely overlooked those 
immortal, though profane authors, whose works are 
still more popular than any of those you have quoted 
— Shakespeare, for instance." 

"Shakespeare is, perhaps, the most favourable 
exception," replied Mr. Lyndsay; "he is, indeed, a 
poet of Nature's own creating ; but the dross of his 
compositions is daily draining off in improved editions, 
and even in theatrical representation, while the pure 
parts of his morality are not thought unworthy of 
being quoted from evangelical pulpits, and one day, I 
doubt not, it will be with him as with some of the 
poets I have just mentioned. They have written 
some things unworthy of their pens ; but their fame 
is perpetuated only as the authors of what is pure and 
good. The profane and licentious works of Lord B. 
will live only in the minds of the profane and impure, 
and will soon be classed amongst other worthless 
dross, while all that is fine in his works will be culled 
by the lovers of virtue, as the bee gathers honey from 
even the noxious plant, and leaves the poison to 
perish with the stalk ; so shall it be with Bums ; so 
shall it be with Moore. The same argument applies 
to music. Handel derives his fame from his oratorios, 
and the "Creation "of Haydn will immortalise his name 
— a performance in which the genius of the composer 



392 THE INHERITANCE. 

has struck a chord which calls forth any genius which 
happens to be in the breast of the audience. To men- 
tion the great painters who have dedicated a portion 
of their time and talents to sacred subjects would be 
to enumerate the whole catalogue ; and I have already 
to apologise for having so long monopolised this sub- 
ject," said he, turning to a clergyman who stood near 
him, and whose looks testified the interest he took in 
the debate — "when there are those present who could 
have done much more justice to the cause." Beneath 

the simple, meek, unpretending exterior of Mr. Z 

few would, indeed, have guessed at the profundity of 
his learning, the extent and variety of his acquire- 
ments, and the ardour of his zeal in the cause of 
Christianity, Firm in his principles, yet soft in his 
manners ; warm in feeling, yet mild and gentle in 
temper ; able to talk, yet willing to listen ; his mind 
was full of information, while his manners were those 
of one seeking instruction. 

Thus appealed to, Mr. Z was about to reply, 

when Miss Pratt interposed with, " What do you say 
to these two great writers. Fielding and Smollet 1 I 
suspect there's none of these you have mentioned will 
ever be half so popular as Tom Jones and Humphry 
Clinker." 

"The works of Fielding and Smollet, even the 
more highly gifted ones of Voltaire and Eousseau, 
are passing away like noxious exhalations," said Mr. 

Z mildly. " If the principles of the age in which 

we live are equally defective with the former, at least 



THE INHERITANCE. 393 

a better taste prevails, and grossness, profanity, and 
licentiousness are no longer the standards to which 
the young look with admiration. Impure writers are 
now chiefly known to impure readers; but where 
virtue and genius unite, their powers are known to 
all. Oh, what injury to the human mind is derived 
from the perusal of the works of writers whose cor- 
rupt imaginations have given the impulse to their 
licentious pens ! Of such it may truly be said, though 
highly esteemed amongst men yet are they abomina- 
tions in the sight of God. Yet, alas ! how few look 
to that guiding principle which alone ought to direct 
the pen ! how few consider that to do good, ' a work 
is not to be raised from the heat of youth, or the 
vapour of wine ; nor to be attained by the invocation 
of Memory and her siren daughters ; but by devout 
prayer to that Eternal Spirit who can enrich with all 
utterance and knowledge, and sends out his Seraphim 
with the hallowed fire of his altar, to touch and 
purify the lips of whom he pleases.'"^ 

There was so much Christian meekness, even in 

Mr. Z 's fervour, that it was impossible not to be 

touched with his manner even where the matter failed 
to carry conviction along with it. Mr. Delmour affected 
to bow with deference to the opinions of a clergyman ; 
the conversation took another turn ; music succeeded, 
till at last the party broke up. Gertrude had been inter- 
ested in the discussion, but soon it passed from her mind 
as "a lovely song of one who hath a pleasant voice." 
1 Milton. 



CHAPTER XLVl. 

" Let us proceed from celestial things to terrestrial." 

Cicero. 

" Jests are, as it were, sawce, where bye v.'e are recreated, that 
we may eat with more appetite; but as that were an absurd 
banquet in which there were few dishes of meat and much 
variety of sawces, and that an unpleasant one where there were 
no sawce at all, even so that life were spent idly where nothing 
were but mirth and jollity, and again that tedious and uncom- 
fortable where no pleasure or mirth were to be expected." 

Sir Thomas More. 

Again Gertrude felt the bitterness of disappointment. 
She had watched and hung upon every syllable that 
Mr. Delmour had uttered ; but he made no mention 
of his brother, and with all the timidity of love she 
felt it impossible to breathe the name on which her 
destiny was suspended. 

The following morning saw Miss Pratt depart with 
all her packages, and many reiterated professions aud 
promises ; and scarcely had she left the house when 
Mr. Adam Eamsay arrived. As Uncle Adam's visits, 
like those of angels, were few and far between, his 
nieces welcomed him according to the rarity of the 
occurrence; and as he appeared to be in unusual good 
humour, he received their attentions with tolerable 



THE INHERITANCE. 395 

civility. But even his civility was always of a rough 
nature ; something akin to the embrace of a man- 
trap, or the gentle influence of a shower-bath ; while 
his kindness commonly showed itself in some such 
untoward shape as was more grievous to be borne 
than aught that malice could invent. 

"What's this come ower ye, my dear?" said he, 
addressing Gertrude with as much affection as it was 
in his nature to testify. *' You're white, an' you're 
dull, an' you're no like the same creature you was;" 
and he gazed upon her with more of interest than of 
good breeding. His remarks, of course, called the 
colour into Gertrude's cheeks, and Miss Black, seeing 
her at a loss to reply, hastened to relieve her by 
throwing the blame, where in this climate it is always 
thrown, upon the weather. But Uncle Adam spumed 
the idea of the weather having the slightest influence 
on the health and spirits of anything but potatoes 
and leeches. 

"The weather!" repeated he contemptuously. 
" You'll no tell me that a shower o' rain can bleach a 
young creature's cheeks white, or put the life out o' 
her een ; but I'll tell you what it is, its the synagogin', 
the tabernaclin', the psalmin' that goes on in this 
hoose, that's enough to break the spirits o' ony young 
creature." 

"My dear uncle " said Miss Black, with a smile. 

" Now I'm no gawin' to enter into ony o' your 
religious controversies," cried Mr. Ramsay, holding 
up his hand, and turning away his head ; " but I'll tell 



396 THE INHERITANCE. 

you what I'll do, my dear " — patting Gertrude on the 
shoulder — " I shall tak' you to see a sight that'll divert 
you, and drive away thae wild notions you've been 
getting your head stuffed wi'. To gang an' mak' a 
bairn like that miserable wi' your nonsense ! " with a 
fresh burst of indignation at his nieces ; then again 
softening down — " Put on your bannet, my dear, an' 
come wi' me. As I cam' up the street the noo I saw 
ane o' thae caravan things standing in the market- 
place, wi' a picktur o' a giant an' a dwarf hingin' on 
the outside, and tho' I wadna cross the floor to see aw 
the giants and dwarfs that ere were born, yet I ken 
young folk like ploys o' that kind; so put on your 
things and I shall treat you to the show;" and he put 
his hand into his pocket, and tumbled his money to 
and fro, as much as to say, " I have plenty of shillings 
and sixpences, and therefore you need have no 
scruples of delicacy as to taking advantage of my 
offer." 

The cold drops stood upon Mrs. St. Clair's brow 
at the thoughts of her elegant distinguished daughter, 
the future Countess of Rossville, mingling with the 
canaille of a country town, in a caravan, to gaze upon 
a giant and a dwarf ! What would Lord Eossville 
say? There was distraction in the thought, yet she 
dreaded to offend Uncle Adam by a hasty rejection of 
his plan. " We are all, I am sure, sensible of the 
kindness that prompts your offer, my dear uncle," 
said she, in her most conciliating manner ; " but I am 
afraid the remedy you propose would only tend to 



THE INHERITANCE. 397 

aggravate the evil. My daughter's complaint is head- 
ache, occasioned solely by the confinement to which she 
has been subjected for some days, and the close air of 
a caravan would be extremely prejudicial. If I could 
have given her an airing — but having no carriage of 
my own !" and the sentence died away in a sort of in- 
distinct ejaculation about the misery of being depend- 
ent upon others for those accommodations. 

"You might let her speak for hersel'," said Mr. 
Eamsay with some asperity; "say what you would 
like best, my dear;" and Gertrude, gladly availing 
herself of the excuse suggested, declared that fresh 
air would be her best restorative. 

Mr. Ramsay pondered a while, still turning his 
money, like his thoughts, to and fro. At length, after 
an apparently severe struggle, he spoke — 

" Weel, since that's the case, instead o' takin' you 
to the show I've no objections to hire a chaise -and 
treat you to a ride. I shall step to the Blue Boar my- 
sel' and order ane up, so you may be puttin' on your 
mantle, an' there will be room for three, so you can 
settle among yoursels which o' you is to gang." 

Mrs. St Clair had been caught in a snare of her 
own setting ; she had thrown out a hint about a car- 
riage, in hopes that her uncle's partiality for her 
daughter would have made him grasp at it at once, 
and that he would have been induced to set up one 
for her sole use and accommodation. This would 
have been a very convenient arrangement for her 
mother, who could not get the command of Lord Ross- 



398 THE INHEEITANCK 

ville's quite so often as she wished. Her blood 
almost froze at the idea of a ride in a hackney-chaise ; 
but it required more courage than she could master 
to oppose this second project, and, in silent despair, 
she saw Uncle Adam snatch up his little old rusty hat 
and set off. Her only hope was that the Blue Boar 
equipages would be all engaged, but that was soon at 
an end ; for in a short time Uncle Adam was descried 
returning on foot, followed by a high-crowned, jang- 
ling, tottering chaise, with a lame brown horse and 
a blind gray one, urged along by a ragamuffin driver, 
seated on a wooden bar almost touching the windows. 

Such was Uncle Adam's triumphant car ; and not 
Boadicea, when dragged captive at the wheels of her 
conqueror, experienced bitterer feelings than did Mrs. 
St Clair when she found herself compelled to take 
her place in this vehicle. True, she might have re- 
fused, but at the certainty of affronting Uncle Adam, 
who could stand anything but airs, and to affront 
seventy thousand pounds was a serious matter, especi- 
ally in the present posture of affairs. The iron steps 
were thrown down with a mighty clang as far as they 
could reach, and having with some difficulty con- 
trived to mount, she seated herself with great disgust 
and ill-humour, vainly attempting to disengage her- 
self from the straw with which it was carpeted, and 
which at once seized upon her silk stockings and lace 
flounces. 

"So much for the beauties of poverty," whispered 
she, in no very sweet accent, to her daughter, as she 



THE INHEEITANCE. 399 

took her place beside her. " For Heaven's sake, pull 
your bonnet more over your face, that you may not 
be recognised," and she carefully adjusted her own 
veil in triple folds over every feature, Mr. Ramsay 
followed, and the driver waited for orders. 

"Whar wad ye like to gang to, my dearl" asked 
he of Gertrude; "but it's aw the same, ae road's 
just like anither — tak' the best and the driest," to 
the driver. 

But Gertrude, who had got her cue from her 
mother, interposed, saying — 

" If it is not disagreeable to you, my dear uncle, 
I should like to see your own Bloom Park." 

" Bloom Park ! " repeated Mr. Ramsay in evident 
discomposure; "what wud tak' ye to Bloom Park? 
What's put that in your head? I'm sure there's 
naething to be seen there." 

"Pardon me," said Mrs. St. Clair, seeing her 
daughter would not urge the matter ; " but that 
beautiful specimen you gave Gertrude of your green- 
house has made her absolutely pine to visit your 
flowers." 

Mr. Ramsay's brow looked rather thundery; but, 
after demurring a little with himself, he desired the 
driver, in a voice of repressed anger, to take them 
to Bloom Park The patched cracked windows were 
drawn up, the driver mounted his seat, the horses 
were with some difficulty set in motion, and off they 
went, the chaise rocking and jingling as though it 
would never reach its destinatioii. To speak or at 



400 THE INHEEITANCE. 

least to hear, was out of the question, so the party 
proceeded on their pleasure -excursion in profound 
silence, till, at the end of an hour and a half of inces- 
sant jolting and clattering, they found themselves at 
the gate of Bloom Park. It was a fine, showy, modern 
place, with a large handsome house standing in the 
middle of an extensive but somewhat new-looking 
park, sprinkled with a few large old trees, and many 
young ones still in their cages. There was nothing 
picturesque or beautiful in the scenery ; but there was 
much comfort, even luxury, denoted in the appearance 
of the gay, airy, spacious mansion, with its French 
■windows, verandas, porticoes, and conservatory; in 
the smooth gravel walks, diverging in all directions ; 
in the well-stocked fish-pond ; in the stupendous brick 
garden-walls, with flues and chimney tops ; in the 
extensive range of hothouses, and, in short, all the 
appliances of affluence and enjoyment. Nothing could 
look more unlike the place than the owner. That 
Mr. Adam Eamsay should have become the proprietor 
of such a place was the wonder of some and the ridi- 
cule of others. But the simple fact was that upon 
this very estate the race (if not the family) of Ramsays 
had been born and bred and lived, certainly time 
immemorial, for it was in the humble rank of cottars. 
Here also Lizzie Lundie had first seen the light ; and 
here it was that Uncle Adam's youngest and happiest 
days had been spent ; for here they had " ran about 
the braes, and pu'ed the gowans fine;" and "though 
seas between them braid had rolled" for many an 



THE INHERITANCE. 401 

intervening day, and the gi-ave had long closed over 
the object of his early affection, he still cherished the 
fond remembrance of auld lang syne. Before his 
return from India he had heard that the estate of 
Broomyknowes, now changed into Bloom Park, was 
in the market; he became the purchaser, partly as 
a means of investing money, which he was rather at 
a loss how to dispose of, and partly from a secret 
penchant towards it, which, however, he would have 
scorned to acknowledge, and perhaps of which he 
was scarcely aware. Great was his surprise and in- 
dignation, however, when he did visit it, at beholding 
the ravages refinement and luxury had committed 
upon the primitive charms of Broomyknowes; for, 
pilgrims as we are in a stranger -land, how do our 
souls cling with fond tenacity to the simple memorials 
of transient, childish, perished joys ! But not a trace 
of his old haunts remained. The banks and braes 
and knowes had been all levelled with the dust ; the 
little wimpling burn, fringed with saughs and hazels, 
where many a summer's day Lizzie and he used to 
"paiddle" for minnows, was gone to swell some 
mighty stream. The Mavis Hill, a rude, uninclosed 
eminence, covered with wild roses, and brambles and 
bluebells, and sloes, where many a mavis and lintie's 
nest had been found, was now a potato-field ; not a 
whin scented the air, — and how often beneath India's 
burning sun had Uncle Adam sighed for a breeze from 
the whinny braes of his native land ! But, worst of 
all, on the very spot where once stood his grand- 
VOL. I. 2d 



402 THE INHERITANCE. 

father's and his father's old green slimy cabins, with 
their fungous roofs, and their kailyards and their 
middens, now rose an elegantly -ornamented dog- 
kennel. That he instantly ordered to be demolished ; 
indeed, it was said he had remained upon the ground 
to see it done; and from that time he had never looked 
near the place till now, that he had come in compli- 
ance with Gertrude's wish, but very contrary to his 
own inclination. 

Mrs. St Clair was in ecstasies with all she saw; 
the interior of the mansion was perfection, the suite 
of apartments elegant, the furniture superb — in short, 
there was not a superlative she did not exhaust in 
attempts to exj)ress her admiration. But the thought 
that was uppermost in her mind she would not have 
ventured to utter so readily, viz., that if the worst 
should happen, and Lord Eossville should discard his 
niece, there was another string to her bow at Bloom 
Park, and she could almost have been satisfied to 
have renounced the ambitious prospects of the one 
for the luxurious certainty of the other. But Mrs. 
St. Clair's raptures were completely thrown away 
upon Uncle Adam, who cared not a rush what she or 
any one else thought of his property, and he followed 
rather than led the way through his own house, with 
a kind of dogged impatience, as if his only wish were 
to be out of it. This was not lessened when, the 
news of his appearance having spread, he found him- 
self beset by a host of retainers indigenous to an ex- 
tensive and neglected property. Grieves, gardeners. 



THE INHERITANCE. 403 

gamekeepers, tenants at will, and tenants on lease, all 
came thronging with wants to be supplied, and griev- 
ances to be redressed, and all looking with evil eyes 
on the visitors, in the fear of their becoming residents, 
and so ending their respective reigns ; while the house- 
keeper, as she went swimming on before in all the 
conscious dignity of undisturbed power, detailed at 
great length all her own doings and sayings, with the 
various means used by her for the preservation of the 
furniture, and the annihilation of mice, moths, "clocks, 
and beasts of every description." 

"Things are no just in the order I could wish," 
said the old curmudgeon of a gardener, as he unwill- 
ingly led the way to the kitchen-garden ; " and there's 
an awfu' heat here ; you'd better no come in for fear 
o' cauld, leddies," as he produced the key of the exten- 
sive range of hothouses ; and, with a sour face, found 
himself compelled to fill a large basket with the 
choicest of fruits, which he had more profitable ways 
of disposing of. 

At length Mr. Ramsay's patience was exhausted, 
and they set off loaded with the most exquisite fruits 
and flowers, which, as he possessed not the organs of 
either taste or smell for ought beyond haggis and 
southernwood, he looked upon merely as sort of arti- 
ficial excrescences which grew about large houses. 

"Noo," said he, addressing Gertrude, as he seated 
himself in the chaise, " I dinna begrudge this, if it's 
to do you ony gude ; and, as I tell't you before, gang 
whan you like, and tak' what you like, but dinna ask 



404 THE INHERITANCE, 

me to gang wi' you; for I'm ower auld noo to be 
plagued and deeved about drains and fences and 
young plantations, out o' doors; and pipes and 
plaster and aw the rest o't, within ; and the gardener 
he canna get the apples keepit ; and the gamekeeper 
he canna keep the pheesants preserved ; an' I'm sure 
I dinna care though there was nae an apple or a phee- 
sant in the kingdom, if they wud only let me alane." 
"It unquestionably would be a great advantage to 
the place, as well as a relief to you, to have the house 
occupied, with some one who could take a judicious 

management " began Mrs. St. Clair ; but a bitter 

look from her uncle made her perceive she was tread- 
ing on dangerous ground, and she allowed the noise 
of the carriage to drown the rest of the sentence. 



CHAPTEE XLVII. 

•' Lord of love ! wliat law is this, 
That me thou makest thus tormeuted be ? " 

Spenser. 

They were returning by a different road from that 
which they had taken in going, and had not proceeded 
far when they were suddenly hailed by a pedestrian 
from the side of the road, and Major Waddell was 
immediately recognised. The chaise was stopped, 
and mutual salutations having been exchanged, was 
about to proceed, when the Major entered so vehe- 
ment a remonstrance against their passing his door 
without inquiring in person after his dear Isabella 
that even Uncle Adam's flinty nature was forced to 
yield. Indeed, as they were within a few yards of 
the gate, it was scarcely possible for even Uncle Adam 
to hold out ; and accordingly, preceded by the Major, 
the chaise turned up the romantic winding approach 
which conducted to the mansion. Black Csesar, bow- 
ing and grinning, hastened to receive them, and usher 
them into the presence of massa's lady, who, in all her 
bridal finery, sat in the attitude of being prepared to 
receive her marriage guests. Having welcomed Mrs. 
and Miss St. Clair with a tone and manner of encour- 



406 THE INHERITANCE. 

aging familiarity, "And my uncle, too ! this is really 
kind. I assure you I'm quite flattered, as I know- 
how seldom you pay visits to anybody." 

Mr. Ramsay had entered with the heroic determina- 
tion of not opening his lips during his stay ; he there- 
fore allowed that to pass with a sort of scornful growl ; 
but Mrs. St. Clair, in her softest manner, took care to 
let her know that the visit was neither a premedi- 
tated nor a complimentary one, and that she owed it 
entirely to their accidental rencontre with the Major. 

"Bless me. Major !" exclaimed the lady in a tone 
of alarm, "is it possible that you have been walking? 
And the roads are quite wet ! Why did you not tell 
me you were going out, and I would have ordered the 
carriage for you, and have gone with you, although I 
believe it is the etiquette for a married lady to be at 
home for some time ;" then observing a spot of mud 
on his boot, " And you have got your feet quite wet ; 
for Heaven's sake. Major, do go and change your boots 
directly ! I see they are quite wet !" 

The Major looked delighted at this proof of con- 
jugal tenderness, but protested that his feet were 
quite dry, holding up a foot in appeal to the company. 

" Now, how can you say so. Major, when I see they 
are quite damp? Do, I entreat you, put them off; it 
makes me perfectly wretched to think of your sitting 
with wet feet ; you know you have plenty of boots. 
I made him get a dozen pairs when we were at York, 
that I might be quite sure of his always having dry 
feet. Do, my love, let Caesar help you off with these 



THE INHERITANCE. 407 

for any sake ! — for my sake, Major. I ask it as a per- 
sonal favour." 

This was irresistible ; the Major prepared to take the 
suspected feet out of company with a sort of vague 
mixed feeling floating in his brain, which, if it had 
been put into words, would have been thus ren- 
dered — 

" What a happy dog am I to be so tenderly be- 
loved by such a charming girl ; and yet what a con- 
founded deal of trouble it is to be obliged to change 
one's boots every time my wife sees a spot of mud on 
them!" 

" Now, you won't be long, Major ? " cried the lady, 
as the Major went off, attended by Caesar. " The Major 
is so imprudent, and takes so little care of himself, he 
really makes me quite wretched; but how do you 
think he looks?" 

This was a general question, and rather a puzzling 
one. 

"As ugly as possible," thought Gertrude, who 
would have been much at a loss to combine truth and 
politeness in her reply. Luckily there are people who 
always answer their own questions when no one else 
seems disposed to do it, and Mrs. Waddell went on — 

" He certainly was much the better of Harrowgate; 
he was really looking so ill when he went there, that, 
I assure you, I was very uneasy." 

*' Whan did he ever look weel V was ready to burst 
from Uncle Adam's lips ; but by a magnanimous effort 
he drew them in, and remained silent. 



408 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Have you been lately at Bloom Park, uncle ? for 
I understand there are pretty doings going on there." 

Mr. Eamsay's only reply was a deep sonorous 
hem, and a bow, something in the style of a bull 
preparing to toss. 

" We are just come from thence," replied Mrs. St. 
Clair, immediately launching forth into raptures at all 
she had seen and tasted. 

" Indeed ! " exclaimed Mrs. Waddell ; " you have 
been either more fortunate or more favoured than I 
have been, for the Major and I went there yesterday 
and could get no admittance, which, I must say, I 
thought very odd. The people at the Lodge had the 
impertinence to refuse to let us in, which, to be sure, 
to a man of the Major's rank in life, and me a married 
woman, was a piece of insolence I never met with 
anything to equal ; but I told them I would let you 
know of their behaviour." 

*' I'm obliged to you," was the laconic reply. 

" I really think they deserved to be turned off for 
their insolence." 

"Turned off for doing their duty?" demanded 
Uncle Adam, preparing to cast off his armour. 

"A strange kind of duty, I think," retorted the 
lady in equal indignation, "to exclude your nearest 
relations from your house, and me a married woman, 
and a man of the Major's rank." 

" I never excluded you frae my house, Miss Bell," 
quoth Uncle Adam, now divested of all restraint, and 
disdaining to recognise her by her married appella- 



THE INHERITANCE. 409 

tion ; '• but if you mean that I'll no mak' you mistress 
o' my property you're perfectly right. What's your 
business at my house when I'm no there mysel'? 
What tak's you there ? " in a key of interrogation at 
least equal to a squeeze of the thumb-screw. 

" I think it was a very natural curiosity " 

" Naatral curiosity ! " interrupted Uncle Adam, 
now brimming high ; " a bonny excuse or else no for 
breakin' into other folks' hooses ! I wonder what 
your naatral curiosity will lead you to next ! " 

" I think you are much obliged to anybody that 
will take the trouble of looking a little after your 
affairs in that quarter ; for I must just tell you, uncle, 
that you are making yourself quite ridiculous by sub- 
mitting to be plundered and cheated on all hands, 
and " 

"And what if it's my pleeshure to be plundered 
and cheated, Miss, by the poor instead o' the rich 1 " 

"I really wish, uncle, you would recollect you 
are speaking to a married woman," said Mrs. Wad- 
dell with much dignity, "and that a man of the 
Major's " 

At that moment the Major entered, with a very 
red face, and a pair of new boots evidently too tight 

" You see what it is to be under orders," said he, 
pointing to his toes, and trying to smile in the midst 
of his anguish. 

" It's lucky for you, Major, I'm sure, that you are ; 
for I don't believe there ever was anybody on earth 
so careless of themselves as you are. What do you 



410 THE INHERITANCE. 

think of his handing Lady Fairacre to her carriage 
yesterday in the midst of the rain, and without his 
hat, too 1 But I hope you changed your stockings as 
well as your boots, Major 1 " 

" I assure j'-ou, upon my honour, my dear, neither 
of them were the least wet. " 

" Oh ! now, Major, you know if you haven't changed 
your stockings I shall be completely wretched," cried 
the lady, all panting with emotion. " Good gracious ! 
to think of your keeping on your wet stockings — I 
never knew anything like it ! " 

"I assure you, my dear Bell " began the 

Major. 

" Oh ! now, my dearest Major, if you have the 
least regard for me, I beseech you put off your 
stockings this instant. Oh ! I am certain you've got 
cold already — how hot you are," taking his hand, 
" and don't you think his colour very high 1 Now I'm 
quite wretched about you." 

In vain did the poor Major vow and protest as to 
the state of his stockings — it was all in vain ; the 
lady's apprehensions were not to be allayed, and 
again he had to limp away to pull off boots which 
the united exertions of himself and Csesar had with 
difficulty got on. 

"I really think my wife will be for keeping me in 
a bandbox," said he, with a sort of sardonic smile, the 
offspring of flattered vanity and personal suffering. 

As he was quitting the room, his aid -de -camp, 
Caesar, entered with a mien of much importance, and 



THE INHERITANCE. 411 

in his jargon contrived to make it known that some- 
thing had happened to springs of Massa Eamsay's 
chaise, that post-boy had gone to smith's to mend it, 
and that smith said chaise no be mend for soonest 
two hours. 

" Then I shall find my way hame mysel'," cried 
Uncle Adam, starting up ; "for I'll no wait twa hours 
upon ony chaise that ever was driven." 

In vain were all attempts to detain him ; he 
spurned the Waddell carriage, the Waddell dinner; 
refused even to wait till the Major had changed his 
stockings; in short, would do nothing but take his 
own way, which was to walk home, leaving Mrs. and 
Miss St. Clair to stay dinner and return in the evening. 

No sooner was Uncle Adam's back turned than 
Mrs. Waddell gave free scope to her indignation 
against him. Turning to Gertrude — 

" I really think he is much worse than he was, I 
don't think you have any credit in your managment 
of him, cousin ; unless he alters his behaviour I don't 
think it will be possible for the Major to keep com- 
pany with him. Did you hear how he Miss'd me to- 
day 1 me a married woman ! if the Major had been 
present he must have resented it" Having at length 
exhausted her invectives, she next began to play off 
her airs by showing her house and furniture, boast- 
ing of her fine clothes, fine pearls, fine plate, fine 
connections ; and, in short, taking all possible pains 
to excite the envy of her guests by showing what a 
thrice happy married woman Mrs. Major Waddell 



412 THE INHEEITANCK 

was. But Mrs. St. Clair had seen too much to be 
astonished at Mrs, Waddell's finery, and Gertrude's 
more refined taste felt only pity and contempt for the 
vulgar sordid mind that could attach ideas of happi- 
ness to such things. Provoked at the indifference 
with which her cousin saw and heard all this, she 
said — 

" I suppose, cousin, you are above regarding terres- 
trial objects now, since you have been living so long 
with our good aunts ; I suppose you have learnt to 
despise the things of this world as beneath your 
notice," 

"I have certainly learned to admire goodness more 
than ever I did before," said Gertrude, quite uncon- 
scious of the offence she had given by her indifference. 

*' Oh ! then I suppose you are half-converted by 
this time ; we shall have you one of the godly ladies 
next," 

"If you mean by godly, those who resemble my 
aunts, I fear it will be long before I merit such an 
appellation ; but, although, in comparison with them, 
I feel myself little better than a heathen, yet that 
does not hinder me from seeing and admiring their 
excellence ; to deny merit to others, merely because 
one does not possess it themselves, is a sin, from which 
I shall ever pray, Good Lord, dehver me ! " 

" Oh, I see you are bit," cried Mrs. Waddell, with 
a toss of her head ; "I know that sort of thing is very 
infectious, so I hope you won't bite me, cousin ; for, 
however it may do with misses, I assure you it would 



THE INHERITANCE, 413 

never answer in a married woman ; and the Major 
has no notion of your very good ladies ; he seems quite 
satisfied with me, bad as I am. Are you not, Major?" 
to the poor Major, who once more made his appear- 
ance re -booted, and trying to look easy under the 
pressure of his extreme distress. 

" Now are you quite sure you changed your stock- 
ings. Major ? Are you not cheating me 1 Caesar, did 
the Major change his stockings 1" 

Caesar, with a low bow, confirmed the important 
fact, and that interesting question was at length set 
at rest. Mrs. St. Clair was too politic to betray the 
disgust she felt ; but Gertrude, alarmed at the prospect 
of sitting audience for the day to the Major and his 
lady, expressed her wish to take a walk. 

"Dear me, cousin, are you so vulgar as to like 
walking?" exclaimed Mrs. Waddell; "I thought you 
would have been more of a fine lady by this time ; 
for my part, I really believe I have almost forgot how 
to walk ; when one has a carriage of their own, you 
know, they have no occasion to walk, and I suppose 
few people do it from choice ; you have quite spoilt 
me for a pedestrian. Major." 

Gertrude could not wait for the complimentary 
reply she saw about to issue from the Major's lips, 
but said — 

"As I am still so vulgar as to like walking, though 
not so unreasonable as to insist upon others doing it, 
you will perhaps allow me to take a peep at the 
beauties of Thombank by myself ;" and she rose to 



414 THE INHERITANCE, 

leave the room, when the Major interposed, and 
making a lame attempt to be agile — 

" Oh, impossible ! you must allow me to have the 
honour of escorting you." 

"Now, Major," cried his lady, "I must lay my 
commands upon you not to stir out to-day again ; it 
is a very damp, raw day ; I am sure my cousin will 
excuse you," — turning to Gertrude ; "he had a most 
dreadful cold in his head last week — I assure you I 
was quite frightened at it." 

" Phoo ! nonsense, my dear," said the Major, still 
hovering between delight and vexation; "nobody 
would have thought anything of it but yourself." 

" How can you say so. Major, when I counted that 
you sneezed seventeen times in the course of an hour 
and a half — and that's what he calls nonsense !" 

Leaving the loving pair to settle this tender dis- 
pute, Gertrude contrived to steal away from them. 
" Oh ! the luxury of solitude after the company of 
fools!" thought she, when she found herself outside 
the house, and alone. 



CHAPTER XLVIIL 

" Now rest thee, reader ! on thy bench, and muse 
Anticipative of the feast to come ; 
So shall delight not make thee feel thy toil. 
Lo ! I have set before thee ; for thyself 
Feed now. " 

Dantb. 

Thornbank was situated on the side of a rapid gur- 
gling river, abounding in picturesque rocky scenery. 
It was a meek, gray, autumnal day, when earth bor- 
rows no tint from sky, but, rich in its own natural 
hues, presents a matchless variety of colour, from the 
wan declining green to the gorgeous crimson and 
orange — nature's richest, saddest panoply ! The 
sweet mournful song of the robin was the only 
sound that mingled with the murmur of the stream. 
It was a day for musing and tender melancholy ; a 
day that came o'er the heart "like a melody that's 
sweetly played in tune." 

Trite as the reflections are which have been drawn 
from this solemn season, and obvious as is the moral 
which points to the heart at witnessing the decay of 
the beauties and the graces of the material world, still 
the same train of thought will naturally arise in every 
mind of sensibility, and the same sober hue insensibly 



416 THE INHERITANCE. 

steals over the soul — "hues which have words, and 
speak to ye of Heaven." 

Relieved from every tormenting object, Gertrude 
sat down on a rustic seat, hung round with many a 
drooping scentless flower, and resigning herself to the 
soothing influence of the day and the scene, she 
gradually sank into those enchanting day-dreams — 
those beautiful chimeras which a young romantic 
imagination can so readily create. The pleasures of 
imagination certainly were hers, but as if only to 
render her more susceptible to the annoyances of real 
life. 

She was recalled from the illusions in which she 
had been indulging by sounds little in unison with 
the harmonious stillness that surrounded her ; a weak 
giggling laugh falling at intervals upon the ear, its 
pauses filled by a sharp, loud, English tongue, louder 
and louder, still drew near ; and presently Miss Lilly 
Black, leaning on the arm of a little, spruce, high- 
dressed young man, appeared. Much surprise and 
joy and affection was testified by Miss Lillias at this 
meeting with her cousin, and Mr. Augustus Larkins 
was introduced with an air of triumph and delight, 
Mr. Augustus Larkins was what many would have 
called a pretty young man ; he had regular features, 
very pink cheeks, very black eyebrows, and what 
was intended for a very smart expression. He was 
studiously dressed in the reigning fashion, but did not 
look fashionable for all that. He had a sharp, high- 
pitched voice, and a very strong, but not a pure 



THE INHERITANCE. 417 

English accent. Such was the future cousin to whom 
Miss St. Clair was now introduced; and with many- 
flourishing bows, and with much mouthing about 
honour, pleasure, and so forth, on his part, the cere- 
mony was happily got over. 

" Dear me, cousin, have you been sitting here by 
yourself?" said Miss Lilly in a soft, pitying tone; 
" what a pity we did not know, and Ave could have 
come sooner; you must have been so dull !" 

" I did not find it so," replied Gertrude. 

" Ah, you Scotch ladies are all fond of solitude," 
cried Mr. Larkins : " Witness that noble apostrophe 
of my Lady Randolph's in your celebrated tragedy of 
Douglas, 'Ye woods and wilds, whose melancholy 
gloom accords with my soul's sadness, and draws 
forth the tear of sorrow from my bursting heart ! ' 
How uncommonly well that was got up last season 
at Drury Lane; you have, of course, been in town, 
mem?" 

Gertrude replied in the affirmative. 

" And which of the houses did you give the prefer- 
ence to ? " 

She had not visited the theatres. 

" No, sure ! is it possible, mem, to have been in 
town without seeing either of the houses 1 How pro- 
digiously unfortunate ! But," with a significant smile 
to Miss Lilly, " I hope we shall have the pleasure of 
showing your cousin the lions by-and-bye. In town we 
call it showing the lions to show the sights and shows 
to our country cousins." 

VOL. I. 2 B 



418 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Oh, that will be delightful! Won't it, cousin 1" 
asked the simple Lilly ; but her cousin only coloured 
with contempt at the idea, 

" The theatre is a favourite amusement of mine," 
continued Mr. Larkins. 

" And of mine too ; I am so fond of the playhouse," 
said Miss Lilly, bent upon all occasions to prove the 
congeniality of their souls, 

"Did you ever see Young in Eomeof 

" No, I don't think I ever saw Mr, Young act it, 
but I once saw a Mr. Something else — I forget his 
name — do it." 

" La ! I have seen Young at least a dozen times in 
Eomeo ; it is a favourite character of mine ; indeed, I 
have the whole part by heart." 

"Is that possible f exclaimed Miss Lilly, in ten- 
fold admiration of her lover's perfections ; " do let us 
hear you repeat some of it ; I'm sure my cousin would 
like it so much." 

"You must learn Juliet, and then I shall be your 
Eomeo ; you would make a capital Juliet ; your hair 
is exactly the colour of Miss O'^eil's." 

" Is it really 1 How I should like if I could act 
Juliet!" 

"When I have you in Liquorpond Street," whis- 
pered Mr. Larkins, "we shall have some famous 
scenes." 

"That will be charming! I am so fond of deep 
tragedies !" 

" You don't dislike comedy, I hope ? " 



THE INHERITANCE. 419 

" Oh, no, I delight in comedies and farces ; I like 
farces very much too." 

"Some of the after-pieces we have in town are 
famously good; what a prodigious run Midas had, 
for instance ; ' Pray, Goody,' was sung for a whole 
season," 

" Oh, 'Pray, Goody,' is without exception the most 
beautiful thing I ever heard !" exclaimed Miss Lilly, 
turning up her eyes in rapture. 

" How amazingly you will be pleased with some of 
our pantomimes in town ! What a famous good thing 
we had last winter at Covent Garden, called 'The 
Oyster in Love ! ' " — here Miss Lilly giggled. 

" 'Pon my soul, ' The Oyster in Love ' was the title, 
and to let you into a little of a secret, it was composed, 
music and all, by a friend of mine " 

" Oh, goodness ! was it really 1 Do tell us all about 
it" 

"Why, the piece opens with a splendid marine 
view; waves — waves as high, mem, as these trees, 
and as white — as white as your gown, roaring in the 
most natural manner imaginable. Two of the ladies 
of my party, who had just returned from Margate, 
became, in short, perfectly sea-sick — 'pon my soul, I 
thought they'd have fainted. However, it was the 
first night, and I was a friend of the author, so I 
wouldn't have stirred to have handed the finest woman 
in the house." 

"Oh! you cruel creature!" cried Miss Lilly, with 
a giggle ; " and what became of them V 



420 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Oh ! they recovered with the assistance of smell- 
ing-bottles and oranges ; but, 'pon my soul, I felt a 
little queer myself. Well, after the waves — these 
curly-headed monsters, as Shakespeare calls 'em — had 
rolled backwards and forwards, till, 'pon my honour, 
I thought they'd have been into the pit ; at last they 
retired in the most graceful manner possible, leaving 
behind 'em an enormous large oyster at the foot of 
a rock; but the beautiful thing, mem, was to see 
the stage, which you know represented the beach, 
all covered with shells and spar and sea-weed. You 
can have no conception of anything so natural" 

" Oh ! how I should like to have seen it," sighed 
Miss Lilly. 

"Well, then, there was this oyster, which you'd 
have sworn was a real oyster but for the size, lying 
at the bottom of the rock; then enters the divine 
Miss Foote, dressed as a princess, with the most splen- 
did crown upon her head, all over with precious stones, 
but looking very melancholy, with her pocket-hand- 
kerchief in her hand. She is attended by a troop of 
3'oung damsels, all very beautiful, and most beautifully 
dressed; they sing and dance a most elegant new 
quadrille; and while they are dancing the oyster 
begins to move, and heaves a deep sigh, upon which 
they all take to their heels, and dance off in all direc- 
tions, shrieking most musically in parts. The princess, 
however, remains, draws near the oyster, contemplates 
it for some time, clasps her hands, falls upon her 
knees beside it, while it rolls, and heaves, and sighs ; 



THE INHERITANCE. 421 

'pon my honour, it was quite affecting ; I saw several 
handkerchiefs out" 

"How terrified I should have been!" exclaimed 
Miss Lilly. 

" Well then, the princess sings that charming song, 

which, of course, you know, — 

• This oyster is my world, 
And I with love will open it.' 

She then takes a diamond bodkin from her hair, and 
tries to open the shell. No sooner has she touched it 
than it opens a little bit, and the point of a beautiful 
long black beard comes out ; the princess, in the 
greatest rapture, drops her bodkin, seizes the beard 
in both hands, kisses it, bedews it with her tears, 
presses it to her heart, and, in short, is in the greatest 
transports of joy at recognising her lover's beard." 

"Good gracious ! was the oyster her lover?" cried 
Miss Lilly. 

"Wait and you shall hear. Well, while she is 
indulging in all these graceful demonstrations of the 
fondest affection, suddenly a sort of dragon or sea- 
horse starts up, seizes the bodkin and disappears. 
At the same moment the sky — that is, the stage — 
becomes almost quite dark, thunder and lightning 
ensue, the sea rises with the most tremendous noise, 
and threatens to engulf in its raging bosom the 
princess and the oyster " 

"How interesting!" exclaimed Miss Lilly; "I 
never heard anything like it !" 

" The sea gains upon them every moment. Now 



422 THE INHERITANCE. 

they are completely surrounded ; she raises her eyes, 
sees the rock, a sudden thought strikes her, she merely 
stops to sing that sweet little air, 'By that beard, 
whose soft expression' (by-the-bye that was twice 
encored); then in the most graceful distress she 
begins to climb the rock." 

" How high was the rock 1 " asked Miss Lilly. 

"Why, I take it, not less than thirty feet high, 

and almost quite perpendicular. Soft music is heard 

all the time she is ascending. She stops when about 

half way up quite exhausted, then comes forward to 

the point of rock where she is standing, which, upon 

my soul, I don't think was larger than my hand; 

and, while she stops to recover her breath, sings one 

of your beautiful Scotch songs — 

' Low down, in the broom, 
He's waiting for me ; 

Waiting for me, my love,' etc. 

Looking down upon the oyster all the while. There 
was a great row then : one half of the house called 
'Encore,' the other 'Go on.' At length she was 
allowed to proceed, and she gains the top of the rock 
just as an enormous wave is on the point of over- 
whelming her oyster." 

"Oh, how dreadful!" wailed the sympathising Lilly. 

" What should you have done there 1 " 

" Oh ! I'm sure, I don't know." 

"Well, she advances close to the edge of the rock 
— pon my soul, it made me a little giddy to see her ! 
— takes off her crown, unbinds her hair, lays down 



THE INHERITANCE. 423 

with her head hanging over the rock, and her hair 
falls down to the very bottom of the rock where the 
oyster is lying." 

"Goodness ! and her own hair?" 

"Of course, you know a lady's wig becomes her 
own hair." 

"Oh, you are so droll !" with a giggle. 

" Well, the hair sticks to the oyster, or the oyster 
to the hair, I can't tell which, and slowly rising, she 
hoists him up, and up, and up — you might have heard 
a pin drop in the house while that was going on — till 
at last she has him on the very top of the rock ! 
Then the house gave vent to its feelings, and a perfect 
tumult of applause and admiration ensued." 

" No wonder ; I can't conceive how she could do 
it. How big was the oyster ? " 

"Why, as large, I suppose, as a washing-tub." 

"And to pull that up with her hair! Did you 
ever hear anything like it, cousin ? " 

"Never!" said Gertrude. 

" Now, tell us what was acted next 1 " 

"' Then there's a fight between the dragon and a 
whale, and the whale throws up a fine diamond 
oyster knife at the feet of the princess ; she seizes it, 
rat -tat -tats upon the shell, which instantly flies 
open with a prodigious noise, and out rushes a warrior, 
all clad in a complete suit of mother-of-pearl, with a 
fine long black-pointed beard, the same he had shook 
out of his shell ; he slays the dragon; the sea becomes 
as smooth as glass ; Venus rises out of it in a car 



424 THE INHERITANCE. 

drawn by two doves harnessed with roses, and guided 
by two young Cupids." 

" How delightful ! And then, I suppose, they are 
married?" 

" Ah ! their happiness would have been very in- 
complete without that termination," said Mr. Larkins 
tenderly. 

" It must be late," said Miss St. Clair, rising ; 
"almost dinner time, I should suppose." 

" Alas ! that Love, whose view is muffled still, 
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will. 
Where shall we dine ? " 

cried Mr. Larkins in a theatrical manner. " You 
know, of course, that is out of Romeo." 

" Oh, is it? I had forgot that, but it is beautiful," 
said the complaisant Lilly. 

Mr. Larkins continued to talk and spout all the 
way home, and his fair to giggle and admire. 

"Well, cousin," said she, seizing upon Gertrude, 
as they entered the house, "what do you think of 
him 1 Is he not charming ? — so genteel, and so droll, 
and at the same time he has so much sensibility; 
he never travels without poetry; and he plays the 
flute, too, most beautifully. And he is so fond of the 
country ; he says he is to drive me out of town every 
Sunday in his Tilbury. Oh, I wonder how Bell could 
ever fall in love with the Major ! He hasn't the 
least taste for poetry ; and Andrew is such an ugly 
name ; don't you think I have been most fortunate 
in a name, for it is so uncommon to meet Avith an 



THE INHERITANCE. 425 

Augustus; and I think Larkins very pretty too — 
don't you f 

But they were now at the drawing-room door, 
which put a stop to Miss Lilly's raptures, and soon 
after, dinner ended all tete-a-tetes. 

Mrs. Major Waddell played the Nabob's lady as 
though she had been born a Nabobess ; she talked 
much and well of curry and rice, and old Madeira, 
and the liver, and the Company, — which did not mean 
the present company, but the India Company. Her 
silver comers were very handsome, and she had to 
take off some of her rings before she could carve the 
grouse. In short, nothing could be better of its kind. 
Nevertheless, Mrs. Major had her own petty chagrins, 
as every petty mind must have ; nobody seemed suffi- 
ciently dazzled with the splendour which surrounded 
them, and Mr. Larkins had the ill breeding to talk 
much of Birch's turtle and Thames salmon and town. 
At tea it was still worse ; like all under-bred people 
he mistook familiarity for fashionable ease, and either 
lounged upon her fine sofa or stood with his back to 
the fire. 

At length the chaise was announced, and as Mrs. 
and Miss St. Clair took leave, the gallant Major pre- 
sented his arm. "Oh, now. Major, I hope you're not 
going to the door without your hat, and at this time 
of night ! Now, it will make me perfectly wretched ; 
pray now, Major — aunt — cousin — Mr. Larkins — for 

Heaven's sake " 

Mrs. Waddell was getting hysterical, and the poor 



426 THE INHERITANCE. 

Major "withdrawing hi>s offered aid, Mr. Larkins 
advanced. 

" And, oh ! put on your hat ! " sighed Miss Lilly 
in imitation, as he boldly presented his brush head to 
the evening air. 

" How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank ! 
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears " 

spouted Mr. Augustus, as he handed the ladies into 
the carriage. They bowed and drove off. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

' ' On s'ennuie tvhs bien ici. " 

Voltaire. 

But the present order of things could not long endure. 
Mrs. St. Clair grew impatient under the secret sense 
of her sisters' superiority, and weary of their simple 
uniform style of living. Her habits were luxurious, 
her mind was joyless. Gertrude, too, in all the rest- 
lessness of suspense, longed to return to Rossville. 
She would there hear her lover's name mentioned ; 
she would be amidst the scenes with which his image 
was associated, and there would be enjoyment even 
in these shadowy fantastic pleasures. While such 
were the feelings of the mother and daughter. Lord 
Rossville felt no less impatient for the return of his 
niece, not for the charms and graces of her society, 
but because she was a being subject to his manage- 
ment and control. True, this act of rebellion might 
have staggered his faith as to the extent of his 
dominion; but he flattered himself that was a sort 
of thundercloud, which, by the wise and vigorous 
measures he had adopted, must already have passed 
away. Besides, Gertrude's prolonged absence would 
have an appearance in the eyes of the world ; suspi- 



428 THE INHERITANCE. 

cions might arise ; things might be said. Even in the 
bustle of electioneering Mr. Delmour had remarked 
upon the impropriety of Miss St. Clair being allowed 
to reside so long in a paltry provincial town, and 
associating with people who might be very good in 
their way, but were not quite suited to her station, or 
such as he would wish his wife to be intimate with. 
On the other hand, Mrs. St. Clair, in the course of 
her correspondence with the Earl, had taken care to 
insinuate that such was Mr. Adam Eamsay's partiality 
for her daughter, it was more than probable he would 
make a point of her residing entirely with him unless 
she were speedily recalled to his Lordship's protection. 
The visit to Bloom Park strengthened this insinuation, 
and decided him as to the necessity of immediately 
recalling his niece. 

A most laborious and long-winded letter was there- 
fore penned to Miss St, Clair, in which, while he de- 
precated the idea of ever taking her into his favour 
until she had renounced the error of her ways, he at 
the same time announced his intention of receiving 
her again under his roof, in the confident hope that 
she would ere long perceive the absolute necessity 
and imperious duty she was under of acceding to his 
long-projected, thoroughly-digested, and firmly-deter- 
mined-upon plan for her ultimate disposal. His Lord- 
ship next proceeded to state that he had consulted 
the most eminent counsel as to the deeds of entail, 
and that three of them were of opinion that the 
whole of the property could and might be most effect- 



THE INHERITANCE, 429 

ively alienated, disponed, and otherwise disposed of, 
to the utter exclusion of Miss St. Clair as heiress-at- 
law. Such being the case, it was his firm intention 
and absolute purpose to act upon this opinion by 
executing a new deed of entail within three months 
from the present date, unless, before the expiry of 
that period, Miss St. Clair should think proper to 
accede to his plan and pursue the course he had 
pointed out to her. Such was the substance of a 
letter filling nearly seven pages of closely -written 
paper. 

"I am sorry — very sorry," said Gertrude, with a 
sigh, as she finished reading it, " for the trouble and 
vexation I am causing Lord Rossville ; and perhaps it 
were better that I should never return to Eossville 
again than that I should go there only to make him 
cherish hopes which never can be realised. I never 
can act as he would have me — I never can change my 
sentiments." 

** You can at least keep your sentiments to yourself, 
considering how much is at stake on their account," 
said her mother, with asperity ; " and, indeed, setting 
everything else out of the question, I think delicacy 
alone demands that much of you ; at least, I should 
be cautious how I expressed an attachment which to 
all appearance is no longer, if indeed it ever was, 
reciprocal." 

"Even were it so," replied her daughter, making 
an effort to repress her emotion, while her faltering 
voice betrayed the anguish of such a supposition, 



430 THE INHEEITANCE. 

" deceived I may be myself, but I never will deceive 
others ; let, then. Lord Rossville know that if I re- 
turn to his house I return unchanged — unchangeable." 

" Beware how you provoke me, Gertrude, for I too 
am unchanged — unchangeable in my determination 
never to see you the prey of that man. I have 
pledged my word it shall not be." 

"Pledged your word!" repeated her daughter in- 
dignantly ; " who had a right to demand such a 
pledge?" 

" One who has the right and will exercise it," said 
Mrs. St. Clair, in some agitation; "but this is wander- 
ing from the point. You have promised you will not 
enter into any engagement until you have attained 
the age of twenty-one ; on that promise I rely. Mean- 
while, all I require of you is only what is due to your- 
self ; leave me, therefore, to manage matters with the 
Earl, and do you remain passive for the present." 

"I am sick of management, of mystery," exclaimed 
Gertrude dejectedly ; " already," cried she, giving way 
to tears, " I am almost weary of the world ; I feel 
myself a puppet ; a slave — nay, the slave of a slave ; 
subject, it seems, to the control of a very menial ; but 
I wiU not endure this mockery of greatness, mingled, 
too, with such degradation." 

There was a height and a depth in the feelings of 
Miss St. Clair which, when once roused, her mother 
could not always contend with. She sometimes felt 
that her only chance of victory was in appearing to 
yield ; and upon this occasion, as upon many others, 



THE INHERITANCE. 431 

she contrived to work upon her daughter's affections, 
and prevailed upon her to acquiesce in her wishes, 
provided she were not considered as a party in Lord 
Rossville's plans. 

The following day the Earl's equipage and attend- 
ants arrived ; and again Mrs. St. Clair's worldly mind 
exulted as she looked on the proud pageant at which 
the whole town of Barnford had turned out to gaze. 
It was not without emotion Gertrude bade adieu to 
her aunts, who were not less affected at parting with 
her ; they saw she was not happy, but were too deli- 
cate to intrude upon her confidence. 

"Farewell, my love," said her Aunt Mary, as she 
pressed her in her arms ; *' and ever bear in mind that, 
in this world, not to be grieved, not to be afflicted, 
not to be in danger, is impossible. Yet, dearest Ger- 
trude, even in this world, there is a rest of heart — 
ah ! would you but seek it where only it is to be 
found!" 

But to the young unchastened spirit nothing 
seems less desirable than that rest of heart which 
in their minds is associated with the utter extinction 
of all that is noble and graceful and enthusiastic ; 
and Gertrude shrank from the wish breathed for her 
by her aunt 

" No," thought she, "wretched as I am, yet I would 
not exchange my feelings, tortured as they are, for 
that joyless peace which is to me as the slumber of 
the dead!" 

And where ia the youthful ardent spirit, untaught 



432 THE INHERITANCE. 

of Heavenly love, which has not, at some period of 
its life, perilled its all on some baseless fabric, and 
preferred even the shattered wreck of its happiness to 
the waveless calm of indifference 1 

Gertrude's melancholy was not diminished by her 
return to Eossville. But a few weeks had passed 
since she had left it in all the pride and magnificence 
of early autumn, while nature seemed scarcely past 
its prime, while life was in the leaf and spirit in the 
air, and the bright toned woods glowed in all their 
variegated splendour beneath a clear blue sky and 
cloudless sun. 

" And now the cold autumnal dews are seen 

To cobweb every gi-een ; 
And by the low-shorn rowans doth appear 

The fast declining year ; 
The sapless branches doff their summer suits, 

And wane their winter fruits ; 
And stormy blasts have forc'd the quaking trees 

To wrap their trembling limbs in suits of mossy frieze." 

In plain prose, it was a bleak, raw, chill November 
day, when nature seems a universal blank even to 
her most ardent admirers; and to use an artist 
phrase, nothing could be more in keeping with the day 
than the reception Miss St. Clair met with from her 
uncle. It was cold, formal, and unkindly, and every 
word fell like a drop of petrifying water on her heart. 
Lord Rossvilie never had been upon easy terms 
with his niece ; indeed, it was not in his nature to be 
upon easy terms with anybody; but the additional 
stiffness and solemnity and verbosity he thought 



THE INHERITANCE. 433 

proper to assume were truly appalling, and caused 
her something of that sensation sensitive beings are 
said to feel while under the influence of a thunder- 
cloud. 

The Earl's aspect was, indeed, enough to blight 
hope itself. There was positive determination in 
every line and lineament; his eyes had grown rounder, 
his eyebrows higher, his lips more rigid, his hands 
longer, his steps were more ponderous, his head was 
immovable ; there was no speculation in his eye ; his 
very wig looked as hard as marble. In short, over 
the whole man was diffused an indescribable air of 
hopeless inflexibility. 

There was no company — nothing to relieve the 
hard outline of the piece — not even the usual members 
of the family; nobody but Lady Betty and her 
eternal rug and her fat lap-dog and her silly novel ; 
and the dulness and tedium which reigned may have 
been felt but cannot be described. 



VOL. I. 2 F 



CHAPTEE L. 

" If thou hast dipt thy foot in the river, yet pass not over 
Rubicon."— Sir Thomas Brown. 

Several days passed in this state of cheerless mono- 
tony, when one morning, as the ladies pursued their 
different avocations in unsocial companionship, a 
letter was brought to Mrs, St. Clair, which she had 
no sooner opened than Gertrude observed her change 
colour and betray visible signs of agitation. The 
servant said the bearer waited an answer, and in 
manifest confusion she rose and left the room. 
Although superior to the meanness of curiosity, Miss 
St. Clair could not help feeling a natural desire to 
know the contents of a letter which had produced so 
visible a change on her mother, and she sat a con- 
siderable time vainly looking for her return. At 
length, unable to repress her anxiety, she put aside 
her drawing-materials, and hastened to her mother's 
dressing-room. Upon entering she found Mrs. St. 
Clair seated at a table, with writing implements 
before her, and her head resting on her hand, seem- 
ingly buried in profound meditation. 

" I was afraid something was the matter, mamma," 
said her daughter, gently advancing towards her. 



THE INHERITANCE. 435 

"Leave me !" cried her mother in an angry im- 
patient tone ; " leave me, I say — I can't be disturbed." 

"Mamma, can I do nothing for joni" asked her 
daughter, as she reluctantly prepared to obey. 

"Much, much," murmured Mrs. St. Clair, with a 
deep sigh; "but at present I desire you will leave 
me," raising her voice in an authoritative tone ; and 
Gertrude, however unwilHngly, found herself com- 
pelled to obey. Uneasy and restless, she could not 
compose her mind to any of her ordinary occupations. 
She saw something had occurred to agitate her mother, 
and she longed to participate, and, if possible, to aid 
her in her distress. After a while she again returned 
to her, and was again repulsed with anger. Seeing 
that her presence only caused irritation, she desisted 
from further attempts; and, taking advantage of a 
watery gleam of sunshine, which streamed from a 
pale, sickly sky, she set out on a solitary ramble to 
which fresh air and exercise only could give a zest. 
She slowly pursued her way through leafless woods, 
where the only sounds she heard where those of her 
own footsteps amongst the fallen leaves, and the 
monotonous rush of the swollen stream. But each 
step was fraught with sad, yet soothing recollections 
— for rocks, woods, and waters seemed all as the 
registers of her lover's vows ; and in each silent 
memorial she felt as though she looked on the living 
witness of his faith. Thus nursing her fond contem- 
plations, she had wandered a considerable length of 
way, when she was roused to observation by the 



436 THE INHERITANCE. 

sudden darkness of the sky ; but whether caused by 
the lateness of the hour, or the approach of a storm, 
she was not sufficiently mistress of signs and times to 
ascertain. Whichever it might be, it had the effect 
of dispelling all romance, and making her wish herself 
once more safe at home. She was, however, more 
than two miles from it by the way she had come; 
but if she could get across the river there was a short 
cut which would take her home in ten minutes, and 
she walked a little farther on in search of some step- 
ping-stones which had been placed there instead of a 
bridge, which had been swept away by what, in the 
language of the country, is called a speat. 

A great deal of rain had fallen the preceding night, 
and the river was so much swollen she could scarcely 
recognise the huge blocks by which she had frequently 
crossed the clear pebbly stream when it scarcely laved 
their sides. Now they merely held their broad heads 
above the brown sullen waters, but still they were 
above it ; and, trusting to her own steady head and 
firm step, she with some little palpitation, placed her 
foot on the first stone. " C'est ne que la p-emihre pas 
qui coute," said she to herself; but notwithstanding 
this comfortable assurance, there she stood for some 
minutes ere she had courage to venture on a second 
step. But the sky was getting blacker, and some large 
straggling drops of rain began to fall. Ashamed of 
her irresolution, she was about to proceed, when she 
heard some one calling loudly to her to stop, and 
immediately she beheld Mr, Lyndsay approaching at 



THE INHERITANCE. 437 

full speed on horseback. In an instant lie urged his 
horse into the river, but the current was so strong it 
was with the utmost difficulty the animal was enabled 
to gain the opposite side. 

" Is it possible," cried Lyndsay, as he threw himself 
off, " that you are going to attempt to cross the river 
in its present state ?" 

"I not only mean to attempt but to succeed," 
answered she, as she felt her courage rise to its 
utmost pitch, since she had now an opportunity of 
displaying it; and she was about to proceed, when he 
seized her hand — 

" You are not aware of the danger ; the river, you 
may see, is far above its usual height, and is rising 
every moment. A great deal of rain has fallen, and 
a fresh flood will be down directly." 

" WeU, it seems merely a choice of evils, as I seem 
destined to be drowned one way or another," said 
Gertrude, as the rain now began to fall in earnest 

" I assure you, then, you will find it much the least 
evil to be drowned on dry land, so pray take my 
advice for once." 

But Gertrude felt as though it were due to Colonel 
Delmour to accord nothing to Mr. Lyndsay, against 
whom she laboured to keep up what she deemed a due 
resentment, and she therefore persisted in her inten- 
tion. 

" I am far from desiring Mr. Lyndsay's attendance," 
said she somewhat disdainfully. " I beg he will take 
his way, and allow me to take mine." 



438 THE INHEKITANCE. 

Lyndsay made no reply but by hastily snatching 
her from the place where she stood ; and at the same 
instant, a sound as of many waters was heard, a sea of 
foam was tearing its course along — and, in the twink- 
ling of an eye, the stones were buried in the waves. 
For some moments Gertrude remained motionless, 
gazing on the mass of discoloured waters as they 
roared along, till she was roused by the cry and the 
struggle of some living thing, which was swept past 
with the speed of lightning, and ingulfed in the raging 
flood. She turned shuddering away ; and Lyndsay, 
taking her arm in his, would have led her from the 
spot ; but, smote with the sense of her own injustice 
towards him, she exclaimed, "Not till I have here 
acknowledged my rashness — my folly; you risked 
your life to save mine, while I — unjust — ungrateful, 
that I was " 

" Not to me, my dear cousin, is any such acknow- 
ledgment due," said Mr. Lyndsay mildly ; " give your 
thanks to God ; only let us be friends." 

Gertrude gave him her hand. " "When can I cease 
to look upon you as my friend 1 — you who have saved 
me from destruction ! " 

Lyndsay sighed, but made no reply, and they 
walked on in silence, till the rain, which had hitherto 
fallen at intervals in an undecided manner, now burst 
forth, in what in Scotland is emphatically called an 
even-down jjour. Neither rocks nor trees afl'orded any 
shelter, but they were now in sight of a summer-house, 
and thither they hastened. While Lyndsay stopped 



THE INHERITANCE. 439 

on the outside to fasten his horse, intending to leave 
him until he could send his servant to fetch him home, 
Gertrude rushed in, and almost blinded by the rain 
did not at first perceive that some one had already 
taken possession of it, and was pacing up and down 
with visible signs of impatience. But, at her entrance, 
the person turned quickly round, and she encountered 
the sharp baleful glance of Lewiston. 

" Ha ! this is more than I expected," cried he, in 
an accent of pleasure and surprise ; then taking her 
passive hand, " This is well — this is as it should be ; 
come, my pretty messenger, sit down, don't be afraid." 

But this caution, though uttered in a soft, con- 
ciliating manner, was in vain. At first amazement 
had rendered Gertrude mute and motionless ; but as 
he attempted to seat her and place himself beside 
her she instantly regained her faculties, and strug- 
gling to release herself from his hold, she called 
loudly — 

*' Mr. Lyndsay, save me ! oh, save me !" 

But Mr. Lyndsay had withdrawn a few yards to 
place his horse under the shelter of a projecting rock, 
and the roar of the river drowned all other sounds. 

"Fool !" exclaimed Lewiston, as he held both her 
hands, and squeezed them with almost painful vio- 
lence; "be still, I tell you — be still, and you have 
nothing to fear ; but if you provoke me, by Heaven, 
you will rue the day you first saw the light ! " and he 
compelled her to be seated, 

Gertrude would have spoken, but the words died 



440 THE INHERITANCE. 

on her lips, and she sat pale and trembling, unable 
to articulate. 

" Why, this is foolish," cried he, but in a gentler 
tone : " very foolish. Have I not told you that you 

have nothing to fear — that I love you too well? 

The deuce ! cannot you be quiet?" as Gertrude again 
called wildly on Mr. Lyndsay. " Why did you come 
here only to squall, you simpleton 1 Why did she not 
come herself, and where is the money ? Answer me, 
I say. A squire, by Jupiter !" exclaimed he fiercely, 
as Lyndsay now entered. " Well, sir, what is your 
business here?" 

Mr. Lyndsay started with surprise as he beheld 
Miss St. Clair seated by the side of this man, whom 
he instantly recognised as the same from whom he 
had formerly rescued her ; but her extreme paleness 
and the terror depicted on her countenance showed 
what her endurance cost her. The insolent question 
was repeated in a still higher key. Even Lpidsay's 
usual calmness was almost overcome, but he repelled 
the rising of his wrath, and answered — 

"My business here is to protect this lady from 
insult or intrusion," and advancing to her, he placed 
himself by her side. 

"Oh, let us begone !" cried Gertrude, as she rose 
and took hold of his arm ; but she trembled so much 
she could scarcely stand. 

" You cannot go yet," said Lyndsay ; then turning 
to Lewiston — " but as your presence seems to agitate 
Miss St. Clair, I must request of you to withdraw." 



THE INHEKITANCE. 441 

" By what right, sir, do you interfere between this 
lady and me ?" demanded he fiercely. 

" 1 know of no right you have to ask me such a 
question," said Mr. Lyndsay coolly. 

" You know of no right I have ! and pray what do 
you know of me or my rights V 

Lyndsay's blood rose at this continued insolence ; 
but making an eflfort to master his spirit, he replied— 

"You say true, I know nothing of you; but I 
know you can have no right to alarm Miss St. Clair ; 
if you have any claim upon her notice this is neither 
a place nor a time for it." 

" Her notice ! " repeated Lewiston, with a scornful 
smile. " Well, be it so ! I have claims upon her 
notice, then, and you will do well to leave us to settle 
our own affairs." 

"Oh, no — no !" cried Gertrude, as she clung to her 
cousin's arm, " do not leave me. I have nothing to say. " 
But as she thought of her mother's mysterious connec- 
tion with him she trembled while she disclaimed him. 

" Do not be afraid," said Lyndsay, trying to reassure 
her ; " there is notliing to fear, except insolence ; and 
that I shall spare you, if this gentleman wiJl walk out 
with me for a few minutes." 

"I have already told you that I have no business 
with you, sir," said Lewiston ; " and the insolence is 
yours, who thus break in upon my appointments. 
Come, my dear," to Gertrude, " rid yourself of your 
spark quietly, for I don't wish to harm the young 
man ; tell him the truth, and bid him begone." 



442 ' THE INHERITANCE. 

Never in his life had Mr. Lyndsay's self-control 
been so severely tried, but he still had firmness to 
keep himself in check. 

" I know of no appointment," said Gertrude faintly, 
as she thought of the letter her mother had that 
morning received ; " accident alone brought me 
here." 

Lewiston looked steadfastly at her, 

" You are sure that is the case 1 Take care how 
you attempt to deceive me — your hand upon it," 

Gertrude involuntarily recoiled, 

"How dare you thus presume?" cried Lyndsay 
passionately; but in an agony of terror, she hastily 
held out her hand. Lewiston seized it, and holding 
it up with an air of insolent triumph— 

" 'Tis well you obeyed me — else, by all the saints, 
in another second I should have had you on your 
knees before me." 

"Audacious villain !" exclaimed Mr, Lyndsay, pro- 
voked beyond further forbearance, and seizing him 
by the collar, shook him with a force that made him 
stagger, "This lady's presence alone prevents me 
from punishing you as you deserve," 

Gertrude shrieked, as Lewiston instantly drew a 
small dagger-sword from his walking cane, 

" Do you see that 1" cried he, with a scornful laugh. 
"How easily I could pink one of those fine eyes of 
yours, or open a vein for you, and let out a little of 
your hot blood ; but I don't think the worse of you 
for this exploit, and only give you this little piece of 



THE INHERITANCE. 443 

advice, before you talk of punishing to be sure you 
have the means in your own hands." 

"I thank you," said Lyndsay, as he led Gertrude 
to the door; then turning back, he added in a low 
voice — " and I shall return to repeat my acknowledg- 
ments — only wait me here." 

The rain had not ceased, but its violence had 
abated, and they walked on for some time in silence, 
till they both at the same moment descried Mrs, St. 
Clair approaching, muffled in a large cloak ; but she 
too seemed to have perceived them, for she instantly 
turned back, and in another moment disappeared by 
one of the many paths which traversed the wood. 

"Oh !" exclaimed Gertrude, with a burst of bitter 
feeling at this confirmation of her mother's clandestine 
intercourse. " Oh ! that the flood from which you 
saved me had swept me away, rather than that I 
should live to endure this degradation !" 

"My dear cousin," said Mr. Lyndsay gently, "do 
not give way to such dreadful thoughts; were you 
steeped in crime you could not do more than despair 
— even then you ought not to do that." 

" Crime there must be somewhere," cried Gertrude 
in the same tone of excitement ; " else why all this 
mystery, and why am I subjected to the insults of 
that man, unless " 

"Do you know who and what he really is?" said 
Mr. Lyndsay. 

" Oh, ask me no questions ! " cried she again, giv- 
ing way to tears. 



444 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Pardon me, I have done wrong; it is not from 
you I ought to seek information." 

" Seek it not at all — leave me to my fate — abject 
and degraded I already am in your eyes." 

" How little you know me if you think that cir- 
cumstances, over which you evidently have no con- 
trol, could ever lessen you in my eyes ! It is not the 
misdeeds of others that can touch your soul, and 
they ought not to influence your character. There is 
not — there cannot be, degradation but in personal 
sin. " 

" Yet I owe it entirely to your generous confidence 
that I am not suspected — despised " 

" Suspicion itself scarcely could suspect you ; and 
for despising you — do not think so falsely, so meanly 
of yourseK, as to imagine that any one would dare to 
despise you. I fear something is wrong, and that you 
are not in good hands ; but put your trust in God, 
my dear cousin, preserve your own natural integrity, 
and all will one day be right. Meantime, if I can be 
of service to you, look upon me as a friend — as a 
brother; will you promise me thisf 

Gertrude, in somewhat calmer accents, promised 
she would. Lyndsay continued to talk to her in the 
same soothing yet strengthening strain till they 
reached the Castle, when they separated with senti- 
ments of reciprocal interest and regard. 



CHAPTER LI 

''• What man so wise, so earthly witt so ware 
As to descry the crafty cunning traine, 
By which deceit doth maske in visour faire, 
And cast her colours died deep in graine, 
To seem like truth, whose shape she well can feigne." 

Faery Queen. 

No sooner had Mr. Lyndsay seen Miss St. Clair safe 
within the castle walls than he instantly retraced his 
steps, with the intention of returning to the summei'- 
house for the purpose of extricating her, if possible, 
from the mysterious thraldom in which she seemed to 
be held by this person. At the midnight rencontre in 
the wood he had asserted a right over her, which, 
although she herself had disclaimed with almost 
frantic wildness, her mother had tacitly acknow- 
ledged by not directly denying. In the short con- 
versation he had held with Mrs. St. Clair subsequent 
to that meeting, she had with tears implored his 
silence, his secrecy, his forbearance; and in broken 
and indirect terms had given him to understand that 
this person had been engaged with her husband in 
certain money transactions, which, out of regard to 
his memory, she was desirous of keeping concealed ; 
and it was upon this ground he had asserted a claim 



446 THE INHERITANCE. 

upon Miss St. Clair's fortune, which he had unwarrant- 
ably extended to her hand. This mangled and absurd 
account could not impose upon Lyndsay, but at 
that time he was almost a stranger to Mrs. St. Clair, 
and did not conceive himself authorised to interfere 
in her concerns. He therefore contented himself 
with mildly admonishing her on the impropriety of 
such clandestine meetings, and recommending to her 
to lay this person's claims before Lord Kossville, as 
the proper protector of his brother's memory and his 
niece's interest In the meantime, he yielded to Mrs. 
St, Clair's entreaties, and gave her his promise not to 
divulge what had passed, upon her solemn assurance 
that the affair was in the way of being amicably 
adjusted, and that she had taken effectual means of 
ridding herself for ever of this person's importunity. 
This promise, it now appeared, had not been kept ; 
again Miss St, Clair had been exposed to fresh insult 
in his presence, and he now thought himself entitled 
to interpose. With this purpose he walked quickly 
back, and had almost reached the summer-house 
when he was met by Mrs. St. Clair ; her countenance 
was agitated, and traces of tears were visible in her 
eyes. She did not, however, now seem to shun him, 
for she stopped and extended her hand to him, say- 
ing — "You are the very person! most wish to see; 
give me your arm, and let us return together, I have 
much to say to you," 

" But there is a person there to whom I also have 
much to say ; and I cannot have the honour of attend- 



THE INHERITANCE. 447 

ing you till I have first spoken with him." And he 
was passing on when Mrs. St. Clair caught his arm — 

" I know whom you seek ; but spare yourself the 
trouble — he is gone." 

"Where? — which way?" eagerly demanded he; 
"but I must ascertain that myself," and he ran with 
aH his speed to the summer-house ; but it was 
deserted ; and, though he looked long and keenly in 
all directions, not a trace of any one was to be seen. 
He was therefore obliged to retrace his steps, and 
soon overtook Mrs. St. Clair. 

" You would not give credit to me, then 1 " said 
she, in a tone of reproach. 

"I shall give credit to you now," answered he, 
"if you will tell me where I am likely to find the 
person I left here half an hour ago." 

" I cannot tell ; and if I could, perhaps I would not. 
No good could possibly result from your meeting; your 
wish, I know, is to befriend my daughter and myself ; 
and be assured I am far from insensible of the value of 
such a friend. But come with me ; I have much to say 
to you, much to confide to you of my dearest Gertrude." 

Mrs. St. Clair's hyperbolical jargon was always 
oflFensive to Mr. Lyndsay's good taste and right feel- 
ing ; but there was something absolutely revolting in 
it at this time ; there was something so strained and 
unnatural in it — such a flimsy attempt at thus seeming 
to court explanation, that he felt armed against the 
duplicity he was aware would be practised upon him. 

"At another time I shall be ready to listen to 



448 THE INHERITANCE. 

anything which concerns Miss St. Clair," said he 
coldly; "but at present I wish to put a few ques- 
tions to the person "- 

" Pardon me ; but I know all you would say, my 
dear Mr. Lyndsay ; and you must allow me to antici- 
pate those questions by the confidential communication 
I am now about to make to you. On your honour, 
on your secrecy, I know I may place the most un- 
bounded reliance ; I therefore require no assurances to 
satisfy me." 

" I certainly can give none until I know how far 
secrecy may be compatible with honour." 

Mrs. St. Clair affected not to hear this implied 
doubt, but went on — 

"You have now had opportunities of becoming 
acquainted with my daughter ; of forming your own 
opinion of her character; of — pardon a mother's 
vanity — of appreciating her charms and her graces; 
but you know not, none but a mother can know, the 
treasures of her heart and mind." 

Mrs. St. Clair paused and sighed, and Mr. Lyndsay 
was too much surprised at such an opening to make 
any reply. 

" Judge, then, at my grief and anguish at finding 
this gifted being, this idol of my affections, ensnared 
by the artifices of one every way unworthy of her ; 
has been led to bestow her regards " 

"Pardon me," cried Lyndsay; "but I can have no 
possible right to be made the depositary of Miss St. 
Clair's sentiments by any but herself. I must be 



THE INHERITANCE. 449 

excused from listening to anything more on that sub- 
ject ; I simply wish to know where I am hkely to find 
the person who has twice in my presence dared to 
insult her." 

" Yet it is only by hearing me patiently, and suffer- 
ing me to take my own way in divulging the circum- 
stances of the case as I think best, that I can possibly 
make you acquainted with them ; either my lips must 
be sealed as to the whole, or you must listen to the 
whole without interruption. I am mistaken if I tell 
you anything new when I allude to my daughter's 
misplaced partiality, still more mistaken if her future 
happiness is a matter of indifference to you." 

Lyndsay made no answer; he felt that Mrs. St 
Clair was weaving a web around him, but he could 
not bring himself to burst from its folds, and he 
suffered her to proceed. 

" I will not attempt to paint to you the anguish of 
my heart at discovering that the innocent affections 
of my unsuspecting child had been thus artfully and 
insidiously worked upon by Colonel Delmour. I 
know him, and you know him, to be a selfish, mer- 
cenary, imprincipled man, as incapable of appreciating 
such a being as Gertrude as she would have been of 
bestowing her affections on a character such as his, 
had not her imagination been dazzled and misled. 
But, alas ! at seventeen where is our judgment and 
discrimination? Yet at seven -and -twenty they will 
come too late ; then, long before then, if she becomes 
the wife of Colonel Delmour, she will be the most 
VOL. I. 2 G 



450 THE INHEEITANCE. 

wretched of women. Formed to find her happiness 
solely in the being she loves — noble, generous, upright, 
sincere herself, what will be her feelings when the 
mask drops, as drop it will, from this idol of her 
fancy, and she beholds him in his native deformity. 
No ! sooner than see her the wife of Colonel Delmour, 
I take Heaven to witness I would rather look upon 
her in her coffin." 

Inflated as all this was, still there was much of 
truth and right feeling in it, and he insensibly forgot 
his suspicions and listened with profound attention. 

" Yet I dare not express to Lord Rossville all that 
I feel, for neither can I accede to his views for the 
disposal of my daughter. Gertrude has too much 
taste and feeling, too much heart and soul, to be 
sacrificed to family pride and political influence ; in 
fact, as far as regards her happiness, there is but a 

choice of evils in these brothers ; but there is one " 

she stopped and hesitated — "there is one to whom I 
would with pride and pleasure have confided my dear- 
est treasure in the certainty that, as her judgment ma- 
tured, so her love and esteem would increase towards 
that one. Why should I conceal from you my wish 1" 

Mrs. St. Clair made a full stop, and looked at Mr. 
Lyndsay in a manner he could not misunderstand. 

This was something he had not anticipated; it 
went far beyond what he had calculated upon, and he 
was thrown ofi" his guard. His features betrayed his 
emotion, although he remained silent. There was a 
long pause. At length Mrs. St. Clair resumed — 



THE INHERITANCE. 451 

" The time will come when the veil will fall from 
my daughter's eyes ; as her judgment ripens her 
imagination will decline ; already I can perceive the 
work is begun, and time is all that is wanting to 
finish it ; but if, as may happen, she is hurried into 
a clandestine engagement, my hopes, her happiness, 
will be for ever blasted ! On the other hand, if, by 
any sacrifice, any stratagem, I can save her, can you 
blame me for the attempt, however wild or desperate 
it may appear f 

" I certainly could not blame a sacrifice, however 
vain it might prove," said Lyndsay; "but I must 
always disapprove of stratagems, even when success- 
ful ; both together seem to me incompatible." 

For a moment Mrs. St. Clair was thrown into con- 
fusion by this remark, but, quickly rallying, she 
replied — 

" Yet the one may prove the consequence of the 
other — in my case I fear it has; and that in using 
what I conceived an allowable stratagem to save my 
daughter I have sacrificed what I value next — the 
good opinion and esteem of Mr. Lyndsay." 

" It rests with yourself to remove any unfavourable 
impression I may have received, a few words will 
suffice." 

"I feel that you will blame me — that you will 
condemn the step I have taken," said Mrs. St. Clair, 
in evident embarrassment; "it must appear to you 
strange, unworthy, unnatural ; but you know not the 
difficulties of my situation : Gertrude rash and un- 



452 THE INHERITANCE. 

governable, Lord Eossville inflexible and exacting. 
If she marries Colonel Delmour her fortune and her 
happiness are both alike blasted; to save her from 
that — at least to gain time, can you altogether con- 
demn me if I have taken advantage of this person's 
unwarranted claim upon her fortune to induce a 
belief in her mind that that claim does in reality- 
extend to her hand, and that But, oh Heavens ! " 

exclaimed she, as they suddenly came in sight of the 
Castle, "it must be very late; lights in the drawing- 
room, and company assembled ! — if I am missed 

To-morrow we shall resume this subject ; meantime, 
I must fly." And she would have withdrawn her 
arm from Mr. Lyndsay's, but he detained her. 

"No," said he; "before we part, promise me 
solemnly that you will lay open to me the whole of 
this dark transaction — strange thoughts have taken 
possession of my mind. I will no longer connive at 
this mystery." 

It was too dark to see the working of Mrs. St. 
Clair's features ; but he felt the hand he held tremble 
in his grasp. 

" To-morrow, then — to-morrow, dear Mr. Lyndsay, 
I promise to satisfy you more fully," said she in a 
voice faint from agitation; "till then be silent, I con- 
jure you ; for Gertrude's sake be silent. Oh ! do not 
detain me — there is the warning belL" 

And she darted forwards, and ran till she reached 
the door, then turning round, she pressed Lyndsay's 
hand, and in breathless accents whispered, "For Ger- 



THE INHERITANCE. 453 

trude's sake, then, you will be silent till to-morrow — 
you promise me this?" 

"Till to-morrow, then, be it," said he. 

Mrs. St. Clair again pressed his hand in token of 
gratitude, then entered softly, and stole upstairs to 
change her dress, while Mr. Lyndsay, as he walked 
openly and deliberately to his apartment, thought, 
" She has got the better of me, I fear, after all ; but 
to-morrow will show." 



END OF VOL. I 



Printed by K. & R. Clark, Edinburgh. 



BENTLEY'S EDITION. 



THE WORKS OF JANE AUSTEN. 

THE ONLY COMPLETE EDITION. 

Library Edition in Six Volumes, crown 8vo, well printed and bound in cloth, 
with a Memoir and Portrait of the Authoress, and Five Illustrations on Steel 
hy Pickering, S6s. Each Volume can be had also separately, 2mce 6s. 



SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 

"I have now read over again all 
Miss Austen's novels. Charming they 
are. There are in the world no com- 
positions which approach nearer to per- 
fectiou." — Macaulay's Journal. 

II. 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 

" The perfect type of a novel of com- 
mon life ; the story is so concisely 
and dramatically told, the language so 
simple, the shades of human character 
so clearly presented, and the operation 
of various motives so delicately traced, 
attest this gifted woman to have been 
the perfect mistress of her art." — 
Arnold's English Literature. 

" One of the best of Miss Austen's 
unequalled works. How perfectly it is 
written !" — Spectator. 

TIL 

EMMA. 

" Shakespeare has neither equal nor 
second ; but among the writers who 
have approached nearest to the manner 
of the great master we have no hesita- 
tion in placing Jane Austen, a woman 
of whom England is justly proud." — 
Macaulay's Essays. 

IV. 

MANSFIELD PARK. 

" Miss Austen has a talent for de- 
scribing the involvements and feelings 
and characters of ordinary life which is 
to me the most wonderful 1 ever met 
with. Her exquisite touch, which 



renders commonplace things and char- 
acter interesting from the truth of the 
description and sentiment, is denied to 
me."— Sir Walter Scott. 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

" Read Dickens's ' Hard Times,' and 
another book of Pliny's 'Letters.' Read 
' Northanger Abbey,' worth all Dickens 
and Pliny together. Yet it was the 
work of a girl. She was certainly not 
more than 26. Wonderful creature!" 
— Macaulay's Journal. 

PERSUASION. 

"Miss Austen's fame will outlive 
the generations that did not appreciate 
her, and her works will be ranked with 
the English classics as long as the 
language lasts." — Atlas. 

VI. 

LADY SUSAN. 

"We do not know a more agreeable 
writer than Miss Austen. The great 
charm of her characters is their reality. 
They are the truest pictures of English 
middle and country life of her own 
time." — Literary Gazette. 

"Miss Austen's merits have long 
been established beyond question ; she 
is emphatically the novelist of home." 
— Spectator. 

THE WATSONS. 

With a Memoir and Portrait of the 
Authoress. 

"Miss Austen's Life, as well as 
her talent, seems to us unique among 
the lives of authoresses of fiction."— 
Qua/rterly Review. 



EICHAED BENTLEY & SON, 
NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 
