I 



FLORENCE MACARTHY: 

BY 

LADY MORGAN, 

AUTHOR OF FRANCE," " o'DONNEL," &C. 



Know thus far forth: 
By accident most strange, bountiful fortune, 
Now, my dear lad\, hath mine enemies 
Broucht to this shore : and by my prescience, 
I fincf m> /ienithdoih depend upon 
A most auspicious star, whose influence. 
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes 

ever after droop. Shakespeare. 

Les femmes ne sont pas trop d'huraeur a pardonner de 
certalnes injures, et quand elles se promettent le pluisir de la 
vengeance elles n'y vont pas de main-morte. 

De Grammont. 

IN FOUR volumes/ 
VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR Hf.NRY COLRURN, 

PUBLIC LIBRARY, CONDUIT STREGT, HAMOYER SQUARE, 



I8I9. 



B. Clarke, Printer, AVell Street, Londo'o. 



30ST0N PUBLIC LIBRARY 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



The Irish have been accused of 
making an ostentatious display of their 
injuries, and of clanking their chains 
to excite compassion. But, however 
humiliating it may be deemed to re- 
iterate complaint where there is no 
commiseration, and to urge claims 
where there is no redress, the alterna- 
tive is less intolerable than that silent 
acquiescence, "which malice or self-in- 
terest is but too ready to construe into 
tacit approbation. 

The appeal to public opinion be- 
longs to the age in which we live; 
and it is the certainty of its ultimate 
success, not the abject hopelessness of 
its repetition, which lias excited thi^ 
affectation of disgust. The ratio ultimg^ 
regum is too expensive an instrument 
to be often wielded by the citizen ; nor 

VOL. I. a 



iv 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



is it very likely that the detractors of 
the Irish nation would be more satisfied 
with an overt act of resistance^ than they 
are with the tameness of annual pe- 
titions. 

But be that as it may, the ^ national 
tale\ with which the reader is here 
presented, is no pathetic appeal to 
public compassion. It is, indeed, im- 
possible to speak of Ireland, still less 
to take it as the scene of a narrative, 
without frequent allusion to its starving, 
squalid, and diseased population. The 
people form too prominent an object in 
the landscape to be wholly passed 
over by the most indifferent observer. 
But it is chiefly from among the master 
cast that the author of Florence Ma- 
carthy has drawn her characters and her 
incidents ; and it is in the reaction of 
the execrable system of ' divide and 
govern,' in the demoralization and in- 
security which that system inflicts upon 
the agents, no less than on the victims 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



▼ 



of oppression, that she has found ma 
terials for another Irish story. 

For the fidehty of her dehneations, 
whoever has resided in Ireland will rea- 
dily vouch; and if the features are some- 
times deeply tragical, and sometimes 
broadly ludicrous, the fault lies in the 
originals, and not with their illustrator. 

The manners she has described, and 
the society she has represented, belong 
to a peculiar epoch ; they arose under 
a particular political combination, and 
they will cease with its dissolution. 
But wherever a possibility exists for 
bringing that combination again into 
action, the tale will have an interest : 
and as ridicule will reach those who are 
impregnable to reason, this picture of 
the aristocracy of the bureau may not 
be without a contingent utility to other 
countries, beside that for whose service 
it was more expressly undertaken. 

In the composition of the series of 
tales, of which Florence Macarthv 



ADVEUTISEIVTENr. 



forms a part, the author has hitherto 
endeavoured to sketch the brilhanlt 
aspect of a people strugghng with ad- 
versity, and by the dehneation of na- 
tional virtues, to excite s^nnpathy, and 
awaken justice. In the portraiture of 
a party, a cast, a faction, the colouring 
must necessarily vary. The opposition 
between the natural characteristics of 
the Irish temperament, nnd those pecu- 
liarities, which a false policy, operating 
for six hundred years, has impressed 
upon a portion of the population, must 
not be confounded with contradiction in 
statement, or versatility in opinion : nor 
the Crawley family be taken as dero- 
gating from the Glorvinas, O'Donnels, 
and Mac Rorys, of former composi- 
tions. 

T. C. M. 

La Grange: 
Dc'paricrnent de Seine et Marncy 

September^ 1818. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAPTER I. 

Whom when I a«ked, from what place he came, 
And how he higlit himself, he did y-cleep 
The Shepherd of the Ocean, by name, 
And said he came far from the main sea deep. 

Collin ClouCs come heme again. — Spencer. 

Early in the nineteenth century, in 
an autumnal month, a corvette, a light 
built Spanish vessel, passed the Bar of 
Dublin, and, with all her canvass 
crow ded, rode gallantly int5 the bay, 
after having weathered, for a period 
of five days, one of those tremendous 
gales, which occasionally agitate the 
Irish seas. A southern port of Ireland 
had been her original destination. Stress 
of weather had driven her up the Chan- 
nel ; and the injury she had received in 

VOL. I. B 



2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

her unequal contest with the elements 
rendered it necessary that she should 
undergo repair^ before she proceeded on 
her coasting voyage. On her stem she 
bore the name of " // Librador;'^ and, 
though now unarmed, and the property 
of a private individual, she had evi- 
dently been a sloop of war in some fo- 
reign service. 

The dawn was breaking in tints of 
gold and hues of crimson, as the cor- 
vette cut her way through the bright- 
ning waves ; and the happiest aspect of 
the Irish coast presented itself to the 
view of two persons, who stood in si- 
lence at the helm; — who had stood 
there since the first pale flush of light 
had thrown its silvery line along the 
eastern horizon. 

The elder of the two was the master 
of the vessel. He was still in the very 
prime of life and flower of manhood ; 



* The Liberator. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 3 

and as each lovely feature of the Irish 
shore gradually developed itself, and 
arose bright and fresh from the mists of 
the morning upon his eager gaze, he 
presented, in his own person, an image, 
that denoted the intention of the creator, 
when he made man supreme above all, 
to reign over his fair creation. 

He stood erect, his arms so folded as 
to give to his square chest and shoulders 
a peculiar muscularity and breadth of 
outline. His fine bust, indicating ex- 
traordinary strength, would have been 
almost disproportioned to his stature, 
which rose not much above the middle 
height, but that the loftiness of his 
air, and the freedom of his carriage, 
conferred an artificial elevation on his 
figure, and corrected what might be 
deemed imperfect in his actual structure. 
His large eyes were rather deep set than 
protuberant; and their glances, rather 
side-long than direct, flashed from be- 
neath his dark impending brows, like 

B 2 



4 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



the vivid lightnings whicli fringe tlic 
massive vapours of a tropical atmos- 
phere. His mouth had a physiognomy 
of its own : it was what the eye is to 
other faces : and the workings of the 
nether hp, in moments of emotion, in- 
dicated the influence of vehement pas- 
sions, habitually combatted, though 
rarely subdued. The expression of his 
countenance was more intellectual than 
gracious, and calculated to strike, rather 
than to please. But his rare and sin- 
gular smile (a smile so bland, it might 
well have become even a woman's hp) 
wholly changed its character; and the 
full displayed teeth, of splendid white- 
ness, produced perhaps even too strong 
a contrast with a complexion, which 
southern suns, and climes of scorching 
ardor, had bronzed into a dark, deep, 
but transparent olive. No tint, no hue 
warmed or varied this gloomy paleness, 
save when the tide of passion, rushing 
impetuously from the heart, coloured 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 5 

for a moment, with a burning crimson, 
the livid cheek, and then, as promptly 
ebbing back to its source, left all cold, 
pale, and dark as before. 

From his accent or manner it would 
have been difficult to assign him to any 
particular country. He seemed rather 
to belong to the world; — one of those 
creatures formed out of the common 
mould, whom nature and circumstances 
combine and fit for deeds of general im- 
port and universal interest. Neither 
could the term gentility be appropri- 
ately applied to an appearance which 
had a character beyond it. He might 
have been above or below heraldic no- 
tices and genealogical distinctions, but 
he was evidently independent of them. 
His mate, an old but hale man, with 
whom he conversed in Spanish (but 
who had English enough to work the 
ship, and sufficient knowledge of the 
Irish seas to steer it with skill), respect- 
fully addressed him by the title of 
B 3 



6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the Commodore and the crew (a 
few Enghsh sailors, to whom he seemed, 
even by name, a stranger) adopted the 
same appellation. But he issued his 
clear prompt orders with the air and de- 
cision of one to whom higher titles of 
command were familiar. He was a 
good sailor, fearless in danger, calm and 
self-possessed in difficulty ; and, to the 
only passenger who accompanied him, 
(one courteously and accidentally admit- 
ted on board his ship), he spoke of him- 
self as a man fond of the sea from boy- 
hood, making voyages of pleasure when 
he could, and now uniting an old habit 
of recreation with the urgency of press- 
ing business. He was on his way from a 
West India island, on a secret mission, 
of importance to himself; but he neither 
mentioned his own name, nor inquired 
that of the young passenger he had 
taken up out of a wherry in Plymouth 
Sound, the port whence he had last 
sailed, and where the stranger had 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. ^ 

vainly sought a passage to Ireland, now 
granted him by the commander of // 
Librador, 

The appearance of this person, who 
had voluntarily announced himself by 
the name of De Vere, was less equi- 
vocal, and though infinitely interesting, 
was perhaps less striking than that of 
the Commodore. It was also of a more 
definite stamp and character; more as- 
signable to a class, a cast, a country. 
Though there was little of conventional 
mannerism about him, though his ele- 
gant and thorough bred air was wholly 
unmarked by the overcharged fashioning 
of any country, yet, to those acquainted 
with the first class of British distinc- 
tion, he was easily cognizable in accent, 
dress, air, and physiognomy, as an Eng- 
lishman of rank and fashion, the homme 
comme ilfaut of the highest circles. 

There was, however, in the counte- 
nance and modes of this distinguished 
young gtranger something more than 
B 4 



8 



FLORENCE MACARTilY. 



the mere characteristics of country and 
rank: — a sort of fantastic pcnsivcness, a 
real or affected abstraction, a something 
imaginative and ideal, in his manierc 
d'etre, that indicated great eccentricity, if 
not eminent j)eculiarity of mind. lie 
seemed a compound of fancy and fashion ; 
a medium between the consciousness of 
rank, and the assumption and posses- 
sion of genius, \vhich placed him out 
of the common muster-roll of society; 
something escaped from it by chance, 
and vain of standing aloof, untractable 
to its laws, and therefore believing him- 
self beyond them. In his conversations 
with the Commodore he spoke in para- 
dox, had systems out of the common 
scale, and theories of alembicated re- 
finement. An ideologist, in the fullest 
sense of the word, in his philosophy 
he talked as one who believed that 
nothing is, but thinking makes it so:" 
and occupied by an ideal presence, he 
aft'ected to live distinct and indej)endent 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. Q 

of all human interests. — The structure 
of his fine head was such as physiog- 
nomists assign to superior intellect ; and 
the precise arrangement of its glossy 
auburn curls left it difficult to decide 
whether its fanciful and fashionable 
possessor was more fop or philosopher, 
dandy or poet. His valet de chambre, 
a Frenchman^ presided with invariable 
punctuality at his toilette twice a-day, 
when the uncivil elements did not inter- 
fere with such arrangements ; and the 
rest of his time was spent in musing, 
reading Spencers Fairy Queen," and 
State of Ireland,"and occasionally con- 
Versing with the commander of the ves- 
sel, who seemed to inspire him with sen- 
timents of curiosity and admiration, not 
usual to his ordinary habits of feeling. 
As he now stood beside him at the helm, 
or rather leaned in a recumbent attitude, 
with an half-closed book in his hand, 
his attention seemed not to be given to 
the beautiful coast scenery, which, en- 



10 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



do wed with at least the charm of novel- 
ty, was now breaking on his view ; for 
his up-turned glance, giving hnn the in- 
spired air of one " communing witli the 
skies," seemed to pursue the gradual 
disappearance of the nioming star, as an 
object superiorly attractive in propor- 
tion as it was remote and fleeting.— 
After a long silence, mutually preserved, 
he withdrew his dazzled eyes from the 
reddening effulgence of the heavens, and 
addressed his companion, by observing: 

" There is to me a singular attraction 
in the aspect of an unknown firmament, 
for it tells of distance from scenes, and 
objects long marked by sameness, and 
distinguished only by satiety." 

" It tells too," replied the Commo- 
dore, " of remoteness from objects, 
precious by interest or habit. The 
cross of the south, first seen in tropical 
climates, draws tears to the eyes of the 
Spanish seaman, its image recalling 
remembrances of his distant country." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 11 

Remembrances of country, how- 
ever, are usually the finger-posts to 
ennui. — One wears out every thing in 
one's own country before one leaves it; 
and, therefore, it is left. - Country ! all 
countries are alike: little masses of earth 
and water; where some swarms of hu- 
man ants are destined to creep through 
their span of ephemeral existence; com- 
ing, they knaw not whence;— going, 
they know not where." 

"These little masses of earth and 
water," said the Commodore, "are there- 
fore precious and important to the ants 
that creep on them ; and each little hill 
is dear to the swarm that inhabits it, as 
much from that very ignorance as from 
interest." 

After a short pause, Mr. De Vere 
resumed : 

" Can you not credit then the ex- 
istence of a creature j^aced by nature 
or circumstances beyond the ordinary 
pale of humanity, shaking off ^ his poor 



12 FLORENCE MACAllTHY. 

estate of man/ scarcely looking upon 
that spot, called earth, with human 
eyes, nor herding with his species in 
human sympathy — one so organized, 
so worked on by events, and thwarted in 
feelings, so blasted in his bud of life, as 
to stand alone in creation, matchless, or 
at least unmatched, whose joys, whose 
woes, whose sentiments and passions, 
are not those of other men, but all his 
own, beyond the reach of affection, or 
the delusions of hope ?" 

" A being, thus constituted," rejoined 
the Commodore, " could not be man. 
He, who wants the appetites and pas- 
sions common to all men, with the 
sympathies and aflfections that spring 
from them, is something better or 
worse, angel or dsemon, but he is not 
man " 

' You deny then the possibility of 
such an existence ?" 

Nay — madmen may fancy such a 
combination, poets feign it, or vain men 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



13 



affect it ; but it has no real existence in 
nature or society. Man is always man ; 
and he who pretends to be more, is rarely 
placed by nature at the head of his 
species — he is in fact usually less." 

Before Mr. De Vere could reply^ a 
question from a sailor interrupted the 
conversation, which was one of many 
held in the same tone and spirit. The 
Commodore was the next moment 
busied in giving orders for tacking. He 
addressed his mate in pure Spanish, 
chided the French valet out of his way 
in good French, and fell foul of a lub- 
berly sailor in broad nautical Enghsh. 

" There is somewhere," said Mr. Dc 
Vere, turning over the pages of Spen- 
cer s Ireland, and resuming his conver- 
sation with the commander of the ves- 
sel, as he returned to his station at the 
helm — "there is somewhere, through 
the quaint pages of Spencer, an admi- 
rable description of the natural ad van- 



14 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



tages of Ireland, which I cannot find." 
"Look around you," answered the Com- 
modore : " you will find them here." 

" I prefer looking through the spec- 
tacles of books. I like the prismatic 
hues thrown by authorship upon places 
and facts." 

"Indeed! that is strange! but in view- 
ing Ireland through Spencers pages, 
you will see it, as children do an eclipse, 
through a smoked glass. He was one 
of those, whose policy it was to revile 
the country he preyed upon, to spoil, 
and then to vituperate. No Englishman 
can fairly estimate this island who 
comes not unshackled by his own inte- 
rests. Spencer, the deputy of a deputy, 
the secretary, whose servile flattery of 
the viceroy, his master, was rewarded 
with a principality (soon lost, indeed, 
but most unfairly won), is no author for 
impartiality to judge by ; and when he 
itoops to eulogize the ' dreadless mighf 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 15 

of his ferocious patron, Grey, one 
of Ireland's Herods^ when he defines 
power to be 

" The riftht hand of Justice truly hight," 
however he may please as a poet, he is 
cortemptible as an historian, and infa- 
mous as a politician." 

" Oh ! as an historian or politician I 
give him up, because both characters 
are equally ridiculous : the politician 
always guided by prejudice and inte- 
rest> the historian always immersed in 
ignorance and error. Time discovers 
and shames both: and thus it is with 
all that bears upon human facts. The 
imagination alone is always right ; its 
visions are alone imperishable. The 
Fairy Queen of Spencer will thus sur- 
vive, when his State of Ireland shall be 
wholly forgotten : and, for my own part, 
so much do I prefer the visions of his 
fancy to the historical relations of any 
period connected with the history of 
men, that I would go a thousand miles 



l6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



to visit the ruins of his Irish KiLcolc- 
man,* where once 

He sat, as was his trade, 

* Under the foot of Mole, that mountain hoar,' 
^Vhere ' Allured by his pipe's delight, 

* Whose pleasing sound y-shrilled far about,' 

the gallant Raleigh found him. But I 
am not sure that I would turn one point 
out of my way to tread upon the spot 
where legitimate despotism signed the 
fiat of its own destruction, and gave 
Magna Charta to an emancipated nation. 

* Originally the principality of the Macarthies 
More; afterwards the palatinate of the Fitz- 
geralds, Earls of Desmond ; forfeited by them, 
and given to new spoliators, among whom was the 
thriftless adventurer Raleigh, who in Ireland (*) 
acted the part of a freebooter. The spoils which 
fell to the poet Spencer, as secretary to Lord 
Arthur Grey, (the * Sir ArtigalP of his dreary 
legend of that name) were three thousand acres 
of rich land in the County of Cork, with the 
beautiful Castle of Kilcoleman, the scat of the 
Earls of Desmond. 

(*) Stt Note (1) at the cad of this Volune. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 17 

The delicious strains of Spencer are 
now fresh and true as when they were 
first breathed ; but where is the spirit 
that commanded and produced an Eng- 
lish Magna Charta ?" 

" Suspended, perhaps/' interrupted 
the Commodore, not extinct. For its 
essence exists in the temperament of an 
Enghshman. You must first give him 
another position on the globe, or employ 
ages of misrule to change his national 
character, before you can reconcile him 
to slavery — circumstances may lull him 
in false security, or force him to tem- 
porary acquiescence ; but no combina- 
tion can ensure his permanent obedience 
to unequivocal despotism." 

The vessel at that moment touched 
the pier. 

The Commodore had sprung upon 
land ; and he stood for a moment on 
the spot that had received the first pres- 
sure of his footstep. To judge by the 
darkling of his eye, and the motion of 



18 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

his lip, some strong and powerful feeling 
occupied his mind ; but it was of brief 
duration. Emotions unconnected with 
action seemed not made for him: by 
the tossing back of his head, he ap- 
peared to give thought to the winds, 
and plunged into all the bustle and ac- 
tivity of the circumstances in which he 
was placed. 

The Holyhead packet was not yet 
visible ; and the earliness of the hour 
left the pier still in quietude. The land- 
waiter had been called to go through 
the necessary forms, and of him the 
Commodore asked some questions, with 
eager curiosity, clearness, and rapidity 
of utterance, as if life were too short to 
suffer one moment to pass by unoccu- 
pied, or uninstructed ; then, as if im- 
patient of the drawling replies, antici- 
pated the answers, and started new in- 
quiries of local reference. Meantime 
Mr. De Vere had landed ; but wholly 
abstracted from the noise and activity 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 19 

that surrounded him, he stood, turning 
over the leaves of his Spencer, while 
the valet was receiving parcels, port- 
manteaux, and port-folios, from a sailor, 
who was flinging them on shore, and 
exclaiming, as he appropriated or re- 
jected each several article, " Ocst d 
nous,'" — ce nest pas d nous.''' — With 
the exception of "got dam," the French- 
man had not yet acquired a single word 
of English. But with this small por- 
tion of the language, and his own very 
expressive gesticulations, he had suc- 
ceeded so well, as almost to think with 
Figaro, that this emphatic imprecation 
was the basis of the tongue; and that 
with it " on ne manque do rien, nulle 
part'' 

Will I step in for a jingle for your 
honor?" demanded a voice, in the broad 
languid drawling of the genuine patois 
of Dublin, addressing the full force of 
its brogue to the delicate ears of Mr. 
De Vere. " Will I, plazc your honor, 



20 FLORENCE MACAllTHY. 

step in^ Sir?'* This question^ several 
times repeated, at last obtained notice 
by its reiteration. The young stranger 
raised his eyes for a moment to the 
face of him who thus unceremoniously 
proffered his services, but he withdrew 
them again in disgust. The object of 
this ungracious glance, so little flatter- 
ing in its expression, had stood its in- 
quiry with great coolness. He was 
leaning, and had been leaning since the 
dawn, against one of the posts of the 
pier, and had watched the approach of 
// Librador idly and patiently for more 
than an hour, partly for the gratification 
of his curiosity, and partly in the hope 
of earning some trifle by going for a * 
vehicle, or by carrying into the town 
some luggage for the passengers. There 
is scarcely any place so lonely, or hour 
so unseasonable, at which some one of 
these genuine lazzaroni of the Irish me- 
tropolis may not be found lounging 
away time, between hppe and idleness. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 21 

in the enjoyment of doing nothing, or 
the vague expectation of having some- 
thing to do. 

Miserably clad, disgustingly filthy, 
squalid, meagre, and famished, the pe- 
titioner for employment had yet hu- 
mour in his eye, and observation in his 
countenance. Occasionally ready to 
assist, and always prompt to flatter, he 
did neither gratuitously. Taunt and in- 
vective seemed the natural expression 
of his habit ; for though debasingly 
acquiescent to a destiny, which left him 
without motive for industry, in a coun- 
try where industry is no refuge from dis- 
tress, he yet preserved the vindictive- 
ness of conscious degradation ; and 
there was frequently a deep-seated sin- 
cerity in his curse, which was some- 
times wanting to his purchased bene- 
diction. Idleness had become the cus- 
tom of his necessity ; and his wants 
were so few, that a trifling exertion 
would supply them. Yet he sought 



22 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

early and late for employment; for 
he had probably wants more urgent 
than his own to satisfy. 

This unfortunate representative of his 
class had hitherto lolled on the pier, a 
listless spectator of the scene, which was 
going forward, muttering at intervals a 
shrewd observation, laughing deridingly 
as he threw his eyes over the French 
valet, whose foreign air and dress were 
peculiarly notable ; and again composing 
his sharp features into a look of respect- 
ful deference, as he reiterated his ques- 
tion to him, whom he supposed the 
master. — Will I step in for a jingle, 
your honor? will I, Sir?" " Step in!" 
at last repeated Mr. De Vere, struck 
perhaps by the calm steady perseverance 
of his intrusion — step in where, 
friend ?" " Step into Dublin, plazeyour 

honor, for a jingle. Sir, or a hack- 
If 

ney. 

" Is Dublin so near then ?" 
It is, plaze your honor, handy bye, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 23 

Sir, quite convanient: yez wont miss me, 
your honor, till I bees back wid ye.'* 

" If Dublin is so near," said Mr. 
De Vere, closing his book, and address- 
ing the Commodore, who now, with his 
rapid step, approached him, after having 
given his orders to his mate and men— 
" if Dublin is so near, I should prefer 
walking, to trusting to any filthy vehicle 
we may be able to procure at this un- 
seasonable hour." 

" I meant to propose it," was the re- 
ply ; and the active animated speaker, 
taking a rich pelisse from his mate, 
which he drew over his ship dress, and 
exchanging his cap for a round hat, he 
gave some additional orders in Spanish, 
and desired the sailor, who stood beside 
him, with a large valise on his shoulder, 
and writing case in his hand, to follow 
him to Dublin. The two gentlemen 
then proceeded, arm in arm, to town, 
furnished by the officers of the customs 
with a card of one of the many hotels 



24 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



which now succeed in the patrician 
streets of Dubhn to the mansions of the 
banislied nobihty. 

Mr. De Vere, to whom the vulgar 
exertions of every-day hfe were all un- 
known, and even ungucssed at, had left 
every thing to a valct, as helpless as 
himself. For the first time since he 
had come into his master s seiTice, he 
was deprived of the assistance of a cer- 
tain Portuguese laquais, one who spoke 
all languages, performed all services, 
and united all the intrigue, roguery, and 
ingenuity of the Pedrillos and Lazarillos 
of the Spanish comedy. This man had 
been dismissed for mal-practices, at the 
moment his master was leaving the port 
of Lisbon for that of Plymouth; and 
since that period the Frenchman had 
acted without deputy or interpreter. 
But as almost the whole of the int-erval 
had been passed at sea (for his master 
had remained but a few hours at Ply- 
mouth)^ he had but slightly felt the in- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 25 



convenience. Now, however, left to 
act, not only for his master, but for him- 
self, he remained, standing on the pier, 
in all the emban-ass of endless books, 
parcels, and the splendid necessaire of 
the portable toilette. He had alter- 
nately taken up and laid down a valise, 
a dressing box, and a pocket edition of 
Zamora's Spanish Plays ; accompanying 
each movement with a " sacre," ^^diantre,' 
ot^^Peste de moname," slowly rolled forth 
from between his closed teeth ; when 
the English sailor, jerking his own load 
on his shoulders, exclaimed,"come, come, 
mounseer, know your own mind ; either 
wait till we sends a coach for you and 
your trumpery, or get some-un to help 

you." 

Shure Til carry in them portman- 
tles to town for you, mounseer, and the 
leather box, to boot, for a trifle," observed 
the Irishman ; who, disappointed in the 
commission he had sought, had remain- 
ed motionless and silent, till the hope of 
VOL. I. c 



26 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

his services being again accepted sug- 
gested itself ; and he repeated his pro- 
posal three several times, each louder 
than the other, as if the louder he vo- 
ciferated, the better chance he had of 
being understood by the foreigner. 

Do you hear me now, mounseei ?" 
he screamed close in the Frenchman s 
ear ; who, stamping his feet with anger, 
exclaimed, Paix ! paix 

" Pay, pay," reiterated the Irishman. 
*^ ril engage you will, dear, and well." 
Then, witliout further ceremony, hoist- 
ing the valise on his shoulders, taking a 
port folio under his arm, and carrying the 
dressing box by its handle, he nodded 
his head to the parcel of books, which 
were inclosed in a leather strap, ob- 
served, "now, mounseer, I'll trouble you 
just to take them bits of books in your 
daddle ; and what would ail us, but we'd 
take in th' other trifles of things betwixt 
us aisy enough, plaze God; Til engage 
we will. So now, my lad," (address- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 27 
\ 

mg the sailor) follow me, and I'll shew 
you the road." 

The Frenchman comprehended the 
arrangements of the Irishman better 
than his language, grinned applause, 
muttered a good humoured " got dam/* 
in token of approbation, and taking up 
the books, these three singular repre- 
sentatives of the three nations proceeded 
towards Dublin, following close, on the 
steps of the gentlemen, who had in- 
quired their route, and were some paces 
in advance. 

The Irish lounger, no lounger now, 
stepped on lightly with his burthen, in 
that short quick trot, with which the 
lower Irish frequently perform journies 
from one extremity of the kingdom to 
the other, bare-footed and bare-legged. 
The sailor and the Frenchman, with an 
appearance much more alert, and bur- 
thens infinitely lighter, scarcely kept 
pace with him, and obliged him fre- 
quently to stop, while he as frequently 
c 2 



28 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



addressed them with a sort of sly in- 
direct curiosity, which ingeniously 
sought its gratification, without any 
obvious efforts to obtain it. 

" ril engage, mounseer," he observed, 
first attacking the Frenchman, " yez 
were never in ould Ireland afore, far as 
you ve travelled ; and ycz 

May travel the wide world all over, 
And sail from France to Balin.robe,'* 

as the song says, afore ye'Il see the likes 
of it again, any way." Bon, bon," re- 
turned the Frenchman, supposing that 
he communicated the joyful intelligence 
of their speedy arrival, " Bon, j'en suis 
charm^." 

^' Why then it will charmi/ ye more 
every step ye take, for there isn't her 
match, by say, or land, with her beau- 
tiful eye, there, like a unicorn s, in the 
front of her forehead ; * and her Hill of 



* Ireland's eye — a rock at the entrance of the 
bay. 



FLORENCE MACARTKY. 2Q 

Hoathj like a mole on her cheek ; and 
see there forenent yez, acrass the bay, 
there, there's the sheds of Clontarf, and 
the green groves of Marino, the great 
Earl of Marlemonfs sate, and ould 
Ballybough, the creatur! to the fore this 
day as when Bryan Borugh lost his 
crown, and his harp on it, (the sowl), 
in the Musaum of Trinity."* 

" Comment done !" demanded the 
Frenchman, denoting his ignorance of 
this detailed description by the per- 
plexity of his looks. Och bother," 
returned the Irishman, out of all pa- 
tience at what appeared to him obsti- 
nate stupidity. 

Bodere, dodere," reiterated the 
Frenchman, indignant at what he saw 



* A harp is shewn in the Museum of Trinity 
College, said to have belonged to the Irish Mo. 
narch, and found on the Plains of Clontarf, 
where he fought his last famous battle against 
the Danes, and lost his life. 

c 3 



30 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



was intended for insult. " Comment 
done bodere gueux, que tu es !" 

" Cut awaif yourself," replied the 
Irishnrian, langhinV^ good humouredly, 
*^ or troth, you'll be in too late for the 
fair, honey !" 

The Frenchman, supposing that these 
words, and the conciliatins; laujrh which 
accompanied them, indicated an apology, 
took off his hat with great j)oliteness, 
and accepted the fancied excuses, with 
" mais voila, mon ami, qui est bien." 
" Och, your humble servant to com- 
mand, mounseer," returned the Irishman, 
dropping his load to make an imitative 
bow: " troth, you do your dancing master 
every justice, whoever he was." 

The English sailor, much amused by 
this interchange of civility in his two 
companions, observed, " aye, aye, sirs 
let the mounseers alone for bowing and 
scraping, and the likes. Never a danc- 
ing dog at Bartlemy fair will beat them 
et that, ril warrant." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 51 

Why then I'll engage/' replied the 
Irishman, " that yellow, swarthy, portly 
gentleman there, your captain, wouldn't 
be a Frenchman, with his eligant sur- 
tout, for all he has a Frenchified air 
about him." 

What he ! Lord help your heart, 
not he — no more a Frenchman nor I 
am, lad." 

" Och! he'd be very sorry, I'll engage i 
though he has an outlandish look with 
him, for all that " 

Why, aye sure, because he corned 
from the Hindies, d'ye see ; the West 
Hindies, — or Spanish America. — It's all 
one for that, come from where he will, 
he's a hearty true blue, every bit of him " 

" And is yourself come all the ways 
with him, dear, from the Western 
Indies?" 

Not I. I was lying in dock, for it 
is not now all as one as formerly — all 
goes by luck and fashion now — Some 
how, one hears no more of the Howes^ 
c 4 



:y2 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

and the Ilothams, andtlic Nelsons, and 
the wooden walls of old England. — Tlie 
jacket, the old true blue s worn out, Sir. 
80 this here gem'man, who owns that 
tight bit of timber, every splinter of her 
liiniself, it seems, put into our Plymouth 
Sound, three weeks ago, bound from 
Demerara, and sent back his Spanish 
crew in a Cadiz merchantman, (except- 
ing old Grim Groudy, the mate), and 
])aid 'em like a prince. So then he set 
sail for London, aloft on the mail ; and 
when he came back, he manned this 
little vessel with a handful of us Ply- 
mouth boys, and we heaved anchor 
gix days agone for Ireland ; and this Fll 
say for him, a better commander never 
stepped on forecastle, or walked the 
quarter-dock." 

" See that now," replied the Irish- 
man, quietly, and has 'nt a mild look 
with him, then, for all that; only mighty 
stern. He wouldn't be a slave driver 
from the Western Indies, Sir, I suppose ?'* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 33 

" What he! not he, bless the heart 
of him ; no more nor I bees ; not but 
he's hard enough, sometimes, and hates 
a lubber as he hates poison; but goes 
our halves in hard work." 

" See that, now. Sir; och, he has a 
fine look with him, and mighty portly; 
and has a great name upon him, if a 
body knew it, I'll engage." 

" Can't tell ye that though," replied 
the sailor, because why, I don't know it 
myself. They called 'n the Don at the 
King's Arms in Plymouth — the Span- 
ish Don, though he speaks as good 
English as the best. And then, when 
one asks a question of Grim Groudy, 
who knows all about him, he only an* 
swers one in his d— d lingo." 

" And that tall slinder young man, 
dear, with his head in the clouds, as 
if he'd snuff the moon, fairly, he's his 
comrade, I'll engage ?' 

" What, yon fair weather, fresh water 
bird there? Mounseer's master — Oh, 
C 5 



34 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

I knows nothing of he, nor Commo- 
dore, nor mate either, for the matter 
o'that; he's a bird of passage, lad, a God 
send, dy see. Why, just as we had 
given Edystone hghthouse the go-bye, 
out comes old Jack Andrews's wherry, 
the Shark, rowing at the rate of ten 
knots an hour; and when it came along- 
side the Librador, yon spark, there, 
stands bolt upright, and begs a passage 
for his self and our mounseer, here to 
Ireland, parlavering about no packets 
plying from Plymouth to Dublin, and 
being in haste to get there. So the 
Commodore has him hauled up, and 
gives him the state cabin; a cabin fit 
for an English admiral; and so they've 
gone on well enough, yard arm and 
yard arm, jawing together fore and aft, 
first in one lingo, and then in another; 
and what with mounseer there, that has 
not a word of English to throw to a dog, 
and the Spanish mate, who has bare suffi- 
cient to work the ship, why the vessel's 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 35 

like to the town of Babylon. But what's 
most oddest, is, that for all mounseer 
and Grim Groudy s gibberishing it so 
with their own masters, shiver me if 
they understand one another a bit. 
Ha! ha! ha!" 

" Why then/* returned the Irishinany 
"it is mighty odd, and very remark- 
able; for if foreigners wont understand 
one another, who do they expect will, 
I wonder. — And so yez are all going to 
put up in Dubhn ? Why then yez are 
in great luck."^ 

"Luck! no such luck either; but 
needs must when the old one drives. 
Why, Sir, we have been pelted about 
this little basin of dirty water these five 
days, and last night were fairly driven 
up the Channel, blov^*n to shivers, tat- 
tered to rags, and must now put into 
dock here, till all's made right and tight ; 
and then we're under orders to weigh 
anchor with old Grim Groudy, and sail 
for Dungarvon.'* 



36 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 

" Troth^ then, if yez will take a foorg 
advice, yez will stay where ye are; for 
yez may go farther and fare worse than 
stopping in Dublin; only may be, your 
business does'nt lie here. Sir." 

*^ Why, for business, I dont believe 
we have much business here; only just 
a voyage of pleasure. Why thafs all 
the go, now. The agreeablest trip I 
ever made was with a young Irish lord 
to the Mediterranean, just for sport like; 
round the world for sport." 

" Why, then, its pretty sport that 
gives a man the say-sickness. But 
its ill winds blows nobody good; and 
only for it, sorrow bit of Ringsend 
yez had seen this day, and here 
it is." 

The two gentlemen in advance had 
at this moment halted at the entrance 
of one of the most wretched suburbs 
that ever deformed or disgraced the me- 
tropolis of any country ; and the Com- 
modore, whose quick and often back-- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 3/ 

glancing eye had long since discerned 
the reinforcement obtained to the party, 
by the addition of the lounger at the 
pier, now called, and desired him to 
lead the way. I will, plaze your honor," 
he replied, trotting briskly on, while 
the wearied Frenchman toiled after 
him in vain;'' and even the sailor made 
an exertion to keep pace with him. " I'll 
only just step in. Sir, by your leave, to 
get my morning, for I hasn't broke my 
fast yet. Sir." 

" Broke his fastT reiterated the 
Commodore, shrugging his shoulders, 
as he observed his newly constituted 
guide step in to a little shop, whose 
gaudy placard of " licensed to sell spi- 
rituous liquors'*' was further illustrated 
by a range of glasses on the counter, fill- 
ed with whiskey. The guide tossed one 
off, observing to the dirty lazy-looking 
woman, who stood wiping a jug with 
her apron, " I'll pay you when I come 
back^ Mrs. Hurley, dear." With this 



38 FLORENCE MACARTMY. 

assurance from ber wretched, but well 
kaown customer, Mrs. Hurley appeared 
satisfied; aware, from experience, that, 
in this instance, punctuality was gua- 
ranteed by self-interest. 

" Break his fast?" repeated the Com- 
modore: " what a mode of breaking, 
festr 

" As good as any," replied Mr.. De 
Vere: " it all comes to the same thing 
in the endw Habit and circumstances 
determine the mode and means without 
our consent or will ; and gin or glory 

* Leads but to the grave.* 

The two travellers now followed their 
guide with difficulty through collected 
heaps of mud and filth. The very air 
they breathed was infected by noxious 
vapours, which the morning sun drew 
up from piles of putrid matter. The 
houses, between which they passed^ 
were in ruins; the sashless windows 
were stuffed with straw; the unhinged 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 3^^ 

doors exposed the dark and dirty stairs^ 
which ted to dens, still more dun and 
foul. Here, if " lonely misery retired to 
die," hving wretchedness could scarcely 
nd a shelter. Yet many an haggard 
face, many an attenuated form, marked 
by the squalor of indigence^ and the 
harshness of vice, even here evinced 
a crowded and superabundant popula- 
tion. The guide, who, as he proceeded 
through this disgusting suburb, saluted 
several among those whose idle curio- 
sity had drawn them from their sties, 
betrayed a courtesy of manner curious- 
ly contrasted with his ow^n appearance, 
and that of the persons he addressed. 
Every body was Sir," or " Madam 
and the children were either " Miss," 
or " Master," or were saluted with 
epithets of endearment and familir 
arity. 

" Morrow, Dennis, dear, how is it 
with you?" " Morrow, kindly, Mrs. 
Flanagan: I hope I see you well, 



40 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ma am." " Oh, you're up with the day, 
Mr. Geratty. How's the woman that 
owns you ?" " Here's a fine morning, 
Miss Costello, God bless it : is your 
mother bravely, miss ?" " Eh ! then 
Paddy, you little garlagh, why is'nt it 
after the cockles ye are the day, and the 
tide on the turn." 

While, however, he seemed occupied 
with " aw unwearied spirit of' doing 
curtesies,'' he occasionally threw his 
shrewd, but sunken eye, over the per- 
sons he was conducting ; and faithfully 
translating the expression of the Com- 
modore's looks, he observed: 

" Och ! its a poor place. Sir, sure 
enough ; and no f>oorer room-keepers, 
your honor, than the Ringsend's, God 
help 'em, not even in the vaults. Sir." 

"The vaults?" 

" Och ! yes, indeed, the vaults under 
the fine new streets. Sir, that is'nt built, 
where there's nothing to pay ; only in 
respect of being mighty moist. Wait a 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 41 

taste, your honor, till yez get an, Sir, 
and yez will see them swarm out in 
great style, the craturs !*' 

" And sure it is a most beautiful 
and sweet country^' read aloud Mr. De 
Vere, who had now found out the passage 
he had hitherto vainly sought in Spen- 
cer, and was treading a clear pathway as 
they left the miserable outlets of Rings- 
end ^nd Irishtown behind them. ^^A 
most beautiful and sweet country 
as any under heaven, being stored 
throughout with many goodly rivers, 
with all sorts of fish, most abundantly 
sprinkled with many very sweet islands, 
and goodly lakes, like little inland seas, 
that will carry even shippes upon their 
waters, adorned with goodly woods, 
even fit for building houses and shippes, 
so commodiously, as that if some prin^ 
ces in the world had them, they would 
soon hope to be lords of all the seas, 
and ere long, of all the world — also 
full of very good ports and havens, 



42 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

opening into England, as inviting us to 
come into them, to see what excellent 
commodities that country can afford. 
Besides, the soyle itself', most fertile, 
fit to yield all kind of fruit that shall 
he committed there unto; and lastly, 
the heavens most mild, though some-- 
what more moist than the parts towards 
the west'' 

" So much for the Natural State of 
Ireland^' said the Commodore, as the 
peripatetic student closed his book, 
to which the guide had given a very 
humorous attention, " So much for 
the natural state. Behold the first 
groupings of its social, its political con- 
dition." As he spoke, they entered 
one of those long-laid-out streets, whose 
houses, in the course of many years, 
have not advanced beyond the founda- 
tions. From the vaults, the thick smoke 
of burning straw or rubbish was emitted 
through holes, perforated in the pave- 
ment; while hordes of wretched and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 43t 

filthy creatures crept from beneath the 
dark roofs of their earthy dweUings, 
to sohcit the charity of those who 
passed above them. One from among 
the number^ who had been less alert 
in picking up some scattered small 
change, flung among them by the gen- 
tlemen, continued to run beside them, 
begging for an " halfpenny to buy 
bread." It was a little shivering, half- 
naked girl, pretty, but filthy and ema- 
ciated. As the guide came up, she re- 
treated, and a significant glance passed 
between them, which drove her at once 
back to her den ; but not before she 
had picked up a silver sixpence fiung 
after her. 

God bless your honor," said the 
guide, in a tremulous voice : that's 
a greater charity than you think, Sir," 

" This is all very bad," said Mr, 
De Vere, " disgustingly bad. Short of 
actual offensive disgust, affecting the 
health and organs, I have, myself. 



44 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



110 positive objection to suburbian 
wretchedness. There is sometimes a 
sort of poetical misery in such scenes, 
very affective to contemplate ; not al- 
together so coarse and squalid as 
Crabbc's Borough Scenery, but a spe- 
cies of picturesque wretchedness, that 
has its merit — rags well draped, mi- 
sery well chiselled, affording a study 
for the painter s pencil, or a model to 
the poet's eye." 

" But who," asked the Commodore 
with emphasis, " can see such wretch- 
edness as this, with a mans eye, and 
not feel it with a maris heart. The 
mind starts beyond the mere impulse 
of sympathy here ; it rushes at once 
from the effect to the cause. Indig- 
nation usurps the seat of pity, and the 
spirit rests upon those who have af- 
flicted, not on those who suffer." 

" Yes, but even so, you go but 
half-way. All is evil in political insti- 
tutes ; because all is bad in moral. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 45 



as all is disgusting in physical nature. 
All realities are evil, and the whole 
system, as we know it, but a fortuitous 
combination of corrupting particles : 
the brightest specks, the most lucent 
points, but the shining glitter of pu- 
trescency, and even 

The brave o'erhanging firmament, 
The majestic roof, fretted with golden fires, 
A foul and pestilent congregation of Tapours/* 

*^ This is Merrion Square, plaze your 
honor,*' interrupted the guide, coming 
forward, " where the quality lives. 
And there's * Sir John's fountain, your 
honor. So beautiful! and cost a power! 
and would'nt get lave to build a taste 



♦ Sir J., afterwards Lord de B . It is 

curious to observe, that the lowest classes of 
the population of Dublin are perfectly ac- 
quainted with the jobbing systems, under which 
all public transactions are effected in that me. 
tropolis : they also discuss them with a mixture 
of humour and anger that is extremely charac- 
teristic. 



46 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



of them, only he declared to God, and 
upon his honour, he never would allow 
a thimblefull of water to come out of 
them, in respect of a sup never going 
in. And there they are to this day, 
a great job, by Jagers; why would'nt 
they r 

The gentlemen, in their way to their 
hotel, in Sackville Street, now passed 
through tliat line of the Irish metropo- 
lis, which brings within the compass oi 
a coup d'oeil some of the noblest public 
edifices and spacious streets to be found 
in the most leading cities of Europe. 
All, however, was still, silent, and void. 
The guide, walking parallel to the tra- 
vellers, with his eye furtively glancing 
on them, evidently watched the efl'ect 
which the beauty of his native city (a 
beauty of which he was singularly 
proud) made upon their minds : and 
when they had reached that imposing 
area, which includes so much of the 
architectural elegance and social bustle 



TLORENCE MACARTIIY. 4J 

<>f Dublin, the area flanked by its silent 
senate- house, and commanded by its 
venerable university, he paused, as if 
from weariness, leaned his burthen 
against the college ballustrade, and 
drew upon the attention of the strangers 
(who also voluntarily halted to look 
around them), by observing, as he 
pointed to the right, " That's the ould 
parliament-house. Sir. Why, then, 
there was grate work going on there 
oncef, quiet and aisy as it stands now, 
the cratur ! grate work shure enough I 
and there's the very lamp-post I climbed 
up the night of the Union. Och ! then 
you'd think the murther of the world 
was in it ; and so it was, shure enough, 
—that's of Ireland, your honor ; God 
help her. And there we were, from 
light to light, and long after, watching, 
aye, and praying too, and grate pelting, 
shurely, when they came out, the 
thieves that sould us fairly. And 
troth, if we'd have known as much 



48 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

as we know now, it isn't that a-way 
they'd have got off. And never throve 
from that hour, nor cared to cry " the 
Freeman's", * and the parliament de- 
bates not in it, nor counsellor Grattan. 
Och, the trade was ruined entirely; and 
from that day to this, never hawked 
the bit of paper, nor could raise a tin- 
penny, only just on arrands, long life to 
your honors ; and that's what the Union 
has brought us to; and sorrow paper they 
need print at all, at all, now, only in re- 
spect of the paving board, and Coun- 
sellor Gallagher s iligant speeches." 

" And what use is made of that mag- 
nificent building ?" asked Mr. De Vere, 
who stood gazing upon it with evident 
admiration. 

" What use is it they make of it ? 
your honor ; Why then, sorrow a use 
in life, only a bank, Sir ; the bank of 



♦ One of the most spirited, popular, and 
best conducted papers in the empire. 



FLORKKCE MACARTHY. 49 

Ireland ; what less use could they make 
of it ? And for all that," added the 
guide, significantly, it cost a power 
to make it what it isT 

It is a beautiful thing of its kind," 
said De Vere, still gazing upon it, and 
rather apostrophizing the building than 
addressing his companion, who stood 
silent, and self- wrapped — Beautiful, 
even now^ entire and perfect in all its 
parts, what will it be centuries hence, 
touched by the consecrating hand of 
time, when its columns shall lie prostrate, 
its pediments and architraves broken and 
moss-grown, when all around it is si- 
lence and desolation? Then haply some 
strife of elements may conduct the enter- 
prising spirit of remote philosophy to 
these coasts ; m ay cast some future Volney 
of the Ohiho or Susquehanah upon the 
shores of this little Palmyra, and he 
may surmise and wonder, may dream 
his theories, and calculate his probabili-- 
ties; and, bending over these ruins, see 

VOL. 1. D 



60 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



the future in the past, and apostrophize 
the inevitable fate of existing empires." 

" Or some American freeman/* observ- 
ed the Commodore, "the descendant of 
some Irish exile, may voluntarily seek the 
bright green shores of his fathers, and, 
in this mouldering structure, behold the 
monument of their former degradation." 

" Why, then, long life to your ho- 
nors," added the guide, who, with the 
subtlety incidental to his class and 
country, drew ingenious, and some- 
times exact conclusions, from very 
scanty premises, and who believed that 
the strangers were predicting the ruin 
of Ireland from the event of the Union 
(an event execrated by all the lower 
orders of the country). Why, then, 
long life to your honors, its true for 
you, and >vas said long ago, that after 
the Union the grass would grow high 
in Dublin streets ; and would this 
day, plaze God, only in respect of the 
paving-board, that be s ripping up the 



FLORENCE MACARTlfr. 5l 

streets, and laying down the streets, 
from June to January, just for the job, 
by Jagurs. 

Well, there is ould Trinity," he con- 
tinued, turning towards the college, as he 
again raised his load upon his shoulders : 
" the boys that used to bate the world 
before them oncet with their fun and 
their larning, are now down, like the 
rest, — and does not know one of them 
myself now, barring Collagian Bar- 
rett." 

"By the bye," said Mr. De Vere, 
" is not this Irish College Smart' 
^ Temple of Dulness,' in the eyes of 
whose learned doctors. Swift and Gold- 
smith could find no favour? I have 
little respect myself for incorporated 
learning, or for literature and taste ac- 
quired by act of parliament." 

^^Intellectual illumination," replied the 
Commodore, " like other things, would, 
perhaps, best find its maximum when 
independent of legislative interference, 
D 2 



52 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



There is an education belonging to the 
spirit of the age, and carried on by its 
influence, far beyond the rules of these 
worn-out monastic institutions.'' 

*^Och! its Ginould place^shure enough," 
said the guide, " and least said about it 
is soonest mended. Now, plaze your ho- 
nors, Fm finely rested, many thanks to 
yez, and so is mounsccr too, and will 
attind you, and lave ould Nosey there 
to put an; for they vc began to deck the 
lad, early as it is." 

As he spoke, he directed the obscrva* 
tion of the gentlemen to the equestrian 
statue of King WilHam the Third, which 
two men were now busily engaged in 
decorating with orange and blue rib- 
bons.* 



♦ This Ir^icrous and offcns'iTC spectacle is 
exhibited at the expense of the civil magistrate, 
on the anniversary of events connected with the 
triumph of the revolution party, and the down- 
fall of the Jacobites. To the Catholics, -who 
behold in this outward sign a token of tticir 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 53 

What does it mean," demanded 
Mr. . 

" What does it mane? why it manes 
to vex the papists sore, your honor, shure 
that's the ascendency. Sir; only for it, 
and the hkes of it, wouldn't we be this 
day hand and glove, orange and green : 
sorrow one colour you'd know from the 
other. Och! but that would not do- 
where would the ascendency be?— only 
all Irishmen thenr 

The gentlemen at length reached 
their hotel, which might have been, 
taken for, what it had once been, the 
splendid mansion of a resident nobleman^ 

political aonihiratioD, and an iosultiog arrogatioa 
of the supremacy of the minority oyer the ma- 
jority, it is a source of heart-burnings, and aa 
incentiye to discord. As, howerer, its continued 
exhibition is a proof of narrow intellect and 
bad feeling in the individuals who persist ia 
repeating it, the oppressed party M'ould do well 
to turn the laugh against their enemies, by ridi- 
culing the taste, and mocking the vanity which 
linds pleasare in thus disfiguring the statue. 
D 3 



54 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



but for the shew-board, which desig- 
nated its present pubHc use and object. 

The capital of Ireland, since the 
Union, has become a mere stage of pas- 
sage to such of its great landholders as 
occasionally visit the kingdom for pur- 
poses of necessity. They consider this 
beautiful city only as a pendant to Holy- 
head; and take up their temjx)rary 
lodging to await the caprice of wind and 
tide, in those mansions where a few 
years ago they spent a large part of their 
great revenues, drawn from their native 
soil. The bill that defrays the expense 
of a dinner at an inn, thus acquits their 
debt to the country from which they 
derive their all, which they dislike to 
visit, and are impatient to quit^. 



** It is very extraordinary that in this large 
and populous city (Dublin), there should be such 
an almost total want of good inns for the ac- 
commodation of travellers and strangers." — A 
Letter from Ireland^ by J, Bush, 1764. 

Thirty years ago there was but one hotel in 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 55 

Several idle persons stood lounging 
about the door of the hotel. The only 
person whom they wished to see^ the 
master, did not appear ; and they had 
to wait some time before the head 
waiter could be found to tell them whe- 
ther they could be accommodated : for 
what is called the dead time of the year, 
is usually that in which Ireland is most 
visited by curious strangers (who choose 
that period as the best for visiting Kil- 
larney and the Giant's Causeway), and 
by necessitous absentees, who, driven to 
look for their rents, or to canvass their 
county, take that time for their penance, 
which they cannot well employ else- 
where, and make a snatch at Ireland in 



Dublin ; nor was there occasion for more; The 
nobility and gentry came from their seats at once 
to their mansions in the capital. When, how- 
ever, the seat of honourable ambition, aad the 
means of raising a fortune and name were re- 
moved to another kingdom, it is natural that the 
rank and talent of the country should emigrate, 
D 4 



56* FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



the interval between the London and 
watering-place seasons. 

While the gentlemen walked up and 
down the hall, with every symptom of 
impatience, the guide applied to the ex- 
hausted Frenchman for payment, who 
was now lying full length on a bench, 
uttering many exclamations of annoy- 
ance and fatigue. When he under- 
stood the meaning of the Irishman's 
extended hand, he gave him what he 
considered a sufficient reward for his 
services. But as this sum was barely 
what the Irishman expected, he re- 
turned it carelessly, with " Here, moun- 
seer ! I'll make you a present of it." 

Mais, comment done, mon ami 
qu est ce que cest." 

" What is it, I sai/, is it ? Why then 
its what I say, I wouldn't dirty my 
fingers with it." 

" Then," said one of the waiters, im- 
patient to get him out of the hall, and 
snatching the portmanteau out of his 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. b^ 

band^ / say, that if you wont take 
that, rd give you nothing." 

"Wouldn't you, Mr. Connolly ?" he 
replied coolly. " Why then, faith, its 
often you gave us that, Mister Con- 
holly, and will again, plaze God." 

The laugh which this observation ex- 
cited in the bye-standers, raised Mr. 
Connolly's choler, and he now endea- 
voured to hustle the guide out of the 
hall ; but he stood his ground firmly^, 
exclaiming with great coolness, *^ I 
wont go till I'm ped, Mr. Connolly ; 
not a foot. Sir, nor wouldn't quit if your 
master was in it himself." 

The Commodore now came forward 
to learn the cause of the scuffle, and 
having heard both parties, he turned 
abruptly to the guide, and demanded, 
*^ What employment are you fit for?" 

" What employment am I fit for? 
Every employment in life. Sir, good or 
bad," 

D 5 



38 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" Would you like to go into ser- 
vice?" 

" Is it into reglar service, your ho- 
nor ? Och, then, I never favoured that 
much." 

" Will you go on board ship:" 
Is it on board ship. Sir ?" (rubbing 
round his shoulders and smiUng,) Och, 
plaze your honor, I oncet went a long 
voyage. Sir, and the say sickness didn t 
agree with me." 

" Well," said the Commodore, im- 
patiently, if there was one inclined 
to be of service to you, to enable you to 
get some more certain mode of sub- 
sistence than that you pursue, what line 
of life would you prefer T 

Why, then, long life to your ho- 
nor, I pray God, and if there was a 
gentleman would have the great kind- 
ness to Und me a trifle to get my rags 
out of pledge, that I might go back to 
the trade nate and dacent, as my ould 



FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 5^ 

father did afore me, I would chose, 
*bove all the employments in life. Sir, 
to stand at the Post-Office and cry the 
Freeman's Journal, plaze your honor." 

And what sum will do this for 
himr" asked the Commodore of the 
head waiter, who now appeared. 

" God bless you. Sir, a pound note 
would make his fortune ; and I would 
be his banker, and see it laid out to ad- 
vantage." 

The Commodore silently presented 
the pound note, and was moving away, 
when the guide following him a few 
steps, dropt on his knees, and seizing 
the skirts of his pelisse, remained for a 
moment struggling for utterance, while 
the tears stood in his hollow eyes. 
" Should I return to Dublin," observed 
the Commodore, touched perhaps by 
the silent emotion of feelings so prompt 
and ardent, so opposed to the poor 
man's former gay and jocose acuteness, 
" should I return, I will enquire for you 



60 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



here^ and if I find you liave given up 
breaking your fast with whlshejf — 

My fast, your honour, that's all for 
the whole day, Sir, mate or drink, and 

the rest goes Plaze your honor, 

the little bit of a naked girl, at the 
vault, that's my child. Sir, and four of 
them— only dacency, your honour, and 
a bit of pride, and the childre, and the 
pound note. Sir; oh! its too much 
goodness intirely." 

The Commodore drew back from his 
grasp, and motioning him to rise, added, 

In that case — four children you say." 
He then gave another note, and walked 
rapidly away. 

God bless you. Sir," said the waiter, 
who ran before, and conducted the gen* 
llemen up stairs. You have made one 
poor man happy this morning, at all 
events." 

You have had a Scena/' observed 
Mr. Do Vere, languidly. 

Almost," he replied, with a deep 



FLORENCE MACARTKY. 6l 



sigh. " Absentee ! yes^ well may they 
be absentees that can. What is that de- 
gree of enjoyment and individual happi- 
ness, which a man may procure, who is 
liable every day to behold such misery 
as we have witnessed, within the last 
short hour ; or who is led to reflect for 
a moment on the train of misrule, of 
the collision of interests, prejudices, and 
feelings, which have produced such a 
state of society in this fine country ?" 

This speech was pronounced after 
they had entered a handsome drawing- 
room, and while each took possession of 
a lounger. The waiter then began a 
long string of apologies. " Dressing- 
rooms would be got ready in a few 
minutes, as soon as the Marquis of 
Inchigeela and his son. Lord Dunmana- 
way, were gone ; and his lordship's tra- 
velling carriage was at that moment at 
the door : but the house was so full ; a 
number of persons from England arrived 
by the last packet ; others about to de- 



ti2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

part for Holyhead and he added, in 
an aside whisper, " the elderly gentle- 
woman would be off in a jiffy, as her po- 
chay was ordered, and she had only 
stepped into the best drawing-room to 
write a letter." He then added aloud, 
that he would just run down himself 
and introduce the French valet to the 
French cook, store the gentlemcns' 
things in the dressing-room, and order 
breakfast. 

The waiter then shuffled off, impress- 
ed with an high opinion of the conse- 
quence of the strangers, from the petu- 
lance of the one and the haughty look 
of the other ; and believing them to be 
well worth attending to, from the extra- 
ordinary liberality of the Commodore, 
who, by an act well adapted to Irish 
feelings, had bought golden opinions 
from all who had witnessed it. 

The mention made by the waiter of 
the " elderly gentlewoman," was the 
first intimation the strangers received 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6^ 

of such a person being present. They 
now threw their eyes round the spacious 
room ; and a figure, which answered to 
the description, appeared seated in one 
of its remote corners at a writing table. 
They turned their eyes instantly away,— 
for a very fine map of Ireland hung on 
the wall, near to which they sat. The 
Commodore took it down, and began to 
trace his route with a pencil^ while Mr. 
De Vere followed his track with his eye 
as he looked over his shoulder. 

Meantime the gentlewoman resem- 
bled, as she sat, one of those wax-work 
figures, which, at once grotesque and 
natural, are coloured to the life, yet in- 
animate as death ; for she remained, 
for a considerable time after the stran- 
gers had entered the room, with her eyes 
rivetted on their persons, and herpen sus- 
pended above the paper upon which she 
had been writing. There was an inten- 
sity in her fixed look that implied some- 
thing more than mere idle curiosity. 



64 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

In whatever manner their sudden ap- 
pearance had affected her^ they seemed 
to hold her senses in suspension ; and 
many minutes had elapsed, and the 
strangers had travel led, on paper, over the 
whole province of Munster, before she 
resumed, with a long drawn sigh, the 
occupation they had interrupted. In 
her person this elderly gentlewoman 
was low and somewhat bulky : her head- 
dress was a tete, with side curls, pow- 
dered, surmounted by a small high 
crowned beaver hat, laid flat upon the 
head. She wore a black crape veil, so 
fastened up in the centre as to expose a 
very red nose, and a very large pair of 
dark green spectacles ; her chin was 
sunk in her cravat, whose long fringed 
ends belonged to other epochs of fa- 
shion than the present. The immense 
chitterling of her habit shirt appeared 
through her single-breasted, long-waist- 
ed, brass-buttoned camblet-joseph. Her 
whole appearance, though most risibly 



I'LORENCE xMACARTHY. 63 



singular, was such as would have been 
scarcely deemed extraordinary in the 
remote counties of Ireland twenty or 
thirty years back, when old fashions 
and old habits remained in fiill force 
among the provincial gentry, who pre^ 
served the faith, principles, and costume 
of their ancestors alike unchanged. 
Even still such figures are occasionally 
seen in the middle ranks of rural life, 
riding on a pillion to mass on a holiday, 
or making one of a congregation of ten 
in some remote and solitary church, 
whose parish, though it bring a large 
revenue to its non-resident incumbent, 
may not consist of as many protestant 
families. 

The impatience of the travellers for the 
refreshment of the toilette and the break- 
fast table was now considerably abaited 
by the occupation which the map af- 
forded them. The Commodore had 
traced with his pencil the great Mun- 
^icT road as far as Cashel; then diverged, 



66 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

by cross ways, towards the Gaul ty Moun- 
tains, to the towns of Doneraile and 
Buttevant. From this point he was 
proceeding towards Kerry, when his 
companion interrupted him, by ob- 
servmg : 

" I perceive we are proceeding by 
the same route, as far as Buttevant. I 
am going to the south, and shall halt at 
Kilcoleman, the reposoir, where, in the 
course of my pilgrimage through this 
island of saints, my imagination will do 
homage to the memory of Spencer. If 
you have not any objection, I should 
like much to accompany you so far; 
but you will reject the proposal with 
the same frankness it is made, if it 
is the least gene to you." 

" On the contrary, I shall accept it 
with pleasure, as far as Buttevant ; 
but from thence my uncertain route, 
through a wild country, will be passed 
on horseback ; and the business of an 
ardent research would leave me no time 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6/ 

for the enjoyment of your society, from 
which I have already derived so much. 
But," he added, after an abrupt pause, 
and suddenly speaking in Spanish, ^^you 
are ignorant of my name and situation. 
You may dislike this equivocal position, 
in which I am necessarily thrown ; for 
it would not suit my views or my conve- 
nience to reveal either. To the title, how- 
ever, of Commodore, given me by my 
crew, I have a right : for the rest, you 
must take me as I am, and upon trust." 

I take you upon your own terms," 
was the reply, " and I adopt them as 
my own : to confess the truth, I like the 
mystery and romance of our connexion. 
It is foreign to the established forms of 
the world's calculated ties : and whether 
or not, when we part, we ever meet 
again, I shall look upon the accident 
which brought me acquainted with the 
commander of II Librador as among the 
most pleasant events of my life. I am 
weary of the stale forms of what is 



68 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

falsely called civilized society ; and he 
who picks me up unknown^ unnamed, 
in the middle of the ocean, receives me 
between sky and sea, a wanderer in the 
elements, gives me the rites of hospi- 
tality, communicates with me frankly, 
cherishes no suspicion, seeks no con- 
fidence, nor obtrudes any, connects him- 
self, in my imagination, with a state of 
things, often dreamed of, but rarely rea- 
lized. Ties, formed under such circum- 
stances, are precious as they are rare; 
and by me, at least, are valued accord- 
ingly." 

" And I," said the Commodore, with 
his splendid smile, brightening the 
•severity of his singular countenance, 
••'^ have just romance enough to enter into 
your feelings; for I once made a friend- 
ship, in swimming down the Oronoko, 
which influenced the fortune and bent 
of my future life." 

They then agreed to leave Dublin in 
two hours ; and Mr. De Vere asked 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 69 

What do you do with your servant?'' 

I have none but my Spanish mate, 
whom I leave to take the command of 
my vessel, when she is ready for sea." 

Then I also will leave my ridiculous 
Frenchman behind me, -till I arrive at 
my place of destination; a period ' still 
hanging in the stars.' The master of this 
hotel will take care of him, I suppose, 
if well paid; as he would of my grey 
parrot, green monkey, or any other 
exotic animal I might consign to him. 
I have not the least idea, though, how 
I shall do without a servant; but the 
situation will he new, and so far good." 

Here the waiter entered, and en- 
quired of the elderly gentlewoman, as 
if merely to make an excuse to get her 
out of the room, Have you any lug- 
gage, ma'am, to put up?'— To this 
question she replied angrily, and inter- 
rupting her reassumed letter, which, by 
the motion of her hand, appeared to 
consist of characters complex as the 
ancient Ogham, Have I any luggage! 



70 FLORENCE MACATHY. 

have I? Then do you take me for a 
snail^ why! with all my goods on my 
back ?" The rich round Munster brogue 
in which this question was asked, the 
guttural acccntation of the ^you and 
the ^ why peculiar to that province, and 
the sharp key in which it was uttered, 
made the gentlemen start; while the 
impertinent waiter took no pains to 
conceal his ready laughter. 

You are mighty pert, Sir,'* said 
the old lady, tossing a black wafer about 
her mouth, and scaling and soiling 
her ill-folded letter with it: she then 
gathered up her papers (some printed 
tracts which lay on the table), and cork- 
ing her inkhorn, which she dropped 
into her capacious pocket, as a peb- 
ble falls into the bottom of a deep 
well, she lowered her veil, resumed 
a black silk rabbit-skin-lined cardinal 
cloaks and waddling to the door, turned 
full round, and made a formal courtesy 
to the gentlemen: the gentlemen bowed, 
and she retired. 



FLORENGE MACARTHY. 71 

The French valet had now prepared 
the apparatus for the toilette: but before 
they adjourned to their dressing rooms, 
the waiter returned, and presented a note, 
illegibly written upon a dirty card, 
which Mr. De Vere took between his 
finger and thumb, and read, first eagerly 
to himself, and then aloud, with a look 
of disgust, amounting almost to nausea : 
it ran as follows : 

Mistress Magillicuddy presents her 
respects, on her way to Munster, would 
make a third in a chay, as far as Tip- 
perary town, if agreeable. N.B. No lug- 
gage to signify, foreby a portmantle and 
bandbox, also a magpie and cage, would 
hang outside, if not agreeable within : 
would prefer the gentlemen if serious : 
begs your acceptance of a religious tract, 
and am, gentlemen. Yours, &c. 

Molly Magillicuddy.^^ 
The waiter chuckled, and observed : 
The lady says she forgot to mention 
the bird and bandbox are to be taken up 



,72 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

in Thomas Street^ Mr. De Vere tossed 
the note on the table, and went to his 
dressing room; and the Commodore, 
with more good breeding, or rather with 
more good nature, desired the waiter to 
say that previous arrangements obhged 
them to decline the honour intended 
them by Mrs. MagilHcuddy. 

This singular looking lady had come 
by the Holyhead packet the night be- 
fore, and liad ordered a chaise previous 
to the arrival of the gentlemen. — The 
freedom,with which they had discussed 
their route before her, had probably 
suggested the idea of economising her 
travelling expenses by joining them. 
She might also have had some more 
important views,than those which were 
prudently directed to their purses; for 
her enquiry as to their being " serious" 
(a technical term in a particular new 
light,) indicated her calling; and it was 
possible she believed herself the elected 
agent of salvation to them^ as to many 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 73 

Others^ the Krudner or Johanna South- 
cote of some Munster village^ to which 
she might now be returning^ laden with 
sectarian tracts, and Irish snufF, bohea 
tea, and intolerance. 

When the waiter delivered a negative 
answer to her card, she shook her head, 
and said : In their blindness they 
know not what they reject why! but 
the sickle will go forth, and the harvest 
will yet be reaped." 

She shortly after set off for Naas, ac* 
casing the waiters of sauciness and ex- 
travagantcharges, talking Irish with the 
driver, and lecturing the beggars on the 
sin of idleness. She accompanied her 
admonition with some small change; at 
the same time accounting selfishly for her 
donation, by observing, He that giv- 
eth to the poor lendeth to the Lord. 

O; I engage,** said the waiter as she 
drove off, " if s little you'd give, if you 
didn't expect it back with interest ten- 
fold—and that's now what the likes of 



74? FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

her calls charity! Its the charity tliat 
begins at home, aye, and ends there 
too. Commend me to the gentleman 
above stairs that gave his two pound 
notes, and never canted nor preached 
about it. That's the real charity, long 
life to him !" 

To this ejaculation an " amen" was 
repeated by all present, who had wit- 
nessed the liberality of the Commodore, 
and heard the departing apostrophe of 
the elderly gentlewoman." 



FJLORENCE MACARTHY. J5 



CHAPTER 11. 

Oh ! quel homme superieur ! quel grand gemCf 
que ce Poco-curante ! Rien nc peut lui plaire. 

Voltaire. 



The two distinguished strangers, 
whom chance had so singularly united, 
and who had mutually chosen, from 
caprice or prudence, to hang the veil of 
mystery over their respective situations, 
appeared to touch on the extremes of 
human character. But there was, not- 
withstanding, an obvious dove-tailing 
in their dissimilitudes; and their moral 
disagreements, like some musical dis- 
cords, produced a combination more 
gracious than the utmost perfection of 
a complete and blended harmony could 
effect. The one seemed a brilliant il- 
lustration of physical and intellectual 
£ 2 



76 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



energy, thrown into perpetual activity; 
the other a personification of moral ab- 
straction, originating ingenious reveries, 
which, though sometimes foundedin fact, 
were generally inapplicable in practice. 
The fortunes of life seemed to have form- 
ed the one, and to have spoiled the other. 
The one thought, sympathized, and 
acted; the other mused, dreamed, and 
was passive. Their first half-hours 
communication, however, on board ship, 
was a prompt commutation of mutual 
good will. — Each felt he was associated 
with a gentleman ; and in that confidence 
had suffered intimacy to grow with a 
rapidity disproportioned to its duration. 
But though opinions were freely discuss- 
ed, and almost always opposed; though 
sentiments were broadly debated, and 
principles vehemently canvassed ; 3'^et 
in the many and long conversations, 
held during the silence of calm seas and 
of slumbering elements, by the midnight 
moon, or the day's prelusive dawn, no 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 77 



circumstance of personal communication 
had ever passed between them: mutu- 
ally in possession of each other s lead- 
ing opinions, and features of character, 
they were ignorant of all else beside. 

Both gentlemen spoke Spanish and 
French fluently; but the Commodore 
had a foreign pronunciation of some 
particular English words, which denoted 
him to have been long absent from the 
countries where English is the verna- 
cular tongue. The reading of the 
younger stranger seemed stupendous. 
It included the classics, ancient and 
modem, with the whole belles lettres of 
European and oriental literature. The 
studies of the Commodore were evidently 
more confined to the exact sciences; 
and, with the exception of Shakespeare, 
Milton, and Ossian, and of some old 
quaint English prose writers, the chro- 
niclers of Ireland's hapless story, the 
Campions, Spencers, and Hanmers, his 
course of English reading seemed cir- 
E 3 



78 FLORKNCE MACARTHY. 

€umscribed. The conversation of the 
i©ne, therefore, was more elegant, orna- 
mented, and detailed ; that of the other 
more original, energetic, and concise. 
The one spoke in epic,, the other in epi- 
gram. They had both travelled much, 
and far; the one, it should seem, from 
choice; the other from necessity: and 
the result from their conversation ap- 
peared to be that the one had stored his 
mind with images, the other strength- 
ened his judgment by observations. 
The one had studied forms^ the other 
men. The one had only increased his 
constitutional tendency to satiety and 
cnnui^ by the resources which, young 
as he was, he had already exhausted; 
the other had sharpened his appetite 
for enquiry by the experience he had 
obtained. Such as they were, they 
were both evidently out of the com- 
mon roll of men" — and alike distin- 
guished by personal &nd mental supe« 
riority. 



FLORENGE MACARTHY. 79^ 

The Commodore had dressed, break- 
fasted, made the necessary arrangements 
for their journey to Munster, and gone 
abroad, before his fellow traveller had 
gotten half way through his toilette^ 
even with the assistance of Monsieur, 
his valet. Mr. De Vere had indeed hut 
just sat down to his coffee, and his 
" Fairy Queen," when the elder stranger 
returned, after an absence of near two 
hours. 

"Have you seen much of Dublin 
fisked the younger traveller, laying down 
his book. 

*^Yes, I believe I have been half 
through it." 

" What impression does it give you 
upon the whole?" 

" Why, with its extremes of poverty 
and splendor, the wretchedness of a great 
part of its inhabitants, and the magnifi- 
cence of its buildings, it is to me a 
Grecian temple turned into a lazzaretto. 
One-third of its population are in an 



so FLORENCE MACARTUY. 

actual state of pauperism: one-half of 
its trading streets exhibit as many bank- 
rupt sales as open shops : the best 
houses are to be let, and the debtors' 
prisons are overflowing." 

" Have you, then, had time to visit 
the prisons ?" 

Business brought me to one: busi- 
ness with the high sheriff of a county, 
who has delivered himself up for the 
purpose of a whitewashing under the 
insolvency act, as he termed it." 

Ha! ha! ha! an high sheriff in pri- 
son — that's singular enough!" 

Not so singular in Ireland; for two 
©ther high sheriff's were confined in the 
same room with him, and for the same 
purposes." 

^^The laws must be well administered! 
But, doubtless, they are all honorable 
men'' 

" They are loyal men, as my friend 
the sheriff told me, though under a 
little present difficulty." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 31 

You have purchased a pocket teles- 
cope, I perceive." 

Yes, and a little information from 
the intelligent optician from whom I 
bought it. I went into his shop as the 
tax-gatherer was carrying out of it se- 
veral articles w^hich he had seized for 
non-payment. The owner was looking 
on calmly, and to some observation of 
mine, he replied, have not the money. 
Sir: there's no use in talking: when 
government have got all, we shall be at 
rest: we cannot be worse,' To my re- 
mark on the supposed tendency of the 
Union, so often vaunted in newspapers, 
and in debate, that it would bring Eng- 
lish capital into Irish trade ; he answer- 
ed, ^ The effect of the Union is ruin to 
Ireland: since that epoch her debt has 
increased, her resources diminished, her 
taxes augmented, her manufactures lan- 
guishing, her gentry self-exiled, her 
peasantry turbulent from distress, and 
her tradesmen, like myself, drained 
I 5 



82 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the last farthing, and sighing to remove 
to that country, where they will not be 
obliged to pay a large rent to the govern- 
ment, for leave to live ; to America.* But 
all cannot do this. — I note these ob- 
servations as being curious from one 
of his class. 

'^It is a pity,** said the younger 
stranger, that these Americans are so 
baroque^ for they are, politically speak- 
ing, a great people; they are, however, 
so prosperous, that they can never bd 
interesting : they are beyond the reach 
of prose or verse : we may say of their 
national, as of Darby and Joan s con- 
jugal felicity. 

They eat, and drink, and sleep, — what then ? 
Why sleep, and drink, and eat again.** 

The waiter now entered, presented 
ihe bill, and announced that all was 
leady for their departure. The land- 



♦ America is considered as the land of Canaaa 
by the lower ranks of Irish : the peasantry em* 
phatically call it Me Land.'* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. «S 

lord, who in his communication with 
Mr. De Vere, on the subject of his valet, 
had decided at once that he was a man 
of rank and fashion, now attended, and 
did the honours of his house in the usual 
style of Irish hyperbole. 

" Upon my credit^ gentlemen, I'm 
heartily sorry we're losing the honour 
of your company so soon; and think I 
could make the place plazing to you, if 
you would do me the honour, on your 
return from the Lakes (for supposes it is 
io them you're going), and am sorry you 
make such a short stay, without seeing 
the Rotunda, and the College, and the 
Dublin-Society house, and the statues." 

" Statues! what statues," demanded 
the younger stranger, catching at the 
sound, and stopping short,. 

" The statues. Sir, at our society- 
house, that's kept m. the greatest style, 
and gets a touch up, whenever the place 
is painted. That's bi/ order, as we say, 
in the society house." — "By what order?" 

as demanded^ with a smile. — • " By 



€4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

order of the committee of fine arts; 
and myself was one^ until business came 
on me so thick, and took up my atten- 
tion; and has a brother tlmt ahews at 
the exhibition every year, a great artist. 
Indeed, I think you d be plazed, gentle- 
men, if you were to stop and see the 
exhibition this saison, and portrait No. 2, 
full length of Mr. Roger O'Rafferty, of 
the Back-lane division auxiliary yeo- 
manry corps, in full regimentals, stand- 
ing quite quiet, and a cannon going off in 
the Phanix;* that's by my brother, Sir." 
This detailed statement of the cognos- 
cente landlord to prove the flourishing 
state of the arts in Ireland, the country 
which has given to the English school 
of painting a Barry, a Shec, and a Tres- 
ham, seemed quite sufficient to satisfy 

* The Phoenix Park near Dublin, the seat of 
reviews, and military evolutions. This beautiful 
tract, to which Lord Chesterfield gave its epithet 
of Phoenix, is also the scite of the Vice Regal 
Villa, and the residence of the chief official 
persons 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 85 

the curiosity of the strangers, who 
passed on, through files of beggars, to 
their carriage: they threw some silver 
among them, and hastily drew up the 
windows, to exclude the infected air, as 
they drove away. 

Pa!" said the finer gentleman of the 
two, this is breathing pestilence." 

" And witnessing its causes in all 
their most shocking details: look, what 
a splendid scene for such a grouping ! 
what a noble street, and what a mende- 
cant population!" 

As they passed through the southern 
suburb, the Commodore demanded of 
the postillion the name and purposes of 
an immense building, on the opposite 
side the water. 

Is it that forenent us, plaze your 
honor, acrass the Liffy? Oh! that's the 
Royal Barracks ; and them there's the 
Richmond Barracks; and if your honour 
could see behind you. Sir, you'd see the 
Porto Bello barracks, and there afore 
you is Island bridge barracks, and the 
barracks in the town; and Musha; 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

myself does not know the half o'them. 
You might travel in the county Dublin 
mountains^ rising there on your lift, 
from barrack to barrack, and never get 
sight of inn, or house, man or baste, 
only sogers, Sir." 

" From this sample," said the Com- 
modore, addressing his companion, " we 
might suppose the whole country to b« 
one great fortress ; as it was in Eliza- 
beth's day, when the population was 
divided into the English rebel and the 
Irish enemy. What an expense this 
army of occupation nmst prove to an 
impoverished country !" 

I have, myself,'* returned Mr. De 
Vere, " no objection to a military go- 
vernment : 'tis at least a picturesque 
legislation : it affords something to look 
at, ind to describe. I like military ar- 
chitecture, battlements and ramparts, 
watch-towers and bastions. The mili- 
tarc costume, too ! the helm and hau- 
berk, and warlike sounds 

Of trumpets loud, and clarions. 

" England is hastening fast to this, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 8/ 

but she will always want appropriate 
scenery." 

" And I trust an appropriate spirit 
too ! Look at Turkey." 

Why, yes, there is something to 
look at. But next to a military, I should 
prefer an ecclesiastical government, the 
despotism of some dark bigotry, som« 
religion 

" Full of pomp and gold, 
With devils to adore for deities ; 

Familiars and inquisitors for ministers 
of state, and auto-da-fes for national 
festivals." 

Spain, for example ; for though 
your fertile imagination invent, as it 
may, sources of oppression and degra- 
dation to man, there are still govern- 
ments in Europe to leave mere fable 
far behind." 

" Well, after all, call governments 
by what name you will, they all equally 
leave man as they find him, feeble and 
selfish." 



88 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Yes, because he is man. But in 
following the natural order of things, 
you at least make him all he is capable 
of being. Nature is the great legisla- 
tor. In creating man free, she com- 
manded him to remain so; and re-action, 
sooner or later, follows the violation of 
this her first great edict." 

" This is Naas, your honour," ob- 
served the postillion, addressing him- 
self to the Commodore, at the end of 
more than an hour's silence, interrupted 
only by occasional questions, addressed 
to the driver, relative to the surrounding 
objects — *^ and there is more barracks, 
Sir ;" and he pointed to a handsome 
square building, in itself almost a town : 
and there's the jail. Sir, an iligant fine 
building, and a croppy's head spiked 
on the top of it. I'll engage," he 
added, opening the door (for Naas was 
their first stage) ; — '^'11 engage he 11 rue 
the day he saw Vinegar-hill, any how, 
wherever he is, poor lad.'* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 89 

The Commodore^ as he alighted, 
raised his eyes to the point at which the 
postilHon's whip was directed, and be- 
held a human head, bleached and 
shining in the noon-day sun-beam. 
Such are the objects still exhibited in 
Ireland, as monuments of times of ter- 
ror, to feed the vindictive spirit of an 
irritated people; announcing triumph to 
one party, and subjection to another. 
The Commodore turned away his eyes 
in disgust, and passed under the fine 
arch of a ruined monastery of Domini- 
cans ; as if it were relief to his feelings 
to associate with less frightful images 
of death in its retired cemetery, than 
to behold them connected with such hor- 
rific associations, exposed in the high 
road of a public thoroughfare, a frightful 
land-mark for an unfortunate country. 

The travellers proceeded on their 
journey towards the province of Mun- 
ster, a province peculiarly interesting 
for its historical recollections, and for 



90 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

those scenes, alternately wild and pic- 
turesque, which attract to its site the foot-, 
steps of taste and curiosity, and furnish 
to foreign artists so many combinations 
of scenic loveliness. Conversation had 
been frequently dropped and renewed; 
and the travellers had remained silent 
for some miles, when they overtook a 
chaise, from which Mrs. Magillicuddy 
formally saluted them. The elder 
stranger recognizing the green spectacles 
and chitterling (the most conspicuous 
parts of her figure) answered her salu- 
tation with a bow ; the younger turned 
away his head in disgust. 

An ounce of civet would not 
sweeten my imagination," he observed,. 

from the infection communicated to it 
by that horrible old Irishwoman. Shut 
up in this chaise with her and her mag- 
pie!! — Do you know, this image has 
haunted me ever since she made the 
frightful proposal.*' 

The smile of his companion indicated 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9\ 

his consciousness of this avowed pre 
judice ; and the attention of the tra- 
vellers became again engaged with the 
passing scene. The various objects 
which presented themselvcG to their 
view, both moral and physical, were 
seen by each through such mediums 
as their respective peculiarity of cha- 
racter, taste, and temperament, were 
likely to produce. The one, rapid in 
perception, instinctively just in infer- 
ence, quick, curious, active, inquiring, 
directed the whole force of his acute, 
prompt observation, to the people and 
their localities, as both appeared upon 
the surface. He turned his eyes to 
the peasant's hut : it was the model of 
the " mere Irishman s'* hovel, as it 
rose amidst scenes of desolation during 
the civil wars of Elizabeth's reign. It 
was the sarne described by William 
Lithgow, the Scotch pilgrim, the 
noted traveller of that remote day. " A 
fflbrick erected in a single frame of 



92 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 

smoke-torn straw, green, long-pricked 
turf, and rain-dropping wattles ; ivhere, 
in foul tv eat her, its master can scarcely 
find a dry part to repose his sky-hap^ 
tized head upon^ 

He beheld the tenant of this miserable 
dwelling working on the roads, toiling 
in the ditches, labouring in the fields ; 
with an expression of lifeless activity- 
marking his exertions, the result of 
their deep-felt inadequacy : his gaunt 
athletic frame was meagre and flesh- 
less^ his colour livid, his features 
sharpened : his countenance, readily 
brightening into smiles of gaiety or 
derision, expressed the habitual in- 
fluence of strong dark passions. The 
quick intelligence of his careless glances 
mingled with the lurking slyness of dis- 
trust, — the instinctive self-defence of 
conscious degradation. He beheld mul- 
titudes of half-naked children, the love- 
liness of their age disfigured by squalid 
want, and the filthy drapery of extreme 



J-LORENCE MACARTHY. 93 



poverty, idle and joyless, loitering 
before the cabin door, or following 
in the train of a mendicant mother, 
whose partner in misery had gone to 
seek employment from the English har- 
vest, where his hire would be paid with 
the smile of derision; and where would 
be expected to excite laughter by his 
blunders, who might well command 
tears by his wretchedness. 

In the proclaimed districts, the mi- 
sery of the peasant population was most 
conspicuous. For he to whom 

The world was no friend, nor the world's law," 

might well set both at defiance. The 
forfeit of life could be deemed but a 
small penalty to him, who in preserving 
it " sheweth a greater necessity he hath 
to live, than any pleasure he can have 
in living." 

The few vehicles, public or private, 
observable on the high roads, the total 
absence of a respectable yeomanry, 



^4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



marked the scantiness of a resident 
gentry, and the want of that indepen- 
dent class," a country's boast and pride.* 
Yet many stately edifices, the monu- 
ments of ancient splendor or modem 
taste, rose along the way ; the former 
in ruins, the latter almost invariably 
unfinished. The castle of the ancient 
chief, and the mansion of the existing 
landlord, were alike desolated and de- 
serted. Town succeeding town, marked 
the influence and power of the great 
English palatines, who drew their 
wealth and luxury from a land, to 
which, like their forefathers, for gene- 
rations back, they were strangers ; and 
the name and arms of the English no- 
bility, suspended over inns, emblazoned 
over court-houses, and fixed in the walls 
of churches, or shining above their 
altars, marked the extensive territories 
of these descendants of the undertakers, 
and grantees of the Elizabeths, the 
James's, and the Charles's. The surface 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9i 



of the country, as it appeared, contained 
the leading facts of its histor}'', and those 
who ran might read. He who now 
read, studied not without a comment 
the text whose spirit and whose letter 
were mis-rule and oppression. 

The young stranger saw with other 
eyes ; and by the illusory lights of a 
sleepless imagination. But his phi- 
losophy, though cynical, was not the 
cynicism of experience ; it was the 
satiety of early excited and promptly 
exhausted sensations. Man, with him, 
was every where as well off as he de- 
served to be, because no where did 
*^ man delight" hijn; while all refer- 
ences came home to his own enjoyment, 
and were appreciated as they extended 
or curtailed its sphere. He looked only 
to that which could gratify the domi- 
nant faculty of his existence; and while 
he found 

Nature wanted stuff, 
To vie strange formi with fancyj" 



96 



FLORENCE 



MACARTHY. 



he sought in the combinations of art^ 
as formed under various epochs of so- 
ciety, for such objects and images as 
embodied events long passed, or^ con- 
secrated, and preserved in memory and 
imagination only. 

He had induced his companion to 
lengthen and diverge from their route 
by visiting the town of Kildare, once a 
city of historical and monkish import- 
ance, because there, his road-book told 
him, were still visible some remains of 
the ' Firehouse,' the Christian temple, 
where the nuns of St. Bfddget performed 
the rites of the heathen priestesses of 
Vesta, and watched over the sacred 
flame, which the English bishop, Henri 
de Londres, afterwards sacrilegiously 
extinguished (2). He found a little 
town, ruinous and wretched, with many 
symptoms of poverty, and few of anti- 
quity ; and he hurried from it in disap- 
pointment and dislike. He insisted on 
stopping the first night at Kilkenny^ 



FLORENCE MACARTUY. 9/ 

for the purpose of viewing the feudal 
castle of the Butlers, and the splendid 
ruins of its abbies. But, even here, 
imagination had got the start of fact; 
and, though a busy fancy peopled the 
silent aisles of St. Francis and St. John s 
with 

eremites and friars, 
White, black, and grey, with all their trum- 
pery;" 

though he garrisoned the ramparts witlt 
" Irish kernes and galloglasses," imagi- 
nation left possibility every where be- 
hind. Disappointment hung like a 
noxious vapour upon his steps ; and he 
every where found reason, or sought it^ 
to scoff at the folly and feebleness of 
man, who, under all stages of society, 
is the victim of blindness, beyond his 
power to dispel ; alternately tyrant or 
slave, impostor or dupe, and neither by 
his own free will. But though he saw 
the evil, he neither felt for its effects, ex* 
plored its cause, nor suggested its re- 

VOL, I, F 



98 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

medy ; and the talents of this accom- 
phshed ideologist, neither calculated 
nor exerted to benefit mankind, con- 
fined their lustre to him, they lighted 
alike to evil or to good. 

Views thus opposed, and sentiments ^ 
thus contrasted, naturally begot fre- 
quent and long protracted discussions, 
as fresh objects afforded themes for ob- 
servation or reflection ; and the travellers 
had passed the boundaries of the fre- 
quently proclaimed county of Tippe- 
rary, w^ithout interruption to their de- 
bate, or any impediment to their jour- 
ney (such as have been supposed the 
inevitable concomitants of Irish post- 
ing) ; when the postillion, alighting to 
lead his horses over a bad step, startled 
them, by exclaiming aloud — " Why, 
then, the curse of the divil on ye, Long- 
ford-pass, I pray Jasus, for youve 
joulted the very life out of me, so you 
have :" then having desired his horses 
to " get along out of that" he dropped 



FLORENCE MACAllTHY. 99 

back, and laying his hand upon the car- 
riage window, entered into conversation 
with the gentlemen, by strongly ad- 
vising them to give up the iday of 
making Thurles their sleeping stage : 
first, hecaise it was the same to his em- 
ployer whether they went a few miles 
one way or t'other ; and, secondly, be- 
caise that Thurles town would be fiiU 
of th* army, in respect of changing 
quarters ; two regiments marching to 
Cork and Kerry, to be sprinkled among 
the towns and mountain-barracks ; and 
there will be grate biletting the night, 
and the inn taken up entirely with the 
officers; and what matter? Shure Holy- 
cross was but a dony* bit further, and 
wouldn*t make an hour's differ. There 
was a new opposition inn in the neigh- 
bourhood set up against Thurles, kept 
by the maister's cousin-germain, Mr. 



* JDony^ small'^so used by Spencer, 
F 2 



100 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Dooly, where every thing was nate and 
clane, and quiet. 

" Is Holy-cross a town ?" demanded 
Mr. De Vere, caught by the religious 
romance of its name (3). 

It is, your honor ; that is, it is not 
a town. Sir, only a township and cha- 
pelry ; and blessed ground every foot of 
it, and well may be. Is'nt there a grate 
big piece of the holy cross itself, the 
wood of life, buried in the fine ancient 
ould abbey there, that the travellers be 
coming to see far and near ? And its 
that, why, plazc your honors, the saying 
goes, that of all places in the world 
round, the devil (Christ save us!) daren't 
shew the track of his hoof near thai 
township : and troth, gentlemen dear, 
it would be worth while to go ten mile 
round any time to see it, only in respect 
of the lovely fine tomb of th' ould king 
that's in it, my namesake, Carbrogh 
O'Brien, King of Limerick. Which 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 



101 



road shall I take^ Sir ? There lies the 
turn to Thurles^ and there to Holy-cross, 
your honor." 

I think the quiet inn, the ruined 
abbey, and O'Brien s tomb, decide it," 
said the Commodore. 

" Unquestionably," replied his com- 
panion; and the driver received his 
orders for Holy-cross. As he turned 
his horses' heads, a chaise passed before 
them, taking the Thurles road ; and the 
spectacles, tete, and high crowned hat of 
Mrs. Magillicuddy, appeared above the 
magpie's cage, which was suspended 
at the side of one of the windows. 

" Raison de plus," said Mr. De Ver«, 
sinking back in the carriage. " I would 
rather fall in with a legion of marching 
regiments than come in the way of that 
horrible old woman, and a renewal of 
her temfying proposition." 

The Commodore smiled. He was 
amused to observe, that Mrs. Magilli- 
cuddy and her magpie had taken pos- 
F 3 



102 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

session of his companion s susceptible 
imagination ; that the idea of an in- 
timate association with her had be- 
come as much the chimcera dire of his 
fancy, as her actual presence would 
have been the annoyance of his senses, 
and the destruction of his ease and com- 
fort : he had more than once alluded to 
the dugout of an atmosphere of Irish 
snuff and marrow pomatum, to the un- 
inviting images of spectacles and pocket 
handkerchiefs, pious tracts, and fusty 
bird-cages. The accident of her going 
the same rout, and her being enabled to 
keep pace with them, by their delay at 
Kildare and Kilkenny (for till the last 
stage they had travelled with four 
horses), were conjured into nothing 
else than a fatality; and even her inno- 
cent magpie was considered as an 
oiseau de mauvais augure. 

You are certain," said the younger 
traveller, addressing the driver, and 
pointing to the route taken by the old 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 103 

lady's chaise, " that that road leads to 
Thurles T 

" Shure and sartain, your honor, 
straight on forenent, and a turn in it to 
the hft that lades to the nunnery, Sir.'* 

" What nunn^ ? Are there nunnA- 
ries in this country ?" 

" Is it nunneries, Sir? There is 
plinty : there is one there, off to the lift, 
between Thurles road and Holy-cross, is 
the convent of our Lady of the Annunci- 
ation : they say, your honor, that in th' 
ould times there was subterranies under 
ground, between the nunnery and th' 
abbey of Holy-cross ; and there was a 
story went about a grey abbot, and — 
troth it makes myself laugh, its so 
funny, only Father Murphy, Sir, says 
there no truth in it, and so I don t be- 
lieve it, for the church knows best al- 
ways, Sir/* — He now jumped upon the 
wooden bar, which served him as a seat, 
and giving his horses the whip, pro- 
ceeded at a rapid pace. 

F 4 



104 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



As the travellers approached the mi- 
serable little village of Holy-cross, the 
sun s last rays had withdrawn from the 
horizon in all the mild and melancholy 
gloom of an autumnal evening. Tlie 

>gTey tints of the clouded atmosphere 
were reflected in shadows on the bosom 
of the Suir, along whose banks arose 
the stately ruins of the abbey. The inn, 

. recommended by the driver, the only 
inn, was a small house leading to the vil- 
lage, and bearing the sign of the Mitre 
and Crosier, as appropriate to its site. 

The approach of a chaise was evidently 
no common event; fur the landlord, his 
wife, a ragged old waiter, with a bare- 
footed girl (the bar- maid, house-maid, 
and kitchen-maid of the establishment), 
had stood at the door for some time, ea- 
gerly watching its approach. All were 
instantly in employment, carrying in the 
portmanteaux, conducting the travellers 
to their room, and knocking their heads 
together, in a confusion, increased by 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 105 



their efforts to do the honours to such 
unusual guests. The travellers per- 
ceived that they w^ere also the only 
guests ; and they were not displeased by 
a circumstance which not only ensured 
their quietude^ but their accommoda- 
tion; for in Ireland, inns are good in 
proportion as they are unfrequented^ 
that is, as they are not patronized by 
some great man, whose servant or de- 
pendant obtains the tontine or princi- 
pal hotel of the town, which his former 
master rules; and adds to this situation 
some office under government, which 
renders him above his business as an 
innkeeper, and induces him to act with 
insolence when called upon in the capa- 
city he despises. The humble inn- 
keeper of Holy-cross had recently fitted 
up a couple of bed-rooms in what had 
lately been a mere Shehean house, (4) 
and dignified with the name of inn the 
little building which had been for half a 
century a noted baiting-place for foot 

F 5 



106 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 

and horse travellers^ and of such piou* 
pilgrims as still came (and they were not 
few) to visit the shrine of the holy- 
relic. 

A few inquiries, and the ordering of 
a late dinner, took up a quarter of an 
hour; after which the travellers proceed- 
ed to visit the abbey. The twilight was 
thickening into darkness, but the air 
was fresh and balmy ; and motion and 
activity were positive enjoyments to 
those who had for many hours suffered 
the cramping restraint and fatiguing 
dislocation of an Irish post-chaise. 

The inn lay half a mile from the 
abbey, to which they passed over a 
bridge, thrown across the river Suir, and 
forming a communication between the 
village and the abbey grounds. The 
ruins covered a considerable tract, and 
were contrasted in their imposing mag- 
nitude by a few wretched hovels con* 
structed out of their fragments. This 
consecrated pile is among the few in- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 107 

teresting monuments of antiquity now 
extant in that country, which, according 
to the statements of the biographer of 
St. Rumoldi, once contained some of 
the most magnificent rehgious edifices 
of Europe. 

Raised by the piety and power of an 
Irish provincial prince, Donagh Car- 
braigh O'Brien, for monks of the Cister- 
tian order, and consecrated to the holy 
cross, St. Mary, and St. Benedict, it 
owed its principal consequence to the 
relic of the cross incased in gold and pre- 
cious stones, and given by Pope Paschal 
II. to Mac Morragh, the predecessor of 
Carbragh. The charms of the beauti- 
ful architecture must, in days so rude, 
have contributed not a little to its fame; 
and the devotion paid to the relic it en* 
shrined has been declared by an English 
minister * to have been universal through- 
out the island. 



» See Sir Henry Sidney's State Papers. 



108 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

The strangers contemplated for a con- 
siderable time the brok«ni mass of its 
dark exterior, and the high steeple, 
supported by beautiful gothic arches. 
They entered the broad nave, but, hke 
the rest of the ruin, it was wrapt in one 
undistinguishing hue ; and the majesty 
of darkness succeeded to the deep and 
misty forms of twilight. 

"Darkness," said the younger stranger, 
after a silence of some minutes, *^ is de- 
cidedly the source of the true sub- 
Mme." 

"And light," replied the Commo- 
dore, " of beauty : light is Ufcy the 
source of forms and motions: darkness 
is death : I abhor it." 

" And I love it. I love the uncer- 
tainty of this mysterious dimness (for 
instance), where every thing is guessed, 
and nothing known; where at every 
doubtful step, 

"Solemn and slow the shadows blacker fall, 
And all is awful listening gloom around." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 109 



A deep sigh, heard near and distinct, 
answered as he spoke. 

" Did you sigh ?" he asked quickly. 

" No : did not you?" was the reply. 

" Not I. Yet some one sighed most 
assuredly." 

"'Tis the wind among the ruins," 
said the Commodore, carelessly. 

" No, the air is breathless. It was a 
human, perhaps a super-human inspi- 
ration.*' 

**That is physically impossible: res- 
piration is organization: spirits have 
none. But do you believe in super- 
human agency?'* 

*^ I believe, and I deny nothing. — I 
resign myself passively to events, moral 
and physical, as they occur. This, I 
fancy, was the original intention of pro- 
vidence with respect to man; which 
made him dark, and left him so; the 
child of ignorance, and its victim.'' 

*^ Then why endow him with facul- 
ties, which impel him to enquiry, and 



110 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

force him into action, which lead him 
to dispel his darkness, and rise above 
his nature?*^ 

"Hush! there again! I am certain I 
heard the heavings of a short convulsive 
respiration. 'Tis most singular!'* 

" The place affects you. We will 
return, and view it by daylight.^ ^ 

" No/* said Mr. De Vere, seating 
himself on a fragment of the ruin : 
" this is to me positive enjoyment." 

As he spoke, the dispersion of a dense 
cloud, which had long scowled over the 
darkened landscape, and which now 
broke into fleecy vapour, displayed the 
broad bright moon, rising in splendour 
above the roofless ruin. A sheet of 
light fell upon the nave, which the 
strangers occupied, but left in shadow 
the lateral aisles, which formed a pil- 
lared arcade on either side. Parts of 
the ruin remained black and massive, 
while the shrine of the holy relic stood 
ilhiminated; and broken rays and silver 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. Ill 



points glittered on the projected tracery 
of the arches and twisted pillars, which 
supported the canopy of the royal tomb. 

The imagination of the younger tra- 
veller was busied in conjecturing which 
part of the building had been the choir, 
which the refectory, which the dormi- 
tory, when the Commodore observed : 
" Fanaticism raised these walls, and 
fanaticism destroyed them.* Their 
foundation recalls a degraded epoch of 
the human mind, w hen bigotry bribed 
its way to heaven, and purchased salva- 
tion with the fruits of that violence and 
injustice which risked it. These monk- 
ish potentates, these sanctified violators 



* What the holy rage of the first reformers 
left undone, Cromwell's soldiers completed. 
Even the monument of the Earl of Thomond, 
in Queen Elizabeth's time, erected in the Ca- 
thedral of the city of Limeric, could not escape 
their fury, though none in this country deserved 
tuore from England, 

Antiquities of Ireland^ 



112 FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 

in all ages and regions, are alike contemp- 
tible — their holy alliances and system 
of spoliation— their building of churches 
and breaking of treaties, combine the 
vices of fraud and hypocrisy, and rob 
ambition of its glory, and majesty of its 
respect/* 

Still/' said De Vere, I like a reli- 
gion of forms, a tangible religion, as I 
beheld it in Spain, where I was once 
half tempted to turn monk; a religion 
mingled with intrigue and credulity, 
passionate and pious, the ready agent 
of love and devotion.*' He sighed pro- 
foundly, and asked: "Is not this the 
twenty-fifth of August ?" 

" I believe so," was the reply. 

" 'Tis a curious coincidence : on this 
day, at this hour, seven years ago, my 
birth-day too, the day I came of age, 
being in Galicia in Spain, chance led 
me to the site of a Moorish ruin adjoin- 
ing the cloisters of the church of the 
celebrated convent of Nuestra Senora de 



FLORfiNCE MACARTHY. 113 



las Angustias.=^ I passed, musing on 
the course of things, from the frag- 
ments of Arabic taste, and Mahometan 
superstition, into the temple of Chris- 
tian rites. Vespers were just celebrated. 
A few stragglers, who had remained 
after service, gradually disappeared. I 
was still examining monuments, gazing 
on pictures, and numbering columns, 
when darkness fell around me : the dif- 
ferent avenues of entrance were closed, 
all save one, which led to Vv^hat had 
once been a Moorish orangerie: this 
orangerie formed a part of the pleasure- 
grounds and cemetery of the adjoining 
convent. While I looked round for some 
means of egress, and twilight rendered 
all objects dim and uncertain, sounds, 
that seemed to come from heaven, met 
my ear: the next moment my eye fell 
upon the minstrel. By the white veil 
and rosary, it was an unprofessed no- 
vice: she was seated on the fragment of 



• Our Lady of Sorrow. 



IH FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

a Moorish bath, leaning her cheek close 
to the lute, from which she had drawn 
such enchanting harmony, as if she 
were childishly, yet prettily, charmed 
with the sound herself had made. 

It is a pretty image altogether," said 
his auditor, seating himself beside him, 
among the ruins, and reminds me of 
a famous picture of Rosso Fiorentino, of 
a seraph listening to its own lute." 

" The resemblance was so great," re- 
turned the narrator, " that I had that 
design copied on this box, with the lit- 
tle alteration of substituting the novice^s 
veil for the wing of the cherub, and the 
head of a lovely woman for that of a 
seraph." 

As he spoke, he drew from his pocket 
a superb gold box, surmounted with the 
picture he had described, done in en- 
amel. The moonlight fell full upon its 
surface; and in the position in which the 
Commodore held it, it was distinctly 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 115 

visible. "Is this head a portrait?** he 
demanded. 

" Not exactly. It was done from the 
idea I gave the artist; an idea in every 
sense: for though the form and outline 
of the fair original, her fairy stepping, 
her aerial motions^, became too soon well 
known, yet the features which that 
envious veil concealed were never but 
dimly seen, half shrouded, half revealed, 
pale in the moon's uncertain Hght, dark 
under the shadows of the monumental 
cypres 8. In the stolen and dangerous 
interviews which followed the first acci- 
dental meeting, amidst scenes of silence, 
mystery, and death, that face was never 
fiilly revealed. Oh! there was in that 
sweet, pure, and short lived communion, 
a fanciful and unearthly charm, which 
I have often since vainly sought. It was 
associated with scenes impressive on the 
imagination: it was pure as a spirit's 
love : no sordid view or selfish feeling 
polluted the bright spring of genuine 



116 FI.OKENCE MACARTUY. 

passion. I was loved for myself; nor 
knew I the name of my concealed mis- 
tress, save that which the church had 
given her — the Sister Benedicta.*' 

" Then you wooed, and won this mys- 
terious saint?** asked the Commodore, 
impatiently. Wooed! yes; wooed, and 
weaned the soul of this consecrated being 
from her heavenly spouse, * her spouse 
in vain;^ but my conquest stopped tliere. 
I proposed to carry my young novice 
to South America; and in some of the 
Eden clifts of the cloud-embosomed 
Cordelliras to lead with her that bless- 
ed life of free unfettered passion, which 
nature dictated to the first created pair. 
Pride, bigotry, which she doubtless dig- 
nified with the name of virtue, triumph- 
ed over love. We parted : I found her 
innocent, I left her so ; I found her hap- 
py too, at least contented and deceived; 
and it is not long since I ordered a 
Spanish friend to raise a cenotaph to 
her memory, in the cemetery of her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. ll/ 

convent, with this device — A Hly fading 
beneath a sun-beam; and with this 
motto ^ Sic me Phcehus amat.^* 

*i You know then that she died, and 
think ^twas of a broken heart?" asked 
his auditor. 

I cannot doubt it; thou;]^h I have 
never heard from the friend to whom 
I trusted my sad commission; and to 
tell you the truth, the conviction still 
haunts my imagination, with a melan- 
choly force, that grows with what it 
feeds on/* 

"Oh! your imagination repeated 
the Commodore, significantly, as he re- 
turned the box. ^ 

" Yes," continued the narrator; " and 
in sketching the story, which I have 
given to the world anonimously, the de« 
scription of her death-bed scene almost 
drove me mad.^' 

A short wild laugh now rang through 
the ruins_, as if some malignant fiend 
had formed a part of the audience, and 



lis FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



scoffed at the fantastic folly of human 
vanity, the short-lived influence of hu- 
man passion. 

The strangers both started, and re- 
mained for a moment silent and motion- 
less. 

We have been overheard/' said 
the elder. 

" I should say by nothing human/* 
replied his companion. " Look round 
you : see, we are alone : all is now 
silence and solitude.** 

" Now, perhaps, but not a moment 
back. — Look there, something is in 
motion." 

They both darted forward. The 
moon had sunk in clouds, the stars 
were few, the pavement broken, and 
their steps uncertain. Still the Com- 
modore attained the object of his pur- 
suit. It was an old mule grazing on 
the scanty herbage which sprang up 
among the ruins. 

*^ This is a most ludicrous adven- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. HQ 

ture said the Commodore ; " and we 
had better terminate it by returning to 
our inn and our supper.*' 

The younger stranger still loitered, 
still mused: the elder drew his arm 
through his : they proceeded in si- 
lence; and though during their meal 
they talked of indifferent subjects^ it 
was CTident to the quick perception of 
the latter that the incident of the 
atbey had deeply affected the imagin- 
ation of his fanciful companion; he, 
however^ made no allusion to it, and 
his silence corroborated an inference 
founded in fact. 



ICO FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAPTER III. 

Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dcns^ 
And shades of death. All monstrous, 
All prodigious things ! 

Milton, 



BuTTEVANT, the Bothon of Ecclesi- 
astical books, the Kilneiiiullagh of 
Spencer, immortalized by his residence 
in its neighbourhood, was the last stage 
which the travellers had agreed to pass 
together ; and whether a feeling of re- 
gret attended this conviction, or other 
causes secretly operated to protract 
their departure, they left Holy-cross at 
an hour comparatively late, to begin a 
journey of some distance through one 
of the wildest mountain tracts, and least 
frequented cross roads, in the province 
of Munster. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 121 

Their next stage, however, was excel- 
lent: it was only to Cashel; and to judge 
from the group of sturdy fellows, who 
lurked about the door of the inn to which 
the travellers were driven, that town 
was not without its due portion of idlers — 
a natural circumstance in the capital of 
a grazing county. As the chaise stopped| 
the gentlemen were looking over their 
travelling map. They had marked 
out their route by the road-book, and 
had chosen the most picturesque, rather, 
perhaps, than the best line of progress ; 
and in crossing the elevated chain of the 
GaltleSy they had selected the road by 
Gaul Bally (the town of the Gauls or 
Celts), with its monastic ruins, in prefer- 
ence to the glen of Agherlow, a valley 
on the opposite side of the mountains, 
which would have lengthened their route, 
but would have presented a more beaten 
tracks though in itself sufficiently wild 
and romantic. Whichever way they 
took, the driver assured them that they 

VOL. I. G 



122 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



would reach Buttevant by sunset, God 
willing, and barring accident." 

As they descended, therefore, from their 
carriage, they ordered a chaise and horses 
fof Gaul Bally, to be ready against their 
return from the rock.''^ 

" Certainly, Sir," said the landlord,-}- 
slightly touching his hat, and resuming 
his conversation with aman-of-business- 
looking person, who was talking to him 
at the door. " Barney, a chaise on to 
Gaul Bally." 

Barney, having taken due time to con- 
sume a portion of tobacco, called out in 
his turn to a driver near him, Tim, 
honey,justcalloutachay to Gaul-Bally." 

* The rock of Cashel, the romantic scite of its ^ 
cathedral. 

+ As inns, in common with the royal cara- 
vanseras of the eastern apologue, are subject to 
a frequent change of masters, it is probable that 
some such revolution has occurred at the inn at 
Cashel since these events took place : at least, ihe 
author has no reason to charge its present ocou- 
pants witk incivility. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 123 

Tim, who was seated on the steps of a 
horse-post, playing with a large dog, ad- 
dressed himself to a blind beggar, with 
" step into the yard, and tell Comey 
Doolin a chay's wanting to Gaul Bally." 

" What is the distance to Gaul-BaJly 
asked the Commodore, who, as well as 
his fellow traveller, had observed the pro- 
gress of these deputed orders with im- 
patience and irritation. 

" What is the distance to Gaul 
Bally r" returned the landlord with sang- 
h-oid, as if he now first observed them, 

upon my word and reputation. Sir, I 
can't say— that is really, — Gaul Bally. 
Barney, can you answer these gentle- 
men.^ 

Och, Sir, shure you don't post to 
Gaul Bally at all at all: there's no post- 
ing there, Sir, nor wasn't many a-year. If 
the gentlemen bes going to Doneraile or 
Buttevant, they^d best go the low road, 
and take the glen of Agherlow to 
Mitchels town." 

'^We are resolved not to take any 
o 2 



124 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

road but that we've fixed on ; and I 
suppose we can have a chaise and horses 
to what stage and place we choose^ no 
matter where, if we pay for them." 

This observation, made with haughti- 
ness and petulance by Mr. De Vere, in- 
duced the landlord to uncover his head, 
^nd to reply : "Certainly, Sir: if you in* 
demnify me, Sir, I can let you have 
every accommodation in life; up to the 
top ofMangerton,if you please; only there 
is no posting, I give you my word, gen- 
tlemen, on these cross roads in Munster: 
that is, I don*t send out my cattle by the 
mile ; but you can have them by the joby 
or day, and welcome." 

" Why then, job or day,*' said Barney, 
with a significant look at his master, 

if the chay goes by Gaul Bally, its on 
a low backed car it will come back." 

" Shure enough,*' said Tim, rubbing 
round his shoulders, " and wouldn't care 
to be the driver, barring I was well ped, 
and left my throath behind me, specially 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 125 



near Kilbalogue, the thieves' wood^ 
down there^ below/' 

I came that way in my gig from 
Kilfinnen," said the man of business, 
" and found it good enough, and two 
dragoons with me/^ 

" Och^ then, it behoves you, and 
the hkes of you, Mr. Fogarty,'* said 
Tim, to look to that. Sir; for the 
times never ran so hard against the ex- 
cise as now : in respect of brhiging 
down the military, and the grate still- 
hunting, and fining the townlands to 
ruination.'* 

" Will you take the chay on to But- 
tevant, gentlemen ?*' asked the inn- 
keeper. 

" To Buttevant, certainly— perhaps 
further,^' replied the younger traveller. 

" I don^t think I could give it under 
seven or eight guineas a-day,^' he re- 
turned, musing ; but 1 11 let you 
know in a minute ;" and he entered 
G 3 



126 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the house, followed by Tim, Barney, 
and the exciseman, to hold a council. 

Eight guineas a-day ! sorrow send 
it you, Mr. Collogon ! — eight guineas ! 
Dioul ! 

This apostrophe was made by a per- 
son who leaned against the back of the 
stranger's chaise. He was wrapped in 
a huge frize coat, wore a slouched hat 
over a grey wig, and stood slashing a 
long cutting whip against the pave- 
ment. When, however, he perceived 
the travellers proceeded towards the 
rock of Cashel without noticing him, 
he followed them, touched his hat, and 
said, " 111 drive your honors to But- 
tevant, and that to your hearts con- 
tint, for half the money, and has as 
iligent a chay, and as nate a pair of 
mountain cattle, as any in Condon's 
country ; and keeps myself, your honor, 
hard bye, convanient to Buttevant, near 
Kilcoleman, Sir, and runs my garans 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 12/ 

«n my own account, and came with a 
fare to Cashel the day before yester- 
day, and was waiting for a return, your 
honor, which would sarve me entirely. 
Sir." 

"Do you know the route well through 
the Galties 

" Do I, is it, Sir? Och! may-be I 
don't I and would go it my lone blind- 
fold from Galtimore to Misenhead; 
and from Knockmell down to the reeks 
in Killarney ; and that's a brave step. 
Sir." 

" I should like to disappoint that 
nonchalant host of the Star, and his 
imposing driver," said the elder tra- 
veller. 

" And this man residing near Kil- 
coleman,'* said the younger, " has a 
classical interest with me. I shall pro- 
bably engage him while I reside in 
the neighbourhood of Spencer's fairy 
ground.^' 

The bargain was instantly made, and 
G 4 



128 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the chaise ordered to be at the inn door 
in half an hour, the time assigned to 
visit King Cormac's chapel. Mean- 
time, the master of the Kilcoleman 
chaise undertook to inform the host of 
the Star that his horses would not be 
wanting ; and when the travellers re- 
turned from their antiquarian visit, they 
found all ready for their departure. 

While the light luggage was removing 
into the new vehicle, the appearance of 
that vehicle, its horses, and driver, were 
a source of affected entertainment to 
the disappointed landlord and his sa- 
tellites. 

" Barney, that's a nate article of a 
chay," observed Tim. " Troth, I would 
not wonder if it was ould Cormac Mac 
Coleman's travelling landau, when he 
went the pilgrimage to Holy-cross.'* 

" Faith, Tim, lad, you're not much 
out, I believe ; for there's a crown on 
it, shure enough, which shews it be- 
longed to th' ould kings of Munster, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 129 

any how. King Flann or Brien Borru, 
may be.*' 

" Why then, for all that, Barney, 
I wisht I had all the chickens that ever 
was hatched in it, grand as it is. And 
look at the garans, =^ Sir ; Och ! but 
their grate bastes, and warranted , not 
to draw. I'll engage they'd rather die 
than run, and no ways skittish, that's 
certain, any way.^' 

The owner of this equipage, against 
which so many sarcasms were launched, 
was hitherto coolly rubbing down his 
horses with a whisp of straw ; and 
ringing, or rather humming, 

I am a rake and a rambling boy, 
My lodging 'tis near Aughnaghcloy," 

He now paused, however, to observe. 
The cattle's shurely not so fine as 
them was shot in the mail, near Kil- 
worth, Mr. Barney HefFernan, but they 
are good mountain cattle, for all that, 



* Poor hack horses. 
G 5 



130 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

and will take the gentlemen better 
through the Galties, and safer too, than 
handsomer bastes, plasc Jasus !" 

The former part of this observation 
had caused a very obvious revulsion in 
the colour of Mr. HefFeman's face, 
who, drawing some straws from be- 
tween the wheels of the chaise, said, in 
a conciliating voice, I*m glad to see 
you about the world again, Owny — 
when did you set up driver ?" 

" A little after the tithe-proctor's 
business in the murdering glen below, 
in the county of Waterford,^' replied 
Owny, significantly. 

Barney Heffernan slunk away, and 
no further sarcasm was launched against 
Owny^s set-out, which both the gentle- 
men stood for some minutes examining 
with curiosity; the Commodore wiping 
with his handkerchief the dust from the 
pannel on which the coronet, alluded 
to by one of the drivers, was visible, 
surmounting a defaced crest and armo- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 131 

rial bearing. The chaise was indeed of 
a very singular and antique build ; low, 
angular, with a projecting roof. The 
large windows, which once perhaps en- 
titled it to the appellation of a glass 
coach, were now partly filled up with 
wooden pannels ; and through the 
rents of the coarse check modern lining, 
remnants of crimson velvet, and rich, 
but thread-bare liveiy lace, spoke its 
former gentility. The travellers had 
proceeded some miles from Cashel, in 
a silence which the younger seemed 
little inclined to break, when the falling 
down of an old green silk blind roused 
him from his reverie. 

" This curious old vehicle,'^ he ob- 
served, " doubtless belonged to some 
noble family. Did you perceive a ba- 
ron^s coronet on the side pannel, and a 
crest beneath it ?" 

" Yes, a dexter arm, issuing out of 
a cloud, and holding a naked sword, 
all proper, with the motto, Figueur 



1^2 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

de dessus — the cognizance and motto 
of some Norman adventurer, who for- 
merly ravaged this country, and who, 
like more modern victors, took the 
sanction of heaven for their deeds of 
violence, and believed, or affected to 
believe, that " Dieu est toujours pour 
les gros bataillons," 

" It is the motto and crest of the 
Fitzadelm family, of the present Mar- 
quis of Dunore, the representative of 
that family,** said De Vere. 

A silence of a few minutes followed 
this observation, and the Commodore 
then carelessly added — " The Fitz- 
adelms! a branch of the far-spreading 
Geraldines ? Yes, they got their portion 
of this fair province by grant from Henry 
the Second, to whom they were sewers, 
as the Ormond family were butlers; 
and shared with Hamo de Valois, 
Philip of Worcester, William de Bcirri, 
and other Norman adventurers, the 
princely palatinate of the Macarthies 



FLORENCE MACARTHT. 133 

More, once chiefs or kings of Des- 
mond." 

It is in the order of things/' said De 
Vere, coolly. 

" Oh! exactly; the ^ vigueur de 
dessus/ which maybe translated ' mighty 
not righty l[i^s been the same in all 
ages; but it is peculiar to the conquest of 
Ireland, to behold Henry the Second in 
his camp at Aquitain, distributing to his 
followers principalities, out of a country 
he had never seen, a country still in pos- 
session of its rightful chiefs, and in which 
his enterprising marshal, Strongbow, 
had then scarcely left the track of his 
footstep. It is curious also to behold 
the pope, consecrating this robbery, the 
Irish chieftains disdaining the Saxon 
king and the Roman pontif, defending, 
losing, recovering, and forfeiting again 
their ancient territories ; and finally the 
EngUsh lords becoming Irish in feel- 
ings, character, and language, and 



134 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



avenging the very injuries they had 
themselves inflicted, because they 
had become victims of the same bar- 
barous poHcy by which their ancestors 
had been influenced. The causes of 
Ireland's misfortunes are so deep seat- 
ed, that every page in her history 
is a palliation of her faults, and the 
graver errors of the people will all be 
found in the misrule of her govern- 
ment." 

" Better governed, she would be more 
prosperous," said the younger traveller, 

and less interesting and less amusing. 
As it is, she is ' melancholy and gentle- 
manlike,' a thing to make one laugh and 
cry in a breath. Her history, turned 
into metre, would dramatize into a sort 
of tragi-comic melo-dram of mirth and 
misery, ferocity and fun, that would 
leave the pathetic grotesque of chro- 
nonhotonthologus far behind." 

Them is the Canities, plaze your 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 135 

honor," said the driver, " among the 
clouds. There, Sir, not a mountain in 
the province will bate them, any how, 
let alone Mangerton." 

They are, indeed, truly respectable 
mountains for this little island," said the 
younger traveller, directing his glance 
to a range of bold romantic perpendicu- 
lar acclivities, whose conic pinnacles 
were lost in the clouds, and whose 
dark stupendous range might have form- 
ed a natural and impregnable boundary 
between rival and contending states. 

At the village of Gaul Bally they 
found only the ruins of some religious 
houses, a barrack, and a little Shebean 
house, where the driver stopped for a 
few minutes to refresh his horses and 
himself. They soon recommenced their 
mountain journey, doubling a formida- 
ble ridge, and ascending a gentle accli- 
vity, while the driver, almost throwing 
the reins upon the horses necks, sat 
with his arms folded, and recommenced 



136 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



for the twentieth time since they had 
left Cashel, 

The groves of Blarney, they are so charming." 

This will never do," said the Com- 
modore, letting down the front glass. 

Why, my friend, your horses seem 
tired already." 

" They do, plaze your honor," was 
the cool reply. " And do you know 
the raison of that samo. Sir ? Why^ 
then, it's becaise they're on level ground, 
Sir. Sorrow a thingr else ails them. 
Och ! the craturs are kind and lazy like 
myself, and quite untractable to a smooth 
level plain ; but wait till yez gets up 
among the glens and precipices. Its 
then. Sir, you will see them bate the 
reglar posters, why ! entirely ; for they 
knows the ways of the place, and little 
fear for the chay being left in smithe- 
reens,^'^ on the top of a rock, there, or at 
the bottom of that hollow, down in the 
divifs glin to your lift, Sir." 



* Smithereens ; i. e. fragments. 



FLORENCE MACARTHy. 157 

^ Its very evident," said the Commo- 
dore, " that this fellow is as untractable 
as his horses. There is a dogged indif- 
ference about him, a good-humom'ed 
pertinacity of manner, with which it 
would clearly be in vain to contend ; it 
were best, therefore, to leave him to his 
song and his waywardness," 

" Oh ! I hold no contention with tra* 
veiling contingencies," replied de Vere: 

through life, asthrough a journey, the 
^ Lttissez-aller is my device. Who would 
take the trouble of even willing, when 
a pebble under your chaise-wheel may 
set volition at nought. Who would 
contend with accidents and events, un- 
certain and incalculable as the element* 
on which they so often depend ?" 

" This is a fine road, your honors^" 
said the driver, breaking off his song 
abruptly, and applying his remark to a 
rude, rough, narrow acclivity, moss- 
grown and torrent-worn, and becoming 
every moment more difficult of ascent. 



136 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" Balleagh-na-Tierna 'tis called, in re- 
spect of being cut across the side of the 
Gahies by the Tierna-Dhu, that is the 
Black Baron, as they named him in 
his own country here below." 

" Black baron!" said Do Vere: " that 
sounds well among these wild scenes. 
Does the black baron live in these 
mountains, friend 

" He does. Sir; that's he did, but 
he's dead, Sir, and doing bravely these 
twenty years and more, and so is his 
brother Tierna Ruadh, the red baron, 
that followed him; whose son is now 
the Marquis Dunore : devil set his foot 
after them all, for its little good ever 
they did the country yet, them Fitz- 
adelms!"(5) 

The two travellers, as if moved by the 
same mechanical impulse, started, leaned 
forward, and then sunk back in the 
chaise—" At least," said the elder, " it 
was doing good to cut a road through 
this wild region, friend.^* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 139 

" Sorrow much then. Sir, any how ; 
in respect of never finishing it, no more 
nor that inn there, foment you to the 
left/* Here the driver pointed to the 
ruins of some dreary walls, which add- 
ed to the desolateness of the scene. 

" This Balleagh, I heard tell, was to 
join the low road, and was made in a 
great hurry to have a short cut for the 
Lord Lieutenant and the quality that 
came down in oceans from Dublin io 
the stage plays at court Fitzadelm ; and 
the inn was to bait at ; for, barring 
Lis-na-sleugh, sorrow baiting place in 
the Galties at all at all; and that was no 
place for quality to stop in/* 

" What an heterogenous association 
of images!'* said the Commodore: 
mountain regions and private theatri- 
cals ! A poor Irish lord beginning a 
work fit for an emperor, and leaving it 
unfinished, a monument of his uncalcu- 
lating extravagance, of that wildness and 
refinement^ that uncivilized dissipation, 



140 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

which characterized the provincial no- 
bihty of Ireland fifty years back, and 
aro^e from the degradation in which 
they were held/^ 

Oh, its dehcious!^^ replied De 
Vere. " I should like to know how the 
descendant or representative of these 
noble Fitzadelms would feel, in thus ac- 
cidentally hearing what we have now 
heard, and seeing what we see." 

" If he w ai a vain man, flattered and 
spoiled by fortune," replied the Com- 
modore, emphatically, " he would feel 
deep mortification ; but if he were" 
—he paused abruptly, and demanded 
of the driver: " Does Court Fitzadelm 
lie in the neighbourhood of these 
mountains?" 

" It does. Sir, fifteen miles off, in the 
valley, down below, between the Gal- 
ties and Gotroes, and the Balli-Howries, 
cribbed round with them and the beau- 
tiful Avon fiorne, the foir water, run- 
ning under the castle bawn^ that's all 



FLORENCE MACARTHY* 141 

that*s left of it. Sir. For shure after 
the Lord^s death it was broken up into 
smithereens, and scarce a skreed* of it 
left to the fore.^* 

" And who has carried it away?" 
asked De Vere. 

Why, Darby Crawley has. Sir, and 
his father before him, ould Pat; and 
has'nt left a taste, but what's in their 
own hands this day. And the chay, 
your honors driving in, shure it was 
from him ; 'twas bought at the auction. 
Troth, and if the young lord that got 
the title, or his brother was in it, they'd 
be entirely amazed to see their crown 
and arms running the road ihis day, 
that's the Gal ties. Sir.*' 

To this observation the travellers 
made no rejoinder. The horses now 
toiled slowly and painfully up a road, 
which every moment became more 
steep and laborious. On either side, 
the mountain scenery opened into in- 



* Skrc€d, a rag or morsel. 



142 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



creasing wildness and sublimity. In- 
numerable defiles boldly diverged to 
ascending regions, while altitudes still 
greater, blue, misty, and cloud-cap'd, 
terminated these natural vistas. The 
ascent had now become so steep and 
dangerous, that the travellers had not 
only alighted, but were frequently 
obliged to assist in lifting the chaise 
over deep ruts, cut by the torrents, but 
which the driver simply, called 'sore 
hits.' He frequently assured them 
that a little further on, a small quarter 
of a mile, the lord's Balleagh* would 
come down upon the Cloghniagh-Cluain, 
the lurking place of the noisy water (a 
torrent he affected every moment to 
hear) and then they would be upon the 
lou) road, which would bring them on 
the high posting road to Doneraile and 
Buttevant. 

Obliged to pin their faith upon a 
guide of whom they now began to en- 
* Balleagh — a road ok way. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 143 

tertain some suspicion, the travellers 
beheld one small quarter of a mile suc- 
ceed to another, and heard and lost re- 
peatedly the fall of many dashing tor- 
rents, until, as they ascended among 
the romantic elevations of the Galties, 
they lost sight of the inconvenience and 
tediousness of their journey in their ad- 
miration of the scenery. They even 
permitted the horses to halt in a nar- 
row glen, while they proceeded to exa- 
mine regions, where nature reigned in 
all her wildest magnificence; and they 
ascended from one commanding alti- 
tude to another till the whole stupendous 
chain of mountains broke gradually 
upon them, spreading far and wide in 
bold fantastic forms, and in the utmost 
freedom of outline. As the travellers 
stood thus occupied at the point of a 
bold cliff, they suddenly perceived a 
shadow thrown from their precipitous 
station, intercepting the blood red beams 
of the now settling sun^ and turning 



144 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

quickly round, they observed a man so 
close to them, that by a single effort 
he ^ might have hurled the incautious 
wanderers down the abyss, they had, a 
moment before, shuddered to contem- 
plate. He had a bold, strongly defined, 
but light and flexible figure, not much 
set off by a ragged frize jacket: his 
neck was scarcely covered by a loosely 
tied red handkerchief. In his counte- 
nance there was a look of mingled care- 
lessness and intrepidity, of gaiety and 
acuteness, which is so often discernible 
in the Irish physiognomy. His hat, worn 
gallantly on one side, his light arch blue 
eye and curly luxuriant hair, gave to his 
whole appearance something of rustic 
foppery, mingled with an hardy daring- 
ness, that was peculiarly characteristic. 
This unexpected apparition in a scene 
so lonely amazed without alarming the 
travellers. When the man asked, 
a sort of triumphant laugh, Doesn't 
your honors know me then ? Shure, a'nt 



FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 14ft 



I your driver. Sirs, that drove you from 
Cashel in the Kilcoleman chay, below, 
in the hollow there." 

This information rather increased 
than lessened the surprise his appear- 
ance excited. " Only," he continued, 
^^that I threw off my cotamore^^ in re- 
gard of the heat ; and wishing to climb 
the mountain after you, I changed my 
old wig and cauheen for this bit of a 
straw hat. Sir, that I keeps under th« 
chay sate for warm weather, why." 

" But with such a profusion of hair, 
why do you wear a wig?'* asked the 
Commodore. 

" Och ! becaise, your honor, it was 
my ould father s before me. Sir,-}- — God 

♦Great coat. The cotaigh was the upper 
garment anciently. 

f This reason the author has often heard as- 
signed by the young Irish for covering their na. 
tural locks with an old scratch wig. Fioehair, 
however, is a national beauty, and an article of 
rustic <:ommerce. The females exchange their 
tresses with pedlars for trinkets and ribboni. 

VOL. I. ,H 



146 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

rest him" — and he crossed himself de- 
voutly. 

This mode of accounting for a dis- 
guise, more of air and manner, even 
than of dress, amused, but by no means 
satisfied tlie travellers; and secrctedly 
convinced that he had some motive for 
concealing liis person in Cashel, they 
accompanied him in silence back to the 
spot where he had left the chaise and 
horses. As they descended the declivi- 
ties, De Vere observed, " This is what 
Shakespeare calls ' a fine, gay, bold 
faced villain:' I should like to know his 
object in bewildering us in these moun- 
tains." 

" If he has any," replied the Commo- 
dore, carelessly, " it must soon discover 
itself.'* 

On reaching the hollow, they were 
surprised and mortified to find that the 
daylight, which still lingered in tints of 
purple and gold on the summits of the 
mountains, had faded away from their 
▼allies. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l4? 

Yea may step in now, gentlemen/* 
said the driver: "we have a smooth piece 
afore us for half a mile, and then we 
turn into Cloghnaigh-Cluain, and will 
be on the top of Doneraile in no time.^^ 
" We are quite aware that is utterly 
impossible/"' said the Commodore, de- 
cisively, as he got into the chaise; "but 
go on as rapidly as possible: we should 
not like to be benighted in these moun- 
tains ; indeed, we are resolved not to be 
,so." 

, " Och! sorrow fear, your honor, any 
how, of that shure: isn't there an ilegant 
fine moon? and if the worst goes to the 
worst, is not there the mountain house 
Lis-nasleiigh, at the foot of the Galties, 
and the best of entertainment there for 
man and baste." 

" No,'* replied the Commodore in 
the same tone of cool decision, "'we 
must reach Doneraile or Butte vant to- 
night, except we ourselves change our 
minds, as we proceed.'^ 
H 2 



148 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" Which we shall not do/' whispered 
his companion, and yet, perhaps shall 
be necessitated to take up our night^s 
abode in this mountain-house he talks 
of." 

They had in the course of a quarter of 
an hour reached the long promised turn to 
Cloghnaigh-Cluain ; but the road, though 
it was a rapid descent, far from improv- 
ing, became every moment more imprac- 
ticable, and the twihght more obscure. 
The driver, at last, after a violent jolt, 
which threatened dislocation to the 
joints of the crazy vehicle^ suddenly 
stopped his horses, and coming up to 
the chaise window, asked, " Yez would 
not have such a thing as a crooked nail 
about ye, plaze your honors?" 

The Commodore replied in the nega- 
tive, half laughingly, though with feel- 
ings of annoyance, arising partly from 
suspicion of the man's intentions, and 
partly from impatience of delay in 
in such a place^ and at such a time. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 149 

*^ Why then^ murther alive, what's 
this for?*' exclaimed the driver, scratch- 
ing his head : " the fore wheel off^ 
and not a bit of a nail for a linch pin; 
and the spring broke too, and not a 
taste of rope to tie it up with." 

" This is a pleasant adventure,'^ said 
the younger traveller, throwing himself 
back in the chaise; while the elder, 
jumping out, examined into the acci* 
dent : the spring was broken, the wheel 
was off. 

This is no accident,'* he said, turn- 
ing abruptly to the driver : the linch 
pin of this wheel has been drawn out 
purposely." 

It has, Sir?" he reiterated with sim- 
plicity. " See that now ! why then, I 
wonder who would be after doing that 
same ; if it wouldn't be your honors, out 
of sport. Sir. But sorrow much matter, 
any how ; Fd as soon drive your honors 
with three wheels as four, and did from 
Cork to Kilworth:— that's father Mur- 
H 3 



160 FLORENCE MACARTHT. 

phy, Sir; and the wheel will just slip 
in the front of the chay, fair and aisy, 
Pll be bound. 

"But that's not the worst of it/* he 
continued coolly, endeavouring to force 
the wheel into the chaise on one side, 
while Mr. De Vere jumped out at the 
other: " we've taken the wrong turn, it 
seems, entirely; for that Cloghnaigh 
bates the world, in respect of contrari- 
ness; and when I thought we were in 
on it, isn't it here the ^ wolfs track,' 
we've slipped into? Dioul!" 

r'" You are to remember," said the 
Commodore, while his companion was en- 
joying a rapid combination of every real, 
fancied, or possible danger, " you told us 
you were well acquainted with the road.** 

*^ And if I wasn't, your honor, how 
would I know that this is the wolf's 
tmcJt. Och! musha! the likes of this 
never happened me before. Ochone! 
Here's your purse. Sir, dear, dropped 
in the hay;" and he carelessly threw the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 151 

pursCj weio-hty from containing some 
golden Spanisli coin^ into the traveller's 
hand: lie then continued his lamenta- 
tion over his mistake, at the same time 
endeavouring to thrust the fore wheel 
of the chaise through one of its doors. 
From his tone of voice, peculiarity of 
manner, and the carelessness w^ith which 
he restored a purse, that in all proba- 
bility would not have been missed, every 
suspicion of sinister intention was hush- 
ed in the mind of the Commodore. 
The younger traveller, however, saw 
only in tlie latter circumstance some 
ruse beyond the ordinary stratagem of 
a common robber; and whether he was 
to be enrolled among a band of Shan- 
avests, or stripped and plundered for 
the benefit of the Caravats, were cir- 
cumstances debated in his mind, under 
the influence of many romantic associa- 
tions appropriate to the scene and hour. 
Meantime, as the driver assured them, that 
though they had not taken the best or the 
H 4 



152 FLORT.NCE MACARTHY. 

shortest road, they were still makings 
their way out of the mountains, they 
continued to walk in advance of the 
chaise, without further reproach ; while 
the driver, leading his horses, recom- 
menced his song, which he only inter- 
rupted to point out a stone cross under the 
chff, that he called the Hag's bed;" and 
some other features in the scene, cha- 
racteristic of its wildness; thus evincing 
that his boasted acquaintance with the 
mountains was not an unfounded vaunt. 
With that sudden change of tem- 
perature incidental to mountain re- 
gions, the air had become intensely 
cold ; and through the increasing dark- 
ness of the evening, they hailed with 
pleasure a long level ray of light, 
which assured them of thei^ approxi- 
mation to some human abode; perhaps 
a forge, where they might have their 
chaise wheel reinstated ; and they 
suggested this possiblity to the driver. 
A forge," he replied, " then thats 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 153 



the great luck^ for if there's a forge, 
ye can put the night over at Lis-na- 
sleugh, for there's not a forge in the 
Gal ties round, barring the forge of Lis- 
na-sleugh, where there's the best of 
fine entertainment^ as I hear tell, that's if 
the chay can't he mended, and y ez don 't 
care to get on by moonlight to Butte- 
vant, which yez may after all, plazeGod/* 
" Freedom of agency," said the younger 
traveller, with a short laugh, ^^that may 
sound very well in a metaphysical argu- 
ment, but here! —we are all the slaves of 
circumstance, the puppets of events over 
which we have no control. Observe, we 
had pointed outThurlesandTipperaryfor 
our stages; we went, we were obliged to 
^,toHoly-cross, andCashel. We propos- 
ed, we willed, dining in Buttevant, — we 
are passing the evening, amidst the savage 
mountains of the Gal ties! And now, 
you may depend upon it, bon gr^, mal- 
gre, we shall be fated to stop at this 
Lis — something, some fortress of th^ 
H 5 



154 FLORENCE MACAKTIIY. 

Shanavests or Caravats, Whiteboys or 
Threshers; our boasted freedom of 
agency, all reduced to inevitable sub- 
mission to the intrigues of this masque- 
rading driver, who, by the bye, has again, 
you sec, assumed his disguise." — "Evi- 
dently not to deceive us,** replied the 
Commodore. As they proceeded, the 
light had frequently appeared and dis- 
appeared; but as their descent became 
lesi rapid, and they advanced more 
deeply into the valley, it assumed a more 
steady beam; and the outline of a small 
building became visible amidst a mass 
of darkly defined objects: as they 
approached they perceived it was a 
little sash window, which emitted the 
red light of a blazing turf fire ; and a 
volume of white curling smoke, issuing 
from an aperture in the roof, stained the 
deep dark blue of the atmosphere with 
fleecy forms. The moon just shewed her 
edge above the horizon, and more strongly 
defined the position of the building. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 155^^ 

which occupied part of a httle plain, 
forming a point of termination to four 
cross roads, that branched oft' round the 
base of the mountains. Those they 
had crossed appeared to rise ahnost to the 
clouds behind them ; and of the many- 
waterfalls, which dashed from the neigh- 
bouring rocks, one fell close to the rear 
of the cottage, dwindling into a rill, and 
forming a little horse-pool in its front. 
A light under a shed at a short distance 
shewed some horses feeding. A bunch 
of mountain hether suspended over 
the door, but above all, a post-chaise 
drawn up before it, which seemed, 
by its position, to have recently ar- 
rived by one of the low roads, de- 
signated this wild and remote edifice as 
an inn. This idea was confirmed by a 
smart crack of the whip, with which the 
driver brought up his weary horses, and 
by his taking off" his hat to the gentlemen, 
and ^claiming, with a courteous bow. 
Why then, long life to yez ! yez arc 
welcome to Lis-na-sleugh!** 



156 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" So/' said De Vere, " I thought so. 
This, however, is wizzard scenery, and 
one may compound for a httle incon- 
venience, or even danger, to enjoy 
it." 

The approach of the carriage had 
brought out from the shed, which served 
as a stable, a lame beggar, who officiated 
as hostler, and a ragged boy, who ap- 
peared as the substitute for a waiter. 

" Here baccah ma vourneen,***' said 
the driver, who was now once more 
muffled in his cotamore, his wig, and 
old caubeen, " take off them cattle for 
me, while I show the gentlemen into 
the place. Come, my gassoon, lend me 
the rush,*' and he snatched the light 
out of the boy's hand. " This away, 
your honors ; take care of the sow. Sir: 
there's a bit of a strame. Sir. Widow 
Gaffney, ma'am, where are you agrah ? 
Oh, here's the mistress herself. I'll 



* Baccah, a cripple. All lame and deforra«(I 
l)eggars, are called baccahs ia Ireland. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 157 

trouble, ma'am, to look after the gentle- 
men, while I give a squint at th' other 
bastes.*' 

The hostess took the light from him, 
and he joined the driver of the other 
newly arrived chaise, who was adjourn- 
ing from the house to the stable. The 
IVidow Gaffhey, with many smiles 
and courtesies, led the guests from the 
dark little stone passages which sepa- 
rated the kitchen, clouded with smoke, 
from another small room distinguished 
by its plank flooring ; exclaiming, as she 
moved before them, " Och ! but your 
honors is welcome, Sirs. Its a sharp 
night to cross the mountains, and will 
have a sod kindled in the chimhley, Sirs, 
if yez are going stay past the cattle's 
taking their lock of hay gintlemin.^' 

As she spoke, she lighted, or endear 
voured to light, a miserable candle^ 
which stood in a dirty brass candlestick 
on a shelf over the " chimhley,'* While 
thus engaged^ the yellow flickering 



158 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



light fell full on her face^ and threw her 
sharp, but handsome features, her deep 
sallow complexion, and black bright 
eyes, into strong relief. A red kerchief 
was tied round her head in the Munster 
fashion, and the rest of her tall, slight, 
boney form was hidden in shade. * 

The strangers withdrew their eyes 
from the figure of the landlady, to the 
apartment into which she had ushered 
them. Its whitewashed walls were 
partially covered with those pious prints 
which are hawked about for sale in the 
remotest parts of Ireland. The history 
of many a saint, the sufferings of many 
a martyr, were here detailed in bright 
vermilion and yellow ochre ; and angels 
and devils, hymns and homilies, were 
mingled promiscuously with the amatory 
history of " Cooleendas,'' " Croothe^ 



♦ The old Irish he ad-her chief ^ is almost 
universally worn by the female peasantry of 
Munster. 



/ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 159 

namoe,' the " Connaught daisy," the 
last dying speech of Captain Dread- 
nought/' bloody and barbarous murders, 
and a favourite sang, called " Ma chere 
amie^' as sung by Mrs. BilUngton. 

A deal table in the centre of the room 
was still covered with some little pewter 
vessels, and two glasses with wooden 
bottoms. The hearth was stuffed with 
withered heath ; and the atmosphere of 
the room, from which all ventilation 
was excluded, breathed the fumes of 
whiskey. The younger traveller, hold- 
ing his perfumed handkerchief to his 
nose, asked if there was no other apart- 
ment they could occupy, while their 
horses were feeding, and their chaise 
mended. 

Och ! blessed Virgin," said the 
hostess, wiping down the table with her^ 
apron^ this is the contrariest day ever 
rose on me ! Weeks we'd be, God help 
us, and not a chay, or sign of quality 
come the road; and now, becaise its 



l60 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the fair of Kiltish^ and the worlds in on 
upon us, here's two po-chaises, and not 
a sowl to help me, only the baccah, and 
my own little garlagh of a boy." 

" We should be glad to go any where 
where there's a fire/* said the Com- 
modore, " the kitchin for instance." 

Och ! your honor, that would be a 
poor place for the likes of you ; but if 
you would demean yourself to step 
into it, while I kindle a sod here, and 
ready the place, and takes down these 

brusheens " 

As she now began to raise a very un- 
pleasant dust by removing the bushes 
from the hearth, the gentlemen walked 
at once to the kitchen. 

The little inn of Lis-na-sleugh, or the 
house of the mount ain, was the genuine 
prototype of all such inns in the re- 
mote cross-roads, or mountain ways in 
Ireland ; and the kitchen^ as is usual 
in such places, was equally the recep- 
tacle of the guest and the beggar ; of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l6l 

those who cc'4ld^ and those who could 
not pay for a temporary shelter. The 
earthen floor of this hospitable apart- 
ment was undulating and broken ; a 
low mud wall^ with an aperture in it to 
see through, screened the fire-place 
from the door; and the capacious hearth, 
lined with a stone bench, afforded a 
comfortable retreat to the chilled or 
wearied traveller. It was now occu- 
pied by a haggard, worn-out looking 
person, who repeatedly drank from a 
noggin of water beside him. Above 
the bright clear fire of mountain turf, 
built upon the floor, hung suspended an 
immense iron cauldron, filled with po- 
tatoes, not boiling, but boiled and 
drying (5). In an angle of the kitchen, 
over a three-legged table, and a little 
pewter vessel filled with whiskey, sat 
two travellers ; one of them, by the pack 
which lay at his feet, a pedlar; the 
other, ill-looking and poorly clad : both 
earnestly conversing in Irish. Beside 



l62 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

the fire-place, on an old settle, were 
seated two females : one with her long 
Irish frize cloak, and the hood drawn 
over her face, exhibited her warmly- 
mittened hands to the fire, towards 
whtch she was turned. The other, 
stately and erect, her round figure co- 
vered in an old fashioned travelling 
cloak, and her head enveloped in that 
curious coiffure made and called after 
the head of a French carriage, and not 
many years back worn in Ireland under 
the name of a calesh. From the supe- 
riority of their appearance, they were 
assigned by the strangers to the chaise, 
which stood at the door on their arrival, 
and seemed but just to have preceded 
them. 

As the gentlemen stood before the 
fire conversing in Spanish on the inci- 
dents of their journey, calculating upon 
the probabilities of the future, and 
making obser\^ations on all that sur- 
rounded them, thewidow having lighted 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 63 

a fire in the best room^ returned to 
await the dispersion of the smoke it 
occasioned. She leaned indolently over 
a table, with her hands wrapped in her 
apron, or as she called it, her prasJieen^ 
and cast a glance of curiosity, directed 
alternately at her guests, in anxious 
hope that they would call for some re- 
freshment. None, however, was de- 
manded until the entrance of Owney, 
the driver, broke the spell ; for he ad- 
dressed her with — 

" You would' nt have such a thing as 
a cuppan * of parliament in the house, 
-Mrs. Gaffney ?" 

Och ! then, if I would not have 
that, what would I have, Sir, when I 
sould the bed from under me to pay the 
license ; and would be sorry to see the 
barony fined, after the murther we had 
in the mountains about ould Sulivan's 
still, last week, and the waylaying of 

* Cuppan, a little cup. — Parliament whiske/^ 
that is, licensed. 



16*4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the exciseman, and two men and one 
soger kilt in the action. Since the at- 
tempt at a rescue made for the Rabragh, 
never was known the hkes in the pro- 
vince of Munster, many a day." 

Mrs. Gaffney was helping the driver 
to a little vessel of licensed whiskey, 
which he had termed a cuppan of par- 
liament, when the ill-looking man, who 
sate t^tc-a-t^te with the pedlar, asked, 

" What's gone of the Rabragh, I 
%vonder ?" 

" Och! Sir, he's about the world 
again, I hear tell,^' replied the land- 
lady, " though never saw him, 'hove 
all the boys in the county. They say, 
the Ban-Tierna * had him released from 
prison last assizes twelvemonth, and 
vv^ent herself to the judges at Tipperary, 
in regard of her being his foster-sister.*' 

* Ban-Tierna^ the female chief ; literally, 
the woman of the chief, or noblewoman. This 
epithet is occasionally applied to female repre- 
sentatives of noble houses. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l65 

Long may she reign/^ exclaimed 
the ill-looking man ; " for she's a fine 
woman, and the poor man's friend. — 
Here's, may she live a thousand years/* 
and he tossed off a glass of spirits. 

" Amen/' said the driver, moving 
his hat reverentially as he pledged the 
toast, in a voice tremulous with emo- 
tion. 

I drink to her in water, wishing 
it was wine," said the poor man in the 
chimney corner : for I come from 
the land where her forefathers reigned. 
Here's to the Countess of Clancare.'' 

" Why then, if this were the last 
drop I had in the world," said the 
driver, drawing his hat over his face, 
as he advanced in the light, " you 
shall go my halves in it ;" and he pre- 
sented what remained in his cuppan to 
the water-drinker, who swallowing it 
eagerly, observed, 

" That's the first bit or sup passed 
my lips the day, barring a dry potati)e 



166 



FLORENCE MACARTHT. 



and a draught of water ; and came all 
the ways from the barony of Dun- 
kerron, district of Clancare in Kerr}', 
over bog and mountain, to sell my little 
bit of an hobby * at the fair of Kittish, 
to pay the rent of the shed I break my 
heart under.*' 

" Why then, is that hobby with the 
saddle your's, Sir?' asked the driver. 

She is/* said the poor man, sigh- 
ing, " to my sorrow : and a finer bit of 
a baste for bog or mountain journey 
doesn't breathe, for all Tm carrying 
her back with me this night ; and of- 
fered her for a thirty shilling Cork 
note and a pair of brogues, to a hawker 
this morning." 

"Why then. Sir, see hear," said ihc 
driver in a voice full of compassion. 

* The little hobbies of this country are the 
most proper to trayel through it; and a man 
must abandon himself entirely to their guidance, 
which will answer much better than if one 
should strive to manage ftnd direct their steps. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. IG7 

^ If I had the money, myself, Pd take 
her oft' your hands the night, if it was 
only to hire her out by the job to tra- 
vellers, and to sarve you into the bar- 
gain, God help you.** 

Then purchase her for me," said 
the Commodore, who, with his com- 
panion, had stood listening to this local 
and desultory conversation, uttered in 
an accent so strange to their ears as 
not always to be comprehended. The 
bargain was soon struck, and the owner 
of the hobby, with eyes streaming with 
joy, and a tongue profuse in gratitude, 
received a small sum over the price he 
had demanded. 

"I believe," said the elder stranger, 
addressing him as he xiountcd out his 
money, " at least I have read or heard, 
that your barony of Dunkerron was 
famous for this small breed of horses?*' 
" And is so, your honor, to this day, 
and that's all it is famous for now, 
barring St. Crohan's cell, the patron 



16*8 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



saint of the barony, hewn out of the 
soHd rock with his own hands."* 

The Commodore leant his head ea- 
gerly forward, and in a peculiar tone of 
voice, said, "And under the hill of Kil- 
crohan there stands — there did stand, a 
small ancient building, commanding the 
bay of Kenmare, once a friary.*' 

" I know it well, your honor; the 
chapelry of Glinsky, the school-house 
of Terence oge O'Leary, and is there to 
this hour, troth.'* 

" To this hour?" repeated the Com- 
modore in emotion. " That's the ruin« 
of it, your honor. After measter O'Leary 
quit the place, nobody cared to take up 



* Smith's Kerry. — In this hill Antiquarians 
assert tliat St. Kicran, the first bishop of Ossory, 
wrote his rule for monks. The stalactitical 
exudations of this romantic hermitage are held ia 
great veneration by the country people, who 
carefully preserve them, in the belief that they 
derive many virtues from the sanctity of the place 
that produces them. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l69 

in it; and somehow, the times doesn't 
favour larning now in Kerry as former- 
ly; and besides, there was an odd story 
went about the school-house. I disre- 
member me what now ; and was a sHp 
of a boy then, and went higher up into 
Clancare — that's twenty years ago, aye, 
faith, twenty-two years, since Terence 
Oge quit the place." 

"And more," said the lame beggar, 
who was filling a sieve with some oats 
out of a sort of chest near the hearth. 
" I've good right to remember it well, 
for I was the very man that brought the 
young lord, that would have been, from 
Court Fitzadelm to Terence Oge 
O'Leary's house, who was his foster 
father, and gave him all the learning he 
got, now, young gentleman." 

"Did you?" said the Commodore, 
seizing his upraised arm ; then suddenly 
letting it drop, he asked in an altered 
tone, "Did you send for a smith to 
look to our chaise? 

VOL. 1. I 



17® FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" I did, your honor, and is at it this 
moment; and troth, I didn't soe that 
same chaise drive up the night with a 
dry eye; for/' he added, turning to the 
Kerryman, it was in that very chaise, 
which my lord brought his elegant bride 
in, that I afterwards carried her son, af- 
ter her death, down to Dunkerron to 
measter O'Leary's, from whence he 
never returned dead or alive." 

That's the young lord, was drowned 
off the Bay of Kenmare, in his own bit 
of a corragh, and they say haunts the 
chapclry of Glensky to this hour," de- 
manded the Kerryman. 

" Och ! to my heavy sorrow," said the 
mendicant, dropping the vessel he was 
measuring the corn with, and leaning 
over the chest, "that was a sore day 
for me. Sir, for if he was in it this hour, 
it isn't in this condition I'd be, ould 
and lame, poor and desolate, and so I 
tould Measter O'Leary last week, who 
dropt salt tears whe!. he saw m^ " 



\ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l^l 

"Last week!" reiterated the stranger; 
then, with a change of voice, he added, 
" W ere you in Kerry last week, in 
Dunkerron? I am traveUing that way, 
and should Hke to know the state of 
the roads." 

" I was not. Sir, in Kerry, and never 
put my foot in it since I left the young 
gentleman there, that's the honourable 
De Montenay Fitzadelm." 

You said you saw O'Leary there, 1 
thought.*' 

" It was down in the Peninsula I saw 
Mr. Terence Oge O'Leary, your honor^ 
and am but just come from it this 
day." 

" The Peninsula!" repeated the Com- 
modore, " where is that?" 

" The Peninsula of Dunore, Sir, on 
the other side of the Boggra mountains, 
where the Marquis's castle is, on the 
sea-side, at the bottom of the country, a 
lovely fine place." 

" I suppose the castle is in ruins?" 
I 2 



172 FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

observed Mr. De Vere, carelessly — I 
mean Dunore castle." 

" Not at all, your honor, but as good 
as the day it was built, every stone of it; 
aye, faith, and better: for sure it was get- 
ting ready two years back for the young 
mad Marquis ; but the workmen have 
been stopped since he went beside him- 
self: and it would have been his cou- 
sins that was drowned, only for the vil- 
lainy of the world that banished the 
cratur to the wilds of Kerry, as Mr. 
O'Leary says, and no luck could follow 
them after that, great as they are now." 

" I remember that OXeary when he 
was out of his mind himself," said the 
landlady, " and I a bit of a slip of a girl; 
he used to be wandering in the moun- 
tains here, and bothering the world with 
the Macarthies and the Fitzadelms, 
and looking for their ould castles, in 
lone places." 

^^Och, then, he's brave and hearty 
now, Mrs. Gafihey," returned the lame 



FLORENCE MACARTKV. i^S 

hostler, and has a fine school in the 
preceptory of Monaster- ni-oriel. Many 
thanks to friar Dennis 0*Sulivan, the 
superior ; for it was he who took him 
up, and preached the devil out of him 
(for they say he was possessed), and set 
him down there, snug and aisy, in the 
friary ; and allows him to let his own 
apartment to bathers that come to the 
salt wather, when himself s not in it : 
and, troth, you wouldn't think, the day, 
he had put more than fifty years over 
his head, that's Mr. O'Leary, though 
he's sixty right out ; for its thirty-four 
years since his wife got the nursing 
at Court Fitzadelm, and Terence was 
twenty-six good then, and a brave 
lump of a poor scholar, when he missed 
his vocation,* and married Soosheen 
O'Calaghan." 

They say it was larning cracked 
his brain," observed the landlady. 

* Vocation — to the priesthood. To miss vo- 
cation, always means to fall in love. 

I 3 



174 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

No, troth ! but grief for the loss of 
his foster child ; and to this day, when 
he isn't going on with his Shanaos of 
the Macarthies More, its of him he beg 
talking, in spite of the Crawleys." The 
mendicant hostler now raised the sieve 
of oats on his head, and hobbled back 
to the stables. 

" Och ! but it's a pity of him, the cra- 
tur," said Mrs. Gaffney, whose evident 
love of gossipry was much gratified by 
the conversation which had accidentally 
arisen — " poor and lame as he is now, a 
Baccah, begging his bit through the 
country, and betimes doing a turn here 
for us : why, then, he has seen great 
days formerly, and was whipper-in to 
Lord Fitzadelm, that's the black 
baron, and often called in to sing the 
hunt of Kilruddery* for my lord and 
the quality in the great parlour after 
dinner; and at last lent him even his 
trifle of wages, and sold his bit of a 
place to raiie money for him. and got 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1/5 

his lameness by being thrown off vci his 
service ; and there you are now, Fineen 
Mac Crehan, without a rag to kiver you, 
or a shed to lay your head under, or a 
bit of a bed to die on, or as much as 
would buy a pipe to wake you with, this 
night. Ah! then, nothing ever thriv 
with them Fitzadelms : they had the 
hlach drop in them, for all they were 
the portliest men in the country (though 
I never see them, barring in pictures), 
and to this day its a saying in the coun- 
try, ^ comely and wicked like a Fitz- 
adelm.' Well, there's the last stick and 
stone of the court to be sold next week. 
We had orders to stick up the bill. Sirs, 
here, from Mr. Crawley's land-baily of 
Dunore, who passed through the 
mountains yesterday." 

" Then the devil set his foot after 
him wherever he goes, and that he may 
never come back, I pray Christ,** said 
the driver, as he drew his cotamore 
round him, and went forth to look after 
the equipage. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

To this pious adjuration a very general 
amen" was returned ; while both the 
travellers, as if moved by the same im- 
pulse of curiosity, advanced to read the 
advertisement hung over the chimney, 
by the rush-light which was fastened in 
a cleft stick near it. This paper indi- 
cated that the old castle and mansion of 
Court Fitzadelm, beautifully situate 
m a valley, watered by the Avon Fienne, 
and sheltered by the Galties and Bally- 
howry mountains, were to be put up for 
sale on a certain day, or might be pur- 
chased by private contract. The mate- 
rials were strongly recommended to any 
gentleman who was building ; and a 
few acres of meadow land, with the li- 
berties of a certain portion of the salmon 
fishery on the Avon-Fienne, were to be 
sold or leased. References were to be 
made to Darby Crawley, Esq. New- 
town, Mount Crawley-Dunore, or at his 
house, MerrioR Square, Dublin. 

" 1 should like to see this Court Fitz- 
adelm,'^ said the Commodore, address- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 177 

ing Mr. De Vere in Spanish. — Per- 
haps I may be induced to purchase it. 
The fishery of a fine river is a strong in- 
ducement, and my future destiny I hope 
is to reside in this country/* 

" I should hke to see it also, and will 
accompany you. By its vicinity to the 
Bally ho wry mountains, it can't be far 
from Buttevant/* replied De Vere. 

On enquiries made from the landlady,, 
and partly answered by the ill-looking 
man at the three-legged table, they 
found that Court Fitzadelm lay due 
south of the Ballyhowry mountains. 

Then/' said the Commodore, " I can 
take it en chemin faisant to the penin-^ 
sula of Dunore.'* 

" Dunore !" repeated the younger, 
traveller : "I thought you were pro* 
ceeding to Kerry ? ' ' 

^' Not immediately," was the careless 
reply ; and the next moment the Com^ 
modore, observing that he would en- 
deavour to expedite their journey, left 
I 5 



178 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the house. De Vere meantime took 
out his Spencer, and threw himself upon 
the settle, in the place of the female in 
the frize cloak, to whom the landlady 
was serving out some milk in another 
part of the kitchen ; when his neigh- 
bour in the calash, jerking the skirt of 
her riding cloak forward, which he had 
incautiously sat upon, observed — " I'd 
trouble you to move off: you were not 
so ready to put your comether* on me, 
when you refused me making a third in 
the chay, why! from Dublin to Ca- 
shel." 

Startled at this halt-remembered ac*^ 
cent, De Vere raised his eyes fearfully, 
and under the yawning cavity of the 
calash beheld the red nose and green 
spectacles of Mrs. Magillicuddy. He 
sprung from his seat and left the house. 

For heaven's sake," he exclaimed, as 
with rapid strides he advanced to his fel- 



♦ CBmether^^ — officioui iotrueiycnest. 



FLOREl^CE MACARTHY. 179 

low traveller, who stood talking near the 
door to the Baccah and the Kerry horse" 
dealer—'^ for heaven's sake let us be off 
directly, with or without a wheel. Who 
do you think one of the two females at 
the fire may be?" 

" Not your night-mare, I hope/' said 
the Commodore, smiling — not Mrs. 
Magilhcuddy." 

" My night-mare, indeed !*' he re- 
iterated, shrugging his shoulders: "this 
is being fairly hag-ridden." 

" Magillicuddy ! " repeated the driver 
of the first-arrived chaise, who was put- 
ting-to his horses. " Is that the ould 
lady's name, your honor ? Why, then, 
troth, she's a gentlewoman every taste 
of her, and pays finely ; and for that 
same I bate your chay fairly, and got ia 
half an hour before yez.*' 

" Where did you start from," asked 
Owny, coming forward. 

From Cashel ; and came the low 
road ; and wonders yez would take to 



180 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



the mountains ; only it's what I be- 
lieve you lost your way, Sir/' he re- 
plied. 

" And where are you going to 
now?" asked De Vere, evidently inte- 
rested in the question. 

We are going on to one side of 
Doneraile, Sir: and if we cant make 
that before ten o'clock, we are to stop 
at the New Inn ; for th* ould lady doesn't 
care to be on the road after tlie moon 
goes down, though from this to Done- 
raile is as beautiful as a bowling-green." 

" I think," said Mr. De Vere, " I 
sheuld be well contented to remain 
here to-night if there was a chance of 
clean beds, or even of fresh hether : we 
could then proceed to Court Fitzadelm 
early to-morrow, instead of having to 
tread back our steps by going to But- 
tevant first.'* This was addressed to the 
Commodore. 

Och, then, not better beds you'll 
get in the barony than at the little back- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



181 



room at Lis-na-sleugh/' observed Owny, 
who appeared to listen with attention; 

and I carried two gentlemen here 
who slept in them last week, and one of 
them a priest, that's Friar O'Sullivan, on 
his way to Cork." 

" Then we will endeavour to make 
our arrangements accordingly," said De 
Vere, turning sharp round, and coming 
in contact with the whalebone of Mrs. 
MagiUicuddy's calash; for she had stood 
for the last few minutes behind them. 

Why, then^ man," she exclaimed 
to her driver, will you lave olf your 
gossip, and not keep us here till mid- 
nighty why !" 

To this remonstrance, made in a most 
stentorian voice, the man replied by 
opening the chaise door, letting down 
the steps, and letting in the infirm Mrs. 
Magillicuddy and her more youthful 
attendant, who sprung lightly into the 
chaise after her: — they immediately drove 
away. 



182 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" I told you/' said the younger tra- 
veller, " we were fated to remain at this 
miserable little mountain inn." 

" The fatality lies in your preposses- 
sions/' replied the Commodore, " or if 
you will, in the super-human influence 
of Mrs. Magillicuddy ; for it appears 
that your motions are retarded or acce- 
lerated, according to your conjunctions 
or opposition with that most repelling 
body. She rules the ascendant." 

" Well," he replied, shrugging his 

shoulders, 

In her bright radiance and collateral heat, 
Maj I be comforted— no^ in her sphere.''^ 

And yet, "said the Commodore, " she 
is a woman." 

" A woman ! Sex hath but one age: 
that passed, there is neither^ man nor 
woman. Who would assign to such a 
thing as that a gender, with her lungt 
and her bulk, her natural defects and 
artificial disgusts, her Bardolph's nose, 
and tower of horse hair. A woman ! 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 183 



gracious heaven ! compared to the crea- 
tures one has seen, to the beings one 
has fancied, who for a moment have 
flashed their radiance on one's dreary 
Hfe path ! and this a woman ! *Tis 
altogether another species, made of 
other elements, and composed of other 
organs!*' 

As he thus stood " chewing the cud 
of sweet and bitter fancies," in apostro- 
phizing all that was lovely in the sex, 
and all that had ceased to be so, leaning 
against the door, his eyes fixed upon 
the silver-lined clouds, that passed in 
forms various and fantastic as his own 
thoughts, before the broad bright moon, 
his more active, more vigilant fellow 
traveller, was occupied in providing for 
their night's accommodation. He had 
also enquired for the driver, to inform 
him of their new arrangements, and 
learned from the lame hostler, that he 
was gone behind the other chaise, as far 
as the smith's forge, for an iron pin, 
which was wanting to the compleat re- 



184 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



instatement of the broken machinery of 
their own crazy carriage. 

The circumstance of two such guests 
remaining for the night at Lis-na-sleugh, 
produced a business and bustle most un- 
usual beneath ks humble roof SJianeen,^ 
the boy, was employed in catching, kill- 
ing, and plucking a fowl, v*^hieh had' 
(reckless of the fate that awaited it,) 
taken up its roost on the rafter of the 
kitchen. The baccah was occupied in 
preparing such a table equipage for sup- 
per as the house afforded ; and the 
hostess herself gave her attention to the 
little bed-room. 

This apartment, which communicated 
by a few steps with the parlour, con- 
tained two small, old fashioned bed- 
steads, with patch-work quilts, the ac* 
cumulated fragments of half a century ; 
and check curtains of transparent tex- 
ture. Though poor and mean, it was 
cleanly and cheerful ; and was just such 
a sleeping apartment as is to be found 



* Shaneea — Little John— Jack. 



FLORENCE MACARTUV. 185 

in every inn in Ireland^ that lies in a 
road but little frequented. 

When the strangers returned to the 
house, from a short refreshing walk 
among the moonlight glens, the house 
was cleared of its guests, silent and tran- 
quil. A clean cloth was spread upon 
the parlor table, the turf fire blazed 
brightly ; and though there was no wine 
to be had, and they had not yet made 
up their palates to what Peter the Great 
called Irish wine, "yet the clear spring 
that gushed from the neighbouring 
rock was pure falernian to thirsty and 
temperate travellers. The supper pre- 
pared by their cordial hostess, though 
homely, was all friandise to appetites 
sharpened by the mountain air, and 
placed beyond the delicacy of fastidious- 
ness by long fast. 

Owny, who had returned from the 
forge, enquired carelessly " if they had 
now the place to themselves, barring 
the gentlemen," and being answered m 
the affirmative (for the three guests in 



186* FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the kitclien,the horse-dealer, the pedlar, 
and his companion, had all departed 
under favour of the moonlight), he im- 
mediately threw off his cotamore, cau- 
been, and wig. Light, alert, and dili- 
gent, he now officiated as valet to the 
gentlemen, and as coadjutor to Mrs. 
Gaffney's establishment; and his services 
added considerably to the little sura of 
comfort and accommodation which the 
travellers could naturally expect, in this 
improved imitation of a Spanish Posada. 

Meantime the Irish head millefaltha * 
^hone in every eye, and beamed its wel- 
come on the strangers. The obvioug 
goodwill of all compensated for the de- 
ficiency of ability, but too obvious ; 
and even the younger, and less easily 
satisfied guest, was led to observe of the 
little Shebean of Lis-nasleugh, as the 
French philosopher did of the world, 
*^ si tout n-y est pas bien, tout est 
passable. 



♦ Hundred thousand welcomes. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



187 



CHAPTER IV. 

" This Eden, this deir.i-paradise 
This dear dear land is now leased out 
Like to a tenement, or pelting farm.'* 

' §U.\K£S|>SAUfi. 

What harmony is this ? 
Marvellous, sweet music; 
Give us kind keepers, heaven.'* 

Ibid. 

Were such things here as we do speak 
about? or have we eaten of the insane root 
(hat takes the reason pri>oner?" 

Ibid. 

m 

There is scarcely any cabaret in the 
remote parts of Ireland, over whose 
door is exhibited the usual advertise- 
ment of " good entertainment for man 
and beast," where a tolerable breakfast 
may not be procured; the abundance 
and freshness of the milk, butter, and 
eggs usually compensating for the indif- 
ferent quality of that far-fetched and 



188 FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

vivifying herb, which the widow Gaffney 
assured her guests was ihgant tay 
from Cork/' as they seated themselves 
at her breakfast table, after the refresh- 
ing repose of the night. Luckily they 
were just then in a temper of mind to 
take much upon faith, and to be pleased 
on very scanty premises. That, which 
under the influence of exhaustion and 
evening gloom, was deemed misadven- 
ture, to the renovated spirits of morning 
and sunshine was amusing incident 
merely, and stimulating variety. There 
was a novelty, a romantic singularity 
in their actual position, which lent it a 
peculiar charm (at least, to the younger 
traveller, to whom it was evident that 
wdiatever was new was good), while 
it was obvious to both, that even the 
wildest parts of Ireland afforded security 
to the stransrers wanderincj: for it 
is only the local, official oppressor who 
has any thing to fear from an ig- 
norant and suffering population ; a po- 



FLORENCE -MACARTHY. 189 

pulation, which, strangers to the protec- 
tion of the laws, fly for redress to that force, 
by which alone they and their ancestors 
have been governed for centuries. 

The travellers left the inn of Lis-na- 
sleugh, followed by the blessings of its 
inhabitants, excited by their liberalit}'. 
Had the younger of them been capable 
of observing any thing, in which he 
was not himself personally concerned, 
he might have noticed that, previous to 
their departure, his mysterious com- 
panion had been engaged in a con- 
ference with the lame hostler, which 
lasted for a x?onsiderabIe time: for while 
Owny was putting- to the horses, and 
arranging the portmanteaux, the Com- 
modore, with arms folded, brows com- 
pressed, and eyes full of eager listening 
curiosity, remained silently attentive to 
some narration, which seemed circum- 
jrtantially detailed by the baccah. As 
they both stood under the shadow of an 
impending cliif, the bold figure of the 



IQO FLOUENCE MACARTIfY, 

Commodore in deep shade, and darkly 
defined, the bending form of the cripple 
supported by his crutch, and tinged with 
the hght of a stragghng sunbeam, they 
seemed appropriate figures for the wild 
scenery that surrounded them. In this 
point of view they were only considered 
by the tasteful observer, who stood look- 
ing at them through his half-closed eyes, 
and who simply noted the effect of their 
picturesque grouping, without one sur- 
mise as to its cause. — The mountains 
the travellers had crossed, and the glen> 
in which they had passed the night, soon 
receded from their view: their journey 
lay along a comparatively good road, 
among a long chain of hills, which fenced 
within their undulating boundaries 
many a lovely glen and romantic valley, 
brightening in the morning sunshine. 
Acclivity rose above acclivity, lifting 
their bleak bare heads to the clouds, in 
wild and savage magnificence — those to 
the west forming the boundaries of the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY*. I9I 

county of Kerry ; those to the north and 
east, the Ballyhovvry and Nagle moun- 
tains, inclosing the classical scenery of 
Spencer ; his own Mole, rising conspi- 
cuously above all. 

In the bosom of this wild and fantas- 
tic region, after a journey of twelve 
miles, the valley of Glenfionne, or the 
fair valley, was announced by the 
driver ; and the old woods and towers 
of Court Fitzadelm were discovered in 
the distance, crowning a rocky summit, 
which seemed to hang perpendicularly 
over the winding waters of the Avon 
Fionne. The demesne of this fine old 
seat was accessible by many mountain 
ravines from the south ; but the design 
of its late lord, who had cut a road 
across a branch of the Galties, to facili- 
tate and to shorten the way from Dub- 
in, though inadequately executed, was 
judiciously conceived. On that side its 
situation was inaccessible, remote, and 
romantic. The extensive stone wall, 
which ran round the north of the de- 



192 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



mesne, forming an opposite barrier to 
that made by the winding river, was in 
many places dismantled and broken 
down ; and through its frequent breaches, 
it exhibited the result of that pernicious 
and exhausting system of farming re- 
sorted to in such places. The ci-devant 
agent, now the actual but absent mas- 
ter, had let out this beautiful demesne 
in what is called jobbing farms, whose 
tillage rarely extends beyond the grow- 
ing of potatoes; for which purpose the 
ground is uncalculatingly burned, to pro- 
duce one good crop to its temporary 
possessor. Here and there vestiges of 
wretched crops of grass and oats evinced 
the land utterly exhausted ; and, in 
many places, it was abandoned to the 
wild growth of weeds and briars. Al- 
most every where the old meadow and 
pasture grounds were covered with 
furze, broom, and rushes, which, though 
now yellow and rich to the eye, were 
still but " iinprqfitahly gayT 

The subdivisions of petty property 



TLORENCE MACARTHY. I95 

were marked by rude meerings, and each 
temporary tenant had secured his own 
rood of ground with unpl anted mounds, 
whose occasional gaps were stopped 
with brambles and heath bushes. This 
coarse and rude system of farming added 
much to the desolate and neglected as- 
pect of a naturally lovely scene, which, 
in its present state, formed an apt epi- 
tome of the abandoned dwellings of the 
Irish absentees. 

The scanty and miserable population 
which appeared in the neighbourhood 
of the once princely Court Fitzadelm 
was appropriately wretched and neg- 
lected. From a few mud-built huts, 
raised against the park wall, occasionally 
issued a child or a pig, while the head 
of its squalid mistress 'appeared for a 
moment through the cloud of smoke 
which streamed^ from the door, and 
then suddenly retreated. The long and 
broken road which wound round the 
wall, seemed to lengthen as the travcl- 

VOL. I, K 



194 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

lers proceeded ; and they stopped to en- 
quire the way to the nearest approach 
of a poor man who was driving a lamb 
with a straw rope round its leg. The 
man pointed to a winding in the road, 
and directed them to the ruined gates of 
the principal entrance : he then took 
up the wearied lamb on his shoulders, 
and proceeded sullenly on. 

" The cratur!*' said the driver, who 
was now walking beside his horses, as 
were also the gentlemen: " God help 
him ! he is now going all the way to 
Ballinispig fair with that bit of a lamb; 
eight good long miles, and may be it 
won't bring him over three tinpinnies." 
" There is/' said the Commodore, 
a mixture of indolence and laborious- 
iiess in these miserable people that is 
singular; they have neither the activity 
of savages nor the industry of civiliza- 
tion. They want energy for the one, 
and motive for the other." 

" What I should complain of in Ire- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. IQB 



land," replied De Vere, that there 

is no rural life ; no pastoral manners ; 
no subjects for the Idyls of Theocritus^ 
nor the Arcadia of Saniiazaro.*^ 

I would rather see it an appropnate 
subject for the Georgics of Virgil, thfe 
native energy of the people practically 
applied to the natural resources of the 
land, was the reply. 

They had now reached the entrance 
of what had been considered one of the 
most magnificent demesnes in Ireland, 
once forming part of tlie principality of 
the Maearthies, and successively pass- 
ing by grants and forfeitures from them 
to the powerful Desmonds, and again to 
the favoured Fitzadelms. It was now 
the ill-managed possession of an attorney, 
who had held it partly on mortgage and 
partly by lease from the elder Baron 
Fitzadelm, designated in the country 
by the soubriquet of the Black 
Baron/* 

The eyes of both strangers seemed 
K 2 



196 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

equally anxious in their gaze, which 
was more expressive of obscure and 
faded recognition than of mere idle cu- 
riosity. A long range of iron gate pre- 
sented itself to their view, much broken, 
the bars drawn out, and the tracery 
covered with rust. The massive stone 
pillars on either side, overgrown with 
lichens, still exhibited some vestioes of 
handsome sculpture : the capital of one 
was surmounted by an headless eagle ; 
the other shewed the claw and part of 
the body of a gos-hawk, both natives of 
the surrounding mountains, and well 
imitated in black marble, drawn from 
their once worked quarries. Two 
lodges mouldered on either side into ab- 
solute ruin ; and the intended improve- 
ment of a Grecian portico to one, never 
finished, was still obvious in the scat- 
tered fragments of furzes and entabla- 
tures which lay choaked amidst heaps 
of nettles, furze-bushes, and long rye- 
grass. The broad approach was still 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1^7 

visibly marked out, though now moss- 
grown and green, winding through 
beautifully undulating but neglected 
grounds : and there was a kind of mi- 
mic forest, richly cloathing the sides of 
the elevated hights, which rose, like 
httle mountains, from the southern 
shore of the river, deceiving the eye, 
and appearing the same luxuriant wood 
which had once bloomed there. It was 
now but the sprouting stumps succeeding 
to the lofty majesty of the full-grown 
oak, pine, and mountain ash, for which 
this country was once so celebrated. 

Frequently and recently as the hatchet 
had been applied to the towering woods 
of Court Fitzadelm, a few clumps and 
clusters of very ancient and noble trees 
were still left standing; but the red 
marks impressed upon their brown 
barks evinced that they also were de- 
stined to immediate destruction. 

While the travellers stood looking 
upon this fine, but melancholy scene, 
K 3 



igB FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

the driver thrust his head through the 
broken bars of the gate, and directing his 
▼oice towards one of the ruined lodges, 
whence issued a feeble smoke, cried 
out, *'Alleen ma chree ! Alleen deelish 

" Who do you call to ?" asked the 
Commodore, impatiently endeavouring 
to open the gate. 

To little Ellen, plaze your honor, 
the daughter of the poor baccah at 
Lis-na-eleugh, who lives here with her 
ould granny, that kept the gates in both 
th*ould lord's time, and is bed-ridden 
now : that's as the baccah tould me last 
night, when I was axing him about the 
way. Alleen ma voumeen." 

"Che shin,"* answered a shrill voice 
from within; and the next minute a 
figure, small, wild, and frightful, bounded 
over the plank laid before the lodge- 
door, and stood at the gate. To a few 
words addressed to her in Irish, she 
lent a timid but fixed attention ; then 

♦ Who's that. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 199 

flew back to the lodge, and instantly re- 
turned with a large massive key, which 
she applied with extraordinary strength 
to the rusty lock; and the heavy gates 
opened slowly, to admit the unusual 
visitors. 

" That's my caen-buy-deelish,"* said 
Owny, kindly patting a head, to whose 
thick and matted locks adhered some 
bearded thistles. The little portress 
laughed with all the wildness of fa- 
tuity ; but shrunk, scared, and inti- 
midated, as she snatched the offered 
remuneration from the Commodore's 
hand. Her countenance, however, ex- 
hibited rather the stupor of unawakened 
intellect, than a natural deficiency of 
intelligence. 

" That's a poor innocent, your ho- 
nor : the likes of them be always 
found in lonely places, like the ould 
court here ; and brings luck with them 



♦ My yellow-headed darling, 
K 4 



200 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



they say. But for all that she's a na- 
luraly her father tells me she's the 
finest eat-huntcr and bird-catcher in 
the barony round ; and is quite cute at 
gathering brushneens for the bit of fire, 
and catering among the neighbours with 
the cruiskeen * and wallet for her ould 
bed-ridden granny." 

To this account the Commodore made 
no reply, but shrugged his shoulders; 
and both gentlemen proceeded in silence 
through the demesne, while Owny 
entered the lodge to make some en- 
quiries from the bed-ridden lodge- 
keeper relative to the house ; whether 
it was to be seen, and who occupied it . 
The grounds were divided into little 
plots and job-farms, up to the- door of 
the mansion, which stood on a rocky 
bight over the river. On the opposite 
shores ascended a range of well wooded 
acclivities, whose summits mingled with 



♦ A little pitcher. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 20l 

the line of the horizon. Of the ori- 
ginal building nothing now remained 
but a square ivy-clad tower, called Des- 
mond's castle, flanking a Jess imposing 
edifice, built by the Fitzadelms in the 
reign of James the First. This wing 
was in good preservation : but the 
modern facade, raised forty years back 
by Baron Fitzadelm, the Tierna-Dhu, 
was ruinous and mouldering. It had 
been built by contract, was rapidly got 
up for a particular purpose, and had been 
constructed with bad materials, most 
of which were not even yet paid for. 
The precipitous declivities which swept 
down from the rocky foundation of the 
house to the river had been cut into 
terrace gardens, a fashion still observ- 
able at the seats of the ancient nobility 
of Munster : and it was melancholy to 
observe the stunted rose-tree, and other 
once-cultivated, but now degenerate 
shrubs and flowers, raising their heads 
amongst nettles and briers, and long 
K 5 



20Ct FLORENCE MACARTIIV. 



grass, and withered potatoc-stalks. Many 
fantastic little buildings were also seen 
mouldering on romantic sites along the 
river s undulating banks; some of shells, 
some of rock-work: all alike monu- 
ments of the bad taste of the day in 
which they were raised, and of the 
wanton caprice of the persons who pro- 
jected them. 

It was doubtless from a scene like 
this," observed Mr. De Vcre, plucking 
an half-perished rose, to which adhered 
the foliage of the deadly night-shade, 
that Spencer drew his poetical me- 
taphor of the seeds of vice springing 
up amidst the scions of virtue 

*^ And with their boughs the geotle plants did 
beat ; 

But ever more some of the >irtuous race 

Rose up inspired with heroic heat, 
That cropt the branches of their scicnt base, 
And with strong hand their fruitful rankness 
did deface." 



" It 18 thus, perhaps," returned the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 203 



Commodore, " that the rightful heir 
of Court Fitzadelm would act, did he 
behold this place as we now see it." 

" No/' replied De Vere, flinging 
away together the rose and the night- 
shade. " It is probable that the repre- 
sentative of the Fitzadelm family (for 
the unfortunate and insane Marquis of 
Dunore cannot be deemed such) would 
look upon this ancient seat of his an- 
cestors, as I now view it, with a new- 
feeling of contempt for the species to 
which he belongs ; and with as little 
interest for the posterity that is to follow, 
as to the ancestry that preceded him, 
he would put it up to the hammer, and 
fly to enjoy its price in happier regions 
and more genial climes." 

" He would, on the contrary, per- 
haps," said the Commodore, with a 
vehemence tinctured with irrepressible 
indignation, " endeavour to redeem the 
folly and negligence of his ancestors, 
wrest his paternal demesne from the 



204 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



grasp of fraud, or rc-purchasc it from 
the gripe of sordidness ; lie would then 
raise its fallen towers, reclaim its neg- 
lected soil, cherish the miserable popu- 
lation, and expiate the violence and 
rapacity by which his distant fore- 
fathers obtained this still beautiful ter- 
ritory, by a constant and beneficial resi- 
dence in the land whence he draws his 
support and existence.** 

" You know but little of Calista,'* re. 
plied De Vere, smiling significantly — 
'^you know but little of Lord Adehn 
Fitzadelm.*' 

"Who is hei'*' asked the Commo- 
dore, quickly. 

" Why, the only brother of the pre- 
sent Marquis of Dunore,heir presumptive 
ef his title and possessions: not to know 
him would argue yourself unknown," 

" Oh true," said the Commodore, 
with the tone of sudden recollection, 
" I have heard of such a person." 

" I suppose so," was the dry reply* 



J 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



205 



Ovvny now joined them with the in- 
formation that the house was to be 
seen, and that it was inhabited by an 
old housekeeper, a follower of the 
Crawley family, nick-named Protestant 
Moll, the ' diviVs own saint,' one he 
had often heard of, but never seen, and 
so called in re^^ard of her having' once 
been a great Papist and a Voteen^^ and 
having afterwards become a hedger, 
(that's a turn-coat), and was made a 
kiln-dried Protestant, by Miss Crawley, 
a great preacher, and sister to the Port- 
rieve of Dunore, Torney Crawley, Esq. 
a raal slave driver, that had many a 
poor man's sowl to answer for. While 
he spoke, he was vainly applying a 
stone to the folding doors of the great 
entrance (for the knocker was off), and 
at last went round to the rear of the 
building, in search of a more easy in- 
gress. In a few minutes his head ap- 
peared through one of the front win- 
dows; and assuring the gentlemen he 



* Devotee. 



i06 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

would be down in a crack, and open the 
hall door for them, he indulged himself 
in a momentary view of the surrounding 
scene. He soon, however, descended, 
and was heard unbarring the long- 
closed portals, which slowly opened to 
•admit the strangers. A most capacious 
hall of black marble discovered on 
either side several doors, half pannel led ; 
a superb, but dismantled staircase, in 
the centre, branched off into a corridor 
which surrounded the hall, and appear- 
ed to lead to different apartments. The 
rafters had in many places fallen in; 
and the plaister of the still crumbling 
ceiling lay in heaps upon the floor. 

This ruinous and melancholy appear- 
ance gave peculiar force to a motto in 
gold letters over the folding doors of a 
private theatre, which opened into the 
left side of the hall. The motto was 
Laugh while we can." 

" Laugh while we can!'* repeated the 
Commodore, with a shrug, that was al- 
most a shudder. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 20J 

" Oh, its delicious/* observed De 
Vere, ironically, " a thing to moralize 
a song withall.'* 

"Why then, its little of ii them gets 
now that put it up there, why! that's 
now, God help them, in a place where 
there's no laughing, but weeping, and 
wailing, and gnashing of teeth." 

The strangers turned round at this 
unexpected address^ but not unknown 
accent, and beheld Mrs. Magillicuddy 
close behind them. 

" This is the housekeeper, who will 
shew your honors the place,*' said 
Owny, and then retired to look after his 
horses. De Vere drew back many 
paces from the frightful phantom of his 
imagination. The Commodore stood 
surprised, and something amused at the 
effect which this sudden apparition pro- 
duced on his companion. Mrs. Magilli- 
cuddy, whose face was partly wrapped 
up in a worsted stocking, and who w as 
endeavouring to keep a brown paper 



208 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

steeped in whiskey on lier nose, looked 
at them for a moment through her large 
green spectacles, and addic sed them 
both in a tone of great familiarity, ob- 
serving, 

" Well, who knows but we may meet 
in heaven yet; little chance as there 
seems for some of us now, why! for 
we ve met often enough in this world 
any how, and may again when least ex- 
pected. And its little yez thought when 
ye refused me a third in your chay to 
Tipperary, that I'd be shewing you 
Court Fitzadelm ; and is as much mis- 
tress here as the lady, if she was in it, 
and will be till it fall into better hands, 
plazc God. Why then, yez had great 
luck, gentlemen, not to go in the chay 
from Dublin; for its in it, shure, I got 
one of my rheumatrix fits, all down the 
face and head of me. And it was the 
Lord's will, I should be overturned last 
night, coming here, and broke my nose, 
why! Well, what matter? Shure 111 



FLORENCE IVIACARTIIV. 20g 

be worse afore I'm better; for whom 
the Lord loveth, he chasteneth. Is my 
strength the strength of stone, or is my 
flesh of brass ? No, troth ! And so this 
young man here tells me yez want to 
see the consarn. Why then, its a sad 
place now; a watch-tower in a wilder- 
ness. And little ever I thought to see 
the likes of yez in it again, though many 
of your sort frequented it formerly.'* 

" Of our sort ? Why what do you 
take us for?*' asked the Commodore 
in some surprise, tinctured with seem- 
ing uneasiness. 

" For two rakes of quality, dear, going 
about the innocent country, seeking 
whom yez may devour, like the old one, 
why !" 

The gentlemen both smiled ; and 
even De Vere seemed not displeased at 
the definition given of his appearance 
by the formidable Mrs. Magillicuddy, 
alias " Protestant Molir Still, how- 
ever, he hung back, and looked upon 
her with disgust and apprehension. 



210 FLORENCE MACAETHY, 

" I understand," said the Commo- 
dore, that this old mansion, with a few 
acres of the ancient demesne, is to be 
sold, and I wish to examine the pre- 
mises, before I apply for the terms to 
Mr. Crawley, to whose seat I am now 
proceeding." "As to the house," said 
Mrs. Magillicuddy, " it is an house of 
clay now;" and she waddled before 
them towards the theatre, the door of 
which she threw open. *^ An house of 
clay, tv hose foundation is in the dust, 
and ivhich is crushed before the moth. 
There ! — there's the devil's tabernacle.^* 

Curiosity now got the better of pre- 
judice ; and Mr. De Vere approached 
to examine this monument of former 
dissipation and refinement, in scenes so 
inappropriate to its site. Most of the 
decorations, and nearly all the seat* 
and scenery, had been removed. But 
fragments of scarlet cloth remained 
upon a bench, which had not been 
taken away. A cut wood scene still 
occupied the stage; and some orna- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 211 

mental painting and gilding were visible 
on the ceiling and cornice. ' 

" This was a box fitted up for the 
Lord Lieutenant/* said Mrs. Magilli- 
cuddy, seating herself on the solitary 
bench ; " and when the bishop's lady 
came here to see me, after my wonder- 
ful conversion (and it was Miss Crawley 
that delivered me from the workings of 
iniquity,) and found the Rev. Mr. Scare- 
*iim sitting with me in this very place, 
(for he came to visit this benighted dis- 
trict, and to take under his protection 
the perishing sinners of the hill country) 
says the bishop's lady to me, (for my 
-conversion made a great noise, far and 
near.) No, says Mr. Scare'um to Miss 
Crawley, it is curious to see, says he, by 
what great strides Molly Magillicuddy 
has made her way out of Babylon. Upon 
which, the bishop's lady remarked — 

" I cannot stand this," cried De Vere 
to the Commodore in Spanish. " I will 
walk down to the river, while you ex- 



212 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



amine the house, if you really think 
there is any thing worth seeing." 

JNIrs. Magillicuddy now rose with sur- 
prising alertness, and observed: "May 
be yez would like to see the ould 
family pictures which will go with the 
house, being worth nothing now, bar- 
ring the frames, the best being gone." 

T\\Q family pictures seemed to coun- 
teract the effect of even Mrs. Magilli- 
cuddy's egotistical jargon, who seemed 
to trade upon the history of her conver- 
sion, and to suppose, with pious vanity, 
that it interested her auditors as much 
as herself^ The gentlemen followed 
her up the hall, while she continued her 
recital with " So, as I was saying, the 
bishop's lady, thinking me a miracle 
grace (though, lord help me, I was then 
but a babe in knowledge, never having 
listened hardly to Mr. Scare'um, nor 
hved with the sariousj, she says to me, 

* Molly says she " 

This is a curious apartment," inter- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



213 



rtipted the Commodore, as he threw 
open the door of the room, which Mrs. 
IVIagilh cuddy announced as the pre- 
sence chamber. 

" Aye, curish enough!" said she. 
" Here it was that royal idolater, J ames 
the Second, held a court in his way 
through Munster, and was attended by 
all the papist lords, the ' recusants,' 
as Miss Crawley tells me. Oh ! she's 
a great scholar; and was here in her 
way to Dublin just afore I went to 
England for that legacy left me by the 
pious Mr. Scare 'um two months ago— 
for the Fitzadelms,** she continued in 
her digressive way, " was then Romans 
themselves; until, by abandoning the 
scarlet lady of Babylon, they se- 
cured their lands and rights ; and the 
king, when he looked out at this 
window (called the king's casement 
ever since), started back, wondering 
much at the great hight of the house 
above the river." 



214 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



She threw open the window as she 
spoke; and the precipitous decHvity 
beneath seemed to justify the royal as- 
tonisliment.* But the strangers were 
httle attracted by the bold and beauti- 
ful views without, nor by the fine friezes 
within, which were painted by the Fran- 
chinis, two Italian artists, who visited 
Ireland a century back, and were em- 
ployed in ornamenting its noble man- 
sions; the few pictures, which moul- 
dered in their tarnished frames, upon the 
oaken wainscot, seemed to fix their 
most earnest attention. They were 
surprised to find the greater number to 
be portraits of the most eminent cha- 
racters of Charles the Second's court. 

The beauties, the wits, and the war- 

* A similar apartment and window are shewn 
at Lismore Castle^ one of the Duke of Devon, 
shire's scats, as distinguished fur its romantic 
beauty, as the inhabitants of its immediate neigh- 
bourhood arc for their courtesy, elegance, aiul 
hospitality. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 21 & 



riors of that day, were in a large pro- 
portion Irish ; and while the pictures of 
the Hamiltons, the Butlers, the Vil- 
larses, the Fitzgeralds, the Talbots, the 
Muskerries, the Taafes, the Dongons, 
and the Burkes, are sketched for im- 
mortality in the delightful Memoires de 
Grammont, their less durable portraits 
by Lilly and Kneller have been copied 
ad infinitum* in Ireland, and are still to 
be found in many of the deserted man- 
sions of the long-absent great. Many 
of these faded representatives of all that 
was once lovely and animated lay upon 
the ground ; and the dilletante traveller 
soon detected la plus jolie taille du 



* Some by Souillard, a French artist, brought 
to Ireland by Lord Muskerry, to paint his castle 
of Lixnaw, in Munster, after the cartoons of 
Rapkael ; others by Gandy, ^vho came over with 
his patron, the great Duke of Ormond, and who 
seems to have furnished half the great houses in 
Munster with the royal harem ; and many also 
by inferior and nameless artists. 



2l6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



monde" of the coquettish Countess of 
Chesterfield,* stopping a broken win- 
dow. " La Muskerry-j- faite com me la 
plupart dcs riches heritieres," skreen- 
ing out tlie ungrated hearth of a caj)a- 
cious chimney-piece ; while the fair 
Hamilton, grande et gracieuse dans 
les moindrcs de ses mouvements," hung 
in a most maudlin state out of her 
frame; and " la belle Stewart," lay un- 
distinguished in a corner, with " la 
blonde Blague," now literally plus 
jaune qu un coing." 

And are these pictures to go with 
the rest of the premises r" asked the 
Commodore. 

" Its little matter where they go,** 
returned Mrs. Magillicuddy, indignantly, 



* Lady Elizabeth Butler, daughter of the 
Duke of Ormond, and second wife of the Earl of 
Chesterfield: she died 1666. 

^ Lady Margaret Burke, daughter and heiress 
of Uiic Burke, fifth Earl of Claiirickard, wife t« 
Charles I^ord Muskerry. 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 21 f 

or if the]^ went with them they 
hken; — a parcel of rakes and harlots! a* 
Miss Crawley tells me; they are paying 
for their scarlet and fine linen now, I 
warrant ; for they that plough iniquity, 
and sow wickedness , reap the same. 
Fie upon such shameless Jezebels ! say 
I, who look full of nought but worldly 
vanity and fleshly ease." 

Fleshly ease, indeed repeated 
De Vcre, gazing earnestly upon the pic- 
ture of the beautiful Duchess of Cleve- 
land.* " There is something in tlie 
swimming eyes and thick lips of the 

* Lady Barbara Villiers, daughter and heiress 
of William Villiers, Lord Grandison : she was a 
iiatite of the scenes here described, and spent 
the innocent and early part of her life in her fa- 
ther's castle of Dromana, on the lovely banks of 
the black water. She was afterwards consigned 
to immortal infamy as the mistress of Charles 
the Second, under the titles of Countess of Cas- 
tlemain and Duchess of Cleveland. Part of the 
summer of 1817 was delightfully spent by the 
author amidst these delicious scenes. 

VOL. I. L 



218 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

beauties of those times, a charming un- 
idea*d sameness of physiognomy, that 
is now lost in the female face." 

Mental cultivation most diversifies 
the countenance/' replied the Commo- 
dore. " In barbarous nations there is 
but one physiognomy for a tribe : where 
there is little intellect, there can be but 
little variety of expression." 

" I hate intellect in women/^ saidDe 
Vere ; and what is most delicious in 
the harem of that happy satrap, Charles, 
is, that they all look such pretty idiots, 
so fond and foolish, as if they were 
of that sect which once flourished in 
Spain, the Embevecidos, whose life and 
faith were made up of love." 

Love, indeed ! love ! when hearts 
were purchased with French ribbons; 
and perfumed gloves went on successful 
embassies to ladies' affections. Oh ! 
trust me, your royal satraps have more 
of laziness than of love in their engage- 
ments; and nothing is further from 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 219 

passion than their idle saunterings ^ in 
ladies^ chambers,'* 

" 'Tis all abomination! all vanity and 
vexation of spirit!" said Mrs. Magilli- 
cuddy, interrupting the Commodore, in- 
dignantly. " I didn't think so once, 
God help me ! For I walked in utter 
darkness till I was thirty; and did not 
wrestle with the ould one till I was 
forty good. My conversion made a 
a great noise far and near. The bishop's 
lady came to me, and said " 

Mr. De Vere was again retreating, 
when the old woman hobbled to a 
door at the further end of the apartment, 
and throwing it open, said, There, 
that's the drawing-room then flinging 
herself upon a broken chair, the only ar- 
ticle of furniture in the room, except an 
antique japanned chest, she continued, 
pointing to two pictures — " There, gen- 
tlemen, there are the pictures of the 
two brothers ; that is half brothers by 
blood, but whole brothers in iniquity, 
L 2 



52a FLORENXE MACARTHY. 

I always took the dark one in robes t# 
be the Prince of Orange, and the red- 
headed one to be the Pretender, till Miss 
Crawley, when she came here for the 
Indy cabinet, informed me that they 
were the two last Lord Fitzadclms, the 
Dhu and the Ruadg, the black and the 
red. Well, that's all that remains of 
them now: the ould one had a fine lob 
of them both. He that would have 
wrestled for their salvation was not 
walking this benighted country when 
they were in it; and so they were left to 
go to the devil their own way, why!'' 

During this charitable speech the 
eyes of the travellers were fixed upon the 
pictures, pointed out by their pious 
Cicerone. The elder brother stood ir. 
his parliamentary robes, by a table, on 
which his coronet was placed : his coun- 
tenance expressed haughtiness, some^ 
thing mingled with indecision ; and 
traces of wild ill-regulated passions, con- 
trasted with a look of feebleness and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 221 

dependence, gave indication of a mind 
endowed with some natural strength of 
character, but which had been spoiled 
by circumstances and education ; as if 
the natural force, which might have 
gone to the strengthening of his in^ 
tellect^ served but to irritate his pas- 
sions and temper. He was of a dark 
and saturnine complexion ; but intem- 
perance had so bloated his features, 
and impurpled his naturally sallow 
hue, that the beauty, for which he 
had once been celebrated, even the 
painter's art could scarcely recal. This 
picture was done, by the date, above 
thirty years back : the name of the ar- 
tist was so obscure, and the execution 
so inferior, that it was probably the 
effort of some itinerant painter, who 
worked by the square foot. 

The younger brother was a true Geral- 
dine in colouring and feature; the light 
curled golden hair, the full blue eye, 
and fair complexion, which distingufeh- 
l3 



'222 FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 

ed almost every branch of that illustri- 
ous family, particularly the southern 
Geraldines: but there was an expression 
of licentiousness and cunning mingled 
in the countenance of Gerald Fitzadelm, 
which belonged not to the physiogno- 
my of his family: he had a foreign air, 
was habited in a Venetian domino, and 
held a black mask so near his face, 
that he seemed but in the very act of 
removing it: the picture was dated 
Venice; the name of the artist was 
Italian; and a label hanging from it, 
with orders how it was to be laid in the 
case, which was placed near it, indi- 
cated that it was about to be removed. 
On the case, in large letters, was paint- 
ed " For the most noble the Marchioness 
Dowager of Dunore, Dunore Castle/' 
" Aye," said Mrs. Magillicuddy, 
reading this address, " aye, to the Mar- 
chioness Dowager: well, careful as she 
is of the picture, its little she valued 
thd reality, why! Its from her, they 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

say, the madness got into the Fitzadelm 
family. For till the Baron Gerald 
married that hoity-toity Englishwoman, 
(though, as I'm tould, they were foolish 
enough, and wicked enough before) 
none of them was ever lunatic, until 
the two young lords, her sons, went 
mad lately." 

^^What, both mad?" asked the Com- 
modore; while his companion turned 
round, and fixed his eyes with a very 
singular expression on the narrator. 

" Aye, Sir, both as mad as March 
hares: the eldest being mad by nature, 
and t'other chap, from pride, why ! But 
shure the sins of the fathers must be 
visited on the childer, as Miss Crawley 
says; affliction cometh not forth of the 
dust, neither doth trouble come out of 
the ground, why ! There is the young 
Marquis in a madhouse, and there is 
Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, his brother, 
wandering the world wide, they say, 
looking for something, he does'nt know 
L 4 



H24 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



what^ like a prince in a story book; 
while his mother, the ould policizing 
Marchioness, is setting him up for the 
borough of Glannacrime, here. But, 
mark my words, she needn't trouble 
herself; it isn't himself will get it, with 
the Fitzadelm name, and the Dunore 
interest to l^oot.** 

No ?" said the younger traveller, for 
tlie first time addressing this formidable 
person. 

" No, Sir, its meat for his betters, 
why." 

Indeed!" returned De Vere, with 
an ironical laugh ; " and who may they 
be pray ?" 

"Counsellor Con is, dear," said Mrs. 
Magillicuddy, coming up close to him, 
with an air of confidential familiarity, 
while he retreated before her advances : 
that's Counsellor Conway Townsend 
Crawley, nephew to Miss Crawley, and 
son to the Portrieve of Dunore. Och ! 
that's the young man will prosper, why ! 



TLORENCE MACARTHY. 225 

Mark my words, and you*ll see them 
come to pass yet.** 

This was said with an oracular nod 
of the head, and pecuhar emphasis of 
voice : but the countenance of Mrs. 
MagilHcuddy gave no superadded force 
to her prophetic words. It was indeed 
pretty well concealed by her broad 
brimmed hat, her green spectacles, the 
worsted stocking bound round her 
rheumatic jaw, and the wet brown 
paper, that covered her broken nose. 
While this short dialogue was carrying 
on, the eyes of the Commodore were 
glancing rapidly from the features of 
the late baron, to the face and figure 
of his young companion ; but when De 
Vere turned round to him, he abruptly 
averted them, and took up a parchment 
label, which hung from one of the 
massive brass handles of the antiquated 
japan chest: the inscription on it was 
curious, and ran -as follows; " This tra- 
velling chest was presented by his most 



226 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

sacred Majesty Charles the Second^ to 
Barbara, Duchess of Cleveland, who 
bequeathed it at her death in 169I to 
her kinswoman, the Lady Geraldine 
Fitzadelm: she married in 1701 Tho- 
mas, Marquis of Dunore, her uterine 
cousin ; and died, leaving issue an only 
daughter, 1730." 

" I wonder this most valuable relic is 
suffered to remain here," observed the 
Commodore. 

" Och," said Mrs. Magillicuddy, who 
seemed all care and eye to every thing 
that was said and looked, " och, when 
every thing went to sixes and sevens, 
why ! and all was ruination, the Black 
Baron dying in a garret in Dublin, and 
hrs brother that came to the title, abroad, 
it was little regard was paid to the likes 
of that. But it is now to go by favour 
of Mr. Crawley, who owns all, to Dun- 
ore, as a present to the Marchioness, 
whenever she comes over: there*s the 
matting to pack it. They say it was 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 22}^ 

in it, that was found the family tree, 
which proved the ruined Fitzadelms to 
be the heirs in the female line, in de- 
fault of male issue, to the title and 
estate of Dunore; and to this day there 
is some curious papers in it. Perhaps, 
gentlemen, yez would like to see them ?" 

"Oh very much!" was the instantane- 
ous reply of both. Mrs. Magillicuddy 
now foraged to the very bottom of her 
capacious pockets for the keys, crying, 

" Weary on them, for keys, they are 
always missing when wanting;" then 
suddenly recollecting she had hung them 
in a closet, she scuded off to fetch them. 

The strangers again turned their ob- 
servation to the portraits of the Lords 
Fitzadelm: but Mrs. Magillicuddy had 
been scarcely more than two or three 
minutes gone, when a female voice, with 
all the flute-like sweetness of the tones 
of youth, breathed a few clear melo- 
dious notes on their ear, as if some 
skilful musician was running a prelusive 



228 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

division, with equal taste and judgment : 
but the sounds, prolonged for a minute 
or two, were as abruj)tly dropped as 
begun, and all was silence. The rude 
war-cry of the Fitzadelms, or the' howl 
of the long extirpated Irish wolf, would 
have excited less amazement in the 
minds of the auditors, than these sweet 
and most musical strains. By their ex- 
pressive looks, they seemed almost to 
doubt their own senses ; and they re- 
mained for a considerable time silent, 
and in the attitude of eager and expect- 
ing attention. Nearly a quarter of an 
hour thus elapsed, yet all remained 
silent 

" Did ever mortal mixture of earth's 
mould breathe forth such sweet en- 
chanting harmony asked De Vere, 
entranced. 

It seemed to come in a direct line 
behind that fragment of tapestry,'^ 
observed the Commodore ; and he im- 
mediately raised the remains of what 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 229 

once had been a handsome specimen of 
the Gobelin manufacture. It had, con- 
cealed, a small iron door, above which 
was written, " Evidence chamber." 
The strangers both looked alternately, 
and for a considerable time, through 
the spacious key-hole, and discovered a 
small rude chamber, dimly lighted by 
a loop-hole, and perfectly empty. After 
some time, they looked out of the win- 
dow, which Mrs. Magillicuddy had called 
King James's, and found that this Evi- 
dence Chamber formed part of the ori- 
ginal building called Desmond's tower. 
Their joint thought was to leap out of 
the window, and to examine this tower, 
which appeared to He open, and to be 
partly in ruins. But the steepness of 
the rocks rendered such an attempt im- 
possible. 

The shortest and surest way to dis- 
cover the mystery (for a mystery of the 
most romantic nature it was asserted to 
fee by De Vere), was to make inquiries 



230 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of the old housekeeper relative to the 
songstress of these ruined towers. But 
Mrs. Magillicuddy, though twenty mi- 
nutes had elapsed, had not returned ; 
and when they went to seek her, to 
their amazement and consternation, they 
found the door locked or bolted, and 
beyond their power to open or force. 
De Vere threw himself on the broken 
chair lately occupied by the house- 
keeper, in an ecstasy of emotion ; his 
companion, on the contrary, displeased, 
annoyed, and irritated, as much as asto- 
nished, sought round the room for some 
mode of egress, in impatience and per- 
turbation. A door on one side opened 
into a dark closet : two windows oppo- 
site to the king's casement he tried with 
considerable strength ; but they were 
nailed down. A third, more manageable, 
was opened with difficulty; for the pul- 
lies were broken. It was, however, 
opened, and supported by a broken pic- 
ture-frame. It communicated with one 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 231 

of the ruined terraces hanging over the 
river^ and cut out of the rock. The 
hight, which was inconsiderable, was 
easily cleared ; but the way to the front 
of the house was intricat(i, and not 
easily found. The narrow irregular 
path was choaked with briars, with the 
stumps of old trees recently cut down, 
and lying at full length, and with frag- 
ments of the original ruined building, 
w^hich had fallen in abundance. 

As they proceeded through the en- 
tangled screen of underwood and briers, 
they caught a view of a man seated in 
a cot (6), on the river near a salmon 
weir; whose curious construction, with 
the picturesque appearance of the pa- 
tient fisherman himself, would at any 
other time have attracted their atten- 
tion. It was now, however, chiefly 
given to their obstructed and difficult 
path-way, by which they at last reached 
the front of this irregular and stupend- 
ous mansion. 



232 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

To their increased amazement, they 
found the liall-door again barred up. 
Every mode of ingress seemed closed, 
as when they had first approached it. 
Their chaise and its driver had ahke 
disappeared ; and the Httle Kerry horse, 
with the Commodore's vahse strapped 
on his back, was fastened to a tree, and 
stood peaceably grazing within the 
length of his bridle ; while the port- 
manteau of De Verc was placed near it, 
on a clump of rock. 

The travellers remained for a moment 
looking at each other in silence; tillDe 
Vere burst into a fit of laughter, nothing 
less than the ebullition of gaiety. It 
was almost hysterical, and the pure 
effect of over-excitement : when it had 
in some degree subsided, he said — 

" So, this is indeed, the delightful 
* land of faery,' which Spencer has de- 
scribed, in which he wrote, in which 
he was inspired. — Here his Gloriana 
seems still to fling about her spells ; and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1233 

Hew adventures appear in ready pre- 
paration for other Sir Calidores and Sir 
^ Tristrams, than those of his creation." 

" Had we not better," said the Com- 
modore, who for the moment was 
stunned by the event, which, though 
not of superhuman agency, appeared in 
his mind scarcely less comprehensible ; — 

had we not better go to the porter s 
lodge, and make some inquiries there ?" 

Oh ! certainly. But you must noC 
be surprised if the lodge, the portress, 
and the idiot, are all vanished, together 
with Mrs. Magillicuddy, Mr. Owny, 
and the chaise and horses." 

The lodge, the portress, and the 
idiot, remained, however, as they left 
them. The old woman was seated up- 
right in her wretched bed, with a red 
petticoat over her shoulders, and em- 
ployed in knitting. To the repeated 
questions of the travellers, she replied 

Nil gaeliga," I have no Enghsh.* 

* Literally, the language of the stranger. 



234 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

Nor could either of them obtain the least 
information from her. Either she did 
not, or would not understand them. 
The idiot, when they approached her, 
laughed and fled. 

Hopeless of information, they walked 
back to the spot where the horse and 
their light luggage had been left. They 
re-examined the exterior of the house ; 
they went round to the postern door by 
which the driver had entered, and which 
with some difficulty they discovered: it 
was padlocked on the outside; and to 
their repeated knocks the echoes of the 
sound alone were returned. There was 
something peculiarly singular, and al- 
most laughably pantomimic in this ad- 
venture, which amused, though almost 
provoked the Commodore ; while it de- 
fied conjecture to detect the cause of its 
occurrence. He had reason to believe 
that his name, person, and very existence, 
were unknown in Ireland ; yet the 
league of the old woman and driver 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 23b 

could not be without object, nor tVie 
whole event without motive : it was 
evidently unconnected with any sordid 
or dishonest view. The housekeeper 
had not been remunerated for her trou- 
ble, nor the driver for his horses or at- 
tendance. Rapid in his silent cogita* 
tions, and quick in his decisions, he at 
once determined that the object of this 
farcical embrogleo was the fanciful and 
accomplished ideologist, with whom he 
was accidentally connected ; and giv- 
ing further conjecture to the winds, 
after a few minutes reverie, he proposed 
that they should hail the fisherman at 
the weir, engage him to convey the 
younger traveller down the river, as 
near as he could to Doneraile or Butte- 
vant : for himself, as the day advanc- 
ed, and time pressed, he determined 
to mount his Kerry steed, and proceed 
by the mountain route, he had obtained 
from Owny, to Dunore. 

To all these arrangements De Verc 



236 FLORENCE MACARTHY* 

passively assented ; and while the Com- 
modore, with the activity of boyhood, 
bounded down the precipitous rocks to 
beckon the fisherman towards the shore, 
his companion, with folded arms, and 
eyes fixed upon vacuity, stood th^ 
image of one, in whom 

Function is smothered in surprise, 
And nothing is but what is not.*' 

The events of his journey had com- 
bined themselves in his mind under 
the influence of the most morbid imagi- 
nation, and the most inordinate amour- 
propre. His vanity and his fancy had 
worked out a series of associations and 
conjectures most favourable to the cha- 
racter of both. Every event, every ob- 
ject, however unimportant in itself, was 
"by him wrought into a miracle, or me- 
ditated into a mystery, through the me- 
dium of his singularly organized mind : 
from trifles, light as air," he had the un- 
happy power of constructing fabrications 
of ideal pain and pleasure, of flattering or 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 237 

mortifying importance; which rendered 
him the victim of delusion^ and covered 
the prosperous reaUties of his hfe with 
shadows, ahke illusory and unsubstantial. 
The per\^erseness of his journey from 
Dublin, the counteraction of his inten- 
tions with respect to his route, the im- 
pish laugh in the ruins of Holy-cross, 
his unintentional visit to Court Fitz- 
adelm, the invisible musician of the 
Evidence Chamber, his reiterated con- 
tact with the formidable Mrs. Magilli- 
cuddy, the youthful figure of the female 
associated with her at Lis-na-sleugh, the 
masquerading mystery of the driver, 
and, above all, the league evidently sub- 
sisting between the old woman and 
Owny, and their sudden disappearance 
from Court Fitzadelm, unremunerated 
for their respective services, all these 
incidents, so strange, so unexpected, 
combined themselves in his medita- 
tions, till he believed himself caught in a 
thraldom, like that^ " Dove in dolce 



238 rLORENCE MACARTMYf 

prigione Rinaldo stassi," the object of 
some deep-laid project, of some ro- 
mantic design, in which there would be 
little to mortify his vanity or to disap- 
point his feelings. The scenes he now 
inhabited were to him all fairy-land, 
and he believed that the Armida was 
not far distant, whose 

Teneri sdegni, e placidc c tranquille 
Repulse, cari yezzi, et liete paci 
Sorrtzi, paroletti," 

were to compensate to him for the dis- 
gusting agents she had employed in 
her service, and who had by no means 
" done their spiriting gently." 

He had resolved, in his own mind, 
to take up his residence in some town 
or village in the neighbourhood of the 
Court, and there await the issue of an 
adventure, of which he alone could be 
the object. Notwithstanding his very 
ardent admiration for his - compagnon 
de voyage; the personal distinction, and 
s^lmost heroical cast of character and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 239 

physiognomy of the extraordinary stran- 
ger, it never once suggested itself that 
he also might have had some share in 
this extraordinary event. He was alone 
the hero of his own thoughts ; and, with 
the hypochondriacal egotism of Rous- 
seau, he believed himself an object of 
occupation, of amity or enmity to the 
whole world. 

This train of thought was, however, 
soon broken, by the return of the Com- 
modore, followed by the fisherman, who 
took charge of his valise, and stowed it 
in his little boat. He had engaged to 
row the younger traveller down the 
river, to its confluence with the Avon- 
beg, ■ which ran by Doneraile, and 
which was the oft celebrated Mulla of 
Spencer, where 

" Oq each willow hung a muse's lyre." 

But the curiosity and interest excited 
by Kilcoleman, the Mole, and the Mulla, 
were now absorbed in feelings of a pro- 
founder emotion ; and his approximation 



240 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



to the shrine of his pilgrimage no longer 
awakened transports in the mind of the 
fanciful pilgrim. As the travellers 
walked together to the river s side, the 
elder observed, " I have been making 
inquiries from the fisherman; and it 
appears that an old woman, who had 
the epithet of protestayit Moll, and kept 
the mansion, where there is nothing 
to tempt to depredation, has been dead 
for some weeks. The house is unoccu- 
pied, and the approach by which we 
entered is the least frequented, there 
being several others, all open : Mrs. 
Magillicuddy is, therefore, some Ariel 
' correspondent to command,' of a con- 
cealed Prospero." 

" Ariel I" reiterated De Vere ; the 
foul witch Sycorax, rather." 

Now, plaze your honor," said the 
boatman, as he drew up his boat close 
to a ruin, which he called the lattery. 
With some difficulty De Vere was 
placed in the cot, which was one of the 



FLOKENCE MACARTHY. 



241 



smallest construction known by that 
name. The boatman, with his spoon - 
shaped paddle fixed against a jutting 
rock, for a point d'appuly was pushing 
off from the muddy shore: tlie figure 
of the Commodore was throw n into 
muscular exertion, in endeavouring to 
assist, and the cot was just afloat, as 
he seized the extended hand of his un- 
known fellow-traveller. 

" We part," said De Vere, in a tone 
of emotion, " almost as we met." 

" Almost," replied the Commodore, 
returning the strong pressure of his 
hand, with a grasp still stronger, but 
in a tone not firmer. 

Farewell, farewell !" repeated De 
Vere, as the boat cleared the banks; and 
he moved his hat, with an air of almost 
affectionate respect, half repressed by 
habitual apathy. 

"Farewell !" returned the Commodore, 
with a mingled expression of courteous- 
ness and cordiality, returning the salute, 

VOL. 1, M 



242 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

The little bark glided into the centre 
of the sunny stream. He whom it left 
behind in scenes so dreary ascended 
the point of a rock, which commanded 
the winding of the river : his eye pur* 
«ued the cot, as its paddles threw up 
the sparkling waters, and as it appeared 
and disappeared amongst the projecting 
cliff's, or glided under the shady alders, 
which fri nge the lovely shores of the Avon- 
Fionne. It soon became a black speck in 
the water^ and finally disappeared in a 
bend of the river. The Commodore, with 
a short involuntary sigh, turned away 
his dazzled gaze. The gloomy, desolate 
demesne of Court Fitzadelm spread 
around him, — he the sole occupant. 

Alone !" he exclaimed aloud, — " once 
more alone, and where ?" He glanced 
eagerly, anxiously, almost wildly round 
him. His respiration was short: emo- 
tions, long repressed, seemed to find 
vent : he threw up his eyes to heaven, 
and clasped his hands, almost convul- 



i-LORENCE MAGARTHY. 243 

sively: years and scenes of distance 
and remoteness passed, in thick coming 
visions, before his memory; then by a 
sudden effort of voHtion, as one 

^' Not framed, upon the torture of the mind 
To lie in restless ecstasy," 

he changed at once his mood of thought, 
and elevated position, and descending 
rapidly from the rock, sprung upon his 
horse, galloped towards the dismantled 
park wall, cleared it at a leap, and pro- 
ceeded on his way to the Peninsula of 
Dunore. 

Whatever was the mission of this 
mysterious visitant, to a country for 
which he evinced so deep an interest, 
he seemed to forbid time's anticipations 
of his views ; and in all things, and 
upon all occasions, appeared habitually 
to act as one who thought 

*'The flighty purpose never is overtook, 
Unless the deed go with it.** 



M e 



244 FLORENCE MACARTHYc 



CHAPTER V. 

I never may believe these antique fables, 
These fairy toys. 

Midsummer'^ s Sight's Dream. 

But I have cause to pry into this pedant.'* 

Taming of the Shrew. 

The Commodore pursued his solitary 
way to the peninsula of Dunore with as 
much rapidity as the nature of his 
mountainous road would admit. He 
had enquired the route both from the 
baccah and the driver ; and to their 
various^ and not always accordant in- 
structions, clearly arranged in his me- 
mory, he added his own judgment, and 
such information as he could occasionally 
glean from the passengers he accident- 
ally met.* These, however, were few; 



* [d Ireland, it is extremely diflBcuit, to learn 
either the way -or the distance, in performing a 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 245 



for as he proceeded among the moun- 
tainSj by roads only passable during the 
autumn, the population was so scanty, 
that in the course of many miles^ ambled 
over by his admirable little steed, he 
met only with three individuals ; a boy 
carrying a couple of chickens for sale to 
a distant market, a woman with a few 
hanks of yam, proceeding to the same 
rustic emporium, and a priest, bearing 
the viaticum to a dying penitent, whose 
temptations to err, amid scenes of such 
privation, could not have been very 
numerous. 

The priest courteously joined, and 
accompanied the lonely traveller on his 
route ; and might have been deemed an 
acceptable Cicerone, in a region, which, 
however rude and savage, was not 

journey by the cross-roads, or mountain paths. 
In remote places, it may be literally said, that 
"the way Icugthens as we go," since e?ery one, 
of whom inquiries are made, adds a mile or two 
to the original distance. 

M 3* 



246 FLORENCE WACARTHY. 

wholly destitute of something like classic 
mterest. In the dialect and accent of 
the province, intermingled with a few 
French and a few Latin words, he 
pointed out, here a Cromlech, and there 
a cairne, a Danish fort, or a monastic 
ruin, and added such scraps of anti- 
quarian tradition, as are to be found, 
even in the remotest places in Ireland; 
where the superstition of the people 
lends implicit faith to all that is marked 
by miracle, and their national vanity to 
all that is stamped with antiquity. The 
legend of St. Olan's cap was repeated, 
as a distant view was caught of St. Olan's 
abbey. Its miraculous efficacy, still 
acknowledged by the peasantry, and 
the belief of its having returned of itself 
to the spot from whence it had been re- 
moved (though composed of an im- 
mense hollow stone), was circumstan- 
tially recorded. One of the defile castles 
of the great Macarthies, called The 
Fairy's Rock, or Carig-na-Souky, was 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 247 

pointed out, in the distance, on the 
summit of a chff, which hung above the 
ravine it guarded. The ruins of St. 
Gobnate's church, rather guessed at 
than clearly distinguished, introduced 
the legend of that fair saint, with the 
episode of the history of the stone cross, 
still extant among its ruins, where a 
far-famed rood of the Virgin was once 
kept, and where still a stone, fixed 
near it, in the earth, exhibits the im- 
pression of many a penitent pilgrim's 
bended knee. For the rest, the com- 
municative and courteous priest gave the 
Commodore some excellent instructions 
as to his future route, and lamented 
that he had not taken a road, which, 
though more circuitous by nearly a day^s 
journey, was far less intricate than the 
one he had chosen. This he asserted 
to be a bird's flight route from the north 
to the south of the county, a bridle- 
way or car-track, cut, time immemorial, 
by the mountaineers, for the purposes 

M 4 



248 FLORENCE MACARlHY. 

of rural economy, and communicating 
among the neighbouring districts. 

At the conjunction of four of these 
mountain defiles^ marked by a large 
stone cross, placed over a holy- well, 
hung with ragged offerings, the priest 
departed, with a cordial benedicite and 
a bow, learned in his French college, 
some thirty years before, and not yet 
forgotten in the wild scenes, where his 
laborious and ill-requited calling placed 
him. 

The traveller, again left alone, pro- 
ceeded by the direction of the priest to 
a little mountainous village, called the 
Town of the Beloved, in Irish, Bally-na- 
vourna. It \yas silent and solitary, and 
seemed to sleep in the noon-tide sun- 
shine, as if placed there only to form 
a pretty feature in the romantic scenery. 
Its inhabitants were all abroad, getting 
in their scanty harvest in a neighbouring 
Talley. When the Commodore, after 
resting and bating his horse at a little 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2 49 

public house, lost sight of its moss- 
covered roofs and curling smoke, no 
further vestige of human habitation 
cheered his sight for many hours. 
Meantime his road became every mo- 
ment more rugged, wild/ and difficult. 
The extraordinary instinct of the little 
animal upon which he was mounted, 
and which seemed as peculiarly or- 
ganized for the region it occupied, as 
the camel for the desert, or the rein-deer 
for the snows of Lapland, excited an ad- 
miration not unmixed with gratitude and 
respect. The traveller,rather abandoning 
himself to its guidance, than attempting 
to direct its steps, fearlessly permit- 
ted it to climb among the rugged rocks, 
to skim over trembling bogs and 
sloughy morasses ; and it still preserved 
its pleasant ambling pace, where other 
horses would have sunk knee-deep, and 
was able to proceed where they would 
have perished. 

The sun was now hastening to its 
M 5 



250 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

goal; the few birds of prey which in- 
habit these elevated regions were re- 
turning to their eyries among the rocks. 
The traveller had still to seek the land- 
marks which the priest had described as 
designating his descent to the Peninsula 
of Dunore. He indeed caught glimpses 
of the Atlantic ocean, through the inter- 
stices of the mountains ; but the even- 
ing shadows were gathering in vapours 
beneath his feet, as he descended, and 
yet he approached not the mountain's 
base. That he had missed his way, 
and might be benighted in a region so 
desolate, had suggested itself as a pos- 
sibility ; and he alighted for the purpose 
of ascending an high cliff, which seemed 
to command a vast extent of prospect, 
to ascertain his exact position. As he 
was in the act of fastening his horse's 
bridle to the stump of a furze bush, 
pounds, measured and mechanical, met 
his ear, and spoke of human proximity : 
they came from a little glen, near whose 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 251 

entrance he stood. A narrow bridle- 
way, leading through a deep ravine^ 
presented itself: on the summit of a 
stupendous rock, some fragments of a 
ruin vere visible ; and beneath, seated 
in a sort of dry dyke, appeared a man 
occupied in scraping away with a sharp 
flint the lichens and mosses which in- 
crusted a large angular stone, in order 
to decypher an inscription which he 
was endeavouring to copy. The cha- 
racters w^ere Irish, and beneath ap- 
peared a translation, in not very pure 
Latin, intimating that " near to this 

PLACE, AT THE CASTLE OF MACARTHY, 
THE STRANGER WILL RECEIVE AN HUN- 
DRED THOUSAND WELCOMES."* 

The person wh© was engaged in this 
antiquarian occupation was so intent 
upon his task, that the approach of tlie 
Commodore was unobserved ; who stood 

* A similar inscription was found in a ditch 
near the ruined castle of the Macswines in 
Munsterl 



252 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



gazing upon him with a look of sin- 
gular and marked expression, as if he too 
was penetrating through the veil of time, 
and gradually recalling traces, and de- 
cyphering lineaments, which its moul- 
dering finger had touched with decay, 
but not wholly defaced. There was an 
emotion of tenderness softening his 
countenance, as he gazed, foreign to its 
habitual expresssion; and when, lean- 
ing forward, he read aloud the La- 
tin, and added the comment of — " I 
believe there is a false concord in 
that sentence," his full, deep voice, 
wanted its usual tone of firmness and 
decision. 

As he spoke, the flint dropped from 
the hand of the solitary sage, and 
he remained for a moment, in the 
motionless position of surprise, tinc- 
tured with apprehension; as if some 
airy voice, that syllables men's names/' 
had suddenly addressed his unexpect^ 
ins: ear. 



FLORiSNCii MACARTHY. 253 

The traveller saw the effect he had 
produced, and endeavoured to counter- 
act its consequences, by assuming a 
careless and familiar tone. 

" I beg your pardon," he said, " for 
this intrusion on your learned researches : 
I am a stranger in this country, and 
I fear have lost my way : I wish to 
reach the town of Dunore before night- 
fail, and you will render me a service 
in pointing out to me the nearest road." 

This speech, evidently, recalled cou- 
rage and confidence in him to whom 
it was addressed ; and he slowly arose, 
putting the flint into his pocket, a cork 
into the ink-horn pendent from his but- 
ton hole, and fastening a roll of paper 
and a pen into the cord of his hat, 
while he repeated, 

"A false concord! sure enough; a 
stranger in the country !" He was now 
on his feet : the Commodore stood op- 
posite to him, with his back to the 
setting sun, his figure cutting darkly 



254 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

against its brightness; his face and 
features in deep shadow. The yellow 
light of the illuminated horizon bronzed 
the grotesque figure of him on whom 
he gazed. This person was of a low 
and clumsy stature; but, though evi- 
dently passed the middle age of life, 
was still strong and hale: the deep crim- 
son of health burned on his slightly 
furrowed cheek; and his countenance 
gave indications of mingled simplicity 
and acuteness. There was also a certain 
indescribable quaint, solemn, dogma- 
tizing importance in his look, and a 
wandering wildness in his eye, which 
were curiously and strongly contrasted; 
while his costume added to the charac- 
teristic peculiarity of his person. A 
very small wig of goat's hair surmount- 
ed a few thick, bushy grey locks, which 
curled round his short neck, for his 
shirt collar was thrown open ; and three 
coats of frize, of various colours, ex- 
cluded, like the cloak of the fabulist. 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 255 

both wind and sun. As he now stood, 
affecting to button up these coats, one 
after the other, he was, in fact, earnestly 
engaged in endeavouring to make out 
the traveller's features, on which his eyes 
were intently fixed. 

"It's long," he at last observed, "since 
your honor was in these parts." 

" I never have been in this district 
before," was the reply. 

" Haven t you. Sir? then 1 renage* 
my remark, and requist your honor s 
pardon. I'll shew you the way to Dun- 
ore, Sir. I'm going it every rood myself, 
and lives a donny taste beyont it." 

As he spoke, he shifted his position, 
with the intention of obtaining a better 
view of the stranger's face ; but appa- 
rently, in order to draw forth a ragged 
colt from a rocky shed: the Commodore 
at the same moment shifted his, and 
led forward his Kerry steed. 

" That's a reyal asturiones," observ- 
ed his new companion, "and comes of a 

♦ Renage, reToke, recall, . 



256 TLORENCE MACARTHY. 

breed of jennets brought over by us 
from Spain, on our way from Phoenicia: 
they are named Hobillers by Paulus 
Jovius, and Automates by Tournefort: 
they are of pace aisy, and in ambling 
wondrous swift. Its little the EngHsh 
Edward would have done at the siege of 
Calais, but for them same Irish Iloblers. 
Not that we were beholden to the likes 
of them ; having our war steeds and 
our chariots. 

** Infroenant alii currus aut corpora saKu 
Subjiciaot in equos.'*— — 

He was now mounted on the back 
of his own steed; and his eyes were 
turned with a fixed look on the Com- 
modore's marked profile, who rode 
with his head somewhat averted beside 
him : the view he thus obtained was 
dim and uncertain; but still it seemed 
to fix his attention: there was, as he 
gazed, an uncertainty in his look; a 
something of slow, doubtful, vague 
recognition, as if the faint and indistinct 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 25/ 



resemblance of some features, once 
known, crossed his apprehension ; now 
lost, now caught; determined by a hght, 
a shadow, a motion, and flitting as soon 
as seized. As they descended into the 
deepening twihght of the glen, the 
obscurity of half- forgotten traits thick- 
ened into darkness ; the clue of associa- 
tion was lost, and the hitherto silent 
spectator withdrew his eyes, with the 
simple observation, 

I could swear upon m / souFs save- 
tie, that I had seen your honor afore. 
Sir: I disremembers me where, but that 
cometh of my memory, which faileth 
me for present things; forgetting by 
times that my own name is Terence 
Oge OXeary, which is remarkable." 

'^O'Leary re-echoed the Commo- 
dore, in a voice of almost boyish softness 
and extreme emotion. 

"Who calls?" exclaimed O'Leary, 
wildly, and suddenly checking his horse: 

Who calls ?" he repeated, turning full 



258 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

round, and throwing his strained and 
wandering eye in every direction. 

It was I who repeated the name 
you announced to me_, Mr.O'Leary," said 
the Commodore, in an altered and care- 
less tone. 

Was it your honor?" resumed 
O'Le'ary, after a pause, and a deep inspi- 
ration. " I thought it sounded like a 
voice I sometimes hear close in my ear, 
Sir, when I am alone in the mountains. 
They tell me 'tis my fetch;* but I have 
heard it these twenty years, and am to 
the fore still — its no fetch," he added 
with a deep sigh : " its only an ould re- 
membrance." 

His head sunk upon his breast, and 
they proceeded in silence to the edge of 
the glen. It terminated abruptly in a 
sloping surface of rich and mossy turf, 

* It is a common superstition in Ireland to be- 
lieve that a mysterious Toice heard in lonely 
places gives notice of approaching death — it is 
called a JeUh, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 259 



beyond which the sea-bathed track of 
land, called the Peninsula of Dunore, 
spread at the mountain s foot, extending 
to the ocean, undulating with green 
slopes, intermingled with rocky ele- 
vations, and combining many views 
of maritime and inland sceneiy, emi- 
nently beautiful and romantic. The 
descent, however, was so steep, and so 
difficult from its smoothness, that the 
travellers alighted and led their horses. 

"There forenent you lieth Dunore, 
as it is called noWy' said O'Leary, with 
emphasis ; " one of the tongues of land 
on the coast of Munster, so named by 
one Mr. Camden, a Saxon churl. But 
its true and ancient name is Dangan- 
ny-Carthy, the fastness of the Macar- 
thies, the kings of the country round, of 
the Coriandri and the Desmondii, and 
blood relations to the Tyrian Hercules, 
every mother s son of them." 

" Indeed! that is an illustrious de- 
scent!" 



360 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



*^ Troth, and deed: for was not Ma 
lech-Cartha, the King of Tyre, says ould 
Bochart, which manes Malaciji Macar- 
thy; that's plain, I bchcve, any how: 
and defies Geraldus Cambrensis, Dr. 
Lcdwich, and Sir Richard Musgravc, 
with ould Saxo Grammaticus to boot, to 
deny tliut: and would have been kings 
of Desmond to this very \\o\iv, \i right 
was afore might, and only for the en- 
ticing bates of the English to entrap 
them in their policies, their plots, and 
their complots— their playing fast and 
loose, their English earldoms and Eng 
lish patents, their grantees, and protec- 
tees,and governorships, until the Macar- 
thiesdegendered with the rest, from their 
ancestors, and never rose to great power 
from that day forth— that's Florence 
Macarthy I mane, the fogh-na-gall, 
the Englishman's hate,* elected to the 
style and authority of Macarthy More, 
1599, even after he descended to bo 



* The foQ of the stranger. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26l 



made Earl Clancare, anno 1565^ Elizab. 
reginae six." 

'^Florence?" said the Commodore, 
dwelling with a peculiar expression on 
the name. Florence then is a name 
given both to the males and females of 
this illustrious family ?" 

It is, plaze your honor, and comes 
from the Spanish name Florianus, which 
the Macarthies brought with them on 
their way from Scythia, as also the 
O'SuLLivAN Bears." 

It is an Italian name also ; and one 
Florianus del Campo has, I believe, 
written on this country," said the Com- 
modore. 

" He has. Sir, belied the land, like the 
rest of them," replied O'Leary. 

" The Macarthies followed the for- 
tunes of the house of Stuart, I believe, 
Mr, OXeary; at least I have some 
where read so." 

^^They did. Sir, to their great moan. 
Of all the regiments after the surrender 



262 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of Cond^, Macarthy's alone refused en- 
tering the Spanish service, till their co- 
lonel got his dismissal in France, from 
the ra'al King of Great Britain, France, 
and Ireland." 

" They have, however, since distin- 
guished themselves in the service of 
Spain ; and even in the popular cause 
of South America." 

They have. Sir, and every where 
but at home, God help'em, fox a raisoH 
they have." 

" Do any of the family now remain in 
this county?" 

"None at all," said O'Leary; and 
then, after a pause, added, barring the 
Bham Tierna, who isn't in it at this 
present." 

"Ha! I have heard that epithet, ac- 
companied by blessings in the mountains 
of the Galties: to whom does it belong ?" 

" To whom does it belong, is it — > 
why, to whom should it, but to the 
grate ould ancient Countess of Clancare^ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 263 



anno 1565, Elizabethte 6. — But sure, 
what signifies talking about them now. 
You may see it all in my Genealogical 
History of the Macarthy More, written 
in the Phoenician tongue, vulgo-vocato 
Irish ; it being more precise and copious 
than the English, and other barbarous 
dialects; also sharp and sententious, 
offering great occasion to quick apo- 
thegm and proper allusion; the only pure 
dialect remaining of the seventy-two 
languages of Babel, introduced into 
Ireland by Finiusa Tarsa, the son of 
Magog, King of Scythia, from his own 
seminary of Magh-Seanair, near Athens; 
and is to this day the ould language, 
spoken by Hannibal, Hamilcar, Asdru- 
bal, and the Macarthies More of county 
Cork and Kerry, anciently Desmond — 
and taught in my seminary, in the ould 
preceptory of Monaster-ny-oriel, accord- 
ing to the Bethluisnion-na-Ogma, with 
Latin and Greek, and other modern 
dialects." 



264 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



^^And yet," said the Cominodore, 
with an half-repressed smile, "there arc 
some sceptics of opinion that there has 
always existed a perfect identity between 
the Irish and the Anglo-Saxon; that in 
fact the Irish received their ancient 
alphabet from the Britons; and that 
their pretensions to an eastern ori- 
gin is a groundless notion, generated 
in ignorance, and idly cherished by a 
mistaken patriotism, which might be 
better directed." 

Oh murthcr!" exclaimed O'Leary, 
clasping his hands : " the thieves of the 
world !" 

" O tribus Anticyris caput insanabilc !" 
Then suddenly mounting his horse, 
with a fook of mingled indignation and 
pity, directed at hit? unknown com- 
panion, he added, pointing to a road 
which wound down a woody hill, 
" there's your way, Sir, to Dunore town. 
If you crass the river at Ballydab bridge, 
you can t miss it." 



FLOKEKCE MACARTHY. 26S. 

He was trotting off, muttering to 
himself some broken exclamations in 
Irish, when the Commodore, who also 
had resumed his horse, followed him, 
and said, 

" In detailing the opinions of others, 
I do not give them to you, Mr. O'Leary, 
as my own : you are to observe, I speak 
not to dictate, but to learn." 

" Why then. Sir," said O'Leary, 
soothed by this conciliatory observation, 
" rd be loath to see the likes of you, or 
any gentleman, enticed by them traitors 
of the world, who come as espials on 
the land, and go forth to defame it ; 
for sorrow one of them English but hate 
Ireland in their hearts : and there's an 
ould saying in Irish, which manes, ' keep 
clear of an Englishman, for he is on the 
watch to deceive you.' I wouldn't give 
a testoon* for the whole boiling of them, 



* An old Spaaish coin, once current iu Ireland, 
VOL. I, N 



# 



^66 flokence macarthy. 

troth, I wouldn t. The Irish not brought 
over by our Celtic Scythean ancestors ! 
Bachal es^u \^ they might as well take 
St. Patrick from us, and deny that the 
potatoe is the plant of the soil." 

" I am afraid, Mr. O'Leary, they 
would go near to do both." 

" Oh! very well, Sir: I see you arc 
one of them that would go ould Strabo 
on us, and Saxo Grammaticus, and Dr. 
Ledwich.'* 

Nay, I speak as one ignorant of the 
subject, and desirous to obtain informa- 
tion. If there were now, as formerly, 
such seminaries to study in as the 
school of Ross Alethri,-|* or such sages 
to study under as those sought for by 
the learned Monk Ealfrith, wlio came 
from Britain for that purpose, I should 
like to become his disciple." 

* The name of the celebrated staff of St. 
Patrick. An usual exclamation. 
+ The Field of Pilgrimage. 



# 



FLOfiENCE MACARTHY. SS? 

To say nothing," said O'Learyj^^of 
Agelbert, bishop of the west Saxons, 
Alfred, king of Northumberland, and 
the blessed father Egbert, and the saintly 
brother Wigbert, who for the love of 
the celestial Isle, quit their kin and 
country, and retired to Ireland to 
study." 

"But what cell," asked the Commodore 
with emphasis, " what preceptory, what 
academy is there now open to the lover 
of Irish antiquities, where learning and 
retirement could for an adequate com- 
pensation be obtained together, by a 
stranger who thirsts for both ?'* 

"There is," said O'Leary, after a 
short pause, and in a voice full of im- 
portance, as he drew up close to his 
companion — " there is, plaze your 
honor, a place called the Monaster-ny- 
oriel ; an old ruin, but a larned retreat. 
And if there tvas a gentleman, who, for 
the love of Ireland, would put up with 
homely fare, and be satisfied to be how- 



268 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

seFd with an oldSENACHY^or genealogist, 

why then " 

O'Leary/* said the Commodore, 
laying his hand familiarly on his 
shoulder, and eagerly interrupting him, 

should you receive me as your guest 
and disciple, you will find me not diffi- 
cult to accommodate : my ostensible bu- 
siness in this barony is with a certain 
Mr. Crawley, but — " 

" With who ?" asked O'Leary, recoil- 
mg in horror, " with one Crawley, did 
you say ?" 

" With Mr. Crawley of Mount 
Crawley." 

" With/ztm/ the land pirate! then. 
Sir, you cannot housel with me, and so 
I wish you luck." 

With these words, OXeary, spurring 
on his little nag, trotted abruptly down 
a craggy glen, and disappeared. The 
Commodore stood looking after him till 
he w^as out of sight, and marked the 
path he had taken. Then with a deep- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. ^6^ 

tirawn inspiration, as one, who after 
some enforced restraint, breathes freely, 
and with a smile almost characterized 
by sadness, he bent his course towards 
the town of Dunore. 

As the descent of the mountain 
softened into an undulating valley, the 
approach to this town became extremely 
picturesque. The conjunction of many 
mountain streams, formed a considerable 
river, which flowed under the single 
arch of an antique bridge, covered with 
ivy, which stood at the entrance of a 
poor, but pretty village, announced by 
a turf carrier in answer to the Commo- 
dore's question, to be Ballyi!)AB. A 
rude bleak mountain, which oversha- 
dowed this village, and x^j^jected into 
the sea, formed a bold head land. At 
the distance of two Irish miles, the road 
joined the high road from Cork and 
Dublin, and wound to the left of a 
group of new unfinished houses, the 
embryo of some rising town, haply in- 
N 3 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

tended to eclipse the fading glory of the 
decaying and ancient village of Bally dab. 
Within a mile of Dunore, the road pro- 
ceeded by the edge of the bay, at the 
head of which the town stood, and then 
appeared to wind along the coast. The 
town itself (once of note^ and of historical 
interest), was appoached by a stately 
avenue of trees. Its ancient, but well 
preserved castle, terminated its narrow 
street, and presented a striking feature 
in a scene now tinted by the silvery 
rays of a cloudless moon. The castle 
easements were lighted with a fairy illu- 
mination by its beams ; and the rippling 
tide, tinged with the same colouring, 
gave a gentle motion to a few fishing 
vessels, which alone occupied a port, 
once of considerable trade with the op- 
posite shores of Spain, Portugal, and 
Italy. 

As the Commodore rode up the street, 
it was already still and noiseless, save 
the barking of a dog, which the echo 



FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 2?! 



of the horse's feet had rpused. Two 
lanterns in the front of two opposite 
houses marked the site of the rival inn$. 
That to the right had a new and gaudy 
sign flaunting in the breeze; and, under 
a p]^)fusion of gilding, yellosv ochre, and 
whitelead, was written The new Du- 
NORE Arms. 

The faded sign of its inferior com- 
petitor exhibited a dancing bear^ 
scarcely distinguishable, under which 
was written, in large fresh black letters. 
This is the real ould Marquis of 
Dunore. The Commodore chose the 
real old Marquis ; and a tolerable sup- 
per, and a clean bed, left him nothing to 
repent of his election. The next morn- 
ing, fatigued by his mountain ride, he 
rose late ; and was surprised to find 
upon his breakfast table a inote, directed 
" To his honour, the gentleman at the 
oulcLBearywho arrived last night, thesQ^ 
He opened and read as follows :— 

N 4 



FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 

Right honorable, 
According to the advisement of my 
better judgment, I herein comphe 
with your requist this tyme, in regard 
of the lodgement in the Friar s room ; 
videlicet Fra Denis O'Sullivan, superior 
of the order, now in Portugal, via Cork, 
where he bides at this present writing, 
pending the visitation. He being likely 
to put the autumn over in foreign parts, 
the place thereby beijig vaquent, the 
floor clean sanded, and the stone belted 
window giving on the sea-coast, ill be- 
fitting your honor howsomever, or your 
likes, being righte worthie of Dunore 
Castle, which is nothing to nobody, 
sithe your honor think it fit. Touch- 
inge the pintion thereof, should your 
honor consent to housel with me, it 
shall be left to your honor s liberalities ; 
the lucre of gain, but little weighing ; 
and if there be juste cause of KK)m- 
playnte touchinge ye unruliness of my 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2Jc> 

scholars, or any rabblement on the part 
of them young but lamed runagate^ 
they shall, on your honor's so deposing 
before me, their plagosus Orbilius, un- 
dergoe chastisement in due austeritie: 
so praying an answer forthwith^ 
I remaine. 
With humble commendations. 
Your honor's dutiful servant, 
Terentius Oge O'Leary. 

From my Preceptory^ 
Monaster y -Oriel. ' ' 

Whatever might have caused this 
sudden revolution in the sentiments of 
Mr. OXeary, it evidently excited much 
pleasure in the person in whose favour 
it had occurred ; and on learning that 
one of O'Leary's academicians, or " lam- 
ed runagates^' awaited an answer, he 
sent back a verbal one, intimating his 
intention of riding over immediately to 
the Preceptory of Monaster-ny-Oriel, 
after he had taken his breakfast. 

On passing through the town, on his 
N 5 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

way to O'Leary's, the Commodore was 
struck, not only with the antiquity, but 
with the Spanish character of its archi- 
tecture. Many of the better sort of 
houses had stone balconies, with win- 
dows and door frames of dark marble. 
The church was dedicated to St. Jago 
de Compostello, and was raised (as an 
inscription on the gate indicated) by 
Florence Macarthy, Earl of Clancare, 
on his return from a pilgrimage to Gali- 
cia : it was called in Irish the church of 
the vow, and was afterwards largely en- 
dowed by a company of Spanish mer- 
chants, who had settled in Dunore, in 
the reign of Elizabeth. It was afterwards 
the protestant parish church, and became 
much decayed and ruinous. A stone 
inscription over a little pot-house, with 
a rose, carved in relief, gave the follow- 
ing quaint information : 

At the rose is the bestc wine," 
" Anno 1568." 

The castle, raised on a rocky eleva- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 276 

tion, and looking down upon the town, 
had, in the course of centuries, lost no- 
thing of its feudal character. Massive 
and heavy, this ancient edifice formed a 
perfect parallelogram, with five flankers : 
its battlements, beltings, and coignes, 
were of hewn stone; and its strength 
and magnitude were, as far back as Eli- 
zabeth, so formidable, that the queen 
was induced to think it too considerable 
an hold to belong to any Irish subject; 
and the lords of the English council 
transmitted an order to stop the works, 
which the Macarthy More of that day 
was carrying on for its completion. 
Shortly after, the chief of that family, 
with many of its immediate branches, 
were placed under the ban of royal dis- 
pleasure. Forfeitures and deaths fol- 
lowed: some took refuge in Spain, the 
usual retreat of the persecuted Irish, and 
some in the less distinguished castles 
of their ancestors. The castle, town, 
and manor of Dunore^ were given to 



276* FLORENCE MACARTH\. 

Hildebrand, first Viscount of Dunore, 
a connexion of the great Lord Boyle's, 
by grant of James the First. This Eng- 
lish lord completed the ramparts, which; 
under his jurisdiction, were no longer 
causes of jealousy. He also planted 
the ancient bawn,* made a stately ave- 
nue of trees from the town to its portals, 
and placed above the arch of its en- 
trance, in letters cut in the stone, and 
still perfectly legible — 

God's ProTidence 
Is my inheritance." 

He had also, like his great kinsman^ 
Boyle, endeavoured to turn the ancient 
catholic town of Dangan-na-Carthy 
(now called Dunore, or the " golden 
fort") into a protestant colony (7). But 



* The Bawn was an inclosed piece of ground, 
reserved for purposes of recreation and exer- 
cise, answering to the modern lawn. Swift's 
Hamilton's bawn was the remains of this Irisl^ 
verger. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 12/7 

the inquisitorial zeal with which this 
attempt was pursued defeated its intent^ 
and persecution produced fanaticism 
where it meant to effect conversion. He 
had also expelled the friars of Monaster- 
Hy-Oriel,one of the communities^ which, 
like many others, still subsisting in Ire- 
land, had never been suppressed, and de- 
voted its revenue for the pin-money of 
his daughter-in-law ; * but still, from 
time to time, some of the order were 
found congregating among the ruins of 
the building, in obedience to the rules of 
the order, which forbid the entire dis- 
persion of its members. 

The first Viscount Dunore was the 
last of his family who had resided in the 
inheritayice bestowed upon them by 
Go^s providence. One of his de- 
scendants, William, second Earl of Du- 
nore, had visited it in a tour to the 



* A similar act was committed by Boyle, Earl 
4>f Cork, and for the same purpose. 



278 FLOUENCE MACAKTHY. 

South, which he made during his vice- 
regency of Ireland. The present mar- 
quis, the eldest of two twin brothers, 
had early in life suffered his susceptible 
imagination to dwell on some affecting 
and curious relations of the ancient and 
actual state of Ireland. Impressions 
thus received, wrought on his mind with 
an influence proportioned to the un- 
happy malady which now first betrayed 
itself in many symptoms^ of which his 
sympathy for Ireland, and his determi- 
nation to reside in what he perpetually 
called his beautiful castle," were deem- 
ed by his mother and friends among the 
strongest. With the uncalculating im- 
petuosity of his disease, he had ordered 
immense sums of money to be expended 
in repairing and fitting what had he» 
come almost a ruin. Furniture, the 
most sumptuous and appropriate, had 
been sent from England ; and even wine 
and plate had arrived, and been stowed 
in the long-unused cellars and buttery of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 279 

the castle. Its lord and suit were daily 
expected^ when his disease declared it- 
self so unequivocally^ that the promising 
but unfortunate young nobleman was 
placed in close confinement. Two 
years had elapsed since that event, and 
his mother, the Marchioness Dowager 
of Dunore, his sole guardian, and in 
whom centred the whole interest and in- 
fluence of the Dunore property, had re - 
cently proposed visiting the castle, in 
order to set up her second son. Lord 
Adelm, who was abroad, to represent 
the neighbouring borough of Glanna- 
crime ; but on some representations 
from her agent, Mr. Crawley, and her 
lawyer, counsellor Conway Townsend 
Crawley, his son, she had suddenly 
given up the intention. 

The castle, therefore, remained in 
statu quo, antique, superb, and desolate, 
such as n^ay be found in every province 
of Ireland; the ancient residence of 
Irish chiefs^ the quondam possession of 



280 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

English lords of the pale, the property 
of more recent patentees, the inherit- 
ance of English-Irish absentees, known 
only by name to the tenants they have 
never visited. The traveller paused a 
few moments before its walls, threw his 
eyes rapidly over the stately edifice, 
and then proceeded under its once 
fortified terrace, along the strand, to the 
monastic retreat of the learned O'Leary. 

Monaster-ny-Oriel was one of those 
ecclesiastical ruins, in which the south 
of Ireland abounds ; it was once of great 
extent, and was (in the terms of its 
charter) given to God and to St. John 
the Evangelist, by one of the chiefs of 
the Macarthy family. The windows and 
arches, still in preservation, were of 
beautiful gothic architecture, the walls 
of the choir remained, but it was roof- 
less : and in the newly thatched chaun- 
try of the blessed Virgin ' O'Leary 
held his academy, literally imaging 
Shakespear 6 description of a pedant keep- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 281 



ing a school in a church. A tower on the 
verge of the ruins (once a small house for 
novices), hanging over the coast, was 
now called the Friary of St. John, where 
the order of the Dominicans was still 
kept up:* it was also the tenement now 
at O'Leary's disposal, through the kind- 
ness of its absent proprietor. Every 
where among the ruins, the tombs of 
rival chiefs were visible through the 
wild shrubs and fiirze that half conceal- 
ed them. Here a ^GLORIA DEO in ex- 
CELsis,' was raised for an English Boyle 
or Petty; there a ^ giste ici.— Dieu 

DE SON AME AIT MERCI,' for SOUie 

Norman de Barri, or de Grosse; and 
above all rose the high grey stone, that 
in the ancient Irish character pointed 
to the resting-place of Conal Macarthy 
More, the swift footed, reposing in the 
midst of those who had opposed, or 
those who had betrayed him. 

• There are many friaries in Ireland, thus 
preserved by the residence of one or two of the 
order, among the ruins of their ancient houses. 



2S'2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

This scene, so solemn, even when 
tinged with the cheery lustre of the 
morning light, was most incongruously 
disturbed by the hum of confused and 
nasal murmurings, resembling the dis>- 
cord of an ill-tuned bag-pipe. The ear 
of the traveller seemed to recognize 
this sound, once, perhaps, well known 
to him ; and directing his steps to the 
chauntry of the blessed Virgin, he per- 
ceived several students stretched upon 
the rank grass, before its high arched 
Saxon door-way: thus refreshing the 
picture of an Irish School, given by 
Campion in Queen Elizabeth's day. 
The ardent, but barefooted, disciple of 
the muses, now, as then, ^' grovelling 
on the earth, their books at their 
noses, themselves li/ing prostrate ; and 
so chaunting out their lessons piece- 
mealy 

The breaking up of the academy took 
place as the Commodore approached it: 
a bevy of rough-headed students, with 
books as ragged as their habiliments, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 



283 



rushed forth at the sound of the horse's 
feet, and with hands shading their unco- 
Tered faces from the sun, stood gazing in 
earnest surprise at the unexpected visi- 
tant : last of this singular group, fol- 
lowed O'Leary himself, in learned dish- 
abille : ' his customary suit,' an old 
great coat fastened with a wooden skew- 
er at his breast, the sleeves hanging 
unoccupied, Spanlsh-ivise, as he termed 
it ; his wig laid aside, the shaven crown 
of his head resembling the clerical ton- 
sure; a tattered Homer in one hand, 
and a slip of sallow in the other, with 
which he had been lately distributing 
some well-earned pandies to his pupils: 
thus exhibiting, in appearance, and in 
the important expression of his coun- 
tenance, an epitome of that order of 
persons once so numerous, and still far 
from extinct in Ireland, the badge 
schoolmaster. O'Leary was learned 
in the antiquities and genealogies of 
the great Irish families, as an anci- 



284 FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 



ent* Senachy ; an order, of which he bc- 
Heved himself to be the sole representa- 
tive,credulous of her fables, a!\d jealous of 
her ancient glory ; ardent in his tVelings, 
fixed in his prejudices; hating the Bo- 
dei Sassoni or English churls^ in pro- 
portion as he distrusted them; living 
only in the past, contemptuous of the 

* The Seanachaiahe* were antiquaries, gene- 
alogists, anil historians ; they recorded remark- 
able events, and preserved the gen«»alogies of 
their patron, in a kind of poelical stanza. — 
Each province prince, or chief, had a senarha; 
and we will venture to conjecture, that in each 
province there was a repo'-itory, for the collec- 
tions of the diffiTcntSeanachaiahe bclon^rin^ to it, 
with thp care of which an OIIamh-le-Seanac!ia was 
charged : the ancient college of arms of Ulster ii 
still maintained. Walker^s Hist, of Irish fJards, 

* Tlie very common word, says Gen Vallencj', is 
peculiar to Ireland ; It is, indeed, daily U9ed in 
the corruption of Shan'ios. — Och ! he has fine old 
ShanaoSf or aid talk is frequently applied to, and family 
history, &c. 

Duald Mac Firbis, who was murdered at DHnslin in 
Sligo, A. D. 1670, closed the line of the hereditary 
antiquaries of that province, to whom it may be supposed 
that for one inspired ten thousand were posseseed. 



FLORENCE MACARTOY. 285 

present, and hopeless of the future ; all 
his national learning, and national vani- 
ty, were employed on his history of the 
Macarthies More, to whom he deemed 
himself hereditary senachy, while all 
his early associations' and affections 
were occupied with the Fitzadelm family; 
to an heir of which he had not only 
been foster father, but, by a singular 
chain of occurrences, tutor and host. 
Thus, there existed an incongruity be- 
tween his prejudices and his affections, 
that added to the natural incoherence 
of his wild, unregulated, ideal character. 
He had as much Greek and Latin as 
generally falls to the lot of the inferior 
Irish priesthood, an order to which he 
had been originally destined: he spoke 
Irish, as his native tongue, with great 
fluency; and English, with little varia- 
tion, as it might have been spoken in 
the days of James or Elizabeth ; for 
English was with him acquired by study, 
at no early period of life, and princi- 
pally obtained from such books as came 



2S6 



FLORENCE MACARTHY- 



'writhin the black letter plan of his anti- 
quarian pursuits. 

*' Words that wise Bacon and grare Ualeigh 
spoke'* 

were familiarly uttered by O'Leary, 
conned out of old English tracts, chro- 
nicles, presidential instructions, copies 
of patents, memorials, discourses, and 
translated remonstrances, from the Irish 
chiefs, of every date since tlie arrival of 
the English in the island ; and a fe\r 
French words, not unusually heard 
among the old Irish Catholics, tlie de- 
scendants of the faithful followers of 
tlie Stuarts, compleated the stock of 
his philological riches.* 

♦ Several of the obsolete terms of Shakespeare 
and Spenser are to be found in daily use among 
the Catholics of Ireland. In the conversation 
of the higher orders, not unfrcquently, 

** A bold eipresBive pbras« appears, 

Bright through the rubbish of some bandred ycari." 

The strong line of demarkation drawn be- 
tween the Catholic and Protestant gentry of the 
country, and -which renders tbem a distinct 
society, explain? the fact. Both in their speech 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 287 

OXeary now advanced to meet his 
visitant with a countenance radiant with 
the expression of complacency and sa- 
tisfaction^ not unmingled with pride and 
importance, as he threw his eyes round 
on his numerous disciples. To one of 
these the Commodore gave his horse ; 
and drawing his hat over his eyes, as 
if to shade them from the sun, he 
placed himself under the shadow of the 
Saxon arch, observing, 

" You see, Mr. OXeary, I very 
eagerly avail myself of your invitation : 
but I fear I have interrupted your 
learned avocation." 

*^ Not a taste, your honor, and am 
going to give my classes an holiday, in 
respect of the turf. Sir. What do's yez 
all crowd round the gentlemen for ? — 
Did never yez see a raal gentleman 

and manners the latter are singularly attached 
to old modes ; and they still preserve that pe- 
culiar courtcousness of address, which is now 
considered as almost exclusively to be found in 
France* 



288 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



afore ? I'd trouble yez to consider your- 
selves as temporary. There's great 
scholars among them ragged runagates, 
your honor, poor as they look : for 
though in these dcgendered times you 
wont get the childre, as formerly, to 
talk the dead languages, afore they can 
spake, when, says Campion, they had 
Latin like a vulgar tongue, conning in 
their schools of leachcraft the aphorisms 
of Hippocrates, and the civil institutes 
of the faculties, yet there are as fine 
scholars, smd as good philosophers still, 
Sir, to be found in my seminary as in 
Trinity College, Dublin. — Now, step 
forward here, you Homers, " Keklute 
meuTroes, kai Dardanoi, ed' epikouroi." 

Half a dozen overgrown boys with 
bare heads and naked feet, hustled 
forward. 

" Them's my first class, plazeyour 
honor : sorrow one of them gassoons, 
but would throw you off a page of 
Homer into Irish while he'd be clamp- 
ng a turf stack.— Come forward here. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 289 



Padreen Mahony, you little mitcher, 
ye. — Have you no better courtesy than 
that, Padreen? Fie upon your man- 
ners. Then for all that, Sir, he's my 
head philosopher, and am getting him 
up for Maynooth. Och! then I wouldn't 
axe better than to pit him against 
the provost of Trinity College this 
day, for all his ould small cloathes, Sir, 
the cratur! troth, he'd puzzle him, great 
as he is, aye, and bate him too; 
that's at the humanities. Sir. Padreen, 
my man, if the pig's sould at Dunore 
nsarket to-morrow, tell your daddy dear, 
ni expect the pintion. Is that your 
bow, Padreen, with your head under 
your arm like a roosting hen? Upon 
my word, I take shame for your man- 
ners. There, your honor, them's my 
cordaries, the little Leprehauns,* with 
their cathah^ heads, and their burned 

* Leprehauns, one of the inferior order of 
Irish Demonology. 

f Cathah — curly, or matted. 
VOL. I. O 



^90 FLORENCE MACARTUY. 

skins: I think your honor would be 
divarted to hear them parsing a chap- 
ter — Well now, dismiss, lads, jewel— off 
with yez, extemplo, like a piper out of a 
tent; away with yez to the turf; and 
mind me well, ye Homers ye, I'll expect 
Hector and Andromach to-morrow with 
out fail: obsarve me well, I'll take no 
excuse for the classics barring the bog, 
in respect of the weather's being dry: 
dismiss, I say." The learned dis- 
ciples of this Irish sage, pulling down 
the front lock of tlieir hair to designate 
the bow they would have made, if they 
had possessed hats to move, now scam- 
pered off, leaping over tomb-stones and 
clearing rocks ; while O'Leary observed, 
shaking his head, and looking after 
them, " Not one of them but is sharp 
witted, and has a ganius for poethry, if 
there was any encouragement for lam- 
ing in these degendered times." 

Having now gratified his pedagogue 
pride, and excused the 'looped and win- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



291 



dowed raggedness' of his pupils by ex- 
tolling that which passeth shew, he 
now turned his whole attention on his 
guest, who stood shadowed by the deep 
arched door-case, waiting till the last of 
the boys had disappeared. O'Leary led 
the way before him into the interior of 
the chauntry, which was divided into 
the school-room, and his own abode; 
then laying down his Homer and ferule, 
and shutting the door almost to the ex- 
clusion of the light, and wiping down a 
seat with his wig, which lay on the 
desk, and which he afterwards placed 
on his head, he respectfully motioned 
his visitor to be seated. A silence for a 
moment nsued ; when O'Leary, fixing 
his eyes into a look of expressive signi- 
ficance, observed, in a low cautious 
tone: 

I axe your lordship's pardon for the 
great liberty I took in calling you, Sir, 
my lord; thinking it due discretion so 
to do before my scholars ; in respect 
o 2 



292 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of your intention of biding here in cam 
incognito'' 

" Indeed!" said the Commodore, 
starting on his feet : " for whom then do 
you take me?" 

For who you are — noble by blood, 
by birth, and by descent; and though 
no Irishman, but of Norman breed, a 
true Geraldine. And though the Fitz- 
adelmfi are nothing to me now, for I 
have shook the dust off my feet at their 
threshold, and threw my ould couran* 
over the head of the last of the race, 
that shall ever give my heart a beat, 
or my eye a tear, yet I'd be sorry that 
it was to say, that a branch of the ould 
tree wanted a sheltering place, when I, 
Terence Oge O'Leary, the last Irish fos- 
terer of the family, had a shed to house! 
him under." 

" For whom, then," repeated the 
Commodore, in a calmer tone than he 



* Ad Irish shoe or brogue, made without heels. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 293 

had before asked the question, " for 
whom do you take me 

"For LordAdelmFitzadelm," repHed 
OXeary, with a respectful bow. " The 
cadet of the twin sons of Gerald Baron 
Fitzadelm, commonly called the Red 
Baron, himself the cadet of the father of 
the son, and heir that would have 
been if " 

O'Leary paused: his voice faltered; 
and after a moment's silence, the Com- 
modore observed. 

It is strange that you should take 
me for the Lord Fitzadelm. For what 
purpose should he come incognito into 
this neighbourhood?" 

"For every purpose in life, your 
honor, and the best of purposes, to cir- 
cumvent them land pirates, them plot- 
hunters, them trianglers! them — them 
Crawley thieves, Bachal Essu! only let 
me live to see that day, and then 
doesn t care how soon I'm carried feet 
foremost to the herring ground of 
o 3 



^29^ FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the pobble O'Leary, near St. Cro- 
han s County Kerry: for its little else is 
left for me now to live for but to 
die." 

" And for this strange tissue of im- 
probability, what grounds have you, 
0*Leary? Why should Lord Fitzadelm 
come over in disguise to circumvent, as 
you call it, his mother's agent?" 

" If you don't believe me, your 
honor," interrupted O'Leary, losing the 
supposed identity of the person he was 
addressing in the incoherency of his al- 
ways confused ideas, " will you believe 
your own eyes, Sir; that's my Lord, I 
mane?'* 

He drew forth a letter from his 
pocket as he spoke, and the Commodore 
took it to the little casement, and read 
as follows : 

"A distinguished looking stranger will 
shortly present himself to the learned 
and sagacious Terence Oge O'Leary: 
should he propose himself as a tenant 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



995 



for the Reverend Mr. O'Sullivan s va- 
cant apartments^ he will do well to ac- 
cept him. Terence Oge O'Leary may 
have heard that Lord Adelm Fitzadelm 
will shortly be in the Peninsula of Du- 
nore, to circumvent the machinations of 
the Crawley faction, and will there be 
incognito. None but the well-wishers of 
the Crawleys would refuse to assist Lord 
Adelm in a temporary concealment, ne- 
cessary for the effecting of his laudable 
purposes." 

After a frequent and amazed perusal 
of this billet, the Commodore demand- 
ed how this strange letter reached 
O'Leary. 

I found it," he replied, after the 
dawn of day." 
" Found it?" 

" Aye, did I, troth, and marvelled 
much to see it fixed in the latch of the 
out-side door of the chauntry ; and was 
mighty loath to break the sale, and 
didn't, only just skimmed round it." 
o 4 



296 FLORENCE MACARTHY* 

The Commodore, on examining the 
seal, found it bore the figure of a child, 
plucking the thorns from a rose, with 
the motto: 

Sou utile ainda que Bricando.* 

" And have you no idea from whom 
this letter comes?" asked the Commo- 
dore, after another pause, and some 
evident perplexity of idea. 

"I have, plaze your honor, that's 
your lordship, I mane ; every iday in 
life, it comes from the good people: often 
they do the likes of that kind turn by 
their pets — that's the fairies, my Lord/* 

^' In this instance, however,*' returned 
the Commodore, smiling, *'they have 
done you an ill turn; for if they mean 
to impress you with an idea that I am 
Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, they most cer- 
tainly deceive you." 

" Oh ! very well. Sir," returned 
O'Leary, with a most obstinate look of 
incredulity, " as your lordship willeth, 

^ I am useful in sportireness. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 297 

that's your honor, I mane, now, Sir/' if 
its Sir you plase to be/^ 

" Supposing/^ said the Commodore, 
that even it were LfOrd Adelm who 
sought concealment under your roof, 
surely you would not defeat his inten- 
tions, by persisting in giving him a title, 
which would at once reveal his rank, or 
at least awaken suspicion." 

" Is it me ! och ! I'd be very sorry ! 
and will be bound, I'll never call your 
lordship my lord, if you was in it till 
the day of judgment, only when we 
are alone. Sir, and nobody by, barring 
our two selves, and can pass you as a 
tinnant come to bathe in the salt water. 
Sir, and need never name your honor 
at all. Sir, only pass you for my lodger." 

You will then pass me for what I 
am anxious to become, O'Leary ; I will 
therefore look at the apartment you 
mean me to occupy. You shall name 
your own terms ; and I dare say you 
have some old dame, who is wont to 
o 5 



298 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

boil a chicken, and make coffee for Friar 
O'Sullivan, who would undertake — " 

" Aye," interrupted O'Leary, eagerly, 
" and who can toss up an omelette, and 
fry a bit of fish on raaigre days, your 
honor, and was taught by Fra Denis 
himself, who has a mighty pretty taste 
that way. Och ! I'll engage we^ll table 
your honor well. Here, Moriagh ma 
chree, throw me the keys of the friary." 

As he spoke, O'Leary rapped at a 
little blind window in the wall, which 
was instantly opened, and discovered at 
once the interior of his kitchen, and 
an old woman employed in carding. 
" That's my Girleen,'* said O'Leary, 
taking a bunch of keys from her, and 
opening a door opposite to that which 
led from the road to the chauntry. The 
host and his new lodger proceeded 
across a sort of grass-grown court, sur- 
rounded by a range of cloister, still in 
high preservation, and bent their steps 
towards the friary. An old, and ap- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2QQ 

paretitly v^ry feeble eagle, with a 
leather collar round his leg, and fastened 
by a chain to a fragment of the ruin, 
attracted the stranger's attention. 
O'Leary paused also, clasped his hand^^ 
and sighed, exclaiming, 

" Yo\ii are not long for this worlds 
my Cunihal honey, and leaves your bit 
of food for the sparrows, my poor bird, 
that daren't come near you oncet, my 
king of the mountains.'* 

He looks very sick, and I think 
dying. 

" Oh ! musha, the pity of him ! He's 
ould and desolate like myself Its 
twenty years and more since he came 
home to me in Dunkerron ; and when 
he came in, with his looks all on fire, as 
he was wont after being out all day, 
Terence, my ould lad, says he, for that's 
a way he had of callmg me, that's he 
that brought me the eagle. Sir, he that 
had the eye of the eagle, and the spirit 
of an eagle ; Terence, my old lad, I 



300 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

have brought you another pet, says he. 
Do you mind, your honor, marking thc^ 
word another, and maning himself to 
be one, the sowl ! Have you, my lord, 
says I, for though he was then left to 
perish by his own kin, and was sharing 
my bit and sup, in the wilds of Kerry, 
I always called him my lord, as he 
was, or would have been ; and did 
so that day 'bove all others, for he had 
scarcely a skreed of his ould red jacket 
left on him ; and called him my lord, 
in regard of the jacket. Have you, my 
lord, says I ; and Terence, says he, 
you'll be kind to this eaglet, (and it was 
fluttering on his left arm, with its blue 
bill and golden eye) you will be kind to 
it for my sake, and I'll tell you why, 
Terence, says he, leaning his right arm 
on mine, and looking with his smile, 
his mothers smile in my face. The 
poor bird has been driven from its pa- 
rent's nest, says he, I found it fluttering 
on a bare rock exposed and perishing. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. S0\ 

For it is the nature of the eagle to chase 
away its young, when unable to supply 
its own wants. For want, Terence^ 
says he, may overcome even a parent's 
love. The tears stood in his eyes as he 
spoke, for it was his own story, plaze 
your honor, and it wasn't with a dry 
eheek I heard him. And yet, says he, 
cheering up and placing the fine young 
eaglet on the ground, the eagle is a noble 
bird, Terence, and even this poor fellow 
-may yet soar high; though it isn't 
under a parent's wing he'll imp his 
flight. Them were his words if I was 
dying, and that was great speaking for 
a boy of twelve years old. But he had 
Homer and Ossian at his finger s ends, 
to say nothing of Don Bellianus of 
Greece, the seven wise maisters, and 
Plae racca na Rourke."* 

WhileO'Learywas giving this history, 
the Commodore seem'd shaken by some 



* The celebrated song of the Irish bard, hu- 
mourously translated by Dean Swift. 



302 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



deep feeling, which, however, was un- 
observed by O'Leary, whose attention 
was wholly occupied in striving to make 
the bird feed, while he described its first 
appearance under his roof. At last, by 
a powerful effort, shaking off his emo- 
tion, and giving a firm and indifferent 
tone to his voice, the Commodore 
asked, of whom do you speak, 
O'Leary ?** 

" Of whom do I speak, your honor ?" 
said O'Leary, raising his head loftily ; 

it's of the Honorable de Montenay 
Fitzadelm I speak, that would have 
been Marquis of Dunore if he were in it 
the day, the only son and heir of Walter 
Baron Fitzadelm : it's of your father s 
nephew I speak, ray lord," said O'Leary, 
with inveteracy, and raising his voice, 

his only nephew. Sir; and such a 
nephew ! and nothing to be got by it 
but a poor bit of a title in distant rever- 
sion ! not a scrubal in money at the 
timey not a cantred of land then ; it was 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 303 



for a sound, a breath, he sowld his 
sowl. But the curses that fell that 
day — added he, closing his hands, and 
grinding his teeth, while he still seemed 
to struggle with feelings, which were 
giving the vehemence of insanity to his 
voice and its wildness to his look ; 
when the Commodore, taking off his 
hat, as if to give coolness to his fervid 
brow, fixed his eye on him. O'Leary 
tottered back a few steps: his colour 
faded, his countenance lost its expres- 
sion of fierceness ; he several times 
drew his hand across his eyes as if to 
clear their vision; then stood gazing in 
silence for many minutes on the face of 
the stranger, which he now first beheld 

fairly revealed. 

" You do not wish that the crimes of 

the father should bring curses on his 
children, OXeary," said the Commo- 
dore, in a tranquil voice, " if indeed 
the late Baron Fitzadelm has been 
guilty of crimes which merit execration?" 



304 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



O'Leary remained silent : his mind 
seemed in abeyance : every other sense 
was condensed in one: his lips moved, 
but he uttered no sound : he stood mo- 
tionless, till his eyes, dazzled by the in- 
tensity of their gaze, obliged him to 
press his fingers on their aching lids. 

" But/' continued the Commodore, 
putting on his hat, and losing much of 
the character of his face by concealing 
its finest features, " but, O'Leary, if 
you persist in believing me to be Lord 
Adelm Fitzadelm, say, is the son a well- 
chosen confidant of his fathers mis- 
deeds ? or if you cannot keep the secret 
of your own indignant feelings, how 
may I expect you will keep my secret ? 
that is, supposing / ivere the Lord 
Adelm, or any other person, O'Leary, 
whose interest it is to keep their real 
name unknown till certain purposes be 
effected. The absence of discretion, 
O'Leary, may render even the zeal of 
affection abortive. But come, time 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 305 

wears^ and time is precious : I will leave 
the arrangement of the friary to your 
care : I must now away to Mr. Craw- 
ley's. My host of Dunore tells me that 
it will be difficult to obtain an interview 
with your powerful portrieve after twelve : 
you shall shew me the way to Mount 
Crawley, and we will talk of the great 
Macarthies More as we walk along, 
the descendants of the Tyrian Her- 
cules, the powerful chiefs of Des- 
mond." 

The spirits of O'Leary rallied at this 
watch-word of the imagination : he 
looked round as one suddenly awakened 
from some strange vision of the night, 
and mechanically followed the stranger 
across the chauntry into the cemetery of 
St. John s, where the boy, to whose 
care he had delivered his horse, was 
still leading it about. — " Bring your 
master his hat," said the Commodore, 
taking the reins of his horse. You 
shall walk a mile of the way with me, 
O'Leary, and then return to your busi- 



306 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



ness, to which I must and am resolved 
not to be an hindrance." 

The boy returned with the hat, 
which O'Leary suffered him to put over 
his httle wig, now all awry. Plunged 
once more in deep cogitation, he walked 
silently beside his new tenant, snatch- 
ing at intervals an eager glance at his 
person, and then shaking his head, de- 
bating as it were some point within 
himself ; and at last clasping his hands 
behind his back, and exclaiming aloud, 
as he paced on heavily—" Sure kin 
may liken^ kin ; and no marvel in 
that, any how : only it all lies in 
the upper part of the face : and that 
was his mothers. The dark ey«s, 
Milesian born. The great O'Sullivan 
Bear s daughter coming from the Luceni 
in Spain, of Scythian origin, and died 
of a broken heart, in the sorrowful 
chamber, so called to this day, only 
fallen to ruin, why wouldn't she, the 
cratur ! and her own child first turning 



* Resemble, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 30? 

out to be Judy Laffan's ; and then^ 
when that wouldn't do, the country 
being well insensed* to the contrary, re- 
ported to be dead, and taken from her: 
and an hard case it was, as she said to 
my wife on her death-bed, God rest 
her : for they'd all desarted the court, 
barring the bailiff's for the execution, 
laving her to die with only the child's 
nurse to wet her lips. ' And a hard case 
it is to lose one child, Susheen^ said 
she, as she gave the prayer-book that 
had the certificate of Mr. De Montenay's 
birth and marriage in it, that's her ov^ n 
marriage with my lord, thinking, God 
help her, that it might be of use to the 
child one day (which it never will), and 
sending it to the friar Denis O'iSullivan 
Finn, her own kinsman atDunkerron, for 
my lady was a Catholic by birth, and — ^" 
" O'SulUvan,*' interrupted the Com- 
modore, " is still in Cork, I suppose ; 
but the book of course lost, if that were 
of any consequence now'' 

* xVware, acquainted. 



308 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" He is in Cork, Sir, and will be till 
the visitation is over, and then will be 
in Portugal ; and the prayer-book's safe. 
I saw it with him the day he departed ; 
but what matter is it? Sure there is 
nothing to prove but that he was mur- 
thered fairly, that's drowned by force, 
vi et armis. I never will believe that 
he sunk when his boat was overturned. 
Is it he, that dived., and swam like a 
duck ? and often saw him, when nobody 
would venture out, cut his way through 
the wild waves that bate the grate 
Skelegs, and his cot overset, and a thou- 
sand ullalues raised from the shore, and 
he rise like a barnacle from the waves, 
and gain the land, and scale the stone 
of pain^ as it's called, and reach the 
spindle, the pilgrim's last station, a 
bit of rock projecting over the raging 
sea, the storm bating wildly round him. 
Och ! that was a great sight. Above the 
world he looked, and above his own lot, 

Auditque ruentes 
Sub pedibus rentos et rauca tombrua calcat.^ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 309 

"AndAeto be drowned on a fine, calm, 
moonlight night, when he went out to 
chase the porpoises ; for that was great 
sport to him ; and to fight the sea 
calves in the caves, under the head- 
lands of Kerry ; for he was never aisy 
but when he was after the seals and the 
sai/'dogs, that covered the rocks and 
slept in the sunshine, or else in the 
mountains ; sometimes chasing the deer 
with their beautiful spotted skins, or 
coming home with a string of curlews 
on his back, barring when he was read- 
ing Homer and Ossian, and the Seven 
Wise Maisters." 

He paused, and again looked ear- 
nestly in the Commodore*s face ; who, 
musing, rather than listening to this 
apostrophe of O'Leary, was walking on 
with a slackened pace, the reins of his 
horse rolled round his folded arms, when 
he suddenly asked- — 

And where does Mr. O'Sullivan 
live in Cork ?" 



310 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" At tlic Franciscan Friary/' said 
O'Lcary: and tlien continued, with a 
deep sigh, " If s marvellous: and does'nt 
know where the likeness is with the 
hat on. Only it*s the Fitzadelm mouth, 
any how — why wouldn't it ? and minds, 
me of the Macarthics More, and 
Macarthies Reagh of Carberry, who 
were^kin by blood as by descent, mar- 
rying through other, ever more, 
and preserving the family mouth al- 
ways." 

" Oh ! by the bye," said the Com- 
modore, abruptly, and throwing off his 
air of abstraction, " did not this dis- 
trict of Dunore belong anciently to the 
Macarthies 

Did it ? Is it Dunore ? The Ma- 
carthies, kings of the Coriandri, of the 
ancient Desmonds, the w hole province 
of Munster, late tyrunni! See there, 
plaze your honor, behind you ; that's 
Dunore Castle, the Dangan-ni-Carthie, 
the ancient fortress of the Macarthies ; 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 311 



now an English pale castle, as I may 
say : and look there to your left, near 
the say^ at the brow of ould Clotnotty- 
joy ; do you see a fine ancient ould 
castle ? Well, that's Castle McCarthy, 
hanging over its depindency, the village 
of Ballydab, oncet a bishoprick and 
borough. The castle on a rock, an 
elliptical conoid, defended by a bar- 
bican to the right, and the hall under- 
neath, where Donagh Macarthy held 
his last court-baron, and his tributaries 
resorted to him for suit and service, the 
pobbleO'Keefe and the pobble O'Leary." 

" I see nothing but a small square 
building on the mountain's brow," 
replied his companion, in vain strain- 
ing his eyes to view the features of 
feudal strength described by O'Leary, 
who saw only in the mind's eye^ who 
now with all the associations of me- 
mory and imagination awakened, and 
with his wonted incoherence, launched 
into his favourite theme, for the mo- 
ment forgetful of every other. 



31'2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

There is the very gabbion Florence 
Macarthy stood on, when he saw the 
cannon planted against his only son, 
then in the Lord President's power, 
sending the warder word that they kept 
him as a fair mark to bestow their 
shot upon. But the constable returned 
answer, the fear of the hoys life should 
not make them abandon their country 
and its cause. Then the Lord Presi- 
dent of Munster and his men intrenched 
themselves between the river here to 
the left, and the castle forenent you, 
and planted before it two demi-can- 
nons, and one sacre. Then, Sir, be- 
gins the battery to play from the 
ramparts of the castle; and a breach is 
made, by a cave under the great hall, 
the English forcing the warder to the 
keep; the musketeers, followed by the 
halberdeers, making their way up the 
turret stairs, there to the left, the Irish 
pour down on them heart and hand^ 
hceretpede pes densus queviro vir, man 
to man, breast to breast. Gal-readh-a 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 313 

Ijoe,* cries the Fitzadelms^ who were in 
the EngHsh army below, encouraging 
their men that appeared on the ram- 
parts above : Lambh-laidre-aboe, ^ 
shouts Macarthy More, from the pos- 
tern, Uke a flame of fire, bearing down 
all before him;-— the English retreat: 
the war-horn of the Macarthies is 
heard through the mountains; the Ma- 
carthies carry the day. Hurra! Hurra! 
Hurra!" 

O'Leary was now waving his hat in 
the air triumphantly, and transported 
beyond the present moment, when '^the 
vile squeaking of a wry-necked fife," 
and the roll of a drum, broke the thread 
of his ideas ; and to the fancied engage- 
ments of the Irish and English cohorts 
of Queen Elizabeth's day, the gallow- 
glasses of the Macartnies, and the bow- 

♦ The cause of the red stranger the war- 
^ry of many of the Norraan families in Ireland, 

+ " The cause of the strong hand," the war- 
cry of the Macartnies. 

VO I. P 



3i4 rLiOftE^JCS MACARTHY. 



men W St. Lc^r, succeeded the New- 
1k)wn Mount Orawley supplementary 
amxiliary ycommvry legioa, a caq)s .»ew- 
lyrakfed by Mr. Crawley^ wkich stepped 
^long the pathway of a very narrefw 
rcxad it neairly ©ccapkid, to the tuiie of 
" the Protectant Boys/' tliat, on the 
appearance of O'Lcary, was instantly 
changed to " Crop^^ies lie down." To 
judge by the appoaFanace ©f tliis evi- 
dently new raised corps, their leader, 
like FalstafT, had 

Mifiiised the king's press most d— mnably;'* 

and whether it were, or were ruA, made 
up of revoked tap6te«?s," and " hostlers 
trade-fallen,'' its members presented a 
most unsold»ier-hke ajjjiearance. There 
gleamed, <h<wevcr, through their awk- 
ward gate, and clumsy ^rarrMige, a coin- 
"sciousiiess superiority, perhaps, bolii 
religious and mihtary, which gave the 
last fmish of ridicule to their exhibition: 
take theai altogethei, 

" No eye had seen such scarecrows," 



FLO&EMCE MACA&THF. 315 



The manner in -wiiich they had hustled 
CLeary off the pathway, the well- 
kRowfi tune, and its well-knovrn mean- 
ing, operated like, -a pell i pon his agi- 
tated mind : he stopped «hort, till they 
liad marched by; and then, wholly 
disenchanted from his splendid dreams, 
the Irish Macarthies, and the Norman 
Fitzadelms, vanished from his thoughts, 
and a third epoch in the histoiy of his 
country was recalled to his recollection: 
t\\\^ little image of local power,and petty 
a^eiidenev, changed the current of his 
ideas, and with a deep sigh he added, 
And now 'tis the reign of the Craw- 

levs." 
»/ 

" Then let us hasten to their court 
baron," returned the Commodore, smil- 
ing, or we may be too late for an au- 
dience, O'Leary.*' 

All the circumstances of the immedi- 
ate moment now flashed full through 
the mental confusion of O^Leary. The 
anonymoits ietterjLordFkzadelm incog- 
p 2 



3l6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

nito, the circumventing, the Crawley 
faction, were incidents which rapidly 
arranged themselves in his imagination. 
Recovering his composure, his spirits, and 
his vindictiveness, he gradually assumed 
the shrewd, animated,and important look 
he had worn, ere traces of his former hal- 
lucination had been awakened by a sup- 
posed or real resemblance to the object, 
whose loss had, for a time, bereft him of 
reason: the idea that the stranger was the 
brother of the Marquis of Dunore had 
now taken possession of his mind, with 
all the pertinacity incidental to his former 
malady; and persuaded that the ruin of the 
Crawley faction^ as he termed it, was 
at hand, he neither speculated, nor rea- 
foned upon the probable means by 
which that event was to be consummated. 
His hatred of that family had its source 
in the strongest feelings, and most fixed 
prejudices of his nature; and, like the 
rest of his countrymen, of his own class^ 
his revenge was proportionate to his 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 317 

devotion and fidelity. A few words, 
dropped at intervals, made up the con- 
versation during the rest of their walk; 
he spoke of the stranger looking older 
than he ought, of his being " mighty 
tanned hy foreign parts ;^ he asked if 
Mr. Crawley had seen him when in 
London, which being answered in the 
negative, he expressed his fear that a 
family likeness might be traced; and 
his hope that Torney Crawley would 
be caught by his lordship in all his 
glory; for this was one of his great 
days, when people came to him from 
all parts of the county for law, justice, 
and money. 

"There is New-Town MountCrawley, 
plaze your honor," said OXeary, point- 
ing to a few slightly-built red brick 
houses : " sorrow call there was, at all 
at all, for them slips of card buildings, 
only to crush the ancient city of Bally- 
dab, handy by. And there's the new 
barracks and the mail-coach road that is 
p 3 



« 



31ft FLOKENCE MACARTHY. 

to be. Ocli ! Musha, Eiiglisii barracks 
and a. mail-coach road in Daiigan-nu- 
Carth}^ I When in Florence MX'arthy » 
time, the English sheriff darcii t set bis 
foot in the plaee^, but the country round 
rose to o])pose him ; and all this now in 
respect of the jobs, and the pati'ona^'e, 
and the protectees, taxing the country : 
and before that road i& finished, irhieh 
it nerer will, many a false oath will be, 
sworn, and many a sowl lost, and many 
a poor man's cattle be driven ; and for 
all that, I remember me the portrieve's 
father, ould l^ddy Craivley, herd to 
McCarthy, of Castle M'Carthy, there 
beyont, that's the late ould titnlaar Eari 
of C7aneai*e. And now, there's Mount 
Crawley, p?azc your lordship, on the top 
of that frreen sod hill, once called the 
Tbanc's heap,* in regard of a Maeartby 
was sfein there in »n engag;ement be^ 
tween them and the Fitzadelms, about 



FLORENCE MA€ART»Y. 

taking a prey of cattle^ that's when the 
Maearthies' greatness Gvershadowcd all 
the southern chiefs ; and tkcy made 
that day an elegant ret?Mt through the 
pass of jMa^hanaglass, there below, to 
their own castle, as wilt be seen in my 
genealogical history. Sorrow much the 
re^ait of Xenophon was in comparais- 
ment to that of Mashanaglass : but now, 
Dioul! its the reign of the Craw leys." 

At the gates of the f^iracipal entrance 
to MouTrt Crawley OXeary took his 
leave, observing, that he had made a 
ymw in the year o^* the rebddion never 
to cross the tlireshold of a Crawley, 

till they had no longer a tlireshold to 
er&ss, plaae your Lordship." At thd 
MFvrd * Lordship^' the Comjncdore pat 
his foretinger to his lips, and O'Lcaiy, 
Feeovering himself, adjdiid,. " your honor 
1 mane." He thea retreated, leaving 
him, whom he persistetl in believing 
Lord Adelm, persuatled, that among hit 
virtues, the " excellent cjuality of diai- 
P 4 



320 FLORENCE MACARTH\. 

cretion" could not be numbered ; and 
that this affectionate, but inconsiderate 
person, was the last to be trusted with 
a secret, in which his own strong and 
ungoverned feelings had an interest. 
He had in the course of his desultory 
and incoherent conversation betrayed 
circumstances detrimental to the family 
honour of the Fitzadelms, and which 
had long slept in oblivion ; that Baron 
Fitzadehn had been reduced by his dis- 
tress, and influenced by his brother, to 
conceal the existence of his son, in order 
to raise money on the little that was 
left of his estate ; that he had after- 
wards yielded to the story suggested 
by his brother ; that this unfortunate 
boy was not his son, but the substituted 
child of his first nurse, to whom 
O'Leary's wife had succeeded ; that the 
boy had afterwards been sent to the 
wilds of Kerry, to his foster father, to 
be kept for some sinister purpose out 
of the way ; that immediately after his 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 321 



fathers death he was drowned by 
accident (though some told a different 
tale); that the herald's office had for 
some years after the death of the father 
and son refused to grant Gerald Fitz- 
adelm the title of Baron Fitzadelm : all 
these circumstances, once the common 
topic of conversation in the province, 
had now died away, with the greater 
part of the generation who had wit- 
nessed them ; and the details were only 
known to the few persons interested 
in their occurrence, and still surviving : 
these were the superior of the friars of 
St. John's, the old baccah of Lis-na- 
sleugh, and, above all, the fosterer of 
the deserted and persecuted heir of 
Fitzadelm, Terence Oge O'Leary. 



p 5 



NOTES. 



Note (1) Pasje 16. — This may seem harsB 
langi^age applied to the gallant Raleh^k^''^ whi> 
had rendered himself so illustrious in many in- 
stances, but it is fully justified by his conduct 
during his residence in frelan<f, ^vh«re lie was 
little better than the caj)tain of licensetf ban- 
ditti — the following anecdote is one out of a 
Kundre^i to be found in the Irish tracts of Queen 
Elizabeth's djvy, wliich illustrates tb» t?u.lk of 
this apparently seTore assertitwi. 

" Soon after this action, Captain Raletgfr, af- 
terwards Sir yValter^ went from Cork to Dub. 
liw, to Ws patroni, the Lord Grey, who, on the 
Seventh of Septen>ber, W3« raadc lord deputy of 
Ireland, with a complaint against thr Barrys, 
(themselves descenda-nls of the English lords' 
who accompaaied Henry If. to Ireland) and tlte 
Comloas, for assisting, the rebels." ( »"hcse com- 
plain !» tr«r« easily made, but rarely substan- 
tiiifed, aird* rtcver i^' quired' into) JI« obi^iined 
a commission to seize on ihc ca^tfe of Barrjf's 
courty and the rest of Lord liarry*s Estate, (on 



S24 



NOTES, 



the strength of this complaint) and had some 
horse added to his company to enable him to take 
possession of it. But Barry having notice of it, 
set Barry's court on fire, and the st ncschal of 
Iraokilly placed an ambush at Moore Abbey, 
ivhich the young Raleii^h courageously attacked, 
defeated, and broke ihrongh, so tha» he arri?ed 
safely at Coik. While Raleigh lay in this city, 
he performed several pieces of service against the 
rebels,* .imongst others, Zouch ordered him (Ra- 



* Tht rebtlsof those days were chiefly such men as Lord 
Barry^ who, sooner ihan give up their families to massacre, 
and their property to plunder, set fire to their houses, and 
took shelter in waods and fastnesses, and their strong holds. 
Vi ith the exception ot Macarthy-Morcy O'lSeil^ and (>'D«n- 
ne/, almost all the rebels of this day were of P.nglish 
origin, men who still inherited from their ancestors some 
recolleciion of Magna-Charta. 1 hey therefore resisted the 
effect of such complaints as Captain /taUigh^ and either 
proiected or burnt their casiles, and were consequently 
** Rebels.^' The persecution of the illustrious family of 
the Fitzgeralds, in the persons of the celebrated Earl of 
Kilclare,and the great I arl of Desmond, whose crime wa» 
being the richest subject in the empire, are too well known 
to need comment, i he Earl of Desmond, in an advanced 
age, was despoiled of all his properi^^ hunted with blood- 
hounds through the woods and mountains, and discovered 
in a miserable hut, warming himself over a few fagots, 
IJis pursuers seized him by the long gre> hairs, and to hit 
appeal, " my friends, I am the old l arl of Desmond," they 
replied io a very brief aud decided manner — they cut off 



NOTES. 



S25 



leigh) to take Lord Roche and his lady pri- 
soners, and bring them to Cork, they being sus~ 
pected of corresponding with the rebels — the 
seneschal of Imokilly, and David Barry, having 
notice of this design, assembled seven or eight 
hundred men to fall on Raleigh ; either going or 
on his return. Raleigh quitting Cork, with 
about ninety men, at ten of the clock at night, - 
marched towards Bally, twenty miles from 
Cork, the house of Lord Roche, a nobleman 
well-beloved in the country, and arrived there 
early in fhemorning. fie marched up to ihe castle 
gate ; whereupon the townsmen, to the number of 
five hundred, immediately took up arms. Raleigh 
having placed his men in order, took with him 
Michael Butler, James Fulford, Nich-ol as Wright, 
Arthur Berland, Henry Swane, and Pinkney 
Huish ; and knocking at the gate, three or four 
of Lord Roche's gentlemen demanded the cause 
of their coming: to whom Raleigh answered, 
that he came to speak with their lord, which was 
agreed to, provided he would bring with him only 
two or three of his followers. However, the gate 
being opened, he and all the above-mentioned 
persons entered the castle ; and after he had seen 

his head. The chief perpetrator was rewarded by the go- 
vernment with a commission and a pension, but was after- 
wards hung for some less horrible atrocity. For an ac- 
count of this truly romantic tragedy, sec " Smith's C«rk." 



3S6 



NOTES. 



Lord Roche, and spoken to him, by degrees, and 
hy different means, !ie drew in a considerable 
niimber of his men, \*hom he directed to guard 
the iron gate of the court lodge, and see that nif 
nvao should pass in or out, and orckred othet'9 
into the hall, vf\ih their arms rcadjr. Lord 
Roche set the bost face Iw cou'd iipan (he matter, 
and invUcd the captain to dine with hitn. After 
dinner, llalcigh informed him that he had orders 
to carry him and his lady to Cork. Lord Roche 
began to excuse his going, and at length rcso. 
lutdy said th»t he rreilher icattld nor could go-; 
biit Ualcigh letting him know that if he rcfuseit 
he zzould be taken by force ^ he found there wa* 
no remetly, and, therefore, he and his lady set 
oat oiT their jom'nei/, in n ino»t rainy and t cin t i e a - 
tiumiv night, and through a very rocky^and (farr- 
fcrour ^ray, whereby many soldiers were se- 
rere^y hurt, and others lost their arms. A? fur 
Lord Roche, he acquitted himself honourably of 
the crimfs he vra?< charged with, and afterward'? 
did good service agaiist the Irish." 

Smith's Ccrk, rol. 
It Is notable, that doin^ good service against 
the Iriih,'' was becoming a plunderer in his turn, 
to avoid being plundered. It was thus (he na« 
tives of the land were plunged into crime in self- 
defence, by the fatal policy which raised its 
power upon the dcmoraliziUioa oi the pc»pie it 



NOTEf. 



827 



jhir scouted and brutified ; and England no-v c\)vn. 
plains of the want of principle and incivilhati'on 
of the Irish. The Iri^jh, in their turn, may exclaim 
wHh Toney Lumpkin to his mother : 

" jls you made me, so ) ou have rae." 



(2) Pago 96. — Of the inextinguishable fire 
heretofore kept by the r4U-DS of St. Bridget at 
Kildare, thus Giraldus Cambrensis. At Kil- 
dare, famous for St. Bridget, are man^y miracles 
worthy to be remembered, among which is St, 
Bridget's fire, which they call inextinguishable, 
not that it cannot be extinguished, but because 
the nuns and holy women, by a continual supply 
of materials, have preserved it alive for so many 
years since the time of that virgin; and the-ugh 
so great a quantity of wood has beea consumed 
in it, yet no ashes renkda. From hence that nun- 
nery is commonly called the &ce.lx>use,. Uut 
this fire was put out by Henry Loundres, Arch- 
bishop of Dublin, in the year 12'iO^says an itno- 
nyaaous author, of the order e£ predicants, who 
compendiously writ the Annals of Ireland, from 
the year of our Lord 1163 to 1314, u herein 
livedo 



(3> Page lOa. -Abbey of the Ifoly-Cross, 
by the River Suire. This abbey was founded ia 



328 



NOTES. 



honour of the holy.cross, for Cistercians, by 
Donald O'Brian, King of Limerick, about the 
year 1169, or as others, in 1181. The posses- 
sions were confirmed by John, Lord of Ireland 
and Earl of Moreton, afterwards King of Eng- 
land. This abbey was afterward, in a general 
chapter, subjected by the Abbot of Clarevaux 
to the Abbey of Furness, in England. 



(4) Page 105 — Shebeao — literally a house 
of concealment. The terra is ap|)lied from 
the circumstance of the spirits which are sold in 
these private pot. houses being unlicensed^ and 
consequently concealed. 



(5) Page 138. — " To the proper names of 
the ancient Irish, sirnamcs were added, either 
from some action, some quality of tho mind, co- 
lour or mark of the body, or from chance, or 
ironically. So Neal, King of Ireland, was called 
Vigialac, because he had taken nine hostages 
from the lesser kings, and had held them for 
some time in fetters. King Brian was called 
Boruma, because he had recovere<l from the 
people of Leinster a cert-tin a nual tribute so 
called. Caenfela was called the Wise. S. Barr, 
Finbarr, or White Barr. S. Comin, Fada, or 
Long, and iEd, the Bearded Clerk, from his 



NOTES. 



329 



long beard : like as among the Grecians, Seleu. 
cus III. King of S^ria, was called Cetaunus, 
that is thunder, from his precipitate temper. 
Ptolomy VII. King ol Kgypt, Fhjscon, from 
his great b< 11 y, and (to omit other-) Ptolomy, 
the last save one, Auletes, from his great love 
to the bagpipe." — Ware, 

I return to Ireland, where, it is to be noted, 
that the ancient Irish, besides these sirnames, 
had also, after (he ancient manner, their fa- 
thers' names superadded, as Dermot-mac-Cor- 
mac, Cormac . mac-Donel, Donel -niac-TirdeU 
Tac." — Ware. 

Both these customs are still extant in Ireland ; 
and even in the families of the provincial gentry, 
persons of the same name are distinguished by 
the colour of their complexions, hair, &c. &c. 



(*5) Page 161.— This Irish Marmite formerly, 
and even within these twenty years, was open to 
any hand its plentiful contentsmight tempt. Now, 
however, the potatoe has risen in value with the 
increase of wretchedness, and of that, one meal 
a day is often with difficulty procured. In the 
summer of 1817, the author being in the coun. 
try, within twelve miles of Dublin, on a visit 
at the seat of a person of rank, frequently 
observed that when the twelve o'clock bell 
rung to send the labourers home to dinner, 



S30 



KCTES. 



ihey lay down in the dry diicbcj. On inqai. 
ring into the cause of a circumstance so uiu 
nsual, she was informed, both by the peas«nts 
and their dTerscers, that being uvabk: to promnB 
more than one nvcal of potatoes, (tahcn only 
with salt avid water), they preferred having that 
meal at nii'ht. Even this w>Fefched *)«pfi«r is en* 
trwnely scanty. Formerly poiafoes (always the 
principal, or rather exclusive food) were sufli- 
oienHy abuTrdant in the poorest fa-niilies. Now 
the father, or head of the family, is -obliged to 
portion them oat >vith great precision, lest an 
excess to-day should produce wan-t to-morrow. 
J^von in the neighbouring coimtics of the metro- 
polis the unfortunate wretches are s^cn search- 
ing the (Hlches for oft'als or cresses; and many, 
to ^e auChoT's knowledge, w*hen she Tfsitcd 
IVluuster in 1817, supported themselves by living 
on cabbage sfalks thrown out from the great 
house of which she was guest. To siidi suf- 
ferers imprisonment or death can have bojt few 
terrors. In Dublin, persons, male and female, 
have been known lately to commit small dcpre- 
'dations for the purpose of being sent to jail, 
"where shelter, with bread and water, was provided 
for them. Two young women, lately brought 
before a most reeprctable police magistrate ia 
Ji)H4)^in, as>*»gned the above reason for breaking 
wifidows. A few. days back, July 9th, 181^, 
ei^ht ..hundred peraoufi presented tiyems^ives to 



KOTEi. 



the MenJieHy Society of Dublin, to obtain any 
labour that could be procured them at the rate 
of sixpence per day. Such is the flourishing 
state of Ireland^'''' so often vaunted by English 
ofiicial visitors, who drive rapidly throui^h the 
country, and are sumptuously entertained by 
the Irish officials^ from whom they learn the 
little they return to describe. 



(6) Page 231, — The ancient Irish used wicker 
boats covered with ox hyde, called corraghs, 
upon the open sea. Upon lakes and rivers they 
used another kind of boat, called cotta^ made of 
a hollow tree. Both these boats are still in ge- 
neral use in Ireland, under the name of corraghs 
and cots, but are chiefly to be found on the rivers 
in remote counties, and on the south and west sea- 
coast. 



(7) Page 276. — " I admit neither presbyter, 
papist, independent, nor, as our proclaniatioa 
says, any other sort of fanatick, to plant here, 
but all good protestants." — Earl of Orreri^'s 
Letter io the Duke of Ormonde^ 1662. 

XND OF VOL, I. 



B. Clarke, Priutcr, Well Street, Louduo. 



BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 




3 9999 05468 9490 




ojf 



m 



