DUDLEY 



BY 



MISS O'KEEFFE, 



AUTHOR OF 

PATRIARCHAL TIMES, OR THE LAND OF CANAi\N ; 
ZENOBIA, QUEEN OF PALMYRA : &c. 



JN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. IL 



LONDON: 

Printed by Strahan and Spottiswoode, Printers- Street j 
FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, 

rATEBNOSTER-ROW. 

1819. 



1^, <»*- 



CONTENTS 



OF 



THE SECOND VOLUME, 



PART III. 

lETTER PAGE 

XXI. Claudy Howard to the Coun- 
tess of Alford 1 

XXII. Lady Alford to Claudy 4 

XXIII. The Rev. Henry Clonmore to 

Sir Eliot Howard q 

XXIV. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 12 

XXV. Lady Alford to Sir Eliot 16 

XXVI. Mrs. Clonmore to her Husband 35 

XXVII. Mrs. Clonmore to her Husband 84 

XXVIIL Lady Alford to Mrs. Clonmore 106 

^ XXIX. Lady Alford to Mrs. Clonmore 118 

XXX. Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clonmore 142 

XXXI. Sir Eliot to Clonmore I69 

XXXII. Lady Alford to Mrs. Clonmore 197 
XXXIII. Lady Alford to Mrs. Clonmore 2^2 



IV CONTENTS. 



PART IV. 

LETTER PAGE 

XXXIV. Clonmore to Sir Eliot 267 

XXXV. Lady Alford to Mrs. Clonmore 285 

XXXVI. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 319 

XXXVII. Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clon- 

more 338 

XXXVIII. Lady Alford to Mrs. Clonmore 354 
XXXIX. Sir Eliot to Clonmore ^»1 

XL. Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clon- 
more 397 



DUDLEY. 



LETTER I. 

Claudy Hoiic^rd to the Countess of Alford* 

MY DEAR AUNT, Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

1 LOVE you very much, and I think of 
you very often, and 1 do long to see you. 
— I cannot write yet, but I can print 
letters, and I think it is easier to read 
printed letters than slanting letters, 
because they are the same as in a book. 
I am copying them out of a book, and 
I love you very much. — Carlo is grown 
fat and jolly ; and aunt Grantley says I 
am very good — sometimes. Papa says 
I am never naughty now but when I 
roar, and I cannot help roaring some- 

VOL. II. B 



2 DUDLEY. 

times, you know, when Nurse and Mar- 
tella and Rosalva and Robert, and Carlo, 
will not do as I desire them. — But now 
I never cry when 1 go to bed, I only cry 
in the day-time. 

I was once afraid of the American 
Consul's wig, but I am not now, so you 
may wear a wig Aunt as soon as you 
please ; and I have no one to play with 
except Rosalva, and she is a great woman 
(twelve years old), and Carlo is very fat, 
and papa is very dull, and very ill, and 
very white (pale), and his nose has been 
bleeding, it bled all over a sheet of 
paper, when he was writing ten long 
letters to dear Mr. Clonmore. — And I 
thank you for all the pretty cups and 
saucers you sent to me, which are of no 
use to me. I am now learning my 
" Compendio de Gramatica Castellana.'' 
I suppose you understand Spanish ; and 
I am, my dear aunt. 

Your affectionate niece 
and god-daughter, 

ClAUDY HOWAHD. 



DUDLEY. ^ 

P. S. From Mrs. Grantley. 
I am truly sorry, my dear sister, to 
confirm little Claudy's account of my 
brother's state of health; he is declining 
very fast : at his request, however, I send 
to Mr. Clonmore the written packet in 
the same state in which he concluded it, 
before he was taken seriously ill. — Mr. 
Balfour at present attends him, but we 

have sent to Madeira for Dr. G : I 

hope in a few days, therefore, to write 
you a more favourable report, as the 
skill of this gentleman is unquestionable. 
Ever your's, 

Jane Grantley. 



B "tc 



DUDLEY. 



LETTER ,IL 

The Countess of Alford to little Claudi^. 

Clifton, 

You dear little jewel of a child ! You 
darling infant ! Why your correspond- 
ence is worth a thousand of such snip- 
snap notes as I receive from Jane, your 
respectable aunt, and my notable sister, 
my dear, I mean : this is a dash at her, 
as I know she will take a peep at my 
answer. 

Write to me my love every day of 
your precious life, and write good long 
letters, a line for every mile we are 
asunder (and that's beyond my calcula- 
tion positively), for 1 have vowed ven- 
geance against any shorter letters than 
four pages of post paper. — With respect 
to notes, I shall certainly try whether 
they are salamanders, (let sister Jenny 
explain that word.) 

Do you know, Claudy, should I ever 
come to Teneriffe, it would be purposely 
to hear you speak Spanish j but, my dear 



DUDLEY. 



3ngel and cherub of a girl, what made 
you think of my wearing a wig ? I wear 
a wig ! that can boast of nut-brown hair 
as long and flowing as the tail of King 
Charles's prancing steed at Charing Cross, 
my love. — And my dear Claudy, have 
you not yet left off that silly trick of 
crying, you will certainly ruin your 
beautiful eyes 5 besides, to cry and roar 
is so unlike a young lady of fashion. 

I am happy to hear that you and Carlo 
are still good friends 5 I have sent him a 
gold collar, with your name and his en- 
graved on it — rather a safer present to 
sport at Teneriffe than in Kensington 
Gardens. — Let your innocence ask wicked 
aunt Jane to explain that also. 

Well, addio cara donzella — cara mea 
— is that right? Is it Spanish, Portuguese, 
or Italian, Depend upon it, that I shall 
become a famous Spanish scholar, I shall 
indeed, and by the time the aforesaid 
horse of King Charles wags his flowing 
tail. 

Your affectionate aunt, 
and god-mamma, 

Caroline Alford. 
B 3 



DUDLEY. 



LETTER IIL 
The Rev, Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Howard 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

We safely received your highly interest- 
ing and most circumstantial narrative, 
my friend, which in many parts greatly 
affected Louisa and myself. We can 
now more fully enter into the spirit of 
Lady Howard's character, and having 
Opie's excellent picture of her, must 
frankly acknowledge, that your happi- 
ness exceeded that of most men, con- 
sequently your loss is proportionable. 

We concluded reading the account 
you sent us last night, by our private 
evening fire-side ; the result being a 
conversation, of which you were the sub- 
ject, and which lasted little short of three 
hours. 

*' But for Lady Howard," I remarked, 
^* I might now with my curacy and 



DUDLEY. 7 

my fellowship be wasting my youth in 
expectation and disappointment, until 
you or I, Louisa, had fallen a victim to 
that worst of evils, * hope deferred.' — 

**True,"she replied, "buthadyounot 
been presented by Lady Howard, on 

Dr. H 's recommendation, with this 

living, you would have accepted that 
offered you by Sir Eliot : you were 
therefore certain of preferment.^' 

** Even so ; and we have now named the 
only two persons in the world who would 
have stretched out a hand to promote 
our interests : — but for them, we might 
have dragged on through existence, 
unable, on the score of prudence, to 
marry, you in celibacy, and I with my 
trifling curacy, my still smaller fellow- 
ship, and perhaps the drudgery of a 
school to make out a bare subsistence. — 
When we look around us, Louisa, we 
may well say, God bless her memory, 
and that of our absent friend, to whom 
under Heaven we are indebted for every 
earthly blessing." 

A silence of a few minutes followed, 
during which we seemed both attentively 
B 4 



8 DUDLEY. 

watching the fire, tracing red blazing 
faces, cocked hats, and burning flowers 
and trees, each seemingly aware of what 
was passing in the mind of the other, 
and this was confirmed, when in looking 
np, our eyes met. 

« Yes," said Louisa, " I think I 
could consent, if you Henry were willing. 
Sir Eliot has asked it as a favour to be 
done to himself, but this cannot blind 
us to the great and important benefit it 
would be of to one of our sons : suppose 
we were to comply with his request, or 
rather, accept his kind and generous 
offer r' 

** Say no more, my dear Louisa, I'll 
write to Sir Eliot on the subject this 
very night: should our minds change 
before the time of sending oflPthe letter, 
all we have to do is to destroy it, and 
matters rest as they were." 

Well, my friend, you are reading this, 
and under the supposition that your 
mind has not changed respecting the 
wish you expressed of adopting a boy of 
ours, we offer you your choice of five; 
but only on one condition, that you 



BUDLEY. y 

come and fetch him : the voyage and 
change of scene will be of service to 
your health and spirits, and render your 
present house, at your return, far more 
agreeable and welcome than it is even 
now. Whilst under the government 
and protection of Mrs. Grantley, with 
occasional attention on the part of Mr. 
Balfour, all things at Euphorbia must 
go on well. 

As Louisa and I have agreed to your 
proposal, however flattering to ourselves, 
you ought to be a little complying to 
our wishes and advice, in which we are 

joined^by Dr. H , who with his usual 

elegance declares to us, " if either of 
your young puppies are worth having, 
they are worth fetching." 

The male hopes of my family shall 
be placed before you, Howard, and in 
cases of adoption, so much depends on 
fancy, f whilst they are all equally dear to 
their mother and myselfj) you shall take 
your choice. — Let your stay in England 
be for as short or as long a period as 
inclination prompts, but do not hesitate 
on coming, otherwise we retract our 
B 5 



10 DUDLEY. 

promise, or rather, we would wish you 
clearly to understand, that it is only 
given on the above express condition. 

Lady Alford, to whom your desire was 
imparted, expressed great pleasure, and 
urged us to comply unconditionally, but 
against that we have resolved. — We ex- 
pect her here to-morrow, on a visit of a 
few weeks, during which I shall take the 
liberty of bringing her ladyship to some 
decision respecting her noble suitors, 
who have complained to me of her 
matchless loveliness and insufferable 
caprice ; the one inclining them to per- 
severe in their matrimonial pursuit, the 
other inducing them fairly to wish her in 
a place where beauty cannot dwell. 

I was at Oakland Park last week ; it 
is let on lease for fourteen years, as you 

specified, and to a Mr. W , an East 

Indian, who being a newly married man, 
has retained most of your old servants. — 
Herbert, I suppose, has written to thank 
you for the annuity you have settled 
upon him ; he was married, about three 
months since, to Martha Bates, Lady 
Howard's maid, who desires me to say 



DUDLEY. 



11 



all that is proper on the occasion, for 
the comfortable habitation you have 
given to her near the gate of the park. — 
The old couple bid fair to spend the 
remainder of their days in sociable com- 
panionship. 

Adieu, my friend: we meet again I 
hope soon in England ; in the mean time, 
Louisa and I mean to fatten up our 
little flock, that they may appear before 
you to the utmost advantage. 

Henry Clonmore, 



B 6 



IS DUDLEY. 



LETTER IV. 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Rev, Henry Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe, 

How shallow the artifice to attempt to 
drag me back to a world I have quitted ! 
That world and I, Clonmore, are di- 
vorced, and for ever — talk no more of it. 
Could you form an idea of the nature of 
the wound of which 1 am now recovering, 
you would never have inflicted it : it 
was becoming a gangrene, but the same 
hand which stabbed, has prescribed the 
remedy. You had fastened, and with 
your own hand also, a veil, a thick and 
black impenetrable veil, enveloping my 
senses : — in vain I struggled, in vain en- 
deavoured to remove it, all around me 
was seen and heard through the me- 
dium of black. — 

The idea of your unkindne?ss, your 



DUDLEY. 13 

selfishness, your ingratitude, pursued me 
day and night. — Yes, I repeated, were 
that man possessed of thousands, and I 
wanted those thousands, he would give 
them, he would perhaps expose his 
liberty to save mine, hazard his life to 
preserve mine ; but this — this the only 
favour I can or will ask, this he denies 
me, and adds insult and self-exaltation 
to his denial : — had he twenty sons he 
could not spare me one ! — a barbarian ! 
— and this is the friend I loved, the 
friend whom I thought regarded me — 
to treat me thus — — - 

Oh, Clonmore, with a heart bursting 
with gratitude, I now own you have 
poured balm into the wound, you have 
removed this veil of despair, this dread- 
ful, this oppressive weight from my 
senses ; you have, in short, restored me at 
once to sun-shine, to life, to happiness. 

My choice is already made — ■ it has 
long been fixed : my adopted son is 
Dudley, the god-son of my Claudina, 
after whose only brother, who died in 
his infancy, you may remember your 
child was named. — Your Dudley is now 



14 DUDLEY. 

my Dudley ; from this hour he is to be 
considered mine, (as for the conditions 
annexed to your precious gift, I consider 
them as idle air,) Dudley is now my own 
— the future object of my love, my pupil, 
my companion, my second child, my 
only son. 

Since the receipt of your last letter, 
so total a revolution has taken place in 
my frame, that all my physicians are dis- 
missed. — My blood is restored to its 
usual circulation, my spirits are free, and 
every sense has acquired a renovation, 
like that of youth. 

To none other than yourselves would 
I confess the follies of which I have been 
guilty, since this change produced in me 
by your letter. — A hundred times a day 
I catch myself repeating the name of 
Dudley : 1 have already fixed on his room 
next my own ; I fancy him standing at 
my knee ; I have his place at table be- 
fore my eyes. — Like poor Constance 
and her pretty Arthur, but with opposite 
sensations, I hourly fancy my little 
Dudley at my side — mi/ Dudley, my 
child, my own. — Bring him to me^ 



DUDLEY. 15 

Clonmore, and tell your Louisa, — no, 
I will send back my message to her by 
yourself. 

May the blessing of the Almighty 
rest for ever on you and your's, 

Eliot Howard. 



1 6 DUDLEY, 



LETTER V. 

The Countess of Alford to Sir Eliot Howard, 

Bioomfield Rectory. 

So, my good brother ! why this is a 
capital new stroke of yours! in a few 
years you will people TenerifFe in grand 
stile. — Instead of our being able to drag 
you back to us, by my two elegant eye- 
brows you are the magnet dragging us 
over to you ! Either your island is the 
loadstone rock, like that in the story of 
Sinbad the sailor, alluring honest folks 
to their destruction, or you a magician, 
like Prospero, bringing them over to re- 
pentance. — Every one, who ventures 
into the verge of your magic wand (alias 
your pen), is certain of becoming your 
slave. 

And Dudley Clonmore, poor little 
>jgly, white-faced puny Dudley, is to be 
transformed into the hero of Teneriffe ! 

12 



DUDLEY* 17 

is he ? — Well, should he live to em- 
bark at Falmouth, and disembark at 
Santa Cruz, and become an inhabitant 
of Euphorbia — look to it, brother. Oh, 

I wish you could hear what Dr. H 

says on the subject. 

Last night we all met in consultation 
on the business, (not as to Dudley's 
going, for that is decided, poor little 
soul,) but upon who was to take charge 
of him. Mrs. Clonmore regretted very 
much, that when you were throwing, not 
the apple of love and beauty, but the 
plum of adoption, to her five boys, that 
you had not fixed on a fine, stout, 
healthy child (for such are all the rest)j 
and then appealing to our old physician, 
enquired how it was possible, considering 
the boy's state of health, to risk the 
voyage. 

During her anxious appeal to his skill 
and opinion, he continued, snuff-box in 
hand, to be considering what reply he 
should make. Now, with me, this man's 
snuff-box is like a drum in the hands of 
an experienced drummer ; it equally 
expresses the feelings. Tap — tap — 



18 DUDLEY. 

tap — went the Doctor's fingers on the 
lid of his instrument, and then slowly 
and methodically came out the decision. 
" Instead of regretting the choice, that 
the Baronet has made, my good madam, 
you ought to crow" — (now such an 
expression to a lady ! but 'tis just like 
him) — " to crow and rejoice that the lot 
has fallen where it has." 

" But, my dear sir, so sickly, so deli- 
cate a child," remarked Louisa ; " the 
time and anxious care it has taken to 
rear him even to his present state " 

Dub-a-dub to quick time on the snuff- 
box, accompanied with this brazen-throat 
remark, or rather demand — *' Do you 
think I talk like your fool of a husband," 
(he sitting at his side at the time,) '* at 
random, madam ? I said, and I main- 
tain," (now for a strong emphasis on 
every word,) " that it was fortunate for 
Dudley, that that crazy-headed fellow 
beyond seas had chosen him ; and can- 
not you from this draw the conclusion, 
that I think the voyage will be of ser- 
vice to him — that the climate of those 
islands will restore him, if any thing 



DUDLEY. 19 

can— and that his constitution, in short, 
may be wholly established by it — eh, 
madam ?" 

And on the box was played the Re- 
veillee, in capital style — then it was 
stopped — the snufF shaken together — 
and the deeply-dyed finger and thumb 
thrust in and brought out again, holding 
a mighty pinch of rappee. 

" No, no, I have no fear of his dying; 
it is not of that I was thinking,*' added 
the Doctor, brushing the abominable 
brown dust from his handsome cambric 
frill, and looking at me with the most 
improper wink of his good-humoured 
old eye ; " No, no, madam," (to Louisa,) 
**your little cub" (such language !) " your 
cub will not die — he'll live — aye, and 
to be the plague of his fool of a Baronet 
guardian." 

On seeing both Clonmore and Louisa 
change countenance, and look hurt and 
alarmed at his mysterious words, he 
continued, patting her hand, which, after 
such a provocation, I should have been 
tempted to make feel his ear : " If this 
little rascal of your's, this Dudley, does 



^0 DUDLEY. 

not, in spite of her father, and in less 
than ten years, fall over head and ears 
in love with Miss Claiidy, I shall con- 
sider him a greater blockhead than he 
now promises to become.'^ 

O how I did laugh — and Clonmore, 
and Louisa — we all laughed ; and you 
were the butt, my wise brother. Could 
you and your long face, which I suppose 
by this time is decorated with a couple 
of handsome whiskers, have seen us all, 
tickled as we were, by this most absurd 
of all amorous whims! — Dudley fall in 
love with Claudy ! much more pro- 
bable than that Claudy should fall in 
love with him. There, Eliot^ you have 
it — does this stagger your resolution? 
Remember, if you persist in adopting 
this or any other hopeful youth, and 
bringing him up under the same roof 
with your daughter, you will have no 
right to complain. You are warned in 
time — you must take the consequence; 
and really, Claudy's charming arrogant 
airs, and pretty face, and deep gold- 
mine of a pocket, may set the young 
swaia to look about him in time, and 



DUDLEY. SI 

from being a partner, aim at becoming 
master. But why not, my dear brother, 
when you did fix upon this plan of 
adoption, why not have chosen a girl 
instead of a boy?- — a much more de- 
cent plan ; for, putting love out of the 
question, if this lad and lass are 
brought up together like brother and 
sister, what can prevent Claudy from 
becoming a hoyden, a romp, a Priscilla, 
in short ; and the Clonmores have two 
little girls, one of whom they could 
have spared, for their fine family goes 
on in a blessed thriving way. But, I 
suppose, you had rather your daughter 
should fall into temptation than yourself 
— that Claudy should hereafter change 
her name to Clonmore, than that a fe- 
male Cionmore should ever take that of 
Howard. In ten years* time, a pretty 
girl in her teens might certainly have 
become a dangerous moveable in your 
house ; whereas a fine grown youth, 
educated as your son, may, without 
much impropriety, add to that word 
son, the two little words of, in-law. If 
he should pass his seventeenth year 



S2 ^ DUDLEY. 

without such an intention, I engage in 
the Cleopatra style (though a vile wanton 
she was, whose example I abhor) to 
drink my pearl ear-rings. 

What a capital figure you will cut, 
when turned schoolmaster ! Has not 
your worship another picture to send 
over to Dudley to prepare him for what 
he is to expect. I think I see you at 
full-length in a Lingo wig, a punishing 
cane and leather strap in one hand, and 
in the other a rewarding silver groat 
(passing current among parents for as 
many shillings), a frown of wrath upon 
your tremendous brow, and at the same 
time a looped-up grin of approbation on 
your lips — on one side an iron pair of 
stocks, and on the other a pyramid of 
books, the works of Mavor, Cicero, 
Virgil, and Lindley Murray. 



Clonmore has been interrupting me, 
as usual. As I am writing to Teneriffe, 
he savs there is no occasion for him to 
write, and desires me to mention that 
all is settled, and that he brings Dudley 
to you himself (about June I suppose). 



DUDLEY. ^8 

Louisa will feel much at parting witli 
her dear Httle nurseling; and in my 
own mind, I think it the most bar- 
barous and unnatural scheme that could 
have been suggested — to tear a poor 
half-dying child from its mother, and 
chuck it over on a savage island, inha- 
bited only by 



Here's a pretty business ! here's a fine 
break-off to your cabinet projects, your 
wise politics, and diplomatic treaties — 
I am so happy ! — I was called off from 
my letter yesterday, and could not find 
time to resume it this morning ; and 
now, sans detour, I have to inform you 
that the principal party concerned has 
run restive, completely unmanageable. 
Dudley will not go — actually will not 
leave England. 

He does not cry and bellow when 
spoken to, like Claudy, or, like her, get 
red with passion, and stamp, and kick, 
andfight; but he lays his gentle head upon 
his mother's heart, and closes his languid 
eyehds: through the long dark lashes 
the tears steal silently down his pale 



24 DUDLEY. 

cheek, finding their way to her veiy 
bosom, as if appeah'ng to that against 
her cruel project. When I speak to 
him, he softly says, *' I cannot leave 
mamma;" and if I attempt to argue, 
he waves his emaciated, tiny, little hand, 
so white and so soft, and sighs forth 
so mournfully, his wet eyes still closed ; 
" Pray do not speak to me ^ — I am so 
tired ;" and in an instant after. Heaven 
help the poor baby (though nearly 
turned of seven years old), he is fast 
asleep where he ought to be, in the arms 
of his mother. 

I am sorry to disappoint you, Eliot; but 
you will never see Dudley, unless you 
come to England, and that soon, or he 
will be deposited in the neighbouring 
church-yard. The child is, in fact, dy- 
ing. What the deuce, Baronet, made 
you choose him instead of one of his 
brothers? Why have fixed so, out of all 
common sense, upon this poor, little, 
perishing creature? But that is just 
you, acting like no other man in exist- 
ence. You cannot have the barbarity 
to expect, as the child is unwilling to 



DUDLEY. ^5 

go that the parents will smuggle him 
thither, without his knowledge, as 

Dr. H did you, and of which act 

of high treason, kidnapping His Majesty's 
liege subjects, I accused him, for which 
I got my best India ivory-fan broken in 
pieces. I rather think, on recollection, 
it was broken before, and that I re- 
proached him with the assault and bat- 
tery, that he might send me, which he 
did the next day, a fan treble its value — 
the dear old fellow ! 

And now that your scheme is all over, 
I am heartily sorry it did not take place ; 
their education would have made so fine 
a subject for romance : — *« The Loves 
of Claudy and Dudley,'' with their 
escape in an open boat from TenerifFe, 
in consequence of the tyrannical conduct 
of the great bashaw of a father. Why, 
what an admirable counterpart to the 
romance of Madeira, which I have been 
lately reading. Madeira, I find, was first 
discovered in the reign of our Edward III. 
by a pair of runaway lovers, Robert Ma- 
chin and his beautiful but guilty Anna. 

VOL. n. c 



2^ DUDLEY. 

By the way, I shall indubitably, lo 
time, acquire a taste for literature, and 
become a proficient in geography, by this 
trick my worthy relations have of going 
abroad. Jane's residence in Copen« 
hagen set me to study Denmark ; and I 
am now deep in the Fortunate Islands. 
I shall certainly become a pedant — a 

barbe Defend me ! — was I going 

to write a barbe-hleu ? Can you con- 
ceive the improper freedom my pen 
takes with me ? — but I believe, were it 
to come to the point, I would as soon be 
a member of the barbe-hleii club as the 
baS'hleu, 

As the amorous adventures of Claudy 
and Dudley are put a stop to, before 
they begin — (I met Irish Charley Max- 
well the other day, at a party, and on the 
spot filled half a page in my pocket-book 
with his blundering good sense) : — well, 
as the loves of these young ones can 
never take place, I have half a mind to 
try how those of Carohne and Zulvago 
sound. Hang the man for suffering him- 
self to be christened by a name beginning 



DUDLEY. ^7 

with a Z ' — of all letters in the alphabet 
my dread and horror ! 

I have some intention, though, of try- 
ing to get a peep at him. I hope, Eliot, 
you don't leave your letters about the 
house. I l^ink of paying you a visit 
about August three years : shall I be 
welcome ? Will you give a ball on my 
arrival, and illuminate the fairy palace 
you have built in a mad fit, and which, 
hanging in mid-air, according to Clon- 
more's account, can never, be reached by 
my fat coach-horses ; and as for travel- 
ling without my equipage, I should as 
soon think of meeting Venus riding up 
Piccadilly without her pair of pigeons. — 
And you are perched half way on a 
towering mountain, are you ? Now, 
clouds over my head I consider as in 
their proper station ; but' when they 
float under my feet, I must beg leave 
to call my phaeton drawn by peacocks, 
whilst sister Jenny may sail in her 
whiskey by my side, with a demure 
owl on her lap, and Zulvago for her 
charioteer. 

c 2 



28 DUDLEY* 

Upon my honour, the Reverend Harry 
Cionmore is excessively ill-bred. If he 
has not been reading over my shoulder 
the whole of this page! and, what I most 
regret, is, that there is not a single word 
of abuse of him in it. He begs leave, 
with his impertinent civility, to add a 
postscript to my letter, and I consent, 
on condition I read what he writes, and 
add a post postscript. 



Continued hy Mr, Cionmore, 

Do not, my dear Howard, be under 
the smallest uneasiness respecting Lady 
Alford's desponding news concerning 
Dudley. Long before the time fixed 
for my bringing him to you, (for I 
give way to your wishes,) his very natu- 
ral objection to quit home will, I trust, 
be overcome. 

Owing to his having spent so much 
time in his mother's or my arms, whether 
we were alone or had occasional friends, 
he has, in a manner, been always ac- 
customed to the society of grown per- 



DUDLEY. 29 

sons, the tender and precarious state of 
his health preventing him ever joining in 
the amusements of his brothers and 
sisters ; and, in fact, he has hitherto been 
kept nearly separate from them : hfs 
meals are taken alone, and he sleeps in 
our room. When v^^ith strangers, lying 
perfectly inert on our knees, yet with 
his eyes open, we have observed him 
look from speaker to speaker, and feel 
interested in conversations, in which, 
however, he takes not the slightest 
part. 

In proportion as the mind has im- 
proved, (and he is really a very sensible 
boy,) the body has decayed. Thus, 
with the intellect of a child nearly double 
his age, his appearance is that of two or 
three years younger. Even the pro's 
and con's respecting his removal have all 

passed in his presence, and Dr. H 's 

arguments, though you might consider 
them as wholly above the comprehension 
of seven years old, have had due weight 
on his mind. 

When the Doctor remarked, just now, 
on the shortness of the voyage, Dudley 
c 3 



so DUDLEY. 

faintly enquired, how many hours it 
would last. We explained that it would 
take so many dai/s ; when he sighed 
deeply, but remained silent. Your dis^ 
appointment was next spoken of; and 
Louisa observed, <* Though you cannot 
remember Sir Eliot Howard, he has of- 
ten had you in his arms ; and would you 
wish to give pain to a friend of our's ?" 
The answer was, " No ; but I don't know 
who you are talking about, and I'm 
very sleepy." He turned his poor 
sickly face on Louisa's bosom, and is 
iiow asleep. 

The great and principal objection was 
the parting with his mother ; and, indeed, 
Louisa's parting with him, in his present 
state, is not to be thought of. This 
objection, by a new plan, started by 

Dr. H , has been completely done 

away. Under the care and protection of 
our good physician, who says he intends 
paying you a visit in spring, Louisa re- 
solves to undertake the voyage in the 
next India fleet, and bring Dudley to 
you herself. This arrangement will be 
more convenient to all parties : a mother 



DUDLEY. SI 

nftakes a better nurse for a sick child than 
can a father, with all his care. I am left 
to ray parochial duties, which I cannot 
conveniently delegate even to Turner, 
who came off, however, very creditably 
in my last absence j and should Lady 
Alford be really inclined to join the 
party, and accompany Louisa to Tene- 
riffe, you will then have the additional 
pleasure of 



Concluded hy the Countess, 

Halt ! my good friend ! Indeed, 
Lady Alford will do no such thing. I 
go to Teneriffe ! The deuce a bit if 
ever such an idea came into my head, or 
into any head containing six ounces of 
rationality, to preponderate five ounces 
and some grains of an opposite quality : 
besides, I must stay at home to take care 
of my good old ailing mother-in-law. — 
So, another pretty affair : I am invited 
to spend part of next summer at the 
rectory, and here is the mistress of it 
prancing over the water, as mad as the 
best of you. Why, this divine and his 
c 4 



S^ DUDLEY, 

wife are the man and woman in the 
weather-house — the one at home, the 
other abroad ! — and must I give up my 
proposed excursion ? — indeed musti 1 — 
To abide haif-a-dozen hours in one house, 
with a single man, whether married or 
not, (veiy good sense in that also,) is su- 
preme horror to me. 

Well, good bye, Eliot j prepare for 
your future son-in-law, but remember 
my words : — in less than a week, your 
heiress will either beat, cuff, and pom- 
mel the poor harmless fellow to a mummy, 
or, with her savage squalls, scare away 
liis little soul, which we ^all see, one of 
these days, flying in at one of the rectory 
windows, in the shape of a canary bird. 

Give my love and twenty kisses to my 
darling Claucly ; and tell her to write to 
me again, for that one of her charming 
letters is worth a hundred such as I re- 
ceive from you and sister Jenny. 



Poor Dudley! — and his fate is, I 
find, decidedly fixed ! Dear boy, I do 
pity^iim, and so I told him — " To be 



DUDLEY. 33 

snatched/' said I, " my child, from 
your comfortable, warm cradle, at your 
mother's side, and be thrown on the top 
of a volcano, in the middle of the sea, a 
thousand miles off, which can only boast 
of four civihzed beings — my most pa- 
thetic sublime brother (the Sir Eliot, as 
these people call him) ; my icicle sister; 
a bowing head on the shoulders of a 
Scotchman ; Don Bachelor, of whistling 
memory, and Christina, queen of Swe- 
den in miniature. 

Well, carofrater, addio ! Though you 
have contrived to draw half-a-dozen per- 
sons within your magic circle, depend 
upon it, never shall that circle be over- 
stepped by the pretty foot and ancle of 
Your affectionate sister, 

Caroline Alford, 

No, though the Spaniard himself were 
to offer me his hand — to hand me over 
it, I mean. 

New news 1 Tmoff with a party to the 
Highlands ! In le^s than four-and-twenty 
hours our horses' heads will be turned 
c 5 



34i DUDLEY. 

northward, and, with the " Lady and 
the Lake" in my pocket, hey for Loch 
Katerine ! 

*< I ne'er before, believe me, fair, 
Have ever drawn your mountain air, 
Till on the lake's romantic strand 
I found a fay in Fairyland." 

Walter Scott. 



DUDLEY. 35 



LETTER XXVI. 

Mrs. Clonmore to her Husband, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

With what lively emotions of gratitude 
to the Almighty giver and preserver of 
life, do I now write to my dear Henry, 
conscious that your feelings will not be 
less grateful than mine to the Supreme 
Being, when you learn that our dear boy 
is not only alive, but improved in looks 
and strength ; but you wish for particu- 
lars, and you cannot receive them with 
more interest and satisfaction than I now 
impart them. 

Dudley suffered much from sea-sick- 
ness; and as I was myself, from the 
same cause, incapable of attending to 
him, I entirely resigned him to the care 
of Dr. H — — , that most humane, most 
excellent of men ; who, surly and un- 
couth in the moment of sunshine, when 
his assistance is not required, proves 
c 6 



36 



DUDLEY, 



ever, in the hour of danger and distress, 
the very angel of softness and consola- 
tion. 

Neither your tenderness or mine could 
equal his, when nursing and waiting on 
our poor sick boy. Though helpless 
myself, and our servants were equally so, 
I could at times see all that passed ; and, 
on the third day, was able to go out into 
the gallery, and on deck. What was 
my surprise to find Dudley, whom I ex- 
pected to see reposing languidly, as 
usual, in the doctor's arms, standing be- 
tween his knees, watching attentively 
three or four porpoises, who were gam- 
boling near the vessel ; his attention was 
next attracted by a flock of birds ; he 
then joined a boy who was fishing, and 
a man feeding guinea-pigs ; in short, 
every thing around seemed to amuse and 
interest him, and in less than a week he 
could walk the deck without assistance. 

My joy was much increased, when I 
first observed the change that had taken 
place in his sickly appetite. The food 
with which the Doctor had hitherto sup- 
plied him (and constantly from his own 



DUDLEY. 37 

hand) was biscuit, steeped in Madeira 
wine, weak chocolate, and oranges. In 
a few days this diet was exchanged for 
hot and cold chicken, and other still 
more substantial meats ; and long before 
we came in sight of the Canaries, he had 
given up his usual sleep in the day-time, 
by which his rest for many hours in the 
night became sound and refreshing. 

No, Henry ; it is impossible to de- 
scribe the sort of rapture I felt, when 
first I perceived a faint tinge of pink in 
his hitherto deadly-looking cheeks and 
lips ; I fondly kissed them both, calling 

on Dr. H to admire his improved 

complexion. He, with a comical gruff 
look, and hoarse voice, abused him for a 
little tipsey rogue, whose Madeira was 
beginning to peep through his skin ; and 
then turning to me, whilst his eyes glis- 
tened as he spoke, he added, " Ah ! 
you'll not get rid of the rascal now in a 
hurry — he'll do.'' 

As to our fellow-passengers, and the 
many little incidents that occurred during 
the voyage, I wholly omit, certain that 



38 DUDLEY. 

your imagination, as well as my own, is 
engrossed by one object. 

It was noon when we first came in 
sight of Teneriffe. " The Peak! the 
Peak!" exclaimed a young sailor-lad; 
and at that moment Henry, I must con- 
fess it, my heart died within me, and as 
Dudley was sitting on my lap, I pressed 
him with some degree of fervour to my 
bosom, saying, " My boy, I cannot part 
with you." My tears fell upon his face. 
What should you suppose was his reply ? 
He looked up, and with a sort of steady 
calmness of voice said, reproachfully, 
** It is your own doing, mamma." 

« Come," said Dr. H , taking him 

in his arms, (and, unhappily, he is as 
light in weight as an infant,) ** come, my 
lad, and see the sugar-loaf hill out in the 
sea." I followed, and on distinguishing 
the Peak, as if just emerging above the 
southern horizon, whilst not a cloud ob- 
scured any part of the blue heavens, I 
felt as if overwhelmed with grief at the 
idea of leaving my helpless child on a 
distant speck upon the ocean. " No," 



DUDLEY. ' 39 

I thought, " Sir Eliot cannot have the 
cruelty to insist upon it — he cannot 
exact so great a sacrifice on our parts, 
for I am now convinced it is such ; let 
him select one of our other sons, a 
healthy boy, but from Dudley I am de- 
termined not to be separated. When I 
return to England, my child goes back 
with me." 

Such w^as still ray resolution, when 
(having been becalmed some hours, m 
sight of the island) we landed the next 
evening, at dusk, in the port of Orotava. 

Yielding Dudley to Dr. H 's care, I 

walked with Barton on one hand, (lean- 
ing on her arm,) and the mate of the 
vessel on the other ; who, hearing we 
were bound for the house of Merchant 
Balfour, offered to conduct us thither. 
We had not, however, gone above a 
dozen yards, when we were accosted by 
a tall thin dark figure, who, stopping 
suddenly before us, called out " Dr. 

H — r 

" Hoy ! hoy V* replied our physician, 
in a loud sea-voice ; " avast there, mess- 
mate ! and pilot us into the harbour of 



40 DUDLEY. 

Euphorbia." Sir Eliot, for it was him- 
self, instantly came forward, and looked 
earnestly through the gloom, as if to ex- 
amine us each separately, when not per- 
ceiving the figure of a child, as he ex- 
pected, he stopped abruptly. " And am 
I deceived !" The tone of his voice was 
so mournful, so expressive of the bit- 
terest disappointment, the action that 
accompanied the words so well indicated 
the state of his mind, that when I held 
out my hand to him it was with mingled 
sensations of pity, tenderness, gratitude, 
and self-reproach. 

He did take my hand, and draw it 
under his arm, but it was with coldness 
and reluctance ; and, instead of ad- 
dressing me, he said, as if to himself^ in 
a broken hollow voice, " This I did not 
expect — this is, indeed, a refinement on 
torture." 

Such behaviour could not long escape 

the notice of Dr. H , who at last 

called out, *' Why, what the plague's the 
matter with the fellow ! haven't you reco- 
vered your senses yet ? I think you have 
had a pretty long spell of Teneriffe air 
for that purpose." 



DUDLEY. 41 

A few minutes' silence followed, during 
which Sir Eliot walked so slowly and de- 
jectedly, that he was a clog upon my 
steps, anxious as I was to keep up with 
the Doctor, who had walked on before. 
A false step, however, nearly tripped up 
the latter, by which Dudley, suddenly 
awakened, called out ** Mamma !" In- 
stantly Sir Eliot, quitting me, darted 
after our old friend, and throv/ing open 
the large sea-cloak in which he was en- 
veloped, saw our boy. " Is it Dudley ?*' 
he impatiently exclaimed, for the dark- 
ness prevented his distinguishing more 
than that it was a child. 

** Is it Dudley! — why, to be sure it 
is,*' replied the Doctor ; *' or what the 
vengeance should bring his mother here? 
Do you think she came to see you ? You 
deceived! and you tortured !" mimicking 
Sir Eliot's manner. " I only wish I 
had been bothered with half-a-dozen 
brats — you should have had all mine at 
a word, you seem so bedeviled about 
them. There, there — cover the fellow 
up again — this cold, biting air is not the 
thing for him. I woke him with my 



42 DUDLEY. 

stumble over your break-shin stones; 
but he's gone off again, fast asleep, and 
must not wake till the morning." 

Sir Eliot's delight was visible, and to 
me most affecting, I could now scarcely 
keep up with his brisk and active step, 
as he dragged me on, seemingly uncon- 
scious that I held his arm ; and I was at 
last forced to stop, and beg him to wait 
for Dr. H , who was very far behind. 

We all got into the carriage, or rather 
covered waggon, drawn by oxen, which 
was waiting to convey us to Euphorbia ; 
and during our ride his joy was so full, 
so perfect, so concentrated, that he 
scarcely spoke to any of us : and, my 
dear Henry, then indeed did my resolu- 
tion begin to waver, and I was forced to 
acknowledge to myself, that should Dud- 
ley improve in health, instead of decline, 
my only resource now was willingly and 
cheerfully to sacrifice him to friendship ; 
if a sacrifice it can really be called, our 
resigning one of our sons to the protec- 
tion and paternal care of such a man as 
Sir Eliot Howard. 

When we had ascended the heights, 



DUDLEY. 43 

and reached Euphorbia, it was quite 
dark, but the scattered lights in all di- 
rections showed we were expected. By 
a new road, made since you were here, 
which w^inds round the hill in a gradual 
ascent, carriages can now come close 
to the mansion, whereas formerly only 
mules, horses, &c. could approach it. 
We alighted at the back of the house, 
there being no carriage-entrance at the 
front, and in the hall were met by Mrs. 
Grantley. 

As I am not myself a flame of enthu- 
siasm, like Lady Alford, I cannot feel so 
strongly the contrast which she draws 
between her sister and herself. To me 
Mrs. Grantley appears certainly not 
warm, but pleasing ; and, conscious 
that the reception she gave me was as 
fervent as any in her power to give, I 
was perfectly satisfied. 

*' Come,'^ said Dr. H- , " my arms 

begin to tire of this load of iniquity; 
where*s the cub's litter ? Show me 
the way, that I may trundle him into 
it." 



44 DUDLEY. 

Mrs. Grantley asked him and me to 
follow her. Sir Eliot offered me his 
arm, and we proceeded along a galleryj 
illuminated, I may say, by small silver 
lamps in coloured shades, to a large 
handsome room, elegantly fitted up, in 
which was a white bed, and a smaller near 
it, both in arched and spacious recesses : 
from the centre of the ceiling hung a glass 
chandelier, and thus the use of candles 
and moving lights are entirely avoided ; 
a prudent regulation in a house like 
this, the inside of which is, I find, 
wholly composed of cedar and maho- 
gany. 

Mrs. Grantley, with much graceful- 
ness of manner, though devoid of ani- 
mation, said to me, " I hope you will 
approve of the arrangements I have 
made in your room. I have been a mo- 
ther myself, and of a sick child also, 
and feel assured you would wish that 
your little boy should sleep near you ; 
that door opens into a small apartment 
designed for your maid ; and those 
hangings on the other side conceal a 



DUDLEY, 4)5 

sliding pannel and a recess, where you 
will find a commodious dressing-room 
and bath.*' 

I was on the point of making my ac- 
knowledgments to my kind hostess for 

all her hospitable care, when Dr. H 

called out, ** I wish you two women 
would leave off your prate, and tell me 
at once where to throw this bundle of 
original sin." 

** His sleep seems very sound," re- 
marked Sir Eliot ; and, taking him 
gently from the Doctor's arms, he 
fondly kissed and examined his pallid 
face, and, pressing him to his bosom, 
said, " My treasure 1" 

*' Ah ! he'll not wake before the lark 
sings," said the Doctor 5 " that's my 
business : — here, you Mrs. Mamma — 
(to me) let him be stripped, and his 
naked body rubbed briskly before the 
fire, with your soft paws, then chuck 
him into his little bed yonder, and 
think no more of him till to-morrow 
morning ; I have taken care he shall 
not wake till then." 



46 DUDLEY. 

By this we understood, what was really 
the case, that he had given Dudley a 
sleeping-draught ; and I was preparing 
to obey his directions, when Sir Eliot, 
still lingering near the child's bed, 

Dr )H- caught his arm with, '* Come, 

I want to talk to you below. — Hey ! 
what's all this about ? are you going to 
turn fool with your new-fangled toy? 
we shall have you set up for nurse soon : 
wash the lad's face, and brush his hair, 
and mend his stockings. Come, be 
content with every thing going on in 
your own way, and don't you go out 
of your way ; — besides, you are in a 
lady's bed-room, Sir-Baronet, do have 
some modesty, and retire ; — see, they 
are both blushing at your ill behaviour ; 
as for the brat, leave him to their care !" 

The gentlemen gone, nurse Morton 
made her appearance, and with many 
respectful curtsies, hoped you and all 
our family were well ; said she wished to 
assist me in attending on my little son, 
and assured me, that her young mistress 
Claudy was grown the finest child m 
the island. 



DUDLEY. 47 

My restraint with Mrs. Grantley gra- 
dually wore off, and by the time I had 
placed Dudley in his little bed, we had 
become sociable; for being both mothers, 
(which is not Lady Alford's case,) there 
is a certain point of interest between 
us, which cannot exist between them, 
although sisters. — We left the nurse 
and my woman to begin their acquaint- 
ance, and returned to the library, where 

we found Sir Eliot and Dr. H in 

high debate. 

" I am telling this crazy Baronet," 
said the latter, as we entered, *« that, 
like a great angler standing on the top 
of the Peak, he has been, ever since his 
arrival, throwing out lines towards Eng- 
land ; and that we, after all, are a sort 
of sorry gudgeons, to swallow his baited 
hooks." Then observing Mrs. Grantley 
take up her ivory shuttle, and begin 
knotting, he continued, after a stare of 
amazement, " Upon my veracity, widow, 
this is rare behaviour ! fine hospitality ! 
instead of a cup of tea, to regale us with 
knotty points !" 

Mrs. Grantley only smiled as she 



48 DUDLEY. 

looked at me, a look which simply said, 
" What a strange man ! the same as 
ever!" and went on with her fringe. 
In about five minutes my attention was 
attracted by some movement at the far- 
ther end of the room, though I felt 
assured no one was within it excepting 
ourselves. My curiosity thus excited, I 
fixed my eyes on the spot, and saw a 
pannel open, and a table roll forward on 
castors — laden with delicacies of every 
kind. The pannel closed, and we were 
left alone. 

" Come, my dear friend," said Sir 
Eliot, handing me over to the table, 
whilst Mrs. Grantley, with light steps, 
followed, and the growling Doctor 
brought up the rear. " So," said the 
latter, throwing himself into an arm- 
chair, and surveying the well-spread 
field before him; " so, this is one of 
your new outlandish customs, is it ? 
Ah! such pantomimic Spanish tricks 
are mere foolery and quackery ; — now, 
I ask you, madam, (turning to me,) 
which custom carries on the face of it 
most reason and comfort — this Aladdin 

12 



DUDLEY. 49 

banquet, served by invisible attendants, 
or an English supper brought in by 
liveries, headed by a butler " wagging 
his jolly face," with a napkin in one 
hand, and the key of the cellaret in the 
other ? Ah ! nothing like good old 
English fashions, after all. Why, now, 
what are we to infer from all this, but 
that we are in a foreign land, surrounded 
by spies, inquisitors, and familiars, with 
white wands and black faces." 

** That collared fish," remarked Sir Eliot, 
'* is waiting for you. Doctor, to spy out its 
merits 5 let me enquire how you find this 
wine \ and pray try and prevail on Mrs. 
Clonmore to h^ familiar with that moun- 
tain pheasant." 

The Doctor literally obeyed all Sir 
Eliot's directions, and was beginning to 
be reconciled to this absurd custom, as 
he still called it ; when, turning briskly 
round to Mrs. Grantley, he enquired, 
what had she done with the Spaniard ? 

" Who? Don Zulvago?" said Sir 
Eliot ; " 'tis very strange, he was here 
last year for three weeks or so, since 

VOL. ]I. D 



tomrof iLLi.v, 



do DUDBE*. 

which period I have neither seen nor 
heard any thing of him." 

" Does he never write to you ?'* 

« No.'^ 

"Nor to Balfour? — an odd fish^ 
faith V' 

At this instant the door opened, and 
a stranger (at least to me), dressed in a 
dark brown great coat, entered. He 
gave one look at Sir Eliot, laid his fur 
cap on the sofa, swung a chair forward to 
the table, took his place, and actually 
began carving a fruit tart 

" There, now," said the Doctor to 
me, " what d'ye think of that ? — 
there's Castilian manners for you." 

" Zulvago I" exclaimed Sir Eliot, 
" we were that moment speaking of 
you — you're most heartily welcome." 

<' I know it," replied the Spaniard ; 
and went on with his apple-tart, seem- 
ingly totally unconscious that a stranger 
w^as present. 

" I tell you," said the Doctor, looking 
full at him, and addressing me — "it is 
the fact, the flesh and bone are here, the 



DUDLEY. 51 

inind elsewhere — time and distance are 
with him annihilated. Now would you 
not suppose, that instead of having been 
absent above fren months, and perl^iaps just 
arrived from another quarter of the 
globe, that he was now come in from 
a walk on the lawn ? Were you to ask 
him, whether at this moment he is 
eating, writing, or reading, he would 
be puzzled to tell you. He puts me in 
mind of the fellow in the fairy tales, 
who dipped his head in a tub of water, 
passed in imagination through twenty 
years of existence, and took his head 
out again — just the same, only qmte the 
reversCy as the Irishman has it,'' * 

Whilst we were preparing to retorii 
to our seats round the fire, Sir Eliot 
disappeared ; when Dr. H , speak- 
ing to the Spaniard, introduced me, 
saying, that as I had more sons than I 
knew what to do with, I had kindly 
consented to throw one upon the hands 
of the Baronet. At this statement I 
laughed, conscious that he knew such 

* O'KeeftVs '' Irish Mimic." 
D ^ 

UBRARV 

UNiVERsmr OF iumm 



5^ DUDLEY. 

was not the case ; when Mrs. Grantleysr 
taking his words literally, observed with 
much gravity, " The Doctor was very 
unjust to me, for that she felt convinced 
by her own feelings, no mother could 
part with a child from mere mercenary 
motives. 

** Whatever may have given rise to 
this plan," said Don Zulvago, (and, not- 
withstanding his foreign accent, his 
voice seemed to me the most musical 
I had ever heard, and indeed he speaks 
English incomparably well,) ** I rejoice 
most sincerely that such has taken place. 
Sir Eliot was relapsing into his old dis- 
order, of which I think now there is no 
danger j he has now an object on which 
to exercise the tender feelings of his 
nature, his care, and his sympathy. 
This nature of his, revolting at being 
himself the subject of protection and 
fondness, rather leads him to guard and 
cherish all who are willing to look up 
to him for that purpose. His little 
daughter is blessed with health so ro- 
bust, with spirits so inexhaustible, that 
she is, happily for herself, almost inde- 



DUDLEY. dS 

pendent of every one around her. She 
amuses, but does not interest him; on 
the contrary, she often fatigues his 
spirits, by her unbounded vivacity. This 
poor little invalid, on the contrary, as 
you have described him, will at first 
excite all the soft affections of Sir Eliot's 
heart, and fully occupy his attentions 
until the period of education shall com- 
mence." 

Such were the Spaniard's remarks j and 
had I not, my dear Henry, previous to 
hearing them, made up my mind to 
keep faithfully to our engagement with 
Sir Eliot, they would have had consider- 
able influence over me. In the mean 
time, Mrs. Grantley had resumed her 

work, and Dr. H , with square elbows, 

pufSng and blowing, was pouring his 
coffee from cup to saucer, and from 
saucer to cup, until more than half was 
spilled on Carlo's back, as he lay stretched 
at his feet, when Sir Eliot returned, and, 
with that sort of visible, yet inward joy, 
that, whilst it prevented him taking any 
notice of us, betrayed to all present his 
secret satisfaction, he stooped, and pat- 
D 3 



54 DUDLEY. 

ted Carlo, saying, "What! my dog — 
my good fellow !" and yet it was clear 
of whom he was really thinking, when, 
throwing up his head with an unrepressed 
smile, he observed, without looking par- 
ticularly at any one, " Yes, he's asleep." 

" Asleep !" cried the Doctor ; ** what. 
Carlo ! with his great hazel eyes wide 
open !" 

"Yes," replied Sir Eliot j " he's fast 
asleep : Martella and Morton are both 
with him. I w^ished to see whether he 
breathed freely, and had waked since 5 
and find he has not." 

By this we understood that he had 
been paying a visit to Dudley, and his 
mind was so fully occupied with the 
ideas of his new happiness, that he did 

not €ven hear the remark of Dr. H , 

who, pointing to him, and turning to 
Zulvago, said, " A school-boy, with an 
unfledged sparrow ; he'll cram him to 
death with kindness, and then roar 
over his own folly : — and harkye, ma- 
dam-mamma, (to me,) I would advise 
you to drop your night-bolt, or this 
moon-struck baronet may take it into his 



DUDLEY. 55 

iiead to walk in his sleep, and visit his 
treasure, as he calls it. Virtue caught 
napping, you know, — hey, Mrs. Lucre- 
tia ? A word to the wise — what would 
our Reverend in England say to that ?'* 

There is something in Sir Eliot*s cha- 
racter that, the more I see of it, is to me 
irresistible. With the perfect manners 
of a gentleman — with all the polish of 
high life, and, indeed, a distinguished 
air of fashion, (though so much altered,) 
there is in him so great a mixture of can- 
dour and spirit — such independence of 
opinion, regardless of who sees what is 
passing in his mind, that it is impossible 
not to feel attached to his person, and 
interested in his feelings. 

Although there is much dissimilarity 
between himself and sisters, I think a 
family likeness (I mean in character) 
may be traced : they are, in short, water, 
ice, and snow. These appear under dif- 
ferent shapes, but are of one and the 
same nature. The passions of the bro- 
ther, according to the situation in which 
his heart finds itself, flow either calmly 
or impetuously — rapid, bounding, scorn- 
D 4 



56 DUDLEY. 

ing confinement, and bursting through 
every impediment, or they are, as of late, 
perfectly motionless. 

Mrs. Grantley is, in truth, the sheet of 
ice, the icicle, on which impressions, 
however, are made, though slowly and 
reluctantly taken, and which reflect the 
cold, chilled face of the stranger to her 
worth : whilst Lady Alford, the flake of 
driven snow, the sport of every wind, is 
now rolling in accumulated heaps down 
precipices, and now drifted up to the 
highest summit, but still preserving the 
most unblemished purity. 



Mrs, Clonmore m conti?iuation. 
The next morning I was hastily 
roused by heavy footsteps sounding 
across the gallery, and a loud knocking 
at my door, which was followed by a 
tremendous cry : this gradually died 
away, and profound silence succeeded. 
I understood the whole transaction as 
clearly as if I had seen it — the heiress 
of Euphorbia had come to pay me her 
morning compliments, not recollecting 
that the hour was rather early for visits ^ 



DUDLEY. . 57 

and her Spanish nurse, or Morton, had 
laid violent hands upon her little lady- 
ship, and carried her off. 

About ten o'clock, leaving Dudley 
still asleep, I quitted my room, and 
joined the family at their social break- 
fast ; when, after answering the usual 
enquiries of fatigue and rest, I said to 
Sir Ehot, I hoped now to be favoured 
with a sight of his other treasure : — 
*' Where is Claudy ?" I added. 

** Here's Claudy!" answered a young 
voice behind me ; and, turning, I saw 
at my side, certainly, the most beautiful 
object, whether in real life, or in paint- 
ing, or in sculpture, I had before met 
with. 1 of course expected to find her 
grown, and, by all accounts, a strong 
healthy child ; but this sight I was not 
prepared for : such perfect loveliness, 
such grace, such firmness and symmetry 
of limbs, joined to the rich carnation 
glow of beauty, I had not even formed 
an idea of: the cheeks, and open lips, 
displaying, not the rose, but that full 
vermilion hue, that ruby tint of early 
childhood — the dark brov/n curling 
D 6 



58 DUDLEY. 

hair cut short, showing the beautifully 
shaped head and throat — the naked arms 
and shoulders so finely proportioned ; — 
and then her dress ^ — the long white 
drawers edged with lace, and the short 
frock trimmed with the same — the 
sleeves tied up with bows of lilac ribbon, 
and the ancles strengthened by half- 
boots of purple leather. The whole 
formed a living picture, perfect and 
unique. 

Add to this, though now seven years 
of age, yet, from being an only child, 
and consequently indulged and treated 
as a child, she is still very infantine in her 
manners : she still calls herself Claudy 5 
and, indeed, in voice, look, and expres- 
sion, is on a par witli a girl of four years 
old. Her great blue eyes were thrown 
up to me, as if endeavouring to recollect 
whether she had ever seen me before ; 
whilst I, unable to conceal my wonder 
and admiration, could not avoid draw- 
ing a comparison between this lovely 
creature, and my own ill-fated Dudley. 

Sir Eliot thinking it necessary, in con- 
'^ideration of our poor invalid, to begin 



DUDLEY. 59 

With firmness, and check at once the 
hitherto unrepressed spirits of Claudy, 
called her over to him, and, as she ba- 
lanced herself on his knees, enquired, 
who was it he had heard screaming in the 
gallery that morning at seven o'clock. 

'< That was Claudy," said the child, 
filling her mouth with a large lump of 
sugar candy, which the Doctor, oat of 
mischief, handed over to her. 

" And who was it, when Nurse was 
carrying her away, said, — *' This is 
Claudy's house, and Claudy will make 
as much noise in it as she pleases." 

'* That was Claudy, ^o," replied the 
little girl, with as much carelessness as 
if boasting a thousand virtues. 

I could scarcely keep my gravity at 
her easy impudence ; the Doctor did 
not attempt to check his mirth ; Don 
Zulvago was engaged with a newspaper ; 
Mrs. Grantley in pouring out the tea ; 
and Sir Eliot went on with his lecture. 

'^ Well, then, I have to tell you, 

Claudy, that this house is not your's, but 

mine and Aunt Grantley's ; and that if 

you choose to make the same noise you 

D 6 



60 DUDLEY. 

made this morning, you must go out of 
it. The next time I hear you cry with- 
out a cause, I open that glass door 
(pointing to it), and put you out upon 
the lawn ; once there, you know well it 
is impossible to return into the house (as 
you cannot climb the iron inclosnre) 
without coming in at this door, and I 
shall lock the door. Do you understand 
me ?'' 

" Yes, papa ;'* and she held out her 
hand to Dr. H for more sugar- 
candy. 

" The next time/' continued her 
father, ** that you roar, and fight, and 
kick, and stamp, 1 put you out of 
doors. All who behave riotously in this 
house, must leave it." 

" Overshot your mark ! by the ven- 
geance 1" exclaimed the Doctor ; and he 
was right, for the last sentence provoked 
a reply. " And if Aunt Grantley kicks, 
and roars, and fights, will you turn her 
out too ?' 

This offered an idea which, contrasted 
with the widow's sober and grave de- 
portment^ was so truly ridiculous, that 



DUDLEY, 61 

even Sir Eliot and Zuh^ago smiled ; 
whilst the Doctor, pleased that she had 
realised his expectation, chuckled with 
all his might. We were, however, 
quickly relieved by Mrs. Grantley, who 
observed, *' Yes, brother, I have to beg 
that the first time you see me behave in 
that manner, you put me out of the 
house." 

This had the desired effect ; and she 
clasped her arms round Sir Eliot's 
neck, standing on tip-toe to kiss him, 
saying, " Claudy will be good, I won't 
cry any more." 

" That's my best child 5 and now, 
Claudy, tell me, do you remember Mr. 
Clonmore, who brought you over from 
England, and used to play with you and 
Carlo ?" 

" Yes, dear Mr. Clonmore, I do love 
Jam ; he put me in a dark closet." 

" And do you remember his poor 
little sick boy, Dudley, whom you used 
to be very kind to, when you were 
staying in his papa's house in Eng- 
land ? — do you remember him?" 

*» No." 



6.€ BmyLtw 

*' Well, perhaps not ; but I have now 
to tell you, he is here in my house — up 
stairs, in the very room at which you 
thought proper to make such a noise 
this morning." 

" What's his name ?" 

" I have already told you ; try to be 
attentive to what is said ? — his name is 
Dudley." 

** May I go and see him ?" 

** Yes ; but though you are such a 
great heavy girl, I must carry you there 
and back, for your little boots sound 
tremendously along the gallery ; and 
you must promise not to speak one 
word ; he must not be disturbed j — do 
you promise me this ?" 

When we all expected a ** Yes, 
papa ;" we were surprised by a ** No, 
papa y Claudy won't promise ; for I 
must speak, but it will be in a whisper, 
so — '* and she mimicked her intention 
with her charming lips. 

As Sir Eliot still hesitated, Dr. H » 

snatched the dear girl's hand, saying, 
" Come along, Claudy, I'll show you the 
little boy j and may the fellow's sleep 
never be disturbed by a worse vixen 



tliaii yourself; but hold, I think we 
are making rather free with <* my lady's 
chamber :" here Madam Clonmore, do 
you take your future daughter-in-law, 
tliis inquisitive Psyche, and let her have 
a peep at her Cupid ; though I cannot 
say a sick Cupid is any very love-inspiring 
sight.'' 

I took Claudy's hand, and led her to 
my room : Dudley was still asleep ; the 
frill of his nightcap shading his delicate 
features made them appear yet smaller, 
and the narrow^ ruffle gave to his pretty 
hand, which lay on the counterpane, a 
still more white and infantine appearance* 
As I was unable to lift Claudy, I had 
recourse to Morton's assistance, who 
from habit carries her with great ease, 
and she held the child over Dudley's 
bed, by which Claudy had a full view of 
him. She was for some time silent and 
attentive ; then with a smile of pleasure, 
not unmixed with pity, said, " Pretty 
baby 1" and turning round gently to me, 
asked might she kiss it ? 

" Yes," said Morton, '* but very 
softly;" and as the dear little creature 
stooped over him, the full vermilion of 



64 DUDLEY* 

her cheek falling on the pale ivory of 
Dudley's, the latter reflected the tinge 
of the virgin rose. She kissed him, and 
he woke. 

I made signs to the nurse to take 
Claudy away, and I then sat down by 
our boy. His long and profound sleep 
had greatly refreshed him, and he now 
looked up to me with a smile. Presently 
he cast his eyes round with surprise, ex- 
amined his bed and the room in silence, 
when conviction coming across his mind, 
a deep sigh followed ; and clasping his 
arms round my neck, as I took him out 
of bed, he whispered ** Don't you leave 
me, mamma." 

Whilst employed in dressing him, I 
talked of Sir Eliot, of the kindness of his 
motive, of his affectionate attention to 
himself, whilst still sleeping ; but little 
that I could say had any effect, the con- 
stant remark being "My own dear papa, 
I shall never see him again. Mamma, 
don't you leave me 5 promise never to 
leave me." 

In the midst of our conversation, the 
door was thrown open with a violent 
8 



DUDLEY. 65 

swing, and in came Claudy, dragging after 
her an immense large velvet bag, the 
contents of which, on reaching the middle 
of the floor, she emptied witli no little 
noise, as you may suppose, when out 
flew all over the room, balls, ninepins, 
cups and saucers, skipping-ropes, puzzles, 
in short, playthings innumerable of all 
sorts and sizes, which in the fulness of 
her heart she had collected and brought 
to please her little guest. 

" Come now, baby," she cried, 
looking at Dudley, ** come and play with 
me.'' 

He was sitting on my lap at the time, 
his head resting on my shoulder : when 
thus appealed to, he asked who was that 
great boy in frocks ? remarking, that he 
thought Sir Eliot had only one child, 
and that a girl. 

*< Hush, my love, this is Sir Eliot's 
little girl. Come here, Claudy, my dear, 
and shake hands with Dudley ; and now 
that he's awake, he'll give ^ou a kiss." 

All smiles and sparkling delight, Claudy 
ran to my knee, and held out both her 
hands and ruby lips to him, when he. 



66 DUDLEY. 

turning from her, hid his face on my 
bosom, saymg " What a noise she makes, 
I don't like her, mamma; send her away ; 
I don't like her." 

You would not imagine, Henry, that 
these words could have any very great 
effect on the little girl ; however, they 
had. She felt them, and deeply j her 
lovely head sunk upon her bosom, her 
cheeks were crimsoned with shame, and 
her eyes cast upon the ground ; there 
she stood, pulling and plucking at her 
little fingers, until a deep and hysterical 
sob bursting from her full heart, showed 
she could contain herself no longer, when 
she broke into so strong and affecting a 
passion of tears, wholly devoid of resent- 
ment, that I really felt for her. 

Martella, who had been standing at 
the door, now took her up in her arms, 
and tried in broken English to soothe 
her, but in vain ; at last she spoke, still 
sobbing, in Spanish to the good old wo- 
man, who carried her immediately out 
of the room. Once more alone, I en- 
deavoured to reason with Dudley on the 
aversion he seemed to have taken to the 



DUDLEY. 67 

child J but all the answer I could obtain 
was, " I wish I was at home with my own 
papa." 



Although Dudley still continues to 
sleep in my chamber, he is now removed 
in the day-time to a spacious airy apart- 
ment, occupied as a sitting room by the 
two nurses and the young girl Rosalva, 
where he is visited in turns by the whole 
family. 

What gives me real and unfeigned 
pleasure is to find that our boy, at the 
first sight of Sir Eliot, showed for him a 
decided and marked preference, and this 
seems hourly to increase. Yet such is the 
waywardness of human nature, that the 
truth is, his partiality arose from contradic- 
tion ; having seen both Sir Eliot and Mr. 
Balfour at the same moment for the first 
time, I cannot guess wherefore, but he 
conceived the latter to be master of the 
house, and, as such, shrunk from him, 
whilst he suffered himself to be caressed 
by Sir Eliot, whom he called Mr, Balfour, 

It is too late now to recede ; nature 
itself has come in aid of our wishes, and 
Dudley already seems to feel himself, 



68 DUDLEY. 

when with Sir Eliot, as if under the pro- 
tection of a father. 

As to Claudy, the little incident above 
mentioned has called forth, young as 
she is, the most acute sensibility, the 
most refined and delicate feelings: no 
finished coquette could act with better 
policy, or more art, to gain her wishes, 
than now does Claudy, inspired by the 
generous pride of her nature. Since the 
day when she was so unkindly repulsed, 
she has never once attempted to obtrude 
herself on the notice of Dudley ; nay, 
she refuses even to come into the nurse's 
room, when she knows he is there, and 
that not with sulkiness or petulance, but 
a sort of firm and silent dignity, which 
compels us to desist pressing her. She 
has, till of late, never been heard to 
mention his name, and though she con- 
tinues her plays with Rosalva both in 
and out of doors, a general remark has 
been made, that her turbulence has 
gradually disappeared, and that her tem- 
per is much softened. 

Dudley, on his side, has entreated me 
never to let that noisy little girl come 



DUDLEY* 69 

near him, as he cannot bear the sight of 
her ; and thus gloriously proceed, as 
Lady Alford would exclaiiu, the loves of 
Claudy and Dudley, whom she prophe- 
sied would fly into each other's arms at 
Jirst sight. 



Ten days more are passed ; and could 
you, Henry, see the change that has 
taken place in our darling boy ! — He 
now takes daily exercise in the open air, 
draw^n in a little waggon lent him by 
Claudy, who gave it cheerfully when 
applied to. One of Mrs. Grantley's ex- 
cellent rules is that of teaching children 
the sacred nature of property by respect- 
ing their's. If she has need of any 
article the most trifling belonging to the 
child, she invariably asks her permission, 
either to take or borrow it, as occasion 
requires, and Claudy is at liberty to re- 
fuse giving or lending, on, however, 
stating her reasons, otherwise her motive 
might degenerate into ill-nature or ca- 
price. 

The other day, Mrs. Grantley broke 



70 DUDLEY. 

her sliuttle, and, having no other, asked 
Claudy for her's, until she could send to 
Orotava for another. — 

*' No, aunt, I cannot lend it you.'* 

" Why so, my dear ?" 

" Because I have promised it to Ro* 
salva." 

" But if Rosalva will lend it to me ?'' 

With that, Claudy seemed to have no- 
thing to do ; she took the shuttle out 
of the room, and a few minutes after 
Rosalva came in and presented it with 
her best courtsey to Mrs. Grantley. 

Here, on the part of Claudy, was the 
strictest truth, fidelity to her promise, 
and impartiality : and she is so thoroughly 
convinced, that no one has a right to 
take what she considers her own pro- 
perty without her consent, that she never 
has been known, (since the occurrence 
of the circumstance that gave rise to the 
imprinting this lesson on her mind,) to 
touch what belongs to another. — It was 
this, — Don Zii:lvago had given her a 
gold foreign coin of considerable value, 
which of course w^as to her a toy, and she 
used it accordingly. This coin she one 



DUDLEY. 71 

day missed out of a little box into which 
she had thrown it, with pebbles, shells, 
flower-seeds, and a variety of rubbish : — 
a grand noise and outcry followed, en- 
quiries were made all over the house, 
which, at length, came to Sir Eliot's ear, 
who dried her tears, saying it was quite 
safe, he having found it in the box, and 
taken care of it for her. A few days after. 
Sir Eliot missed a large gold seal, which 
had been lying about loose on the library* 
table. A search was set on foot, and 
the seal found in the aforesaid box of 
Claudy, who, when it was taken from 
her, cried for her pretty plaything, 
which was her's, she said, for she had 
taken it from papa's own inkstand. Had 
his purse and its contents lain in her way, 
she would equally have appropriated 
them ; and thus it was necessary to con- 
vince her, in the best possible manner, 
that, in a civilized country, individual 
property must be held sacred. 

>jeither have children the slightest 
idea of the relative value of property, as 
xve can vouch by an incident which hap- 
pened in our own family. Do you re- 



7^ DUDLEY. 

member our little William, at four years' 
old, walking off with a Noah*s Ark from 
a toy-shop in town, and exclaiming, with 
great indignation, when it was taken 
from him by his nurse, '* I paid for it, — 
I did, and 'tis mine/' — This payment 
was a halfpenny, laid with all due cere- 
mony on the counter. 
, But to return to our boy. Sir Eliot 
himself is the charioteer ; he shakes and 
adjusts the cushions which line Claudy's 
little waggon ; lifts Dudley in and out 
of it ; carries him up and down stairs ; 
watches him at meals ; carves his food ; 
leaves us and his daily company to go 
and sit an hour at a time with him in his 
nursery, to talk to him of you and his 
brothers and sisters : all which affection- 
ate attentions, Dudley takes with the 
same calm composure as if he was really 
his son, and that they were his due ; and 
this very indifference, which appears to 
me so strange and uncouth, is the proof 
of secret and growing love and con- 
fidence, that gives Sir Eliot so much 
pleasure. 



DUDLEY.' 73 

I once said to Dudley, " I think you 
might, at least, thank Sir Eliot for his 
kindness, and all the trouble he takes 
with you :" when he replied, " I sup- 
pose he likes to take care of me, or he 
would not do it." This answer, which 
seemed to me sturdy and ungrateful, 
pleased Sir Eliot, in whose arms he hap- 
pened to be at the time, to that de- 
gree, that he pressed him to his bosom 
with paternal love, saying, " My trea- 
sure, my own child." <' And now," 
returned Dudley, " carry me down stairs, 
and round and round the lawn." I looked 
after both, with a mixed seitsation of 
surprise and affection, whilst Mrs. Grant- 
ley, without noticing either, desired 
Claudy to rise from the floor, whom Dr. 

H took pleasure in rolling on the 

carpet with his foot, saying, '« Ah, my 
girl, I told you your nose would soon 
be put out of joint by this whipper snap- 
per of a lazy young pet llobin." 



Another week has passed, and the 
improvement in Dudley's person is now 
become most striking ; add to which, a 

VOL. II. K 



74 DUDLEY. 

happy revolution has taken place in our 
domestic circle : whilst I now write, 
the children are as fond of each other's 
society as they have been hitherto 
averse to it ; and all this has been pro- 
duced without any interference on our 
part ; on the contrary, being resolved to 
leave them to their own inch nations, 
we had even ceased mentioning the name 
of the one to the other. 

Last Wednesday afternoon, it was 
thought advisable, Dudley being so much 
stronger, to begin to accustom him, by 
degrees, to join us below. — He was 
brought down by Sir Eliot, who placed 
him on a sofa, with a cushion under his 
head, and a silk scarf of mine thrown 
loosely over him as he lay. There were 
several strangers assembled, yet by the 
Doctor's particular advice to them, not 
to take any notice of the little invalid in 
the corner of the room, Dudley felt quite 
at his ease, and seemed to be listening 
with interest to the conversation near 
him, as I judged by his eyes, which were 
cast up, and wandering to the faces of 
each speaker. His posture becoming 



DUDLEY. 75 

uneasy, for his little bones have not yet 
their full share of flesh, he wished to 
turn himself, and made a sign for Sir 
Eliot to assist him ; and what is singular, 
though I was much nearer, and offered 
my help, he preferred that of our friend, 
whom I heard enquire whether or not he 
was tired and would go away. 

" No," he replied ; " I like to hear 
the description Don Zulvago is giving 
that gentleman of the customs of Lima." 
These answers of our dear boy, when 
contrasted to his still puny figure, and 
childish sickly look, have something in 
them truly affecting. 

I was soon after engaged at piquette 

with the P consul, and we were all 

variously employed, when Claudy ap- 
peared in the viranda (we were in the 
02)en saloon) with nothing on her feet ex- 
cepting her stockings, and with a boot in 
each hand. In answer to some enquiry 
of Mrs. Grantley's, as to this unusual 
and indecorous mode of proceeding, I 
heard her whisper, '' Baby is up stairs 
asleep, and I took off my boots that they 
might not make a noise in the gallery, 
E 2 



76 DUDLEY. 

and wake him ;" — then, as 1 conjecture, 
spying him out where he lay, she con- 
cluded with an *« Oh !" uttered in a low 
voice of surprise, and running out again 
across the viranda, shortly afterwards 
returned properly shod. 

Without noticing any of the company, 
she, as usual, struck out her own amuse- 
ments, and with paper and pencil seemed 
to be engaged writing a letter, as she sat 
on an ottoman before a very low maho- 
gany table. 

By degrees the company dropped off, 
and we were left a family party. — During 
our conversation, some remark that was 
made provoked the loud laughter of Dr. 

H- : on which Claudy looked at him 

with the utmost gravity ; — shaking her 
head, frowning, and putting up her finger, 
she said, in a low voice, '' Doctor, what 
a noise you make — silencio /'* This of 
course increased his mirth, which effect 
observing, she wisely refrained from fur- 
ther notice ; when having neatly folded 
and directed her letter, she brought it 
over to Mrs. Grantley, asking her to seal 
it, and send it to aunt Alford. " I will, 
my dear j but why whisper ? — Your writ- 



DUDLEY. 77 

ing to your aunt is no secret." " Oh, no ; 
but I was afraid of waking baby :" — and 
turning round, to where Dudley lay, she 
fixed her eyes full upon him, seemingly 
surprised to find he was already awake. 

For the last half hour, as we had all 
secretly observed, the eyes of Dudley had 
been watching her; he had heard her 
words both to the Doctor and to Mrs. 
Grantley, and for the first time in his 
life, now honoured the charming girl 
with a transient smile. 

This was a moment not to be lost, Sir 
Eliot saw his time, and seized it; **Claudy, 
my love," he called out, ** why will you 
persist in calling Dudley a baby ? Have 
I not frequently told you he is not a 
baby, but a little boy of your own age ? 
indeed he is about six months older than 
yourself." 

At this news her surprise was great ; 
for considering his diminutive stature, his 
delicate face, and his little hands, she 
had really fancied him an infant. I was 
not sorry either, that Sir Eliot had taken 
upon himself to explain this important 
truth ; having observed that, notwith- 
E 3 



78 DUDLEY. 

standing the smile, the word baby had 
really galled our boy, which became evi- 
dent by his no longer noticing Ciaudy. 

<« Then what must I call him ?" asked 
the little girl. 

'* Dudley,*' replied Sir Eliot, *' as you 
hear us call him/' 

*' What an ugly name !" was the next 
unfortunate observation; and we per- 
ceived Dudley turn himself on the 
cushion to hide his face. I was at first 
inclined to go over to him ; but thinking 
it wiser to leave their cause in the hands 
of Sir Eliot, I continued my work, and 
sat still. 

" Now, Ciaudy," said Sir Eliot, " I 
think it a very pretty name ; and if you 
ever have a little brother, he shall be 
called Dudley." 

** The name of Ciaudy is much 
prettier," remarked the child. 

To our great surprise, it was Dudley 
himself answered this observation, — as 
he threw off the silk scarf which half co- 
vered him, he raised himself on one el- 
bow, whilst the other arm was thrown 
over the low back of the sofa, «* I think 
it is," he said, — " Ciaudy is indeed a 



DUDLEY. 79 

beautiful name — I am told the full 
name is Claudina, but / prefer that of 
Claudy." 

Her lovely eyes, sparkling'with pleasure, 
were now turned full upon him 5 she 
made a step or two towards the sofa ; and, 
as we may conclude, seeing nothing for- 
bidding in his countenance, ventured, 
though very slowly, and frequently stop- 
ping, to approach quite close '— she was 
now at his side. 

<< Are you ill now, Dudley? — Does 
your head ache ?" On his answering in 
the negative, she continued " Shall I 
show you some of these pretty pictures ?" 

*« If you please, Claudy," was the an- 
swer ; and she attempted to sit upon the 
sofa, but the fear of mcommoding him 
checked her, and she drew back, saying, 
" No, I can stand." 

" Here is room for you,'' he observed, 
courteously shrinking to the back of the 
sofa, by which sufficient space was left for 
her. When she had seated herself, she 
opened the book, saying she would read 
him a story about three lions, two tigers, 
and a bear. — We more than once heard 
E 4 



80 DUDLEY* 

her enquire, " Are you tired ? if you are, 
I'll read no more :" and his answer of — 
" No, no ^ go on/' 

The appearance of Nurse Morton and 
my maid Barton, to fetch their respective 
charges, interrupted this scene of har- 
mony 'y when Dudley, looking anxiously 
at the book, enquired, " Did you finish 
that story ?" 

" No, but I will to-morrow, if you wish 
it, and I'll show you some more pictures. 
I don't make a noise now, do I ?'^ 

<* No, but you speak very loud," 
answered the unceremonious Dudley. 
•« Then I'll speak 5o," replied the lovely 
child, softening her sweet voice. 

'' Hurrah !" roared Dr. H. — , when 
they were both out of sight and hearing, 
«' the plot's begun, faith ! the loving ad- 
ventures of TeneriiFe ! the courtship of 
J)udley and Claudy ! — A new system 
this ! we have heard of women polishing 
the men, but here with a vengeance is a 
lady polished by a gentleman." 



The friendly intercourse, thus accident- 
ally and voluntarily begun, has daily 



DUDLEY, 81 

increased: Claiidy is now freely admitted 
to Dudley's nursery, and he to Mrs. 
Grantley's private drawing-room, where 
yesterday finding Claudy at her lessons, 
he on a sudden grew pensive — and to 
my enquiries replied, he was afraid he had 
lost much time ; on which I consoled 
him, saying his health was the first con- 
sideration, and that, please God, once 
established, he would soon recover all he 
had previously learned. 

Instead of separate meals, they now take 
their's together in the nurse's room ; and 
when Dudley rides out in his little wag- 
gon, Claudy is his constant attendant — 
either running on before to gather flowers 
for him, or pushing him behind, or help- 
ing to draw his carriage ; but when he 
walks, she keeps close to his side, never 
quitting him for an instant. — The system 
of harmony thus established, has been of 
the utmost advantage to both the children 
— Dudley, by having a companion of his 
own age, has gained a flow of spirits, 
which has been of the greatest advantage 
to his health ; and Claudy is no longer 
the boisterous little termagant, of whom 
E 5 



S2 DUDLEY. 

every one complained, though all at the 
same time idolized her : and, as Sir Eliot 
foretold, it has already had the excellent 
effect of checking that growth of pride 
and selfishness, which, notwithstanding all 
Mrs. Grantley's care, was rapidly deve- 
loping itself in her character. From 
having been so long a most arrogant and 
conceited mortal, she is now become of 
no consequence comparatively in her 
own eyes ; all her wishes and pleasures 
seem a secondary consideration — they give 
way to those of Dudley, — his infirm state 
of body demands her compassion, and liis 
helplessness her active kindness; in short, 
her attention is no longer engrossed by 
her own charming self, but is turned to 
the benefit of her little friend. 

Thus will her character be formed, 
her good qualities drawn forth, and her 
temper softened — and no fear of a re- 
lapse, for these advantages will have 
gained some maturity by the time Dudley 
will no longer require these proofs of her 
humanity; when confirmed health, joined 
to the real manliness of his nature, will, I 
trust, incline him gratefully to acknow- 



DUDLEY. 83 

ledge her past services, and in his turn 
endeavour to contribute to her amuse- 
ment and happiness. 

Farewell, my dear Henry : you will 
hear from me again in a few days, and I 
hope with still better accounts of our 
darling boy, who desires his love to you, 
and all his brothers and sisters, whom I 
am requested to mention particularly by 
name. 

Ever your affectionate wife, 

Louisa Clonmore. 



E 6 



84) DUDLEY, 



LETTER XXVIII. 

Mrs. Clonmore to her Husband, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffr, 

1 YESTERDAY received your letter, my 
dearest Henry! and by what a convey- 
ance ! Astonishment is too poor a word 
to express what we all felt on the oc- 
casion — we were electrified — and even 
now I can scarcely recover my senses. — 
Dr. H*— himself swings his arms, and 
rolls his head on his shoulders, as he 
strides across the room, saying • — <* Weil, 
after this, tell me that Ching Hong Ki is 
King of Ireland, or that the Duke of 
Albany is sovereign of Algiers, or that 
the Emperor of France, after plundering 
the hives of Europe, has been stung to 
death by his own bees, I'll believe all : — 
I'll credit every thing that is told me, 
however absurd; for if this had been 
mentioned yesterday morning (by a maUy 
understand me), I should have run the 
risk of exchanging bullets with him. 



DUDLEY. 85 

or got myself collared by the gripe of 
law/' 

Attheusual dinner hour, twelve o'clock, 
we were assembled to the number of 
fifteen or sixteen, and were taking our 
places at the table, when we could dis- 
tinguish an unusual bustling noise, which 
seemed to come from that part of the 
house called the Visitors' Library, to 
which, as you may remember, strangers 
who come on mere business are con- 
stantly shown. — From the window, we 
saw several of the servants running to 
and fro across the lawn, whilst Carlo, 
roused from his sleep, put up his ears, 
barked, and sprung through the open 
door. 

<« Some new guests," I remarked ; 
which was rather silly, as I knew that 
such ate invariably admitted into the 
house with as little disturbance as they 
quit it. 

" By Jupiter and his thunder-bolts," 
cried the Doctor, ** we are invaded by the 
Gauls 1" — " An express from Europe, 
perhaps," remarked Don Zulvago, and he 
turned pale j — ** Some news from town," 
(Orotava,) said Mr, Balfour, becoming 



86 DUDLEY. 

red with alarm ; for, as he afterwards con- 
fessed, he thought of his warehouses being 
on fire, or of some political commotion 
among the inhabitants of the city ; — 
whilst our host requesting us to be seated, 
and begin dinner, we complied. 

Mrs. Grantley, who had not yet spoken, 
having deliberately taken her seat, and 
arranged her knife, fork, and spoon, ob- 
served, with a composure which at such 
a moment was irresistibly laughable, — " I 
have no doubt but what it is Caroline." 

'* Caroline !" exclaimed SirEIiot, rising, 
** te;^«^ Caroline ?" for how was it possible 
to imagine that Mrs. Grantley alluded to 
her sister, in a manner as ii' Lady Alford 
had gone out on an airing, and was re- 
turned later than usual for dinner. — Sir 
Eliot, however, requesting Mr. Balfour to 
take his place at the head of the table, 

quitted the room, whilst Dr. H , in 

ecstacies at the idea of such a visitor, ex- 
claimed — ** My Persian Princess ! — no 
no, that's too good to be true." — Then 
turning to Miguel, a Spanish servant, who 
was passing through the room, he called 
out — <^ Hollo! you sir, come here, what's 



DUDLEY. 87 

all this about — who's come to the castle ? 
— you impudent varlet, what do you 
stand there making faces ? — can't you 
speak." 

The man in broken English, and with 
a sly look, which would not have dis- 
graced Gil Bias' arch valet Scipio, an- 
swered — " Senor, courier arrived — dama 
lady, and joven, (young,) like Infanta of 
Spain, she come to Balfour casa — ve^y 
sick — was, on board navio — want 
Doctor Inglese, ask for him." 

** Oh !" exclaimed Dr. H , seem- 
ing fully to comprehend this explanation, 
which no one else could, " is that all ! 
a crazy Infanta, on her way to South 
America to join the house of Braganza, I 
.suppose, puts in here enpassanty to have a 
vein or two breathed. — No, no; Spanish 
blood, Spanish doctors: — none of your 
visits to inquisition prisons for me, — and 
so, my dear widow, (to Mrs. Grantley,) 
with your leave I'll attack that roasted 
leg of a sheep." 

Our hostess was complying with his 
request, when his attention being at- 
tracted by the sight of three men at a 



88 DUDLEY. 

distance in rich crimson liveries, who 
were passing across the lawn before the 
windows, seemingly ignorant of their 
way, he shouted aloud, *' Hurrah ! the 
Alford livery ! it is, it is my princess !" 
And at the same instant, the opposite 
folding doors being thrown widely open. 
Sir Eliot appeared with Lady Alford 
leaning on his arm. 

You may suppose the scene that fol- 
lowed — half-laughing, half-crying, Caro- 
line quitted her brother, and ran to Mrs. 
Grantley, who rose and advanced to meet 
her. — Stopping short, Lady Alford curt- 
sied slightly, and in a formal voice said, 
*« I hope I have the honour of seeing 
you well — the mistress of the house, T 
presume:" then springing forward — she 
clasped her in her arms, with "My dear, 
dear Jenny.*' 

/ was then noticed, and with the 

utmost pleasure ; — Dr. H-- claimed 

and was granted his privilege of a salute ; 
and as he grasped both her hands in his, 
he looked in her face with a mixture of 
parental tenderness, wonder, and appro- 
bation, that was most pleasing. 



DUDLEY. 89 

Sir Eliot seemed to have acquired a 
new existence, his eyes were brilliant 
with joy and astonishment, and every 
motion, though gentle, was swift and 
vivacious. — Never till then was 1 so fully 
convinced of the power of early impres- 
sions. — We are aware of his opinion of 
Caroline's capricious and volatile disposi- 
tion, and the decided preference he 
gives to the character and manners of 
Mrs. Grantley, yet now the unexpected 
sight of his younger sister, by recalling 
the period of their youth, their juvenile 
affection and sympathies, and early habits, 
seemed to inspire him with rapture, — 
with perfectly new life. 

He, however, did not long forget the 
attention due to his numerous visitors ; 
and on perceiving that they, when they 
understood the new-comer was a family 
connection, were preparing to retire un- 
observed, he turned gaily round, and in 
a manner which reminded me strongly of 
the spirit and animation which distin- 
guished him during Lady Howard's life* 
time, ordered his servants to close the 
doors, and not suffer a single guest to 



90 DUDLEY. 

escape. " As for your company, Caro- 
line," he added, ** we will excuse that, 
and also Jane's ; Mrs. Clonmore will do 
the honours here, and you may both 
retire." 

** Thank ye, brother," replied Lady 
Alford, throwing herself into an arm- 
chair, which she wheeled forward to the 
table, between Sir Eliot and Mr. Balfour: 
** Doctor, help me to some curry, will 
you ?" This instantly took effect ; we 
were all again seated in the utmost har- 
mony; and I must confess that this meal, 
if not one of the most i*ational, w^as cer- 
tainly the most cheerful I had partaken 
of at Euphorbia. Such is the power of 
a person (privileged to take the lead), 
when inclined, to set the tone of con- 
versation, and become the mirror of the 
company. 

" And what the plague did you mean, 
you rascal, with your Spanish Infanta ?" 

said Dr. H , throwing his head over 

his shoulder, and looking up at the face of 
the servant who was handing him a glass 
of wine and water; " and a sick Infanta, 
too! Speak, sirrah ; out with your lingo: 



DUDLEY. 9i 

am I to be bamboozled, and to my M.D, 
face, by one of your swarthy phiz ?^ 

'' No boozle, Senor," replied Miguel, 
with that modest, yet arch freedom of 
manner, which is allowed to foreign ser- 
vants, and justly prohibited our own: 
" no boozle ; I said to Senor M.D.'s face, 
lady, like^ resemble. Infanta of Spain — 
and sick — ill — was, on ship. El negro 
y la blanca, ask me — out of coach — for 
Doctor H- ." 

" Ah! that's all right, my good fellow," 
cried Lady Alford, entering into the 
spirit of his explanation ; " you paid one 
of your Spanish princesses the com- 
pliment of saying she was like me, — for 
which I give you little thanks, — and my 
black boy and white girl enquired of you, 
vrhom I found at Mr. Balfour's house, whe- 
ther Doctor H Vvas still here, adding 

that, positively, were he gone, I would 
detain my barge, and row back to 
Europe." 

Though the numerous strangers had 
staid dinner, in compliance with Sir Eliot's 
desire, yet when they separated for the 
siesta, they had the good sense to drop 
off one by one, when we were again al- 



9^2 DUDLEY. 

most a private party. Then was opened 
an attack at once upon the lovely Capri- 
chosa, as Sir Eliot calls her : — " Welcome 
from the Highlands ;" — " Have you 
drowned the Lady in the Lake?" — 
*' What news from Loch Katrine ?'' were 
asked by us in turn ; but, with admirable 
promptitude, she parried every stroke, 
and came off from the assault tri- 
umphantly. 

"What could I do ? — I had sent round 
myP.P. C. cards; given Miles Cavendish, 
the sailor boy, the meeting at Coventry, 
the Marquis at No-mati's-land, and the 
Viscount in 'Change Alley. There stood 
waiting in Park Place my travelling car- 
riage and four fiery steeds ; my furs and 
pelisses for a Highland winter all packed 
up ; and Savage, my woman, with her 
sulky, long face, trundled into one corner, 
when who should pass me on horseback 
but Charley Maxwell ! You remember 
that scarlet fop, Eliot ? * Good-bye !' I 
cried, kissing my glove j * I'm off for the 
North.' 

" ' Ha ! my brilliant Countess,* he ex- 
claimed 5 * what running away with a 



DUDLEY. 9S 

minor in the disguise of a waiting-maid 1* 
(Did you ever hear such profligacy ?) * I 
lay ten to one I'm at Gretna Green 
first.' 

" Done!" I cried. — « And done!' 
Off he set at a full gallop, as if 
Marshal Ney were behind — I mean, 
before him ; and I, with a — ' Frank- 
lin, round with the horses' heads,' 
(could not run after the men you know, 
better lose my wager than that,) turned 
full South : — instead of leaving London 
by the Oxford road, I came over West- 
minster Bridge, and — here I am." 

We were at liberty to give credit to as 
much of this story as we pleased, at that 
time ; but we afterwards heard the real 
account of the death of tiie dowager 
Countess, and of Caroline's accom- 
panying her friend, Lady Mary L , 

(an invalid,) as far as Madeira, from 
whence she crossed over the next day to 
TenerifFe. 

Her increasing vivacity threw a sort of 
sunshine over us all, and we now felt as- 
tonished how we could smile, except in 
her society. Her spirits are certainly 



94 DUDLEY. 

higher than ever; her appearance, if 
possible, more juvenile than when we 
parted, her h'gure more exquisitely 
finished. 

To Mrs. Grantley's enquiries of how 
she bore the voyage, she replied, ** 1*11 
tell you, Jane, if you'll perform a mi- 
racle — open your mouth with a pretty 
laugh. We had a squall and a calm, my 
dear : the squall so like the howl of an 
old woman scolding her cat, that I looked 
up among the creaking sails for a red 
petticoat and a broomstick ; — and the 
calm gave a precious opportunity for a 
saffron-faced East-India sea-captain to 
make love to me. Down he was upon 
the knees of his poor, dear, darkrblue 
trowsers at my feet, fancying himself an 
Arion and me an Anna *, when a sudden 
roll of the ship sent his calabash head, 
bless the man! full against that of — " 

Then stopping abruptly, and turning- 
round, she continued, ** Eliot, my dear 
boy, I've brought out a venture, upon 
my life I have. Who the deuce would 

* Felkland's " Shipwreck." 



DUDLEY. 95 

undertake a fortnight's voyage, and not 
try to turn the penny ? I have brought 
out an article on speculation, and as you 
have few of the species here, I think it 
will fetch ten times its value. Eh ! 
Eliot, what say you ? buy unsight, un- 
seen ?'' 

" Well but, Caroline, your fellow- 
passengers,'' 1 said, ** what of them, 
where did you leave them all?" 

" My dear child, we played a rubber, 
rattled the dice at backgammon, made 
witless (witty I purposed saying) replies 
to gallant speeches, promised to begin 
and keep up a constant correspondence, 
vowed everlasting friendship — stepped 
on shore — and forgot that each other 
were in existence." 

'^ What, Lady Mary L and all ?" 

" Aye, verily so. Lady Mary L 

and all. If she recovers, she is bound to 
Calcutta, and I am now bound to — ring 
for Savage and Patience, my maids, and 
adjourn to my room. What say you, 
sister Jenny ?" 

*< Come, come, my queen of whim," 
said the Doctor, '' we don't let you off 



96 DUDLEY. 

thus; now explain, what is this venttu'e- 
or <26/venture of your's ; come, tell the 
truth, is not Charley Maxwell packed up 
in your bonnet-box ?" 

Before she had time to reply, Mr. Bal- 
four, who had been engaged reading the 
English newspapers brought over by the 
same ship, said, *« One moment, if you 
please. Doctor. Her Ladyship's cha* 
racter, I see, is at stake, and I am happy 
to acquit her of the accusation now 
brought forward, though I may decline 
enquiring into any other." After this 
" pompous preface," as Lady Alford 
called it in a whisper to me, he read 
aloud : — 

" Married, at Gretna Green, on the 
S4th of August, Charles Maxwell, Esq. 

Captain in the Dragoons, to Miss 

Emily Goldsmith, aged 15, with a fortune 
of 80,000/." In the Courier, it adds, 
*« the parties were pursued as far a& 
York, but the indissoluble bands were 
already contracted, and the amiable and 
happy couple are now spending the 
honey-moon in the neighbourhood of 
Chepstow." 



BUD LEY. 97 

*« Bravissimo, Hibernia!*' cried the 
Doctor ; whilst Lady Alford exclaimed, 
" A wretch, a good-for-nothing wretch ! 
then that was the game he was upon, when 
himself and his horse brushed the side 
wing of my carriage! — and never to give 
me the slightest hint ! never even to in- 
vite me to be brideswoman, and yet to 
decoy me into a bet of ten to one! — the 
deuce is in those mad red-coated Irish 
rakes. She's got a bad bargain of him, 
however. I'm glad of that." 

" Ah ! all spite," remarked the Doc^ 
tor : " the Captain has cut you, my de- 
licate widow, and taken up with virgin 
sixteen ; he's in the right of it. — You 
would have given the rosy tips of both 
your pretty ears, diamond pendants and 
all, had he, instead of brushing past, 
brushed into your carriage, and given 
the word of command to Gretna Green ! 
— charge J" 

" Doctor, a pinch of your snuff, if you 
please," said the Countess. 

" How dare you thrust your lily-white 
hand into my box, you beautiful gipsey ? 
Don't you know the consequence at- 

VOL. II. F 



9S DUDLET* 

tached to a pinch of snuff? Don^t yoo 
know, madam/' continued he, raising 
his voice, ** that we no longer, speaking 
of a thing of no vahie, say — * I value it 
no more than a pinch of snuff,' — that in 
these days more value is attached to a 
pinch of snufi* — '' 

" Do, for Heaven's sake, hold your 
tongue 5 and by-and-by give me your 
opinion of that article/' placing a small 
shagreen case in his hand. 

" I am reflecting," said Sir Eliot, 
whom we had long observed lost in 
thought, *' on the inconsistency of man. 
— Maxwell's marriage has given me no 
small surprise ; for this is my very friend, 
who for years, in my hearing, inveighed 
against disproportionate marriages in 
point of fortune — whom I have heard 
invoke on his own head all the evils 
usually attending such connections, were 
he ever weak enough to commit the 
error he condemned in others 5 and yet 

now " 

« Well now, Eliot," interrupted the 
Countess, " don't get into heroics, that's 
a good child 5 but tell me what am I to 



DUDLEY. 99 

do with the Cantab of a chaplain I have 
brought over to you, and who is now 
staying at Mr. Balfour's house, until he 
hears from you." ^ 

" Mr. Turner !" I exclaimed, — 
" Henry's curate, I am certain it is — I 
shall be truly happy to see him, as he 
must bring me news from home. — And 
this is your venture, Lady Alford ?" 

" Yes, was I not a bold girl to venture 
across the water with such a gallant? 
Oh, had you seen Jack's woeful glance at 
the first sight of the Peak ; I really 
believe he thought it was not large enough 
for him to stand upon. * Never mind,' I 
said to him, ' no matter whether you 
gain ground at the Peak, provided you 
are secure of 2, footing in Euphorbia :' — 
but defend me, Louisa, my dear," — and 
she whispered, and looked slowly round 
the room. 

" Upon my word, I don't know," I re- 
plied, following her eyes \ " but he was 
here not long since," — " Here !" she 
almost shrieked, ** and where ?" 

'^ What is the matter, Caroline ?'* en- 
quired Sir Eliot, alarmed — and she really 
F ^ 



100 DUDLEY. 

blushed. I enjoyed her confusion, and 
answered, " The Countess wishes to be 
introduced to Don Zulvago.'* 

** Certainly ; but where is he — he is 
not in the room at present — did he dine 
here ? — I have not spoken with him 
since the morning.*' 

We all endeavoured to recollect at 
what time we first missed this Spaniard ; 
and I even doubted whether he had 
staid dinner, so wholly engrossed was I 
with the arrival of our friend. Mr, 
Balfour was positive that he had dined 
with us. Mrs. Grantley knew nothing 
about him ; but Mrs. Balfour informed us, 
'that he had not been gone more than ten 
minutes, and that for the last two hours 
he had been sitting alone in the recess of 
a distant window, to which she pointed j 
and that though almost concealed by 
the curtains, she had remarked he had 
scarcely taken his eyes from the face of 
Lady Alford since her arrival. Lady 
Alford blushed still deeper. 

" No matter," said Sir Eliot ; " he is 
gone to Orotava for the night, for he re- 
fused in the morning sleeping here, and 
6 



DUDLEY. ' 101 

we shall see him at breakfast, when Ca- 
roline's curiosity will be gratified :" — 
and he left the room hastily. 

Dr. H , who had for the last ten 

minutes been twisting, and turning, and 
griping the shagreen case, trying in vain 
to open it, now chucked it into the 
Countess's lap, saying, <* Confound your 
noble tricks, to set my gouty old fingers 
to open your lozenge box ! — there, trust 
me again with the bauble, and I'll open it 
as the crow did the cockle, carry it to the 
roof of the house, and leave your Right 
Honourable paws to pick it up on the 
stones below." 

** You an M.D. and a F.R.S. and a Com- 
mon Councilman !" said Lady Alford, 
indignantly, *' to pretend to regulate and 
adjust the human machine, and all its 
wheels, and ropes, and pulleys, and yet un- 
able, without losing patience, to conquer 
this simple piece of mechanism !" Then 
taking breath, <' Good heavens, what 
a long period ! I thought I never 
should come to an end. Physician, 
do you give up this box, or only the 
secret of opening it ? Speak, and in time, 



102 DUDLEY. 

say yes, or no, — and hey, presto ! the lid 
flies open and—" 

** Out comes/* added the Doctor, <« a 
warbling linnet, or a hooded snake, or a 

bearded Capuchin friar, or a : bless 

my eyes ! what's that ?" 
, Lady Alford had touched the spring, 
and from the shagreen case she took out a 
large gold snuff-box, her own lovely pic- 
ture on the lid, encircled by a double ro\t 
of diamonds. She put it into his hand, 
saying, in a tender voice and manner^ 
" From your own Caroline, who has 
been a plague to you from her very 
cradle/' Then, perceiving he could not 
answer from emotion, she recovered her 
usual vivacity. — ** Now you know, my 
dear Doctor, if you rap about your 
smifF-box in future, it will be fairly slap- 
ping my face. — Well, good folks, once 
again good-by to you all, for positively 
you^ see no more of me imtil to-morrow 
morning.'' 

«« At breakfast, madam, I suppose," 
said Mr. Balfour, with a low bow. 

She had a repartee ready, we could per- 
ceive, as it was plain he alluded to her 



DUDLEY. lOS 

wish of seeing Don Zulvago ; but before 
she could utter it, Sir Eliot came in, 
leading in each hand Claudy and our 
little boy. 

Lady Alford^s spirits were by this time 
completely exhausted, and on fondly- 
taking the children alternately in her 
arms, she could not refrain from tears — 
when, for her own sake, we shortly after- 
wards persuaded her to retire. As Mrs. 
Grantley and I were leaving her at her 
own room-door, she called me back, hav- 
ing unlocked her writing-box, and put 
your letter into my hand, and with a 
smiling good night, closed the door upon 
us. 

The account you give of yourself and 
our children, my dear Henry, affords me 
the utmost satisfaction. I have now little 
iriore to add than this, — Should Dudley 
continue to improve as he has done since 
our coming, and consent to remain with 
Sir Eliot, of which I have now scarcely 
a doubt, I purpose returning to England 
in about three weeks with our good 
Doctor and the Countess, who declares, 
if I prolong my stay after that time, she 
F 4 



3 04 DUDLEY, 

will go without me, protesting that she 
only came here to fetch me back, 

Dudley will at first miss me greatly, 
but our plan is now decided upon, — his 
health having so materially benefited by 
the change, or rather that as I see clearly 
Providence has snatched him from the 
grave, I shall feel happy in the idea of 
leaving him in the scene of his reno- 
vation. Sir Eliot is also much improved 
in spirits, and Claudy in disposition : thus 
the scheme appears to have afforded uni- 
versal benefit. Mrs. Grantley, to whose 
maternal care I shall now most willingly 
consign niy child, has greatly risen in my 
opinion by many indirect and unobtru- 
sive circumstances, of which she is herself 
unconscious. That she is unhappy, I am 
convinced ; or rather that she has been, 
for a more contented being cannot exist ; 
and I do not yet give up all hope of know- 
ing the cause, — or rather, to speak less 
selfishly, of being able to induce her to 
write to me when I shall be in England, 
and under the familar intercourse of let- 
ters to open and relieve her mind. 



DUDLEY. 105 

I had written thus far last night, and 
breakfast being ovct, came up to finish 
my letter. To our great astonishment, 
and indeed disappointment, we found on 
enquiry that the bird had flown. Don 
Zulvago quitted Teneriffe yesterday 
for the island of Forteventura, with as 
little ceremony as he arrived here ; and 
thus is our lovely Countess, though she 
affects to make light of it thwarted in 
one of the first wishes of her heart. 

Sir Eliot has given a kind reception to 
Mr. Turner, and desires me to say he 
will write to you more fully respecting 
him.' — Farewell, my dear Henry ; you will 
soon again see your affectionate wife, 

Louisa Clonmore. 



ST ^3 



106 DBDtE-r 



LETTER XXVIir. 

The Cmmtess of Alford to Mrs, Clonmove, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe,- 

AV^E were all most sincerely happy to 
hear that my dear Louisa, and her phy- 
sical chaperon (is chaperon mascu- 
line ?) had arrived safely at their clerical 
nest in the church-yard, namely, Bloom- 
field Rectory, which, upon the honour of 
a Countess, I very much regret having 
quitted, to come capering over the ocean 
to this most odious of all places. — Well, 
after my adventure, no one can have the 
assurance to deny that Eliot is not in 
possession of a magic wand. — I fancy 
that upon a statute of King Jemmy the 
First, I could have him well roasted for a 
wizard, to think of dragging me also into 
the unholy circle traced by his conjuring 
staff. — Stop though, let me consider, 
did he ever invite me over to see him ? 
^pon my word no, or I should not have 
come. 



DUDLEY. 107 

And after all, what did bring me ? 
What could induce me, Caroline Alford, 
to give the go-by to a ruined Marquis, a 
fantastical old Viscount, and a chatter- 
ing cabin-boy, (I beg the Lieutenant's 
pardon,) — who were all at loggerheads 
which should put the golden (that is 
leadenj chains of matrimonial slavery on 
my comely wrists,— and sail over to these 
regions of fire and snow. 

By my precious self, when I think of 
my living on a volcano, I shake my pet- 
ticoats with a shudder of horror ; if one 
of the children move my chair or table, I 
cry out *' An earthquake !" and when I 
catch a glimpse of the Peak in his white 
night-cap, I exclaim, " Oh would that I 
were now passing under the sign of 
Mother Red-cap." 

I wish now that I had kept to my re- 
solution, and returned to England with 
you ; and I certainly should, but for that 
unaccountable drowsiness that prevented 
my rising from my pillow the morning 
you sailed : besides, poor Lady Mary is 
dead, I had no wish to visit Madeira again, 
with which you were so enchanted, — and 
F 6 



108 DUDI.EY. 

in siiort, to run away from Teneriffe on 
the very day the Spaniard was expected, 
would have appeared so very cowardly I 
— After all, he did not come, Louisa ; he 
has never been here since ; and, — do I 
not blush to write it. I have really staid 
six months in this place with the sole 
hope of seeing him. 

Then Eliot and his outlandish customs, 
of which I am heartily weary ! — Of 
course, I breakfast at what hour I please; 
but unless I wish to miss all his Dons and 
Donnas, Senors and Senoras, I must con- 
form to his peasant hour of twelve o'clock. 
Twelve o'clock ! Why, my dear, when I 
caught you all round the smoking table 
the first day of my arrival, I of course 
concluded, when I had time to cast away 
a thought on such vulgar propensities as 
eating and drinking, that you were taking 

your luncheon is so vulgar, your 

social meridian, and the hot viands I 
supposed to be introduced in compliment 
to Spanish taste. 

Then this ridiculous parade of music 
at dinner, a custom established since you 
were here. Would you believe it, half a 



DUDLEY. 109 

dozen hideous fellows are placed in the 
outer hall, to blow clarionets, and flutes, 
and hautboys, whilst those within employ 
their lips to much greater advantage. — 
Now I like talking at meal-time, but this 
is (at least at the dinner hour) strictly 
forbidden : Eliot having taken it into his 
comical head, (bless the dear maniac, he 
does now and then indulge in such 
frolicsome whims !) that it is unwhole- 
some to talk at meals, has substituted the 
flow of harmonious sounds for the " flow 
of reason'* and exchange of souls. I sus- 
pect our living in a strange land, sur- 
rounded by foreign servants, may have 
had some share in inducing him to adopt 
this solemn procedure; but, whatever the 
cause, I know the effect it has on my 
nerves, — and, dinner over, most en- 
chanted am I to escape to the saloon, 
where we may chat as much as we 
please. 

I do detest innovations of all kinds, 
and by the same rule have quarrelled with 
Claudy's dress ; her immoderately long 
trowserF,and amazingly short frocks, I 
have declared war against ; and it is in 
vain that sister Grantley promises to 



110 DUDLEY. 

curtail the one, and lengthen the other, 
when the child reaches her tenth year t 
why in tlie mean time am I to be put to 
the blush, and perpetually scandalized? 

— One would imagine, from our charac- 
ters, that Jane and I would, entertain 
opposite sentiments on this important 
subject, — she the prude, and I the 
degagee — no such thing; I insist upon 
it that Claudy's equipment is — fie, fie! 
Jane, on the contrary, quotes Eliot's 
opinion, that it gives freedom to the 
limbs, assists their growth and expan- 
sion, and is best suited for active exercise. 

— Active exercise! yes! I wish you could 
just now behold the very young lady of 
whom we are speaking, — there she is, 
with Dudley at her side riding. 

By the by, J do protest, and verily 
believe, that on opening my letters you 
cast your wicked eyes over them, catch 
the word Dudley, skip the preceding 
parts, and — if I thought that, I were a 
wise one, and a teacher of philosophy, to 
scribble half a dozen more pages, and con- 
clude with <* your affectionate Caroline," 
without repeating again that dearly be- 



DUDLEY. Ill 

loved name. — But would that be affec- 
tionate? aye, there's the question; would 
my words and actions correspond ? Well 
then, to corne to the point — these last 
fi\e months have performed miracles; and 
whilst I now write, Dudley is mounted 
on a fine spirited mule galloping over the 
circular forest walk, which being com- 
manded by my windows, as you may re- 
member, I catch a glimpse of his figure 
now and then through the opening of 
the trees. No, instead of dying of a 
consumption, he is now more likely to 
die of a broken neck, and who should 
you suppose accompanies him in these 
mulish excursions — no other than the 
dignified heiress : — there they are, like 
Hebe and Ganymede, scouring the coun- 
try to the terror of the hawks, hares, 
jackdaws, and parrots. 

As for books, and lessons, and proper 
behaviour, I see not an atom of 'c\x\y thing 
of the sort ; granted that their studies 
are over before I am up in a morning, 
and that they are constantly endeavour- 
ing to assist in amusing me, yet if this is 
the plan of education the baronet and hi& 



11^ DUDLEY. 

amiable sister go upon, how on earth will 
these children be able to conduct them- 
selves when they come into the beau 
monde, 

Dudley's dress is also highly eccentric. 
Instead of being clothed like other boys, 
in a coat, waistcoat, and pantaloons, he 
wears a loose jacket and trowsers of 
coarse dark-blue cloth, and looks more 
like a sailor-boy than a gentleman. A 
sort of flat cap is thrown upon his head, 
like that of a Russian peasant, which is 
sometimes exchanged for a wide-rimmed 
hat to keep off the sun ; and if you add to 
this dress, strong leather boots, you have 
his figure before you ; that is, figure him 
almost as tall and robust as Claudy, 
though with less colour in his cheeks 
and lips. — His deportment, however, is 
become erect and firm, his step graceful, 
and his spirits are uniformly cheerful — in 
short, he is — a little villain ! upon my 
word ! — The gentleman just now darted 
into my room with *« Aunt Alford, are 
you ready?" — (this is my title with him 
as well as Claudy :) then running up to 
the table, with the most insufferable im- 



DUDLEY. lis 

pudence he threw his arms round my 
neck, with a loving kiss, saying, ** I 
know you are writing to my own dear 
mamma, give her ten kisses for my one,'' 
— and off again he scampered. 

Depend upon it, he'll grow up a rake. 
I would no more trust Claudy alone with 
such a fellow, than I would my little dog 
Bloom with a Bengal tiger. — And now 
adieu, for I must go play cricket — a fact, 
I assure you, though a sport more suit- 
able for folks living under a Greenland 
sky, than one so near the torrid zone : 
but for a game at ball upon the green 
before the house my word is pledged. 
By the time I return to England, how 
wonderfully my stock of accomplish- 
ments will be increased ! — I can already- 
shoot a marble, fly a kite, catch a ball, 
and hit the bull's eye in the target — as 
to leap-frog, hunt the slipper, follow the 
leader, and sundry other elegant exercises, 
I have begged leave to decline attempt- 
ing, having been the other day caught 
rolling a hoop upon the lawn at exactly 
fifty -five minutes past eleven (Horse- 
guards), by as stately a set of male and 



114 DUDLEY. 

female Spaniards as you would wish to 
see, at the head of whom stalked his 
mightiness the Governor General of all 
the Canaries ! 

No bad thing after all to learn to 
trundle a hoop : to keep up the revolving 
hoop of life, without jostling our neigh- 
bour, or falling into peril, requires a 
more dextrous hand, a steadier eye, and 
a step of firmer rectitude than we are 
aware of. 

Well, after all, Euphorbia is the most 
charming abode that ever was graced by 
my presence : the house for beauty and 
convenience is unparalleled, neither over 
large nor too small j and the grounds are 
an Eden. 

Eliot and sister Grantley seem so well 
suited to each other, as I always pro- 
phesied they were ; the improvement of 
the children is so perceptible, the society 
we daily meet with here so very desirable, 
it is altogether a heavenly place ; I could 
really live and die in it. I have certainly 
met with one little disappointment, and 
the worst of it is, nobody seems to pity 
me. I do love to hear the children talk 



DUDLEY. 115 

of their dear Don Zulvago, particularly 
Ciaudy, who had been longer and was 
better acquainted with him than Dudley. 
I could have hugged the darling the 
other evening, on her asking Eliot when 
he would come back. — I then ventured 
to say — *« Do you never hear from him?" 
— ** No ; he seldom writes to any one, 
and to me, never."' 

" But you assuredly expect to see him 
again, at some period or other 5 where is 
he now ?'' 

*' 1 have no right to expect Don 
Zulvago's return," replied Eliot, *' as he 
never gives notice of either his depar- 
ture from a place, or his arrival ; — and 
where he is at present, you are as well 
informed as myself. — I may not see him 
for many days, weeks, months, or years ; 
and, for what I know, he may be in the 
house at this very moment." 

I really shuddered with horror, at this 
mysterious account. *' Why he must be 
a sort of a Bravo of Venice — at any rate 
an Inquisitor," 1 remarked. 

" Not a very inquisitive one," replied 
Eliot, with one of his good-natured im- 



116 DUDLEY. 

pertinent smiles ; " for I never remem- 
ber an instance of his asking a question." 

** Thank you, brother, for that hint, but 
I am incorrigible — until I come face to 
face to this redoubtable Spaniard I will 
talk of him : when 1 do see him, I may 
not think it worth my while to exchange 
a word, or give him a second look. — I 
have only one request to make, Eliot, 
which is, that you will promise me, should 
he arrive unexpectedly, to give me timely 
notice, that I may not expose myself, and 
look silly." 

" I make no such promise, CaroHne — 
be ever yourself — look, speak, and move 
naturally^ and you must please," (he 
thought it necessary to soften his blunt re- 
fusal :) " and let me ask you, why should 
you feel under any fear or restraint when 
meeting this or any other Spaniard, or 
indeed any other man ?" 

<* On the contrary," said mercantile 
Balfour, who was present, " were I you, 
Sir Eliot, should Don Zulvago chance to 
arrive here one of the many daily guests, 
I would advise you to let the Countess 
find him out," 



DUDLEY. 117 

Did you ever hear such a Caledonian 
Machiavel, Louisa, such a determined 
plotter of mischief! — and supposing that 
I should, in my giddy way, perplexed with 
their barbarous names, speak of this very 
Zulvago in his hearing, or worse, to him- 
self. Morning, noon, and night, is the 
name of this Hidalgo on my lips : — 
neither shall I be surprised to catch 
myself one of these days trying to 
whistle J and to a certainty, if I ever 
meet a Spanish grandee in a starched 
doublet and hose, short black cloke, hat 
turned up in front with loop and button, 
and plume of feathers — that is, should 
he be holding a bunch of grapes over his 
gaping mouth, like an over-grown Bac- 
chus, I shall accost him with " Wel- 
come, Don Zulvago." 

Farewell, Louisa, and Hal the divine ; 
your friend, 

Caroline Alford. 



118 DUDLEY, 



LETTER XXIX. 

The Countess of Alford to Mrs, Clonmore* 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe* 

X HANK you, Louisa, for your * letters \ 
and now hear me protest, that if I stay 
much longer in this place, I shall lose my 
senses. Defend me ! what can rivet me 
to this solitary lump of rock and extin- 
guished lava, surrounded by waves, bil- 
lows, and cockle-shells? Weary, sick, 
and tired am I of the whole business : — a 
calm at sea is well enough for us fresh- 
water folks J but a perpetual calm on 

shore is the very does not exactly 

suit my taste, I intended to say. 

Would you credit it, Louisa ! from the 
moment of my landing to this present 
hour, nov/ fifteen months, I have not met 
one soul in the house to quarrel with ; — 
not one will even trouble themselves to 

* They do not appear. 



DUDLEY. 119 

contradict me. The same unruffled com- 
posure pervades the whole establish- 
ment as when you were here ; not a 
frown is to be seen, not a contending 
word to be heard above a certain pitch 
of voice 5 and as for a tragical stamp of 
the foot, I would give the world to see 
that ; that might set my blood in motion 
— and only this morning I vowed to part 
with my best pearl necklace (and I have 
but four), just to have a fair set-to at a 
wrangle, — no matter what the subject, 
who my opponent, or in what language, 
(provided I understood it.) 

Half an hour's downright squabbling 
would to me be better than a dose of 
Madeira and laudanum. I have tried the 
temper of my maid Savage above fifty 
times,but it would not do; never was there 
so mild, so obsequious, so respectful a sa- 
vage on earth as she is become, and all 
out of opposition to me ; therefore on that 
very ground I have a right to scold her. 
Kad I, when in England, played off half 
the capricious tricks to which I have sub- 
jected her here, she would have paid me in 
kind, said, ** Suit yourself," and packed 



ISO BUDLEV. 

Up her band-boxes ; but here, having 
caught the placid contagion of the place, 
she is all softness, and it is every hour of 
the day, ** As you please, my lady,'* — 
Certainly, my lady,"— ** Yes, my lady," 

— the deuce and his long claws take her 
civihty,! say. And my other servants, they 
are all in a combination against me! Con- 
trary to my expectation, these John Bull 
domestics agree perfectly v^ith those of 
Castilian breed; and even my coach -hcwses 
are in the plot — no wincing, and floun- 
cing, and rearing, and kicking now, 
though put to their utmost strength with 
these odious steep hills ; but in Hyde- 
Park, indeed, oh, there they must floun- 
der and paw in grand style, to the terror 
of my life, and the hazard of my beauty. 

— No anti-climax, that, Louisa, with 
some folks, I assure you. 

I positively return to England by the 
next respectable conveyance, for there is 
no existing longer in this mawkish at- 
mosphere, — even Claudy, my angelic 
little tyrant, has left off her termagant 
airs, and since she got herself turned out 
upon the lawn some months back, for an 



DUDLEY. ISl 

hour or more, all in the cold and rain, 
the darlino^ ! she has never once tuned 
her voice to a squall. 

A good opportunity this of bringing in. 
Squire Dudley's name. Claudy and her 
nurse, my dear, had a grand battle about 
something or other in their own room, 
which Eliot overhearing, went up stairs, 
took little Miss in his arms, and bringing 
her through the saloon, where we were 
sitting, fairly placed her on one side of 
the glass-door of the garden, whilst he 
remained on the other ; — the key was 
turned, and put into his pocket, and thus 
did the heiress become an outcast. Al- 
though we continued our several em- 
ployments, you may suppose w^e often 
now and then took a peep at the little 
culprit, who, after a moment's silent pause 
at the door, wandered slowly to the far- 
ther end of the lawn, w^here as she placed 
herself, she was still visible to us. You 
remember, there is really no access to 
this garden spot, except through the sa- 
loon ; and that it is surrounded from one 
extremity of the house to the other, by 
a green lattice-work of wrought iron, as 

VOL. II. G 



1^^ DUDLEY. 

high as the walls of the King's Bench 
prison ; and, in fact, it is a sort of prison, 
for here multitudes of canary-birds breed, 
at once wild and encaged, who seldom go 
beyond this their boundary. 

We saw Claudy sit down under a large 
orange-tree ; by her attitude she seemed 
still crying, and in great distress. Dudley 
was with us at the time she was expelled, 
but on turning round shortly after, we 
missed him ; and in about ten minutes 
more, looking by chance at Eliot's ex- 
pressive countenance, I saw it greatly 
change : his face seemed to glow with 
some sudden and powerful sensation, and 
the tears certainly did start into his eyes, 
which to hide, as I suppose, he got up, 
and walked over to examine the ba- 
rometer. 

Once more I turned my attention to 
the dear little criminal, whose every 
action could be clearly discerned through 
the glass-door, even without going near 
it. There, my dear Louisa, what should 

I see but • Oh ! what a charming tale 

would a heathen poet have made of this 
anecdote ! Ovid would most certainly 



DUDLEY. 123 

have clapped wings on the shoulders of 
the boy, and a beak on the mouth, turn- 
ing the young desperado into a pheasant 
or a partridge at once. — On the very top 
of the aforesaid fillagree iron wall sat the 
bold hero Dudley, who, having easily 
scaled one side, we could perceive 
preparing to descend the other. He 
appeared at first encumbered with a 
large bundle, but this was thrown down 
within the wall, when, like a " feathered 
Mercury," he glided from the top of the 
iron rails to the green below, took up 
his bundle, and joined Claudy. We 
clearly saw her rise to meet him, and throw 
her arms round his neck with a loving 
embrace. We next watched him equip- 
ping her in three or four pelisses or great 
coats, one over the other, which he had 
brought with him to shelter her from the 
cold and rain. 

It was an uncommonly pretty sight — 
there they sat, like Paul and Virginia, 
wrapped up snugly under the orange- 
tree, no doubt setting paternal authority 
at full defiance ; and this I remarked to 
Eliot, adding to sister Grantley — ** In- 
G 2 



1£4 DUDLEY. 

stead of turning the child out of doors 
at the risk of her catching her death, 
much wiser to have given her a long 
psalm or a hymn to learn, as they used 
to give me at school ; by which means I 
hated the sight of both hymns and psalms 
for year s afterwards." 

" You have answered your own observ- 
ation," replied Widow Precise. 

" And I," said Eliotj " would rather 
Claudy should take cold, than prove me to 
have broken my word with her. When 1 
threatened to act as I have now done the 
next time she should disturb the house, 
by giving way to her violence of temper, I 
never bargained for either sunshine or 
rain." 

*« That is true, - — but, Dudley, I hope 
you intend to correct him for thus dis- 
obeying your orders, and braving you to 
your very face," — (though I could have 
kissed the dear boy myself^ for his cou- 
rage and good-nature.) 

** Certainly not," replied Eliot. — 
" This act of his, is not one of disobe- 
dience, for I laid no commands upon him 
5 



DUDLEY. 125 

on the subject; and as to braving me, it is 
exactly what I should have done myself.'' 

" A¥ell, but how long is this punish- 
ment to last ? As tliey are not 2/e^man and 
wife you know, their spending the night 

together among the canary-birds '' 

and a sudden cough tickled my throat. 

** Claudy,'' said Eliot, " shall remain, 
until the nurse of her own accord goes 
and fetches her, and promises to forgive 
her wilfulness." It was about two hours 
after, that Morton made her appearance 
for this purpose, when receiving the key 
of the door from Sir Eliot, the good old 
woman, apparently scandalized at the 
treatment of her darling, whom she her- 
self would suffer to pull her head off, ra- 
ther than vex, hobbled away to bring in 
the pair of lovers, whilst we adjourned to 
the collation — a fine word for a late din- 
ner. Thus concluded the first act of the 
tender adventures of Claudy and her hero. 

Mr.andMrs. Balfour have invited me to 
come and spend a few days at their charm- 
ing villa near Santa Cruz, which (like a 
true Scotchman) is named by him, Ben 
JLomond 3 and I have agreed to go, as it ap- 
Q 3 



1 26 DUDLEY. 

pears that he and I have at last raised the 
shadow of an argument between us, the 
ghost of a bet. He pretends, with respect 
to the height of the Peak, to go on the prin- 
ciples of mensuration, and calculation, 
and meridians, and so forth, with which 
ladies of fashion have nothing to do : all 
that can be expected from us is to see and 
judge with our own eyes. And as for his 
telling me that this mountain is 12,500 
feet high, Til never believe it — ridicu- 
lous, my dear ! You remember it ; if it is 
that number of inches, I very|much doubt. 
-^However, we have a wager depending 
on it, — an India shawl, a real Cashmeer, 
which is either to muffle up the short 
little roll-about figure of Mrs. Balfour, or 
to hang in folds around my graceful sylph- 
like person j and it is to be decided in a 
few days by three umpires, natives of the 
place, (neither asses nor mules, human or- 
brute.) 

I was relating my grievances to this 
excellent wide-shouldered, broad-chested 
Caledonian the other day ; complaining 
how cruel it was, that no one thought 
it worth their while to put me in a passion ; 



DUDLEY. 127 

and asserting that a tit of rage was often 
as beneficial as a fit of the gout ; when 
in his slow, deliberate, smooth manner, 
obsequiously convincing, (a good con- 
trast, by the by, to his bustling little 
wife, all spring and activity,) he advised 
me to order a carpet to be flung over a 
rope in the centre of the lawn, and hav- 
ing armed myself with a couple of bam- 
boos, one in each hand — 

Could you think it possible, Louisa, for 
such an idea to enter the head of a gentle- 
man ! " Beat a carpet !" I exclaimed with 
a shriek, " a lady beat a carpet !''— When 
he deliberately answered, " And why 
not, as well as a lady being in a passion ?" 

Now this very advice of his was fair 
ground for anger on my part, on which 
he continued, — '' Or, suppose, since 
you object to that remedy, that you pro- 
vide yourself with a quire of paper, and 
fill every sheet with invectives against 
your TenerifFe friends, in the shape of 
letters to your English friends ; — erase, 
tear away, and burn letter after letter, as 
your passion increases, and thus will tem- 
porary spleen evaporate, leaving behind 
G 4 



128 DUDLEY. 

it nothing but the exhilarating charms of 
natural good-humour, combined with 
solid sense and fixed principles.'* (This 
came of course.) 

Well, Louisa, do you approve this lat- 
ter advice of the Scotchman's. — You see 
I adopt it j you will be the chief receiver 
of my bitter complaints, which will never 
be removed until I am fortunate enough 
to meet with a kind enemy — a sociable 
foe — one who will from principle adhere 
to their own opinion, and no more think 
of giving way to mine, than I should to 
that of Carlo the dog ; when, shaking his 
shaggy neck, he seems to say, *« The 
deuce fly away with this gold collar you 
have clapped on my neck,*' 
, Then, and then only, I shall feel re- 
lieved of a heart-ache; let me but find 
one mortal to dispute with, and I shall 
be happy. No matter, I repeat, what the 
subject of contention — politics or dress, 
love or matrimony, (the two latter not 
always one and the same thing.) Let one 
.topic, that of religion, escape contro- 
versy, and I am ready to enter the lists 
with man, woman, or child, on any other. 



DUDLEY. 129 

So I find you and sister Grantley 
design to scribble a little on the subject 
of education. Is it you, Louisa, who wish 
to know how Jane manages Claudy ; or 
is it Jane who is anxious to borrow a few 
hints from you ? In either case, all I have 
to beg is never to become a party con- 
cerned in your correspondence. Suffer 
me to enjoy a game of romps with these 
urchins, and with your's, when in Eng- 
land ; and for mercy's sake never appeal to 
me on the subject of tuition, — recollect 
my nerves and transparent complexion, 
would you destroy either ? Rely upon it, 
teaching alternately screws and unscrews 
the former till they crack and they flag, 
whilst the lilies and roses ever take flight 
before the genius of education. 

I do certainly sometimes saunter into 
Jane's drawing-room, (which I out of 
perverseness delight in calling her school- 
room,) and then for a change I leave 
Claudy and her aunt at their sciences, and 
take a stroll to Eliot's study, to watch 
how Dudley comes on, and when both 
visits are paid, for the life of me if I can 
tell what they were all about; though 
G 5 



130 DUDLEY. 

from the observations I have been able 
to make, I do not hesitate to affirm, that 
were I questioned on my oath, as to my 
opinion on their progress, I should say, 
considering their age, all Britain itself 
could not produce a couple of more 
complete dunces. 

With respect to your hopeful Dudley, 
you shall judge. — *' Well, my sparkling 
fellow," I said to him the other day, " can 
you read Livy yet ?" — " No." — ** Do 
you yet know Alpha from Beta ?" — 
*' No." — *' What, not know any thing 
of squares and roots, sections and tri- 
angles?" — " No." — ** Nothing of tri- 
gonometry, mensuration, hydraulics, and 
fortification?" — « No." — " Well, but. 
Sir, I suppose you can dance a reel, 
play the fiddle, or break a foil ?" — ** No, 
no, no !" sung out your all-accomplished 
son. When, provoked into a sudden 
swell of indignation, I cried out in a rage, 
" Well, then, can you cobble a shoe, 
powder a perriwig, shave a chin, mend a 
kettle, or cut out a pair of small-clothes, 
for you seem fit for nothing else." 

If the little reprobate did not with a 



DUDLEY. 131 

loud laugh throw his audacious arms 
round my neck, and then snatching 
Claudy by the hand, run off with her to 
the garden. — A more daring libertine I 
never met with, — let Eliot look to it, 
that's all. — I have warned him, but he 
is deaf to my Cassandra-voice, (I love to 
display my reading in common with all 
ignorant folks,) and he has the impud- 
ence to say to me, in a most impertinent 
familiar whisper — "I wish I may have 
reason to place the same confidence in 
you and Zulvago, should you ever meet.'' 
— I fancy Eliot is a little rakish, after ail, 
notwithstanding his outward decorum. 

Then there's this Rosalva, the com- 
panion of Claudy and Dudley, upon my 
honour, as pretty a brunette, with << full 
black eyes of liquid lustre," as Southey 
has it, as you would wish to see. — I 
caught the Reverend Jack Turner ogling 
her the other day : — apropos^ that import- 
ation was not amiss, after all ; Eliot has 
taken a fancy to him, and he to Euphor- 
bia, where he resides in the double 
capacity of chaplain to the Baronet, and 
tutor to Dudley, or rather pedagogue; for 
G 6 



132 DUDLEY. 

by agreement, Jack goes through the 
delightful drudgery of teaching the ele- 
ments of languages, writing, and arith- 
metic, to all of which he is so partial ; 
whilst Eliot reserves to himself the higher 
departments of literature. 

As to the accomplished Claudy, I could 
bring up a girl better myself. — At all 
events, I intend, when I can find leisure, 
to instruct her in music ; she has a voice, 
and with three or four hours a day prac- 
tice, will in time be tolerably proficient 
in my favourite sciences. At present, 
her talents consist of being able to read 
English and Spanish fluently, to cut out 
and sew up again, as Petruchio says, a 
doll's frock, cast up a sum in numera- 
tion, and write a billet-doux to Dudley. 
— There now, Louisa, ask me no more 
on the subject } but confine yourself to 
Sister Grantley, whose correspondence 
with you will be mutually agreeable : 
whereas I, never having had children, 
know nothing of either them or their 
horn-books. — Get formal Jane to write 
to you once on that head, and I'll lay 
any wager you give in first. — Bravo I that 



DUDLEY. 138 

puts me in mind of my wager depending 
on the height of the Peak. — I am going 
to the Balfours next Tuesday, and most 
delectable to me will be the change, for 
nothing more intolerable than a drone 
finding itself in a hive, except indeed the 
bees whose hive is incommoded by a 
drone. 

Eliot has just tapped at my door, re- 
questing me to come down to the library, 
and immediately to meet a visitor. — I 
must therefore leave off. — I will just add 
one line — at the word visitor, pronounced 
with a strong emphasis, my heart, Lousia, 
gave such a leap ! — it did, positively it 
did. — What can that be a sign of ? — my 
burning cheek scorches the back of my 
hand when I touch it. 

I suppose I shall have time to con- 
clude my letter, not having a dozen 
words more to say, — and yet — no, I'll 
leave it open, just to add the name of 
the visitor, and tell you, whether my 
heart was right or wrong. 



Nol this is beyond endurance ! I defy 
a saint from the clouds, a seraph from 



134 DUDI.EY. 

the sun, an angel from the morning star, 
nay, I challenge the very cherub of 
patience herself, to say whether, had she 
been disappointed as I have, she would 
not have jumped from her monument, 
and torn her marble hair in a rage. 

He has been here, he enquired for me, 
he was anxious to be introduced, watched 
the door in silence for five minutes, and 
at the instant I now write, I can dis- 
tinguish from my window the ship, far 
out at sea, in which he is sailing for 
South America ! 

He, Zulvago, the Spaniard, the Don, 
the Hidalgo, the Grandee, the Conde 
D* Almeida, Knight of Calatrava, St. Jago 
and Compostello ; he, whose name since 
I first heard it has been ever buzzing in 
my ears, and flitting on my tongue, 
whose person in a strange variety of 
forms is for ever dancing before my eyes. 
— He 'was here, and is here no longer — 
I might have seen him, and I now may 
never see him. 

Now, Louisa, I'll state the case to you, 
and be so good as to judge whether 7 
was to blame, as Eliot thinks proper to 



DUDLEY. 13.5 

say I was. — From the above-mentioned 
blush and palpitation of heart, I began to 
have some faint guess of who it might be, 
consequently nothing more natural than 
to consult my appearance, and debate 
whether or not my dress that morning 
looked becoming. 

They say, when a woman gets to 
her looking-glass, the de'el himself (you 
understand abbreviations) can alone 
frighten her from it. — I certainly saw no 
fright in that glass, — as to face ; but I 
did see a most odious looking cap, which 
of course I exchanged for one more 
elegant, out of respect to a stranger, a 
foreigner, and a guest, (for I made sure 
of his now staying at Euphorbia,) — then 
the ribbon on this second cap did not 
exactly suit the trimming of my gown. — 
You know I hate a mixture of colours, 
so that I was under the necessity of call- 
ing to my maid Patience, and exchang- 
ing that also. — Then I gave one more 
look, observing aloud, my honoured 
mamma must certainly have made an 
error in the date of my nativity, and when 
in the great family Bible setting down 



156 DUDLEY. 

my age, have written a 3 instead of an 8. 
After one more look, and a twist of my 
glossy brown curls between finger and 
thumb, and a graceful toss of my shawl 
over my shoulders, down I sallied, so soft, 
so stately, so truly the high-bred woman 
of quality, (on her best behaviour,) that as 
I slowly opened the door, to give better 
effect to my first appearance, I felt myself 
irresistibly charming. 

Now only just figure my astonishment, 
to find Eliot lolling on a sofa, with a 
newspaper in his hand, and Sister Jane 
hanging over her eternal tambour frame ; 
Carlo, the dog, asleep ; and Claudy and 
Dudley at play in the centre of the room, 
with a puzzle of the fox and the crow. 

I stopped short : — ** Eliot, where is 
your visitor ?" and I looked round in asto- 
nishment. " Gone,'^ he replied, coolly, 
without taking his eyes from the paper, 
** he could not wait, — the boat from 
Canaria put in only for a short time, and 
he had but half an hour to spend with 
us." — ^* And who?" I exclaimed, " who 
was this he .^" 

'' Don Zulvago." 



DUDLEY. 137 

^' Don Zulvago ! ! !" and I believe I 
shrieked. I know I was on the point of 
snatching the newspaper out of Eliot's 
hand by way of revenge, for his not ac- 
quainting me who it was when he came 
to my door, or for not sending up again 
to me ten times and ten times over. — I 
almost cried with vexation. — *' Could he 
not wait five minutes," I said, "The mon- 
ster ! who seems to live only to keep me 
on the wheel of torture and expectation." 

" Five minutes ! my dear Caroline," 
replied Eliot, turning his head, and look- 
ing at the time-piece over the chim- 
ney, ** he was here upwards of forty 
minutes, and it is now above an hour 
and a half since I was at your door." 

*' But perhaps," I said, " he is only 
gone for a day's sail, and will be back 
again to night, or to-morrow." 

" Do not flatter yourself," replied 
Eliot, (flatter myself!) <« Zulvago was 
just returned from the Mediterranean, 
where he has been for the last twelve 
months, and has now sailed for the Bra- 
zils. — His stay there, as he told me, 
would be uncertain." 



138 DUDLEY. 

** The Brazils! and the Mediterranean ! 
and in every quarter of the globe 1" I 
cried in a tone of rage, " instead of being 
a Spanish knight, I suspect he is a king's 
messenger, and in lieu of wearing a gold 
cross at his button-hole, should hang out 
a silver greyhound." 

** Really, Caroline," said Eliot, *' one 
would suppose it were Buonaparte himself 
had landed, and gone away without your 
seeing him, you appear so very much 
mortified." — I felt my face burn at this 
inuendo, and still more, when I perceived 
the two little wretches at play on the 
carpet staring up at my uncommon beha- 
viour. — And to give the finishing stroke. 
Sister Jane addresses me very calmly 
with, " Caroline, have you any more of 
that tambour cotton to spare ? — if you 
have, Claudy shall fetch it, for mine is 
all used." 

I ran up to my room, — I did not break 
my looking-glass, but I made hideous 
faces in it, and almost demolished my 
cap, the cause of all my misfortune. — 
That fright fell to one of my maid's share, 
with this order of transfer, — ** Take it, 



DUDLEY. 139 

you Savage.'* — Well, he and I are 
doomed not to meet, fate says we shall 
not ; for I now understand, when he 
quitted the house so abruptly on the very 
day of my arrival, that it was in conse- 
quence of letters received from Lisbon 
by the same ship that brought me ; there- 
fore, his strange and unaccountable dis- 
appearance, when throwing his leg out of 
the window upon the lawn, (that was, it 
seems, his mode of departure from the din- 
ing-room,) was no slight to my honoured 
presence, it was unavoidable, and such it 
appears are his singular habits of life, that 
he is accustomed to travel, and to take 
long voyages without even a servant. In- 
stead of incumbering himself with more 
luggage than is barely necessary, his 
well-stocked purse enables him to supply 
all his wants, at every place wherein he 
halts. 

And what can be the business that 
carries this knight-errant from one ex- 
tremity of the globe to the other, what 
the ostensible motive for thus wandering 
from land to land, — either he must have 
more affairs upon his hands than any 



140 DUDLEY. 

Other one man in the universe, or he 
interferes in those of others, and I equally 
abhor a selfish man, and a meddler. 

I have neither time nor inclination to 
write more at present 5 perhaps when 
I get to Ben Lomond you may hear from 
me again 5 till when, adieu. 

Your affectionate friend, 
Caroline Z 

By all the powers of Venus and her 
blind Cupids, this man's name so runs 
in my head, I was going to sign Zul- 
vago! — No, Almeida is the title, the 
Countess of Alford and Almeida ; not 
amiss that, were it not for that dread- 
fully ominous name beginning with a Z. 
— You remember the Gunning story? — 
at least you may have heard of it from 
your great-grandmamma. — The adven- 
ture that happened to me was something 
similar. You must remember it, for I have 
told it you a hundred times. I am to 
run the risk of my life from the love, 
hatred, or indifference, of the last letter 
in the alphabet. — Oh the deuce take. 



DCJDLEY. 141 

(if he has not them already) all fortune- 
tellers, say I. Heigho ! 



This visit to the Balfours — I wish it 
was over : I feel no longer any desire to 
go thither. Once more, farewell, Louisa. 
I think about July, or later, you may 
expect me back to dear England, that 
land of delicious fogs and verdure, of 
downright bluntness and flat contradic- 
tions ; that land, which is at once the 
Paradise of widows, the Purgatory of 
constrained celibacy, and the illuminated 
hower of many an honest married couple. 



142 DUDLEY, 



LETTER XXX. 

^ Mrs, Grantley to Mrs, Clonmore. 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

As I find by your last letters to my 
sister, my dear madam, that it is still 
your wish to hear from me, with some 
account of the inhabitants of this place, 
with the utmost pleasure I now write to 
you, with assurances that all at Euphor- 
bia continue, thank God, in the best 
health. My correspondence with you 
will, no doubt, contain many trifling par- 
ticulars, such as escape the observation 
of Lady Alford, and are beneath the 
notice of ope man when wTiting to an- 
other ; but wdth mothers, on the subject of 
children, nothing is too insignificant to 
be noticed. 

There was no need of your apologiz- 
ing for the trouble that it may give me, 
1 am fond of writing, I see your sur- 



DUDLEY. 143 

prise, but such is the fact. I really like 
letter-writing, when it is not indulged at 
the hazard of neglecting affairs of more 
importance. During the life-time of 
my husband and my children, I had no 
leisure to spare ; every hour then had 
its destined employment ; and become a 
widow, it was too late in life to take 
pleasure in what is called a worldly cor- 
respondence, which is merely relating 
to a friend at a distance, the concerns of 
our surrounding neighbours. With me, 
such communication must have some 
decided object in view, some beneficial 
purpose, some point to answer. You 
honour me by saying you approve of the 
method I had adopted with Claudy, and 
may hereafter feel inclined to follow it 
\^ith some of your younger children.; 
and by asking me to communicate some 
of my plans to you by letter. Writing 
is but committing our thoughts to paper, 
and, from your own observations when 
here, you may credit my assertion, that 
though little inclined to talking, I never 
cease thinking. 



144 DUDLEY. 

On the subject of the inhabitants of 
Euphorbia, I must begin with my bro- 
ther. — He has not suffered an hour's 
relapse in health or spirits since the 
coming of your son : he is now a miser, 
daily adding to his store ; putting out 
his own acquirements, his own affectionate 
attention at high interest, all of which 
Dudley will in time repay him. Caro- 
line has also greatly contributed to his 
restoration by her cheerfulness and gaiety, 
and even her caprices exercise his talents, 
in order to vary and chequer her amuse- 
ments. She is at present on a visit at 
Mrs. Balfour's, where being the attrac- 
tive star to as brilliant a circle as the 
island can afford, of different nations, 
her time has passed so agreeably, she 
writes us word, she means to prolong 
her stay. 

Dudley and Claudy miss their aunt 
Alford, as they both call her, very 
much ; but though excessively fond of 
her, young as they are, they see the 
shades in her character and disposition, 
and this is clearly betrayed by the very 
affectionate manner in which they strive 



DUDLEY. 145 

to excuse her errors to each other. It 
is natural for children to copy the 
manners of* those whoai they see uni- 
versally admired,, and this was the case 
with Dudley, who, shortly after Caro- 
line's arrival, or rather your departure, 
introduced into his hitherto chaste and 
simple language, many of Caroline's 
favourite expressions, — a very few of 
which are — " defend me ! plague take 
it ! odious ! hideous ! abominable ! 'pon 
my life, and 'pon my honour ! the deuce 
it is ! you wretch, and you creature !" 
&c. &:c. 

Claudy heard and gravely reproved 
him, saying, *' You do not hear papa 
make use of those words, though aunt Al- 
ford does ; but aunt Alfordyou know — " 
Here she stopped abruptly, and then 
added, — *' I think, Dudley, you had 
better av^oid them," And her advice 
was strictly followed, without the ne- 
cessity of my brother or myself speaking 
on the subject. 

Another day, Claudy was walking in 
tl.e garden with us, and, in imitation of 
Caroline's usual practice, suffered a long 

VOL. II. u 



146 DUDLEY. 

silk shawl, which had been folded over 
her chest to keep out the cold, trail 
after her on the ground, whilst, with 
childish affectation, she pretended not to 
see it. Dudley took it up, crossed it 
once more, and tied it behind in a neat 
and firm manner, observing, — " Scarfs 
are made to wear, Claudy, not to drag 
upon the grass ; you never see aunt 
Grantley do thus, — sometimes, aunt 
Alford, indeed, — but — there now, 
Claudy, surely that is much more proper 
and comfortable." 

These two instances, selected from a 
hundred of the same nature, which have 
arisen in consequence of my sister's re- 
sidence here, may convince you, that 
the examples she frequently sets them 
lias had no ill effects ; — on the con- 
trary, trifles such as these serve to bring 
out their sense of propriety, and to teach 
them w^hat should be imitated, and what 
avoided. 

Caroline has, I understand from her- 
self, made you acquainted with the state 
of our niece's acquirements, or rather 
non-acquirements. You may, ray dear 



DUDLEY. 147 

Madam, think the account that our gay 
and thoughtless sister has given you is 
exaggerated, there, I do her justice, be- 
lieve me it is not. — If Lady Alford has 
told you that our Claudy can read Eng- 
lish and Spanish, speak both fluently, 
just hold a pen and a needle, and guide 
a pencil, she has been accurate j but I 
trust she has added to the list of the 
child's deficiencies as to education, an 
acknowledgment of her personal accom- 
plishments : — if not, I have to inform 
you that, being now in her tenth year, 
her health is established, and promises to 
be invariably excellent; her temper is 
good, her spirits are equal, and her 
beauty unimpaired. 

She has hitherto made little or no pro- 
ficiency in any one branch of learning, 
and wherefore ? because the time is only 
now arrived that we are to begin, now 
that the growth of the body, the strength 
of the limbs, and clearness of intellect 
have prepared our way, and not by com- 
mencing, at three or four years of age, 
to aim at making prodigies. — J had two 
prodigies — had ! alas I 
H 12 



J 48 DUDLEY. 

Before I continue my apology as to this 
scheme of neglect (as Caroline calls it), 
permit me to be candid with you, and do 
justice to myself, by informing you, in as 
few words as possible, wherefore at this 
day I am childless. You have, perhaps, 
heard from my sister the mode of educa- 
tion that with respect to us was adopted 
by our different mothers. So very plain, 
so very homely was mi/ culture, that I 
often, when young, had the folly to blush 
at my own deficiencies ; and though I 
did not exactly envy the brilliant accom- 
plishments possessed by several of my 
youthful friends, I secretly regretted 
that there had not been a more judicious 
mixture in my education of the solid and 
the ornamental. 

I became a wife, a mother, and then 
resolved that my children should^ not 
only enjoy, and to perfection, the advan- 
tages I possessed, but those in which 
Caroline now so much excels. You have 
met with, most probably, an Indian anec- 
dote of an elephant and its guide. — The 
noble creature, after repeated and vain 
attempts to throw down a massive wall, 

8 



DUDLEY. 149 

Was reproached by its comae with idle- 
ness, — it collected its powers, gave one 
more stroke, succeeded, and died. 



Pardon me — but this is the only subject 
that could ever draw tears from me — the 
only one for which I still have tears left. 
I said daily and exultingly to my children, 
** Aim at perfection in all you do, in all 
you undertake ; get as near the goal of 
perfection as is possible, in languages and 
mathematics, music, singing, and other 
still lesser branches of education 5 lose no 
time, make the most of your youth — 
study with as little intermission as pos- 
sible, this is the season for improvement." 
They obej^ed me, — professors, masters, 
mistresses, and teachers, gloried in their 
progress ; they became the wonder and 
the delight of every society — they suc- 
ceeded, and they died ! My Edward 
was long the victim of a nervous debi- 
lity, which ended in a confirmed state of 
idiotism; my Mary became a pale tall 
shadow, supported by irons; she sunk 
under a consumption : both, I most firmly 
and sacredly believe, (from many cir- 
H 3 



1^0 DUDLEY. 

CLimstances known only to myself, and 
which are not worthy detailing,) the vicr 
tims of my ill-judged tenderness, for 
more beautiful and healthy children could 
not exist, until I began my system of 
tuition. 

Mr. Grantley, being from his official 
situation unable to attend to his chil- 
dren, left them wholly to my care, and 
often do these words of his come across 
my mind, to my eternal sorrow — " Ed- 
ward seems very knowing, but I wish he 
knew less, and laughed more •/' and of 
Mary, «* That she undoubtedly sung well, 
but he could wish she would put a rose 
in her cheek.'" He at length found out 
the cause, and from my own agonised 
reproaches ; but it was then too late to 
apply a remedy. 

I saw my children perish before my 
eyes; I sat by their bed of death ; I helped 
to lay them in their coffins ; and I looked 
down steadily into the grave before the 
earth covered them for ever, saying-^ 
^ 'Tis I who have placed you there." 

Can you now wonder at my mind being 
concentrated within itself; that though 
indefatigable m my duty, yet that I have 



DUDLEY. 151 

no relish for general, or even any so- 
ciety ; that I consider myself as guilty 
in respect to the death of my children, 
and as such am far more an object of 
pity than ever my brother was. He lost 
his wife, his excellent and most beloved 
wife, and suddenly, but by no fault of 
his own ; the Almighty recalled her to 
himself, and after the first strong and 
natural emotions of grief had passed, he 
was no longer to be commiserated. I 
lost my children by my own folly, and 
am indeed to be pitied ; had I early pur- 
sued with them a different plan, they 
might now be living — living to bless, to 
be blessed of me. 



I recollect the sad reflections that filled 
my mind, when Mr. Clonmore first com^ 
municated to me my brother's wish that 
I should become the mother of Claudy. 
How lively my gratitude to God, at this 
instance of his love and forgiveness ; 
it came to me as a voice from heaven, 
saying, " You have erred and have 
been punished ; your motive was good, 
you are pardoned ; this child shall com- 
H 4 



15^ DUDLEY. 

fort you for those you have lost." I ac- 
cepted the gracious terms held out to me, 
and taught by mournful experience, adopt- 
ed the plan I have hitherto pursued, and 
Claudy is now such as nature intended 
her, strong, robust, healthy, and cheerful. 

If we would build a ship, raise an edi- 
fice, or construct a piece of mechanism, 
our first aim is to collect materials for our 
purpose, and those we take care shall be 
sound and proper. Health, I am now 
convinced, is the principal material re- 
quired in education ; without an ample 
supply of which most precious of all ar- 
ticles, our attempts for success to crown 
our labour will be vain. Health has al- 
ways been considered as the most blessed 
gift that God can bestow on man j let it 
be our care then to improve it, by per- 
mitting our children the enjoyment of 
their birth-right, exercise, and liberty as 
full and complete as is consistent with 
their safety, at least for the first seven 
years of their existence. During the next 
seven, more restraint, and a greater num- 
ber of duties, must necessarily be im- 



DUDLEY. 153 

posed ; and in the third period, a still 
greater degree of both ; at the end of 
which time, the pupil, by the laws of our 
land, becomes his own master, when im- 
posed study and required duties become 
voluntary resources of pleasure and em- 
ployment. 

Claudy is now in her second course of 
probation, and henceforth her progress 
will be gradual, but more perceptible. 
You recollect the position of our respec- 
tive rooms, and can therefore understand 
my explanations when speaking of the 
many arrangements I have lately made. 
When you were here, the nurses and Ro- 
salva occupied a room adjoining that of 
my niece; 1 have now removed them from 
the south to the west gallery, by which 
means, when Claudy leaves us for the 
night, she goes directly to her own cham- 
ber, without, as hittierto, stopping in 
their's. — Women will talk, and children 
will listen. 

As there are three servants in the nur- 
sery, I have lately established the regu- 
lation that one of them take it in turn 
every v/eek to put Claudy to bed, and 
H d 



lo4 DUDLEY. 

stay in the room with her, until I shall 
come up for the niglit. 

By these means 1 prevent any convers- 
ation that might disturb the child's 
sleep, or of her overhearing what she 
ought not to hear. Thus two of the women 
are left to keep each other company, by 
which means their feelings are consulted^ 
and leisure afforded them for their own 
business or recreation, whilst I expect 
the third person, whose duty it is to at- 
tend Claudy, to be strict to her post, and 
not stir from the room until my appear- 
ance. To secure this, I always let Claudy, 
when she bids us good night, take up 
a newspaper for the nurse, who, as Eliot 
observes, is in common with other ser- 
vants, a great politician. 

Lady Alfojd strongly objects to this 
practice of mine, and argues that chil- 
dren should be early accustomed to dark- 
ness and solitude ; and being once in bed 
should there be left. I think othery/ise 5 
the cry of the child thus treated is that 
of nature ; solitude and darkness, when 
united, are repugnant to every human 
feeling p neither is it safe thus to leave a 



DUDLEY. 155 

helpless child ; night is the hour of dan- 
ger, whicli to avert, if possible, is one of 
ourbounden duties. 

From accidents apparently the most 
trivial, dreadful consequences have arisen; 
and supposing such to occur, what ex- 
ertion or self-defence can be expected 
from a boy or girl suddenly awakened 
from the most profound sleep, we will 
say by fire, a cat, a rat, nay, even a 
mouse ; no matter the cause of fright or 
panic, the effects are what we are speak- 
ing oi\ and convince us that they should 
never be left alone, and not at all in 
darkness. 

It is as much a nurse's duty to attend 
her charge when sleeping, as waking ; 
therefore, in the full security of protec- 
tion and light, it should be laid to rest : 
Claudy having never been deceived, is 
so firmly persuaded that the person 
whose turn it is to sit in her room will 
not leave her until I come, that her head is 
no sooner on the pillow, than she is asleep. 

No convulsive starts and fears drive 
away slumber from her heavy eyes j no 
repeated opening of the curtains to be 
H 6 



156 



DUDLEY. 



convinced she is not alone ; no timid 
anxious cry of " Nurse, are you there ?" 
How often has my heart been grieved, 
when staying at the houses of differ- 
ent EngHsh friends, I have heard, when 
accidentally going up stairs, the piteous 
cry of a child thus deprived, by its 
terrors, of that balmy rest, which only 
attends early sleep ; and the tremulous 
sobs that followed, convincing me that 
the maid was shaking it in its bed, with 
the peremptory command of ** Go to 
sleep," which is often as wholly out of 
the poor infant's power, as it would be in 
that of the servant, had she indulged in 
half a dozen cups of strong green tea* 



By my brother's particular desire, 
Claudy's dress, though simple and con- 
venient, is at all times of the richest ma- 
terials, and these are his reasons : — the 
growth of the body and grace of car- 
riage are hourly, nay, at every instant, 
expanding and increasing ; and both de- 
pend, in a greater measure than seem 
probable or possible, on the quality or 
shape of the dress. See a child sordidly 



DUDLEY. 1.57 

and meanly equipped, (provided tliey are 
conscious of the appearance they make,) 
and you will observe it contract itself, 
shrinking back with uncouth and clown- 
ish shame, like Madame de Maintenon, 
at her first interview with Scarron, when 
she hid behind her companions, and shed 
tears because of her '« short io:own." 

Observe an ill dressed child holding 
down its head, comparing its coat or 
frock with those of its companions, hiding 
its hands, and treading on its own feet j 
thus, day after day, year after year, the 
body contracting these and other evil 
habits, the limbs are warped, and the whole 
deportment assumes a mean and grovel- 
ling appearance. On the contrary, the 
well-dressed girl or boy, conscious that 
their exterior is prepossessing, often be- 
come thus, in a high degree, — open, in- 
dependent, and graceful, both in person 
and manners. 

I remember Dr. H ridiculing these 

notions of my brother as absurd and 
fanciful, and adding, ** Wild through the 
woods the noble savage ran j'* desiring 



1.58 DUDLEY. 

him to look at our bold, hardy, and half- 
naked peasantry. 

" I neither allude to the savage, noble 
or ignoble," replied Eliot, ** nor to the 
peasant, but to the meanly dressed per- 
son in civilised life ; there is some dif- 
ference, assuredly, in not being clothed 
at all, and being badly clothed; — the 
noblest dress of the savage is his skin ; 
the pride of the peasant is his labour and 
usefulness, which lift both the one and 
the other above the necessity of outward 
ornament. Let, therefore, the savage 
remain unclothed, or in his tattooed dress, 
and the husbandman or artificer in their 
appropriate costume, I allude to the fine, 
yet shabby appearance of many we meet 
with in every day's society." 

" It is therefore my wish," he conti* 
nued, addressing me, '* that these chil- 
dren should be clothed in the best ma- 
terials that money can procure, for 
which the weavers, lace-makers, em- 
broiderers, sempstresses, tailors, and man- 
tua-makers, at Oratava, and elsewhere, 
will never find fault with me. Should 
Claudy, therefore, leave a yard or two of 



DUDLEY. 1.59 

lace or muslin on a hedge now and then ; 
or Dudley ink or tear his shirts and coats, 
do not be displeased, Jane, but provide 
them with more ; this would be extra- 
vagance and folly in another, but is 
not so with me." 

On this principle, the dress of Claudy 
is, as you may have observed, of the 
most expensive materials, and regularly 
changed morning and evening. Dudley, 
in the forenoon, dresses little better than 
a common sailor, by which his limbs have 
their full freedom ; and in the afternoon, 
he changes to white or nankeen waist- 
coats, and a better sort of dark blue 
jacket. 



As the ground-work of my plan is, even 
in the merest trifles, to adhere to the 
strictest truth with Claudy, and never to 
employ snares to entrap her into improve- 
ment, I make it my study to watch for 
the faintest expression she may throw out 
of herself, which, I think, will lead to 
that desirable end. She was already five 
years of age, and had never learned to 
pray ; nurse Morton had early offered her 



160 DUDLEY. 

services for that purpose, but I declined 
them. 

We had been at Euphorbia about a 
twelvemonth, when Claudy coming has- 
tily and by accident into my private 
closet, found me on my knees. I took no 
notice of her, and she stood still at the 
entrance until I rose, when, with a face 
full of wonder and gravity, she drew 
near me, saying, '' What were you doing, 
aunt.'' 

« Wait, and I will tell you presently," 
I read a few concluding verses in the 
Bible, and then, closing the book, sat 
down in the only chair the room afforded, 
and, at the same time, drew her to my 
knee ; her eyes still fixed anxiously on 
my face. 

** I was thanking God for saving me 
from any danger that might have other- 
wise befallen me last night ; for allowing 
me to sleep in peace and health j for 
permitting me to wake this morning ; — 
and I was also recj^uesting him to protect 
and bless me during this day." 

The child, with an action at once 
graceful, solemn, and wondering, looked 



DUDLEY. ]6l 

slowly round the room, and then again 
at me, saying, *' Nobody here, aunt ?'** 

" No, I cannot see God, but He can 
see me. We can see this little gnat 
upon the table, but the gnat cannot see 
us." 

** See you now ?" 

** Yes, at this very moment.'^ 

" See Claudy too?" 

** Yes." 

** Where is He ?" 

** In this room, in every part of the 
house, in the garden, in the (ields, in the 
whole island, throughout the world, and 
in heaven." 

She followed the direction of my 
finger, and having for some time looked 
stedfastly to the sky, said, " Is He in 
Claudy's little closet like this." 

** He is." 

She paused, and before she could 
reply, her attention was diverted by 
Rosalva, who called her out to take her 
glass of whey and bread. 

This was Claudy's first introduction 
to the knowledge of her Maker. The 
next morning, she came purposely to my 



16^ DUDLEY. 

closet door, and standing within it with- 
out disturbing me, heard me repeat in a 
half-voice the Lord's Prayer ; and, soon 
after, glided away. The three following 
mornings she never made her appear- 
ance, of which I took not the smallest 
notice : I was resolved to leave her, for 
some time longer at least, to her own 
voluntary inclinations ; and, in imitation 
of the brute creation, (it were well would 
we in many respects attend more to the 
laws by which the?/ are governed,) who 
ever set an example to their offspring, I 
did not take upon myself to say, ** Do 
thus, and thus ;'* but led the way I was 
desirous she should follow. 

For example, we sometimes in vain 
inform children, that to a Supreme 
Being they are indebted for life and every 
blessing, a Being whom they should con- 
sequently daily thank : they infer from 
this, that children are alone dependent 
on his care, and that maturity brings 
with it independence. On the contrary, 
(that is, by beginning at the other end,) 
Claudy was convinced, that / daily 
thanked the Giver of all good ; that I 



DUDLEY. 163 

luid done thus from five years of age till 
then, and should continue thus to do 
until the hour of my death, should it 
please God to spare my senses. She, 
therefore, exactly understands what is 
expected of her during the whole of her 
life-time, and is, at the period 1 now 
write, most exact in fulfilling her religious 
duties. 

To return to the period of her child- 
hood. Oa the fourth morning, she again 
appeared at my closet-door, and having 
long watched me attentively without the 
smallest interruption, yet often looking 
round, as if to be convinced no one was 
in the room except ourselves, and seem- 
ingly wishing to behold the person whom 
I addressed, she waited until I rose, and 
then coming to me said, " Claudy pray 
to God too,'' 

** Then you must first learn the prayer 
that God has taught us;" and lifting her 
on my lap, I began the Lord's Prayer, 
which she slowly and deliberately re- 
peated after me ; during which, as I had 
not suffered lier to kneel to me, neither 
did I permit her to join her hands, and. 



I64i DUDLEY* 

by these means, she clearly understood 
she was not at that time praying, but only 
learning to pray. 

The lesson thoroughly perfect (it took 
nearly a fortnight to teach), I told her 
she might, the following Sunday morning, 
pray to God, for the first time, in her 
little closet, which, like mine, opens into 
her bed-room, and which I intended 
should be prepared for her in the same 
state as my own. 

The time agreed upon arrived, and I 
led her to it. Pictures, playthings, and 
every thing extraneous, had been by my 
desire removed ; and nothing remained 
but the plain, simple walls of pale-blue 
stucco, the cedar floor brightly rubbed, a 
small green table, on which lay a bible 
and prayer-book, a footstool and one low 
chair. 

I think it is highly necessary, where 
our situation in life will admit of the in- 
dulgence, to have in our dwelling one 
spot, however small, set apart peculiarly 
for the exercise of our devotions. I, 
from experience, know the advantage 
resulting from this custom. In prayer. 



DUDLEY. 165 

in joy, and in sorrow, the heart seeks 
retirement; it flies to hide itself where 
no intrusion can come, where no object 
can exist to call off the attention, where 
it is seen by the eye of Providence alone. 
This small apartaient was in future to 
become the sacred refuge of Claudy ; 
and, as I led her into it, my heart 
breathed its own prayer to the Almighty, 
that it might witness her grateful piety 
to Him, the aspirations of innocent joy, 
and seldom, if ever, those of a contrary 
nature. 

On entering the room, the cliild looked 
round, and seemed pleased with the 
changes that had been made. I had 
caused the thick Venetian blinds to be 
removed, and replaced by a light wire-^ 
work, to prevent accidents : by this the 
view which the wide and single window 
commanded was indeed truly sublime. 
You may remember it ; sea, forests, 
waterfalls, hills, and mountains at a dis- 
tance, and the beauties of the plains, the 
vineyards, and of the gardens of Eu- 
phorbia, in the near ground — all was 
nature, nothing of art made its appear- 



166 DUDLEY. 

ance ; for from these Eastern windows, 
neither city, village, nor habitation is to 
be seen. The sun had long risen, its 
bright beams shone through the clustering 
jasmine, China rose, and clematis, which 
surrounded and shaded the window, and 
fell full on the table, on which lay a new 
bible and prayer-book, presents from her 
father : though unable as yet to read, 
they were never to be removed from that 
place. 

1 shut the door upon us, and making 
her kneel upon the footstool, and before 
the table, I stood behind her, whilst 
with joined hands she repeated the 
Lord's Prayer slowly and steadily ; after 
which, rising calmly and with com- 
posure, she asked, ** Did God hear me, 
aunt ?'' 

" He did, my child, and will at all 
times and in all places, the same as at 
this hour and in this closet ; but it is 
better to have a fixed spot to which we 
may retire whenever we please, assured 
of no one disturbing us.'* 

*' Do you pray to God at night tQO, 
aunt?" 

*« I do.'^ 



DUDLEY. 167 

** May I too ?'' 

" You may, if you choose to follow 
my example. TJiere are no lamps or 
branches lixed in these small rooms of 
ours, as you see, and it is forbidden to 
carry lights about the house; I, therefore, 
go into mine in the dark, and shut the 
door upon myself, and pray. If you go 
into your's at night, of course, it must 
be also in the dark." 

No answer whatever was made to this 
observation, and I left the affair to take 
its own course. It was not until two 
years after this conversation, that Claudy 
of her own accord did thus ; and of 
which she informed me the following 
morning, adding, ** Claudy was not 
afraid, for God was there.'' 

I then seized my opportunity, and 
expressed a hope that, as she had made 
a beginning, she would in future never 
go to bed without performing this act of 
devotion and gratitude,' by which, in 
time, she would be led to banish ground- 
less terror, and become convinced that 
God was every where. 

At the same time, I observed to her- 
selfi that there was a wide difference 



168 BUDLEt. 

in her being left alone for hoars asleep 
in bed, and passing five minutes awake 
in a closet though in the dark. 

Thus is the worship this child offers 
her Maker become wholly voluntary ; 
with her His service is indeed perfect 
freedom. I do not pretend to say, that 
slie even yet fully comprehends the 
nature of the Divine Being ; brit she 
understands that she is ever in the pre- 
sence of an invisible, an omniscient, and 
all-powerful Spirit, who created her, who 
preserves her, and who will, at the hour 
of death, call her hence ; — that shelter, 
food, and clothing, and health of body 
and mind, are His gifts, and not only to 
herself, but equally to her father and to 
me. She thanks us, it is true, as the 
agents who have it in charge to provide 
her good, but she never fails to look up 
to the First Cause ; — and this, my dear 
Madam, you will concur is having made 
some progress in theology. 

With best respects to Mr. Clonmore, 
believe me, 

Your faithful and attached friend, 
Jane Grantley. 



DUDLEY. 169 



LETTER XXXL 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Rev. Henry Cloninore. 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

IHE thoughts of our dear friends at 
Bloomfield Rectory are no doubt often 
and fervently with us j let them be 
assured our's are not less frequently with 
and warmly attached to them. 

When I inform you that Dudley now 
looks over Mrs. Grantley's shoulder, you 
may judge that he is no dwarf; and when 
1 tell you that he is now, as I see from 
my window, wrestling with his tutor, 
young Turner, and whom I perceive he 
has just thrown, whether by sleight or 
strength, I know not, — we may acknow- 
ledge that he is no longer entitled to the 
epithets of weak and puny. 

His English constitution begins to 
show itself, and we may sopn join in 

VOL. II. I 



170 DUDLEY. 

calling him — not a John Bull — but, as 
Miguel has it, a young " Jack Boeuf." 
His plunge every morning into cold 
water, at the instant of leaving his bed, 
has been of essential service towards 
bracing his nerves, and rendering his 
limbs robust and firm. He dresses him- 
self without assistance, and having spent 
about ten minutes in private prayer in 
his own cabinet, runs immediately out of 
doors, in ail weathers, for about an hour j 
or joins Claudy, who does not leave the 
house very early unless fine, in the 
billiard room, in which, as it is situated 
on the ground-floor and distant from the 
sleeping rooms, they may make what 
noise they please. 

This exercise over. Turner, Dudley, 
and breakfast are very glad to see one 
another. He then comes to me in my 
own private study, where we regularly 
begin with reading two chapters, one in 
the Old, the other in the New Tes- 
tament ; we comment, remark, take 
notes, have recourse to the authors 
around us for any elucidation that may 
be required, and conclude with reading 



t>UDLEY. 171 

in turn about twenty pages of some of 
our best theological writers. 

He and I have thus already gone 
once through the Old Testament, and 
six times through the New. We have 
read Bishop Porteus's Lectures, and the 
two first volumes of Blair's Sermons j " 
these concluded, we intend to begin 
Paley's Evidences, unless you can recom- 
mend me any that you think will better 
suit the capacity of eleven years of age, 
in which case, the latter author shall be 
deferred for some time. Indeed, now I 
am on that head, I wish you to select a 
few of what you consider the best of our 
writers on divinity, and send them to me 
for Dudley's use. 

He at present continues to learn with 
me daily about six verses of the thirty 
Psalms I have selected for that purpose, 
and is already master of ten, which he 
repeats slowly, and with a proper and 
quiet emphasis. I intend this course, in 
time, to be followed by a selection from 
the book of Job, of Proverbs, of Eccle- 
siastes, and of Ecclesiasticus, which I 
think will close our theological studies, 
I 2 



17^ DUDLEY. 

(by which I mean the plan of committing 
parts of the Scriptures to memory.) 

In about two years, I shall recommend 
his passing an additional hour or more in 
his own cabinet, and alone, as I wish to 
habituate him early to solitude : this prac- 
tice, though some carry it to a pernicious 
extreme, is, I am confident, of the most 
beneficial effect in fixing the mind to one 
point, in cooling the imagination, and in 
teaching the value of retirement, and the 
importance of depending on self, for oc- 
cupation and amusement. 

These prime duties concluded, he joins 
us, with Turner, at our breakfast, of 
which he and Claudy contrive, without 
fairly sitting down, heartily to partake. 
This refreshment over, and about half 
an hour's exercise in his own garden, or 
more frequently in that of Claudy, his 
next move is to his tutor's room, where 
they consume one hour in teaching and 
learning the dead languages ; writing, 
arithmetic, and geography, being de- 
ferred to the afternoon : in all which 
sciences, I yield the palm to your young 
^clerical friend, for Dudley made more 
15 



dDdley. 173 

progress with him in every one of these, 
in the first six months, than he would 
have done with me in ten years. 

Reading Horace and Homer for our 
own recreation, my friend, I found very 
different, from teaching those worthies to 
another ; therefore, fairly relinquished 
all competition, and reserved to myself 
those studies of a sacred nature, for which 
I have both taste and inclination. 

At eleven o'clock, Dudley's mule is 
brought to the door, and in a few minutes 
after, he is, perhaps, out of sight and 
hearing. Turner, when he feels inclined 
for a ride, accompanies him; other- 
wise he is alone. Claudy now and then 
mounts her beautiful little mule, given 
her by Mrs. Balfour, when, for fear of 
accidents, my old confidential servant, 
steady Robert, accompanies them. 

The children dine together in the nur- 
sery at twelve o'clock ; and, their meal 
over, either go out of doors again, or 
play in one of the empty rooms below, 
according as the temperature of the air 
permits 5 the heat of the sun sometimes 
I 3 



174 DUDLEr, 

inclining them, as well as their elders, to 
indulge in the siesta. 

At six o'clock, their afternoon lessons 
with Turner being over, both Dudley 
and Claudy come to my study, whither I 
retire for about an hour, leaving my com- 
pany to entertain themselves ; and here 
we read together, and still by turns, some 
book of amusement, either travels and 
voyages, of which Claudy is become 
greatly enamoured, or biography, Dudley 
showing a decided taste for the latter. 

My taking it in turn to read to them has 
two advantages : it puts them on a perfect 
equality with myself for the time, which 
makes them look forward to this lecture 
with delight ; and it improves their mode 
of reading, as it is my wish they should 
imitate my quiet manner, and avoid that 
of Turner, which is, in my mind, highly 
inflated, and indeed most painfully pom- 
pous : he is young, and I hope will cor- 
rect this defect. 

A book of maps is always open on the 
table before us, on which we trace with 
great avidity and interest, such places 
as may be mentioned j and this rule, of 



DUDLEY. 175 

course, is as necessary when studying bio- 
graphy and history, as travels. 

An extra duty falls to my share ; with 
a pencil I have to mark such passages as 
strike any of the three worth copying ; 
and this the next day, when alone, I dili- 
gently perform, in a large quarto book 
of blank paper. 

I have already filled two of these with 
pleasing, moral, and instructive extracts, 
which are gone to Orotava to be bound ; 
and I am now commencing a third vo- 
lume. These books are left on the table 
in the library, and we refer to them 
when desirous of amusement and inform- 
ation. 

Our habitual and daily intercourse 
with Spaniards has made their language 
familiar to Dudley, and he is now read- 
ing with me Ovieda's Notes on Cicero, 
and Cordero's Josephus, into both of 
which he enters with great spirit. He 
also begins to take pleasure in the French 
language ; to which I mean to add, in the 
course of a few years, German and 
Italian. But no persuasion of mine has 
yet been able to overcome his aversion to 
I 4 



17^ DUDLEY. 

writing and arithmetic. He does not 
even endeavour to conceal his abhor- 
rence. Yesterday, his lesson with Turner 
being longer than usual, I went to their 
room to learn the cause : — on one side 
of their large round table sat the master, 
spouting Virgil, with many flourishes of 
his hand in the air, whilst at the opposite 
side lounged Dudley, his elbows on the 
table, screwing his face into a hundred 
forms, and slapping his forehead with both 
his hands, whilst shuffling and kicking his 
feet under his chair; a copy-book lay open 
before him, scrawled over with figures. I 
saw how it was, and turned away in si- 
lence; but not before Dudley had seen me, 
when he exclaimed, " The deuce ! — no, 
Claudy desires me never to say the deuce ; 
but, really, if aunt Alford had this sum to 
prove, she would say, ' the deuce fly away 
with it.' " At last he seemed to have con- 
quered, and dashing down half-a-dozen 
figures, he handed the paper over to 
Turner, who took it to examine very com- 
posedly. *' Is it right, sir ? — Is it right ?'' 
cried Dudley, impatiently ; and on receiv- 
ing a nod of approbation, started from the 



DUDLEY. 177 

table in such haste to follow me, that he 
drew after him the green cloth with which 
it was covered, and the room was in- 
stantly spread with papers, slates, ink, 
pens, and wafers. 

He attempted to escape, and overtake 
me, calling loudly, " Padre ! Padre 1'* 
when I heard Turner call him back, and 
shut the door. I guessed the reason, and 
sauntered slowly to the gate, where 
their mules had long been waiting 5 and 
in a few minutes they both came running 
down stairs, more like a couple of school- 
boys than tutor and disciple : — and this, 
my friend, which would be an objection 
with some people, is with me young 
Turner's great recommendation. 

Although a good scholar, possessing 
an excellent disposition in the main, 
(setting aside the trifling tenacities of 
his temper, which are more the conse- 
quence of situation in life than nature,) 
and a strict disciplinarian, the moment 
the lesson is over, he is no longer the 
pedagogue, but a wild college youth, full 
of spirit and harmless mirth. In joining 
Dudley's sports, he thinks less of pleas. 
I 5 



lyS DUDLEY. 

ing the boy's inclinations than his own ; 
therefore they are more likely to be 
permanent. 

Turner in his study, Turner in our 
society in the dining and drawing rooms, 
and Turner at play with Dudley, are 
three distinct personages, though one and 
the same man, such as, in Prince Hoare's 
Three and the Deuce, is Peregrine, 
Percival, and Pertinax, three persons 
represented by an individual actor. John 
Bannister, whom I saw perform this, or 
rather these characters, was not capable 
of greater transformation of face, voice, 
and gesture, than is Turner. The only 
difference between them, the versatility 
of one is the result of talent, that of the 
other is solely owing to the dictates of 
nature, by which inspired, he seems thus 
to argue : — *' I must be grave and at- 
tentive to my duty in the school-room y 
secondly, I cannot get rid of my college 
sheepishness in the drawing-room ; and, 
thirdly, in the open air, I am myself.'' 

And here, to do him full justice, I 
must add, that when performing divine 
service, or preaching, he is a fourth and 



DUDLEY. 179 

a totally distinct character: Caroline 
says, for this we may thank the canon- 
icals. However, her gaiety must have its 
jest, and we can only acknowledge, that 
his deportment, at such times, is all that 
is solemn, impressive, and reverential. 

" Well, you dunce," I called to Dudley, 
as he, passing me, ran down the garden- 
steps and sprang upon his mule, " I hope 
Mr. Turner made you pick up all you had 
thrown down : here have your chargers 
been waiting for you both this half- 
hour.*' <* Yoicks ! yoicks !*' shouted 
Dudley, as he gave Turner's mule a lash 
with his whip, and galloped off, — the 
master following, full speed, at the 
hazard of his neck, whilst I remained 
standing at the door watching them. 

It is thus that the bond of friendship 
unites the pupil and the youthful teacher; 
and it is but justice that, as the former 
benefits by the talents and labour of the 
latter, the latter should share with him 
his exercise and diversions. Every 
day shows me the prudence of your 
choice : an older or graver man than 
Turner would have been in my way j I 
I 6 



180 



DUDLEY. 



should have felt a constraint before him, 
and my sister and our company would 
have been liable to constant intrusion : 
whereas, with this young man, the re- 
verse is the case. From his diminutive 
stature (Dudley is now nearly as tall), 
his juvenile appearance, and fondness 
for youthful sports out in the open air, 
he is, in fact, much more partial to the 
society of Dudley than to our's, and 
seems glad to escape from our meals and 
return to him. 

I have observed, that with respect to 
money-aifairs he is as thoughtless as 
Goldsmith himself; and I have remarked 
to him, that being neither poet, artist, 
nor musician, he is entitled to no patent 
for the exercise of pecuniary careless- 
ness, and, consequently, ought to be a 
little more provident. Though, between 
ourselves, you may depend on my making 
an ample provision for him for the re- 
mainder of his life, whether, when Dud- 
ley's education shall be completed, he 
should choose to quit Euphorbia for 
England, or remain with me as chaplain. 
He devotes his youth tome and mine^ 



DUDLEY. 181 

and fulfils his duty to both ; it must be, 
therefore, my care to shield his winter of 
life from the storms of poverty and de- 
pendence. His destitute and friendless 
state is another claim to my attention : 
— he was an orphan, I tliink you said; 
one of eight children of an unbeneficed 
Shropshire clergyman, and educated at 
the Blue-Coat School, from whence he 
was passed to Cambridge, where he took 
his degrees. He is one of the hundreds 
who, but for this whim of falling in love 
with Euphorbia, from your report of it, 
might have, in less than ten years, been 
struggling in obscurity on an abject 
stipend, encumbered with a wife and a 
young and increasing family. 

He feels himself happy here ; I like 
him ; Mrs. Grantley treats him with kind- 
ness ; and, what is of more consequence 
than all, Dudley is excessively fond of 
him. 



The next day, Dudley and I being 
alone together, I took occasion once 
;more to make some remark on the 
childish dislike he seemed to have taken 



ISS DUDLEY. 

to writing and arithmetic ; on which he 
answered, " I do detest both.'* 

" That is a strong phrase, my boy, — 
I do not think, that when I was your age 
I detested either, but 1 certainly did not 
like either one or the other." 

" You did not!" he repeated, with 
an expression of triumph and pleasure. 

" No ; I own 1 preferred almost 
every other branch of education ; but I 
was conscious that it was indispensably 
necessary I should write a good legible 
hand, and become master of figures : I 
therefore persevered, and, before I was 
twelve years old, had conquered both 
these difficulties." 

My dear Clonmore, how easy it is, by 
a little timely concession and candour, 
(for this was strictly true,) to make your 
own terms with youth ! 

This unreserved and opportune con- 
fession of my boyish stupidity and aver- 
sion, had a good effect on Dudley. — 
<« If you conquered your dislike, why 
should not 7.^" he said j ** TU try, at all 
events." And he has kept his word. 
His hand- writing is daily gaining firmness, 



DUDLEY* 185 

without formality ; and he has made great 
proficiency in arithmetic, being now con- 
vinced, that the latter science is one of 
the mostessential and important ground- 
works of most of his studies. 

When we join in a walk, although 
we all set out together from the house, 
we generally separate, and very soon, into 
parties; and I have remarked, thatClaudy 
is of mine, and Dudley of Mrs. Grantley*s : 
by which means the children have the 
advantage of our several instructions ; 
and you will agree with me, that as ex- 
cellent lessons may be given in a walk 
as when sitting in a room, before a table 
covered with books. 

The sky, the clouds, the trees, the 
verdure, nature, whether animated or 
still, all that surround us become the 
subject of a theme ; and on these occa- 
sions, the curiosity of these children is as 
insatiable as our patience is unwearied. 
— What is singular, they never, in their 
walks, question either Turner or young 
Rosalva, as to any object of which they 
may wish to enquire, — their communi- 



184 DUDLEY. 

cation with them seems confined to play 
and active sports, while their questions 
are reserved for us. 

Did you ever make the remark, that in 
a tete-a-tete with a child, no matter its 
age, the difference of years is insensibly 
forgotten by yourself, to the great benefit 
of the said child ? — For example, set out 
on a walk with a boy of eight years old ; 
your conversation, independent of your 
own will, soon raises him to your level 
of understanding, — until meeting acci- 
dentally with a lad of fourteen, you in- 
stantly, and yet without intention, alter 
your style of address to your former com- 
panion, and treat him in a manner adapted 
to his age : — proceed half a mile farther, 
and you are accosted by a youth of 
twenty, whom you are very glad to see j 
you take his arm and join in discourse, 
during which you scarcely turn aside to 
attend to the remarks o^ fourteen, and not 
at all to those of eight ; nay, you now tell 
the latter to jump on before like a little 
man, and perhaps desire the former to 
join him : — lastly, you are overtaken by 
a friend of your own time of life, who 



DUDtHY. 185 

puts his arm under your's, and thereupon 
engrosses the whole of your attention, to 
the total forgetf Illness of the child, the 
boy, and the young man, who, had you 
continued your walk with each sepa- 
rately, would otherwise have benefited 
by your society, and derived from it solid 
and lasting advantages. 

Under this impression, Mrs. Grantley 
and I make it an invariable rule never to 
suffer a third person to remain in the 
room during the studies of the morning, 
(those of the afternoon being rufher re- 
creations.) Igrant that this plan of our's is 
not for general imitation : indeed, it were 
impossible, in schools, for example, or in 
large private families ; but, situated as we 
are, it is what we have adopted, and, con- 
scious of its advantages, what we shall 
pursue, until education is at an end. 

The idea originated long since, when 
Dudley and I being engaged one morn- 
ing, Claudy, who had not at that time 
the same hour appropriated by her aunt, 
begged permission to stay with me in my 
study, and I consented, on condition she 
would be quiet and not disturb Dudley 



186 DUDLEY. 

at his lessons, to which I had the usual 
answer : — *< I cannot promise, because 
perhaps I may laugh/' 

She was however admitted, at Dudley's 
earnest request; and in less than ten 
minutes, I had the honour of showing 
her the door. 

No, my friend ; I am convinced that 
where it can be thus arrai;iged, more use- 
ful instruction is gained by the pupil in 
an hour, when alone with him, than ir^ 
double that time when in company of a 
fellow student : — if tired, they yawn 
through sympathy; if inclined to be face- 
tious, mirth is catching ; if desirous of 
being idle, idleness is thought becoming : 
their attention is engrossed by each 
other, and thus the lesson frequently 
closes, after great fatigue and exertion on 
the part of the teacher, and with little or 
no improvement on the side of the pupil. 
Whereas, instead of four hours being 
thus spent, two hours given to each child, 
separately, might have been attended 
with every desired effect, with less waste 
of spirits to the grown person, and with 
more advantage to the young ones ; the 



DUDLEY. 187 

latter of whom might each, while the 
other was employed, be spending the 
same time more profitably at play in the 
open air. 

When 1 am alone with Dudley, his mind 
has but one object, whilst his temper 
(granting that it meets with no irritating 
obstacles) is invariably smooth; and with 
the usual lessons, he learns the important 
one of taking an affectionate interest iu 
the person whom he sees devote his time 
and intellects to his sole improvement. 

— Whilst still on this subject, I will just 
mention what occurred with us the other 
day. 

You already know they have begun 
drawing, and that this truly elegant and 
delightful talent being particularly pleas- 
ing to me, I undertake to be their master. 

— Some months were spent in acquiring 
excellence in their horizontal and per- 
pendicular strokes, their circles, angles, 
&c. ; — and at this period, Dudley has 
made some progress in copying features, 
and Claudy in imitating leav^es, flowers, 
and fruit. 

I give them a drawing lesson, for two 



188 DUDLEY. 

hours at a time, twice a week : but being 
last Wednesday obliged to go over to Ben 
Lomond on business, I told them they 
should take their lesson together. — The 
idea was delightful ; they came hand in 
hand to my study, — opened their port- 
folios, — prepared their materials, and 
took their places. — I exacted no pro- 
mise, fully persuaded they would behave 
well — if they could. Dudley laid the 
large outline head of Socrates before him, 
and began to copy. Claudy placed her 
drawing of a branch of an oak-tree on 
the table, and both were for about half 
an hour silent, and attentively employed. 
^ — The first symptom of breaking the 
peace, was a look from the little girPs 
large blue eyes, which, without raising 
her face, were thrown upon her opposite 
neighbour. This look Dudley caught, as 
he accidentally lifted up his head and 
hand, to reach a penknife; when a little 
prim mouth of admonition, a nod, and a 
wink to be silent, followed on his part. 

In a moment after, Claudy called 
out, *' Papa, cut my pencil ;" and, 
^* Dudley, you have got my Indian 



DUDLEY. 189 

rubber." — Then stooping over the table 
to take it from him, she caught a view of 
liis performance, when she exclaimed, — 
" Oh, Dudley, what a chin you are 
making ! — when will it end ?'' 

Dudley's talents thus called in ques- 
tion, he started from his chair, and com- 
ing round to examine her task, remarked, 
with much composure, " I can make out 
six chins in that oak-branch you are 
drawing: — there's the old woman's chin, 
meeting her nose ; and the peaked chin 
of a Jew J and the hooked chin of 
Miguel ; and — " 

Claudy caught the ridiculous, and 
laughing, continued to assist him in find- 
ing out resemblances in her oak-leaves. 
My opinion w^as referred to, which, as it 
certainly did agree with their's, was 
frankly given ; at the same time, I set- 
tled in my own mind, this is the last time, 
my friends, you take your drawing-lesson 
together. 

You and Mrs. Clonmore, I feel con- 
fident, remember our afternoon customs 
at Euphorbia too well for me to remind 
you of them ; and I only now mention 
these to introduce to your notice Dudley 



190 DUDLEY. 

and Claudy, as having long formed part 
of our society, yet, paradoxically speak- 
ing, forming no part of it whatever. 

When we adjourn to either the open 
or the closed saloon, (as the weather 
permits,) the children make their ap- 
pearance, attended by Rosalva. This 
young girl is extremely clever and in- 
genious in all little handicraft works, 
several of which she knew when she 
first came to live here, and others have 
been taught her by competent persons at 
Santa Cruz, at Mrs. Grantley's desire. 

Dudley and Ciaudy, having selected 
their ottomans, or other low seats, and 
removed them to any unoccupied part of 
the room, take their places on each side 
of Rosalva, by whom their attention is 
so wholly engrossed, that they continue 
their employments with as much eager- 
ness and unconcern, though there may 
be thirty or forty strangers present, as if 
sitting on one of the fallen stones on 
Salisbury Plain, 

Rosalva has taught them to make 
baskets of palm-leaves, of various forms; 
others of willow, which they colour for 



DUDLEY. 191 

their purpose ; also to ii^ake fruit-nets, 
plait straw, weave mats, construct down 
tippets, feathered ruffs, and, in short, a 
variety of other aifairs, of which I scarcely 
know the name or use. 

Though they are the objects of atten- 
tion and interest to the company, such 
is their humility, that they never consider 
themselves of the smallest consequence, 
or even the subjects of notice, and thus 
go on with their amusements and con- 
versation with perfect indifference to all 
around them. — If any person wishes to 
speak to them, they are called over, which 
invitation they instantly obey, and with 
cheerfulness answer the questions put to 
them j on being dismissed, they return to 
their occupations, as they are never suf- 
fered to question in their turn, and thus 
many untoward occurrences are avoided. 
Had such been the plan adopted in our 
childhood, I should not have asked Sir 
X — Y — , before a large and silent com- 
pany, what was become of his wife (di- 
vorced the preceding week); nor Caro- 
line, when at the dowager Duchess of 
Z ^s knee, and staring in her face. 



19^ BUDLEY. 

enquired had she been running, riding, 
or standing at the fire, for that her cheeks 
were very red. 

Our children, I repeat, are desired to 
answer, but never to question : they, how- 
ever, take good care to make themselves 
amends for this prohibition, by attacking 
their aunt and myself, when we are alone, 
with interrogatories without number. 

During the collation, the children nei- 
ther look at the guests, nor receive any 
thing from them. One of the servants 
brings them on a salver their portion of 
fruit and bread, which he places at their 
side, and of these the three partake, — 
stiy going on with their work, regardless 
whether they have, or have not, a sample 
of every thing on the table. More than 
half of their supply is constantly left by 
them, when they quit the room for their 
own chambers ; — and having always an 
abundance of food, and of the plainest 
kind, with which they are uncondition- 
ally trusted, the gratification of appetite 
seems ever with themthe last co nsider- 
ation. 

A few advantages resulting from being 
thus daily admitted into society without 



DUDLEY. 19s 

mixing with it, must strike both you and 
Mrs. Clonmore : they do not disturb the 
company ; they escape a most insuffer- 
able vice in children, that of aping the 
manners of their elders ; and what is per- 
haps still worse, the habit of mimicking 
the peculiarities of others. — In this their 
eleventh year, they retain their own 
childish ways, language, and graces ; the 
elegance and innocence of their actions 
and ideas are not perverted by imita- 
tion : and I repeat, in the presence of a 
numerous society, they ever act as if 
they were in perfect solitude. 

Turner sometimes goes over to their 
station, and joins them in work and con- 
versation, but ever against my wish, as it 
spoils the simple and pretty group : 
besides, my desire is that at this hour, 
the only one in which the three meet 
together, they should give their undi- 
vided attention to Rosalva, who always 
converses with them in Spanish, which, 
from her having been brought up in a 
convent, she speaks correctly. — . I have 
also a third motive, tending to the young 

VOL. II. K 



19^ DUDLEY. 

clergyman's own advantage ; it is, that 
he should mix as much as possible with 
the company who almost daily assemble 
here y by this his manners would be im- 
proved, and he would get a little more 
the air of a man of the world, in which 
at present he is woefully deficient. 

Balfour, the other evening, entered 
into my views, and fairly dragged him 
away from the trio, with a good-humoured 
remark, that some of the twenty or thirty 
pair of eyes then upon him, would think 
he courted the society of the pretty 
young girl Rosalva, instead of that of 
the children. Instead of taking this ad- 
vice as it was intended, in a friendly man- 
ner, he coloured, and turning fiercely on 
Balfour, asked, did he mean to insult 
him, by insinuating that it were possible 
he could become enamoured of a menial 
— a servant-maid ! 

You can contrast the two figures in 
your own mind, the fiery, irritable little 
clergyman, and the portly though short 
smooth-faced and good-humoured mer- 
chant. Balfour gave him his answer^ it 
was the Newfoundland dog dropping the 



DUDLEY. 195 

snarling cur unhurt from his mouth into 
the Thames. 

" No, my good friend/' replied the 
Scotchman, laying his hand on Turner's 
shoulder, " by no means — but * Amor 
omnia vincit.' — Correct me,;if I'm wrong. 
The sum total has been my study, not the 
classics — a word to the wise though — " 

Thus, Turner fancying himself on a 
sudden transformed into a hero, dre?/ 
himself up, walked over on the points of 
his shoes to a young French lady, who 
sat near Mrs. Grantley, asked her some 
question, to which she returned a short 
answer, with a smile, and a look of timi- 
dity ; when he, in full triumph, stretched 
out his legs, put his hands in his pockets, 
and cast an eye of defiance on Balfour, as 
much as to say, " / am invincible." 

"Well, my friend, thus far I give my 
report of the progress of Dudley's edu- 
cation. We are, as you see, getting on in 
our travels, and what, in reality, is life, 
but a walk from the cradle to the grave ? 
— What our acquirements of a serious 
nature, but tools placed in our hands to 
clear our road, or arms to procure suste- 
K 2 



196 DUDLEY. 

nance, or provide for our safety ? — 
And what those which are deemed merely 
ornamental ? — flowers scattered in our 
path, to beguile and charm the way. 

Adieu, my friends. When I think of 
the blessing you have bestowed on me, 
in resigning to my care this darling object 
of my hopes, I have no words to thank 
you ; in that case, let the miniatures of 
Dudley and Claudy, which I have just 
completed, and which I now forward to 
you, silently express all I would say. I 
send both, as I wish them never to be 
separated, 

Your's ever, 

Eliot HowarDc 



BUDLEY. 197 



LETTER XXXli. 

The Countess of Alfordto Mrs. Clonmmei 

Ben Lomond, TenerHfe. 

xJo you recollect, my dear Louisa, the 
conclusion of my last letter : whether 
you do or not, you have the advantage of 
me, in being able to refer to it, as 1 am 
certain the single name of Dudley would 
ensure its safety. In future, I shall con- 
trive to save my correspoiidence from 
destruction, by hauling into it, in some 
shape or other, the name of that young 
scape-grace — so will it be preserved 
for my own amusement, when I come to 
my spectacle-age, and my take-off-and- 
on forehead ringlets, not to mention 
crowsfeet and parenthesis. 

I repeat, have you any recollection of 
the wind-up of my last letter ? Was it 
that I intended to live and die in this 
Paradise, for it is such in fact j or did I 
desire you to be on the look out for the 
signal flag of my return to England. 
K 3 



19S DtJDLEY. 

Finally, did I authorise you to inform the 
Marquis, the Viscount, and the Lieute- 
nant, that I was coming home ; and that 
whichever should first jump from off the 
chalky cliffs of Albion to greet my wel- 
come, it should be, catch and keep ? 

Well, no matter. — Whatever I might 
write at that hour, I have now, at this 
present moment, to inform you, Louisa 
Clonmore, that under the blue counte- 
nance of Heaven — no, that's a vile com- 
bination of words, and directly the re- 
verse of what I mean — to look blue at a 
body has one meaning, to look cheerily, 
another. — I have then to assure you, that 
upon the wide surface of this globe, since 
I must descend from the skies, there is 
not a more exquisitely happy place than 
this same island of Tenerifte. 

Would you believe it, my dear, I have 
at last met with a person who has broken 
the spell of apathy and obsequious po- 
liteness ; one who has fairly entered with 
me the lists of opposition ; one who, in 
short, cares no more for me or my whims, 
than I should for the squalling of a mac- 
caw. I am, at this present hour of writings 



DUDLEY. 199 

hoisting the joyful colours of triumphant 
warfare : — and who do you think is lying 
at full length on the table before me ? — 
Sir Paul Riccaut, my dear ; that is, Sir 
Paul Riccaut's wars of the Turks : and by 
his side lies another folio, giving a history 
of Malta — its situation, air, climate, soil^ 
customs and manners. And should ever 
chance throw in my way a feathered 
chief of the Esquimaux, or one of the 
Emperor of China's plump mandarins, 
I shall in like manner make North Ame- 
rica and Pekin my study* 

You will hence infer, that my new ac- 
quaintance is of Malta : no such thing ^ 
but from the little Maltese cross he 
wears, I judge him to be a Knight; and 
it has ever been my ambition to fall in 
love with a Knight of Malta. 

Oh, Louisa, if you could but know 
all the methods I have taken to render 
myself agreeable in his eyes ! And to 
speak the truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth, this Knight is as 
fine a wretch as ever my eyes beheld. 
He is as tall as Eliot, as stout as Balfour ; 
but neither as lathy as the one, nor mus- 
K 4 



200 DUDLEY, 

cular and thickset as the other. He has 
not the smooth, open, good-natured face 
of your Henry, the Rector 5 or the irri- 
table, changing countenance of Turner, 
the Cantab, his ci-devant curate : and yet 
he is as placid and as active as either. 
Mais enfin, take the best properties of 
these four men, whom I mention parti- 
cularly, as we are so well acquainted 
with them all, and by combining them, 
you may form a tolerable idea of my new 
Spanish friend, who is a Major Her- 
nandez, of the regiment, which has 

lately distinguished itself in Spain under 
Castanos or Palafox, I forget which ; and 
is come to these parts, as Balfour tells 
me, on political business, <* in which,'* 
he added, " ladies have no concern ;'* 
and for which I was very much tempted 
to challenge him — that is to challenge 
him to name a single political stroke 
achieved throughout the world, since Eve 
gave the apple to Adam, in which a 
woman had had no share. 

But to relate events in chronological 
order. You may remember I went to Mrs* 
Balfour's on a visit of a week, and this ia 



DUDLEY. 201 

the second month of tny stay. Part of 
the time was spent at their town-house 
at Orotavaj and we are now settled in 
their country seat near Laguna, about 
four miles from Santa Cruz ; from whence 
I proposed, a few days back, to make the 
tour of the island, of which I thought no 
more than flying in a sociable round the 
Isle of Wight. 

Well, the day was fixed, and the party 
named ; and on the settled morning, 
they all assembled at Ben Lomond, six 
beaux and as many belles. I therefore 
made a bargain, before I set out, that 
whatever gentleman chance should throw 
in our way on the excursion, should be 
monopolised by myself, and my nerves ; 
that he should attend solely on me, to 
keep me in good-humour, and make me 
forget the toils of the journey. To this 
proviso they all agreed with alacrity, and 
we set out — not in sociables, my friend, 
as you may suppose ; no, the ladies left 
their chariots behind, and we mounted 
our mules ; a sort of covered waggon, 
drawn by a couple of horned beasts, 
called in England oxen, bringing up the 
K 5 



20^ DUDLEY. 

rear, with a tent, provisions, and a va- 
riety of live and dead stock. 

Tiie morning was as bright and auspi- 
cious as any augur or priestess could wish ; 
and on we trotted, up hill, down hill, over 
broken roads of lava and pumice-stone, 
to the south-west of Santa Cruz, beguiling 
our way with chat, good-humour, a duet, 
a glee, an anecdote, and the pleasing 
strains of a lute, which one of the Spa- 
niards played to the accompaniment of 
the cheerful song of the muleteers, when 
encouraging their cattle. 

Our first halt was in a grove of chesnut, 
fig, and pine-trees, near the summit of a 
rocky hill, and here we dined most sump- 
tuously on the grass, in a sort of a wild 
wilderness, in which grew peaches, apri- 
cots, and grapes in abundance : cheered 
by the sun and a light breeze, and re- 
galed by the birds, every sense was gra- 
tified. Our servants remained at a distance 
with their mules and oxen, which having 
fed, they stretched themselves to sleep 
under the trees. Such was our position, 
when from the top of a high tree rushed 
down from branch to branch, and then 



DUDLEY. 203 

leaped on the ground, almost in the centre 
of us all, the most hideous monster of the 
ourang-outang species I had ever beheld. 
I gave a loud scream, and hid my face be- 
hind Balfour's shoulder, who, turning, 
said, « Don't be alarmed. Lady Alford, 
it is only a Guanche." 

" A what T' I exclaimed; *« A Guanche, 
a mountaineer, one of the descendants of 
the aborigines of the island, who, though 
very rarely, are still to be met with in 
some of the wildest and most unfre- 
quented midland parts. — He is no doubt 
going to Santa Cruz, to make some pur- 
chase or other.'* 

" Not in that dress !" I cried. 

" Why not ? It is the ancient national 
dress, and, I think, very becoming." 

Judge yourself, Louisa, of Squire Bal- 
four's taste. First imagine before your 
eyes, a high, broad, and lean old savage, 
with immense bones, clothed in a coat 
of rushes, which reaches to his naked 
knees, and this tied round the waist with 
a leather girdle ; gaiters of the same 
materials, a short goat-skin cloke over 
his shoulders, the hair worn outward, and 
K 6 



204 DUDLEY. 

a skin cap upon his head, with long hairy 
lappets hanging down on each side his 
face. — No ! Robinson Crusoe was a birth- 
day beau to him ; if you add to this dress 
a gloomy stedfast frown, which, as he 
eyed us all around, seemed to say — " Oh, 
what luxury, to spike you all, one after 
another, on this huge iron spear in my 
hand, and chuck you into the mouth 
of the burning Peak, ramming you down 
into its very fiery bowels — you set of 
Spanish robbers !" 

Balfour offered him some fruit, which 
he refused 5 and having given one more 
look at us, he placed his lance between 
his feet, gave a sudden spring down a de- 
clivity behind us, and thus leaping from 
rock to rock, was at length lost in the 
distance. Some time after, we heard so 
loud and shrill a whistle, that some of us 
clapped our hands to our ears. — *' What 
was that ?'^ I asked, in a tremor of fright. 

«« The whistle of the Guanche," re- 
plied Balfour ; " and really we are much 
mdebted to him, that he did not give 
this signal when standing here among us, 
of the effect of which you may have some 



DUDLEY. g05 

idea, when I assure you he is at present 
at least three miles off." 

" A signal !*' I exclaimed ; " we shall 
be all robbed and murdered ; he is calling 
his gang together, and we shall never re- 
turn alive. The deuce take all parties of 
pleasure, I say. Mr. Balfour, I insist upon 
it, that we halt this evening at our inn 
two hours earlier than we proposed." To 
this, Baifour gave a nod of assent, and I 
was satisfied. 

** But, apropos,^' I enquired, " Pray, 
how many days is this expedition to 
last ?" My question appeared, at first, to 
puzzle him ; but he replied, on my repeat- 
ing it, *'Why,Imust leave your ladyship to 
calculate : the island is about 70 English 
miles in length, and about 30 in breadth. 
Supposing that we take a circuit, upon an 
average, of half a mile from the coast, 
and travel ten miles a day, in what time 
shall we return to Ben Lomond ?" 

'' The deuce take your calculations, 
man ; why not give a simple answer to a 
simple — that is, a rational question ? 
Well, then, can you tell me at what 
hour we shall arrive this evening at our 
inn ?" 



S06 DUDLEY* 

He took out his watch, and, with some 
hesitation, replied, looking very wisely, 
*< By ten o'clock, most probably." 

" Ten ! defend me, it will be dark by 
that time ; and in these strange, out- 
landish roads, among Guanches and ban^ 
ditti" 

" Never fear, the guides are perfectly 
acquainted with the roads, and were they 
not, I am." 

' And thus once more satisfied, on we 
journeyed, as merry as a gang of gypsies; 
and at about eight o'clock, again halted 
in the bottom of a deep valley, on one 
side of which was a mountain covered 
with forest trees, and on the other a 
precipice, that made me giddy to look 
down. Thus perched on this shelf) mid- 
way, we enjoyed about half an hour, 
laughing over the adventures of the 
morning, most of which I have omitted, 
fearful of wearying you, Louisa, for the 
main adventure is yet to come. 

Througli the opening of the hills the 
Peak was visible, when pointing to it, I 
reminded Baifour of our bet, appealing 
at tbe same time to the rest of the com- 



DUDLEY. 207 

pany, asking, was it possible that that 
hill could be nearly three miles in height; 
it appears to me, at this distance, to be 
only about a thousand yards to the 
summit. 

*« Nevertheless," replied the Scotch- 
man calmly, as he piled a quantity of 
heath and Spanish broom on our vagrant 
fire, which had boiled our tea-kettle in 
the English fashion, — " The Peak is, I 
repeat. Lady Alford, 1^,500 feet above 
the level of the sea ; and I have already 
fixed on the colour of the shawl you will 
lose to me for Mrs. Balfour." 

I gave him his answer, when, as he 
was turning av/ay to gather more of the 
delightful fuel which grew in profusion 
around us, he stopped abruptly, and 
looked over the precipice, his eyes 
seemingly following some moving object; 
and, soon afterwards, he turned his head 
slowly to the opposite road whence we 
had come, and added, '* Here, if I am 
not greatly deceived, is one who, if you 
will abide by his judgment, can at a word 
decide our wager, for he has been to the 
summit of the Peak above half a dozen 



©08 



DUDLEY. 



times, and has taken the altitude geome- 
trically." 

Whilst he spoke, the thick branches of 
the trees near us were separated by a pair 
of hands, and a human figure came for- 
ward, the sight of which, when I ex- 
pected the Guanche to appear again, 
afforded me the greatest relief. 

My dear, represent to yourself a gen- 
tleman dressed in a long, dark-blue mili- 
tary coat, embroidered, be-tasselled, be- 
frogged, and be-furred ; a flat leather 
cap, huzzar boots, and sword and belt. 

«* Oh, oh. Major!" cried Mr. Balfour, 
" here you are, directed hither as I per- 
ceive by the Guanche ; his signal was to 
you, I suppose. — Well, just in time to 
decide a wager between Beauty and 
me." 

Now this * Beauty and me' offered 
so ridiculous an idea to my imagination, 
(ever enamoured of fairy tales,) that, in- 
decorous as it may appear to you, and as 
it certainly did to some of the Donnas, I 
could not help laughing en plein cceur ; 
during which, Baifour, unconscious of the 
folly he had committed, v/ent up close to 
^3 



DUDLEY. SOg 

the stranger, drew him apart, and in a 
low voice seemed entreating liiin to com- 
ply with some urgent request ; to which, 
with a sort of a shrug and a iaint smile, 
the other appeared at last to consent ; 
when they both joined the company, and 
threw themselves on the grass. 

«' Well, Major," said Balfour aloud, 
*< am I not right ? is not the Peak of 
Teneriffe estimated at — what is your 
estimate, Major?" 

" 12,500 feet above the level of the 
sea," replied the stranger, calmly^ 

This was such palpable collusion, so 
manifestly a manoeuvre between them 
both, that I could no longer keep my 
temper, and appealing to all the party, 
I had the satisfaction of their support in 
declaring the wager was not decided. 

Whilst they all joined in debating on the 
subject, Mrs. Balfour, with a mixture of 
malice and archness, for which I could 
have cuffed and kissed her, said in a low 
voice to me, *' Remember the other sti- 
pulation you made with us ladies this 
morning, that any gentleman we might 
meet with on the road should fall exclu- 
sively to your share." 



^10 DUDLEY. 

I had my reply. <' It was a Valentine 
stipulation, my dear madam ; for, with 
mental reservation, I said, the^r^^ gen- 
tleman that we should encounter should 
attend on me ; therefore, the Ouanche 
falls in toto to my share, and you rhay 
divide the Major amongst yourselves." 

The object of our conversation was at 
this time lying nearly at his length on 
the grass, one elbow supporting his head> 
and the other hand making sad depre- 
dations on some pine-apple ice which lay 
before hime 

** Besides,'' I added, now fully aole to 
Examine his features as Ae was examining 
the features of the ices, " when I made 
the bargain, who could think of meeting 
a gentleman accidentally in these ashy 
roads of repentance ? When I talked of 
beaux and cavaliers, I alluded to mule- 
teers and water-carriers, who might flog 
my lazy brute on to a canter, or help to 
carry my palanquin.'' 

*' Shall I mention this allusion of 
your's ?" said Mrs. Balfour — she is as 
full of mischief as a parrot or a baboon — 
" I have no doubt our friend would be 



DUDLEY. 21 1 

happy to enlist himself in your service in 
any capacity whatever." 

*' Hush!" I .cried, more horribly 
alarmed than a lady of fashion ought to 
feel on such an occasion ; but recollect, 
though in a warm climate, the wind blew 
at that time so cold over the frozen zones 
of the Peak, that I trembled violently 
whilst giving her a pretty bracelet (here- 
after to become one of black and blue 
^mc^-beck) — " if you utter a single 
syllable of what I said, I'm oiF to-morrow 
for Euphorbia/' 

<« Well," she replied, '' I obey, but 
you would not be trespassing on neigh- 
bour's ground ; for the Major is a ba- 
chelor, and I would venture my pearl 
crescent against your pearl coronet still 
disengaged." 

Our attention was here called off by 
Balfour's exclaiming,^' Major Hernandez, 
(we had three other military men of our 
party,) before you demolish the whole of 
that Chinese pagoda of sweetmeats, will 
you give a story or two of it to this young 
lady ?" 

Now you would suppose that on such 



'21'^ riUDLEY* 

an intimation, the Major would have laid 
down tlie spoon, gallantly handed the 
pagoda to the lady, helped her, and 
never touched it again himself. An con* 
iraire, this strange mortal deliberately 
acted as Mr. Balfour desired, gave the 
young lady what he considered a suf- 
ficient quantity for her health, and then 
finished the remainder himself. 

I believe Balfour guessed my astonish- 
ment at the uncouth manners of this 
elegant man ; for when he saw me sted- 
fastly watching the fine countenance and 
easy attitude of his friend, he rose, saying, 
^' We have halted long enough, and 
nlust be now off, or we shall not reach 
our ^OM^^ by ten. Come, Major, there 
is a spare mule for you; you have walked 
far, and must be tired." 

" And so am I," was on my lips ; but 
fears of breaking up the party kept me 
silent, and we were all (excepting Major 
Hernandez, who chose to walk) again on 
mule 'back. 

And how it happened I know not, but 
we had not wound up the hills above a 

hundred yards, when Whether my 

mule, or myself, or my guide, were in 



DltDLEY. ^13 

fault, is not for me to determine. My 
mule is silent on the subject ; my guide 
takes his own part, and that of his brother 
mule ; therefore, I can only conclude 
that I was to blame. 

We had just reached the top of a steep 
hill, when I discerned through the eve- 
ning shades, a number of scattered lights 
at some distance: and with joy at the sight 
I exclaimed to Balfour, who was on one 
side of me, ^* Well, after all, you are the 
bonniest lad that ever wore a bonnet. By 
the ghosts of Bruce and Baliol, you have 
sent on a special messenger, the Guanche 
perhaps ; and there is our inn, and every 
thing already prepared for us. Now for 
the comforts of waiters, chamber-maids, 
landlords and landladies, fires, lights, 
supper and good beds.'^ 

Balfour smiled, and can you possibly 
guess his next question ? it ran thus, my 
dear : ** Lady Alford, did you ever read 
< She stoops to conquer ?' '^ 

a No — yes, I think I have. I don't 
exactly remember ; but what of that ?" 

** I have a collection of plays at home,'* 
he replied, <* and you shall read it to^ 
morrow." 



^14i DUDLEY. 

" To-morrow !" and as I checked my 
mule I looked round, absolutely struck 
dumb with astonishment (and very few 
of the passions have that power over me) ; 
*« Why angels and ministers of grace 1" 
I cried, (I've read the mad Dane, how- 
ever,) " can it be possible ? is it ? it is. 
Yonder is the stone archway ; there the 
entrance trees near the gate ; and here 
the green and gold lamp-post to direct 
travellers the short road to Laguna. So 
here is a pretty deception ; and we are 
returned to Ben Lomond after all." 

" Yes, we are once more at the best of 
inns, our house j after a single day's 
pleasant excursion up the country, the 
fatigue attending which must convince 
you of the utter impossibility of ladies, 
especially nervous countesses, (pardon 
me, we medical folks aged half a century 
are privileged, you know,) to surmount 
the inconveniencies of making the tour of 
Teneriffe, although, before you set out, 
you seemed to think it as easy as a trip 
to the Hebrides." 

Oh, Louisa ! at this stroke of nation- 
ality, had you but heard me laugh. " A 



DUDLEY. 215 

trip to the Hebrides !•" when, of course, I 
expected him to wind up his speech with 
a trip to Brighton or Bath : — he is a 
comical soul after all. Well, my love, 
giving way as usual to the risible con- 
vulsions of my nature, I fairly dropped 
the reins out of my hand, and the wretch 
of a mule, either frightened at my face- 
tiousness, or snuffing his abominable 
stables at hand, started off down the 
steep, rugged hill a full gallop. In vain 
they tried to stop him: on he dashed over 
immense stones, furze bushes, a deep 
stream of water, and in short every thing 
that came in his way ; whilst I, grasping 
his tossing mane, looked like Europa 
carried off by the ox, or Leonora by the 
death's head. The long petticoat of my 
habit, the deuce was in it, (better that I 
should say that of myself than my neigh- 
bour,) being strapped closely down,' pre- 
vented my disengaging my foot from the 
stirrup, and I remained completely at his 
mercy. 

Balfour's mule, when he wished it to 
follow me, ran restive, and round and 
rounds as I was afterwards told, reiming 



^16 DUDLEY. 

to go a step forward ; while the rest of 
our company, as if they were bewitched, 
opened on the road to let me pass through 
them, supposing, as it should seem, that 
I (a Mrs. Jenny Gilpin) was running a 
race, and thinking this might be the 
fashion among English peeresses. Well, 
to shorten my adventure, just imagine 
my pretty person losing its balance, and 
my noble head coming bang against an 
enormous stone, when the only gentleman 
pedestrian among us came to my rescue. 
I had senses enough left to observe the 
mule, when disengaged of his burden, 
kick up his heels at us both with a loud 
bray of scorn before he sprang down the 
hill ; and Balfour on foot come to my 
assistance -, when I went off in as hand- 
some a swoon as any distressed damsel on 
such an occasion would wish to display. 
I was carried. Heaven knows how, or 
by whom, into the house, and scarcely 
remember any thing that passed, until 
the next day, when I found Mrs. Balfour 
on one side of my bed, and, on the 
other, her smooth-looking doctor of a 
husband feeling my pulse. It seems I 



DUDLEV. ^17 

had been bled the night before ; there- 
fore, if you, Louisa, should find this 
letter of mine duller than usual, you 
must place the change to Balfour's ac- 
count, who took from my arm half-a- 
pound of blood, six ounces of spirits of 
levity, and ten drops of the essence of 
caprice. 



Thus ended that memorable day, in 
which I lost my journey round the 
island ; a Cashmeer to Mrs. Balfour ; my 
balance, when on the back of a mule ; 
and my heart to — 'pon my honour I 
forget the Hidalgo's name ; — well, no 
matter, to the Major, (the definite article 
on such occasions is infinitely expressive.) 
— Oh, Hernandez ! — not half so ro- 
mantic a name as Zulvago D' Almeida ! 

This Hernandez, I found afterwards, 
repeatedly enquired of the Balfours as 
to the consequences of the accident, and 
expressed joy on hearing they would be 
but slight. — Civil enough that, but 
only what I had a right to expect, after 
his saving my life ; for save it he did, 
as they all positively assert. " Splash, 

VOL. JI. L 



S18 UUDLEk, 

splash,'* through the watei-, " dash, 
dash," against the stones ; and they were 
not of pumice, but rock, my beauty; and 
another blow might have consigned me 
to the honoured tomb of my ancestors : 
and, upon my veracity, like high-spirited 
Rosalind, I would rather enjoy the com- 
pany of my grand-children than pay a visit 
to my grandfathers. 

" You will not come down to dinner, 
of course. Lady Alford," said Mrs. Bal- 
four, ** and what shall I do with you, 
I don't like to leave you alone." 

'< Nonsense j go you down to your com- 
pany, (the whole party of yesterday were 
invited to spend the three or four follow- 
ing days at Ben Lomond,) and send me 
up the play of * She stoops to conquer,' 
if you can find it ; and the book I was 
reading the day before yesterday, the 
third volume of Camilla. — There now, 
do get along, my good woman, (for she 
is horribly tidgetty, never thinking she 
can make enough of her guests,) go 
along, and carve the ducks for the geese^ 
and the geese for the diicks^ and let me 
see no more of you these three hours." 



dudlev. S19 

And I fairly pushed her out of the room* 
I then went and sat in my boudoir, 
which has a charming balcony before it, 
communicating by French windows. — 
This bakony, by the by, runs all round 
the house; and besides commanding the 
most delightful and diversified land- 
scapes and sea-views, has ' the double 
advantage of enabling us to visit each 
other through the long windows of our 
respective apartments. All in the stile 
of decorum — you understand me. — No 
naughty tricks are ever known here. — ^ 
Honest Ben Lomond, though not the seat 
of Virhi, is the seat of a far more ex- 
cellent damsel, of much the same name, 
though of dilierent accent and spelling. 
Well, the play was brought up ; 
through Vvhich running my bright eyes, 
I soon found Balfour's allusion, — of our 
having taken a long journey, like the 
young Squire and his mother, round and 
round the house, Camilla next made her 
entree, and I arranged myself to read in 
a soft reclining posture in my large 
damask arm-chair ; my left hand in a 
sling, (which gives a lady or gentleman a 
L e 



£20 DUDLEY. 

most captivating appearance,) and my 
grey kid slippers, enclosing a couple of 
beautiful shapes, reposing on an otto- 
man. 

There I sat, admiring myself in an 
opposite looking-glass, for some time ; 
until at last, getting absorbed in the full 
delights of my book, self was wholly 
forgotten, and my mind enchanted by 
the eccentricities of good Sir Hugh and 
his domestic tutor. No, the subject be- 
came irresistibly laughable 5 I endea- 
voured to repress my mirth ; strove hard 
to retain my dignity ; but it would not 
do. At length, entirely overcome, I 
threw down the book, took out my 
handkerchief, fell back in a perfect con- 
vulsion, I cannot deny it, a roar, (but 
it was a roar like Thisbe's lion, soft and 
gentle,) and the tears ran down my face. 

Neither did I stop here ; for — • but 

here I ttvV/ stop ; for I think you must 
be already shocked with the picture I 
here hold out, — of a woman of fashion 
forgetting herself. 

Judge, then, my horror, my amaze- 
ment, when, on taking my handkerchief 



r)ui:)LEY. Ml 

from my eyes, I saw standing in the 
balcony, before the open window, Major 
Hernandez ! With powerful emotion 
of voice and countenance, he sprang for- 
ward to my assistance, saying, as he sat 
down on the sofa near me, ** I fear you 
suffer — is it from your head, or your 
arm ?** And, as he spoke, he rang the 
little silver hand-bell which lay on the 
table. ** Say, Lady Alford,'' he con- 
tinued, *' why are you in tears? — You 
are in pain." 

" Pain, and tears ! — Oh, yes — Oh, 
no! — Why, Major, I am laughing! — 
laughing at that book. It has, indeed, 
given me a pahi in the side, and caused 
me a hearty ^Y of laughter." 

His whole face and manner on a sud- 
den changed ; he rose, retreated, took 
up the book to which I pointed, and 
opened it, saying, 

** Camilla!" 

" Why, 1/ou cannot have read it, 
Senor ?" 

" And why not? — Pardon me, I have 
read it, and many of your best and most 
L 3 



22^ DUDLEY. 

celebrated English authors: with this 
work I was particularly pleased." 

<« Wei], then, you remember the cha- 
racters of Sir Hugh and Dr.Okebourne?" 

" I do 5" (and again he seated himself 
at my side, without either invitation or 
permission ;) " but it was in that of Edgar 
I was most interested, which, by leading 
him to trifle so long with his own happi- 
ness, and that of his mistress, involves 
them both in distress, and her in misery.'* 

" Ah ! I don't like Edgar y his cha-. 
racter is not natural." 

" None more so," replied HernandeZj 
his foreign accent giving a delightful 
zest to his voice ; <* there are many such 
characters, believe me, in real life ; and 
others who are anglers, — who lay snares 
for the innocent, and having caught 
their prey, sport with it till they lose it y 
or, to speak more to the purpose, men 
and women whose aim is to win hearts, 
without an idea of an exchange." 

Lord help the maai ! did he think me 
an angler or a coquette, that he fixed 
his sparkling and yet mournful eyes upon 
me, as if he intended to impeach me in 



DUDLEY. 223 

the Iiigh court of Cupid ! — A pretty way, 
thought I, of throwing out lures to throw 
one's self off a mule's back ! 

I do assure you, Louisa, the ill-bred 
charming eyes of this Spaniard rather 
perplexed me ; and to recover myself, I 
was forced to have recourse to some of 
my fashionable airs : first, I threw a side- 
long glance in the large mirror, then 
settled my veil in folds over one side 
of my face, arranged my muslin sling, 
pulled off and on my gloves, played with 
my rings, — especially with that given me 
by Alford one morning in church, a 
pretty twirl with which insignificant 
hoop of gold has often been the means 
of catching another of the same kind. 

During these evolutions I went on 
talking quickly and fluently of Camilla, 
when, on looking up to see the effect of 
my charms and conversation, there stood 
the man, staring at me, it is true, but no 
longer with the tenderest interest, the 
softest admiration ; a gravity, bordering 
on scorn or indifference, was nov/ the 
predominant expression, which gradually 
settled into that of contempt. 
L 4 



^24 DUDLEY. 

So, SO, this man blows hot and cold ; 
his looks thaw and freeze, and melt and 
harden. — But am I to be subject to his 
caprices, though he did save my life ? 
am I to burn and shudder under his in- 
fluence ? Not I ; and he shall learn that 
piece of intelligence — nay, positively, 
from this moment he shall become my 
cavalier, servante, or cartejo, or cicisbeo, 
or whatever is the appropriate term for 
that male tribe which I do abhor ; and 
he shall fly at a beck, and shrink at a 
frown, and expand at a smile — he shall, 
by all the magical arts of nobility and 
beauty I 

With this intent I said, mingling hau- 
teur with politeness, " Senor, have the 
goodness to reach me that battledoor 
yonder j I tliink I shall go into the 
balcony and play." 

Instead of obediently flying at the 
word of command, as half a score of my 
illustrious attendants in England would 
have done, this grandee had the assu- 
rance to ask me, was I not bled in the 
arm the night before ? 



DUDLEY. 225 

^' Yes, in the left arm ; h«t that does 
not prevent my using the right, I am 
tired of reading, and require exercise." 

His next speech was rather spoken 
al me than to me, as you shall judge. — 
" I hope the accident of last night has 

not affected the head.'' The head, 

as if he were speaking of a mare or a filly. 
— This really piqued me ; however, I 
endeavoured to conceal my mortification' 
under a dignified look of proud, stupid 
vacancy, as I lounged across the room, 
and fetched a raquette and shuttlecock 
myself: but, scarcely had I given two 

strokes! really, Louisa, lam ashamed 

to go on ; however, I acquaint you with 
such a multiplicity of my good qualities, 
you may as well accept a few anecdotes 
of my evil propensities. — Bless me ! 
this exordium will lead you to think I 
beat the Major : not at all, my dear, for 
two very good reasons — in the first place, 
I never had an Amazonian turn ; and in 
the second, from what I have observed 
of this soil of Bellona, I could almost 
fancy, that had I racquetted him, he 
^vould have returned the salute in kind. 
L 5 



S^6 DUDLBY. 

To continue the history of the shuttle- 
cock. — I had twice sent it aloft in the 
air, when the bandage of my left arm 
became loose, and you may suppose the 
consequence : — in an instant the elegant 
carpet, the sofa, Camilla, and the Major 
were covered with my ruby blood. In- 
stead of shrieking, as I did whilst calling 
for help, he came to me, deliberately 
enough took hold of my arm, put his 
thumb forcibly on the orifice, removed 
the muslin sling from my neck, tore off 
a part, formed a pledget (I think it is 
called), staunched the blood, and bound 
up the arm in capital style. — Instead 
of a major, I should rather thin^ him a 
military surgeon — a mender, not a cutter- 
up of the human body. 

During these metaphysical transactions, 
I, all shame and penitence and deep hu- 
mility, kept still repeating my thanks for 
his kindness, blaming my own childish 
imprudence, and promising better beha- 
viour in future : whilst he, busily engaged 
in tearing up bandages with teeth, knees, 
and one hand, (for the other still held 
my arm,) took no more notice of my 



DUDLEY. 2^7 

apologies than as if he were deaf; but on 
perceiving, from my change of colour, 
that I was fainting, (and indeed, though 
I could not see my face, yet I did 
look towards the glass, I felt from the 
strong palpitation of my heart I was just 
going off,) he led me to the sofa, and 
placed a pillow under my head. Before 
I closed my eyes, I had just sufficient 
strength to hear Mr. and Mrs. Balfour, 
and Savage and Patience, come into the 
room, summoned by the Major, who had 
rung the hand-bell most violently. 

And what was the surprise of all these 
good folks on their entrance, to find one 
of us playing the part of Banquo's ghost, 
and the other, that of the Bleeding Nun ! 
Hernandez explained the cause, for I 
had no power to speak ; but though I 
could not speak, I could see ; and on 
again opening my eyes, I felt more 
pleasure than I dare avow at the sight 
of the Spaniard's looks once again fixed 
upon me with interest, pity, and tender- 
ness, but now in a greater degree than 
ever. 

I never remarked that he looked at any 
L G 



^^8 DUDLEY. 

one else in this way ; and on my observ- 
ing this to Mrs. Balfour, she craftily re- 
plied, *' I really do not comprehend the 
nature of these glances you speak of; 
neither is it possible, until he looks at 
me in precisely the same manner." 

I have endeavoured to question her 
about this Hernandez, — who he is — 
whence he comes from — where he lives — 
and, if not a resident of these islands, 
how long he means to stay? But she is 
not particular in her answers ; and you 
may remember I was informed he is here 
on some political business. Indeed, this 
good little Canarian (she is a native of 
Teneriffe) was so short upon me one 
day, that I resolved never to mention his 
name again in her hearing. Balfour him- 
self is equally sententious : so what a 
pretty pair of mysterious personages are 
these two Spaniards, Don Zulvago and 
Major Hernandez, that their best friends 
seldom like to be questioned concerning 
them ! 

This military genius is about nine-and- 
thirty, or forty, his complexion a clear 
olive, his face oval, his features small 
i6 



DUDLEY. ^29 

and elegant, — the eyes, however, are 
large and long, black, and of a dejected 
and melancholy cast ; his teeth white and 
beautiful ; and his lips, in which alone 
any colour appears, are set off by as 
handsome a pair of whiskers or musta- 
cliios as ever graced the nostrils of a 
grand Signior ; his hair is very short, 
dark and curled, and his hands of the 
finest shape and symmetry. His person 
and dress I have already described, the 
one tall and well-proportioned, the other 
military. — And now, Louisa, tell me, is 
it possible for any soul to inhabit a finer 
tenement ? 

Never talk of your Zulvagos now! 
let him and his whistling stay in the 
Brazils till doomsday, provided Hernan- 
dez remains here — for with one or the 
other I am resolved on having a harmless 
flirtation. I acknowledged as much to 
Balfour himself the other morning, and 
at once put this question to liim, — ' 
" Which, in your opinion, is the prettier 
fellow of the two, the whistler or the 
jiladiator ?" — On which he answered, 
drawing; his chair dose to mine, and 



S30 DUDLEY. 

smirking up in my face, " Did your 
ladyship ever hear the story of the 
Spaniard stopping at night under the 
window of an inn, to ask for a night's 
lodging, and the host replying, ' Why, 1 
may have room for two or three, but how 
many of you are there below ?' when — " 
*' There, there, my good man," I cried, 
rising and running away, ** do keep that 
anecdote w^arm till I come back again." 
— The worst of these worthy fellows, 
Louisa, who have never read much more 
than their Ledger and Lloyd's List, when 
they get hold of a story, new to them, 
and old to all the world beside, they 
never know when and where to sport it. 
Like a heathenish fellow who went about 
in all companies, rubbing his hands, and 
boasting that he had just met with the 
most beautiful, the most pathetic, charm- 
ing, and ^r2^^ history ! — and when all the 
folks were gaping with expectation, out 
came — the history of Joseph and his 
brethren 1 You will say this is too good 
to be fact ; I'll confirm it by a parallel 

Halt, my wicked pen ! — the parties 

are alive, so do you be now laid up in 
ordinary. 



DUDLEY. 231 

Adieu, sweet Mrs. Primrose. — Fare- 
well, thou most handsome of all Vicars 
and Rectors. — Remember me to your 
living rosebuds of Bloomfield ; and Jhites 
mes amities a St. Eloi. 

Caroline Alford^. 



232 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XXXIII, 

The Countess of Alford to Mrs. Clonmore, 

Santa Cruz, TenerifFe, 

Well, I do think that it is a most fortu^ 
nate circumstance for us both, i'or me the 
writer and t/ou the reader of confidential 
epistles, that we were brought up to- 
gether under the same duenna ; that our 
school-days were passed exclusively in 
each other's society ; and that since our 
separation, we have made our way through 
the world, you in pattens, as I have heard 
you remark, and I in a sedan, without 
a single^?^.r pas, or even a slip or a slide 
by which our white draperies could have 
been injured by the smallest speck of mud. 
— The arm and umbrella and presence of 
your Henry have supported you ; whilst 
I, shut up in my box of protection^ 
left my chairmen to fight their own vvaj, ' 



DUDLEY. 233 

and take care of my person and reputa- 
tion, 

I assure you, I have a very good opi- 
nion of myself, when I reflect that as yet I 
have not forfeited your's. — Thus far my 
preface, now for an N. B. Be it known 
to you, then, that I have lately gone 
through scenes, and witnessed circum- 
stances, sufficient either to turn my head, 
or fill my heart ; and truly, had I no con- 
fidante with whom to communicate, I 
should become as lovely an Ophelia, a 
Moulines-Maria, a mad Bess, a crazy 
Jane, or a maniac Kate, as the best of 
them. 

Well, my dear, you already are acquaint- 
ed with some of the parties of whom I 
am about to write ; but unfortunately, 
very little with one of the principal per- 
sonages of the drama, and not at all with 
the other — Major Hernandez and — but 
hold! let me go on in a regular style. — 
You remember the scene of my arm, and 
the lancet, and the sling, and so forth. 
In a few days I was perfectly well, and 
ready for the very next frolic Balfour or 
Jiis little wife should propose ^ and they^ 



234 DUDLEY. 

having no children, and abundance of 
money, and plenty of visitors, are not 
very averse to spend their time just as the 
latter would wish them. 

Nothing, how^ever, offered itself until 
the arrival of a trading vessel, who in- 
formed Balfour that the outward bound 
East India fleet was then off Funchal in 
Madeira ; adding, that the G — India- 
man having on board an English family 
of distinction, that of Sir William and 
Lady h — — , v/ould remain there some 
weeks perhaps, 

'' Sir William and Lady L — - !" I ex-, 
claimed, " my old friends! — Oh how I 
should like to see them, but they will very 
probably come to Teneriffe/' 

*' Nothing more i;??probable,'' replied 
Balfour ; add to which, their stay at Ma- 
deira is uncertain, and they may sail in 
a few days : if you have really any wish 
to see them, my yacht is at your service/' 

'' How far is it from hence ?*' 

" Seventy leagues -, and with this wind 
we shall be there in less than forty-eight 
hours." 

<' Will you go ?'' I enquired of Mrs, 
Balfour, 



DUDLEY. ^S5: 

" Willingly ; and as nothing is so dreary 
as a sea-voyage, however short the dis- 
tance, v^ithout cheerful company, I'll 
invite more than half the 7nule party to 
join us.*' 

The same hour I sent off a letter to 
Eliot, to enquire would he or any of 
the family of Euphorbia accompany us 
to Madeira. — The answer was brought 
back by little Parson Turner, whom my 
brother wished to be of our party, as he 
thought the excursion would, from the 
change of scene, and novelty, be produc- 
tive of pleasure to the divine youth. 

Well, madam, we sailed ; and aided by 
a fair brisk wind, high spirits, mutual 
kindnesses, music, and good humour and 
good cheer, (the two latter greatly de- 
pending on each other,) the day passed 
most delightfully. We sailed through the 
whole fleet of Indiamen and their con- 
voy ; and as 1 sat on deck admiring the 
grand and beautiful appearance which 
the near approach to Madeira displayed, 
(for I find I have a great taste for the 
picturesque when pointed out to me by 
the elegant hand of a handsome Spaniard,) 



Q36 



DUDLEY. 



we landed at Fiinchal, and under the 
eare of commercial Balfour, were con- 
ducted to the stately mansion of one of 
his friends and mercantile correspon- 
dents, a widower, who w^elcomed us with 
the honours due to the divinities of the 
ocean. 

To the house inhabited by Sir WiUiam 
and his lady during their stay, Balfour 
took me, and very glad I v/as to see old 
friends, wlio, as relations of Lord Al- 
ford, received me with undissembled 
pleasure. We talked over ancient times, 
and those leading to times present, I could 
perceive Sir William was rather disap- 
pointed that my brother was not of our 
party. On his expressing the greatest 
desire to see Sir Eliot, as his own ab- 
sence in India would be for ten years, 
Mr. Balfour immediately offered not only 
his yacht but his company to escort him 
to Teneriffe, which proposal was instantly 

and thankfully accepted ; Lady L 

declining the voyage, saying she had 
oceans before her, staid behind, and the 
gentlemen set off for Euphorbia. 



DUDLEY. *287 

Tims was 1 left on a strange Island in 
charge of Mrs. Balfour and the Major 
and the Reverend. By the by, during 
the voyage not a single compliment did 
I receive from the former gentleman; and 
as for the latter, he fairly quarrelled with 
me. The occasion was this, he was stand- 
ing with arms folded, leaning over the 
side of the vessel, grinning at the gambols 
of a dolphin, which seemed to delight 
in sporting under our eyes in the warm 
and bright sun-beams, — when I called out 
to Jack, «' Jump over and catch me that 
fish, I know you are a good swimmer 
even in your canonicals, and dolphins 
are not sharks, he'll not swallow you." 

Seeing that the little Cantab did not 
stir, I repeated my orders, adding, «*Why 
don't you obey me!" — *' Change the word 
to oblige," said the Major, *« and the 
gentleman perhaps may obey." Now 
here was a fair subject for a dispute, and 
at it we went ; I insisting that a lady had 
a right to command ; he, that no lady, 
even had she the right, would command. 
In the midst of this friendly wrangle, 
which I delighted to prolong, Turner, 



^SH DUDLEY. 

like a waspisli school-boy, raised himself 
from his leaning posture, (I suppose the 
dolphin was gone,) and walked the deck, 
muttering and pouting " that he was 
no fisherman — that he was not bound to 
take orders" — (of course I did not let slip 
the opportunity he gave me of a jeti de 
mots on fisherman and orders') — when he 
continued — " Come out for pleasure — 
as much as any one — independent as any 
man present — care no more for a Duke 
or a Duchess than any man." 

Bless his irritable fanciful pate ! I wish 
for his own sake and those around him 
he had a clear 5000 a year, and then his 
tenacity might go to sleep, he might then 
be ready enough on a wager of sixpence 
to jump into the sea after a shrimp. 
Eliot is the only person that can manage 
this troublesome sensitive plant : for his 
generous feelings lead him ever to pity 
those who are, with a liberal education, 
in a state of dependence, and to treat 
them with ten times more attention than 
he shows his equals; and yet, to state the 
question fairly, is it not more truly deli- 
cate in such as myselfj who omit drawing 



i)bDLEV- 23^ 

tills line o^* politeness (alias of superiority) 
and by treating my inferiors in society 
with the same familiarity as my equals, 
and even my superiors, to try and banish 
all sense of inequality. 

For example, had I been on board the 
Royal Yacht at Brighton, with even the 
Duke of Cornwall at my elbow, I might 
have exclaimed, " Royal Highness, jump 
over and catch that porpoise for me," 
w^ith the same heedlessness that I spoke 
to Jack Turner, who is often too apt tt3 
forget that it is above ten years since he 
quitted the Blue-coat school, and that 
boyish sulks cannot be admitted into 
general society. 

Oh these tenacious mortals ! who are 
ever clapping on their huft-caps, and 
with arms a-kimbo crying out, " Who's 
afraid ?" He is really, I understand, an 
excellent scholar, and I am certain has 
a good heart j otherwise, for these jerks 
and querks of temper, he would assuredly 
be sent from Euphorbia to preach to the 
descendants of Gray's Bards, or to the 
goats browzing on the roof of his ca- 
thedral. 



^40 DUDLEY. 

Well, to return to pleasant and polished 
company, from which I have wandered 
with peevish Jack. — 

The next day Lady L— — - returned 
my visit, and after a little private confab, 
we joined Mrs. Balfour, (who did the ho- 
nours of the widower's house,) and the 
rest of our party. They were seated out- 
side of the house on a terrace in the gar- 
den, ill the very centre of as superb a 
vineyard as you can imagine. The stocks 
being trained like the vine at Hampton 
Court, were laden with fruit of the finest 
sort, of which boys w^ere gathering for 
the company, in large coloured baskets. 
> We were partaking of these and other 

refreshments when my friend Lady L ^ 

remarked, " But where is Vic, all this 
while?" *' Now," thought I, " is Vic, a 
parrot, a monkey, or a lap-dog" (she has 
no children). However, the next sentence 
satisfied me, that she alluded to a young 
girl. — Vic would, no doubt, like to 
partake of all this ; the sight of vine- 
yards and pine-apples growling in the 
open air — and this sun, and this sky. 



DUDLEY. 241 

and these flowers, are all new to the 
eyes of us Britons — where can the girl 
be r* 

Mrs. Balfour offered to seek her, when 
stopping at the glass door of entrance, she 
enquired, ** But what is her name ?" — 

<« Oh,true,"repliedLadyL ,both hands 

employed on a bunch of grapes, — " Vic- 
toire, my dear Mrs. Balfour — or Miss 
Shelburne, if you prefer her surname. — 
But I am so fond of her, the Miss is drop- 
ped, and she is with me plain Vic.'* 

Then, as if aware that some introduc- 
tion was necessary, out of respect to the 
society of which her favourite was about 
to become a membex', she added, whilst 
stopping frequently in her narrative to 
lay aside the stones and skins of the 
grapes — " Poor thing ! her father — man 
of considerable rank and property — turn- 
ed to the mercantile line — highly res- 
pectable — understood little of business 
— failed — insolvent — pistol, or something 
of that kind — widow alive — an excel- 
lent creature — proud — great misery — 
this the only child — brought up high— r 
capital singer and player — harp and 

VOL. II. M 



24^ DUDLEY. 

piano — my concerts at Calcutta will be 
the rage — engaged her for seven years 
— bound to me by articles — secured by 
law — she is entitled from this time to an 
annuity of 200/. for life from me." 

" But how,'' remarked one of the la- 
** dies, could her mother part with her/' 

" What could she do ? — they were starv- 
ing, that is living on from day to day — the 
mother went almost on her knees begging 
the girl to accept my offers — stating that 
otherwise poverty must be her lot for 
ever : — hard struggle — but I conquered : 
— Vic secured to her mother half the sa- 
lary — payable at my banker's in town — 
K — n, as secure as Abraham Newland 
was, "or Henry Hase is — engaged to for- 
ward their con'espondence — all I could 
do -^ poor thing. 

^* Poor thing ! "repeated another,** Poor 
thing !" said a third person ; and poor 
thing was passed a watch-word round the 
room. 

I was so provoked with Lady L— — , 
with her pity and her grapes, exposing 
the girPs misfortunes with the same 
apathy as if describing a new novel she 



DUDLEY. 24.3 

had been lately reading, that I could 
have given her a tremendous shake. — 
Could she not assist the young person, 
and hold her tongue? — But, however, it 
is better of the two to chatter and do 
something, than be silent and do nothing. 

Lady L , it seems, has really been of 

the most effectual assistance to both mo- 
ther and daughter — so in Heaven's name 
let her prate on. 

You may suppose our curiosity was 
awakened by this account, and that we 
were anxious to see Miss Shelburne ; 
when Turner, with pert vivacity, stretch- 
ing his legs at their full length, (I have 
endeavoured to break him of that trick, 
by pretending to stumble over his feet 
several times, but he is incorrigible,) 
exclaimed, ** Going to India ! good spe- 
culation, faith : — the old lady mother 
had a nabob son-in-law in her provident 
eye, and desired Miss Vic to leave be- 
hind the English merries, and secure a 
Mogul plum. How is the state of the 
market, I wonder ?" 

Now this Cantab and his merry Mogul 
plum, had not the sense and delicacy 

M 2 



^44 DUDLEY. 

to see that he was himself in the self 
same predicament with this poor girl.—- 
I had half a mind to punish his frivolity, 
and ask, *' And on. what speculation did 
I bring you out, my gay and reverend 
sir ; was it to cut pine apples with a 
golden knife?" (the very act that fol- 
lowed his illiberal speech.) 

But at that moment the door of the 
house opened, and Mrs. Balfour appear- 
ed on the terrace, not followed by Miss 
Shelburne, but leading her forward arm 
in arm. 

*< Vic, my love," said Lady L , 

holding out a magnificent bunch of 
grapes in one hand, and patting the 
grass on the other, ** come here ; you 
never take wine, you know, but you 
cannot refuse the staple of Madeira." 

Miss Shelburne, without taking notice 
of any other person in company, accepted 

Lady L 's offers, whilst a china plate 

was supplied by Mrs. Balfour, to whom 
she returned a bend and a smile parti- 
cularly graceful. 

Turner, with easy impudence, looked 
at her and at me alternately for some 



DUDLEY. ^45 

time ; and then affecting to whisper some 
remark on her person, said, " A tolerable 
looking girl — don't you think so, my 
lady?'* Such is ever the way with these 
dependants of tenacious disposition : they 
will not suffer the slightest liberty to be 
taken with themselves, yet tr^at those 
whom they consider as their inferiors 
with a hauteur that is really insuperable^ 

*' I'll ask her," he said to me, ** if she 
h-as her harp unpacked, or if she can sing 
** Love among the Roses." 

" Upon my honour, Mr. Turner, if you 
do," and I was in a genuine rage, " I'll 
tell her to ask you how long it is since 
you left off your yellow stockings." 

Now this, as you are aware, is a sore 
subject with the silly coxcomb. Instead 
of being proud of his having been edu- 
cated at a school, one of the noblest 
institutions in our country, and which 
has produced so many brilliant and use- 
ful characters, this clerical fop, ever since 
he wore a square cap at Cambridge, has 
taken it into his head to be ashamed of 
Christ's Hospital. 

M 3 



S46 DUDLEY. 

But oh, my dear Louisa, whilst I am 
detaihng the silly contention between 
Turner and myself, what a strange and 
wonderful scene was going on in another 
part of the room ! 

But first to give you some idea of this 
girl's person : — she is what we call tall 
and well-formed ; her complexion a dead 
white, or rather a fair brunette, — con- 
tradictions, I allow : but when we came 
to sum up her description, such were our 
opinions. Not the shghtest tinge of car- 
mine, natural or artificial, appears in her 
cheeks, and but little in her lips. Her 
nose is very large, and decidedly Roman ; 
her eyes rather round than long — very 
black, though not sparkling — no tender- 
ness is to be seen in them, but much re- 
serve ; her hair is of a jet colour, and 
seemingly without any natural curl 5 the 
throat full, long, and arched; and the 
shoulders well-formed. — —Here you will 
say is no beauty, and you are right ; 
but should you imagine from this de- 
scription that she is plain, you would 
judge wrong. Add to this, the cast of her 
features take off the air of youth, to 



DUDLEY. ^47 

which her age would otherwise entitle 
her, and though only eighteen, she ap- 
pears three or four-and-twenty. 

I was mortified that Lady L had 

made us acquainted with the circum- 
stances of her family, — for though un- 
conscious of it ourselves, this knowledge 
had its effect more or less upon us all ; 
and though she could not be certain that 
such was the oase, she felt it might be, 
and was reserved and dignified accord- 
ingly. Mrs. Balfour, on the contrary, 
having been out of the room during the 
explanation Lady L— had given, was 
the only character acting naturally among 
us all. — It was, " My dear Miss Shel- 
burne," and *' Yes, my dear," and ** No, 
my dear," in her benevolent candid way, 
at every moment, helping her to grapes 
sufficient to make a gallon of wine, and 
a variety of cakes and fruits enough to 
kill her, and which Victoire still kept 
decidedly but politely refusing. 

At length, in the honest warmth of her 

heart, Mrs. Balfour added, " But you 

must become acquainted with all this 

good company, and individually, for you 

M 4 



S48 DUDLEY. 

have many weeks to spend among us, 
and we must not see you look so grave 
and dull at leaving England : we Cana- 
rians are very cheerful people, I assure 
you, when we are pleased, as Lady Alford 
would say, (looking slily at me.) See, 
that is the Countess yonder, and this is 
Donna this, and Senora that, and Mrs. 
and Miss the other." 

Thus she proceeded introducing us 

one by one to Lady L *s young friend, 

as she called her ; for not aware of the 
pecuniary engagement Miss Shelburne 

was under to Lady L , she thought 

rather that Victoire was a hundred and 
tenth cousin of Sir William or his wife, 
and was going out to India as their re- 
lation and ward. 

At last the gentlemen's turn came — 
they were all named, when looking round 
briskly, she added, " But where's the Ma- 
jor? — Oh, here he is, standing behind a 
rose-bush, and, as usual, buried in deep 
thought. Major Hernandez, allow me 
to introduce " 

Oh, Louisa, Louisa ! — did you ever 
se© the play of the Stranger? — What a 



DUDLEY. '349 

question ! And I remember you and I 
— no, / alone, for you were resolved not 
to cry, wiping from my damask cheek 
the liquid pearls of sensibility, to speak 
in the frothy language of a certain 
poet. — Well, my dear, you recol- 
lect the shriek Mrs. Haller gives when 
she falls as dead as a killed wood-pigeon, 
and the bounce he gives when he turns 
his back upon her and runs away. — 
Do you expect any thing of that kind 
to happen here? — If you do, you will be 
disappointed, for all was conducted with 
the strictest decorum. 

The young person certainly did not 
shriek on raising her eyes to Major Her- 
nandez, but she fell into Mrs. Balfour's 
arms in a swoon, and he did really turn 
away, but it was to fetch a glass of wa- 
ter, with which he came back, saying 
calmly, " Give her air," and pouring 
some in his hand, he sprinkled her face. 
Sister Jenny herself could not have acted 
with more composure on so desperate an 
occasion. 

Addressing himself particularly to the 

astonished Lady L , he said aloud, as 

M 5 



250 DUDLEY. 

if he designed to be heard by all, " This 
yp.uQg lady is Spanish, madam, as of 
course you know ; she is a native of 
Aranjuez, and I am one of the oldest 
friends of her mother." 

Perceiving that she revived, he left us, 
and went into the house. 

" The oldest friend of her mother !" 
repeated Jack Turner, as he paced to 
and fro; *' not, as it should seem, her 
^^5^ friend:" — and he was in an actual 
passion of commiseration on seeing the 
poor girl's distress. — "To suffer the mo- 
ther to fall into misery, and permit this 
beautiful creature," — (genuine distress, 
you know, is a great beautifier in the eyes 
of some men,) — ** to suffer her to ramble 
about the world in search of a mainte- 
nance 1" He seemed to have forgotten 
the market, nahoh, plums, and merries. 

1 made no answer, though this address 
was to me, but turned him and his pity 
off the terrace, as he had not had the 
sense to follow the other gentlemen; 
andVictoire, by our care, entirely revived. 

We waked with some degree of ex- 
cusable curiosity to hear what would be 



DUDLEY. S51 

her first words on coming to herself, 
for such in general show the true state 
of the heart — when, how great our grief 
and compassion on hearing her, before 
she had even opened her eyes, say, in a 
low and mournful voice, " My poor, poor 
mother !" 

Then, looking round, she added, with- 
out the slightest confusion, " Where is 
he ? Where is Don Isidore?" 

" Don who, my dear ?" said Lady 
L . 

" Major Hernandez,*' replied Miss 
Shelburne, calmly, and without any emo- 
tion, *^ one name is as much his as the 
other ; and when I last saw him, and for 
the first time in my life, about three 
years ago, my mother (an old friend of 
his) called him Isidore/' 

This explanation exactly agreeing with 
that given by the Major, seemed to make 

a favourable impression on Lady L ; 

when conceiving that it would be most 
proper to leave Victoire to unbosom the 
secrets of her heart to that person, who 
among us was alone authorised to expect 
any confidence on the part of her prote>- 
M 6 



25^ DUDLEY. 

gee^ we left them togetlier, and dispersed 
to follow our own inclinations. 



I thought it, however, no harm, when 

we were alone, to remind Lady L 

of our long friendship, by way of a hint 
that as she had already confided to us 
the greater part of Miss Shelburne's 
history, it would be but kind to let me 
know the remainder — when what was my 
surprise to be told by her gaunt ladyship, 
that it was true Victoire had no conceal- 
ment with her at present, having the 
night before related every thing she 
knew concerning the acquaintance of 
this Spaniard with her mother, whose 
secret she had hitherto thought it right 
to keep inviolable \ but that as circum- 
stances had turned out, she conceived 
that, situated as she was with Lady 
L — , unlimited confidence was her due ; 
*« and with me," added my friend, 
" their secret shall be most sacred." 

Well, my dear, though thus horribly 
disappointed, I actually felt more plea- 
sure at this instance of Lady L — ~-'s 



DUDLEY. '253 

fidelity to her unhappy dependant, than 
at that of her exposing the girl's affairs to 
above half-a-dozen uninterested strangers. 

Besides, Louisa, to tell you the truth, 
I began on reflection to be convinced I 
already knev^ the whole affair 5 and the 
more I think upon it, I find it as clear 
as the sun at noon-day, (according to 
our hacked-about political phrase.) 

I can go over the whole romance in 
three words. Victoire's mother and this 
Don Hernandez were lovers ; he jilted 
her, or she him, no matter which, they 
were separated ; though I should rather 
think the lady played false, as she evi- 
dently did marry; and he remains a 
bachelor, good man, to this day. But 
as the mother is a widow, what on earth 
prevents their marrying now ! or rather 
why the deuce did they not marry ten 
years ago, as it appears it is thus long 
since the husband took himself out of the 
world. -— And she is even now no more 
than six-and-thirty, and he about a forty 
or so. — Money, it seems, was scraped toge- 
ther to educate this girl in a v»^ay by which 
she might be able to support herself; and 



S54 DUDLEY. 

though for a long time wretchedly poor, 
they with true dignity contrived to keep 
their poverty to themselves. 

I was malicious enough, the next time 
1 met the Major, (it was in the garden,) 
to ask him, in an apparently careless man- 
ner, " Did Miss Shelburne resemble her 
mother?" '' Not in the least," he re- 
plied; "neither in person, feature, expres- 
sion or voice does she at all resemble her 
mother, who is not a Spaniard, she is 
a German. — Victoire does not resemble 
her, but ■ -" 

"But what ?" I hastily exclaimed, and I 
threw up my charming eyes full of anxi- 
ety at his face, when I met his, in which 
there was a melting softness not to be 
described. Just at that moment I hap- 
pened to stumble — on purpose : having 
chosen the most intricate walk in the gar- 
den, covered with the cuttings of trees, 
hedges, and brambles, in the hope he 
would offer me his arm, and of course be 
led to afford me his assistance — when 
the unaccountable mortal, as if he had 
really divined my purpose, started from 



DUDLEY. 9,55 

my side, struck abruptly into a long nar- 
row walk, and disappeared. 

" So, these are Spanish manners 1" I 
cried (to myself), " and military manners, 
— you anHidaIgo,and a soldier!" And just 
at that instant Turner came tripping to- 
wards me with his grinning officiousness, 
and his " my lady," and " your .lady- 
ship," until title palls on my ear. — " Will 
you permit me to hand your ladyship over 
the bushes ? — Will you take my arm, my 
]ady ? — Pray let me assist you, my lady ? 
Do give me your hand." — I felt secretly 
inclined to give it him on the tip of his 
long ear, for, thought I, the sight of him 
perhaps drove the Major away. I there- 
fore put on one of my stately smiling 
looks, and very politely declining his of- 
fer, he sulked off to try his luck else- 
where, leaving me to my solitary twilight 
walk. 

In less than twenty minutes I return- 
ed to the house, and went straight-forward 
to the saloon, which I saw through the 
windows was lighted up for the assem- 
bling of company. Finding no one there, 
I passed through it to a conservatory, in 



^56 DUDLEY. 

the vestibule of which, dimly lighted by 
painted lamps of ground glass, I distin- 
guished two figures — Miss Shelburne ! 
and the Spaniard ! whom I verily believe 
before my entrance had been almost down 
on his knees before her ; at all events, he 
appeared in a noble fuiy : he was beg- 
ging, entreating, beseeching, and grasping 
her poor hand, until I am certain her fin- 
gers were inclined to cry O ! 

And what was most singular, my unex- 
pected presence seemed to have no 
effect whatever upon either the lady or 
the Major : they went on with their con- 
versation, and in English, (which seems 
Victoire's native tongue, if I may judge 
from her accent,) w^ithout evidently know- 
ing or caring whether a third person were 
present or not. 

She sat down very deliberately on a 
settee opposite to that on which I had 
thrown myself, and Hernandez, though 
he had so repeatedly, without permission, 
taken his seat near me, now seemed 
awed into timidity as he stood before this 
girl. Her features are so commanding, 
that no air of youth is to be distinguished; 



DUDLEY. 2^7 

and her frown is tremendous, it almost 
staggered me as I came in, — no wonder 
that it knocked the Spaniard down, (men 
being more susceptible of female frowns 
than we.) And by what magical influence, 
I could not understand, this young girl 
seemed to have the power of awing a man, 
of whom until now every one stood in 
awe. 

" Senor," she replied to his question 
of " Then you refuse even this offer ?" — ■ 
(what offer ! thought 1) — *^ Senor, my 
word has been given, and shall not be 
broken : what can induce you to perse- 
cute me thus?" — (** So, then, this is not 
their first meeting to-day !" said my re- 
flections) — " leave my mother to her fate, 
leave me to mine, and think no more of 
either." — And she rose with the majes- 
ty and indeed the look of a Siddons. — 
*' As Lady L — has proved our real friend, 
I mean to keep strictly to my engage- 
ments with her of a seven years' residence 
at Calcutta, during which I hope she 
will never have cause to be disappointed 
le." 
But," said the persevering Spaniard^ 



"^58 DUDLEY. 

(and all this passing before my eyes and 
in my hearing, as if I had been sitting in 
a stage-box at a play, and they rehearsing 
a scene before me) — *' but supposing I 
were to gain Lady L over to my in- 
terest by relating all the past, you surely 
then could not refuse." " All would be 
in vain," replied the inflexible Victoire. 
• — Upon my word, that girl has a great 
deal of spirit and character about her ; 
there is a tone and decision — which how- 
ever her great Roman nose prepared me 
to expect, that would astonish you, and 
all this from a chit of eighteen ! 

** I repeat, Major, this is the last time I 
speak to you on this, or indeed any sub- 
ject : and even were Lady L to join 

in your request, I should reject it, and 
adhere most sacredly to the solemn pro- 
mise given to my mother at our last 
parting." 

All this was to me algebra, but he 
seemed au fatty and sat down dejectedly 
on a sort of wooden bench, where there 
were a number of flower-pots. Represent 
to yourself the situation of the three at 
that time, and then figure to your imagin- 



DUDLEY. '259 

ation that busy spark Jack Turner ap- 
pearing at the door of the saloon, (whicli, 
by the buzzing noise, I conjectured was 
now filling,) and in his quick pert voice, 
calling out " Miss Shelburne ! Miss Shel- 
burne ! a dance is proposed — will you 
honour me with your hand ?" 

What was the reply of the heroine I 
know not 5 all I could distinguish was her 
slow movement, when rising and leaving 
the vestibule with Turner, by which 
exit, the Don and I were of course left 
together : but though / was conscious of 
a duet, he seemed to consider himself 
entitled to play a solo. — Whilst his arm 
and head rested on an orange tub, his 
eyes were fixed in a stupid stare upon the 
marble flooring. 

The sound of the violin and lute, ac- 
companied by castanets and drum, added 
to the gentle murmur of the feet of the 
dancers within, and their cheerful voices, 
seemed to have no power to rouse him ; 
and though I felt how incumbent it was 
on me to join the company, for the life 
of me if I could take my eyes off the no- 
ble countenance and its desponding ex- 



^60 



DUDLEY. 



pression, or the mournful graces of the 
figrire before me, faintly lit from above 
by the dim lamps. 

I thought it fair, however, to give notice 
that he was not alone, lest he should fall 
into that old-fashioned lover-like custom, 
of speaking aloud to self; and I therefore 
determined to have a troublesome little 
hemming cough. — But bless me, my dear, 
the man seemed no more conscious of my 
being within six yards of him, than was the 
sleeping paroquet perched over his head ; 
for with the true sigh of a dying swain he 
distinctly uttered (never altering his posi- 
tion — and I suppose his mind at the 
time taking a back leap of twenty years) 
— " Gabrielle ! Gabrielle ! — Padre ! — 
Amante ! Merido ! — Victorina !" 

Now such was my intuitive brightness, 
that having picked up a Spanish phrase 
now and then from Dudley and Claudy, 
I comprehended from these words that he 
was lamenting his old flame, whose name 
I conjectured was Gabrielle — now de- 
prived of her all, of father, lover, (him- 
self I suppose,) husband, and daughter! 
™ Resolved, however, no longer to be an 



DUDLEY. 261 

eaves-dropper, though full in his sight, [ 
pushed from off the little table at which 
I was sitting, a most magnificent silver 
urn filled with roses and posies — and 
then followed a natural scream of, " Lord, 
what mischief have I done!" — 

This did rouse my Senor, when he 
very coolly replied, whilst replacing the 
urn, " Not much mischief;— but I think, 
LadyAlford,you will take cold here — (the 
windows of the observatory were open) 
— had you not better join the company 
within ?" — Here was gallantry ! here 
was joy of the opportunity of a tete-a-tete ! 
But the old maxim is true, if we wish to 
be pursued, we must run away. 



Euphorbia Tenerifle, 

Five days are now gone by, since the 
India fleet sailed on its destination, 
and with it Sir William, who returned 
from Teneriife delighted with Euphorbia 

and all its contents ; and Lady L -^ 

and Miss Shelburne, and their suite, and 
— no, no, my dear, there you are mis- 
taken, Don is still with us, that is, he is 
staying at Ben Lomond. We returned to 



S62 DUDLEY. 

our island, as we may now cail it, the 
day after the departure of our friends. I 
left the Balfours and the Spaniard at 
Santa Cruz, and came hither, where I 
was truly happy to find Eliot in high spi- 
rits with the visit of Sir William — and 
happier still to see me come back. 

Madeira adventures were talked over, 
and you may rely upon it my new ac- 
quaintance the Spaniard was not forgot- 
ten^ I was, I must confess, extrava- 
gant in my praises of him, and made him 
so much taller, broader, stouter, browner, 
and in short so much handsomer than he 
really is, (if that be possible,) that Dud- 
ley exclaimed — " What a giant P* and 
Claudy, with a pert glance at your boy, 
observed, " he must be of the colour of 
burnt umber. — I don't like brown men.' 
— (Dudley, you must know, is still very 
fair.) — Her impudence, indeed ! she does 
not like brown men ! And what the deuce 
business has she to like men at all? can't 
she leave that trouble to her younger aunt, 
a little flirt ! — 

I am beginning, you observe, to put 
the er to young, and shall soon be post- 



DUDLEY. 263 

tive tliat I am com^mrativeli/ a middle-aged 
lady, for during my excursion to Ben 
Lomond and Madeira, Claudy has had the 
audacity to grow up to a level with my 
non-pencilled eyebrows. 

** Where is this Major Hernandez of 
your's," enquired Eliot," at present ? — is 
he staying with the Balfours? — if so, as 
they are coming here to spend a few days, 
I suppose, as he saved your precious life, 
you would wish me to invite him also." 

" Upon my honour, I know nothing 
about him," I replied, ** either who he is, 
what he is, or from whence he is. — I found 
him in the company of the Balfours, and 
with them I left him. — And as to your 
inviting him with them, that is to me of 
the utmost indifference." And whilst I 
uttered these words, and quitted the room 
to seek for my letters left above in my 
own chamber, I could have kissed Eliot 
with delight for his hospitable intentions. 



Your letters, among threescore which I 
-have received from England, gave me, 
my dear Louisa, the sincerest pleasure. 
And can it be possible that this is the 



264< DUDLEY. 

fourth year of my transportation, to this 
wilderness in the ocean! And really you as- 
sert that my two noble suitors are still 
unmarried, and that that little Triton 
Cavendish deigns sometimes to enquire 
for me, — and the latter has the imper- 
tinence to boast that he is glad I have 
chosen this banishment until he becomes a 
Post Captain, and his amazingly rich un- 
cle's heir, when he means once more to 
make a formal attack upon my pretty left 
hand! and his reasons! so droll! just 
like himself: — *' In any part of Europe 
the divine Lady Alford might have met 
with, and accepted her match ; but where 
she is now, FU be shot if she ever finds 
any thing in the shape cf a gentleman, 
therefore is she safe in reserve for me 
until I choose to go and fetch her/' — And 
these are the words of the honourable 
Lieutenant Frederick Miles Cavendish, 
R. N. are they ? 

Then tell him from me, Caroline Al- 
ford, that were he to find himself on a sud- 
den placed by the side of Isidore Her- 
nandez, I would not ensure his pate being 
singed with a pistol-ball from his own 



hand ; neither would I bestow on him a 
single patch of black taffeta. 



No, Louisa, if I once begin upon this 
gentlewoman's — fsistej' Jenny, you un- 
derstand) — her never-to-be credited apa- 
thy, I shall write till my doomsday. Yes- 
terday afternoon, at collation time, you 
must know, being en famille, (by which 
I don't mean, as Claudy translates it, 
" in a family way,") I was answering 
all Eliot's inquisitive demands respectmg 
the East India adventurers; when having 
brought my narrative into the v^vy vesti- 
bule of the widower's house at Madeira, 
describing the pathetic scene between 
the Major and Victorina (as he called her), 
Jane stops me on a sudden with — '* Caro- 
line, there's a small comb falling from 
one of your side curls ; let Claudy replace 
it for you." — Now only think of her ab- 
surdity ! 

Oh, how I did clinch my fine pearly 
teeth, shaking — not my "gory locks," 
but my auburn ringlets in her face at this 
her impenetrable supineness, 

VOL. II. N 



266 DUDLEY. 

" You an auditor, you a spectator even 
at second hand of a scene like this ! — Only 
that you have been married, I should 
think it as easy to woo the black statue 
of Queen Nancy in St. Paul's church-yard 
as yourself.'' 

I said this in hopes of putting her in a 
passion ; but she was attending to Dudley, 
desiring him to take his hat and riding 
whip off the table; when, unable to con- 
tain myself any longer, I started up, de- 
claring, that she should not touch a sin- 
gle crumb of my bride-cake, as long as I 
remained a widow. 

Ever your's, 

Caroline Alford^ 



EKD OF THE THIRD FART. 



DUDLEY. ^67 



PART THE FOURTH. 



LETTER XXXIV. 

The Rev. Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Howard. 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

JMy dear Howard can well conceive the 
reception his invaluable presents met 
with : had a ship freighted from India 
been consigned to us, it could not have 
been welcomed with more sincere plea- 
sure and gratitude. 

The admirable execution of these 
miniatures, the resemblance they bear 
to Claudy and Dudley, which, of course, 
struck Louisa and myself instantly, af- 
forded the highest intellectual gratifica- 
tion. In Claudy, Louisa sees but little 
alteration (allowing for the growth of 
four years) ; but in Dudley I here is in- 
deed the bright and lovely representation 

N 2 



26s 



DUDLEY. 



of confirmed health: and though the 
charming expression of candour in the 
eyes remains the same, we should be 
greatly perplexed to trace in this picture 
of a fine hearty boy, the sickly child of 
seven years old. 

Now are we truly rewarded for parting 
with our Dudley ; and daily do we thank 
God for inspiring you with the wish of 
rearing him. 

Our family continues increasing. My 
two elder boys are at Eton, my third at 
Sandhurst College. — Your name-sake I 
intend for the church, and Charles for the 
law. William is destined for the sea, and 
will soon leave us for Portsmouth Aca- 
demy; and as yet we have sufficient 
time before us to think of a profession 
for little Henry. The plan of private 
education may suit a wealthy man to 
adopt, or one who has only two or three 
children, and can provide hereafter for 
such : but where boys must cut their way 
through the world, brush, elbow, and 
thread the crowd, they must be tempered 
in that species of public life which is 
alone met with in a public school. 



DUDLEY. ^69 

I have, as you well know, read all that 
has been said on this subject, Locke, 
Rousseau, Colman, Vincent, &c. and still 
adhere, in opposition to your opinion, 
which gives the preference to private 
tuition, that public education has supe- 
rior advantages, where, as I state above, 
youth have to get on in life by the exer- 
tion of their industry and talents. How- 
ever, we have so often debated this point, 
that I am only trespassing on your time 
and attention to renew it now. At your 
suggestion I have, however, adopted the 
plan of implanting on the minds of every 
one of my boys, the importance of never 
changing their profession, once decided 
upon. How many instances have I ob- 
served of the mischievous tendency of 
such habits ! — Having once changed, 
they seldom stop there, but persist in 
ranging from one employment to another, 
until no employment is left them. 

Early to impress the necessity of their 
being destined for such and such profes- 
sions, my boys, even from childhood, 
have worn some distinguishing mark 
about their dress, which denotes their fu" 
ture calling. 

N 3 



^0 DUDLEY. 

Eliot's from his birth has been military; 
William's naval : and though the rest 
neither wear lawyers' wigs, nor clergy- 
men's bands, nor dress in black, their ap- 
pearance is grave and sober. And so 
much are we creatures of habit, that this 
apparently puerile adoption has had a 
good effect. 

I have also to remark, that none of my 
boys leave the paternal roof without 
being thoroughly grounded in religious 
principles : this is their mother's de- 
partment until they are five years of 
age, when they pass successively under 
my tuition ; and as fast as I complete my 
labour, I send it off to other workmen to 
put the finishing stroke. Hitherto 1 
have, thank God, no reason to complain ; 
they are a set of healthy, well-grown, 
cheerful, and spirited lads ; and my three 
girls are all that their mother and I can 
desire. — 

The latter \vill of course never quit 
their home for tuition, we being fully 
capable of teaching them ourselves 
all that is necessary for them to learn, 



DUDLEY. ^71 

to render them worthy wives and mis- 

tresses of families, and they ► 

But I am called off to a parishioner, 
and must defer finishing my letter until 
to-morrow. 



Continued hy Mrs, Clonmore. 

Henry has requested me to fill a page 
or two to our dear and best friends at 
Teneriffe, and express all I feel in return 
for the treasures sent us. The picture of 
Dudley is the wonder and astonishment 
of those who see it. When they recall to 
recollection the poor invalid, apparently 
more fit for his grave than a distant voy- 
age, they can hardly be persuaded that 
this can be a resemblance. 

My dear, dear boy, how I long to see 
him ! — The portrait of our beautiful 
Claudy is, with that of Dudley, placed 
over the chimney in our drawing-room ; 
at the opposite end of which hangs that 
of tJieir mother, I may almost say, Lady 
Howard. 

I find that Henry has been sufficiently 
N 4 



Ti%- . DUDLEr. 

communicative respecting his boys ; let 
me add a few words to Mrs. Grantley 
concerning my girls. — And here I have 
once more to repeat my heartfelt thanks 
for her candour in opening her mind to 
me long since, and without reserve, con- 
cerning the conduct she had adopted 
with respect to her own children. — I 
must acknowledge, that when first I be- 
came a mother, I also had some wish of 
seeing my children little short of pro- 
digies, and was preparing to act accord- 
ingly, when her letter opened my eyes in 
time \ and I determined that my girls, in- 
stead of aiming at proficiency in all things, 
should learn only one thing well. To 
this resolution I have adhered, and to 
this perhaps they owe their present state 
of sound health, and invariable cheerful- 
ness. 

You must, my dear madam, be aware 
of the difference that should mark the 
bringing up the heiress of Euphorbia and 
your adopted Dudley, to the educating 
six boys and three girls under an obscure 
clerical roof, within a few miles, it is 



DUDLEY. ^8 

true, of a provincial town, but at a con- 
siderable distance from London. 

My girls are brought up to considei* 
home as the most delightful spot on 
earth, and to be conscious that as their 
future fortune will, (and that only with 
prudence,) lift them above dependence, 
and no more, it becomes their duty to 
improve that fortune by learning many 
useful, perhaps humble, employments, 
without mentioning the acquiring such as 
Bre indispensable. 

Whilst still young, I initiated them 
into the habit of instructing each other ; 
but not until their tempers were formed, 
and that I could feel assured that in my 
absence as well as presence, would be 
shown patience, perseverance, and mild- 
ness on the one part, and on the other, 
docility and gratitude. 

This lightened my own labours consi- 
derably. I instructed Caroline in the ele- 
ments of reading, writing, and summing, 
to which we may add needle-work 0/ 
all kinds. All these Caroline taught 
Frances, and Frances Louisa. About 
once a week, I, acting as inspector-ge- 
neral, marked their progress. 
N 5 



S74' DUDLEY. 

When these four absolutely necessary 
acquirements were learned with some 
degree of excellence, a choice of those 
merely ornamental was the s^ibject of 
much debate ; as in the latter accom- 
plishments, taste, genius, and inclina- 
tion, were to be consulted, which, in 
studying the former, were never once 
named. Their health, thank God, being 
sound, their persons well formed, and 
their intellects perfect, they were given 
to understand, both by their father and 
myself, that they 7nust read, write, sum, 
and work well ; and their attention, at 
that time, being closely confined to 
these studies, they fulfilled our expect- 
ations. 

A few years afterwards, they were in- 
formed they might choose between draw- 
ing, languages, and music ; but that 
each was to be confined to one style, one 
tongue, and one instrument. 

At the end of a year, Caroline chose 
landscape drawing ; adding, that on our 
letting her have a master to finish her in 
that, she would, at some future period, 
make herself mistress, and without assist- 

lO 



DUDLEY. ^7^ 

ance, of the additional arts of oil paint-, 
ing, miniature, and crayon drawing. 

Henry smiled, as he shook his head 
at her ambitious speculations, and then 
enquired of Frances what had been her 
choice : — " Music," she replied ; '* and 
as the harp,I am told, is productive of end- 
less expense and trouble, I shall be content 
with the piano." Her determination 
pleased us, as she has a tolerable singing 
voice. — On Louisa being applied to, she 
answered, with eyes sparkling with joy, 
** Oh, dancing, mamma, for me!" — On 
which our girls, to their great surprise 
and pleasure, were informed, that dan- 
cing we considered one of the indispen- 
sables, as conducive to health, amuse- 
ment, and grace of person ; and though 
they had been hitherto suffered to dance in 
their own wild fashion, which is not devoid 
of elegance, that on our going to Bath for 
a few weeks, they should have one of the 
first masters to teach and perfect them 
in that grand science. 

Dr. H was with us at the .time, 

and enquired of the child, who seemed 
• N G 



^76 DUDLEY, 

perplexed as to her choice, what she 
thought of boxing. (This was alluding 
to a little battle the day before with one 
of her brothers.) — "Well, my girl, as 
you see that frisking in a country dance 
comes into the bargain, and that you 
already excel in fighting, what do you 
think of heraldry, and chemistry, and 
zoology, and conchology, and mineralogy, 
and botany ?" 

Louisa, without attending to him, was 
debating, like a child who might have 
three wishes given it by a fairy, what 
she should choose j at last it came out, 
" German, papa." 

" German !" cried the Doctor, ** why, 
that language is only fit for soldiers ;—- 
will Louisa be a soldier ?" 

*^ Are all the ladies in Germany sol- 
diers?" enquired the arch little girl: 
and then to her father, "I do wish to 
learn German." 

♦* And why not French, my love, or 
^vetf Italian, in preference ?" enquired 
Henry. 

<< Oh, no, no ; not French ! — Italian, 
if you please — but not French." 



DUDLEY. S77 

Her aversion to this most charming 
and useful of all languages, was, on 
enquiry, explained by one of her sisters. 
Having been on a visit to a family in the 
neighbourhood, where the children had a 
French governess, Louisa making more 
noise than was agreeable to the nerves 
of old Mademoiselle Vertot, was com- 
manded repeatedly to be quiet, in really 
affectionate language ; but which, from 
the vehemence of her manner, and the 
loudness of her voice, had a direct con* 
trary effect on my little girl, who, in 
tears, begged to leave her presence, and 
be brought down to the drawing-room 
to me. 

A good laugh from the Doctor on 
hearing this story was followed by a pro- 
mise, that if she would learn French to 
please him, he would give her a com- 
plete library of children's books in that 
language ; which bait succeeding, Louisa 
is at present a most excellent scholar, as 
far as reading, writing, and translating 
goes ; but hitherto has not got rid of the 
English mauvaise honte when speaking it. 
Caroline and Frances, in the mean time* 



^7S DUDLEY. 

have made still greater proficiency in 
drawing and music, for which each has 
a decided taste. 

And now, my dear Mrs. Grantley, I 
have to explain to you a third and en^ 
tirely distinct branch of what I under- 
stand by the term Education, in which 
my girls may at this period be termed 
adepts. 

We love to see them dressed alike, 
both in respect to the shape and colour 
of their clothes, and at all times well 
dressed. — That is, not in imitation of 
Claudy Howard, with frocks and drawers 
of worked India muslin, and fine laces, 
** a yard or two of which she may leave, 
any day she pleases, on a hedge or a 
nail ;" (neither can we suffer our boys, 
like Dudley, to change their clothes as 
often as they choose '* to ink or spot 
them.") Our girls always dress in a 
becoming style, but with frugal simpli- 
city. 

As you may suppose, w^e cannot com- 
mand the constant attendance of man- 
tua-makei-s, milliners, and sempstresses, 
which we should consider our duty, did 



DUDLEY. ^79 

our present fortune or their future ex- 
pectations entitle us thus to do ; we 
therefore adopt such plans of domestic 
economy as are suited to our situation in 
life. For six months at a time, one of 
each of these three trades has been stay- 
ing in our house, young women of good 
behaviour, well recommended, and of 
serious, yet cheerful habits, (very com- 
patible qualities, I assure you, as Lady 
Alford would say.) Tliey take tlieir 
station in the children's sitting-room, 
in the centre of which is fixed a large 
round table, or board of green-cloth, as 
Dr. H calls it, when sometimes ad- 
mitted by special favour. 

Here I occasionally preside ; if called 
away, Caroline is my deputy, — on each 
side of whom her sisters take their places, 
and the young needle- woman sits opposite. 
She takes her meals with the younger 
children, and when the latter come down 
to us in the evening, we furnish her with 
books of amusement, or she is at liberty 
to ^o and sit with Barton, my woman. 
Thus are my girls become thorough mis- 
tresses of the above employments j and 



280 mjDLET. 

thus will they hereafter be enabled to 
increase their little fortunes, by doing 
that for themselves and their families 
which otherwise would inevitably cost 
them half their income. 

This, my friends, is not all : as we entitle 
these acquirements essential, so thet/ also 
have their ornamental counterpart. In 
like manner, I have engaged for them a 
lace-maker, a platter in hair, a straw- 
platter, an artificial flower-maker, a glove- 
maker, and what will perhaps give you 
most surprise, a ribbon-weaver. The 
tools, the implements, the pillows, the 
looms, &c. necessary for the carrying on 
these avocations, have been provided by 
their father, and in the most liberal and 
even elegant manner, — his pleasure is 
equal to that of the girls, when he pays 
them a morning visit about once or twice 
a week. Sometimes he comes into their 
room with a piece of muslin under his 
arm, saying, " Should this be mantita- 
making week, here are frocks to make ;" 
and in a few days he has the pleasure of 
seeing them equipped in his present. 
At other periods he makes his appear- 



DUDLEY. 281 

ance with some pieces of Irish. — The 
sempstress is then summoned, by whose 
joint aid the girls are enabled to supply 
their brothers with a fresh stock of 
linen. 

As their father and I have our own 
sempstress and mantua-maker, we never 
have recourse to the " Board of Green 
Cloth'* for any articles of this nature; 
but we do not hesitate at times to accept 
from our young artificers a pair of gloves, 
or a watch-chain, a hair-ring, or a lace- 
cap, a wreath of flowers, a new ribbon, 
or straw for a bonnet, — all of their own 
manufacture : besides which, their bro- 
thers have endless demands on their 
industry and ingenuity for purses, gar- 
ters, head-bands, &c. 

One rule laid down with us, and by 
which we have alone been enabled to 
keep the house in perfect order, is nevfer 
to suffer any of them to follow their 
employments out of their own work- 
room. " Keep to your shop-board, 
girls,*' said their father, ** and never 
bring either looms, pillows, straw^, leather, 
or in short any rubbish, into the library, 



£8S DUDLEY. 

drawing, or other rooms. Within your 
own four walls these things are useful ; 
beyond them, litter. Keep them, and 
your minds, in one place ; when you 
quit that, think no more of your work 
until you return to it.'' 

*« But," said the Doctor, " Frances, 
bring your singing voice among us of 
an evening, when I am asleep in my 
elbow-chair, and your fingers to the 
piano ; now and then Louisa must tune 
her reading pipe when I ask her j and 
if Caroline must not run about with 
brushes and pallets, let her settle her 
pretty little ears to listen to her sisters." 



Thus, my good friends, have Henry 
and I given you a rapid sketch of the 
state of our large and still increasing 
family, than which, being ever employed, 
there cannot exist one more cheerful, 
happy, and united. 

And now let us dismiss Bloomfield 
Rectory and its inhabitants, to take an- 
other look, before I close the letter, at 
Euphorbia and its dear inmates, — of 
whom Lady Alford is not one of the 



DUDLEY. 283 

least beloved. Her prolonged stay at 
Teneriffe causes all her friends in Eng- 
land no little astonishment. Although, 
through affection for Sir Eliot, to whom 
she was aware her society was of the 
utmost advantage, she refused to return 
with me to England, we were under the 
full idea that her absence after my de- 
parture would not exceed a mouth or 
two at the farthest — and she has now 
been away upwards of four years.— 
We grant that the attractions of Eu- 
phorbia are great ; but still, tliat a court 
beauty — a dashing belle — one of the 
brightest ornaments of fashion, should 
thus banish herself from a world by 
which she was idolized, seems to us 
most wonderful. Some of her suitors, 
(and I fancy, as she herself once boast- 
ed, she has as many as Penelope,) 
having lost all hopes of her, have con- 
soled themselves elsewhere ; but others 
still persist in waiting her return : — 
amongst the rest Mr. Cavendish, who is 
now a Commander, and lately returned 
from cruizing in the Mediterranean. 
He declares himself resolved not to 



S84 DUDLEY. 

give lip his chance of winning the lovely 
prize; and that, but for his being ordered 
to the North Seas, on a station, for some 
considerable time, he would himself fit 
out a frigate, sail to Teneriffe, make a 
desperate landing, and like, and unlike 
another Paul Jones, not run away with 
a bushel of plate, but secure to himself 
the noble lady. 

Farewell, my dear and kind friends! 
Let us hear from you as often as pos- 
sible ; and, in your next, pray give us 
some idea of the taste of Claudy and 
Dudley, when trifling presents are to be 
chosen, as our boys and girls design to 
fill a box with toys of their own manu- 
facture for the beloved little inmates of 
Euphorbia. — Henry joins me in kind 
remembrance to all. We will answer 
Dudley's letters * by the next convey- 
ance. 

Louisa Clonmore. 



* They do not appea;r» 



DUDLEY* 285 



LETTER XXXV* 

The Cmntess of Alford to M>^s, Clonmme* 

A PLOT ! a plot, by all that's religious ! 
I mean flagitious— the meaning as oppo- 
site as light and darkness. If ever I ex- 
change the tenth part of a monosyllable 
with Alexander Duncan Ross Balfour, 
Esq. or with Mrs. Mac Flora Cameronia 
Macdonald, his honoured wife, may my 
lily knuckles be covered with chalk-stones, 
and a Swiss goutre^ like the maw of a 
pelican, dangle from my snowy throat ! 

'Pon my life, when I quitted England, 
that land of Rye-house plots, pop-gun 
treasons, and gunpowder conspiracies, I 
thought I had left dame Wickedness be- 
hind me 5 but I find she gave me the 
slip, and here now turns round to accost 
me with an impudent nod of " How do 
you do, old friend ?'* 

1 believe I told you in my last letter, 
that Eliot had invited the Balfours (the 



S86 DUDLEY. 

crafty loons !) and their Spanish friend^ 
to Euphorbia. — I wish the husband had 
staid at home over his insurance books, 
and the wife to take care of her husband's 
flannel waistcoats, &c. Well, my dear, 
they did come. 

I was in the library at the time, en- 
gaged in a violent dispute with Dudley; 
who, having had the impertinence to 
take Claudy's quarrel upon himself, as 
usual, brought all my vengeance on his 
own pate. You know, Louisa, how well 
1 figure in a quadrille, a bravura, and a 
polacca; and you have seen how J do 
shine in a conversation on Geography, 
History, and the Belles Lettres. 

I happened to make a very silly re- 
mark, I forget of what nature, and a very 
apt remark, which I remember perfectly : 
'* Heigh ho 1 Jane," I said, " I am very 
tired :" (Jane was winding silk :) " I wish 
those good folks in England would not 
keep the sun as long as they do, but 
send him to us, that we might clap on 
his night-cap, and put him to bed in our 
western waves, for the day here does seem 
marvellously long.*' (The Balfours, &c. 



DUDLEY. 287 

Were not yet arrived, you are to under- 
stand.) 

Oaudy's remark on this was, *' If the 
sun comes to us later, it leaves us later 5 
therefore it is all the same thing.*^ 

«' Well said, Claudy," cried your boy, 
who was holding the silk for Jane to wind. 

*< Tm not tired now, aunt," said our 
little niece, and relieved Dudley, w^ho 
was leaving the room, when I called 
him back with, <' I suppose, sir, you 
will next presume to question my skill 
in Physics ; and say I do not know the 
east from the west ?" 

** And what have the east and west to 
say to Physics, aunt Alford ?" as the 
darling little pedant always calls me. 
(He goes upon the plan of appropriating 
all Claudy's relations ; it is " aunt Grant- 
ley," " aunt Alford," and «' papa Eliot." 
He at first said " father Eliot," until I 
laughed him out of it, advising him to 
say *« father Luke,** or " father Paul," at 
once : but the urchin never calls Glaudy 
sister ; no, no, trust him for that.) 

** Well, nephew Dudley," I replied, 
" I think ril puzzle you nowj pray tell 



SS8 DUDLEY. 

me, does St Helena, for example, lie east 
or west of the Cape of Good Hope ?" 

" West,*' he replied immediately. 

" East!" I exclaimed; *' Ha! have I 
caught you, my boy?" — for he looked 
doubtfully J but what I considered hesita- 
tion was in reality surprise at my igno- 
rance J for, as I had never sailed to 
India, it was very immaterial to me 
whether that little bit of an insignificant 
rock in which I, in common with the 
rest of the world, could have no manner 
of interest, was east or west, north or 
south of the said Cape, and I considered 
myself as correct, until I took down and 
examined an atlas. 

" Now, you vile beautiful charmer,*' I 
said, " that you have made me blush for 
my stupidity, now have I it in contem- 
plation to punish you." 

<« Fd rather you would reward me," 
said he, throwing open the piano and 
placing a chair : " Do, aunt, play and 
sing me Giles Scroggins* Ghost.** 

" I play a Scroggins, my dear! — a 
pretty employment for a lady of ton ! — 
the very siame gives me a creak in the 



DUDLEY. 289 

heck. — No, no: sit you down, sli', take 
a sheet of blank paper, and with my 
charming gold pencil (stay, I'll cut it 
for you) draw for me, (without one peep 
at the atlas, mind,) the south coast of 
Africa, and the very island in dispute, — 
with Madagascar into the bargain." 

He complied, and drew it with an 
accuracy that astonished me. ** Why, 
you prodigy, I exclaimed, " 1 will cer- 
tainly obtain for you the post of map- 
drawer, not ordinary, though extraordu 
nary, to his most immaculate highness 
the king of the Hottentots." 

*« Claudy," said your son, " draws 
much better than I do." 

** She does! does she? — Here, madam, 
come here \ now, do you take a sheet of 
paper, and sketch the outline of the 
English coast. Not a glimpse at a map 
do I allow; you must do it from me- 
mory." 

Claudy obeyed, and I looked over in 
silence, now and then opening the book 
to take a peep to convince myself r,he 
^as right. 

<* Very well \ and now clap on tlic 

VOL. 11. o 



^90 DUDLEY, 

head of England, Scotland and its islands, 
like a bowed and befrilled laced cap." 

It was done. 

** And now Ireland, as substantial as 
one of its own potatoes, and not unlike 
it in shape." 

When completed, there was Great Bri- 
tain very exact, though, of course, the 
outline was more correct in the general 
whole, than in the minute parts. In the 
opposite coast of France, which I re- 
quired her to trace, she failed ; when 
Dudley, at her request, took the pencil, 
and thus each giving it to the other 
alternately, they completed France, 
Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Adriatic, 
when I stopped them with my usual 
*^ bravissimo !" We then opened the 
atlas, compared, examined, and corrected 
various faults, when, at my request, they 
gave me the drawing to ornament my 
boudoir, and I gave Dudley the pencil 
to line his pocket. 

" Well," I said to Jenny, *' this is 
wonderful ! — these younkers to draw 
these countries from memory, when the 
deuce a bit if I could copy a single line. 



DUDLEY. £91 

even out of the atlas: and by what 
method have they acquired this profi- 
ciency ?" 

" By a very simple one/' she replied, 
(Jenny gallops at a great rate when on 
her hobby of education,) " what they 
have now done is no more than their 
repeating a psalm or a hymn : they have 
learned map-drawing in the same man- 
ner as hymns and psalms, that is, hy 
liearU They were first taught to draw 
the shape of the room in which they study 
with my brother j they next successively 
copied a drawing of the ground floor 
of the house, — the plan of the estate, 
— a map of TenerifFe, — each island 
singly, — and lastly, the whole group of 
the Canaries : and this first series, as I 
may call it, was so repeatedly drawn, so 
perfectly impressed on their minds, that 
they could do it blindfolded. A map of 
Great Britain and Ireland followed, to 
which succeeded Europe and Africa, — 
and here, I believe they stop." 

" Yes," said Dudley, " we know no 
more. Next year v\^e begin Asia, and 
six months afterwards, America — 
o 2 



^92 13UDLEY. 

" And then/' added Claudy, stretch- 
ing out her arms, " the whole world/* 

" And in which map did you take 
most pleasure, Claudy, my angel ?" 

" In that of England,'' she replied, 
" dear, dear England !" 

This child possesses more feeling than 
slie ought, if she wishes to get through 
the world happily. I honoured her with 
a smile, saying, <* Be a good girl, and 
when I return to England, you shall go 
with me." 

" Oh no," she replied, retreating 
hastily, and tossing back her fine head. 

<^ What then, must I go alone ?" 

" Yes." 

** Alid you would not like to live with 
godmamma ?" What should you sup- 
pose, Louisa, was the answer ? 

" I should like to live with God and 
with mamma, but not with godmamma." 

And her sweet pretty eyes filled with 
tears, which, would you believe it, 
your libertine of a son presumed to 
kiss away, as they fell upon her cheek ! 
Lord, my dear, I could have sermonised 
on the subject, and cross-questioned 



DUDLEY. 593 

Claudy an hour longer, had not Dudley- 
teased me till I played and sung for 
him « Unfortunate Miss Bailey," and 
sister Grantley said, with one of her 
out-of-the-way never-in-time remarks,— 
** The room feels warm, — Dudley, 
open the window," and *< Claudy, pick 
up that ball of silk :" it was rolling 
away as fast as she wound ; and, by 
the by, my subject seems to be rolling 
away just as fast from me. Now for 
a jerk this way, and then to wind up 
my history of plots and treasons. 

To cut the affair short at once, my 
love, ril tell you a round-about tale, and 
I'll tell it roundly, and, though round, it 
shall come to an end at last, and not a 
King's end as the wise people of Dubl??i 
Bay have it. ** Well, well, Caroline," I 
hear you cry, ** to the point — to the 
point." 

Yes, now I am something like a child 
with a dose of physic in one hand, and a 
J)it of sugar in the other, arguing with 
her nurse, — " Why I will take it, I 
mean to take it, indeed I do, lam going 
to take it directly, by and by ; but I do 

o a 



^94 DUDLEY, 

not like it;" and then I look at the cup, 
and then at the sugar. 

You must know, my dear, that Claudy 
had just picked up the silk, and Dudley 
had just opened the window, when (a 
smiling villain ! ) in walked Merchant 
Balfour and his traitress wife. 1, in the 
generous spirit of my nature (when I am 
pleased), jumped up in a transport of 
joy, and gave a hand to each, with — 
*' Come at last ! heartily glad to meet 
again ; — have you seen my brother ? — 
how well you do look, Mrs. Balfour, 
(coin to be repaid in kind) ; — sister 
Jenny ! for Heaven's sake, widow, never 
mind looking for the sheath of your 
^cissars now, do give a squeeze of civil- 
ity, and welcome your guests ; — Dudley, 
Claudy, boys and girls, go and play.'* 

And all the time I was speaking, 1 
was looking over the shoulder of the 
Balfours, at the door at which they had 
entered, thinking it rather queer (a fa- 
vorite word of mine, though now out of 
fashion, on land at least ; I learned it, 
when a child, of Cavendish) rather queer 
that they had left the stranger (you guess 



DUDLEY. ^95 

whom) to introduce himself; and I was 
really beginningto feel alarmed lestMajor 
Hernandez had not accompanied them at 
alL I wonder if at all is good English, 
or in vogue among elegantes \ I hope it is^ 
for it helps out a phrase wonderfully, 
and I know not what the deuce the Irish 
would do without their at ally at all! 

Oh, by all the powers of cold cream 
and milk of roses, I blush at my rambling 
pen! Why the wandering Jew, com- 
pared to my zig-zag thoughts, was, I 
mean, is, as steady as a mile-stone. Well, 
once more to return. Widow Jenny, bless 
her pretty prim mouth ! d-e on one lip, 
and m-u-r-e on the other^ comes out 
with a sort of a question, which for the 
life of me I could never have forced my 
degagee rose-buds to utter, " We hoped 
to have had the pleasure of seeing your 
friend — Major Hernandez, I think his 
name is.'' 

Now that single phrase was better 

worth, in solid value, all that Jenny had 

uttered for a twelvemonth before. I 

would have told her so, but fearful of 

o 4 



f296 



DUDLEY. 



opening the ejes of Scotland and his 
Canarian mate. 

" The Major is with Sir Eliot in 
the garden," said Balfour, opening his 
snuff-box, and turning round to look 
through the windows that faced that 
way J whilst Mrs, Balfour taking up the 
map-drawing of the children's, which 
lay on the table, made some observation 
on it to Jane : my heart, in the mean 
time, resembled a balloon fastened down 
to the ground, fluttering in the air this 
way and that, impatient to be off to the 
ivinds. 

I was determined not to lose a sight 
of this Spaniard by going up to ask a 
question or two of my looking-glass, 
not knowing but that the Major might 
decline Eliot's invitation, and be off. I was 
therefore resolved to keep my ground, 
though, foolish enough, I remained per- 
fectly silent, (foolish ! — therein often 
is our greatest perfection,) whilst Jane, 
(never knew her so talkative,) bless her ! 
gaid, " You have seen my brother then, 
I suppose he is showing your friend the 
grounds and plantations 5 Eliot has made 



DUDLEY. S97 

a gi'eat many alterations since you were 
here last, and now talks of building an 
observatory near the flag»stafi^ where 
lately he has had a gong erected close to 
the bell ; the latter is, as usual, to be rung 
daily, to assemble our visitors together at 
meal time, and the former to announce 
the arrival of strangers.'* 

** Is Senor Hernandez a native of 
TenerifFe, or of Spain ?" my sister next 
enquired. 

** Madam, he is — he is^^ — and Bal- 
four was seized with such a fit of cough- 
ing, that I suspected he had rammed a 
pinch of snuff into his m3uth instead of 
his nose. 

At that instant, my eyes being fixed on 
the windows, to one of which I had ap- 
proached, I saw coming up the lawn, 
Eliot, and with him — at the first glance, 
my dear, my tremor returned, and whe- 
ther it were the tightness of my shoe, or 
the sight of a large hole in the thumb of 
myglove, that occasioned me a violentpaln 
in my chest, on the left side, I cannot be 
certain ; but I felt very much inclined to 
leave the room, and equally so to sit still 
5 



298 DUDLEY. 

in the window seat, half wrapped up in a 
blue curtain ; particularly when T said 
to my tremors, " Be quiet, — faint heart 
never won — brown gentleman/' 

On seeing the two figures together, as 
they walked slowly up the lawn, I was 
never more convinced of this Spaniard's 
decided superiority, in feature, grace, and 
person, over every one of the male kind 
(you understand me, human males), 1 had 
ever met with. Eliot, we all agree, is a 
handsome man 5 in face and form unques- 
tionably handsome ; he was ever reckoned 
such in England^ and has now recovered 
much of the appearance of his better days; 
yet, when compared to this Don soldier, (by 
the by, a prettier companion, at least for 
the ladies, than a Don Cossack,)! doubted 
whether or not he was very ugly, uncom- 
monly awkward, and astonishingly insig- 
nificant : such is the power of contrast ! 

Well, when I fully expected Eliot, on 
approaching the house, to throw up the 
long window, and come into the room 
with his guest, they turned back again, 
and back, and backwards and forwards 
they paraded their beauty and noble car- 
riage, as if with a design to captivate 



DUDLEY. ^99 

the senses of a couple of upright honest 
widows ; and what most astonished me 
was, to see Eliot, instead of stopping to 
point out the distant prospects and the 
nearer views, and the surrounding im- 
provements, as one would expect the 
owner of a place to do to a stranger: 
whether they had got on politics, which 
absorb all other interests, and is the 
point of union, or disunion, among 
strangers, I know not, but there they 
walked to and fro, their eyes fixed on the 
ground ; Eliot appeared to be talking 
most earnestly, nay, vehemently, and 
once or twice he actually stopped, and 
caught hold of the tassels or frogs of Her- 
nandez's long military coat, and seemed 
to fix him to the ground ; the Senor 
upon this shrugged his shoulders, shook 
his head, and, when disengaged, walked 
slowly on ; whilst Eliot looked as if he 
could demolish him for non-compliance. 
*< Very odd,*' I thought, " such fa- 
miliarity at first sight !*' At last my pa- 
tience was really exhausted, when, very 
luckily, a gnat or musquito buzzed before 
my eyes, and fixed on the sash of the 
6 



30(J DUDLEY. 

window ; as I make it a point to try and 
exterminate these blood-suckers^ I took 
out my pocket handkerchief to murder 
him, when, with a loud knock, I killed 
the gnat, and caught the attention of the 
gentlemen — the very thing I wanted. 

Eliot started forward, came to the ad- 
joining sash, and threw it up ; but just 
as he was stepping over the sill of the 
window, to come into the room, he stop- 
ped, turned his head aver his shoulder, 
and said in a low voice, ** There, there, 
think no more of it now; but do make up 
your mind at once." 

Now Louisa ! now for it. Oh, what I 
felt at that moment ! When I look back, 
I could tear out — not my pretty blue eyes, 
surely ■— no, but every abominable page, 
spent at TeneriiFe, from the book of ex- 
istence ! Guess 1 could you but guess ! 
bat you, you wicked one — you and your 
wretch of a respectable spouse, and that 
arch joker the M. D. ! all, all, by your 
equivocations on one subject, you all 
joined in leading me into this fatal error. 

Could you guess the answer that was 
given to Eliot's advice ; why, my best love^ 
BO answer at all — or rather the only one 



DUDLEY. ^ 301 

was, a few notes of the Marseillois hymn, 
whistled in a low sort of a melodious mur- 
muring tone of voice, which, tliough 
scarcely audible, drew my attention, and 
fell upon my heart. 

No ! la Hlle sauvage at the sound of the 
flute, could not have felt a greater degree 
of amazement, when led by the ear to fol- 
low he\piping\ovev from her native woods 
to his ship, than 1 did now. Conviction 
came upon me like lightning : I put all 
circumstances together, and felt assured 
that my rising suspicions were — 

But, to goon in order. — He followed 
Eliot into the room, and straightforward 
to Mrs. Grantley, to whom having 
spoken for an instant, they both, at the 
same instant, turned to where I was still 
sitting, in the distant window-seat. 
Eliot came up and spoke to me, but I 
did not hear a word he said. I felt deaf, 
stunned, blind ; a mist was before my 
eyes ; a sort of buzzing noise in my ears. 
1 attempted to rise : I sat down again. 
Eliot still kept near me ; the other ap- 
proached, whom he seemed to introduce. 
I heard the words, by which, like a 



302 DUDLEY. 

passing-bell in my heart, my suspicions 
were wholly confirmed, and I found that 
— - Zulvago and Hernandez were one and 
the same person. 



Oh Louisa, my dear, enchanting rec- 
toress, Louisa ! could you have seen me 
at that moment. I'm glad you did not. 
My spirits w^ere completely overcome. 
So deeply mortified was I at the conduct 
of the Balfours, whose collusion to dupe 
me into the acquainta.nce of this man 
was apparent, for, until now, I was un- 
der the full idea that they were distinct 
personages, that I secretly vowed never 
to forgive them. I, however, contrived 
to summon my presence of mind, and 
answer the Spaniard's enquiries respect- 
ing my health ; and then hastened to 
my own room, where, as is the invaria- 
ble custom of all heroines, since the 
days of Clarissa, I locked my door, 
fanned my face, washed my eyes in rose 
water, and gave three distinct hems. 

Louisa, I have one question to ask 
before I proceed ^ but, unfortunately, I 
i3 



' DUDLEY. 303 

can have no answer until this is gone ; 
(tell Charley Maxwell, should you see 
him, I am still his plJpil.) Well, then, 
this one letter I will entrust to your ge- 
nerosity 'y but should I in future disco- 
ver that my confidential epistles, in which 
are registered all my enormities, are 
shown to your or any other lady's 
husband, or gentleman's wife, or chits, 
or young virgins, or old gone-by's, or 
widows — in short, if they are not sa- 
cred between ourselves, and deposited in 
your pin-money chest, in which your 
lord and master has no right to peep, 
upon the word of a Caprichiosa, here 
ends our correspondence. 

Oh how I did, that very same evening, 
wish for a delicious gossip with an old 
friend ! How I did recall our maiden 
days of confab, when sitting at a fire, or 
without a fire, until break of day, tongues 
active, spirits fagged, limbs cramped 
with cold, or scorched with flames, 
nerves in tremor at the slightest noise, 
(the rest of the family being all in bed,) 
a gust of wind through a key-hole, a 
creaking window-shutter, a piece of 



30^ DUDLEY. 

mortar dropped by a spider in his travels 
on the ceiling, a mouse, or rat, setting 
out on a foraging journey — then we 
start ; all conjecture, all doubt, mystery, 
suggestion and debate ; and then ? Why 
then comes the wedding-day, and adieu 
to female confidantes; for, as I have 
often heard from our dear old licentiate 
M. D., ** Girls will be girls : it is the 
nature of the sex to have their secrets ; 
and let them : but once married, there 
must be no confidante but the husband. 
Rely upon it, there is more mischief 
caused by female friendship among 
married folks, than you young hoydens 
are aware of.'* 

And here am I a single woman chat- 
tering to a matron, and asking her to keep 
my secrets. — My secrets ! Lord, my 
dear, I've no secrets. I only relate the 
facts that occur in this barbarous out- 
landish place, just merely to amuse you 
and myself; but you may naturally sup- 
pose that I was rather surprised to find 
that the Don Zulvago whom I had so 
long wished to see, and this Major Her- 
nandez, — this Senor Isidore, — ('pon 



DUDLEY. 305 

my life, if I am not tempted to ask the 
man at once to give me a list of his 
names, for they are all, in fact, his own 
property,) to find, I repeat, that they 
were the same person. Oh, you set of 
traitors all ! on your side of the water as 
well as on this ! not to describe to me, 
when I so repeatedly enquired of you, the 
face and figure of this renowned, this 
charming Spaniard. 

Eliot, and Jane, I acquit of all know- 
ledge of the deception practised on me 
by the Balfoursj for they were equally 
surprised with myself, and candidly re- 
marked, how singular not to mention to 
Caroline that this was Don Zulvago* 
Both my brother and sister are, as you 
well know, great enemies to mystery and 
manoeuvring, and have spoken their 
minds accordingly ; which, I can see, 
has had a good effect on my worthy pair 
of deceivers. 

Eliot, after dinner, took a ride to Oro- 
tava, with Dudley and Her — no, Zul — 

no, no, Isi Oh the deuce take it ! if 

I know what to call the man now ! WelJ^ 
to shorten the business at once: Eliot 



306 DUDLEY. 

took a ride with Don Zulvago, Isidore, Her- 
nandez, Carlos, Conde D' Almeida, now 
a major in the Spanish service.— Balfour, 
tb do him justice, might well remind me 
of the story of the Spaniard asking for £t 
night's lodging ; and but for my petu- 
lance in running away at that time, and 
not letting him finish it, perhaps he was 
about entering on an explanation. 

The gentlemen had not returned at 
collation-hour ; and I found myself awk- 
wardly situated with the Balfours, who 
both looked conscious of their crimes. 
The wafe, at length, after a concerto on 
the piano, (she plays well,) took a turn 
with Jane in the garden ; whilst the 
guilty husband, with a sort of distant re- 
spect, mingled with good-humour, and 
an imploring look, with design to depre- 
cate my wrath, — I almost expected him 
to sing •* Pray Goody, moderate"* — ap- 
proached me, with his smooth shining 
face thrust out from between his broad, 
high shoulders. 

" Lady Alford, I see you are offended, 
and I fear with cause ; but I also suspect, 
^ In O'Hara's " Midas." 



DUDLEY. 307 

you think my conduct still more repre- 
hensible than it really is. Permit me to 
explain.'* 

As, you know, we never come to de- 
meles in English fashionable life, I 
scarcely knew how to behave on the oc-^ 
casion, so called in an orange to my aid ; 
and this, after a dignified bow of assent, 
I quartered into as many angles (Erin go 
brah !) as the compass can boast ; and 
then sugared it, and peppered it, and ate 
it most eagerly, without, I declare, scarcely 
knowing whether it were an orange or 
a shaddock. I believe, as 1 would not, 
or rather could not, answer to that, or 
any other purpose, I made a wry face, 
with a tear in my eye, saying, " This 
fruit is horribly sour j" though, at the 
same time, it lay buried in sugar. 

** Your ladyship may remember the 
period when Don Zulvago, (for as suoh 
he was distinguished when last in the 
island,") said Balfour, sitting down by 
me, and, with both arms on the table, by 
way of employment carving my orange- 
peel into a thousand different shapes, — 
*« When Don Zulvago sailed for South 
America -, from thence, after a few days' 



508 DUDLEt*. 

stay, he took shipping for Lisbon. He was 
aconsiderable timeinSpain, where, having 
formerly been in the army, he raised a 
regiment on his estates, in which, by his 
own desire, he held the commission of 
major only ; the superior commissions 
devolving, at his request, on friends of 
his own who were residents in the coun- 
try. After one campaign, he returned 
to these islands on public business, 
which however was of a secret nature, 
and had several interviews with the go- 
vernor of the Canaries. This affair con- 
eluded, he repaired to Ben Lomond, en- 
quired for me, and hearing we had gone 
on a party of pleasure for the day, 
strolled out in the evening to meet us." 

*^ Ah, there," thought I, «' is another 
of your tricks, you complaisant Jesuit j" 
I alluded to our wager on the height of 
the Peak, but I did not speak. I went 
on with great ardour devouring my fruit ; 
— and my rising tears, Louisa, — at having 
been the dupe of a Highlander, one's 
own countryman in some measure ; — 
such barbarous treatment ! 

" Well," he coutmued, cutting out 
orange-peel, mincing chesuut^, ^nd con- 



DUDLEY. 309 

ducting his defence, as thus, " when 

Hernandez overtook us nay, Lady 

Alford, why this surprise ! Hernandez 
is his name, and so is Zulvago, the latter 
being in reality the first of his Christian 
names. What is the matter, Lady Al- 
ford ?'' for I stopped in my orange pro- 
gress, scarcely able to breathe. 

*' His Christian name !" I repeated ^ 
** Well, well, go on. Nothing is the 
matter, only a pippin'* (a pip, I suppose, 
I intended to say) " has got into my 
throat." No, my dear, it was the letter 
Z that had struck at my heart. It was 
the fortune-tellers, and their cards, and 
their cups, and their cats, that now came 
across my mind, at the words, <* Christian 
name.'* 

Now was my foil}^ in consulting such 
impious wretches, most deservedly punish- 
ed. I would go, — in the company of two 
as giddy madcaps of quality as myself j 
I would leave my home at seven o'clock 
in an autumn evening, (when mamma 
and sister Jane were gone on a visit to a 
friend's house in the same square.) At- 
tended by my maid, a vile seducing 
agent (not Savage), we all three got 



310 DUDLEY. 

into a sordid hackney-coach, and after 
driving through half-a-dozen dirty narrow 
streets and lanes, we stopped ata wretched 
place, and crawled up three or four flights 
of stairs into a back garret. Oh, I shud- 
der even now at the recollection ! 

There were the two sorceresses, with the 
implements of their wicked trade, cards, 
globes, and spirits (evil spirits indeed) ! 
I remember what was said to my friends, 
but I cannot — dare not repeat the pro- 
phecy to each. Learn from me, how- 
ever, that it brought its own fulfilment. 
Yes, I will confide it to you, Louisa: — 
on second thoughts, I will relate what 
passed at that hour 5 though I have only 
to remind you of the death of Emily 
Harcourt, and Susan Lascelles, and you 
will at once comprehend the nature of 
the predictions told to them on that 
dreadful night, and which made so lasting 
and fatal an impression on their minds, 
and on my own. 

To Emily it was said, ** Your Jirst 
child mil never have either brother or 
sister ;" — by which she understood, she 
would never have but one child. Her 



DUDLEY. 311 

little son was already three years old, 
and she was near the time of again be- 
coming a mother, when the prediction 
coming across her mind in an evil mo- 
ment, she died, giving birth to a dead 
female infant. Susan Lascelles was in- 
formed, " that she must guard against 
water J" She, of course, lived ever after 
in dread of the sea, and of rivers. 
Whether this constant fear brought on a 
derangement of the system, I am not 
competent to judge j but this fact is as.- 
certained, she died of water on the 
brain.* 

To me the following words were ad- 
dressed, after I had first duly answered 
her demoniac questions, and suffered my 
fair soft hands to be opened and examined 
by her mahogany claws. 

" Young lady J yours is a happy lot : 
hut look sharp, have a care ; you mil only 
escape the grave by the twentieth part of an 
inch ; a man whose Christian name begins 
with a Z, and who is now beyond seas, 
will nearly be the death of you,'' 

On quitting this den of vice, and re- 

* Both these instances are facts. 



Bii BUDl£Y. 

turning to the drawing-room, we all 
laughed over our adventure, and in the 
true spirit of fifteen, declared we would 
combine to cheat the fortune-teller : — 
Emily protesting she would never marry, 
Susan that she would avoid every thing 
in the shape of a boat and a ship, and I 
exclaiming, ** Heaven keep me from all 
the odious names of Zachariah, Zedekiah, 
Zaccheus, and Zany." 

** But by this Zulvago," thought I 
now, my life has been saved, not en- 
dangered;" — and thus endeavouring to 
rally my spirits, I told Balfour to go on 
with his exculpation. 

** Major Hernandez, (under which 
designation my friend has lately dis- 
tinguished himself in Spain, as I men- 
tioned before,) joined our company ; 
and when I rose to meet and speak 
to him apart — these were my words : 
Lady Alford as you see is, with us, very 
desirous of making a tour of the Island, 
which you well know is impracticable for 
delicate ladies to accomplish ; wherefore 
we have contrived a little plot to convince 
her of the fatigue, that even one day's 



DUDLEY. SiS 

journey would be, and though we are now 
within half a mile of Ben Lomond, her 
ladyship thinks we are at a considerable 
distance, and approaching aPosaday where 
she expects to find accommodations equal 
to many of the inns on the Bath road, of 
which I have heard you boast Do not 
undeceive her yet, that is all we beg of 
you.'' 

" The Major was silent, yet seemed by 
a sort of faint smile to accede to our 
request; and you, Lady Alford, helped 
the deception, by supposing we were iu 
a collusion concerning the height of the 
Peak, of which in reality not a single 
mention had been made." 

I here interrupted Balfour, asking him 
solemnly — whether or not, at that time, 
he. did not persuade the Spaniard to join 
in the artifice respecting his own iden. 
tity. " Upon my honour I did not ; 
nay, to this very moment, he himself is 
unconscious of your mistake, and thinks 
that from the first, you knew him to be 
Zulvago, the friend of your family ; — 
nay, 1 can assure you, had 1 even tried, 
which I never should, to persuade hira 

VOL. II. P 



314 DUDLEY. 

to give into a deception of that nature, he 
would not have lent himself to it. I 
repeat, you will hereafter find him oftener 
addressed by the name of Hernandez, 
than Zulvago ; no doubt by his relations 
in Spain, he is indiscriminately call^iej?^ 
Carlos, and Isidore, and by the court 
and his vassals, Conde D' Almeida ; and 
upon the same principle that your brother 
is addressed by the names of Eliot — 
of Howard—of Sir Eliot— of Sir Eliot 
Howard — and of the Baronet, according 
to the respective rank, or degree of kin- 
dred, or relation, of the persons who 
speak to, or of him." 

Perceiving that 1 still remained silent, 
he continued : " My real error lies in hav- 
ing, through harmless pleasantry, and I 
confess a foolish whim, wished that you 
should speak of Zulvago to himself, or to 
another in his hearing, (as indeed I long 
since expressed a desire you should,) in 
pursuance of which plan, I certainly did 
conceal from you, that Major Hernandez 
was Don Zulvago j and for this crime, I 
have really no excuse to make, and 
must, therefore, Lady Alford, request 



DUDLEY. 315 

your pardon, by throwing myself uncon- 
ditionally on your mercy." 

This explanation, which reduced their 
mountain of enormity to a little Eng- 
lish ant-hill of thoughtless frolic, re- 
stored me to good-humour : giving one 
hand to him, and the other to his con- 
scious wife, as she returned with Jane 
from their walk, I said, though nearly 
choked by tears, and yet I endeavoured 
to shake off the horrors, which were 
rapidly gathering on my spirits ; ** Well, 
good folks, forget and forgive ; but how 
terrible the consequences, should I fall 
in love with this Spanish Orlando Furioso, 
and he a Knight of Malta !'' 

Zulvago was not in the plot, and my 
iieart soon recovered itself, as if relieved 
of a thousand pound weight. On their 
return from their ride, I had already 
become the most captivating mortal 
breathing — at least in TenerifFe ; for I 
had put on at once the cestus of Venus, 
the look of a Juno, and — oh no, faith, 
I've nothing to say either to the wisdom, 
or the owl of Minerva, or to any of her 
old ynaidenties of *' touch me not." Zul- 
r 2 



316 DUDLEY. 

vago, for in spite of wizards and prophe- 
cies, I prefer that of all his profusion of 
names, seemed in doubt, whether he 
would or would not be smitten with me, 
whilst Ifeltrather pleased at hearing Eliot 
very naturally address him, sometimes as 
Major Hernandez, once or twice as 
D* Almeida, but most frequently, out of 
familiarity, by the name of Zulvago. 

On recollection, it appeared strange to 
me, that during our intercourse at Ben 
l.omond, and at Madeira, he had never 
once spoken to me of Euphorbia, or its 
inmates, until I remarked, and it was 
told me, that, unless where his own heart 
is deeply interested, he is invariably re- 
served y he had early it seems enquired 
for them of Balfour, and was content 
with looking at my eyes, seemingly very 
indifferent whether he ever spoke to me, 
or I to him. 

Yes, he was very reserved when Jiearly 
on his knees to Victorina, he was very 
indifferent when imploring her to comply 
with his wishes. The truth is, that in- 
stead of being naturally reserved, this 
man has become thus by the very vio-. 



DUDLEY. 317 

lence of his own passions ; which leads 
him to look on all the world, (uncon- 
nected with that one object,) with the 
utmost supineness : — wholly absorbed by 
some personal disappointment in early 
life, (caused, I have no doubt, by Victo- 
rina's mother) he is utterly regardless of 
every person around him, except indeed 
he can render them any essential service, 
as in Eliot's case, on his first arrival at 
TenerifFe, which 1 am told is but a soli- 
tary instance of a hundred of the same 
nature. 

His riches being immense, he is con- 
sequently in possession of the ring of 
Gyges, and the purse and cap of Fortu- 
natus ; — and by his never being stationary 
for any length of time, and by going 
here and there, without giving notice of 
his arrival, or departure, he throws 
around himself a sort of solemnity, and 
mystery, which has something in it truly 
interesting and awful. 

Eliot observes, he puts him in mind of 

a poor fellow, who supposing him to have 

lost a Pigot diamond, spends the remain- 

der of his life in roaming through the 

p 3 



318 DUDLEY. 

world, with eyes fixed on the ground ii^ 
search of it. Can the heart of woman be 
that diamond ! what could be that heart 
to refuse him ? — and this Gabrielle still 
lives ! 

Farewell, Louisa ! I am weary, tired, and 
fatigued : add to these tautologies a sum 
up for complete lowness and dejection of 
spirits, and you will form some idea of 
my present state of mind. I'll try if a 
volume of Sir Charles Grandison can 
revive me. Adieu ! it is most probable 
that you will see me shortly in England. 

Ever your affectionate friend, 

Caroline Alford* 



DUDLEY. 319 



LETTER XXXVL 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Rev, Henry Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. v 

W^ouLD you ever have imagined, my 
friend, that I should turn author, or 
rather compiler, and translator ? I would 
not, however, have you suppose, I design 
€ither to print, or publish ; no truly, my 
literary pursuits have no other aim, than 
th€ improvement of these dear children, 
whose welfare occupies my thoughts and 
time, almost without intermission. Dud- 
ley and Claudy are now my Librarians, 
Secretaries, and Amanuenses, and I must 
add, their places are no sinecures. They 
refer to such authors as I wish to consult, 
make abstracts, and take extracts; search 
for dates, compare one author with 
another, that we may fix upon the most 
accurate authority; examine various 
maps, and turn over the pages of half-a^* 
p 4 



320 DUDLEY. 

dozen dictionaries, to seek synonymes^ 
etymology, and not unfrequently, ortho- 
graphy. 

I have, at their request, translated 
** Robinson Crusoe" into French ; some 
of Mrs, Opie*s " Simple Tales" into 
Italian ; and " Las Estaciones del Ano"* 
into German. I have also made an 
abbreviation of Rollin and Josephus, 
which Dudley does me the honour to 
pronounce a most capital performance. 
Turner has completed two copies of each 
of my works, in his clear and fair hand- 
writing, to which I have added etchings 
in Indian ink, and these are not the least 
admired of all my labours. The MSS. 
•have been bound at Orotava, and now 
ornament the book-shelves of Dudley 
and Claudy. 

This employment has served to awaken 
their attention, and teach them the im- 
portance of accuracy, with respect to 
dates; of patience in research ; and the 
benefit of comparing authors, to ascer- 
tain truth. They themselves translate, 
and indeed compose themes tolerably 
for their age, particularly Dudley ; but 
♦ Th§ Seasons of the Year. 



DUDLEY. 3S1 

such studies with them are still a task, 
they have not arrived at sufficient pro- 
ficiency to render either easy and agree- 
able ; therefore, from my taking this said 
task on myself, and allowing them to 
assist me in it, you may suppose the 
greatest advantages have resulted, of 
which they are fully aware, as they often 
remark — *< how good of papa, to take 
such pains to instruct us." 

CaroHne has of late given Claudy a 
few lessons on the piano and the harp, 
for which kindness, I believe we may 
thank Zulvago, who on hearing her play 
a little Spanish air correctly, asked 
whether Lady Alford had taught it her : 
an arch snnile followed her exclamation 
of "Aunt Alford!" which plainly said, 
<« I might as well expect Carlo the dog 
to teach me," — "oh no, it was Mrs. Bal- 
four ; — Mrs. Balfour taught me my 
notes, and all I know of music." 

Caroline understood her look, and 
heard her words, and as most of her 
movements are as impetuous as they are 
transient, she promised in some of her 
own peculiar language of abusive tender- 
p5 



322 DUDLEY. 

ness, to begin the next day to give the 
child a lesson of four hours duration, on 
the piano and the harp. I at this of course 
interfered, and assured both, that for the 
sake of pupil and teacher, I should limit 
the lesson to half an hour, and on its ex- 
ceeding that period even the tenth part 
of a minute, by my watch, that I would 
run away by force, with one or the other, 
into the garden. 



I had been absent for some days at 
Orotava on business, and on my return, 
happening to come into the library un- 
expectedly, what was my surprise and 
concern to see Claudy standing at Lady 
Alford's knee, seemingly endeavouring 
at some great effort, which the latter was 
encouraging her to accomplish. The 
child looked weary and exhausted, her 
mouth was open, her neck stretched out, 
her face white, and her eyes red. Not 
at first comprehending the cause, I ex- 
pressed my alarm, when Caroline care- 
lessly replied, " Oh, you Eliot ! Claudy 
is learning to sing; this is her fourth 
lebbon, and she has already reached up 



DUDLEY* 3^23 

to G. — Gome, my precious, try once 
more — that note again — thus :" and 
she set the example, which Claudy at- 
tempted to imitate. 

" Now begin, my beauty,— whole tone, 
semi tone, &c. Begin — no, no, true, 
I have promised to ride out with the 
Balfours — that is enough for to day, 
darling — now go play — I think we 
have conquered aunt Jane's sturdiness 
fairly ; I never interfere with her, and 
I desire she will not interrupt our lessons 
in future. In less than six months you 
will sing like an angel." 

Away went the good-natured, thought- 
less Caroline, leaving Claudy so totally 
overcome with her exertions, that she 
had not even the power to stir from the 
spot, much less to obey the dismissal 
of *' Go and play." 

She looked up to me as I sat near, and 
making a step or two towards me, threw 
herself in my arms, and to my great re* 
lief burst into tears. Dudley, who had 
now joined us, brought a caraffe from 
the table and poured out a glass of water; 
with deep sobs she hid her face on my 
p 6 



324 . DUDLEY. 

shoulder, saying, " Papa, papa, 1 don't 
wish to appear ungrateful to Aunt Alford, 
but, indeed, indeed, I don't like singing." 
" Well, Claudy," I replied, " your 
aunt and I will settle that affair ; suppose 
that now we three go and visit the pad- 
dock that is making in the centre of the 
chesnut grove, for the little -antelopes 
Don Zulvago has given you." 

She complied, and walked silently be- 
tween Dudley and myself, but not even 
tlie sight of the enclosure, of its new 
fence, of the pretty animals themselves, 
or their newly erected accommodations, 
could banish her dejection, — her spirits 
were totally depressed, and I found could 
not be forced — they must rise gra- 
dually, and of their own accord to their 
proper level. 

We reached a sloping lane, called 
the Geranium walk, being enclosed by 
hedges of that plant, and when about 
half way down it, rested ourselves on a 
grass bank. — Dudley had hold of Gau- 
dy's hand, which he repeatedly stroked 
and kissed and fondled, but she remained 
pa3sive, whilst I mentally ejaculated, 
•* here end your singing lessons j — you 



DUDLEY. 325 

shall not be brought to an early grave, as 
were my sister Grantley's children, even 
though your voice should promise to 
rival St. Cecilia's.'' 

Dudley's anxious tenderness had in 
part restored her usual frame of mind, 
and she was beginning to join in his 
gaiety, when I cried out " hush !" at the 
same time putting up my finger, enjoin- 
ing silence. In the thick orange bushes 
opposite to us, as I well knew, (this being 
one of my favourite solitary walks,) was 
the nest of a Capriote ; I do not think, 
Clonmore, that you remarked the song of 
this bird, when you were here ; in 
variety of tones, in softness, in richness, 
and melody, we reckon it superior even 
to the nightingale, you may therefore, 
conceive that of all songsters, it is the 
most sweet. 

A few notes were given by way of 
prelude after which followed, for upwards 
of twenty minutes, the richest strains of 
music that ever met the human ear: 
the children had hitherto, from heedless- 
ness and turbulence of spirits, never 
heard the Capriote for such a length of 



3S6 DUDLEY. 

time together, and now sat listening to 
it with evident pleasure, marking by 
their looks and raised finger, the varying 
cadence, the sweet piping sound, the 
swell, the thrill, and the fail of note. 
At last the starting of the bush, gave 
sign that the charming songster had fled, 
and I then broke silence. 

" I would rather hear that bird, or the 
nightingale, for five minutes, than Aunt 
Alford for any length of time, or any 
man or woman singer in the universe ; 
your aunt sings sweetly, and with taste 
and science, but I would rather hear 
the song of the Capriote." 

** Then I need not learn to sing,^* said 
Claudy, reviving. 

" No, my love, not learn to sing — if 
you can catch a little tune by ear, and 
warble it in your own simple fashion, as 
this bird does, all is well, but very supe- 
rior scientific singing should be avoided, 
(unless the design is to obtain a liveli- 
hood, when every exertion, mental and 
corporeal, is most honourable and praise- 
worthy) — I have no wish to see you in a 
consumption." 



DUDLEY. 327 

" But/* remarked Claudy, " Aunt 
Alford is a fine singer, and yet not in a 
consumption." 

** Very true/' replied Dudley; "but 
Aunt Alford is very — that is, she 
does not read, or work, or draw, or write 
as much as you do, Claudy ; therefore she 
has more time for music than you can 
spare. — And now, Claudy, let us have a 
run together." 

I perfectly understood the reflections 
that occupied the minds of both, as to 
Caroline's acquirements, and though I 
admired their discernment, I gave still 
greater admiration to the delicacy, which 
led them to feel grateful for her kind 
offers, and to endeavour at changing the 
subject. 



We have since that evening made 
several assignations with the Capriote, 
which have led me to teach them to dis- 
tinguish the different notes of the birds, 
to examine the construction of their 
nests, to find amusement and improve- 
ment as much out of doors as within j 



328 DUDLEY. 

and thereby to implant on their minds 
the conviction, how far pre-eminent are 
the \\(;iks of God to those of man ; — 
that they may not, when grown up, on 
entering a picture gallery, gaze with 
lingering admiration on a landscape (of 
even a Claude), and look hastily and with 
indifferen^ce on the rich and ever-chang- 
ing landscape of nature, comprehending 
all the glories of a rising, a meridian, and 
a setting sun, the varying moon, the 
stars, the perpetually shifting clouds, the 
sea, and all its endless variety of tint — 
mountains, valleys, rivers, cataracts and 
lakes ; forests, foliage, verdure, plants 
and flowers, — all these which offer never- 
ceasing subjects of pleasure and interest. 
I would not have them pass with an 
indiscriminating glance one of the love- 
liest objects on earth, a strong, healthy, 
and beautiful infant, and yet start, with 
w^onder and delight, at the sight of a 
marble Cupid (though the performance 
of a Michael Angelo.) In short, I wish 
them not to prefer a rose of cambric and 
wire, to a rose of the garden 5 the tricks 
of a clock-work puppet, to the sportive 



DtrDLEY. 3^9 

gambols of a lamb, a calf, a fawn, a colt, 
or a kitten : or, to return to the point 
from whence we set out, to prefer the 
acquired voice of even the first profes- 
sional singer, male or female, to the na- 
tural notes of the birds. 

Polished society, my friend, is too 
much the slave of art — the worshipper 
of science. Arts and sciences, human 
industry and ingenuity, ought, I allow, 
to be fostered and encouraged, and Dud- 
ley and Claudy are already instructed 
thus to do ; but it is rather on the broad 
basis of rewarding merit, and of giving 
bread to the deserving, than as preferring 
the works of man to those of nature. — 
Being rich, this becomes their duty } as 
it is that of the poor to simplify their 
wants, by dispensing, as far as possible, 
with the productions of art and science, 
and to place their daily happiness in the 
possession of such natural pleasures as 
may be attainable ; of which pure air, 
and fine prospects, are their luxuries, 
supposing the necessaries, and perhaps 
comforts of life, already within their 
reach. 



330 DUDLEY. 

Let the cottager who may be blessed 
with health, food, and clothing, and 
whose little flower-garden commands 
an uninterrupted view of the sun at its 
rise and set, never envy the slave of 
fashion, although he may be in possession 
of picture galleries, museums, cabinets, 
private theatres, ball, card, and billiard- 
rooms. Rather should the latter envy 
the cottager. 



Since the above occurrences took 
place, Dudley and I have had some little 
explanation on the subject of music ; a 
few days back he acquainted me, to my 
great surprise, that he was in some doubt 
whether, when he should begin to learn, 
it should be the violin or the flute, as he 
and Claudy had arranged between them- 
selves that it was absolutely necessary he 
should be master of one of these in- 
struments, to accompany her on the 
piano. Here were a pair of inde- 
pendents ! neither Mrs. Grantley nor I 
consulted on the subject ! The whole 



OUDLEY. 331 

affair had been determined by themselves 
in Jess than ten minutes. 

As you, Clonmore, are already aware 
of my reasons for not suffering music to 
form any part of the education of a boy, 
I need not recapitulate them at this time. 
I have merely therefore to state, that 
finding I should gain my point by argu^ 
ingwith him in a friendly manner on the 
subject, much more effectually than by 
taking it up seriously, we at last under- 
stood each other, and he assured me he 
should think no more of it. — " And now, 
Dudley,*' I continued, ** that we are on 
the topic of what are called elegant, 
though superfluous acquirements, let me 
mention my opinion of dancing. You at 
present dance well j your master" (a na- 
tive of Orotava) " has done his duty by 
you, and it is pleasing to see you and 
Claudy dance a pas-de-deua:. But if you 
would follow my advice, you would 
fix a limited time (say five-and-twenty), 
when you should leave off engaging ac- 
tively in this recreation. It is better to 
relinquish, too early, an amusement, the 
exercise of which must become ridicu- 



S32 DUDLEY. 

lous if persevered in, than carry it on too 
long. Therefore, when you come to be 
an old gentleman of twenty-five^ dance 
no longer yourself, but promote dancing 
among your juniors." 

Dudley smiled at this, and with a pro- 
mise to remember my advice, seemed not 
displeased to find that he had still so 
many years to dance pas-de-deuoc with 
Claudy. — " As you, now," I added, 
*• have so cheerfully given up, at my re- 
quest, your wish of learning music, I have 
to propose substituting another acquire- 
ment, in which, with a little brush up of 
my talents, I think I could be your master 
myself." 

" Yourself, padre!" he cried. 

" Yes. — Y/hat do you think of fen- 
cing ?" 

Had your son been brought up from 
his cradle in the tented field, which 
happily for himself he was not, a greater 
degree of sudden ardour could not have 
displayed itself in his face and person, 
when, with all the enchanting vehemence 
of early youth, he seized my arm to drag 
me back into the house (we were walk- 



DUDLEY. 333 

iiig ill the forest), and immediately take 
his first lesson. — " But," added he, with 
some degree of hesitation, ** I should 
first like to know whether — do you 
think Claudy would wish me to learn 
fencing ?*' 

** No doubt," 1 replied, with a smile, 
for it is ever thus with these children. 
No matter what the subject proposed; 
from the colour of a pair of gloves or a 
ribbon, to the learning a science, a re- 
ference is immediately made to the taste 
and inclination of the other. These ob- 
servations lead me to hope, my friend, 
from day to day, that the first, the fond- 
est wish of my heart, may yet be realised. 



And now, Clonmore, I have two com- 
missions for you to execute ; the one from 
myself, the other from Zulvago. Mine 
is, that with the enclosed letter, you 
will remember me most kindly to my old 
master, Angelo, leaving to him the choice 
of a few sets of foils. You will take 
care to let me have them by the first 
conveyance. 



3S4f DUDLEY. 

Zulvago's business is this : — He did 
intend to execute it himself, but I per- 
suaded him that you, as an English- 
man, could do it much more effectually ; 
and that until we should receive your 
answer, he ought to give his mind and 
body a little rest, by staying at Euphor- 
bia. — You have to go to Tunbridge 
Wells, and enquire in that neighbour- 
hood for a Mrs. Shelburne ; Gabrielle 
Shelburne (that being the maiden name 
of one of her aunts, who brought her up); 
— herself the widow of one Sobrino, a 
Spanish native of St. Domingo, who 
settled in the mercantile line at Ham- 
burgh, and afterwards in London, where 
he some years since put an end to his 
existence. 

By Zulvago's account, and all mystery 
respecting himself has ceased between us 
since his arrival here (which, however, 
I must place to the exposure of certain 
circumstances connected with his former 
life, at the arrival of the last India fleet 
off Madeira) — by his account, this Mrs. 
Shelburne has for years contrived to keep 
the place of her abode a secret from him 5 
II 



DUDLEV. 335 

her daughter, her only child (as Caroline 
may have informed you in her letters), is 
gone to Calcutta with Sir W — and Lady 
L — , but being under a solemn promise 
to her mother, not to reveal whither she 
had removed, Zulvago still remains un- 
able to trace her. — In this you may suc- 
ceed, through the means of the house of 

, the bankers, who are appointed 

to pay Mrs. Shelburne, by half yearly 
instalments, a part of the daughter's 
salary. 

Although I am thoroughly informed 
of every particular concerning the par- 
ties (whom I esteem and pity), I can- 
not, such is the face of the times, risque 
being very communicative to you by 
letter ; but of this you may rest assured, 
nothing of a public nature is connected 
with these persons; — their affairs are of 
a private, indeed of a domestic tendency, 
and, upon my responsibility, you may act 
without fear. — Should you be fortunate 
enough to trace the person in question, 
the power of attorney from Zulvago, 
which accompanies this letter, will teach 
you how to act with respect to her j every 



336 DUDLEY. 

Other particular necessary for you to 
know he has himself added in a separate 
paper ; and placing full confidence in 
you and your judgment, he thinks that 
you, as an Englishman, and a clergyman, 
might meet with more success than he as 
yet could, an alien and a foreigner. 

Mrs. Grantley desires me to thank 
Mrs. CI on more for the pleasing account 
she sent of her rising and charming 
young family, with a promise of writing 
to her shortly, concerning the progress 
Claudy has made within the last twelve- 
month : with respect to Caroline, she 
has been indeed the sunbeam of Euphor- 
bia, as she calls herself j and though I 
feel for the disappointment of her Eng- 
lish suitors, I am not so disinterested as 
to wish them happiness at my own ex- 
pense. I shall be truly sorry when Lady 
Alford quits us, of which, however, I do. 
not at present see the smallest prospect i 
for though Mrs. Grantley and I have our 
time a id attention chiefly occupied by 
Dudley aud Claudy, Caroline finds never- 
failing ami'Sement in the society of the 
Balfours and Major Hernandez (the name 



DUDLEY, 337 

by which Zulvago has of late distinguish- 
ed himself in Spain). Neither does the 
Major talk of leaving us ; at least until 
we receive news from you respecting 
this Mrs. Shelburne, when, I conjecture, 
we may prepare ourselves at all events 
for losing him. Should you be success- 
ful, he will proceed to England, and be 
guided by you his " polar star ;" and 
should you, on the contrary, fail in find- 
ing die retreat of this unfortunate 
lady, he will, I doubt not, proceed to 
India, for the purpose of conquering the 

daughter's or Lady L 's scruples, 

and learning the abode of the mother. 

The letters from Dudley and my little 
girl, which accompany this, will thank 
you for the box of treasures, which they 
received safely, and to their great satis- 
faction. Ever yours faithfully, 

Eliot Howard. 



vox.. II. 



338 IMJDtEl', 



LETTER XXXVIL 

Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clonmore, 

MY DEAR MADAM, Euphorbia, Teneriffe, 

As my brother informs me that in his 
letters to Mr. Clonmore he makes little 
or no mention of Claudy, leaving that to 
me, I feel confident you will hear, with 
the utmost pleasure, that my niece is at 
this time all that either of us can wish.— 
You tell me, in your last letter, that I 
cannot be too explicit on the subject, 
especially as you have now a little girl of 
three years of age, in whose tuition you 
would wish to adopt the plan I laid down 
for the early instruction of Claudy. — » 
Yoii honour me, my dear Mrs. Clonmore, 
by the approbation and wish you now 
express, and I will endeavour to be as 
clear and concise in my explanations as 
possible. 

A« you already know, long pre- 
viously to my niece being able to read, I 



DUDLEY* 339 

was accustomed to read to her, her only 
duty for upwards of a year being this, 
thoroughly to learn several little packs of 
cards, on which I had written every 
name mentioned throughout the Bible ; 
to each some characteristic epithet be- 
ing attached — as good Joseph, Mnd 
Ruth, meek Moses, mcked Absalom, &c. 
— I began with three of these cards at a 
time, and daily added three, which mak- 
ing twenty-one in the week, finished the 
first pack accurately and correctly learn- 
ed, although she did not know her letters 
at the time, and could not at first dis- 
tinguish one card from another. 

For example — on the first three cards 
were written in a fair legible hand, 
** Adam"—** Eve"-—" Paradise."— You 
may of course suppose the question put, 
and the answer required, which if not cor- 
rect, the card was v/ithheld by me. The 
questions and answers were also reversed; 
and thus she was made to understand 
completely the nature of both. Accord- 
ing to the number of cards that either 
held, the lesson was decided in her fa- 
vour or in mine (for it was not called a 



Q 



<5I 



340 DUDLEY, 

play or a game) j and thus without anger, 
distress, or even a single tear, Claudy 
had learned to answer correctly not only 
who and what was such a person, of 
whom mention was made in the Holy 
Scriptures, from Adam to St. Paul ; but 
the names of all the principal places 
spoken of in both Testaments. 

Dudley frequently joined us in this 
lesson, in which both took equal pleasure, 
even to their ninth year ; our cards had, 
by that time, swelled to upwards of 
twenty packs ; as upon Eliot*s improve- 
ment of the plan, we constructed some 
of the same nature on the histories of 
{Ingland, France, &:c. 



Claudy has now gone with me three 
times through the Old and New Testa^ 
ment ; that is, such parts of the former as 
are indispensable towards her thorough- 
ly comprehending that its chief purport, 
in the present day, is to prove the truth 
of the latter. Of course all the cere- 
monial laws of the Jews are omitted in 
our peri^al, and many parts of the his- 



DUDLEY. 841 

torical and prophetical books. Eliot has 
«ot, however, adopted this plan with 
Dudley: they read the whole of the 
sacred text together, repeatedly and en- 
tire ; as he justly remarks, that the veil, 
though a fit ornament for female youth, 
would only entangle the steps of one of 
the other sex. 

Claudy has at present upwards of 
twenty of the Psalms by heart, with seve- 
ral sentences from the book of Proverbs 
and Ecclesiasticus. I have also another 
large Bible devoted to her use ; and this 
I have caused to be interleaved with 
blank paper, on which I insert, opposite 
the corresponding letter-press, any par- 
ticular historical references, with an ac- 
count of how, and where, the different 
prophets lived and died ; and remarks on 
the soil, produce, and customs peculiar 
to Judea and Egypt, extracted from vari- 
ous eastern travels, as Pocock, Harman, 
Lewis, Sandys, &c. 5 this method (being 
that of my brother) at once pleases the 
inquisitive mind of youth, and serves to 
establish the truth of each particular 
mentioned. 

Q 3 



34^ BUDLEY. 

Claudy and her father are now engaged 
in the study of French and Italian; 
her knowledge of history being aided by 
port-folios of plates, and cabinets of coins, 
which to arrange in chronological order, 
with or without Mr. Turner's assistance, 
a^rds both great pleasure. I am often 
appealed to 5 but my ignorance in these 
affairs proves to them that I am not all- 
perfect, and leads them to place a full 
reliance on what I do profess to teach ; 
and that is indeed trifling, and yet all in 
all. From my earliest youth the sacred 
volume has been my sole studi/y and that 
at a glance, even blindfolded, if I may thu« 
express myself, is ever before me. Nei- 
ther of the children can prove me in an 
error when questioned on that head ; for 
the Bible has ever been, and ever will 
be, my daily, fervent, yet private study. 
It is the perusal of that comforter that 
has enabled me to submit, with as little 
murmuring as possible, to the chastise- 
ment, however severe, my folly received 
m the early loss of my once promising 
children. 



DUDLEY. 348 

Claudy's Spanish is, I understand, very 
good, her drawing correct and pleasing, 
and her music tolerable. Her hand- 
writing is, at present, just legible, and 
her knowledge of accounts sufficiently 
advanced. In both the latter Mr. Turner 
is her master ; and she shows with him 
rather more patience and docility than 
Dudley displays -j for he, it appears, pre- 
fers the society of his master when at 
their sports out in the open air, to that of 
^tudy within doors. 

Claudy is no needle-woman ; but what 
she does attempt is finished with neat- 
ness and cleanliness ; her little proficiency 
in various female works being retarded 
by my brother's desire, who fears, and 
very justly, that sedentary employments, 
persevered in for any length of time, ir- 
reparably injure the growing shape. — 
Neat and orderly as Claudy is in her dress, 
and in the arrangement of her rooms, in 
which not a single article is now to be 
found out of its place, she was for a 
length of time exceeded in both these 
excellent qualities by Dudley. He has 
the care of his own drawers, in which are 
Q 4 



'344 DVDLEW 

spread layers of orange-blossoms. His 
clothes are arranged in the best manner ; 
and not only his wardrobe, but his book- 
case, his writing materials, his drawing 
and dressing boxes, all invariably display 
the utmost regularity: in short, your sou 
is, even at this early age, completely 
master of the three golden rules of " Do 
every thing in its proper time,**—" Put 
every thing to its proper use," -r— *• Lny 
ev'ery thing in its proper place.** 

Mr. Turner was on his arrival here^ 
owing to former careless habits, contract- 
ed, I suppose, at college, very negligent 
in many particulars; from mere though t- 
lesness he would litter the taible with 
Jialf-used pens, jerk the ink upon thp 
floor, and scatter the carpet with the 
cuttings of pencils and torn papers ; be- 
sides which, on every window-seat and 
chair, and sofa, were left books opened 
on their leaves, or with pages turned 
down ; gloves, handkerchiefs, &c. Dud- 
ley, in silence, and perfect good humour, 
generally replaced the books, and ar- 
ranged all things again in order, and so 
often, that Mr. Turner could not fail* 



DUDLEY. 345 

at last, taking notice of it; at length, 
to our great relief, he stood corrected, 
and at present, in his apartments reigns 
the same neatness that is to be seen in 
Dudley's bed-room, his study, and his 
cabinet. 



My sister's arrival at Euphorbia 
threatened some evil changes in Claudy's 
habitual love of order, our niece being, I 
observe, more ready to follow a bad ex- 
ample than even Dudley is of setting a 
good one. You may remember the suite 
of rooms appropriated to Caroline, and 
Jier two female servants (the men sleep 
in the town), and the admirable conveni- 
ence with which they are fitted up, with 
drawers, wardrobes, chifFonieres, and re- 
cesses; and yet I do assure you, my 
dear Mrs. Clonmore, I never yet was in- 
side tliese apartments, and found a sofa, 
a table, or a chair disengaged : here 
were bonnets and gloves o« the bed ; 
night-dresses on a nail; caps and turbans 
pinned to the drapery of the recesses ; 
shoes upon a sofa ; shawls on the ground;, 
q5 



346 DUDLEY. 

letters on the toilet table; a chocolate 
cup on the wash-hand stand ; a veil 
blowing out of window ; heavy hand- 
screei]^ in a drawer among feathers and 
artificial flowers ; a bunch 'o|*jdried natu- 
ral roses, and their thorns, among laces j 
and an innumerable medley of other 
strange instances of disorder. 

I once remarked the state of the rooms 
to Savage, her head maid, one of those 
who have been with her from a child; the 
reply was — "It is all in vain, ma'am, to 
attempt to keep my lady's things to rights: 
— if I should put every thing in its pro- 
per place ten times a day, my lady would 
come and turn them ten times a day 
topsey tiirvey, — If any thing is wanted, 
instead of having the patience to ask 
either of us for it, she flies to her drawers, 
takes up all the contents in both her 
hands, shakes them, as if searching for a 
needle in a bundle of hay ; tosses them 
half in and half out, and runs away, when 
perhaps she finds that she had left the very 
thing she had been looking for below oe 
the sofa behind her." 



DUDLEY. 347 

This was too true a statement to be 
denied, but I was silent, and Savage con- 
tinued : — " Twenty times in less than a 
month are my lady's necklaces and brace- 
lets broken, and rings lost, by that trick 
she has of fidgeting and working them up 
and down: — then the carpets have to be 
taken up and shaken, whilst half my 
time is employed in taking out spots of 
ink and paint/' — And thus the woman 
went on with her complaints, and excul- 
pation of herself, though my sister came 
in in the middle of them. Throwing 
herself at her length on the sofa, flinging 
her hat one way, and her riding whip on 
the bed, and letting fall her gloves on the 
ground, Caroline remarked, " What! 
you are talking of me, are you? — telling 
Mrs. Grantley what a sad time you have 
of it ; eh ! you Savage ! don't I pay ser- 
vants to keep my room in order ? Then 
where lies the fault? — If you are tired 
of my service, why the deuce don't you 
leave me ? — Who wishes you to stay ? 
— No, no! You know better: you are 
conscious that the gift of half my clothes 
every year is worth putting up with my 
Q 6 



.^48 BUDLEY. 

negligent pranks ! No other peeress in 
England would suffer you to snip, snap, 
and crib, and change and ej^chdmge their 
wardrobe as I permit you to do witn mine. 
Here, my good honest women, both oi'yow^ 
Savage and Patience; you pair of grumb- 
lers ; pull off my boots — do you hear ?" , 

Both the servants, with smiles at her 
oddity, for they are really fond of her, 
obeyed, whilst turning to me, she said, 
— «« Jenny, my dear, only that whilst 
standing there upright you do look so 
like an old maiden aunt, I would ask you 
to run after Zulvago, and tell him I shall 
not ride out this evening." 

On turning round to leave the room, I 
felt at first sorry, on perceiving Claudy 
close behind me, she having followed 
her aimt in, and attentively observe 
ed all that passed : but I soon found, 
that instead of this scene making a bad 
impression on her mind, it had a totally 
contrary effect. Having sent Caroline's 
message to Don Zulvago, I sat down in 
our private drawing-room, to write to 
you, when I observed Claudy, after look- 
ing carefully round her, pick up every 



DUDLEY. 349 

$crap of paper, and every stray leaf or 
flower off the carpet ; then, on examin* 
ing her own hands, and perceiving a spot 
of ink on her fingers, she left the room, 
but soon after returned, her hands wash- 
ed, and her hair brushed. As I saw she 
wished for an opportunity to speak to me, 
I shut my portfolio, and took up my 
knitting. ** You see, my dear," I re- 
marked, " how very beautiful and charm- 
ing your aunt Alford is. You observe 
how excellently she dresses, and are 
aware that instead of two servants to 
attend upon her, she might have twenty 
if she chose ; and vet, you see her fault, 
Gaudy." 

** But perhaps aunt Alford had not, 
when she was a little girl, a good mamma, 
or aunt, to teach her to fold up her 
clothes, and keep her drawers in order." 

" Yes, my dear, she had, and until 
she was ten years of age was as neat 
and as careful as yourself; therefore you 
see it is not only sufficient to acquire 
good habits ; we must persevere in keep- 
ing them." 



350 budLey. 

" And what caused this change in 
auntAlford?" 

" An unlucky friend of her own age, 
spending the holidays with her, who de- 
stroyed all the good that my sister had 
gained from the instructions of hermother 
and myself, by ridiculing her neatness, 
and saying, as you heard your aunt just 
now observe, ' If you are so particular, 
Caroline, you will certainly die an old 
maid.' From that time she gradually left 
off her youthful habits, and is now such 
as you see. Her wardrobe and jewels, 
and indeed her purse, are entirely in the 
care and power of her servants ; and as 
she herself boasts, she knows not what 
she is in possession of/' 

*< But aunt Alford may correct these 
faults : — she is not veri/ old yet." 

<* She may : to amend our errors is never 
too late. — And, Claudy, I have another 
observatioQ to make to you : of your 
aunt's total negligence with respect to 
her rooms, and her sad custom of fling- 
ing her clothes in every direction, you are 
aware j and I must now, as a warning to 
you, remark another of her evil propen-^ 



nUDLEY* 351 

laities, the habit of ringing for her ser- 
vants perhaps twenty times a day, when 
she is really in want of their assistance 
not more than half-a-dozen. Sometimes 
it is to give her an article at the other end 
of the room ; to pick up a book she may 
have dropped in an adjoining chamber y 
to stir the fire ; to open the window ; to 
let down or draw up a blind j not to 
mention her change of mind respecting, 
the articles of her dress, and the hourot 
her dressing, when I have heard her say 
to Savage more than once, * Come at 
four o'clock — what! so soon! — go 
away j I'll ring for you in half a minute^ 

— Nearly five, is it? — well, run down 
stairs, and by that time I shall have 
finished this volume — only a few pages 
more. — What, you come again ! Well, I 
believe I did ring j but I am not ready 
yet — go away, and send Patience to me. 

— ril ring once more in a second and 
a half." 

" Strive, my dear child," I continued, 
addressing Claudy, " whatever may be 
your condition in life, as much as possible 
to assist yourself^ therein consists true 



35£ DUDLEY. 

independence. Your papa is a rich man ; 
you will be rich ; you may, when grown 
up, be able to keep a dozen women to 
wait upon you ; but if you would study 
the real comfort and happiness of your 
existence, learn to do without superfluous 
aid, and, in short, as far as your strength 
will permit, to wait upon yourself!" 

This lesson was not lost on Claudy; 
from that day she greatly improved in 
those lesser virtues, in which, until now, 
from giddiness, she was rather deficient. 
I wish I could say the same of Caroline, 
but she is, as she owns herself, incor- 
rigible, though in aU other respects 
greatly amended. 

She now takes pleasure in reading, not 
exactly of that nature that I could wish, 
and have in vain recommended, but still- 
moral and good. The society of the 
Balfoursand Don Zulvago (whose charac- 
ter for universal philanthropy has been, 
detailed to us by many friends, and is 
most exemplary) — to their society, I re- 
peat, Caroline is particularly partial; and 
Eliot and I must confess that to them 
is chiefly owing her lengthened stay in 



DUDLEY. 353 

Tenenffe ; for occupied as we are, with 
our dear children, who are now become 
our daily comforts and blessings, my 
sister would have found it very dull. At 
present Caroline and the Balfours are 
inseparable, and she often goes and 
spends a fortnight with them at Santa 
Cruz and Ben Lomond, when she returns 
to us with renovated health and spirits. 

With every best wish to you and yours, 
believe me, dear madam, ever your faith- 
ful and attached friend, 

Jane Grantley* 



3.54< DUDLEY. 



LETTER XXXVIII. 

Tlie Countess of Alfo7^d to Mrs, Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Tencriffe. 

Oh Teneriffe ! Tenerifte ! thou most 
delicious of all spots on this our 
orange-shaped globe ! I could fill twenty 
pages, in the Ossian style, upon thy 
beauties ; but doubtful whether they 
would not be converted into allumettes, 
I confine myself to plain sober English, 
and hasten onward, to inform you, 
Louisa, of the past. 

Did you ever meet with the picture of 
an old man creeping down a hill, with 
his head turned over his shoulder (Jhe 
past), and a young man running up it 
peeping through a telescope straight be- 
fore him {the future). Eh bien, my dear, 
suppose me upon the s^id hill, neither 
the greybeard, nor the beardless youth ; 
neither tottering down nor striding up j 



DUDLEY. <^55 

but Standing on the tip-top of the hill of 
life, in the gay, jolly, and independent 
meridian of thirty. 

Well, just suppose me — you know 
what I am — indeed you do not ; for 
even sister Grantley, who does not shine 
in compliments, declared the other day, 

upon her honour and life No, no, 

no, she merely said, thus, " Caroline, 
you are become more blooming, more 
radiant, more captivating than even 
Osman's Zara." By the way, I don't 
think Widow Jenny could twist her 
prim mouth to pronounce either of those 
pagan names, which flow so readily from 
my pen. 

Isidore, you must know I choose to 
call him Isidore, though, I fancy, he has 
made Eliot request me not y but I love 
mischief. Well, then, Zulvago has been 
reading to me this play of Voltaire's ; 
and it is an invariable rule with me to 
fancy myself the heroine of every book 
that comes in my way, — provided the 
hero suits my fancy. 

This man reads French and Italian in- 
comparably, as Eliot says, for I am no 



^56 DUDLEY. 

good judge; but, with a bashful ness for 
which I could beat him, he will never 
read English, though he speaks the Ian* 
guage fluently, and writes it, I'm told, 
as well as a Briton. Yes, I[m told ; for 
upon my life he never honoured me with 
even an anagram or a charade ! I have 
endeavoured, but in vain, to make him 
read English with me ; and, with any 
other man, my lady-like airs of *♦ You 
shall,'* *' You must," ** I insist upon it," 
" I will not be denied," would have 
their effect ; but this warlike Hidalgo, 
when I thus launch forth, very calmly 
puts his hands in his pockets, throws his 
eyes on the ground, gently whistles a 
tune, and walks off with himself. 
- I am happy to say, though, we ha've 
been engaged in one grand dispute, which 
may in time lead to more. He has 
thought it worth his while to contend with 
me in one particular, and I love — no, I 
like him the better for it. There is a wide 
difference between these two little words, 
by-the-by : though beginning with the 
same initial, and consisting of the same 
number of letters, agree with me that 



DUDLEY. 357 

they stand at 10 and 80 in the ther- 
mometer of human affections. 

But to return. I am become an adept 
at chess, and Zulvago having taught it 
me, I find it a most delightful game, 
particularly as it sets off* to singular ad- 
vantage a lovely hand (mine you under- 
stand), sparkling under a constellation of 
superb rings. The other day we had, in 
the morning, walked out, and about the 
green lanes and terraces, gathering orange 
and lime blossoms, with which we filled 
our little baskets. He attended on me, 
it is true ; but was equally civil to Mrs. 
Balfour ; ■— I think he might have let 
Eliot come in for his share of ga- 
thering blossoms for her. We then rode 
up the mountains, and got out of > our 
carriages, and off' our mules, and saun- 
tered, and laughed, and chatted, talking 
sense, and nonsense — (plural they, sin- 
gular /), and rested on the grass ; when 
he, having taken his position close to 
sister Jane, and opposite to me, I was 
on the point of calling out, as he lay at 
nearly his length on the turf^ *< Major 
Hernandez, there's a snake at your ear," 



358 DUDLEY. 

in hopes he would change his posture, 
and situation ; but I checked myself in 
time, for it is easy to get into a scrape, 
but deuced hard to get out of it again. 

Soon after, whilst we were walking, I, 
swinging in my hand a dead white rose, 
remarked, <« How beautiful could I tinge 
this flower with red :" — he took it from 
me, and held it close to my cheek. I 
felt myself colour deeply. "The white 
rose is now tinged with red," said he, 
** and from the reflection of a blush 
rose." 

This was prettily said of him, was it 
not, my dear ? I looked about in vain 
for my flower, after this : it had vanished : 
I wonder, did he eat it ! 

We returned to dinner, — separated, 
— met again at the collation-hour, when- 
a shining party (comparatively speaking, 
TenerifTe you know,) being assembled, I, 
unasked, played, con amore^ a grand, 
rapid, and brilliant voluntary, to which 
Zulvago did me the honour to listen. 
And he asked me to sing, and I complied, 
with the most bewitching grace ; — and 
he led me in silence to the harp, and he 
15 



DUDLEY. 359 

iuoked his request, and I was kind 
enough to understand that the use of a 
harp was to be played upon, and I did 
play as if inspired. 

Upon my honour, 1 surpassed myself ; 
and to wind up the ball of admiration, 
for the company professed themselves in 
ecstacies, I accompanied the instrument 
with my voice in the celebrated bravura 
of ** Strike the harp in praise oP' — 
Isidore (an allowable misnomer of my 
own). 

Oh, how often have I heard that most 
enchanting of all private singers, Mrs. O. 
in this noble and all-perfect air, and 
never without tears I I suppose her 
charming image was full in my mind at 
the time, for I felt most seductively soft, 
and irresistibly delightful — even Zul- 
vago, as he led me back to my seat, trod 
upon — not my shawl — but the border 
of a compliment, in saying — *« Why not 
ever thus ?'* — Eliot heard these words of 
his, and on my looking up, with an in- 
comprehensible stare, as if wishing his 
meaning to be explained, had the gal- 
lantry to remark to Jane, in my hearing. 



^0 DUDLEY. 

<* I wish Caroline would be always con- 
tent in being the Jlne woinan, and never 
aim at ihejine lady.'* 

For the remainder of the evenings 
whichever way I looked, or to whatever 
place I moved, I met the eyes of the 
Spaniard ; — and yet, my dear, it is im- 
possible to construe his looks into any 
meaning positively decisive; for were I 
at this moment at the stake of confession 
(defend me 1 what a burning idea !) I 
could not assert that this man feels the 
twentieth part of a grain (is not that a 
scruple!) of preference for me: nay, I 
am positive he prefers the dispositions of 
Mrs. Grantley and Mrs. Balfour to mine, 
which is too volatile and capricious to 
please him ; and yet that there is some 
fascination im my society, not to be 
found in theirs, I am confident. Had he 
any free choice on the subject he would 
dislike me, but it seems my fate to please 
him, even against his own wish. 

The next evening, being en famille, 
we were assembled in the drawing-room 
at various employments, which ended in 
a whist table being formed, from \vhich 



DUDLEY. 361 

the Spaniard and I seemed excluded, as 
the Balfours and Eliot and Jane had got 
deep into four by honours, and the odd 
trick, before either of us were thought 
of. Elated at the applause I had won 
the day before from Zulvago, and electri- 
fied by the sound of his compliment, the 
first I had ever received from him, I 
made so sure of my conquest, that, re- 
solving not to be too civil at first, in. 
order to rivet my captive the closer in 
my chains, I now called to him in the 
style of damsels to their devoted knights, 
desiring him to fetch the chess-board, and 
arrange the ivory combatants. 

I suppose he reflected that some return 
of civility was due from him to me for my 
civility the evening before, in the music 
way, and therefore readily complied. We 
began to play : — steadily and well went 
on the game for about ^we minutes, when, 
in the most interesting moment, I sud- 
denly drew from the table, checked an 
enormous yawn, protested I was very 
tired, and took out my netting, at the 
same time humming a march in <« La 
Belle Laitiere," 

VOL. II. R 



36^ DUDLEY. 

His bright eyes were instantly removed 
from the chess-table, and fixed intently 
on me, waiting, as I imagined, for me to 
take a new whim, and return to the 
board : — there he sat ; and there sat I. 
•— At last, unable to eoiitain my merri- 
ment at his profound gravity on so trifling 
an occasion, I laughed, yet he never 
changed his countenance. Eliot looked 
round — I looked at him : the whi»t 
party by turns cast their eyes our Way, 
and then exchanged glances with each 
other ; whilst the Balfours, I could see, 
had a smile on their visage, which en- 
Gouraged me in my impudence. During 
this optical proceeding there sat Don, 
waiting, as it should seem, until I should 
:6nish my scarcely begun purse. No 
statue, no picture, could appear more 
immoveable. — My dear, 1 would have 
given the tenth part of my jointure to 
know what was then passing in the inside 
of his excellently fashioned head. 

The rubber was over before either my 
patience or that of the Spaniard was at an 
end (never worked so indefatigably, or 
for so long a time, in my life), when 



DUDLEY. 363 

Eliot came to our table with « Well, 
Caroline, which is conqueror?" — «* I 
am," I replied, " if having one's own 
way is to conquer.'* 

" But I heard you request the Major 
to play with you at chess, yet you do not 
seem to have made above two moves." 

" No, certainly, 1 changed my mind — 
I did not choose to continue the game — ■ 
so here we are at a stand." 

«* Caroline !" and Eliot looked very odd 
— I believe he thought he was lecturing 
Claudy, instead of speaking to a grave se- 
date widow, ten years on the white side of 
forty. He drew the table towards me, af- 
fecting to rally me into compliance, saying 
to Zulvago, " Come, Major, you are not 
accustomed to be vanquished either in 
the field or at chess, and must rally your 
forces :" then seeing that I pushed my 
chair away as fast as he drew it near me, 
he added, " Caroline, don't be silly; 
these school-girl airs (think of this !) 
were very well ten or fifteen years back, 
but do not so well suit these present 
times. You have engaged our friend to 
play with you, and I entreat you to com- 
R 2 



364f DUDLEY. 

ply with a good grace.*' — *' My head 
aches." — He looked doubtfully. — "Lord, 
Baronet, are you arrived at this time 
of life, and are yet to learn that a wo- 
man's excuse for every thing she is 
not inclined to do, is that her head 
aches ?" 

" Then lay by your work, and do no- 
thing ; for moving these chess-men can- 
not injure your head half as much as 
stooping over that purse." — Then, after 
a pause, seeing that I was busy filling my 
needle, he enquired, ** Have you a head- 
ache ?'^ — ** No 5 but I don't choose to 
play. Call me capricious, or whimsical, 
or what you please, I — will — not — 
play." 

Here was a pretty warfare about a 
trifle ! — and Claudy and Dudley, with 
their great open ears, and beautiful 
staring eyes, observing and listening to 
all that passed; whilst Don took out his 
watch, looked at it, and with great de- 
liberation placed it on the little table be- 
tween us. 

Eliot continued to request me to play, 
attaching as much importance to the sub- 



DUDLEY. 365 

ject, as if it was the awful one of — 
•* Wilt thou Caroline, &c.'* and I in 
persevering to fill my netting-pin row 
after row: when suddenly the superb 
grandee removed his eyes from my work 
to his own watch, caught it up, fobbed 
it, started from his chair, and left the 
room. 

How deucedly unfortunate ! For I was 
at that very moment on the point of 
putting away my work, and saying to him, 
** Well, since you seem so sorrowful upon 
Ihe business, I will play with you :" and 
now that I was in the complying mood, 
I had no longer the power to accept or 
reject his offer 1 Lord, my dear, had it 
been a matrimonial offer, I wonder would 
he have acted in this summary way, — 
taken out his watch, limited me to a 
minute, and then — «' hey off for ever, 
catch me again if you can." 

I was resolved, however, the nextmorn- 
ing to catch him again — if I could ; and 
after breakfast (the rain preventing our 
going out of doors) I put on the sweet- 
est smile that ever basked in the dimple 
of beauty ; and instead of desiring the 
R 3 



366 DUDLEY. 

Spaniard to bring the chess-board, I 
arranged it myself, and then sought his 
great soft black eyes, which I found so 
generally on the search after mine. But 
all I met with now, were two large oval 
lids, covering the brilliant look, that 
seemed engaged in the perusal of some 
busy officious pamphlet or other, as he 
sat half buried in an arm-chair. 

I did not like to go over to him, 
neither could I send any message : lovely 
chance, however, in the shape of Claudy, 
befriended me, and I, being all ears and 
eyes, heard her say as she approached 
him, " Major Hernandez, Aunt Alford 
is waiting for you to play chess, why don't 
you go to her ?" He lowered his book, 
and looking stedfastly at the child, an- 
swered in a tone that I could hear, " It 
is too late'^ — ** Late !" repeated Claudy, 
« no, Senor, it is very early yet.'* /uri- 
derstood him ! — he referred to his having 
limited me to time by his watch : — such 
ridiculous, such unmanly, such ungentle- 
manly conduct ! and all about a game of 
chess ! — a mighty mole-hill truly — a con- 
sequential nothing ! — and I felt tempted 



DUDLEY. 367 

in a rage, to ram kings, queens, bishops, 
castles, knights, and pawns into the chess- 
board, and fly out of the room in the 
bravura stile ; but that would have been 
so unlike a woman of fashion! I thercr 
fore concealed my irritated feelings 
under an Euphrosyne smile, and going 
over to him, said, " Major, / was in the 
wrong yesterday, do i/ou be in the right 
to-day, and take your revenge.—- Come^ 
^ fair challenge." 

" And from the « fairest of the fair,' " 
he replied, closing his book, and look- 
ing up at me in a sort of a piercing man- 
ner, full of love and admiration, which 
made my poor cheek burn most famous- 
ly • — For the life of me, old as I am now, 
if I can leave off this tell-tale trick!-— 
** But,'' he continued, (without changing 
his posture) " I never revenge myself 
on beauty : — a challenge of this nature, 
therefore, I cannot accept, even from the 
charming Lady Alford, though I will 
not promise to decline a challenge of a 
more tender nature." 

There, my dear! now what do you 
think of this sort of language j a pretty 

b4 



368 DUDLEY* 

saint, and an anchorite, and a moUk, and ^ 
prior, we have domesticated with us ! — I 
tell you he is little better than a respect- 
able libertine, a sober rake. Oh, had you 
but, at this repulse, seen my poor scorched 
cheeks, you might actually have thought 
he had been using the discipline on 
them. 

Sister Jane understood the whole busi- 
ness, and instead of laughing off the 
affair, as any woman of sense or know- 
ledge of the world would have done, she 
(the fidgets take her ! which seem never 
yet to have paid her a visit) made my 
crime a warning lesson to Claudy, who, 
with her enchanting incomprehensible 
looks, was wondering what was the 
matter with the Spaniard and me. — 
*' Caroline,** said Jane, " why not have 
played with Don Zulvago yesterday, 
after having engaged him to play — 
women ought early to begin to know 
their own minds, and not expect to sub- 
ject men, or indeed any person whomso- 
ever, to their caprice and humour.'* 

I felt horribly mortified, but with a 
careless air sauntered to a distant win- 
dow seat, humming " The Soldier tiredj" 



DUDLEY. 369 

and tearing a geranium to pieces in 
admirable timeo 



Oh, my dear Louisa ! such an adven- 
ture ! all is discovered ! But to proceed 
regularly 5 this morning, Eliot said 
to Zulvago, ** What do you say to a 
touch at the foils? — will you try at a hit 
with Dudley? he improves, I assure 
you. The ladies need not retire, they 
may look on and fancy it a tournament, 
or just.** 

This noble, odious, handsome, admir- 
able Crichton ! Oh ! Louisa \ could you 
but have seen the attitudes of this Don ! 
his skill, his rapid movements, his grace- 
ful and firm step — then the kindness 
and softness of his voice and manner, 
when encouraging and instructing Dud- 
ley, who seems, as far as I can judge, 
to have made great proficiency in this 
truly manly science. The broad-sword 
exercise followed, and my senses were 
rivetted with pleasure, until recalled by 
a shriek from Claudy, whom, on turning 
round, we saw standing within Eliot's 
R 5 



37Q DUDLEY. 

folded arm as white as her India frock, 
loudly exclaiming — " Oh, Dudley! 
Dudley ! wiU be killed/' 

Zulvago immediately stopped, to ex- 
plain to Claudy the impossibility of dan- 
ger occurring, and to show her the blunted 
foils and edgeless swords. " With these," 
he added, " that is with any degree pf^ 
care, no accident can happen." And 
then addressing Eliot, he continued, 
*< though we may sooth alarm, we must 
remove panic:" they had not continued 
their play long, when the little girFs 
smiles and colour had gradually re- 
turned. 

On a sudden Claudy exclaimed, " Oh, 
Don Zulvago, you have dropped some- 
thing! — it fell from your waistcoat, — it 
came out of your neck." And before 
he had time to stoop for it, she sprang to, 
his feet, and took up the somethings at 
which, naturally enough giving a glance, 
she added, turning round to us with great 
and evident surprise and pleasure in her 
countenance, " Aunt Alford's picture !" 

Here was a pretty subject for a 
painter ! — Had a magician and his ebony 



DUDLEY. 371 

wand come into the room, and touched 
us all round, suspending every attitude, 
we could not have cut a more grotesque 
figure ! — Even Jane, that living emblem 
of inanity, held the newspaper suspended 
in her hand, and looked — surprised. 
Eliot sat the statue of king Amaze- 
ment : — Dudley stood still, one foot be- 
hind the other, his broad sword motion- 
less in the air; whilst the Spaniard, resting 
on his sword, looked steadily on the 
picture as it lay on Claudy's open hand : 
and I, the sixth person of the group, and 
as it should seem the most interested, 
felt at that moment as if — as if I had 
no body, but was all soul. — I know not, 
Louisa, whether you ever had that sort 
of feeling : supposing that you already 
know it by experience, I will tell yoa 
when it was that it visited your bosom ; 
it was the moment when Clonmore first 
said to you — and you did not say to him, 
for the throbs of your heart kept your 

tongue tied 

Well, Louisa, this was a trying mo- 
ment : — ^.however, though I could not 
speak, I could look, and I could hear^ 



S7S DUDLEY. 

and I saw and heard Zulvago stoop, and 
say to Claudy, pointing to the picture, 
from which dangled a long black ragged 
old ribbon (broken at the tie, as it ap- 
peared, in the ardour of exercise) — " Go 
and ask Mrs. Grantley to bestow her 
bounty upon me, and give me a new 
ribbon for my picture." 

Claudy of course brought it over to 
us, and according to the Spaniard's evi- 
dent intention, we took and examined it 
in turn. Eliot, at the first glance, threw 
a look and a smile at Zulvago, saying, 
'* Oh ! I see — the likeness between that 
lady and my sister Caroline, as you have 
frequently told me, is indeed most 
astonishing ! — I am not surprised at 
Claudy 's mistake." Mrs. Grantley then 
took it, and acknowledged the resem- 
blance, at the same time observing the 
plaited hair and cyphers at the back, 
with a date, which proved it to have been 
painted some few years before I had 
quitted my teens. 

The picture was next placed in my 
hand, when the glow of pleasure that I 
felt on looking at the angel face, the 



DUiDLEY* 373 

heavenly expression, the almost divine 
sweetness and softness of the eyes, is not 
to be described. " No," I cried out in 
in a rage — "no, never, never was I half 
as beautiful (pretty creature that I am) 
as this lovely girl l" The fair hair is in 
natural curls, and disfigured by no head- 
dress ; the drapery, consisting of only a 
white shawl thrown over one shoulder, 
and shading the bosom, prevents any dis- 
agreeable effect from an old-fashioned 
stile — the painting is exquisite. Though 
I could not deny the strong resemblance 
this miniature bore to myself, neither 
could I that I was at present nearly 
double the age of the person it repre- 
sented, who appeared to be about six- 
teen. I remarked that the hair was a 
shade or two darker than mine, the eyes 
of a deeper blue, the face of a more per- 
fect oval, and that the chin was dimpled, 
whereas my chin has transferred that 
beauty to my cheeks. 

Mrs. Grantley having promised him a 
new ribbon, very composedly put the 
picture into her work-basket, whilst the 
Major, now thrown completely off' hh 



$74^ DUDLEY. 

guard, or rather disarmed of his shield 
of mystery, and flung upon our mercy, 
had no other resource than unconditional 
frankness. Besides, we saw through his 
manoenvre ; when, fearful that a wrong 
impression might dwell on the minds of 
Claudy and Dudley res[>ecting himself 
and me, he continued speaking aloud, 
whilst preparing to renew the combat, 

" We old bachelors have always some 
good reasons wherefore we are such. 
Had the lady whose picture that is, and 
which, out of affection and respect, I 
have worn upwards of twenty years, be- 
come my wife, as I wished, why then — 
I should not be now an old bachelor. 
Dudley, guard your flank.'* 



And thus, Louisa, are explained his 
tender looks at me ; and thus, after all, 
his affection for me, which I thought 
heart-core deep, is only skin deep. I 
had often observed a black ribbon peep- 
ing from his waistcoat, — - but bless me, 
child, I thought that it was b. solitaire I — 
The original of that picture has made 



DUDLEY. S75 

him a solitaire indeed, poor fellow ! Now 
did ske refuse him, or he her ? By his 
own modest confession, it appears he was 
the rejected. And what woman in her 
senses could have the heart to reject the 
affections of such a man ! Even at this 
day, although upwards of twenty years 
have since passed over his noble Castilian 
pate, he looks, and moves, and speaks 
the hero. — Probably they were of dif- 
ferent religions. She is a German, I 
fancy, and might have been Protestant ; 
he, as a Spaniard is Catholic. In that 
case she is to be commended, for con- 
nections between those of different per- 
suasions seldom turn out happily, espe- 
cially if there is any family. 

There are instances to the contrary 
certainly, and in England particularly, 
where such unions have proved most 
auspicious. Well, all this appears to me 
a fine romance, truly ! not unlike Cle- 
mentina and her Grandison. I hope this 
good lady did not go mad also : and she 
is still living, — this Mrs. Shelburne, my 
dear. Eliot tells us, for secrecy is now 
at an end, that Clonmore is to take a 



37^ DUDLEY. 

brace of ferrets, and find her retreat, and 
force her out of obscurity and poverty, 
to enjoy the sunshine of wealth and 
affection, as the wife of this grandee. 

Of course she preferred her horrible 
half black merchant of St. Domingo, Dpn 
Manuel de Sobrino, I think they call him, 
whom I suppose his white-faced inky^ 
haired daughter, Victoire, resembles. 
Well, how good dame Shelburne, as 
she chooses now to call herself, can be 
reconciled to keep this dear Conde 
D' Almeida on the tenter hooks of sus- 
pence respecting her abode and situation, 
seems marvellous to me ! Why on earth 
do they not marry ! never too late to re- 
pent, you know. Ah, sour grapes, you 
will tell me. Now that it is proved, be- 
yond the shadow of a doubt, that Zul- 
vago has loved, does love, and will love 
to the end of his existence this outlandish 
Gabrielle, for thus he has declared to 
Eliot, I may be allowed to abuse him to 
the limits of my ability. 

But hold, whither am I wandering ? 
Please, Madam Louisa, to return with 
me to the company we have just quitted, 



DUDLEY. 377 

and suppose the combatants still at their 
warlike exercise, we looking on with at- 
tentive admiration, and they flourishing, 
with " right arm protect ! left arm pro- 
tect ; guard ! &c." when, in an instant, 
Zulvago's sword dropped on the floor, 
and he clapped his hand to his temple, 
as if in sudden pain. By some violent 
and unskilful movement, or thrust, as 
they call it, he was wounded by Dudley, 
an awkward monkey ; and for an instant 
stunned by the blow. 

Before Jane could lay the newspaper 
out of her hand, I had torn up a laced 
cambric handkerchief, which 1 snatched 
from her table, and applied it to the 
wound, for the blood flowed freely, 
whilst Eliot was cutting a large patch of 
sticking plaister, Dudley stamping dis- 
tractedly, and Claudy pacifying him 
with, " you know, Dudley, you could 
not help it." 

*< Do not be uneasy, my dear boy," 
said Zulvago, "it is nothing, we will 
finish our exercise presently 5 — thank 
you, Mrs. Grantley, that will do very 
well, you would make a famous nurse in 



S7B BUDLEY. 

a military hospital." — " Aunt Grantley !'* 
cried Claudy, " it is not Aunt Grantley, 
it is Aunt Alford who is binding up your 
forehead." 

" Indeed !" he exckimed, and looked 
up at me as well as the flowing blood 
would suffer him ; and then seizing my 
h^nd as I was going away, he held it 
clasped in both of his, saying in tolerable 
good English : 

'* Oh woman ! in our hours of ease, 
" Uncertain, coy, and hard to please, 
" When pain and sickness wring the brow, 
" A ministering angel thoul" 

Marmion, 

True, my dear, these beautiful lines 
were strictly applicable, but you cannot 
conceive the ridiculous figure his donship 
cut when repeating them, with his bleed- 
ing face and black patch : besides, to 
take hold of my hand in the presence of 
brothers and sisters, and little boys and 
girls ! such high indecorum — had we 

been alone indeed 

. A quick relief followed in the sound 
of the bell proclaiming the arrival of 



DUDLEY. 379 

the mail, and this gave a new turn to the 
ideas of the whole party. Robert comes 
in with the large leathern padlocked 
pouch, Eliot takes out his key, of which 
the duplicate is at Orotava, unlocks it, 
and the treasures are distributed. — Zul- 
vago pockets the letters to himself i and 
strides hastily out of the room ; Jane 
places her's on the table, until she has put 
away her work ; Turner receives his with 
a bow, and takes care to flash before our 
eyes thpse which display great large 
dashing seals and coats of arms (if any) j 
and Eliot throws himself into a chair and 
opens his dispatches. Dudley in the 
mean time anxiously enquires if there 
are any letters from papa or mamma 5 and 
Claudy, with a pair of scissors, goes 
round to collect seals for them both. 

And I, with my budget of correspond- 
ence, get into a corner of the room, and 
read and exclaim, and duly wince and 
laugh and cry, according to the ^ews 
therein contained. 



Thanks, dear Louisa, for yours just 



380 DUDLEY. 

received) — and so one of my suitors, 
who declared he would live and die in 
my service, is married ! and to a little 
sprig of nobility, scarcely escaped from 
her nursery. Well, let him take the con- 
sequence, I prophesy that in less than a 
twelve-month, he will have a nursery of 
liis own, and he has my best wishes that 
it may be a thriving concern, in annual 
buds, blossoms and fruit ! And tell him, 
just to tantalize his lordship a little, that 
had he waited only five years longer, I 
fully intended to return, and take him 
with all his faults — in exchange for 
mine. 

And you also inform me, that the little 
viscount, all sigh away, die away, will 
take no refusal, unless it comes in the 
shape of an attestation of solemn rejec- 
tion, under my own hand. Well, then, 
this is to certify, that I, Caroline Alford, 
being at this present minute in sound 
health of mind, body, and heart, (a word 
of legal import in the court of Cupi^,) 
do give and bequeath to him this my 
advice, I being dead, (that is insensible,) 
to love {his love), that he from this time 



DUDLEY. S8i 

forth look about him, and select in mar- 
riage either spinster or widow, out of any 
country on the globe, (Teneriffe ex- 
cepted,) on which occasion, the said Ca- 
roline Alf'ord doth hereby promise to 
bedeck her person from crown to sole 
with golden knots and silver favours, 
he having done her the greatest favour 
in his power to perform. 

And my third, the Honourable Frede- 
rick Miles Cavendish, you say, declared, 
before he left England for the North seas, 
and a station of some years, that he was 
resolved to run away from his ship, fit 
out a privateer, dash over to Teneriffe^ 
and either smuggle me out of the Island, 
or, like another Paris, run away with me 
in the face of the whole world — (much 
obliged to him, by the by, for comparing 
me to that odious minx.) — Well, I like 
spirit, 1 must own ; — but why the deuce 
did he not keep his resolution ? as you 
told Eliot, when speaking of Dudley, 
" if I am worth having, I am worth fetch- 
ing.'* And since I now am assured 
that the Post Captain is ice-bound oft* 
Copenhagen, for four years at least. 



BB^ DUDLEY, 

tell him, should Clonmore write to him 
as he requests, that had he, instead of 
sailing north, sailed southward, and fan- 
cied himself a Jason, and me a Golden 
Fleece, upon the word of a peeress t 
would have met him in St. George's, 
Hanover Square, and shaken hands with 
him over a book and a wedding ringj — 
verily I would, even in the presence of a 
parson. 

Oh ! how I do love to tantalize folks, 
who have, like the dog and the shadow, 
lost their dinner and snapped at water. 
And thus ends the courtship of the Mar- 
quis, the Viscount, and the noble cabin 
boy. 

And now to a more serious and import- 
ant part of your letter. Do you know, 
Louisa, lam angry with you? — Your 
ideas respecting me are almost too absurd 
to be noticed, and yet as " prudence 
doth press me,'* * I must endeavour to do 
away the foolish impression that has been 
madie upon your mind by my silly cor- 
respondence. My dear creature, were I 

* In General Burgojne*s <' Heiress." 



DUDLEir. S83 

oiice to begin and correct my letters, 
you would not receive a single line from 
me. I never read them over, but 
dash on, fold, seal, and direct ; and had 
I my carrier pigeon, should tuck them 
under his wing, and say, ** Hey off to 
Europe with you \*' and never give them 
a second thought. 

I indulge the slightest partiality for 
this tall man, this Zulvago ! Nonsense, 
child ! really one would imagine that you 
or I were girls in our teens, to give way 
to such romantic absurdities. / nourish 
a growing preference for this Spaniard — 
a foreigner - — a man of a different per- 
suasion — a man diametrically opposite 
to me in every respect — in temper, hu- 
mour, taste ; — even in person, there ne- 
ver was a greater contrast ! — one who, it 
is now acknowledged, is devoted to an- 
other, and who, were he not, has never 
shown the slightest preference to me ; — 
scarcely paid me the common attentions 
that every woman expects from every 
man, that is gentleman. — Besides, you 
have long known my sentiments on this 
head. I do not think there is on earth a 



38i 15UDLEY. 

more despicable object than a woman in 
love, where love is not returned : it is an 
error in nature — a fault in judgment — 
a depravity of heart— a failure of taste, 
delicacy, sentiment : — in short, my dear, 
a man, whose love is unrequited, is uni- 
versally pitied; a woman as universally 
despised : — at such, let the slow-moving 
finger of scorn point ; thereby teaching 
her, that on forfeiting her own esteem 
she loses all claim on that of the world. 
Let me hear no more of these follies, 
or you and I must cease to write to each 
other : my amour propre is deeply wound- 
ed y but though you have made me shed 
tears of vexation, I shall never cease to 
love you. — Return to England ! Lord, 
my beauty, if I was to give way to your 
suggestions and advice, of what a world 
of pleasure I should debar myself ! Yes- 
terday, only yesterday it was, that Eliot 
prevailed on the Balfours, and their friend 
with mustachios, to prolong their visit 
here. I am pleased in the company of 
the latter, it is true ; but were he to leave 
the island to-morrow, and for ever, I 
should not feel one moment's une?isiness j 



DUDLEY. 385 

no, not even were I assured that I should 
never see him again. And I have not 
seen him since I put the black patch 
upon his temple, I give you my honour- 
able word ; and that he pressed my hand, 
and spouted verses. 



We have such delightful plans in 
view : we are to sail from island to 
island ; to visit the crater of the Peak 5 
and to spend a few days at Madeira. He 
is grown amazingly sociable with me 
within these last few weeks : we read to- 
gether ; he assists my Italian and French 
wonderfully ; and I have, as I mentioned 
before, offered to improve him in Eng- 
lish. Defend me! did I ever think I 
should turn governess, even to a noble 
Spaniard ! the last of all horrible disfigur- 
ing trades, which, had the fortune-teller 
prophesied I should one day pursue, I 
should have certainly started from the 
crazy rush chair on which I was perched, 
burned her cards, set fire to her spirits, 
and demolished her cat. 

VOL. II. s 



SS6 DUDLEY. 

I never was more happy in my life, my 
dear ! Instead of your evil prognostica- 
tions of horrors hanging over me, the 
finger of joy beckons me forward, — I 
was once a bad walker, but now I am 
much stronger, and I think the exercise 
does me good, especially a walk by the 
sea-side. He has a good stout arm, which 
seems to bear up one's steps, and to sup- 
port them ; and he has reconciled me to the 
sight'of theGuancheSjtowhomhe is so par- 
tial. — I never can get even my own groom 
to arrange my saddle, and bridle, and bit, 
and snaffle as well as this Spaniard does ; 
and in a boat or yacht he is really clever. 
1 do not think that Admiral Cavendish 
(that is to be) could better manage sails> 
and helms, and cordage ; and steer, and 
tack, and row, and all that. — I have xio 
doubt, with a little more training, this 
Zulvago Hernandez Carlos Isidore Conde 
d' Almeida, will in time, from a wild, 
free-born steed, become a very useful do- 
mestic animal. — And Clonmore and my 
dear Doctor make the kindest enquiries 
after my health and welfare ? Well, 
tell them, Louisa, from me, that I am 



DUDLEY. 387 

still all spirit, air, whim, and cheerful- 
ness ; that I intend never to grow old, if 
good-humour will keep me young 5 and 
never to despond whilst hope smiles 
in my face. Tell them, also, that at 
length I am become an early riser j that 
the TenerifFe air has braced my nerves, 
exhilarated my whole system; that my 
complexion still wears the York and 
Lancaster livery ; and that should the 
next few months be spent as delightfully 
as the last have been, there will not exist 
on earth a happier creature than your and 
their affectionate and faithful, though 
ever giddy, 

Caroline Alford. 



I had sealed this letter — I have torn 
it open. Oh, Louisa ! Louisa ! this is 
cruel work ! — I scarcely know what has 
happened, but a strange rovolution seems 
to have taken place at Euphorbia. My 
head has certainly been suddenly twisted 
off; and clapped again on my shoulders, 
the face behind, and the poll before, for 
my mind never seems to know what my 
s 2 



388 DUDLEY. 

hands are doing, or whither my steps are 
going. — Did you ever hear of the wo- 
man who fancied herself a clock as she 
stood behind the door wagging her head 
(the pendulum), and her tongue going 
click, click, click? — and the man who 
insisted upon it that his flesh and bones 
were a glass-house ? — Some day or other 
my head will be certainly found in flames, 
I fancying myself the Peak of TenerifFe. 

— TenerifFe ! Oh what had I to do with 
Teneriffe ? — I wish I had been in the 
pound on Englefield Green, or locked. up 
in Bullock's Museum, or sitting in wax- 
work state by the side of Queen Bess, in 
Westminster Abbey ; — any where, than 
have come to this most savage, and un- 
kind, this most unfriendly spot. 

Oh, heart, heart, be silent — writhe in 
pain ; throb, flutter, break, but be silent. 

— He is gone 1 for ever, ever gone ! — 
He has sailed, and for Calcutta, as he 
said himself to Eliot, perhaps for years, 
I shall see him no more — and what 
of that? — My happiness did not depend 
on him, or any man, or woman, or child ^ 
it depends on myself alone. 

5 



^ / DUDLEY. 38& 

I never saw him from that hour when 
— w^hen — you may remember the cir- 
cumstance — or rather, you can look 
back at that part of this letter which 
mentions it: to read over these pages 
would be a^ punishment my worst enemy 
(if I have an enemy) could inflict. — 
You will see, that on the arrival of our 
letters we separated ; he took his, and, as 
it appears, had a long conference with 
Eliot in his study ; from whence, leaving 
his kind regards to the ladies, and his 
love for the children should he not return, 
he proceeded toBenLomond,from thence 
to Santa Cruz, and in a few hours was on 
his way to the Cape, from whence he 
designs to proceed to Calcutta ! 

Neither Eliot or Jane seemed to think 
his departure at this time more extraor- 
dinary than at any former period, when 
he was absent for upwards of two years ; 
but to me ! it strikes me, that having re- 
ceived no satisfactory information from 
Clonmore of Mrs. Shelburne, he is gone 
in a sort of despair to spend in India the 
remainder of the time of Victoire's en- 
gagement to Lady L j that he is 

s 3 



390 DUDLEY. 

anxious to devote his presence and atten- 
tion to the daughter, as the mother still 
escapes his search ; and that when Miss 
Shelburne returns to Europe, it is his de- 
sign to accompany her, even into the 
very presence of that mother — and 
then 



I have been wandering through the 
house, and into the rooms lately occupied 
byhim. — I am now returned from the 
drawing-room, where I saw only one 
thing that could remind me of his pre- 
sence and absence — the old broken 
black ribbon which had belonged to his 
miniature, and which Mrs. Grantley, on 
replacing it for new, had thrown out of 
the window ; it had been caught by a 
myrtle-bush, on which it still hung. 

Adieu, Louisa. — I have taken cold 
lately — my nerves are unstrung — or 
rather, I feel as if they had been wound 
up by an unskilful and hasty hand, and 
that the main-spring were snapped. 

Ever yours, 

C. A. 



DUDLEY. 39X 



LETTER XXXIX. 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Rev, Henry Clonmore, 

MY DEAR CLONMORE, Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

Your letters have remained unanswered, 
from the shock we have all received, and 
the distress we have been thrown into, by 
the sudden and alarming illness of Lady 
Alford. Even Balfour's skill, which is 
not trifling, had no effect in ameliorating 
her sufferings, and I have sent to Madeira 
for the best advice that can there be 
procured. 

1 fear she has taken cold, from being 
out late the other evening on the water, 
when we went on an excursion to the 
island of Gomera. Jane and I in vain 
intreated her to put on a warmer shawl, 
or a boat-cloke ; — she refused ; and with 
the usual peevishness attending the com- 
mencement of any illness, was in tears at 
our continued remonstrance 5 and at last 
s 4} 



392 DUDLEY. 

threatened, if we offered them to her 
again, to throw them into the sea. — 
Balfour, it appears, observed symptoms 
of fever coming on 5 the night air finish- 
ed the business ; and the next morning 
she was confined to her bed, in high 
deh'rium. 

In a sick room, Jane, as you may sup- 
pose, shines ; it is, in fact, her own de- 
partment ; and Carohne has been nursed 
by her with the fondest and most tender 
assiduity. I take my turn to relieve her 
cares ; and Martella, and Morton, and 
her own women, are incessant in their 
attendance. 



Dr. G — is just arrived from' Madeira, 
and is gone up with Jane to visit our in- 
valid, leaving me to look over a packet of 
letters brought by the same vessel, and 
which have arrived from England via 
Lisbon. One of them, I see, is from 
you, my friend. — I break off in my letter 
to read what news from your part of the 
world. 



DUDLEY. 393 

Your letter, Clonmore, has filled me 
with the extremest sorrow and constern- 
ation. — It is not possible ! What you 
and Mrs. Clonmore have long surmised, 
and think it now your duty to inform me, 
is not to be credited ! — Surely neither 
of you can be so good a judge as 
myself, not to speak of Jane and the 
Balfours, who have been on the spot, 
and almost constantly with them both. 

— A growing attachment for Zulvago ! 

— and on the part of Caroline ! — I 
repeat it is impossible — wholly im- 
possible. 

In the first place, I think her incapa- 
ble, from the very capriciousness of her 
nature, to feel that sort of powerful sen- 
timent which might occupy the heart of 
either you or me : add to this, I have 
heard her repeatedly declare her opinion 
of a woman who should suffer herself to 
fall in love (to use her own phrase) with 
any man, unless in return for his sincere 
and offered attachment. — Your communi- 
cation, however, must not be slighted upon 
merely my own judgment. Jane must 

S Q 



S94f DUDLEY. 

be consulted, and according as we find 
necessary, we shall act upon it, and thus 
be on our guard, at the same time not 
suffering the slightest suspicion of this 
nature to come to the ears of the Bal- 
fours, who, I am confident, at present do 
not see affairs in the same light with you. 
The illness of Lady Alford is a fever, 
the consequence of a violent cold caught 
on the water ; and herein are sufficient 
reasons to shut the gates of Euphorbia 
against all visitors. Should your con- 
jectures prove just, I can only pity this 
perversion of judgment in my sister ; for 
to do Zulvago justice, though nature has 
formed him to be esteemed and loved, 
and to be susceptible of beauty, he never 
paid her one-half the attentions he gave 
to Mrs. Grantley and Mrs. Balfour, with 
exception to the melancholy pleasure he 
derived in silently watching her counte- 
nance, which, when natural and unaffect- 
ed in its movements, greatly resembles 
that of Mrs. Shelburne when young. 

Your intelligence of the total failure 
with respect to finding the latter, drove 



him away, and induced his immediate de- 
parture for India, under the idea that 
she might have followed her daughter to 
Calcutta. 

There was in the conduct of Zulvago 
to Caroline all the frankness, candour, 
and freedom of manner, which we see 
between a brother and a sister, without 
the licensed and becoming familiarity 
that distinguish the behaviour of relatives 
so near and so beloved ; and not an atom 
of that reserve, that timidity, that over- 
whelming and painful consciousness, 
which existed on my part during court- 
ship with my late wife, or yours with 
Mrs. Clonmore ; and 1 am confident on 
Zulvago's with his dear and lamented 
Gabrielle. To her he is already deeply 
and eternally attached ; and were he 
not, Caroline would never become his 
choice. -»— He greatly admires her per- 
son, her vivacity, and her temper ; but as 
a foreigner, is perhaps more clear-sighted 
than an Englishman would be to the 
faults that preponderate against these 
good qualities. 

s 6 



396 DUDLEY. 

Dr. G — has just been with me. He 
has seen Caroline. Unless the fever can 
be subdued, and soon, there is but little 
hope of her life. God bless you all. 
Jane will write to Mrs. Clonmore as soon 
as possible. 

Eliot Howard. 



DUDLEY. 397 



LETTER XL. 
Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

A PAINFUL suspense of nearly three 
weeks is now over, and we have at length 
the satisfaction to acquaint our dear 
friends that the life of my sister has been 
spared. — After sufferings, of which even 
the detail must be dreadful, (for the fever 
was attended by nearly a fatal accident,) 
she has been twice snatched from the 
very verge of the grave. 

But before I proceed, let me, in order 
to your better understanding the scenes 
we have witnessed, explain to you, without 
unnecessary reserve, that your suspicions 
were true. The illness of Caroline is to be 
traced to the departure of Don Zulvago ; 
from which period, an entire abandonment 
of self, of all employment and amuse- 
ment, took place : — instead of associat- 
ing as usual with the Balfours, she 



398 nuDLV^r. 

shunned them in particular, and to the 
total neglect of health, took long and 
solitary walks ; returned to the house 
with damp and wet shoes ; and sat up 
half the night reading frivolous and se- 
ductive books, at once inflaming her 
brain, and endangering her sight. A 
water excursion completed the mischief, 
when, through obstinacy and folly, she 
refused to take the necessary precautions 
against cold, and a malignant sore-throat 
and fever were the consequence. 

Of these she had nearly recovered, 
through the persevering attention and 
skill of Dr. G — , when by an unfortunate 
mistake of Rosalva, whom we had left 
alone with her in the room for five 
minutes only, she drank off at once the 
whole of a powerful medicine, instead of 
taking it, as was the design, in drops, and 
at stated intervals. 

The consequences were most horrible. 
You may imagine to yourself a human 
being rising slowly from the bed of 
death, and by the hand of violence sud- 
denly thrust back again. The fever re- 
turned, and with redoubled and alarming 



DUDLEY. 399 

symptoms, when both Dr. G — and Mr. 
Balfour prepared my brother and me 
to expect the worst. I sat up with her 
that night, and the delirium was such, 
that the strength of four women was 
necessary to hold her in bed. Exhausted 
by her struggles, she at last became more 
composed, and they left her solely to my 
care. 

Shortly after Morton came to her bed- 
side with a cup of barley-water, when my 
sister, looking stedfastly at her face, en- 
deavoured to articulate, but could not : 
— her features appeared convulsed ; and 
as she half raised herself, she dashed the 
cup from the hand of Morton, with a 
strong expression of horror and aversion, 
to the other side of the bed. Martella, on 
seeing this, brought another cup, and re- 
quested Caroline to drink the contents ; 
but no sooner had she caught a ghmpse of 
the old Spanish nurse, than she uttered a 
loud, wild, and piercing shriek, and hid 
her face in the bed-clothes. The most ter- 
rific and at the same time dreadful scene of 
delirium followed,in which her convulsions 
became so strong, that Eliot, Dr. G — , and 



400 DUDLEY. 

Mr. Balfour, were all summoned to our 
aid, and we expected every moment to 
be her last. The paroxysms, however, 
were at length subdued, and they once 
more left us together ; when, seeing her 
more composed, I sat down at the head of 
the bed, and took her parched and burn- 
ing hand in mine. 

She knew me, saying, " How could 
you, Jane, let those wretches come near 
me ? And you. Savage," to her wo- 
men, "and Patience, to open the door 
to them 5 you ought to be ashamed of 
yourselves! — I assure you, if you ever 
play these tricks on me, you may leave 
my service as soon as you please. — And 
the odious creatures, to bring their cups 
and saucers with them ! — No, no, they 
shall never again tell me my fortune ! 
I have had enough of fortune-telHng ! — 
I thought I was in Teneriife. — How 
did they find me out here ?" 

I saw which way the mind was now 
directed, and conceived it better to re- 
main silent, than by explaining that the 
women were the good old nurses Morton 



DUDLEY. 401 

and Martella, to irritate her into contra- 
diction. 

After a long pause, during which she 
frequently smiled, and seemed speaking 
to herself, she remarked — ** It is very 
singular that their predictions were ve- 
rified respecting Susan Lascelles and 
Emily Harcourt, but they failed with me! 

— I am still full of life and frolic ; and 
yet they told me — what was it they did 
tell me?" — and she frowned, and put 
her hand upon her forehead — ** Oh ! I 
remember now, that I should be within 
an inch of the grave, hurried thither by 
a man whose Christian name began with 
a — '* She stopped, relapsed into a fit, and 
in a loud frenzy, of which I can give no 
adequate description, started upright, 
and with alternate sighs, lengthened 
screams, and sudden shrieks, called out 

— " Oh, see ! see ! see ! the bed is full 
of the letter Z ! — they hang upon the 
curtains ! — they blaze on the canopy ! — 
they cover the counterpane !" — And she 
rapidly traced with her finger on the 
sheet this fatal letter. — Another horrible 
scene ensued, as appalling to the specta- 



402 DUDLEY. 

tors as it was afflicting to the sufferer, in 
which she fancied that the room was a 
place of eternal punishment, filled with 
conjurors and fortune-tellers, who had 
permission to torment her. She then 
held a conversation with her two young 
friends, her companions in her visit to 
the place of iniquity, and who, it seems, 
had both died prematurely. They ap- 
peared to complain that they were shut 
out from heaven ; on which she en- 
deavoured to rally their spirits, and, tell- 
ing each to take hold of her arm, offered 
to conduct them thither herself — A 
dismal shriek followed, as if rejected at 
the very entrance to bliss: and in language 
whose import could not be misunder- 
stood, for the terms were those of intense 
passion, she called by name on Zulvago, 
on Hernandez, on Isidore — saying, " I 
see you! You are there! within the 
gates of heaven ! You are ! — and a 
guard of angels shall not prevent my 
coming to you ! — No power shall sepa- 
rate us !'* — Every epithet of tenderness 
and affection followed, when suddenly 
stopping, as if repulsed by Zulvago him- 



DUDLEY. 408 

self, a sort of horrid calm settled on her 
features ; her eyes became fixed and 
glazed ; her mo,Lith was half open ; and 
she fell back on the bed speechless, and 
to all appearance dead. 

The medical gentlemen, with Eliot, 
were in the adjoining dressing-room, and 
on hearing my voice came in. Dr. G — , 
to my question, replied, she was not yet 
dead, but that he had only faint hopes 
of her ultimate recovery. An anodyne 
was soon after administered, a twelve 
hours* calm succeeded, a gentle sleep 
followed, and she awoke the following 
evening, free from delirium. 



Thanks to the Almighty ! the inflictor 
of punishment, and the restorer of health ! 
Caroline, at the moment I now write, is 
declared out of danger ! If any proof 
were wanting, my dear friends, to con- 
firm your suspicions of the original cause 
of her malady, the knowledge oi' it is in 
my possession. — In helping to undress 
her, when she was first taken ill, I found, 
pinned to the bosom of her handkerchief. 



404 



DUDLEY. 



SO as to be wholly concealed from sight, 
the old black ribbon which had belonged 
to the miniature of Mrs. Shelburne, worn 
by Don Zulvago. I pitied my sister's 
weakness, and threw it into the fire. 

I have hopes, however, that great as 
have been her corporeal sufferings, she will 
ultimately derive from them some advan- 
tages : — that her mind and disposition 
will reap from this event the most im- 
portant and lasting benefits, to assist 
which, I have resolved to break through 
my natural reserve, and point out to her 
wherein have lain her errors, and in what 
manner she may endeavour to correct 
them. 

On her being removed to her dressing- 
room for change of air, I became her in- 
separable companion ; neither was I sorry 
to remark that, conscious of the state of 
her heart, she was reserved, and shy of 
admitting the Balfours, who, though 
they might be silent on the subject of 
Zulvago, could not fail, by their presence, 
of recalling his image to her mind. I 
considered it my duty at once, like a 
skilful surgeon, now that she was pro- 



DUDLEY. 405 

nounced out of danger, to probe the 
wound of her heart, and therefore, taking 
advantage of our being alone, on the first 
day of her removal, I laid by my work, 
and looking at her with firmness, reminded 
lier that I was at once her elder by many 
years, her only sister, and one of her 
best friends ; and what motive, but of 
kindness, could be mine in telling her, 
without disguise, that her illness had 
been the consequence of determined 
neglect of health, which neglect had re- 
sulted from a want of a due regulation 
of the passions. 

She saw I was mistress of her secret, 
and with uncontrollable emotion hid 
her face in her hand, and reclined her 
head upon my shoulder. —• " Be com- 
forted," I said, fondly pressing her other 
hand in mine, " the proof of weakness 
you have shown is confined to Eliot 
and me in this place, and to the Clon- 
mores in England ; judge how sacredly 
it will be concealed." 

" Aiid the Balfours ?" she whispered, 
without raising her head. 

*' They know nothing as yet j it will 



406 DUDLEY. 

hereafter depend on yourself, whether they 
are ever to become acquainted with the 
teal cause of your illness. Neither does 

Dr. G ; he remarked, of course, that 

some uneasiness preyed upon your mind, 
but your brother satisfied him on that 
head." 

*< And in the delirium of the fever, I 
did not repeat the name ?" 

** The name of whom ? Of Don Zulva- 
go? — As the first step, Caroline, towards 
a return to good sense, delicacy, and 
upright principles, we must put away 
these mysterious and childish monosylla- 
bles of the and he, and speak to the point 
at once. — You did frequently mention 
the names of Don Zulvago, of Hernan- 
dez, and of Isidore ; and you called 
on me, on Eliot, on the Bal fours, and on 
the Clonmores, also on Dudley, on 
Claudy, and even on Mr. Turner !'* 

For the first time since her illness, I 
perceived a faint smile, on which I con- 
tinued in the same strain, — «« You were 
extremely sociable in your recollections 
of ail absent friends during your illness, 
for you also spoke of the Viscount, of the 



DUDLEY. 407 

Marquis, of Charles Maxwell, of Miles 
Cavendish, of Victoire, and Gabrielle, of 
India, Madeira, and the Peak of Tene- 
riife. You see, therefore, there was nothing 
very particular in your having spoken of 
our Spanish friend Don Zulvago.'* 

Here she again concealed her face, with 
an observation that she and I appeared 
to have exchanged characters. ** Pardon 
me, Caroline,'' I replied; " if until now 
you knew but little of me, you have only 
yourself to blame, for even from child- 
hood you have shunned my society : you 
married early in life, it is true, but had 
you at your mother's death accepted the 
offer o^my protection and home, instead 
of rejecting it^^ror that of a boarding- 
school, we should not have been the 
strangers to each other's mind which has 
evidently been long the case. 

" In the prime of life, highly gifted 
with beauty, fortune, connections, and 
every blessing that can make life desira- 
ble, you have wantonly brought yourself 
to the last extremity ; which crime, traced 
to its source, will be found to flow from the 
error of a moment, committed upwards of 



408 DUDLEY. 

fifteen years back. To finish a few pages 
of a light and silly novel, you refused to 
accompany your mother and me to see 
a worthy family, who were, in your opi- 
nion, of a grave cast, and unfit for your 
society : whilst the same hour, which was 
spent by us in the company of religious 
and excellent persons whom you despised, 
was passed by you and your accidental 
visitors, in the garret of two wretched 
and unprincipled fortune-tellers : — thus 
your fault has brought with it its own 
punishment^ 

" And now, my dearest Caroline, that 
you have obtained a new life — nay, 
do not thus distress yourself, the evil, I 
hope, is past,'' (for she v^^t convulsively, 
and her sobs now shook her whole frame,) 
« the evil is past; and now that you enter, 
as it were, on a new existence, let me 
persuade you to endeavour to begin to 
live in this world, as if there were another. 
You have, it seems, read a great deal, but 
what has been till now the tendency of 
your reading ? — Suffer me to answer this 
question. — Books of amusement have 
hitherto been your study, and the Bible, 



DLDLEY. 409 

aad \\orks of a senous nature, 1 fear, 
onbf the oh]QCisQ( occasional curioati^ ; — 
reverse this plan, hj adopting mine, and 
in future, be works of imagination, the 
toys of leisure, and the Bible your studi^ : 
rely upon it the advantages you will reap 
from this course will be incalculable, and 
that then, and then only, can be brooght 
into proper subjection, the irregularities 
of the heart," 

I pursued my argument, and in a man- 
ner, and with a diflusiveness wholly unne- 
cessary to detail to either of you, my ex- 
cellent friends, and saw with pleasure I 
made some impression on mj sister. — 
This became evident every succeeding 
day, from the eagerness and pleasure with 
which she alwavs saw me come into her 
room, and the patience with which she lis- 
tened to me, when speaking, and wh«a 
readi ng, as I d id aloud, a few pages of " Gis- 
borne on the E\-idences of Christianity." 

It had been arranged berween Eliot 
and me that we siu uli each keep to 
our own peculiar treatment of Caroline's 
disease — that I should speak seriously 
and impressively on the subject, and that 

VOL. U. T 



410 DUDLEY. 

he on the contrary should make light of 
it, by which she could scarcely fail of 
being cured by one, or the other, or the 
united exertions of both: in pursuance 
of this agreement, when he considered 
that she had been long enough under my 
hands, he contrived, by coming abruptly 
and cheerfully into her room, to interrupt 
our conversation, and turn it on a variety 
of subjects, — not unfrequently on that 
of Major Hernahdez himself* 

The other morning he came in sud- 
denly upon us — saying ** I have just 
received letters from Zulvago j he is at 
St Helena, and talks of coming hither, 
instead of proceeding to India. — How 
is this! going to faint, Caroline ! well, 
what would I submit to, on condition of 
being thus loved by a fair lady.'' — These 
words had their effect on my sister ; she 
instantly forced herself to appear calm, 
and even cheerful. *' I shall return to 
England," she said, " and would wish 
you, Eliot, to make the necessary arrange- 
ments for my departure, and without 
delay." 

" Well, but Caroline," he replied. 



DUDLEY. 411 

** would not that be rather singular ; for 
Zulvago speaks in this letter of going to 
England, his stay here being only for a 
few days.*' 

" Then, during his visit here, I shall 
confine myself to my own rooms ; you 
must allow me to plead a head-ache now 
and then," and both Eliot and I felt 
pleased to see a returning smile upon her 
faded cheek. 

« That will be awkward," remarked 
Eliot — " however, I see nothing better 
to be done, except indeed I was to have 
recourse to my conjuring talents; you 
know, Caroline, you are fond of conjuring 
tricks ; suppose I mount the Peak, and 
throw out my hook and line, and fish for 
one of your old suitors — which do you 
think would be the first to bite, the 
Viscount or the Captain ?*' 

These words caused in our sister so 
great a revulsion of blood, that we feared 
she w^ould faint — we applied the proper 
remedies, when he entreated her to par- 
don his folly, as he chose to call it, and 
once more we were left together, 

Eliot has since told me, and seriously, 
T 2 



4H DUDLEY. 

that it is become the first wish of his heart, 
that Caroh'ne would accept one of the 
offers made to her by either of those 
gentlemen, who have proved the sin- 
cerity of their attachment, by their long 
and kind remembrance of her : — her 
preference of Zulvago has been merely 
a bias of the heart, without any serious 
evil consequence, which a man of sense 
and candour would readily overlook, and 
so unconscious is this object of her 
secret attachment of the powerful im- 
pression he left behind him, that in his 
last letter he observes, " with my most 
respectful admiration of the good Lady 
Alford, inform her, that though I am 
upon love's oath never to play at chess 
again at Euphorbia, the prohibition does 
not extend to Ben Lomond, or to any 
other part of the world, and that I hope 
yet to have with her, many a conquering 
game." 



During the illness of Caroline, Dudley 
and Claudy have regularly pursued their 
studies alone j thus proving the bene- 



DUDLEY. 413 

ticial effects of having been early ac- 
customed to spend a certain portion of 
every morning in their own rooms: their 
religious duties have met with no inter- 
ruption in consequence of the absence 
of Eliot and myself, and their lessons 
with Mr. Turner, and Rosalva, have pro- 
ceeded as usual. 

This evening, for the first time, they 
were admitted to see Lady Alford, and 
so great is the alteration of person caused 
by her illness, vivacity having given place 
to languor, and lier talent for frivolous 
conversation, to almost uninterrupted 
silence, that the sensibility of both 
was called forth at the first sight of 
her ; Dudley's particularly, — instead of 
speaking to Caroline, he turned, with his 
eyes full of tears, from her to my brother, 
remarking — " How sorry Don Zulvago 
will be, to hear of Aunt Alford's illness, 
he did love her so tenderly ! ' — This was 
a, home stroke at Caroline — and from 
the hand of innocence ; when Claudy 
equally unconscious as to the effect of 
their observations, added, " Yes, I have 
heard Don Zulvago say to strangers in 
'T 3 



414 DUDLEY. 

company, that Aunt Alford was one of 
the most beautiful women he had ever 
met with : when he comes back, how 
changed he will find you, dear aunt, I 
hope you will soon quite recover." My 
sister made no answer, but folding an 
arm round each, as they stood at her 
side, kissed them affectionately. 

When they had left the room with my 
brother, I remarked to Caroline that she 
must summon all her fortitude and firm- 
ness, and even delicacy of mind, to m.eet 
daily remarks of this nature ; that we 
could not, of course, forbid either of the 
children talking of their Spanish friend ; 
and that though she were not compelled 
to speak of him herself, she must learn to 
hear him mentioned at all times, and in 
all places, with composure at least, until 
intense feeling could settle into perfect 
indiiference." 

" Indifference!" repeated Caroline, 
with a look and an accent, which I 
readily understood. " Well," I replied, 
'' since that term displeases you, we will 
exchange it for friendship ; you are not 
as yet perfectly restored to health of 



DUDLEY. 415 

body, the mind therefore participates in 
the disease ; but the time is not distant, 
that you will regard this man with the 
same kindness which I myself entertain 
for him, without a hope or a fear further 
than for the continuance or otherwise, of 
his most valuable esteem." 

After some pause, she enquired 
whether 1 was acquainted with the cir- 
cumstances of his early life, and the 
nature of his connection with the Mrs. 
Shelburne, so frequently mentioned by 
us all. I replied, that my brother had 
informed me of what he himself already 
knew on the subject, which Don Zulvago 
had frankly communicated to him, on 
the very first day of his arrival here from 
Madeira after the sailing of the India 
fleet : but that the latter had promised 
Eliot a written, and minute account of 
every particular, which, though not yet 
received, would no doubt be sent, when 
he should find leisure to transcribe it, 
•• And would there be any impropriety," 
enquired Caroline, eagerly, « in my 
seeing this account?" 

" None whatever; on the contrary, I 
T 4 



416 Dudley. 

rather imagine that it is Don Zulvago'^ 
\yish, to make us acquainted with the 
untoward circumstances, which in early 
life separated him from this lady, to whom 
he has ever since been most faithfully 
attached. They have never met it ap- 
pears but once since her marriage, about 
two years back, when she had been 
already many years a widow." 

" And should they ever meet again ?^' 
said Caroline. 

'' Why then," I replied, ** neither 
Eliot or I have any doubt of the result j 
>vhich is this, that his tenderness, his 
constancy, and perseverance, must con- 
quer her long cherished scruples and pre- 
sent feelings : — Where a man is truly 
attached, as is the case with this Spanish 
nobleman, he will endeavour to surmount 
every obstacle, to gain his wishes. It is 
the nature of man, Caroline, to persevere, 
as it should be that of woman to remain 
passive." 

Lady Alford sighed with conviction at 
the truth of my words, and changed the 
subject. 



DUDLEY. 4-17 

Another week has passed, and my sister 
now ventures to take a few minutes exer- 
cise in the garden, — she joins us below 
for about half an hour at a time, when we 
are only a private party, and gradually im- 
proves in strength and spirits. Eliot is 
all kindness and attention to her, giving 
as one motive, that he is her debtor, for 
her having by her visit to him, greatly 
contributed to his present excellent health. 
The children daily wait upon her, per- 
forming all the engaging little services 
in their power, and endeavour to amuse 
her in a variety of ways 5 whilst Mr. 
Turner assists Eliot to draw her in the 
forest walk, when she takes exercise in 
the garden chair; she is grateful to us 
all, and in my mind has instead of having 
suffered by this illness, much improved ; 
although her person is reduced, and her 
complexion faded, there is now a quiet 
and sedate manner, which better suits 
her meridian of life, than that high- 
spirited liveliness, only truly becoming 
in \ery early youth, and which, had she 
been blessed with children, she would 
probably have long since laid aside, 
T 5 



41S DUDLEY. 

It seems astonishing to Eliot, that con» 
sidering lier unsteady and inconstant dis- 
position, she could be susceptible to an 
impression of so profound a nature as this 
appears to have been, (and she has con- 
fessed to me that her partiality for him be- 
gan early — from their first interview). 
When married to Lord Alford, Caroline 
was not more than seventeen, and being 
both immediately engaged in every scene 
of high life, they were as fond of each 
other as they could find leisure to be, 
and showed it in much the same manner, 
as would an overgrown boy, and a school 
girl. 

Had my sister been blessed with a 
family, she would have found an addi- 
tional interest in her home, and enjoyed 
it accordingly, for she is naturally very 
fond of children, as is proved by her 
affection for Claudy and Dudley, which 
nothing can exceed. 

She has many good qualities, the chief 
of which, I find to be an excellent 
temper j for, with all her whims, I have 
never observed her out of humour; the 
instance of her inexcusable behaviour to 



DUDLEY. 419 

Don Zulvago over a game of chess, 
standing on record at Euphorbia as one 
of the most heinous. His conduct on 
the occasion was of no little service to 
her, as we remarked, that from that hour 
she seemed to curb her propensity to 
changing her mind. In real anger, or 
being in a passion as she expresses it, I 
have never seen her indulge, although to 
judge of her by the character she gives of 
herself, a stranger might fancy she only 
lived in a storm. 

When we reflect on the conduct of 
Mrs. Shelburne to Don Zulvago, and 
that of Lady Alford to Viscount — , 
and Captain Cavendish, we may well ex- 
claim, on the waywardness of the human 
heart; it will burst away from under an 
iron shackle, yet submit to be bound in 
silken bonds, firmly and everlastingly, 
when imposed by the hand of love. 



A new arrival at Euphorbia is just 

announced by the gong. I dread the 

effect even this sound will have on the 

shattered nerves of Caroline } and should 

T 6 



4^0 DUDLEY. 

it be Don Zulvago, as I suspect, I can 
only hope that she will summon all her 
fortitude, to go through the hardest 
trial, perhaps, she ever yet encountered. 
The visitor has been announced — it is 
not the Spaniard ; but I must conclude, 
and leave Eliot to finish my letter. He 
will inform you of all that passes here, 
as Caroline now requires my daily and 
constant attendance. 

Ever, my dear friends. 

Your attached, 

Jane Grantley. 



DUDLEY. 4^1 



Continued by Sir Eliot Hcmard, 

Well, Clonmore! this indeed is a bold 
and daring stroke ! all I can at present 
add, is a wish to Heaven that it may 
prove successful. The usual bustle over, 
which never fails to attend the arrival of 
strangers (by which we understand 
strangers to the Island) at our mountain 
solitude, I sent a message requesting 
instantly to speak to Jane, (the children 
being with her at the time) ; and on her 
coming to my study, imparted my sus- 
picion, that this might be Zulvago, ac- 
companied by some fellow-passengers, 
and advised her to go and prepare our 
sister for his return, adding, *' you had 
better not leave Caroline, until I shall 
send to you.'' 

In a state of most anxious suspense, I 
took my spy-glass, and going to the terrace 
pointed it at that part of the road visible 



422 DUDLEY. 

from hence, lying between the house 
and the flag-stafF; and saw distinctly the 
figures of three men, riding towards 
Euphorbia, neither of which, however, at 
that distance, appeared to have the air 
of Zulvago. I returned to the library 
and rung for Robert, desiring him to 
meet those people, and, whoever they 
might be, to conduct them straight for- 
ward to me. ** Do you think," I added, 
** that one of them is Major Hernandez?'' 
" Certainly not, sir," replied Robert, 
who, it seems, had seen them on their 
landing at the port ; " one is a shortish 
gentleman, and the other his servant, and 
the third is Inarco the guide, hired to 
conduct them hither." 

<* A shortish gentleman, you say, 
Robert?" 

" Yes, sir, about my height, with a 
fine round smiling rosy face 5 he's very 
fair and handsome, about one or two and 
thirty, 1 should suppose, and dressed in 
mourning ; besides, sir, the servant has 
a cockade in his hat." 

At this instant the distant gate bell 
rang, that at the hall followed, the large 



DUDLEY. 4^3 

folding doors of which were thrown open^ 
and Robert left me to usher in the gen- 
tleman. 

" Cavendish !" I exclaimed, spring- 
ing forward and grasping his extended 
hand, with an emotion of which you may 
well judge the full import, but which 
must have appeared to him a more 
hearty welcome than he could even ex- 
pect. ** Welcome, dear Cavendish, a 
thousand welcomes to Euphorbia.'* 

** Oh, in that case,'' he replied, turn- 
ing his head towards the hall, " you, 
Dunstan, (to the man) you may sheer 
off, and take him (the guide) back in tow, 
or he you, and forward my luggage here 
this evening, and follow it yourself as 
quick as you can, do you mind ?'* The 
door was closed, and he took the seat I 
offered him. 

On my remarking that he was but 
little altered, he said, in his usual rattling 
manner, " Not altered! I should be 
sorry for that faith, for you left me a 
Lieutenant, and you find me Posted, — 
And what may be still better, you sqe 
me my uncle's heir : — the dear old soul 



4^4 DUDLEY. 

not being able to hold out longer than 
ninety-eight." 

<* Ninety-Qighi ! pretty well that l" I 
remarked ; *' but we heard from Clon- 
more, that you were gone on a three or 
four years' station to the North seas.*' 

" True, but countermanded by supe- 
rior orders, you find me here : — the 
expedition ended in smoke ; — my ship 
is in dock, under repair, and 1 have leave 
of absence for three months." 

** And you took the advantage of 
making a trip to see your old friends — 
kind enough of you, captain ; but how 
were you assured of a welcome ?" 

He understood my meaning, though 
Lady Alford's name had not been men- 
tioned, and taking out a pocket-book, se- 
lected a letter from among others, which 
he threw me, saying, " I love always to 
act above board : there are my instruc- 
tions, signed by the Lady Commissioner 
herself — and had I not on that signal 
given chase to the loveliest prize that 
the Atlantic can boast, I were no British 
sailor." 

I read it — ^the whole truth flashed 



DUDLEY. 425 

upon my mind at once ; it was Caroline's 
last letter to Mrs. Clonmore, wherein she 
speaks of Cavendish ; and supposing him 
absent from England and for a consider- 
able time, throws out in her giddy way 
under what inducement she might be 
led to accept him. She was fairly caught 
in her own snare, and I rejoiced at the 
circumstance, particularly when Caven- 
dish entered into detail, by which 1 
found, that on the expedition being 
countermanded, he had set off instantly 
for Bloomfield Rectory, at which he ar- 
rived at the very moment you were 
reading this identical letter of my sister, 
in the presence of Dr. H ! 

To the Doctor, then it seems ,we are 
indebted for this visit of Cavendish, who, 
regardless of all your and Mrs. Clon- 
more's objections on the subject, asked 
the latter at once, the full blunt question 
of, " Do you love that saucy queen of 
caprice, Lady Alford, sirrah ?" 

" I do.'' 

" You do, do you, and in what manner 
would you prove your love ?" 



4^6 DUDLEY. 

*' By going through fire, air, and water 
to make her mine," replied the sailor. 

" Well," said the Doctor, " impelled 
by thej^re in your heart, and blown over 
by a fair xvindy you may soon cross the 
water; and there," flinging him the 
letter, <* is the chart by which you are 
to steer, you puppy." 

This is Cavendish's own account, and 
now let me satisfy the natural scruples 
of yourself and Mrs. Clonmore, by as- 
suring you, that had I had my choice of 
a brother-m-law, it would have been fixed 
on this gallant and disinterested fellow, 
who 1 have long been convinced is sin- 
cerely attached to Caroline ; and that 
now my only wish is, that he may not re- 
turn to England a bachelor and alone. 

It was fortunate that the very letter of 
Caroline, which speaks of Cavendish, 
should be that wherein she lets the secret 
of her heart escape respecting Zulvago : 

it was a desperate remedy of Dr. H 

to show him this, a sort of dernier resort ; 
but even had it checked his partiality, 
so great a reliance I have on his honour, 



DUDLEY. 4^7 

that I am assured the affair would have 
remained as profound a secret with him 
as with ourselves. Happily, however, it 
has had a total contrary effect, for he en- 
quired of me, *< What sort of chap is 
this Don, that Lady Alford has taken a 
fancy to? — is he worth pistolling? — 
vvhei^ is he now ? — if he loves her in re- 
turn, he is a dead man." 

This led us to some serious conversa- 
tion on the subject, during which I re- 
lated as much as was necessary of Zul- 
vago's affiiirs, and the whole progress of 
his acquaintance with my sister, to one- 
half of which he did not appear to attend, 
repeatedly enquiring, as he watched the 
door, *' But when can I see Lady Al- 
ford r' 

" You will find my sister altered," I re 
plied, " and I am sorry to seeyou consider 
this impression that has been made upon 
her mind, in a much lighter nature than 
it really deserves." — Cavendish became 
instantly grave, as I wished he should j 
and, indeed, appeared considerably hurt, 
on which I continued, ** You must act 
with your eyes open, instead of suffering 



4^8 BUDLEt. 

yourself to be blinded by your passions^, 
at the very moment when you require 
most discernment and penetration. All 
I have to say is this : — whether or not 
you and Caroline feel inclined that you 
should become my brother-in-law, you 
are most heartily welcome here, and the 
longer your stay the more agreeable to 
me. Lady Alford shall be informed to- 
morrow of your arrival; and then, good 
folks, I shall leave you to settle your 
affairs as you please.'' 

Mrs. Grantley soon after joined us, to 
whom I introduced Captain Cavendish j 
and the children being admitted, every 
subject was spoken of, except that which, 
we could discern, was nearest his heart. 

The same hour I thought it better to 
take upon myself the management of 
Caroline in this truly delicate business, 
which, to carry through with success, 
required more spirit than Mrs. Grantley 
possesses. As you may suppose, I was 
resolved to befriend the cause of Ca- 
vendish to the utmost of my abilities ; for 
all the points but one, her inclination, 
(and that, you may observe, was the 



DUDLEY. 429 

inost important,) were in his favour. 1 
did not doubt, however, to work upon 
her sense of propriety, and that she 
might be led to see the affair in the same 
light in which I, her sister, yourselves, 

and Dr. H , have, and do view it* 

The difference of their religious per- 
suasions, and the prior attachment of 
Zulvago to another, render all idea of a 
union with him as unsuitable as it is 
hopeless. Here, on the other hand, is 
a man of birth, fortune, and education, 
whom Caroline has known from child- 
hood, who is a distant connexion of our 
own, and who has served liis country 
with honour, and been rewarded with 
distinction. They are of equal age, of 
the same rank in life, and greatly re- 
semble each other in temper, and pur- 
suits, and taste ; and to sum up all, he 
loves Caroline, and only her, and has 
long regarded a marriage with her as the 
summit of his happiness. I repeat, no- 
thing on my part shall be left unat- 
tempted to ensure this union ; and as I 
apprehend this place, and the scenes 
around it, only serve to keep alive in hei* 



430 DUDLEY^ 

thoughts the image of Zulvago, I shall 
also, the moinent 1 see the slightest 
prospect of success^ not only hasten a 
marriage with Cavendish, but forward 
their return to England* 



Leaving the captain, and Mrs. Grant- 
ley to supply him wath refreshments, and 
show him the gardens, I dismissed 
Turner, with Claudy and Dudley, on a 
ride to Ben Lomond, to invite the Bal- 
fours, whom I wish Lady Alford to ac- 
custom herself to see on as friendly habits 
as ever 5 and having the coast clear, (to 
use Cavendish's phrase) I went up to Ca- 
roline, fully determined to enter boldly 
on the subject at once. T went into the 
room, when, struck with pity and con- 
sternation at the sight of her condition, 
I hastened to her assistance, as she stood 
near the chimney-piece, with a smelling 
bottle in her hand, and only in time to 
prevent her fall. She was for a long 
while wholly insensible, and I was forced 
to summon her woman to assist me in 
recovering h^r» 



DUDLEY. 431 

Once more alone, I found that the de- 
cisive measures I had resolved on would 
only be productive of mischief; and 
therefore, folding her tenderly in my 
arms, as she reclined on my shoulder^ 
said, in a low voice, " V/hat is it you 
fear, my dear Caroline ?" 

** Is he come ?'' she whispered. 
*< If by he you mean Don Zulvago, 
he is not." 

** Not! Not come?" and a passion of 
tears relieved her heart ; and she looked 
up, and smiled, ** I am happy j so very 
happy." 

" Well," thought I, ** here is more 
propriety, more tenderness, and far more 
genuine sensibility than I could expect j 
and I must act accordingly." 

.<' Then who, -^ who is it that is ar- 
rived ?" she enquired. 

*' Captain Cavendish. My old friend. 
Miles Cavendish." 

At these words she drew back from 
me, and rose, a sort of stern dignity 
spreading itself at the same time over 
her face, which was succeeded by a look 
of undissembled anger. 



43^ DUDLEY. 

" You are not displeased at liis paying 
us a visit, Caroline ?'* 

" I scarcely know," she replied; 
" but, during his stay, I shall not be vi- 
sible 5" — and, as she spoke, she walked 
towards an open window. A start back- 
v/ards, a kind of hysterical low shriek, 
and a deep flush of countenance, fol- 
lowed. I rose, and on looking down 
upon the lawn in front, saw Cavendish, 
his hat in his hand, his eyes thrown up 
to us, all rosy smiles, bows, and delight. 
Mrs. Grantley was at his side, and ex- 
erting her voice louder than usual on 
that or any other occasion, she exhorted 
Lady Alford to wrap herself well up, 
and join them in a walk. 

As I saw that Caroline was really 
distressed, I made signs to them to re- 
tire, and closed the window. Then, 
assuring her that her privacy should not 
be broken in upon against her consent, 
and that I would not press her to meet 
us below until she felt herself inclined, 
I was leaving the room, when she ob- 
served, reproachfully, ** I never could 
have expected this oi^ you, Eliot. This 
10 



DUDLEY. 433 

aititice is most unworthy of you. How 
could jou have the barbarity to send for 
that man ?" 

This was my time for commencing a 
determined attack ; and seizing the op- 
portunity she herself held out, I turn- 
ed back, and replied, " No, no, Lady 
Alford, it is not I that have used arti- 
fice : it was not / that sent for Caven- 
dish ; and if you are very desirous of 
knowing the name of the culprit, you 
will find it there;" and I put into her 
hands her own letter to Mrs. Clonmore, 
adding, with more earnestness, ** read 
over those pages, written by yourself, 
and of which Cavendish has been the 
bearer to me. He, with us, and the 
Clonmores, and our physician, is ac- 
quainted with your predilection in favour 
of one'~ of the most excellent of men. 
Cavendish feels gratified that you could 
thus distinguish worth, and owns him- 
self to be greatly his inferior ; but as a 
anion of that nature is wholly out of the 
question, he has placed his cause in my 
hands, and hopes you will permit him to 
succeed Zulvago in your preference. 

VOL. II. u 



434 DUDLEY. 

Read over that letter of yours, Caroline; 
reflect how dearly you are loved and 
valued by all the friends around you, 
and should it be possible, that is, not in- 
compatible with your own ideas of future 
happiness, let me yet hope to call Ca^ 
vendish my brother.'* 



For a whole week Lady Alford has 
persisted in keeping her room, and deny- 
ing herself to the repeated intreaties which 
her enamorato sends by Mrs. Grantley 
and me, requesting her to see him : — 
•' Let me," he says, " only exchange one 
look, one word, and I shall be satisfied." 
So should I J for once we could bring 
her to that point, I should have no fear 
of the result, such is the cheerfulness, 
good humour, spirit, and activity of 
this brave young officer. We see in him 
the strongest possible contrast, in person, 
disposition and manner to Zulvago, and 
of this I am not sorry, under the idea that 
the image of the latter may fade the 
sooner from her memory. 



DDDLKV. iS5 

The first step is over, and we may now 
look forward to the happiest conse- 
quences. About an hour back I went, as 
usual, to see CaroHne, and to my sur- 
prise found Dudley and Claudy, one on 
each side of her, seemingly preferring 
some petition with great earnestness : 
this I found to be a request that she would 
permit the visit of Captain Cavendish, 
who, on our failure with my sister, had 
had recourse to their ascendancy, observ- 
ing, that all methods were fair to entrap 
the foe. 

On Lady Alford pretending to be 
angry with the children's importunity, 
and desiring them to leave her, and never 
to mention the name of that sea monster 
again in her hearing, 1 felt greatly re- 
lieved, for here was a return, though 
faint, of her former arch vivacity, and 
flighty mode of conversing. 

Both Dudley and Claudy, from their 
entire ignorance of how affairs really 
stood, gave, in the simplicity of their ob- 
servations, the coup-de-main to her ob- 
stinacy. *' Why will you not see Captain 
Cavendish ?'' enquired Dudley j ** Was 

U !2 



43(i DUDLtV. 

he not an old friend of yours in Eng- 
land ? He says, that when you and he 
were about the age of Claudy and I, you 
used to play together, as we do now :'* 
** And I am certain," added my girl, 
" that the time will never come when I 
shall reifuse to see Dudley : — besides, 
aunt. Captain Cavendish is so handsome, 
and so good natured ; and he smiles, and 
laughs, and talks, and romps with us." 

" Well, by your own account, he is 
very happy without me/' 

" Yes, but he would be happier with 
you,'* added Dudley. 

** But what does he want with me ?" 
said Caroline ; " if he has any message, 
let him send it up by one of you. — And 
now, my dear children, for you have been 
here above an hour, do go ; for really my 
head aches." 

" Then may Captain Cavendish come 
and see you, when we are gone ?" added 
the persevering Claudy ; and they were 
as earnest in his behalf as if he had feed 
them both. 

" No, no, no, child ! — nonsense ! — J 
have nothing to say to Captain Caven- 



DUDLEY. 437 

dish, or to you either ! — EKot, do, for 
Heaven's sake, take these brats away ; or 
turn them out of the room, for their 
noise distracts me." 

" They make no noise that I observe,'* 
I replied, running my eye over a pam- 
phlet which I had taken up during the 
above altercation. 

** How can you suflfer them to be so 
absurd ?" inquired Caroline, coming over 
to me, in a half whisper, during which 
the little traitors were at work, whisper- 
ing each other. I saw Dudley leave the 
room, but took no notice of his departure, 
as Caroline had not observed it, owing to 
the ceaseless importunity of Claudy, who 
now conceived herself authorised by me 
to continue her request. 

" You deserve to be flogged as much 
as any young lady in the land," said 
Caroline ; — "to teaze your poor sick 
aunt, day after day, in this unmerciful 
manner." 

" Well then, aunt, why not see Captain 
Cavendish, who frets himself on account 
of your illness ? — He only wants to say 
' How d'ye do ?' to you." 
u 3 



438 DUDLEY. 

'' No more," said Caroline, with an 
arch glance, full of meaning, at me. 1 
reflected that we were en hon train; and 
that, after all the serious endeavours 
made by Mrs. Grantley and me, the 
end would certainly be brought about by 
these young ones, and in their own 
fashion. 

I was right ; a gentle tap at the door 
was heard. As the children are accus- 
tomed always to knock before they come 
into her room, Caroline concluded it to 
be Dudley, and said quickly, " Come in j" 
then, with a sudden blush and tremor, 
added, <* No, stay away, Dudley ; and, 
Claudy, do you go away to him ) for I am 
actually tired of you both." 

The door opened, and Dudley, with a 
sly look, danced into the room : capering 
and flourishing his arms, he called out, 
** Countess of Alford, give me leave to 
introduce tlie Honourable Captain Frede- 
rick Miles Cavendish, of the Royal Navy 
of England, commander of one of His 
Majesty's seventy-four gun ships, and a 
Knight of the most famous Order of"— 



DUDLEY. 439 

'« Dear Dudley," interrupted Claudy, 
"* you are like a show-man in a picture, 
exhibiting a wild beast/' 

Cavendish stood at the door — the ex- 
pression of his countenance was at first all 
joy and rapture; but on catching aglimpse 
of Caroline's altered figure; so wan, so pale, 
and so dejected ; he started back with sur- 
prise and sorrow, and stood immoveable. 
Caroline seemed to guess his thoughts, 
and also to feel grateful for the evident 
distress his warm and tender nature 
now exhibited; but thinking it necessary 
to rally her spirits in the presence of the 
children, she said, as she stood at the 
table, gathering in her hands a pack of 
historical cards, with which they had 
been playing, " So, Captain, I thought 
when you and I parted in England, many 
years ago, I sent you to Coventry." 

At these words I arose, threw down the 
pamphlet I had been reading, and taking 
the hand of Dudley, and that of Claudy, 
drew them under my arm — desired 
Cavendish, as I passed him, to go in at 
once, shut the door after me, and thus 
Jeft them together. 

u 4 



440 DUDLEY. 

You may suppose that Mrs. Grantley 
and I formed our own conclusions. About 
half an hour after we sent Robert to 
acquaint Cavendish that dinner was 
ready, when he joined us, and with the 
most sincere emotion : on watching his 
countenance as he entered, every hope 
was confirmed, and I felt truly happy. 

" We must have time," he said, " we 
must tack, and tack again ; we can't 
run right into the wind's eye : it is by a 
revolving not a steady lightj that I shall 
make the port j but, provided I do make 
it, no matter by what means, or the 
length of time it may take. 



From that hour his visits to Caroline 
have been daily renewed. He has even 
succeeded in prevailing on her to walk 
with him into the garden ; and though 
we always go out in a party together, he 
usually contrives to decoy her into a 
lonely w^alk with himself. 

She now joins our society below for a 
few hours in the course of the day ; and, 
to my real satisfaction, has met the Balr 
ours with great seli-command, and even 



DUDLEY. 441 

cheerfulness. Whether or not they have 
any suspicion of the truth I do not 
know ; but if they have, they also pos- 
sess sufficient tact to make them hide it ; 
and neither Mrs. Grantley or I will ever 
feel inclined to give them the lead to an 
explanation. 



Cavendish is making daily progress in 
Caroline's favour, and yet, to be sincere 
with you, I think he owes his success, in 
a great measure, to her late weakness 
for another. Her spirit is thereby 
humbled ; there is now more timidity in 
her manners, m.ore reflection, more sus- 
ceptibility, than was ever before observ- 
able ; and, in short, she is a far more ami- 
able woman, and rational companion, 
than before this unfortunate attach- 
ment took place. — Once the wife of 
Cavendish, I shall have no fear of her ; 
for her principles are sound, and she 
will study the happiness of her husband ; 
though, with some degree of excusable 
levity, she now persists in trifling with 
him as a suitor. However, she must soon 
come to the point of decision, for his 
V 5 



44S 



DUDLEY. 



leave of absence expires in a few weeks, 
w^hen he must show himself, as he says, 
at the iron gates of the Admiralty. 



Wish us joy, my dear Clonmore ! And 
now receive the warmest thanks of all 
on this side the water, for the share you 
and Mrs. Clonmore, not forgetting our 
excellent doctor, have had in this truly 
important business ; which is, after a 
month's assiduous courtship on his side, 
and much silence and deliberation on 
hers, (though no coquetry) come to a 
conclusion. 

Lady Alford's health is restored nearly 
to its former sound state. Her spirits 
are not as high as they were ; but her 
beauty is very little impaired ; and I 
doubt not, in a short time, will bloom as 
lovely as ever. 

Several little sparring matches have 
taken place during the last month, in 
which I have been frequently reminded 
of Catharine and Petruchio. The first 
was occasioned by her insisting, that he 
.should quit his profession, and live at 



DUDLEY. 44S 

home for the remainder of his life, in 
" love and idleness." These terms he 
positively and firmly rejected, saying he 
had been bred a sailor, and would die a 
sailor; at least never quit his station 
whilst the war lasted ; adding, that a 
man without a profession was like a man 
deprived of his intellect ; that he was a 
burden on society, a non-entity, a lub- 
ber ; that if he had a ninety-gun ship 
lined with prize dollars, he would still 
retain his profession ; and thus he con- 
tinued, launching out in strong invective 
against all persons who had no calling in 
the world, for upwards of half an hour, 
to the great fatigue of us all j but to the 
high gratification of Dudley, who seemed 
to listen to him with the deepest interest. 
Each time that Cavendish would have 
dropped the subject, your boy forced 
him to renew it. 

" Every man," continued the captain, 
clapping Dudley on the shoulder, seem- 
ingly pleased by his attention, — " Every 
man should look 'forward to rise to the 
head of his profession, and I swear — " 

** No, don't swear," said Caroline, 



444 DUDLEY. 

" you may vow and protest, but you 
must not swear." 

" Well, I protest and vow, though I 
see no great difference in the essentials, 
that I intend soon to be an admiral/' 

" An admiral!" cried Caroline; 
" Not if I can help it ; for I suppose, in 
full, or court-dress, you must wear a 
wig, such as we see in my old great- 
grandfather's picture, who fought with 
De Ruyter." 

** Well," said Cavendish, «* and what 
is there so frightful in a wig ?'* 

** Oh, it is my abhorrence, my aver- 
sion, I would prefer uniting my destiny 
to that of a baboon six feet high, or 
Peter the wild boy, than any man who 
wears a wig." 

** I am neither of those gentlemen you 
mention, Lady Alford," said the Captain, 
" and yet — " he stopped, put his hands 
to his head, and gently lifted up, to our 
real surprise, a false head of hair — dis- 
covering beneath it, a black silk skull- 
cap ! — if "we were astonished, you may 
imagine what Caroline felt at this unex- 
pected sight : the ghost of her great 



DUDLEY. 14^5 

grandfather itself could not have thrown 
her into more apparent terror and con- 
sternation, " Awig !'*she almost shrieked, 
** defend me, a wig !" 

" Yes, a wig," he replied calmly, taking 
a glass of jelly and a spoon, from the stand 
near him — you would not wish to see a 
bald-pate, countess, would you ? and if a 
man gets the salute of a musket ball in 
battle upon the crown of his head, and a 
fever follows with a scythe in his hand, 
and ninwe doWIl hls broWH lock?- is he a 
shot the worse for that — (worse by a 
shot I allow) — but no matter his loss 
of hair, provided his strength and cou- 
rage did not lie in that." 

" I'm off, positively off the bargain," 
said Caroline, " I engaged myself to a 
man with a round head — (** Not a round 
head, but a Cavalier,*' interrupted Caven- 
dish:) Well, Sir, to a head of beautiful 
natural hair : you have lost your identity, 
and are no longer the person I took you 
for. — I never promised to marry a wig, 
and I'm off; — at all events you will have 
the goodness to wait until your hair shall 
be grown." 



M<6 DUDLEY. 

This was their first dispute. The 
second was something similar. I asked 
them whether they had come to any 
decision, as to the day when I was to 
stand father, and with readiness and 
pleasm'e, give my sister to her sincere 
admirer. 

" He's no admirer ofmine," said Caro- 
line, balancing one foot over the other, 
*« such libertine conduct does not suit my 
nerves ; and he may hoist his broad 
pendant, and be off to England as soon 
as he chooses, and he may take her with 
him, if he pleases." 

" Her/ I repeated, rather alarmed,*' 
what new fancies, Caroline, have you 
taken now in your head." 

** I defy him to deny it" replied Lady 
Alford, "there has he been standing 
forty minutes, by my repeater, in one 
position, his ill-made eyes fixed on 
Rosalva; whom you see is employed at 
the other end of the room with the 
younkers weaving a basket. I spoke to 
him, he never heard me j I tapped him on 
the arm, no notice ; I crossed his path, 
he never altered his posture, or his look; 



DUDLEY. 447 

and after this unchaste behaviour, do you 
imagine I can ever forgive him! there, 
look at him now! you see his conduct, 
he cannot keep his eyes off her." 

At this moment Cavendish starting 
from his contemplative position, joined 
us seemingly highly pleased. "Caroline," 
said he, " at the first masquerade you and. 
I give at Richmond, in the house of my 
deceased uncle, (the dear old gentle- 
man) you shall see me top the character 
of a Spanish girl — you shall positively: 
yonder is my prototype ; dress, manner, 
all ; and I'll be also seen splicing a basket. 
Avast! I think I must take another 
cruise, and get a nearer view of the 
pretty Rose — I will have my lesson 
perfectly." 

" Indeed you will not," cried Caroline, 
" catching his arm," I don't approve of 
such unmanly studies." He immedi- 
ately sat down near her, and they seemed 
engaged in earnest conversation, of which 
I, with my book, could only observe, 
that some fresh subject of altercation 
had sprung up between them, and that 



i48 DUDLEY. 

they seemed desirous of referring to me 
on the business. I gave them to under- 
stand I was ready to afford them all the 
assistance in my power, when Caroline 
said to Cavendish, " Will you consent 
to what I propose?'* 

** No, I will not,'' he replied, " and if 
you persist in your wishes, on this head, 
I'll not be married at all." This was so 
truly absurd coming from the gentle- 
man's side, that I could not forbear a 
smile ; neither could Caroline. " You 
will not be married at all! and who 
wishes you to be married at all, what 
made you come here at all, at all P I 
did not send for you," — then checking 
herself — ** and suppose I did ; it is my 
fixed determination that the abominable 
ceremony shall not be performed at Eu- 
phorbia ; in one of the dark caves of the 
natives, or on the fiery top of the 
peak, it may, but under this roof it 
shall not. 

"But what is your objection, Caro- 
line ?" I asked. 

" Simply this, we ought to be married 



DUDLEY, 449 

by a reverend, and what reverend is at 
Euphorbia ?' 

" My dear love," I said in a low voice, 
for he was, though at a distance, in the 
same room, " do you forget Mr. Turner, 
Caroline ?" 

" What, Jack Turner ! Lord ! I could 
never fancy myself married by a Jack ! 
He a reverend ! look at him now ! look 
at him at this instant, singing <* Dicky 
Gossip," or some other comical song, to 
Dudley, at which both the children are 
laughing, until the tears run down their 
cheeks. Heighho ! I fear next Wednesday 
lie will cause the tears to run down my 
cheeks." 

'' Wednesday r I repeated *< is it 
Wednesday? then God bless you, my dear 
sister, and make you as happy as you de- 
serve to be." 

*< No happier ?" she replied, with arch- 
ness ; and I was leaving them together, 
when she called after me, ** No, not 
Wednesday ; we have no moon now, and 
what the deuce is a marriage without a 
honeymoon ?" 



450 DVD LEV. 

Their iiianiage settlements have beeii 
drawn up, and the Balfours have offered 
Ben Lomond for a week or so, to whicli 
place they will retire after the ceremony. 
Euphorbia is now once more thrown 
open to those visitors and friends who 
have been kept away so long on account 
of Caroline's confinement. 

On some of our English acquaintance 
enquiring into the particulars of her ill- 
ness, Cavendish, with a good deal of 
judgment and sound sense, mixing truth 
and fiction in his account, took upon 
himself to answer them ; and in the pre- 
sence of Caroline and ourselves, said, 
*< The fact is, Lady Alford had long 
cherished a secret partiality for my un- 
worthy and highly honoured self ; and 
I was at the same time most despe- 
rately in love with her ladyship, but 
we neither knew the mind of the 
other. At length the Countess cut 
her cable, and slipped away from Eng- 
land to avoid me, on which I became in- 
different to her. — Hearing, however, 
through a mutual friend, that she was 
dying on my account, (a very mortifying 



DUDLEY. 451 

ami humiliating circumstance for a lady 
to be subject to,) I took pity on her, 
though being a baclielor, like Benedict 
I never thought at that time I should die 
a married man. Thus have we proved 
the truth of the old adage, when speak- 
ing of fond lovers like ourselves, *< The 
farther we fly, the closer we tie." 

The light in which Cavendish had 
placed her own partiality for Zulvago, 
had a moral effect on the mind of Caro- 
line ; and though his whimsical expla- 
nation caused visible confusion in her, 
it seemed naturally the effects of his state- 
ment, without any latent meaning ; but 
one observation which I made at this 
moment, gave peace and happiness to 
my mind. The image of Zulvago, thus 
recalled to her memory, instead of, as 
formerly, producing silence and a sudden 
death-like paleness, now caused lively 
rattle in return, and the most brilliant 
blushes. 



45i2 DUDLEY, 

Wednesday Evening. 
One line more. — Caroline, though still 
Countess of Alfbrd, is no longer a widow. 
She is now a lovely, happy bride, and 
with her affectionate husband has just 
left us for Ben Lomond. — You may ex- 
pect them in England, a few days after 
the receipt of this, which I conclude with 
uniting all our best and kindest wishes 
to the dear inhabitants of Bloom field. 
Ever yours, 

Eliot Howard. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 



I'rimtd by Strahan and Spottiswoodt, 
Printers- Street, London. 
