GRACE CASSIDY; 

OR, 

THE REPEALERS. 

A NOVEL. 
BY THE COUNTESS OF BLESSINGTON. 



Some popular chief, 
More noisy than the rest, hut cries halloo. 
And in a trice the hellovving herd come out : 
The gates are harr'd, the ways are harricado'd : 
And one and all's the word : true cocks o' th' game ! 
They never ask for what or whom they fight ; 
But turn 'em out, and show 'em hut a foe ; 
Cry Liberty ! and that's a cause for quarrel. 

Dryden's Spcaihh Friai 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. IL 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

(successor to henry colburn.) 

1833. 






THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER I. 

" Know, 
Without or star, or angel for their guide, 
Who worship God, shall find him. Humble love, 
And not proud reason, keeps the door to heaven ; 
Love finds admission, where proud Science fails." 

We left Jim Cassidy, though somewhat loth, 
spending his evenings at his own cottage, in- 
stead of, as formerly, visiting the Cat and 
Bagpipes ; and for the first time of her life, 
Grace accepted joyfully a sacrifice, though 
she saw it was unwillingly and uncheerfully 
made. 

Hard is the fate of her who is compelled to 
accept of such, and yet be thankful that they 

VOL. II. B 



% THE REPEALERS. 

are made ! Poor Grace had sensibility and 
delicacy enough to feel all this as keenly as the 
most refined heroine of romance, though she 
could not express it so well. 

Jim would sit in moody silence, his naturally 
open brow knit into a scowl, and his hands 
hanging listlessly over his knees ; while Grace 
turned her spinning-wheel or plied her needle. 
She used to try all her powers of conversation 
to amuse her husband, until she felt, in all its 
bitterness, the sentiment expressed by the 
French woman, whose irksome task it was to 
amuse a man, and a king too — that he was no 
longer amusable. 

" If it wouldn't tire you, Jim dear," said 
Grace one evening, when she had exhausted 
all her powers of amusing him, and found the 
effort vain, " maybe you'd read aloud to me, 
as you used to do oncet ;*" and a sigh uncon- 
sciously followed the observation. 



THE REPEALERS. S 

" Sure, so I would Grace," replied Jim, 
" but the devil a newspaper have I ; and as for 
rading the ould books we've read over so often, 
sure it tires me, and does me no good.*" 

" Well, I won't ax you, Jim, if you don't like 
it ; but sure it is not half so tiresome as to be 
sitting doing nothing at all, with the hands 
idle and the thoughts busy with vexing sub- 
jects. Nothing is such a comfort, when one 
has vexing thoughts, as to keep the hands 
active, and to try and turn the poor troubled 
mind to something else. When I feel unaisy, 
as often I have done of late, God help me ! I 
open the Bible which Miss Desmond (that was) 
gave me, and when I read of the troubles that 
others have had, and think that we are all 
born to ' trouble as the sparks fly upwards,' 
it seems to me that I forget my own cares in 
pitying those I read of, though they have found 
rest long and long ago.'"* 
B 2 



4 THE REPEALERS. 

" Vd like to know what the Sogarth* would 
say to you," said Jim, " if he knew that you 
were reading a Protestant Bible ; sure I see that 
Miss Desmond, or Mrs. Forrester as I ought to 
call her, wants to convart you by giving you 
such a book. It's very well for her that 
is a great lady, and has got her heaven 
upon this earth, as all them rich tyrants have, 
to forget that there'*s another heaven that 
b^' rights is kept for us who never enjoy this 
life, having to toil, and moil, and work, while 
they have all the fruit of our labour. But 
we must think of the heaven in the world to 
come, which we surely won't get a place in, if 
we don't mind what the Sogarth tells us, and 
he cartainly warned us not to read the Bible.'' 

" Och ! Jim, can you with your fine heart, 
bear to think that, bekase people are rich in 
this world, they cannot, will not enjoy heaven 
• Priest. 



THE REPEALERS. 5 

if they deserve it ? Could you bear to think, 
that the dear, good ould masther and mistress, 
and Miss .Desmond, Mrs. Forrester I mane, 
and her husband too, won'*t be all in heaven, 
and that we won't have the comfort, and a 
great one it will surely be, of seeing them 
there?" 

" I mane to say, what the Priest tells me, 
that no one out of our own Roman Catholic 
religion will be saved; and as for the rich, 
sure the priest himself tould us all, and said 
he took it out of the Bible, that it was easier 
for a camel to enter the eye of a needle, 
than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of 
heaven."" 

"If it's a sin to read the Bible, why then 
does the priest read it ?" asked Grace, with all a 
woman's quickness; " and sure, if he tould you 
that passage, he ought to tell you also, that it 
manes that rich people are tried with so many 



6 THE REPEALERS. 

more temptations than the poor, in the way of 
having the power of indulging all their fancies, 
that as it is more difficult for them, so have 
they more merit for being good, and desarving 
heaven, than the poor have.*' 

" But what have you to say, Grace, against 
what the Sogarth tould us all ? Says he, ' Sure 
them that lives in fine houses, sitting on gold 
chairs covered with silks, and the very walls 
covered with silks and satins, and pictures that 
oftentimes isn't dacent ; walking on carpets 
that's smoother than the finest meadow in the 
month of May ; ating the richest of meats off' 
silver, and dhrinking the brightest of wines 
out of glasses that's as clear as the dew on the 
leaves and herbs in the morning; lying on 
beds as soft as the down of the thistle, and on 
sheets white as the dhriven snow, curtains fall- 
ing around 'em of the richest colours, and not 
letting a breath of could air blow on 'em ; and 



THE REPEALERS. 7 

when they're tired of ating and dhrmking, and 
riding, and dhrivingj with horses that look as 
if they, too, were come of noble fatiiers and 
mothers, they can hear music that goes to the 
very heart and can make one jump for joy, or 
sit down and think of all them that's gone till 
the tears come into the eyes ; they can then 
lie down on their soft beds, sure and 9artain 
that the morning will bring 'em back the same 
grandeur and pleasures they had the day be- 
fore; and sure their sleep must be pleasanter 
than a poor man's; and what elegant drames 
they must have going to their soft beds, with 
their stomach full of such fine food of every 
kind. And then,' says the priest, ' would it be 
just or natural, that them that have such a 
heaven upon earth should also have a heaven 
in the other world ? Sure 'twould be a crying 
shame if they had.' " 

" Och ! Jim honey," said Grace, " what a 



8 THE REPEALERS. 

false picture the priest drew ! Sure it's a sin 
and wickedness to put envy and jealousy into 
the minds of the poor against the rich, by 
making 'em believe whafs not true. The grand 
people are so used to the fine gold chairs, and 
walls covered with silks and smooth carpets, 
that they don't remark 'em as we would do ; 
they are always before their eyes, and give 'em 
no pleasure ; and it 's only in case they were 
taken from 'em that they'd begin to think 
about em. The grand dinners they are mostly 
tired of ; and sure enough the housekeeper at 
Springmount has tould me that the great 
people took more pleasure in plain, com- 
mon things to eat, on account of the novelty, 
than in all them rich savoury dishes they have 
before 'em every day. Then, as they don't work 
hard like us, they are seldom hungry, and they 
force their appetites by unwholesome things, 
which often makes 'em sick and sorrowful too, 



THE REPEALERS. 9 

for you'll see ten, ay twenty, grand, idle 
gentlefolks ill, for one hard-working man or 
woman, which ought to reconcile us to work. 
That bright wine too, which looks like damask 
roses, and clove carnations turned into liquor, 
does 'em more harm than good ; and when they 
lie down on them soft beds, with their poor 
stomachs too often overloaded, or else that 
what they eat is too rich, many an hour they 
lie tumbling and tossing, more unaisy than the 
poorest labourer on his bed of straw, and 
throubled with night-mares and dhreams that 
seldom come near the poor man's bed. The 
rich have a thousand vexations that we have 
not, ay Jim, the very best of 'em have their 
throubles ; and as they are brought up with 
every thing so grand about 'em, they get into a 
way of believing every thing ought to happen 
as they like, and therefore their disappoint- 
ments hurts 'em more than ours do us ; indeed, 
B 5 



10 THE REPEALERS. 

they feel things more keenly, and take many 
things to heart that we wouldn't understand at 
all. So you see that those, if they have more 
pleasures, have also more pains than us, 
for God makes every thing equal. The rich 
have to think of us and for us : we depend on 
them, and sure a heavy burthen we must be to 
their minds, thinking what they can best do to 
make us aisy and comfortable. All the plea- 
sures the rich and great have too, Jim dear, 
that seems so delightful to us, isn't so to them, 
for they're too well used to 'em to take much 
enjoyment in 'em, but their cares and throubles 
fall harder on 'em than on us, who are too well 
hardened in minds and bodies to fret as they 
do. Then, if grief comes to us, we haven't 
time to give ourselves up to if ; we're obliged to 
work and be active, and that dhrives it away 
from us by day ; and the hard labour, by tiring 
us, makes us sleep sound by night, so that we 



THE REPEALERS. 11 

get over it sooner. But the rich, who have 
nothing to do but to think, brood over their 
grief; and sure it 's a sorrowful sight to 
see weeping and wailing in grand rooms, with 
every thing around as if they were made only 
for rejoicing. The very grandeur makes the 
person grieve more ; for if he has lost some 
one he loved tliat shared it all, it reminds him 
more and more of the loss ; and it 's a mourn- 
ful thought to look around on all the beau- 
tiful things about, and to think of the dark, 
gloomy vault where those he is grieving for 
is lying ; for though them that 's gone can't see 
or feel how dismal the vault they 're resting in 
is, or what a difference there is between it and 
the fine houses they have left, them that 's left 
behind often thinks of it, and the comparison 
adds to their throuble." 

" Why faith, Grace, you 'd thry to per- 
suade a body that the poor is happier than the 



12 THE REPEALERS. 

rich ; but you won*t get many to believe you. 
Maybe you 'd be for telling us that the masther 
isn't happier than I am ?" 

" Sure, Jim dear, it's myself that has no 
raison to be proud any way, when you, my 
husband, who I pass my life in thrying to 
make happy, thinks a poor ould gentleman, a 
rich, and a grand, and rael gentleman he is to 
be sure, happier than you, a fine, comely, 
hearty, healthy boy, with a loving wife, and 
wanting nothing but the spirit of contentment, 
which may God give you! " 

*' Why, what does the ould masther want, 
Grace? Hasn't he oceans of gold and the 
whole side of a counthry belonging to him ? 
Hasn't he a good wife, though she is a Sasse- 
nach, and a fine beautiful daughter ? What 
more would he want ?" 

'' Do you forget, Jim, that he lost his son 
and heir, and never had a second ? Isn't this 



THE REPEALERS. 13 

a terrible grief to a father's heart, when he had, 
as you say, oceans of gold, and the whole side 
of a counthry to give him, and an ould grand 
name, respected all round Ireland ? Sure, the 
more he had to leave his son and heir, the 
more heavy must be the loss to him. When a 
poor man loses his child, though he grieves 
truly, he hasn't so many different vexatious 
thoughts to make it worse as the rich man 
has; and he thinks, 'Well, he's gone to a 
better place, and is at rest from all labour for 
evermore ! ' If he 's hard-worked himself, 
he thinks his child that's gone to heaven is 
saved a life of toil and privation, and this com- 
forts him. Now though the dear ould masther 
has the best daughter in all Ireland, still it is 
not like having a fine grand gentleman to stand 
in his father's shoes, and keep up the name of 
Desmond. Then the masther has passed all his 
long life in doing good to all about him, and 



14 THE REPEALERS. 

now that he 's an ould man, isn't it a bitter 
sight for him to see the whole counthry forget- 
ting his goodness, and, like ungrateful, unnatu- 
ral children, turning against their own father, 
for such he ever has been to us all, and instead 
of listening to his good advice, and following 
it, to know that they think of nothing on earth 
but mischief and repaling ? Och ! Jim, sorry 
am I to say, the dear ould masther is rwt 
happy, and more shame to them that puts a 
thorn in his side ; for what goes to the heart 
like ingratitude from those we've been liking 
and serving all our days, as he has been sarving 
all the whole counthry ?" 

" Why, Grace, you talk as if I didn't love 
the ould masther and the family, when it 's you 
that 's mistaken, for I do." 

"I know you ought, Jim dear, and I hope 
you do ; but it 's a quare way you take to 
show it, by going quite contrary to his ad- 



THE REPEALERS. 15 

vice, when you and all your blood that came 
before you, has had years and years of good 
actions, and noble actions, from the masther, 
to prove he is your best and only thrue 
friend.'' 



16 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER IL 

" It is a busy talking world, 
That with licentious breath blows like the wind 
As freely on the palace as the cottage." 

" Slander meets no regard from noble minds ; 
Only the base believe what the base utter.'' 

So unconscious was Lady Oriel of any cause 
for a change in the manner of her friends and 
acquaintance, that she did not observe it ; but 
it was not lost on her husband, who, sensitively 
alive to even the shadow of disrespect, was 
wounded to the quick by it, and mentally 
blamed her severely for having given birth to 



THE REPEALERS. IT 

such impertinence, as also still more bitterly for 
not perceiving to what she had exposed herself. 
Some ladies, who were barely tolerated in 
society, and whose conduct scarcely merited 
toleration, — if the cold reception they experi- 
enced in the few houses to which they had the 
entree could be so called, — might now be seen 
to approach Lady Oriel with a confidence and 
ease very different to the embarrassed and 
humbled air with which they formerly tried 
to catch her eye or court her notice. 

Each day found Lord Oriel still more cold 
and repulsive, and his wife now almost dreaded 
a tete-a-tete with him. Lord Delmore, as he 
became better acquainted with Lady Oriel, 
began to question the success of which, at the 
commencement of his attentions, he entertained 
no doubt. The more he saw of her, the more 
he became convinced of the purity of her mind, 
and that he owed the favour with which he was 



18 THE REPEALERS. 

treated, to her perfect freedom from suspicion 
that any meaner feeling than friendship urged 
the attentions which, he now believed, would 
be spurned with contempt, if their real motive 
were avowed. 

How many v^omen'*s reputations have been 
for ever compromised by a belief in the friend- 
ship of men ! — a sentiment that no woman 
excites in the breast of man, until she has lost 
the charms that gave birth to other and more 
passionate ones. 

The vanity of Lord Delmore, — that craving 
passion that sleeps not while aught is left to 
animate it, — now became alarmed. He count- 
ed the few weeks of the season still remaining 
ere the close of the session would release the 
members from their parliamentary duties, and 
send them from London for many months. In 
proportion to his doubts of triumphing over 
the principles of Lady Oriel, became his 



THE REPEALERS. 19 

anxiety d^afficher his attentions, and to com- 
promise her reputation ; and with the unthink- 
ing sentimentality of most of her sex, she 
attributed this change of manner to his excited 
feelings at the prospect of their approaching se- 
paration ; and repaid it with increased kindness. 

In the unsuspecting purity of her heart, 
how often did she lament that Lord Oriel par- 
took not of her friendly feelings for Lord 
Delmore ; nay, she blamed the former as being 
cold and prejudiced, in withholding his appro- 
bation from one so apparently deserving it, and 
regretted this omission the more, as it precluded 
her extending to him the invitation that includ- 
ed a large circle of fashion at Oriel Park for the 
autumn. She had given various hints on the 
subject to Lord Oriel, but they had been re- 
ceived with such marked coldness, that she had 
not courage to persevere. 

At the commencement of the season. Lady 



^0 THE REPEALERS. 

Oriel had been continually asked to chaperon 
a daughter, sister, or niece, by friends who 
were as remarkable for the strictness of their 
principles and decorum, as for their elevated 
positions in society. Lord Oriel had felt flat- 
tered that his young and lovely wife was 
selected to fill this confidential situation. 
When forced by his parliamentary duties 
to be absent from her, he dwelt with com- 
placency on her being attended by one or 
two young female friends, and remarked with 
pleasure, how well satisfied the young ladies 
appeared with the manner in which Lady Oriel 
discharged the duties of a chaperon. 

But by degrees the demands on her to fulfil 
this service fell off, and at length totally ceased ; 
while she, unconscious of any cause for it, com- 
mented in the presence of her husband on the 
unaccountable estrangement of her friends, and 
on their confiding to others, the trust they had 
so often besought her to fill. 



THE REPEALERS. 21 

The morbid sensitiveness of Lord Oriel took 
fresh alarm at what he conceived to be indica- 
tions of liis wife's decreased estimation in the 
opinion of the scrupulous ladies in question, as 
also proof that she had ceased to merit the same 
respect as formerly ; hence his manner became 
more cold and austere than ever, and checked 
every approach to confidential intercourse on 
the part of his wife. 

Lord Delmore noted all these changes, and 
noted them with pleasure ; for who is so ego- 
tistical and unfeeling as the heartless be- 
trayer, who beholds the entanglement of her 
whom he would make his victim in the snares 
he has set for her, with the sensations of the 
spider watching some hapless fly hopelessly 
writhing in the meshes of its web ? He 
had tried repeatedly, but tried in vain, to in- 
duce Lady Oriel to open her feelings to him 
on the subject of her discontent with Lord 



22 THE REPEALERS. 

Oriel. Hints, innuendoes, all were tried ; paral- 
lel cases were described by liim, the wives pitied, 
and the husbands decried as unworthy of such 
amiable victims ; but still, with the instinctive 
delicacy of affection. Lady Oriel shrank from 
exposing the dissatisfaction it was but too 
evident she felt; for though disappointed in 
her husband, she yet loved him too well to 
confess to any living creature that she consider- 
ed herself aggrieved by him. 

This was perhaps the only prudence that 
now marked her conduct ; for, though the 
thought of guilt was still a stranger to her 
mind, scandal and slander were busy with her 
fame; and, like many of her sex, she fur- 
nished an example that honour and fame are 
ViOt synonymous, and that personal purity may 
be preserved when reputation, one of its best 
guardians, has been lost. 

One of the most difficult lessons to impress 
on the minds of women is, the defencelessness 



THE REPEALERS. 23 

of fame unless prudence guards the outposts; 
and, alas ! this lesson is often only acquired by 
the loss of that which prudence alone can pre- 
serve ; and she who has not violated the laws of 
virtue finds herself condemned as a criminal 
for having been only remiss in appearances, and 
has to weep over a blighted name, while the 
heart is still untainted. 

Lady Oriel had a feminine fondness for 
flowers ; and few days passed in which she did 
not drive to some florist's, to select plants for 
her conservatory or a fresh bouquet for the 
evening. Lord Delmore knew all her haunts ; 
and, without anything like an assignation, from 
which, notwithstanding their friendship, she 
would have held back, he generally contrived 
to meet her on the road, or near the florist''s, 
and to give her his arm while walking through 
the nursery-grounds or hot-houses in search of 
flowers. On such occasions, they had frequently 
encountered many of her female acquaintances. 



24 THE REPEALERS. 

whose coldness of manner and evident avoid- 
ance of them were too visible not to be re- 
marked. 

Lady Oriers pride prevented her from com- 
menting on this change to Lord Delmore ; but 
he failed not to draw her attention to it, by de- 
claiming against the envy and jealousy of her 
sex, which induced them to show coldness to 
those whose beauty and powers of pleasing left 
their inferior attractions immeasurably behind. 
He thus instilled into her unsuspicious mind 
the injurious belief that beauty and talent 
can hope for no friends among her sex ; and 
each new instance of coldness from her former 
friends was considered as an irrefragable proof 
of the truth of this dangerous doctrine. 

Lord Delmore's saddle-horses or cabriolet 
were to be seen drawn up near Lady Oriers 
vacant carriage at the doors of all the nursery- 
grounds she frequented, or the exhibitions or 



THE REPEALERS. 25 

galleries she visited ; and the significant smiles 
and sly looks exchanged by their fashionable 
acquaintances, nay, even by the servants, had 
she seen them, would have for ever humiliated 
the pride and delicacy of her whose unthinking 
imprudence, in allowing such a marked display 
of attentions, gave rise to them. 



VOL,, i: 



26 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER III. 

" Man is an embodied paradox, a bundle of contradic- 
tions; and as some set-ofF against the marvellous things 
that he has done, we might fairly adduce the monstrous 
things that he has believed. The more gross the fraud, the 
more glibly will it go down, and the more greedily will it 
be swallowed, since folly will always find faith where im- 
postors will find impudence.' 

" Let me implore you, Jim dear," said 
Grace, " to go no more to the meetings of the 
Repalers. It's my prayer to you, and it's the 
advice of the masther." 

" Indeed then, Grace, 1 don't see what right 
the masther has to be giving me his advice, 



THE REPEALERS. 27 

just for all the world as if I was his slave, in- 
stead of being his tenant." 

" But tell me, Jim dear, when you won't 
take the advice of a friend that has been so 
many years thried as the good masther, how 
come you to go lieadlong, as if you were blind- 
folded, at the bidding of the Repalers ?'" 

" Why, Grace, didn't they tell me how bam- 
boozled we all are ? and didn't they prove it, 
as clear as mud, that all landlords are tyrants, 
and all of us slaves ? They didn't, to be sure, 
say that the ould masther in particular was a 
tyrant ; but, as they said, all landlords were ; 
and sure as the masther is a landlord, he must 
be a tyrant, and it 's our duty not to follow his 
bidding." 

" Well, Jim, a cuishlamachree, only wait, 
and if ever those same Repalers that ^s crying- 
out against landlords now, come to pick up 
their crumbs, and to have broad lands of their 
c 2 



2S THE REPEALERS. 

own, with tenants and dependants belonging to 
'em, you '11 see how they '11 alter. If I was 
to see the great estated gentlemen, who have 
large fortunes to lose, advising the poor ignorant 
people to agitate and make disturbance, I might 
think it worth while to listen to them, from 
knowing that if the poor ould counthry was 
ruint they would suffer the most, and it would 
make me think they loved freedom, as they 
call it, better than their great fortunes ; and 
when that 's the case, there 's something mighty 
grand in it — something that makes my heart 
swell and a could tremor run up to the roots of 
my hair, which always happens to me when I 
hear of any one doing what is grand and noble. 
But when I know it's only a few gentlemen, 
followed by a pack of buckeens and spalpeens, 
who have more wind in their lungs than guineas 
in their purses, and have no fortunes to lose 
even if they ruin the poor ould counthry, sure 



THE REPEALERS. 29 

then I think to myself, if these gentry didn't 
do something to make a disturbance and get 
themselves talked of, who 'd ever hear they 
were in the world at all at all ? and one way or 
other they must gain by their mischief, and have 
nothing to lose. 

" If the Lord Leftenant takes 'em up, to 
stop their mischief,"' pursued Grace, " then 
they cry out they are parsecuted; and well 
they know that even if the worst men are par- 
secuted, it makes all the people stand up for 
'em, and this gives 'em more power. If the 
Lord Leftenant lets them alone to go on with 
all their disturbance, then they say he is afraid 
of 'em, or wanting to make it up with 'em ; so, 
whichever way that poor English lord acts, 
they 11 find a plan to de9aive him. Then you 
see, Jim, that while they're disturbing the 
counthry, they get all they can out of the poor 
people ; and if they are brought up by the Lord 



30 THE REPEALERS. 

Leftenant, they make a good bargain too; so 
they are sure to gain, while we are as certain of 
losing, and this is what none of ye will open 
your eyes to see. Now as the Repalers have got 
used to be followed by mobs, and to be always 
talked of and made a fuss about, they '11 never 
like to sit down quiet and aisy again as long as 
they live ; so I see no chance of our ever hav- 
ing this poor ould, throubled counthry happy, 
unless some plain, honest-spoken people would 
take the pains to show the poor people what 
fools and tools they Ve made of to sarve the in- 
terests of a few men who are puffed up by am- 
bition, and who would give up the counthry 
clear and clane to sarve their own ends. 

" Well, Jim honey, little I ever thought 
that I ""d be turning my thoughts to such 
matthers ; nor would I, if I didn't see the 
madness of the poor good-hearted fools about 
me ; and above all, Jim, if I didn't see you 



THE REPEALERS. 31 

ready to believe the rhaiimeish of the Re- 
paler s against the proofs before your own 
eyes. — Will you tell, me, Jim, oncet for all, 
what is a tyrant ?" 

" Sure, Grace, a tyrant is a great budoch 
who makes his tenants pay their rints to him, 
and thries to prevent 'em attending 'sociations, 
and is always for forcing his advice on 'em 
whether they like it or no." 

" Och, Jim, if that 's all that a tyrant is, 
I don't think any one need mind being called 
a tyrant ; faith, myself thought it was some- 
thing terrible, and was quite vexed at hear- 
ing the dear ould masther called so, but now 
I see it means no harm. Was it the Re- 
palers that tould you this maning of the 
word, Jim .?" 

" No, Grace, it was myself; for as this is 
all I ever saw our landlord do, and they call 
him tyrant, sure this must be the maning." 



32 THE REPEALERS. 

" Jim a-vourneen, isn't it a terrible thing 
that words, turned and twisted against the 
right nianing, should have power to unsettle 
the raison of them that have more hearts in 
their bodies than brains in their heads. 'Tis 
only necessary for the Repalers to come down 
on your ears with a few high-sounding wicked 
names, and ye are all on fire, never stopping 
to enquire if those to whom they give such 
names desarve 'em. Does not all the world 
think that a tyrant is the strongest term of 
reproach that can be given to any man in 
power r^ and doesn't even the feelings of a 
woman rise up in anger against it ? And when 
the Repalers use it against those that Pro- 
vidence has placed over ye, are ye not worked 
up to madness, and ready to commit any crime 
against 'em ? But then when in cool blood ye 
reflect on all ye know of your landlords, and 
can't find any act of cruelty or wickedness, ye 



THE REPEALERS. 33 

then begin to think that the word itself can't 
be so bad as ye thought, merely bekase ye 
don't find the badness in those to whom those 
bad names are tacked. Jim dear, you think 
that I 'm tame, and too quiet to bear up with 
courage against bad usage ; you think that 
I 'd be afraid of a rael tyrant, if I had the 
misfortune to meet with one. But you're mis- 
taken ; for, weak and feeble as I am, not all the 
tyrants on the earth could make me do what 
was against my own sense of honesty and prin- 
ciple ; and I 'd submit with all the courage and 
patience I could, to support whatever punish- 
ment they might heap on me, so as that I had 
the comfort of thinking T was doing what I be- 
lieved was right in the sight of God, and that 
my conscience was satisfied." 

" Faith, Grace, the difference between you 
and me is, that the right notions or principles, 
as you call 'em, is wrote down in large letters 
c 5 



34 THE REPEALERS. 

with black ink in your mind, and can't be 
rubbed out, but they 're only slightly marked 
with a pencil in mine, and the least thing takes 
'em away, more 's the pity, and the sin too for 
me to be so wake. But you see asthore, no 
passions but gentle loving ones come into your 
head, to rub against your principles, though I 
believe even if they did you would resist ; but 
many strong and evil passions come into 
mine, and my principles melt away before 
'em like butter before a fire, or a lump of ice 
in a warm hand. Besides, Grace, you never 
yet heard the greatest of the Repalers spake ; 
sure, if you did, it would make a difference. 
When that man stands up, and his wide chest 
seems to grow wider and wider, and as he 
spakes he grows taller and taller, and the 
strong firm voice of him sends out the big 
words in a manner so earnest, that one is 
plaised with the very sound, without examin- 



THE REPEALERS. S5 

ing the sense, (though sure there can't be a 
want of sense in words that moves and mad- 
dens hundreds, ay, and thousands) you 'd be 
moved yourself, Grace a-vourneen, like me, 
and feel ready to do all he told you." 

*' Maybe I would, Jim, for lown that there is 
something very grand in hearing big thoughts, 
which sure is a gift from God, coming from 
the mind in big words that matches "'em ; and 
if the great Repaler turned the big thoughts 
and the big words to stamp notions of honesty, 
dacency, and respect for the laws, on the minds 
of those whom he can so easily move, I *d look 
on him as one that ought to be approached 
with reverence, as using the gift of God for 
the benefit of his fellow creatures. But at 
present I look on him as I would on a moun- 
tain stream, swollen by rains, rushing down 
and overpowering all that it meets in its pas- 
sage, bekase its force is too much increased to 



36 THE REPEALERS. 

allow it to keep in its own place. Instead of 
doing good, it destroys ; and though grand, its 
grandeur is awful and alarming, and more to 
be feared than admired." 



THE REPEALERS. 37 



CHAPTER IV. 

" Oh, God ! my wife, 
The nearest, dearest part of all man's honour, 
Left a base slur to pass from mouth to mouth 
Of loose mechanics, with all coarse foul comments. 
And villainous jests, and blasphemies obscene ; 
While sneering nobles, in more polish'd guise, 
Whisper'd the tale, and smiled upon the lie." 

Lady Oriel, with that infatuation which 
often accompanies a consciousness of talents, 
was the more easily led to believe the asser- 
tions of her artful admirer, that the coldness 
of her female friends proceeded from envy and 
jealousy, excited by her superior attractions. 



38 THE REPEALERS. 

This belief led her to assume a Jierte of manner 
towards them, which increased their animad- 
versions on her conduct. They might have 
overlooked much greater levity in a woman 
who sought to disarm their criticisms by 
courting their society ; but, seeing her assume 
a still higher tone, which she did from a con- 
sciousness of her own innocence, and what she 
considered their inferiority, (proved as she ima- 
gined by their mean jealousy and envy,) they 
became still more vehement in their censures, 
and less charitable in their conclusions. 

Her select receptions on Wednesdays, hi- 
therto the very focus of fashion, into which 
all its rays were merged, now became " fine 
by degrees, and beautifully less,''"' until the 
society was reduced to so limited a num- 
ber, that it seldom amounted to more than 
seven or eight persons ; of which five were 
males, and not the elite of her former circle, 



THE REPEALERS. 39 

but the tolerated portion of it. Lord Oriel 
looked in occasionally on such evenings, 
and his face assumed a paler hue, and his 
glance more severity, when, having passed 
through the splendid suite of illuminated 
rooms, he found his lovely wife with her 
small, but no longer select, circle, of which 
Lord Delmore appeared the hero, being so 
far superior to the other men present, that 
he could not fail to appear to great advantage 
by the contrast. 

The love of crowds is one of the besetting 
sins of the English of all ranks ; and this was 
never more clearly proved than in the case of 
Lady Oriel. Three parts of her guests came 
to her house to meet the fourth, and now stayed 
away because there was no longer a host — 

" Mocking the desert they themselves had made." 
The few who attended, talked of some former 
satellite of Lady Oriel who had now chosen 



40 THE REPEALERS. 

her Wednesdays ; the new aspirant building her 
chance of becoming a leader of haut ton on the 
ruins of the temple of the deity hitherto so 
worshipped: and the fallen goddess disco- 
vered with a pang, that all her consciousness 
of superiority could not assuage the vexation 
she experienced in hearing the names of some 
of the most brilliant of " those her former boun- 
ty fed,'' as among the deserters to the camp of 
the enemy. 

It had been settled, before the attentions 
of Lord Delmore became conspicuous, that two 
young ladies, one the daughter of the Duchess 
of Derwent, and the other the heiress of the 
house of Heaviland, were to leave London with 
Lady Oriel, and to remain with her for two 
months. Cold apologies stating a change of 
places, came from the mothers of both ; and 
two of the most distinguished of the invited 
male visitors, on discovering this defection, 
made their excuses. 



THE REPEALERS. 41 

It was about this period that Lord Oriel, 
having returned from the House of Lords one 
night, and having looked into the drawing- 
rooms, retired by a private staircase to his 
library to write some letters; and while thus 
occupied, was disturbed by the sounds of angry 
voices in the vestibule. He was on the point 
of ringing to enquire the cause of the clamour, 
when the names of Lady Oriel and Lord Del- 
more being repeated with vehemence, he re- 
cognized the voice of an Irish footman, whose 
violence of temper had been made known to 
him on a former occasion, but whose promises 
of amendment had induced the maitre-d'' hotel 
to intercede for his pardon. With the exu- 
berance of language peculiar to his excitable 
countrymen, now increased by ebriety, he pro- 
claimed aloud his disbelief of the aspersions 
cast on the honour of his lady by the foot- 
man of Lord Delmore. He defied him to 
single combat, and in the true spirit of vulgar 



4}2 THE REPEALERS. 

recrimination, accused Lord Delmore of being 
a wily deceiver, who came into happy families 
to disturb their peace. 

In vain the footman of Lord Delmore, 
trembling with fear of punishment, apologized, 
explained, and urged the Hibernian to silence. 
The irascible champion, — though commanded to 
retire by the maitre-d' hotel, — aided in the sup- 
port of his official duties by the groom of 
the chambers and butler, — continued to vocife- 
rate invectives against Lord Delmore, mingled 
with vulgar and humiliating defences for his 
Lady, until he was dragged from the vestibule 
by the other servants, lest the noise should be 
heard in the drawing-rooms ; where they sup- 
posed their Lord as well as Lady to be. 

As the most clear and sparkling water can- 
not pass through an impure vessel without 
being sullied, so the reputation of a woman 
cannot be made the subject of menial conversa- 
tion without losing its original purity. Vul- 



THE REPEALERS. 43 

gar and uneducated minds are incapable of 
judging their superiors. The fine gradations, 
and almost imperceptible lines of demarcation, 
between apparent error and actual guilt, are 
altogether invisible to them. A sympathy of 
habits and feelings renders persons of equal sta- 
tion capable of appreciating motives and draw- 
ing conclusions from circumstances which the 
coarse-minded and ignorant cannot compre- 
hend ; who, judging from self, the only cri- 
terion known to them, hesitate not to attri- 
bute guilt where indiscretion alone exists. 
The utmost malice of the refined never ex- 
tended to one-half the length in its conclu- 
sions, to which servants, without any malice, 
continually go in theirs ; and many a high- 
born and innocent woman has been by her 
domestics believed capable of actions, the bare 
suspicion of which would have filled her with 
dismay and horror. But they had deduced their 
opinions wholly from the laxity of their own 



44 THE REPEALERS. 

moral feelings, without any malice towards 
her. 

Little did the noble-minded, delicate Lady 
Oriel imagine, that the indiscreet intimacy 
which she had allowed to subsist between her- 
self and Lord Delmore, had become for weeks 
the subject of a thousand gross pleasantries, 
hints, and innuendoes, among the lower ser- 
vants in their respective establishments. Her 
name had become familiar in their rude 
mouths, her husband"'s a jest, and her sup- 
posed lover was considered by them as a 
monstrous clever fellow, who knew what he 
was about. The upper servants, more reserv- 
ed, though equally suspicious, expressed not 
what they thought ; but, contented themselves 
with narrowly observing and internally com- 
menting on all that they observed, wondering 
at the courage of their lady, who took no pains 
to conceal the intimacy, as though she had never 



THE REPEALERS. 45 

attached any idea of impropriety to it. But the 
cordiality of her accueil to Lord Delmore, and 
the frequency of his visits, confirmed them 
in the most erroneous and injurious conclu- 
sions ; while she, unsuspecting and pure-mind- 
ed, dreamed not of the dishonourable and odi- 
ous light in which she was viewed by them. 

What the feelings of Lord Oriel were, on 
hearing the degrading defence, and the accusa- 
tion that led to it, is more easily imagined than 
described. He became for a few minutes trans- 
fixed, as it were, to the spot ; a tremor shook 
his limbs ; and anger, pride, and deeply-wound- 
ed delicacy, strove for mastery in his breast. 
A few moments' reflection induced him to steal 
softly from the library ; having previously ar- 
ranged the papers on the table, and extinguish- 
ed the light, so as not to have it imagined that 
he had been there. He ascended his private 
staircase with noiseless step, and it was a relief 



46 THE REPEALERS. 

to him to hear the sounds of music proceeding 
from the drawing-room, — though they ill ac- 
corded with his present feelings, — as it convin- 
ced him that the clamour in the vestibule had 
not been heard in the salons. He turned from 
the sounds, and sought the privacy of his dres- 
sing-room, to brood over the " food for medita- 
tion even to madness," which the scene he had 
overheard had engendered. 

Bitter were the pangs that shot through his 
heart, when he thought of his beautiful and 
worshipped Louisa as the subject of the com- 
ments and calumnies of servants. How did she 
appear shorn of her beams, and her purity blot- 
ted by what he had heard ! . The stain on his 
own personal honour, — and few could be so sen- 
sitively alive to such a stain as was this high- 
born and high-bred aristocrat, — seemed even 
less shocking to him than the degradation of 
her he so loved and honoured. Anger rose to 



THE REPEALERS. 47 



repel the blow aimed at his respectability ; but 
tears, of almost feminine softness, wept the 
insult that was heaped on her he would have 
died to shield, even from a glance of disrespect ; 
and whose fair fame, now blurred over by the 
tongues of vile menials, he could not vindicate 
or avenge. How did he wish, with the pas- 
sionate affliction of a high mind unaccustomed 
to give way to violence, that the accuser and 
defender of his wife were of a rank which could 
enable him to meet them in the field, where 
their lives should atone for their accursed pro- 
fanation, or his own death release him from the 
agony it had entailed upon him ! 

At one moment, he thought of opening the 
eyes of his wife, as he felt the absolute neces- 
sity of at once putting an end to her acquaint- 
ance with Lord Delmore ; but the next, found 
him shrinking with disgust at the idea of her 
humiliation at the disclosure, and the dread 



48 THE REPEALERS. 

that, with her keen sense of pride, this humilia- 
tion would chase away for ever all softer and 
warmer feelings towards him. Lord Oriel 
never for a moment doubted the actual inno- 
cence of his wife ; but he had often, and sorely, 
felt her want of reteriue in her liaison with 
Lord Delmore, and the impropriety of a mar- 
ried woman forming any friendships with men, 
of which her husband was not the connecting 
link (]r medium. 

With an agitated mind and feverish body, he 
acknowledged the impossibility of encountering 
Lady Oriel until he had come to some final deci- 
sion. His ideas were in a chaos; he seized his pen 
to write to her, but threw it away in despair at 
the first few incoherent words it traced. Never 
had he written to her before except with a heart 
overflowing with love and affection. But now 
— what a change ! A thousand bitter, but 
tender emotions overwhelmed him as he looked 



THE REPEALERS. 49 

back on the past. The lovely and trusting 
bride, who had preferred him to all others, was 
present to his imagination ; the charms of 
infancy in her person scarcely rivalled by those 
of womanhood ; and then " the wife still dearer 
than the bride,'' the fond, the happy, confiding 
partner of his happiest days, stood before him 
in all her beauty. The present, the fearful 
present, was for a few minutes forgotten in the 
past. 

But soon came back the bitter recollection, 
and with it the reproachful question, how had 
he fulfilled his duties to the lovely object con- 
fided to his care ? Had he warned her before 
danger found her ? or had he shielded or ad- 
vised her when it had ? Alas ! no ; he owned 
with mortal anguish that he left her in the 
path of danger ; from which, though she might 
escape with an unsullied person, she could not 
bear away an unspotted reputation. 

VOL. H. D 



50 THE REPEALERS. 

^ All this his guilty neglect now struck him 
with keen self-reproach ; but such was the de- 
votedness of his love, that it was a relief to him 
to accumulate blame on himself, that a less 
portion might fall on her ; and he felt that she 
had more right to upbraid him than he had to 
censure her. 

Let no one say that true affection is ego- 
tistical, because a few pretenders to love are 
selfish. No ; egotism proves at once the absence 
of love. 



THE REPEALERS. 51 



CHAPTER V. 

" The flying rumours gather'd as they roU'd ; 
Scarce any tale was sooner heard or told ; 
And all who told it added something new, 
And all who heard it made enlargement too ; 

In every ear it spread, on every tongue it grew.'' 

Lord Oriel passed the night in feverish slum- 
bers, reclining in a bergere ; and was awakened 
by the shrill tones of Mademoiselle La Tour, 
the femme de chambre of his wife, who was in 
the dressing-room of her mistress, with which his 
room communicated. La Tour, between occa- 
sional sobs and angry tirades against Monsieur 
Henri, le valet de pied de Milord Delmore, and 
d2 



UHIVEHSITY OF tLLlNUI* 
UBRARV 



52 THE REPEALERS. 

with the brusquerie and want of tact that is a 
distinguishing characteristic in her country- 
women of that class, when once their anger 
is excited, stated, that certainement ce vilain 
Henri did say to Monsieur Jacques, le valet de 
pied de Miladi. que Milord Dehnore est Vamant 
de Miladi. Imaginez vous,miladi, quelle horreur! 
et malgre queje rCen crois rien, c'est toujours bie?i 
dSsagreable pour nous tous^"" including, with 
a true French feeling of equality, herself with 
her lady in the Nous tous. 

Her volubility met with no check, until a 
slight noise, and an exclamation of " Ah, mon 
Dieu! elk se trouve malT made Lord Oriel 
forget all but that the person dearest to him on 
earth was suffering. He rushed into the room, 
and found Lady Oriel extended on her chaise 
longue, and to all appearance dead. Her face 
had all the rigidity and snowy whiteness of 
marble; her dark eyelashes, resting on those 



THE REPEALERS. 53 

pale cheeks, gave them a still more death-like 
aspect; her i-aven hair fell in wild disorder 
over her figure, rendering it more touching; 
and the total prostration of moral and physical 
force which her whole appearance betrayed, 
showed the violence of the shock that had 
subdued her. 

To bathe her temples, to apply pungent 
odours to her nostrils, and to chafe her icy 
hands within his own, were the work of a 
moment ; but it was many minutes ere return- 
ing animation repaid the anxious and agitated 
husband's cares. During which time, with the 
usual bustling helplessness of those of her coun- 
try and station. La Tour wept, scolded, and be- 
moaned her destiny; by turns recommending 
unpeu (Teau de Cologne sur du sucre — une goutte 
dejleur d'^orange dans Veau — une tasse de tilleul, 
avec une cuilleree de syrop de violettes ; and, 
having exhausted her catalogue of a French- 



54 THE REPEALERS. 

woman's remedies in all similar cases, without 
Lord Oriers showing any desire of trying 
their efficacy, she murmured to herself, taking 
care that it should not be loud enough to be 
heard by him, '' Mo7i Dieu ! mon Dieu ! 
comme ces Anglais sojit betes et entetts /" 

A slight tinge of rose on the pale cheeks, 
and a deep sigh, marked Lady Oriel's return 
to life and consciousness. She opened her 
languid eyes, and seeing her husband tenderly 
occupied about her, closed them with a shudder 
that threatened a renewal of the attack. He ad- 
dressed her by the fondest terms of endearment ; 
disguising all his own misery in the hope of al- 
leviating what he knew she must feel. Having 
dismissed La Tour, who unwillingly and sulkily 
departed, he succeeded in restoring Lady Oriel 
to something like a state of calmness ; though 
the wild glance that first shrank from his when 
she opened her eyes, was now exchanged for 



THE REPEALERS. 55 

the expression of mute, hopeless, and fixed 
despair. She suffered his attentions with an 
air of deep humility, as though she felt she 
was no longer worthy of them ; and his manly 
heart bled for her, when he witnessed the 
mental anguish that was expressed in every 
look. 

Lady Oriel believed that her husband was 
still ignorant of the cause of her sudden indis- 
position ; and the tenderness of his manner, so 
unlike the cold constraint that had marked it 
for the last few months, awakened the deep 
love that had lately slumbered in her breast, 
but which had only slumbered to awaken with 
renewed force. But at what a moment did it 
awaken ! Her indiscretion had brought dishonour 
on his name, had been the cause of the aliena- 
tion of friends, the coldness of acquaintances ! 
All — all was now revealed to her ; and she was 
dismayed when the fearful reality of her po- 



56 THE REPEALERS. 

sition was exposed to the scrutiny of her 
alarmed, too lately alarmed, sensitiveness. 

How did this favourite of fortune, blessed 
with all that can render life desirable, now 
wish that the grave should hide her repentance 
and her shame! — Alas! we seldom think of 
death, until life is embittered by our errors, 
and when we are least fit to encounter it ! Lady 
Oriel dared not contemplate the probable results 
of her conduct, and yet she dreaded the results 
less than she execrated the cause; for she now saw 
the unthinking folly of her perseverance in per- 
mitting attentions which the coldness of her hus- 
band's manner had proved that he condemned. 

Lord Oriers delicacy and forbearance now 
presented themselves to her in brilliant colours, 
and in proportion to her admiration of them 
became her self-condemnation. Pride, that 
arch enemy, which avenges itself unmercifully 
when we err, yet cannot preserve us from 



THE REPEALERS. 57 

erring, was up in arms in her breast, to oppose 
the flood of tenderness and deep sense of 
humiliation which threatened to overpower it. 
At one moment, she thought of proposing 
to Lord Oriel to retire to the country, to 
the Continent, any where, to escape from the 
scene of her present degradation ; hoping that 
he might be kept in ignorance of the reports 
to her disadvantage, for that such reports 
were in general circulation, she no longer al- 
lowed herself to doubt. The next moment, 
she determined to avow all to Lord Oriel, 
to throw herself on his tenderness and mercy, 
and to pass the rest of her life in endeavouring 
to atone for her faults. 

She requested Lord Oriel to leave her to 
a few hours' repose; though of even this 
temporary blessing, she felt she had at the 
present crisis but little hope. When consigned 
to the solitude of her chamber, she communed 
D 5 



58 THE REPEALERS. 

with her own heart; and, while tears of con- 
trition and despair fell over her paper, she 
communicated to him the result of her re- 
flections, in the following letter : — 

" How shall I address you, most beloved 
and most injured of men ? how find courage to 
tell you, that my levity and fatal indiscretion 
have brought blight and dishonourable suspi- 
cion on your name ? that name never before 
sullied by the searching breath of scandal — 
that noble name which you gave to me with 
confidence, and in which I gloried! You — 
you alone, understand me, and can believe that, 
though exposed to suspicion, I am incapable of 
guilt. Think of the bitterness of heart with 
which I avow this, and knowing that in public 
opinion I am dishonoured, I still live, and live 
to wound your peace with this fatal avowal. 
Friends have fallen off from me ; acquaintances 



THE REPEALERS. 59 

have deserted me ; and you, too, whom I have 
so cruelly injured — your kindness and forbear- 
ance rises up in judgment to add to the 
misery I feel, when I reflect that I have 
brought your spotless name even to be the 
topic of your own menials. 

" Why, oh ! why did a false pride prevent 
me from seeking the cause of the coldness that 
has for the last few months marked your man- 
ner towards me ? All would have then been 
explained, and this wretchedness would have 
been spared me. But no ; I shut my eyes to 
the danger that menaced me, and, never 
dreaming of crime, disgrace has overtaken me. 
My own dishonour I might bear, supported by 
the consciousness of innocence; but to draw 
shame on you! no — that I cannot bear and 
live. We must separate, though despair is in 
the thought ; but never shall it be said that 
you were the dupe of her whom you so loved 



60 THE REPEALERS. 

and trusted. My innocence can never be made 
manifest to the world ; and while it is doubted 
— nay, more than doubted — can I suffer you 
to be pointed at by the finger of scorn for 
sheltering one who has, in losing her good 
name, forfeited all right to such a boon ? I will 
retire to some solitary place, where a life of the 
most circumspect prudence shall at least pre- 
clude the possibility of future scandal, though 
it cannot atone for past indiscretion. — Try to 
forget and pardon me. 

" Little did I think, a short time ago, that 
I should ever have to ask you to do either ! — 
But let me not dwell on the past, or how shall 
I bear the present.^ I dare no longer give 
expression to an affection that must appear 
suspicious, if not worthless, when it could not 
preserve her who professes it from the cruel 
necessity of signing herself 
" Your unworthy wife, 

" Louisa Oriel." 



THE REPEALERS. 61 

Various and agitating were the feelings and 
thoughts which passed through the mind of 
Lord Oriel during the hours of seclusion which 
succeeded his departure from his wife's dressing- 
room. He never for a moment contemplated 
the idea of a separation from her ; though the 
vulnerable part of his character, extreme pride, 
was painfully wounded by his anticipations 
of all that would be said and thought of 
his continuing to live with a wife whose repu- 
tation was so tarnished. 

But love, at length, triumphed over every 
other feeling in Lord Oriel's heart, and he 
awaited with fear and trembling the next 
interview with his wife ; on which he felt hung 
the peace of his future life, because on her 
conduct on this trying occasion depended his 
esteem. 

" Now," thought Lord Oriel, " is the crisis 
of my fate. If she, believing that I am igno- 



62 THE REPEALERS. 

rant of it, conceals her position, how can I 
esteem her again ? and yet, so naturally proud 
is her spirit, if she humiliate herself too deeply, 
may I not lose her affection in her own too 
vivid consciousness of her self-abasement ?" 

Her letter was brought to him while all these 
reflections were passing in his mind; and in 
the various sentiments of love, admiration, and 
pity every line of it excited, he forgot all, but 
the certainty it conveyed that her attachment was 
undiminished and the purity of her mind unim- 
paired. The opinion of the world faded away 
before the tenderness with which his heart 
overflowed ; and when he sought Lady Oriel, 
the timidity of a lover was more evident in his 
manner, than the forgiveness of a husband. 
His arguments and reasoning were too flatter- 
ing to her love and to her pride, to be resisted. 
She felt that a separation from him would steep 
her future years in misery ; but she shrank in 



THE REPEALERS. 63 

dismay at the thought, that when the excite- 
ment of the moment was over, he might quail 
before the strictures of the clique, whose fiats 
had hitherto had so much influence on his 
mind, and regret the sacrifice to affection that 
he was now making. 

Dearly has that woman expiated her errors, 
when she feels that the protection a husband 
affords her, may subject him to the contumely 
of the world ! This dread was rooted in the 
sensitive heart of Lady Oriel, never again to 
depart ; but it lent new charms to her manner 
towards him ; and the gentleness, the beseeching 
love that each look and action displayed, origi- 
nating in the self-reproach and humiliation 
which preyed on her health and peace, only 
rendered her, both mentally and personally, 
more exquisitely interesting. 

Mingled tears, mutual self-reproaches, and 
renewed fondness, marked the reconciliation 



64 THE REPEALERS. 

of Lord and Lady Oriel ; they vowed to be 
all the world to each other, as in the first 
days of their married life ; when in the happy 
seclusion of Oriel Park, they wished never 
to leave it. They thought not then of the 
world, because they feared it not; and their 
indifference was a triumphant proof of their 
affection, because that world held forth to 
them all its smiles. But now, both shrank 
from its powers, for both had learned to dread 
them. It was no longer an admiring but a cen- 
suring world from which they were secluding 
themselves; and bitter were the secret thoughts 
of each, as they reflected that while returning 
to the path of duty, and devoting themselves 
to domestic life, they were drawing down the 
sarcasms of that world which they had not yet 
learned to estimate at its just price. 

In trying to assuage their mutual feelings, 
each became continually aware of the futility of 



THE REPEALERS. 65 

the effort. In praising retirement, they were 
conscious of the weighty motives both had to 
seek it ; and their delicacy taking the alarm, 
mutual constraint ensued. 

Ma'm'selle La Tour was discharged with a 
liberal present ; the whole establishment was 
dismissed, with generous remunerations for 
their services ; and Lord and Lady Oriel com- 
menced their tour to the Lakes, more devoted 
than ever to each other ; but the very excess of 
that devotion produced increased sensitiveness, 
and dread of the future. 

Had Lord Oriel possessed strength of mind 
in proportion to his pride and tenderness of 
heart, happiness might again have dawned on 
them ; but alas ! he was infirm of purpose, and, 
though not prepared to sacrifice his love to the 
world, he was nearly equally unprepared to 
confront that world in the discharge of consci- 
ous duties, while he thought his actions likely 



66 THE REPEALERS. 

to be misinterpreted, or the finger of scorn 
pointed at his name. He had too much and 
too little pride; too much to be satisfied with 
aught less than the world's applause, and too 
little to be able to bear up against its tyranny 
and injustice. 

Lady Oriel had failed to make this discovery 
in happier times ; but it now came home to her 
bosom, making her dread the present, and trem- 
ble for the future, as she saw that the world, 
the fickle capricious world, which she had nei- 
ther the courage nor the wish to re-conquer, 
still held an empire over the mind of her 
husband, which would render happiness, inde- 
pendent of its opinion, difficult if not impossi- 
ble to attain. 

It has been well observed by an acute 
writer of our day, that " to be satisfied with 
the acquittal of the world, though accompanied 
with the secret condemnation of conscience, is 
the mark of a little mind ; but that it requires 



THE REPEALERS. 67 

a soul of no common stamp to be satisfied with 
its own acquittal, and to despise the condemna- 
tion of the world." The insufficiency of self- 
acquittal to satisfy the mind, must proceed 
from the consciousness that, however innocent 
in fact, we have been faulty in appearance; 
unjust as the world is, it can seldom wound us 
if we do not furnish it with weapons. The 
world exaggerates, and misinterprets, but rare- 
ly invents. We must lay a foundation ere it can 
build ; but when once we have furnished it, there 
is no saying to what height the edifice will ex- 
tend ; and she v^ho has committed one fault, 
must expect to be accused of a hundred crimes. 
" Ce 7i'est que le premier pas qui coute.'''^ In 
the life of a woman, one false step that cannot 
be disproved, renders every future step sus- 
pected; and the heart-wounding conviction of 
this injustice takes away the confidence of virtue, 
even long after its duties have been fulfilled. 



68 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

" Our decrees, 
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead ; 
And liberty plucks justice by the nose." 

" Some, for renown, on scraps of learning doat. 
And think they grow immortal as they quote." 

Jim Cassidy returned from his work one 
evening, bringing with him the schoolmaster of 
the village, whom he had encountered on the 
road, and engaged to share his humble supper. 

Grace felt that he did this to avoid a tete-d- 
tite with her, and sighed as she thought of 
other days, when Jim would have considered 



THE REPEALERS. 69 

such an interruption on their privacy a hard- 
ship. 

The schoolmaster was a simple, honest man, 
only remarkable for a habit of interlarding his 
discourse with scraps of Latin, even when 
addressing those totally ignorant of that lan- 
guage, which habit generally left his hearers in 
doubt as to one-half of his conversation, and 
not quite aufait of the other. 

They were about to sit down to supper, 
when Larry M'Swiggan made an addition to 
the party, and was cordially greeted by all. 

" I 'm afraid you don't like the supper," 
said Jim, observing that the schoolmaster was 
more intent on looking around him than on 
eating. 

" Why, to spake the truth, Misther Cas- 
sidy," replied the pedagogue, " I am admiring 
domus et placens uxor.'''' 

" I see how it is," said Larry, with an arch 



70 THE REPEALERS. 

smile. " You were looking at Misthress Cas- 
sidy, and by speaking Latin, show that it was 
something she ought not to hear. Far be it 
from me to say, even in a dead language, what 
could offend a living ear, and that ear, more- 
over, attached to the head of a female." 

" No, Misther M'Swiggan, I was thinking, 
on looking around me, that fas est et ab hoste 
doceri, as I remark many clever contrivances in 
this culinary apartment, which Misthress Cas- 
sidy must have taken from the English." 

'• Why, then, be my soul, if you knew her 
as well as I do, ever since she was a brat of a 
girl, and before too, you 'd never be after sus- 
pecting her of taking any thing from the Eng- 
lish, or any one else, but what was her right." 

" You misconceive my maning, Misther 
M'Swiggan." 

" Well, all my mistakes come from your 
spaking the Greek, which as neither the good 



THE REPEALERS. 71 

man nor woman of the house understand any 
more than I do, it bothers us a little, and 
puts us at cross purposes. Sure, it's no 
offence I mane to you, for I used just to say 
the same to a Frenchman on board the ship 
with me, going to the West Indies, who was 
always for jabbering his outlandish lingo to 
me. ' Sir,' says I, ' if as how you 're inclined 
to swap thoughts with me, take your choice of 
spaking Irish or English, which you '11 find 
come just as aisy to you, as having to conster 
my words into your own mother tongue, which 
I suspect you'll be obliged to do before you 
know the maning.' He shook his head, and 
said, 'Bait.' ' Bait !' says I ; ' faith, that's a 
game two can play at, and if I had you in my 
own sweet counthry, where baiting is chaip, 
I'd see what you were made of.' Sure, he 
knew well enough what I was after, for he 
looked as mad as a March hare, and after that 



72 THE REPEALERS. 

we never swapped a word while we stopped in 
the ship/' 

" I think, Misther Cassidy, that your friend 
has a cacoethes loquendi^'' observed the school- 
master. 

" I hope you haven''t said anything affront- 
ing to me,'' said Larry ; " for ould as I am, I 
wouldn't sit by to see myself attacked ; and, 
sure, if you have anything to say to me, spake 
out in plain English or Irish, and don't be like 
a backbiter, saying what's not fair when my 
back is turned, for sure it's all one as being 
absent when I don't know what you say of 
me." 

" I declare to you, Misther M'Swiggan, that 
I have said nothing offensive. I am not dis- 
posed to quarrel, being, as you must observe, 
the caput mortuum of a sexagenarian." 

" Well, there 's more of it," said Larry. 
" Follow on, my ould boy, for I see it 's useless 



THE REPEALERS. 73 

to thry to stop you once you Ve got flounder- 
ing in your bog Latin." 

" Misther M'Swiggan, if you main to insult 
the erudition of which I am but as the mouth- 
piece, IM have you to know that contra stimu- 
lum calcas.''^ 

*' You see, Misther and Misthress Cassidy, 
he will keep throwing his bad words in my 
teeth ; for, sure, as I said before, if they are 
not bad, why not say 'em out like a man, 
instead of disguising 'em in clothes, as he 
says himself, which I can't make head or tail 
of.?" 

" I repate, Misther M'Swiggan," replied the 
pedagogue, " that I do not wish to offend ; of 
this you have only my ipse dixit, which I hope 
you will accept." 

" Och ! sure, if you Ve tipsy it \ another 
matther," said Larry. " Why didn't you say 
so at first ? though, faith, I thought you looked 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE REPEALERS. 

a little cumflusthered, and seemed dumb- 
founded by spaking Greek and Latin to us all 
the evening, just to show your book-larning." 

The schoolmaster felt by no means inclined 
to allow Larry M'Swiggan to continue in the 
belief that he pleaded inebriation as an excuse 
for whatever he might have said, and Grace 
was obliged to interfere, to bring them to 
a good understanding ; which having accom- 
plished, the schoolmaster declared that he must 
proceed to the Cat and Bagpipes, for the pur- 
pose of exhorting the men there assembled, and 
of opening their eyes to the danger of the evil 
courses they were at present pursuing. 

" Faith,'' said Larry, " if you main to do 
that, I 'd advise you stick to the plain English, 
or, what 's betther still, the Irish tongue, which 
is ten times as expressive, — then they '11 know 
your maning ; but if you bother 'em with the 
Greek and Latin, faith, you might just as well 



THE REPEALERS. 75 

be whistling jigs to a milestone, in the hopes 
of making it dance." 

" I have already arranged the discourse I 
main to give them," said the pedagogue. '' I 
have no doubt it will produce a powerful eifect 
on their unsopliisticated understandings." 

" Don't be too sure of that,'" said Larry. 
" Sure, they 're already much too fisticated, as 
you call it, for it 's a word and a blow with 'em 
on every occasion, and the blow first and the 
word afther. Sure, it would be well for many 
of *em that they had no fists, for they do 
nothing but mischief with 'em ; but if you 're 
going, I '11 just go with you, and maybe tell 
you what you had best say to 'em." 

" Circus iter monstrare vulty'' murmured the 
schoolmaster. 

" There he is at it again," said Larry. 
" I 'm no more a monsther than yourself, and 
it is not over-mannerly of you to call me so." 
E 2 



76 THE REPEALERS. 

" I per9aive that if we continue to talk,'' 
said the schoolmaster, " it will be a helium 
internecivum between us ; but let us proceed 
to the Cat and Bagpipes, Misther M'Swiggan. 
I shall be proud of your company on the way, 
for comes jucundus in via pro vehiculo est.'' 

Jim Cassidy accompanied them to the scene 
of meeting, promising Grace that he would 
retire from it as soon as the schoolmaster had 
finished his speech to *em. " For I 'm curious," 
added Jim, *' to see how they '11 take advice in 
Latin, which they can't understand, when they 
won't listen, or at least won't mind, what 's said 
to them in their own tongue ; perhaps, for the 
raison that they can't understand, they '11 pay 
more attention to it, for, somehow or other, we 
poor Irish are a little contrary whin we've 
got a quare notion in our heads." 

Grace smiled at the truth of the last observa- 
tion, and the three friends departed. 



THE REPEALERS. 77 

On reaching the sheebean-house, sounds of 
merriment and singing, with loud applauses, 
proclaimed that there was a full meeting, and 
they entered in time to hear the following song 
sung, or rather roared, by Bill Davin, better 
known by the appellation of *' Rattling Bill,'"* 
each verse of which elicited thunders of ap- 
plause. 

SONG. 

Sure, ain't we all slaves in the chains 
We 've taken such trouble to get ? 

Ould England 's the cause of our pains, 
But she '11 suffer the penalty yet. 

We '11 drive all the rich from the land, 
And set up the poor in their stead ; 

By O'Blarney we '11 all of us stand, 
By O'Blarney we '11 only be led. 

For he is the broth of a boy ; 

How to get up a row he knows well ; 
In Parliament, sure, 'tis his joy 

To bother their brains all pell-mell. 



78 THE REPEALERS. 

We tried long enough with troubles 

The English to vex and enrage ; 
They thought our riots but bubbles, 

Till they found we 'd open war wage. 

Boys ! drink to the great agitator. 
And long may he rule o'er the land, 

For he is the only dictator, 
And by him till death will we stand. 

The vociferous plaudits that followed the 
song had no sooner subsided, than the school- 
master asked permission to address the meet- 
ing, which was accorded by some of the as- 
sembly and refused by others. At length, 
however, it was decided that he should be 
heard. " We know he is an ould tory," said 
rattling Bill, " but what of that ? Hear him, 
hear him, say I ;" and it was accordingly agreed 
that he should be heard. 

*' Neighbours and pupils, for many of you 
are my pupils,*" said the schoolmaster, " I am 
come here amongst you, like a hrutum fulmen^ 



THE REPEALERS. tV 

to arouse you to the dangers that threaten you. 
Led on by a man who is ever seeking the aura 
popularis, you will pass the Rubicon, after 
which there is no retreat. He is determined 
to be aut Casa?' aut nullus, and to arrive at 
the former, he will make you the pedestal on 
which he will elevate himself. But remember, 
in doing this, he tramples on you ; you but 
support his feet. He is a man who only uses 
arguments ad captaudwn vulgus, and is emi- 
nently skilled to ambiguas in vulgum spargere 
voces. But you, my countrymen, who are 
adscript us glebcB, must never forget the pro- 
verb. An nescis longas regibus esse manus? I 
would prove to you that which is so rare, an 
amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. Listen 
to me, therefore, not only with your ears, but 
your hearts, for if the ear hears and the heart 
heeds not, all arguments are vain. 

" I am actuated by an amor patrice, and 



80 THE REPEALERS. 

would oppose my feeble voice against him who 
proves the verity of the old adage, asperiiis 
nihil est humili cum surgit in altum. I would 
call it dulce et decorum est pro patria mori, 
but to be sacrificed on the altar of ambition 
for the aggrandisement of one man — no, this I 
could not bear. This man has established the 
system of divide et impera, and takes advan- 
tage of the power it gives him ; he considers 
you all but as the fa: x populi, to be thrown to 
the winds the moment he has used you. But 
before jacta est alea, reflect on the inevitable 
consequences of following his pernicious coun- 
sels, and remember that gravis ira regum 
semper. Poor and lowly as I am, I have 
incoctum generoso pectus honesto, and I would 
die sooner than be as those who iras et verba 
locant.'''' 

" Hear, hear, hear him," was repeated aloud ; 
*' sure what he says must be fine, for we can't 



THE REPEALERS. 81 

understand the half of it. He baits out 
CBlarney by three chalks. Faith, the ould 
boy is a grand scholar any way." 

Larry M'Swiggan was mortified with the 
success of the schoolmaster, and still more 
at the folly of his countrymen for applaud- 
ing, merely because they could not under- 
stand. Poor Larry, with all his shrewdness, 
was too simple to be aware how many orators 
and literary works are judged of and ap- 
proved on the same principle, and with this 
ignorance he thought to himself — " Well, after 
such applause, the ould boy will spake more 
Greek and Latin than ever, and there '11 be no 
bearing with him. Now, if I was to spake 
plain sinse to 'em in plain English, it 's ten to 
one if they 'd listen to me, and more than ten 
to one if they 'd give a single screech for me. 
But this comes of his book larning. Sure 
after all, it's a great lielp at a pinch, espe- 
E 5 



S2 THE REPEALERS. 

daily when it taches a body to spake with 
the thoughts and words of another, and no 
one can contradict it." 

When order was restored, the schoolmaster 
resumed his speech ; " Think not, my coun- 
trymen, that I am insensible to the misfortunes 
under which this divided country has groaned 
for centuries. Alas I longa est injuria, longa 
ambages. But it is not by proving that we 
are unworthy of liberty, that we can hope to 
gain it. As well might the maniac try to 
persuade his keeper that he requires not the 
fetters that alone prevent his injuring him- 
self and others, as for us to expect that go- 
vernment will grant us the rights we forfeit 
by our own violation of the laws. I can have 
no object but the amor patria, which throbs 
in my heart, for urging you to beware of evil 
advisers, whilst he who inflames your passions 
has twelve thousand golden reasons for keeping 



THE REPEALERS. 83 

up the heat of that mint that pays his agita- 
tion. But cursed is the gold that is earned by 
the misery of the people, and shameless must 
he be, who, while he declaims on the poverty 
and ruin of his country, accepts from that 
poverty and ruin the hire of acts that, if per- 
formed with sincere good-will for his country, 
he ought to be above receiving pay for, and 
if not, what shall be said of him ? 

" Paid patriots, my countrymen, are ano- 
malies that I admit not of; I will believe him 
to be a patriot who struggles against poverty 
and oppression, and disdains to accept wages 
for services that never can, never ought to be 
paid. Of him who does otherwise it may be 
said, vendidit hie auro patriam ; for what dif- 
ference does it make that the gold comes from 
the sold? the chapman equally receives it. 

" I would exhort you to pause and reflect. 
Return to your duties, and ut ameris amabilis 



84 THE REPEALERS. 

esto. Show that you can be trusted, and you 
will be trusted. Show that you know how to 
respect the laws, and you will not long be 
exposed to know them by their severity, in- 
stead of by their protection. Nunquam lihertas 
gratior extat qiidm sub rege pio. And when 
did a monarch sit on a throne more worthy 
to be so considered than ours ? Let us not, 
my dear countrymen, force him to show us 
his power instead of his paternal love, nor 
compel him to give us the ultima ratio regum. 
Leave our grievances to be remedied by those 
who have the inclination to relieve, and the 
knowledge how to accomplish it ; but attend 
not to him who, if we have wounds, puts an 
unguis in ulcere.^"* 

" Faith, the ould boy is right," said one. 
" The ould scholar is no fool," said another. 
" Sure how could he be a fool with such fine 
laming as he has in his head .?" interrogated a 



THE REPEALERS, 85 

third. " If I had only the half of it, I 'd 
speechify as well as tlie best of 'em, but when 
a body has only one's own thoughts in one''s 
pate, sure how can one make a speech ?" 

Rattling Bill was the first to address the 
schoolmaster, which he did in the following 
terms : — " Well, ould boy, you have been 
chopping Latin for some time, and we 've 
listened to you for all the world as if you 
were a prophet, though small profit it has 
brought us any way, for we didn't under- 
stand the half of it. So much the betther, 
perhaps, for I see by the drift of your sha- 
nahos, you 'd be for thrying to persuade us 
to remain quiet till them English fitted on 
our handcuffs. Now, I 'm of the same mind 
as O'Blarney, that the only way to avoid 
danger, is to meet it halfway, and sure we 've 
been more than halfway on the road to meet it, 
and now is not the time to turn our backs on 



86 THE REPEALERS. 

ourselves. And let me ax you, what would we 
do to pass the time, if we didn't kick up a bit 
of a row ? Sure it 's the only occupation we 
have, and if we like to give our money to him 
that divarts us, and keeps us always warm 
with the fiery things he puts into our minds, 
that 's our own affair. Sure, I 've heard that 
the grandees find time so dull on their hands, 
that they pay lashings of money to play-actors 
to agitate 'em, either by making 'em laugh or 
ci-y ; and why shouldn't we pay our own play- 
actor, who can do both, and prevents our ever 
bothering ourselves about thinking of paying 
rints or tithes, or providing for the wives and 
brats at home, which we used to be breaking 
our heads and hearts too, to prepare for ? No, 
no, O'Blarney has taught us a trick worth two 
of that, and I 'm for sticking by him let what 
will happen. When I think how, before I 
knew O'Blarney, I used to be bothering the 



THE REPEALERS. 87 

life out of myself, sure, faith I laugh at my 
folly ; for now when the agent talks to me of 
the next gale of rent, I think that may be 
there'll be another sort of a gale before that 
comes, that will blow away rents, landlords, 
and agents too, and lave us, like the wreckers 
on the shore, to pick up whatever escapes from 
the ship that has perished ; so you 11 find we 11 
have the best of it." 

" But when you see the soldiers and the 
police pouring down on us like a mountain 
floud, sweeping everything before 'em," said 
an old man who had not before spoken, " what 
will you say then? when our wives and chil- 
dren are starving and unprotected, and our- 
selves between four walls in a stone jug,* where 
we may be found morning, noon, and night, 
and obliged to stand our trials for all the 
troubles we Ve brought on the country, sure, 
* An Irish phrase for jail. 



88 THE REPEALERS. 

Bill, you '11 wish you had hearkened to the 
schoolmaster's advice, and if you 're trans- 
ported to Botany Bay, or are condemned to 
dance a jig upon nothing, 'twill then be too 
late to repent. Think of the judge putting 
on the black cap — think of the terrible words 
he will spake, the solemn faces of all the court, 
and the wail of the heart-broken wife ; and 
then ax yourself how much better it would 
be to stop in time. Think also of the terrible 
night in the condemned cell — the last night. A 
disgraceful death the passport to an offended 
God — the horror of the present — the terror of 
the future — the grief of all who love you, and 
the shame you leave 'em. Ah, if you would 
think of all this, you would turn from those 
that would lead you into such snares, and you 
would yet be saved." 

" But do you think," replied Rattling Bill, 
" that there's the laist chance of its coming to 



THE REPEALERS. 89 

all this ? Why, don't you see that we have the 
best of it ? Was the counthry ever in such a 
state of throuble as we've put it into at pre- 
sent ? Fresh disturbances every day, and at 
every side ? And hasn't our laider sent us a 
steel to whet our pikes ? As for our mimbers 
that's in London, sure they're carrying every 
thing before 'em by the force of their speeches. 
Didn't our laider call the Parliament Com- 
mons the other day six hundred scoundrels? 
Sure that's spaking plain enough ; I dare say 
it's the first time they ever heard such names, 
but they'll hear worse before he has done with 
'em, if they let him go on." 

" Yes, and how cleverly he got out of it 
afther," replied Larry M'Swiggan ; " Oh ! let 
him alone for that. He's the boy that can get 
out of a scrape. He said he did, and he didn't 
call 'em such names; and all the House was 
crying out oh ! oh ! as well they might, to see 



90 THE REPEALERS. 

his 'cuteness. And he said sure, if he did say 
it, it was in the hate of the moment ; but sure 
it isn't the hate of a moment, but the hate of a 
life, that he has against the English, as well we 
know, for, faith, he can't bear to allow any one 
to attempt to govern Ireland but himself, and 
small blame to him, it's quite natural afther 
having had his own way so long. Now, them 
English are quare people, and don't often call 
bad names ; but when oncet they say a thing, 
the}'- never will deny their w^ords, and that's 
where our laider has the advantage over 'em, 
and this bothers 'em. Now there's that Misther 
Manly, that gentleman that they call an Irish 
secretary, which is a bull, as he is an English 
secretary ; now, when he spakes, he never baits 
about the bush, but comes to the truth at 
oncet, and yet the people in the Parliament 
listens to him, and never coughs or laughs, 
or cry oh! oh! as they do for our mimbers, 



THE REPEALERS. 91 

but keep crying out hear ! hear ! hear ! Sure, 
they seem as if they never would be tired of 
hearing him, and yet he never gives 'em the 
hard words, or clips the king's English, as 
our mimbers do, — long life to 'em, say I, but 
a little more raison." 

" Well, sure," said Rattling Bill, " it will 
be a hard case, and a cruel case too, if we can't 
go about at nights killing, maiming, houghing, 
burning, and flogging, as we've been doing 
lately, but be forced to stay at home and go 
to bed. Who could stand this ? and to be 
obliged to mind our work, and not attend 'soci- 
ations, nor follow the advice of our laider and 
his followers — better be hung at once. Then 
they want to thry us by soldiers instead of by 
jurors, which we never will stand, for we can 
frighten jurors at any time, but the devil him- 
self wouldn't frighten them soldiers, who, not 
being used to our ways, would think our 



92 THE REPEALERS. 

killing a few spalpeens a great crime, and 
make nothing of swinging or transporting us 
for it. But our own jurors, who are used to it, 
arn''t so severe ; besides they're afraid to be too 
hard on us, knowing that we'*d soon pay 'em a 
visit, and pay 'em nately, for their justice. No, 
no, we must keep away the trials by soldiers, 
for there's no joke, as we'll find to our cost, if 
they come amongst us." 

" We may defy trials and soldiers too, if we 
behave dacently and quietly," replied Larry 
M'Swiggan, " and show the English we have 
raison, which we've never shown 'em yet ; for to 
tell the truth, when they call us the wild Irish, 
it's the mad and the wicked Irish they might 
call us, without telling any fibs." 

" But aren't we in honour bound to stand 
by O'Blarney ?" asked Rattling Bill. «' And 
wouldn't it be a shabby and a mane thing too, 
to turn our backs on him, now that all the 



THE REPEALERS, 93 

English are laughing and coughing him down, 
and that he doesn't seem to have a leg to stand 
on ? Sure, in honour and dacency we're bound 
to stand by him to the last, and maybe he'll 
come to his senses, and write to us to lave our 
disturbances ; but 'till he does we had better 
go on in the ould way." 

It was evident even from the subdued tone 
of Rattling Bill, that the schoolmaster's speech 
had produced some effect on his hearers, and 
that even in their rude breasts and turbulent 
spirits, a sentiment of generosity was the 
strongest bond that still attached them to 
their leaders. When will the natural good 
qualities of this misled people be allowed to 
display themselves, and to win admiration 
where they have hitherto been accustomed to 
excite only dread or dislike ? Let us hope 
that this period is not far distant. 



94 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER VII. 

" So love does raine 
In stoutest minds, and maketh monstrous warre : 
He maketh warre, he maketh peace againe. 
And yett his peace is but continuall jarre : 
O miserable men that to him subject arre !" 

The spirits of Lord and Lady Oriel felt 
lightened when they had left London, and each 
mile that they retreated from it seemed to ren- 
der them more cheerful. The fair and delicate 
hand which Lord Oriel pressed within his, re- 
turned the pressure; and the renewed tender- 
ness of their sentiments made them feel as if 
they had escaped from some direful calamity. 



THE REPEALERS. 95 

some deluge that had threatened to annihilate, 
or, worse, — to separate them for ever. 

All this was felt, but not expressed. At 
such moments, language appears too cold, too 
feeble to convey our thoughts, and a look — a 
pressure of the hand, speaks more eloquently 
to the feelings, than all that words could 
express. 

The blow which Lady Oriel's health had re- 
ceived in the late shock, rendered her too deli- 
cate to travel rapidly; but, so tranquilly, if 
not happily, passed the hours, that she wished 
not to abridge their brief career. Lord Oriel 
read to her, and, when fatigued, she leaned her 
head on his shoulder with more tenderness, if 
with less confidence, than on former journeys, 
because she felt that henceforth they must be 
all the world to each other, while hitherto the 
world had been much to them. They stopped 
the first evening at * * * *, and while 



96 THE REPEALERS. 

waiting for tea, Lord Oriel took up a news- 
paper that lay on the table, while Lady Oriel 
closed her eyes to protect them from the glare 
of light in the room, which after some hours 
of darkness in the carriage had dazzled them. 
On opening them, her glance fell on her hus- 
band, and she was shocked at witnessing the 
change a few minutes had produced in his 
appearance. The hand that held the paper 
trembled ; his face was deadly pale ; and wildly 
and furtively he glanced at her, and perceiving 
he had excited her attention, hastily left the 
room, carrying with him the paper. 

When he returned, the traces of suppressed 
agitation were visible in his countenance, and 
it instantly occurred to Lady Oriel that the 
paper he had been perusing must have con- 
tained some statement relative to her, which 
had caused this change ; but on which she dared 
not, either for his sake or her own, trust her 



THE REPEALERS. 97 

self to speak to him. Her embarrassment was 
increased by observing that when tea was 
brought in, the three officious waiters who 
attended, seemed to examine her and Lord 
Oriel with peculiar attention. This might only 
be imagination, but she thought that Lord 
Oriel seemed to have made the same remark, and 
that he shrank beneath the infliction. All his 
efforts to keep up a cheerful conversation for 
the rest of the evening were unavailing ; both 
felt their restraint, but neither dared to com- 
ment upon it. 

At each resting-place on the route, Lady 
Oriel observed that her husband studiously re- 
moved the newspapers from her sight. This 
studied precaution increased the nervous agita- 
tion which each day gained ground, and added 
to the languor and feverish excitement that 
was exhausting her strength. His affectionate 
attention seemed redoubled, and he watched 

VOL. IL P 



98 THE REPEALERS. 

over her with a tenderness known only to those 
who have witnessed or been the object of those 
nameless attentions that an all-engrossing and 
anxiously-excited affection bestows in illness or 
in affliction. 

Arrived at the Lakes, they took up their 
abode at the inn at Keswick, and were more 
surprised than pleased, at finding that Lord 
and Lady Borrodaile, with their daughter, 
occupied the suite of rooms next theirs. Old 
connexions had thrown the families of Oriel 
and Borrodaile much into each other's so- 
ciety ; but a total want of sympathy, and as 
total a difference of taste, had precluded the in- 
timacy and cordiality that generally arise be- 
tween people who often meet ; and left in its 
place a cold and formal politeness, beyond 
which neither parties wished to pass. 

This untoward rencontre was evidently as 
disagreeable to Lord Oriel as to his wife, 



THE REPEALERS. 99 

though he took some pains to appear indiffer- 
ent to it, and proposed with affected careless- 
ness not to make any effort to renew an inter- 
course which had never afforded them any 
pleasure. Lady Oriel felt all that was passing 
in his mind, and determined on avoiding, as 
much as lay in her power, the possibility of 
meeting the Borrodailes. The constraint like- 
ly to be imposed by this resolution, was con- 
templated with a depression of spirits both by 
husband and wife ; and they retired to their 
pillows gene by the dread of the morrow. 

What are called presentiments are but a 
knowledge of the future, acquired by expe- 
rience ; and they are seldom fallacious. Those 
that depressed Lord and Lady Oriel at night, 
were increased in the morning by discovering 
that, unless they made themselves prisoners in 
their chamber, there was little chance of avoid- 
ing their neighbours, as the rooms were so 
F 2 



100 THE REPEALERS. 

near, and they were so continually passing 
from the salon to the bed-rooms, that not to 
meet would be almost impossible. 

Lady Oriel was going to her sitting-room, 
when Lady Borrodaile with one of her daugh- 
ters came suddenly upon her. The girl ap- 
peared embarrassed and awkward, blushed and 
turned away ; but the mother drew herself up, 
with an air of affected dignity, and having 
thrown as much angry expression into her 
small grey eyes as they would contain, which 
expression was turned on the beautiful face 
of Lady Oriel, she seized her daughter's hand 
and hurried quickly away, as if fearful of con- 
tamination by contact with her. 

All this was the business of a moment ; but 
its effects on Lady Oriel were overpowering. 
She retreated to her bed-room, to endeavour to 
calm her agitation before she joined Lord Oriel 
at breakfast, and she had been twice summoned 



THE REPEALERS. 101 

to that repast, ere she had courage to en- 
counter him. 

Whilst writhing under the insult she had 
just received, her only source of consolation 
was, that her husband had not witnessed it. 
Her own humiliation, hard as it was to be 
borne, she could bear ; but /^^s, brought 
on him too by her, was more than she had 
fortitude to resist. The Indian proverb says, 
that contempt can pierce even the shell of the 
tortoise. How then must it have wounded the 
sensitive mind of a proud woman ! She had 
now to learn the painful lesson, that we may 
be stung by the marked disrespect of those 
whose warmest approbation could give us no 
satisfaction, and that the bitterness of the mor- 
tification inflicted, is not diminished by our 
consciousness of the unworthiness of the source 
whence it springs. 

It was a great relief to Lady Oriel, to see in 



102 THE REPEALERS. 

about an hour afterwards, preparations going on 
at every side for the departure of the Borrodaile 
family. Her conclusions that this event was 
expedited by her arrival, were borne out by 
the officious intelligence of the landlord of the 
inn, who, when presenting the menu for dinner, 
observed that the departure of Lord Borrc- 
daile's family was very unexpected, as their 
rooms had been engaged for another week. 
When this communication was made. Lady 
Oriel stole a glance at her husband, and his 
heightened colour and averted looks betrayed 
to her that he also had guessed the motive of 
the Borrodailes* sudden departure, though he 
avoided all recurrence to it. 

Each new arrival at the inn filled Lady Oriel 
with alarm. It was in vain that she endeavoured 
to reason herself into tranquillity, by dwelling 
on the happiness that was still hers, in possess- 
ing a husband dearer to her than ever, and 



THE REPEALERS. 103 

who, however a cruel and envious world might 
slander or misjudge her, was convinced of her 
purity. But, alas ! she felt that the warmth 
and delicacy of her attachment to him, gave 
fresh poignancy to the bitterness of knowing 
that he was wounded through her; and often 
did she mentally acknowledge, that all other 
sufferings would be light in comparison to be- 
holding him shrinking beneath the stain her 
indiscretion had fixed on his honour. She 
even thought that a total separation from him, 
would be less wretched than the state of con- 
straint in which they lived, and the witnessing 
the humiliations she had drawn on him. 

The sejour at the Lakes had failed to give 
them the pleasure they had anticipated, and 
they now began to suspect that solitude alone 
could save them from the perpetual rencontres 
with persons they wished to avoid. Without 
daring to expose their thoughts to each other, 



104 THE REPEALERS. 

thoughts in which so strong a sympathy ex- 
isted, they mutually wished to direct their 
steps to Oriel Park ; but neither had courage 
to make the proposition, till remarking one day 
some plants that reminded them of similar ones 
transplanted the year before at their home, 
it led to an expression of " How well the 
gardens must now be looking," and a deter- 
mination to go there was the consequence. 

The journey was long and tedious, both the 
travellers being occupied with painful reflec- 
tions, in which retrospections of the happy past 
were contrasted with fears for the clouded fu- 
ture. Their anxiety to conceal such thoughts, 
with the increased tenderness a mutual pity 
excited, only added to the painfulness and con- 
straint of their situation. The sensitiveness 
and pride of Lord Oriel, taking alarm at every 
incident, kept alive in his wife's mind the con- 
tinual recollection of her misfortune, and de- 



THE REPEALERS. 105 

stroyed the self-confidence which a conscious- 
ness of innocence might otherwise have given 
her. 

It was on a Saturday evening that Lord and 
Lady Oriel reached their home. During the 
last ten miles of their journey they had passed 
through their own estate, and were greeted by 
smiles of welcome, even more flattering than 
the marks of deep respect that accompanied 
them, from the happy and prosperous pea- 
santry they encountered at every step return- 
ing from their accustomed labours. 

The cottages peeping forth from the trees 
and flowers that shaded them, the paled-in 
gardens, redolent with the flaunting pride of 
autumn, the cheerful fires seen blazing through 
the bright windows half filled with plants, and 
the rosy- cheeked children at the gates, watch- 
ing the return of their fathers to share the 
evening repast, all presented a picture of rural 
F 5 



106 THE REPEALERS. 

happiness, that for a short time banished the 
sense of their own depressed spirits, and the 
cause, from the breast of the owners of this 
exhilarating scene. 

The unsophisticated joy their presence seemed 
to afford, was healing to the wounded pride be- 
neath which the travellers had lately rankled. 
They were conscious of their power of dis- 
pensing happiness to hundreds — a conscious- 
ness that in itself precludes that deep sense of 
self-humiliation under which they had drooped 
for the last few weeks ; and as Lady Oriel re- 
clined her head on the shoulder of her hus- 
band, and with eyes beaming with love, sought 
his glance, she met a look of satisfied affection, 
to which his intelligent countenance had long 
been a stranger; and for which she requited 
him with a fervent and grateful pressure of the 
hand enclosed within her own. 

The air of busy gladness with which their 



THE REPEALERS. 107 

servants welcomed them, was damped by an 
appearance of curious examination, convin- 
cing the conscious master and mistress, that 
the slanderous reports in circulation in the 
artificial sphere they had quitted, had reached 
their home. The demonstrative attentions of 
affection which passed between them, — perhaps 
somewhat more evident now that a conscious- 
ness of their position suggested to them the pro- 
bable examination to which their manners might 
be subjected, — were regarded with triumph- 
ant smiles by the old servants, as proofs of the 
total falsehood of the reports that had reached 
them : and, during the late dinner that was 
served on their arrival, each gentle interchange 
of tender courtesy and kindness was noted by 
the significant looks and happy countenances 
of these faithful domestics. 

Lord and Lady Oriel, in remarking this dis- 
play of respectful sympathy, felt that the rank 



108 THE REPEALERS. 

breath of scandal had scathed even their house- 
hold gods, and that the lustre of untarnished 
honour and purity, which identified them with 
all around, was blighted. The princely splen- 
dour of the apartments, the treasures of art 
scattered at every side, reminding them of their 
high station, and, alas ! too, of all the publicity 
that high station commanded, of which neither 
had ever before so forcibly felt the responsi- 
bility, seemed at present to weigh them down 
with a sense of oppressive and insupportable 
melancholy. As they retired to their chamber 
through the grand picture-gallery, they almost 
shrank beneath the stately and dignified glances 
with which a long train of ancestral nobles 
appeared to regard them from the massive and 
coronet-crowned frames ranged along its vast 
length. 

Humbly did Lady Oriel, in the privacy of 
her oratoire, pray to the fountain of all mercy. 



THE REPEALERS. 109 

that some portion of the peace which had 
hitherto blessed her in this happy spot, might 
now be vouchsafed her; and bitter were the 
tears she shed, when she recollected the dif- 
ferent feelings with which she had last knelt 
on the same hassock, then as much a stranger 
to the suspicion of guilt, as she was still to 
its reality. But the bitterness was soothed by 
the reflection that it was only the suspicion 
she had to weep over ; and she thanked the 
Almighty, who had preserved her from a worse 
fate. 



110 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

'* O reputation ! dearer far than life ! 
Thou precious balsam, lovely, sweet of smell, 
Whose cordial drop once spilt by some rash hand, 
Not all the owner's care, nor the repenting toil 
Of the rude spiller, ever can collect 
To its first purity and native sweetness '/* 

Lord and Lady Oriel made it a rule to be 
regular attendants at divine service. They 
went to church the day after their arrival, and 
felt the soothing influence each well-known 
object had over them. They arrived before 
the service had commenced, and as their eyes 
fell on the family monuments, monuments so 
often looked upon, and never without chastened 



THE REPEALERS. Ill 

feelings, the nothingness of all that had lately 
agitated them seemed more forcibly brought 
before them. In the pew they now occupied, 
once sat the persons whose names, recorded on 
the marble before them, and whose memories, 
perhaps treasured by a few, were all that now 
remained — shadows that had appeared and 
passed away, to be followed by others, alike 
destined to the same fleeting existence, and 
doomed to sleep in the vault beneath. The 
same feelings and passions had actuated them ; 
their hearts had beat with the same feverish 
pulses in youth ; and disappointment and care, 
the lot of all, had reconciled them to the 
inevitable denouement of the tragedy of death. 

Nothing so strongly enables us to meet 
with dignity and resignation, the misfortunes 
of life, as reflections on its brevity ; and 
such reflections are never brought so vividly 
to the mind as in a place of divine worship, 



112 THE REPEALERS. 

where our progenitors have offered up their 
prayers. We occupy their places among 
the living ; our eyes dwell on, and our hearts 
repeat, the same supplications to the Deity 
so often offered up by them; our ears drink 
the solemn sounds of the same pealing organ 
that thrilled theirs; all the objects around 
have been familiar to their eyes, as they 
now are to our own; and they are sleeping 
the marble slumber of death in the cold dark 
vault, that sends forth its hollow reverberations 
to the sacred music they can hear no more. 
And we, too, who fret our little hour upon this 
mortal stage, shall soon rest with them ! Others 
will take our places as we have taken theirs, to 
pass through the same existence, and to arrive 
at the same goal. 

It is at such moments that we truly feel the 
nothingness — the worthlessness — of all that 
most preys upon us in life, and that the mind 



THE REPEALERS. 113 

reposes, if not with hope, at least without 
dread, on that doom the inevitableness of 
which offers the only balm for ills that would 
be otherwise unbearable. 

The soothing contemplations of Lord and 
Lady Oriel were interrupted by the commence- 
ment of the service; and, though occupied as 
both were by its duties, they could not avoid 
observing that all eyes were directed to their 
pew with an expression in which curiosity was 
much more apparent than that bienveillance and 
respectful attention which had hitherto been 
wont to greet their first appearance at church. 
The sermon, too, which at any other period 
would have only claimed attention for its merit, 
now seemed to their conscious imaginations as 
being appropriately chosen with a reference to 
their supposed position. Its subject was charity ; 
not the charity of giving alms, of clothing the 
naked and feeding the hungry, but the greater. 



114 THE REPEALERS. 

the more difficult, and more elevated charity 
of judging favourably the imputed or proved 
errors of others — a charity so seldom practised. 
The earnest and fervid manner of Dean 
Vernon, their good pastor, lent additional force 
to the eloquence and purity of his words ; and, 
(but it might be only fancy,) they thought that 
a kinder expression seemed to pervade the coun- 
tenances of the congregation, whose glances 
were continually directed to their pew. The 
service being over, the acquaintances of Lord 
and Lady Oriel, who had been hitherto proud 
to flock round them and dispute their gracious 
smiles and shakes of the hand, now seemed to 
stand back, as if waiting to be guided by their 
pastor. The good dean having sought his 
wife and daughter, advanced with them to 
Lord and Lady Oriel; and the inquisitive 
examiners of the meeting observed, that if 
there was an increased gravity in his manner. 



THE REPEALERS. 115 

there was also an affectionate cordiality in the 
greeting-, which showed that, if he had been 
grieved by the injurious reports so shamefully 
blazoned in the newspapers, he had never be- 
lieved them. 

This public display of respect from the 
dignified and conscientious clergyman and his 
family, was the signal for the respectful saluta- 
tions of the rest of their acquaintances; and 
they returned home with something of their 
accustomed feelings, though with a latent con- 
sciousness that to Dean Vernon's treatment 
they owed their good reception. 

The next day's post brought Lady Oriel a 
letter from her brother from Ireland, an- 
nouncing his intended marriage. It was filled 
with lover-like praises of his future wife. 
After enumerating her perfections, mental and 
personal, he added, " But I will sum up all by 
saying, that Frances Desmond is worthy to be 



116 THE REPEALERS. 

the friend of my sister, and I anticipate with 
feelings of delight her residence in England, 
and her entrance into the world of fashion under 
your protection. I know not another woman of 
your age, my dearest Louisa, to whose guidance 
I would entrust Frances; and perhaps there 
are few who would like to take charge of so 
handsome a person as she is. But you are free 
from jealousy, as your reputation is established 
as a beauty, and, what is infinitely better, 
as an unsuspected wife, — so you alone shall be 
her chaperon^ 

The letter fell from her trembling hands, 
and a violent flood of tears gave relief to her 
oppressed heart. The affectionate praises of 
her brother arriving at such a moment, pierced 
her to the soul, and she felt that he too, who 
had hitherto been a source of happiness to her, 
would henceforth be an additional cause of 
pain, as he, like her husband, would be forced 
to blush for her. 



THE REPEALERS. 117 

" Oh ! how dreadful is my position," ex- 
claimed Lady Oriel. " I bring only shame and 
dishonour on those who love me; those for whom 
I would die to save them from a pang. How 
often have I looked forward to my dear bro- 
ther's marrying, and giving me a sister to love ; 
but now — how bitter is the thought ! my im- 
prudence has rendered me unworthy to be the 
friend of his wife ; for how could I bear to 
have her exposed to any of the cruel animad- 
versions which her association with me might, 
nay, must occasion ?''"' 

It was some time ere Lady Oriel could again 
take up her brother's letter to finish its perusal, 
but when she did, she was relieved by finding 
that he stated it was not his intention to come 
to England for some months, and she was 
grateful at being spared, even for so short a 
period, from the embarrassment which the 
arrival of his sister-in-law, under her pre- 



118 THE REPEALERS. 

sent humiliating circumstances, must draw on 
her. 

And now Lady Oriel felt, and felt with 
renewed bitterness, that even the appearance 
of guilt produces situations incompatible with 
the domestic affections. What could be a more 
convincing proof of this, than that she, who a 
short time ago would have anticipated with 
impatience, and hailed with delight, the arrival 
of her dear and only brother, now shrank from 
seeing him, and felt relieved that he was not 
coming for some months ? She answered her 
brother's letter ; and it was that answer, in 
which a tone of melancholy was so evident, that 
alarmed him. The manner in which Lady 
Abberville tore the veil of ignorance as to his 
sister's situation from the eyes of Colonel For- 
rester, is already known to our readers. 

We must now return to London, where we 
left the Desmond family and their son-in-law, 



THE REPEALERS. 119 

waiting the answer to the letter which the 
Colonel had written to his sister on the subject 
of his proposed visit. This answer we will 
now lay before our readers. 

*' Never, my dearest brother, did I address 
you with such various feelings as at this 
moment, when joy at your arrival, after so 
long a separation, ought to be the only one I 
should entertain. How shall I tell you that I 
have had the misfortune of incurring scandal 
that has blighted my fame, and though innocent 
in deed, has sent me covered with shame into 
retirement ? That I am guiltless, you will 
readily believe ; but how few will render me 
this justice ! Still, ought I, can I, let your 
young and spotless wife's reputation be exposed 
to the sarcasms that the ill-natured world may 
be inclined to throw on it, if she becomes my 
associate ? I shrink from this responsibility. 



ISO THE REPEALERS. 

for, alas ! have I not already brought disho- 
nour on him I would have died to preserve 
from it ? And you too, my brother, will you 
not have cause to blush for me, when you see 
the name of your sister, of whom you once 
were proud, made the subject of defamation ? 

" All that I have borne you may imagine, 
but I never can describe. My husband, my 
inestimable husband, like yourself, has never 
doubted me ; but his affection and unswerving 
confidence, which ought to be my consolation, 
as they are my pride, only make me feel with 
more bitterness the dreadful position in which 
my inexperience and folly have placed us both. 
Lord Oriel knows that the tongue of slander is 
busy with my fame, and that even his con- 
tinued confidence has not shielded me from its 
envenomed wounds. My own humiliation I 
could bear, but to draw shame on hiniy does, 
indeed, fill my soul with bitterness. 



THE REPEALERS. 121 

" But I have not yet told you what has led 
to this fearful degradation. Alas ! it was my 
levity in permitting attentions; the motives of 
which, though obvious to others, never were sus- 
pected by me until the comments they excited 
had rendered me the subject of general conver- 
sation, and were reported to me through the 
mortifying medium of my own servant. I 
have frequently tried to write all this to you, 
but felt unequal to the task. Now, however, 
it can no longer be delayed, and mine is the 
bitter, the humiliating duty of telling you, that 
you have no longer a sister of whom you can 
be proud, or one that can be an honorable 
companion to your wife. 

" I can never do justice to the delicacy of 
the conduct of my dear husband all through 
this fearful business; but I tremble when I 
think of the mortification I have entailed on 
his proud spirit : and fear that even you will 
VOL. IL G 



1^^ THE REPEALERS. 

think I ought not to have subjected him to 
a continuance of humiliation by accepting the 
protection his love affords me, now that he 
alone, besides yourself, believes me worthy of it. 

" I have had great struggles on this point. 
You, who know how I love my husband, can 
imagine the despair which a separation from 
him would cause me ; but the misery of see- 
ing him exposed to mortification and suffering 
brought on him by me, is almost as bad. 

" Your happiness is my only source of con- 
solation. If you wish to preserve that, let 
not your young and inexperienced wife, in the 
consciousness of innocence, be exposed to atten- 
tions, which, though they fail to sully the 
purity of her mind, may leave a stain on her 
reputation that all her tears can never efface. 
Be her guide and adviser ; warn her of the ap- 
proach of danger ; be careful that her conduct 
exempt her from the possibility of miscon- 



THE REPEALERS. 123 

struction, and that her purity be as little 
doubted by the world as by yourself. So will 
you both be spared the misery now felt by 
your affectionate sister, 

" Louisa Oriel;' 



G 2 



\2i THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER IX. 

" 'Tis slander, 
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue 
Out-venoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath 
Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie 
All corners of the world : kings, queens, and states, 
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave. 
This viperous slander enters." 

Colonel Forrester saw at a glance the 
whole position of his sister ; and knowing the 
character of her husband, he felt all that she 
must suffer from his pride and susceptibility. 
He, too, had indulged in an almost blameable 
pride of his sister. He had seen her the idol 
most worshipped in the temple of fashion ; and, 
conscious of her purity and fixed principles, he 



THE REPEALERS. 125 

had never for a moment suspected the possi- 
bility of her losing that high consideration in 
the world which he saw her enjoying. But, 
alas ! in proportion to her elevation had been 
her fall ; for those who once durst hardly have 
approached the altar of this earthly divinity, 
were now the most ready to trample on her. 
His manly heart bled when he contemplated 
his still pure and high-minded sister exposed 
to the sneers and calumny of those incapable 
of believing her innocence, because incapable 
of passing the fiery ordeal of temptation un- 
defiled, as she had done. 

But while he grieved over her imprudence, 
and its fatal consequences, how did he rejoice 
in her innocence ! With the conviction of this, 
he could stand forth her champion undis- 
mayed, and he could place by her side the 
wife of his bosom, his own pure and high- 
i^ouled Frances, without aught, save pleasur- 



126 THE REPEALERS. 

able feelings. Never did his heart yearn 
towards his sister more tenderly than at this 
period, and the letter he wrote her was filled 
with every expression of undiminished coji- 
fidence, affection, and sympathy. 

A worldly-minded brother would have re- 
mained away from the scene of his sister''s de- 
gradation at such a moment, and would either 
have contented himself with appearing ignorant 
of the circumstance ; or have taken the oppor- 
tunity of sending her a lecture on her impru- 
dence, mixed up with some comments on the 
chances of its results extending to him. All 
the possible annoyances would have been dwelt 
on, until he had made her feel that in a bro- 
ther she had found a censurer instead of a 
friend. 

But Colonel Forrester was no worldly-minded 
brother, and therefore he tried to comfort and 
assuage the already too bitter feelings of his 



THE REPEALERS. 127 

sister. He made Mr. and Mrs. Desmond ac- 
quainted with the letter of Lady Oriel ; for, as 
they had heard the statement of Lady Abber- 
ville, he thought this exposition necessary. 
They were too good, too honorable, and too 
pure themselves, not to enter with warmth into 
the feelings of the writer ; and they named an 
early day for leaving town for Oriel Park, 
determined to contribute all in their power 
to re-establish its mistress in the high station 
which she was so calculated to adorn. 

It has been before stated, that Mrs. Des- 
mond was English. Her connexions were 
amongst the highest and most influential of 
the aristocracy, and she had always kept up 
a constant and cordial intercourse with them. 
The Desmonds belonged to no clique, sought 
not for supremacy, because their due portion 
of respect was accorded to them ; and they were 
as ignorant of the petty intrigues, jealousies, 



128 THE REPEALERS. 

" envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitable- 
ness," that characterise the circle, designated 
by the pretentieuse and insulting cognomen of 
" The Exclusives," as though they had never 
lived in London during the season. 

The circle in which Mr. Desmond moved, 
has ever been distinguished for the purity of 
its morals, the dignity of its manners, and 
the unaffected decorum of its members. This 
circle is a kind of oasis in the desert of the 
vast metropolis, refreshing to all who approach 
it, and where politics, that powerful leveller, has 
no influence, as Whigs and Tories are equally 
well received in it. It would be invidious to 
name the females who adorn this high and 
pure aristocracy ; but we might make a long 
list, and glory in holding up to imitation 
women of whom England may well be proud, 
though they are neither patronesses of Almack's, 
nor obstinate sticklers for any system of exclu- 



THE REPEALERS. 129 

siveness, excepting that which regards moral 
character. 

Mrs. Desmond suggested to her son-in-law 
the propriety of introducing Lady Oriel into 
this circle. " They all know me well," added 
the good woman, " and will take your sister 
on the faith of my character. Nay, it is more 
than probable that they are in perfect igno- 
rance of all the vile reports, for they neither 
talk scandal nor read scandalous publications. 
But if they heard them, they would conclude 
them false the moment they saw Lady Oriel 
living on the best terms with her honorable 
and high-minded husband, and that she was 
the associate chosen by me for my daughter. 
The consciousness of your sister's establishment 
in this really respectable circle, will soothe the 
wounded sensibility of your brother-in-law, and 
restore him to all his former feelings. So we 
must persuade them to return with us to Lon- 
G 5 



loO THE REPEALERS. 

don for the season, however little disposed 
they may be to do so." 

Colonel Forrester felt the good sense and 
kindness of Mrs. Desmond, and rejoiced in 
thinking of the invaluable female friends, — the 
rarest of all acquisitions, — he had secured for 
his sister in Mrs. Desmond and her daughter. 

The party set out for Oriel Park, and were 
not sorry to see in all the fashionable news- 
papers an announcement of their departure from 
Thomas's Hotel, Berkeley Square, to join the 
distinguished individuals, who were on a visit to 
the Earl and Countess of Oriel. They knew 
London and its fashionable inhabitants suffi- 
ciently well, to be aware that one half of them 
would conclude the other half were amongst 
the guests of Oriel Park, and forget all scan- 
dalous histories, in their desire to be there also. 
Such are London fashionables ! 

When we censure London fashionables for 



THE REPEALERS. 131 

the heartlessness and selfishness which have 
rendered them proverbial, the censure is ap- 
plied to them not as individuals, but as a body. 
It is the system that produces the evil, and it 
is only while acting en masse that they are 
faulty. The same persons who in the country, 
removed from the influence of the many-headed 
monster, ycleped fashion, are rational and well- 
disposed, in London lose their own identity, 
and adopt all the conventional egoism of their 
different cliques. They have raised a mon- 
strous idol, whose worship demands a continual 
sacrifice of all the best and purest feelings, 
and they are frightened at this imaginary 
hydra of their own creation. The opinions of 
their circle are made the alpha and omega of 
their line of conduct ; and it is not the wrong 
or the right of such or such a step, but the 
" What will the world say of it .?" which go- 
verns them. Moral rectitude and kind feelings 



132 THE REPEALERS. 

are all made subservient to the tyrannical 
sway of fashion, and the most ill-natured ac- 
tions are committed without a particle of 
malice, merely because each individual of a 
clique must act as the others do. 

Only one thing can be said in favour of this 
system of congregating, and loss of identity, 
namely, the humility it implies ; for a person 
with any consciousness of mental superiority, 
could never offer up his tastes and feelings at 
the shrine of an earth-formed deity, who de- 
lights only in mediocrity. M*x\dam has not 
more effectually reduced the surface of our 
streets to the same level, than has fashion 
macadamised the minds of her votaries. No 
inequalities remain — ^no elevations to mark a 
difference. All are flattened down ; and cue 
may bowl along through fashionable life with- 
out encountering any more jolts from geniu?, 
talent, or affectionate feelings, than one should 



THE REPEALERS. 133 

receive on the high ways of the modern Colossus 
of Roads, as he has been aptly named. 

This community of the private stock of 
thoughts and feelings of each individual, to 
the public stock, reminds one of the partition 
of goods and repasts in common among the 
Spartans. There are other' points of resem- 
blance also, which we leave to the ingenuity 
of the reader to discover ; only premising that 
England has arrived at too great a degree of 
civilization to sanction a partition of goods. 
It is only in thoughts, feelings, time, and 
repasts she tolerates a community — property 
is carefully preserved for private use or public 
display, and nowhere is more respect paid to 
the distinctions of jneum and tuum. 

We must not omit to state that which we had 
nearly overlooked, namely, that the habitual 
reference to the received usages of fashionable 
life, on all cases of feeling as well as of eti- 



134 THE REPEALERS. 

quette, has its advantages. Private sympathies 
and family affection, with all the embarrass- 
ments they are so likely to entail, are at once 
abolished by the irrevocable laws of fashion ; 
and one is absolved from the painful necessity 
of extending invitations to brothers or sisters 
not d-la-mode, or living out of the set of the 
fashionables. " They don't mix with our 
clique,'' is considered by a woman of fashion 
as a satisfactory and unanswerable mode of 
accounting for any breach of family kindness : 
she is innocent — the world alone is guilty. 

How much trouble is saved by this con- 
ventional mode, this true savoir vivre ! Pre- 
cedents are established, from which there is no 
appeal ; and in cases of reproach from slighted 
friends, left-off cousins, and cut acquaintances, 
a reference to the standing laws of the society 
acquits the reproached of any breach des co?ive- 
fiances de sa clique, or of being at all (as a lady 



THE REPEALERS. 135 

in such a case once candidly said,) influenced 
by private feelings. Yet some of the most ad- 
mirable women, and excellent men, are to be 
found in the circles denominsLted, par excellence, 
the fashionable world. They enter them as 
they would a theatre, and are but as an audi- 
ence; while tliose whom we have described 
en masse, are the actors, who have so identified 
themselves with their roles, that they have for- 
gotten their original characters, and never 
figure but in those they have assumed. It is 
for this weakness that we have criticised them ; 
as, however excellent the performance may be, 
a little more variety would be agreeable. 

Marmontel described the fashionables of his 
own time and country, as " Passant la moitie 
de leur temps a rien faire, et Vautre moitie a 
faire des riens,''"' a description more applicable 
to ours at present, as the French confine their 
fashionable homage to dress alone ; and each 



136 THE REPEALERS. 

individual contributes his or her quota to so- 
ciety without attempting to dictate to it, or 
establish codes, except as far as regards the 
toilette. 

In Italy, the " dolce far niente^^ operates so 
powerfully on the habits of its luxurious na- 
tives, that few could be found who would 
submit to the trouble of framing laws, or fol- 
lowing them, for the regulation of that which 
they consider merely as an accessoire to general 
society ; and there are perhaps from this cause, 
less heart-burnings and bitter feelings in Italy 
than elsewhere. 



THE REPEALERS. 137 



CHAPTER X. 

" O ! sacred Sorrow ! by whom souls are tried, 
Sent not to punish mortals, but to guide ; 
If thou art mine, and who shall proudly dare 
To tell his Maker he has had his share ? 
Still let me feel for what thy pangs are sent, 
And be my guide, and not my punishment.'* 

In addition to her own troubles, Grace Cas- 
sidy had many friends and relations who had 
fallen victims to the system, into which they 
were led by the designing and self-interested, 
and she had to weep over the consequences of 
errors she could not defend ; errors still more 
to be deplored, because their commission marks 
not alone the want of sense but the want of 



138 THE REPEALERS. 

principle, two deficiencies which are too fre- 
quently inseparable. 

A first cousin of Grace had been imprisoned 
on a charge of having been implicated in the 
murder of the police-man killed by Jack Dono- 
van. His v^^ife was in her confinement, and his 
first-born child was supposed to be at the point 
of death, when Grace sought their cabin to per- 
form the duties of humanity. 

A few months before, the cottage of Patrick 
Mahoney was remarkable for its air of cleanli- 
ness and comfort. He was an industrious and 
sober man, an affectionate husband to a mild, 
gentle creature, and the fond father of one of 
the finest boys in the village. Every thing 
round them flourished, and they were quoted 
as an example of the good eflPects of prudence 
and steady conduct. But in a luckless hour 
Patrick had listened to the counsel of one, 
whom not to listen to would have been deem- 



THE REPEALERS. 1S9 

ed sin ; and ruin and misery followed his obe- 
dience. 

Wretched are those, and miserable must they 
remain, whose religious, moral, and social du- 
ties, are in direct variance. An observance of 
the advice of his spiritual director is supposed 
to be as necessary for the future salvation of 
a Roman Catholic, as obedience to the laws, and 
respect to the implied wishes of his landlord, 
are considered necessary to his worldly welfare. 
When these several obligations happen to be 
in violent opposition, how difficult is it for 
a poor, and well-disposed, but ignorant man, 
to choose between ruin here and perdition 
hereafter ! And is it to be wondered at, that 
many risk and merit the first, to avoid the 
second ? Such was the case with Patrick 
Mahoney ; for unfortunately he, like all his 
countrymen of the class to which he be- 
longed, with a strong predisposition to good, 



140 THE REPEALERS. 

had no fixed principles to guide him ; and con- 
sequently fell a ready victim to the pernicious 
advice of those who should have saved him. 

In a country where the true principles of reli- 
gion are understood, the precepts of its minis- 
ter must be in accordance with its tenets ; but 
in the Catholic church, in Ireland, where super- 
stition supplies its place, and where moral duties 
are as undefined as they are miscomprehended, 
the priests wield a power as dangerous as it is 
in general misapplied ; and those who yield an 
implicit obedience to it, which in the early ages 
would have won for them the palm and glory 
of martyrdom, have now all the sufferings, but 
none of the glory. Some there are among the 
Catholic clergy who are pious, good men, ful- 
filling the duties of their station with exem- 
plary perseverance, charity, and humility ; but 
they become every day more rare, and one 
dictator can encourage a thousand Jesuits to be 



THE REPEALERS. 141 

ready to act as his political agents whenever he 
intimates that he has occasion for their services ; 
and what such services as they can lend may 
accomplish, the last few years in Ireland bear 
painful witness. 

Grace found poor Mary Mahoney laid on the 
bed of sickness ; her body exhausted by suffer- 
ing, but her mind still more afflicted. Her 
pale face was contrasted by her straight raven 
brows, and the long black eyelashes, that 
threw a shadow over her cheeks. A dead in- 
fant was placed in a cradle near her bed, and 
her poor sick child was lying by her side, his 
heavy eyes and flushed cheek denoting the 
ravages that fever was making in his consti- 
tution. His poor mother was continually 
moistening his lips with some syrup, and the 
glance of mute, meek, subdued anguish with 
which she looked from the sick boy to the 
dead infant, and then at Grace, spoke more 



142 THE REPEALERS. 

powerfully than words could have done, all 
that was passing in her mind. 

Grace attempted not to comfort the bereaved 
mother, for she felt that the attempt would 
be unavailing; but she actively bestirred her- 
self to have the sick boy put into a small 
bed, and kept as cool as possible, and made 
the necessary preparations to have the dead 
infant removed for interment. 

Mary Mahoney submitted to all Grace's ar- 
rangements, merely saying, " Let me kiss my 
poor baby before you hide it from me for ever. 
It never had a father's kiss ; but promise me, 
Grace, that you will go to the prison to my 
husband, and try to comfort him. Poor Pa- 
trick wants it more than I do, and tell him, 
dear Grace, what a sweet baby it was ; but no — 
don't tell him, for he would only regret it the 
more, and he has had too much trouble already. 
Tell him, Grace a~vourneen, that I am better, 



THE REPEALERS. 148 

and doing finely ; quite reconciled to the will of 
God, and always praying for him. Tell him 
that our poor boy is aisier, and to have no care 
about us. Oh ! Grace asthore, spake kindly 
to him, with your own sweet, mild, sensible 
voice, and 'twill do him good, and take the 
bitterness out of his heart, just as honey cures 
the wound that is made by the sting of wasps ; 
and ochone ! he has been stung, and to the 
quick too. Mind, a-vourneen, you tell him 
how well I am, and give him this kiss for me," 
pressing her pale, cold lips on the forehead of 
Grace. 

The coffin which a kind neighbour had 
ordered for the dead infant before Grace 
had arrived, was now brought in, and a 
tremulous movement about the lips, and still 
more marble paleness, proved the renewed 
anguish of the mother. " Grace ma-vour- 
neen," murmured she, " don't raison with 



144 THE REPEALERS. 

me, for I'm beyond raison, my heart, and my 
poor head are so tired ; but do, for mercy-sake, 
what I ask you. Sprinkle the coffin with holy 
water. Now bring it here, and lay it on the 
bed, and fetch me the flannels you '11 find in the 
corner cupboard. There — that will do ; help 
me to sit up, that I may make my baby's last 
bed." 

She folded the flannels smoothly, one over 
the other, making a little elevation like a pil- 
low, and then pointed for Grace to bring her 
the dead infant. When it was brought to 
her she kissed its little face and hands several 
times, pressed it to her bosom, and then placed 
it gently in the coffin. 

" I had hoped, my precious babe," said she, 
" to have placed you in a softer bed, and to have 
made my breast your pillow ; but the Almighty 
has thought fit to take you from me, and I 
submit without murmuring to his holy will. 



THE REPEALERS. 145 

The thoughts of you, child of my heart, shall 
make me still more desirous so to do my duty 
in this life, that I may meet you in Heaven/' 

She bowed her head to kiss, once more, the 
infant, and then said to Grace, " Now, dear 
friend, close the coffin, I have looked my last 
on that sweet face ; and lift the curtain of 
the little bed where my boy lies, that I 
may see I have still a child left me. Och ! 
Grace, it is a blessed thing to be a mother ; but 
to see the babe, for which one has suffered so 
much, carried away from one for ever, is a 
bitter thing. Then it seems, too, as if a child 
lost, was a link lost of the blessed chain of love 
between man and wife ; but no, I won't think 
this, for grief draws hearts together." 

Grace had the little bed of the sick boy 
brought nearer to his poor mother, and the 
dead infant removed for interment; and having 
made everything round the sick woman as 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE REPEALERS. 

comfortable as circumstances would admit, 
poor Mary became so anxious that Grace 
should proceed to Dungarvan to visit Patrick 
in his prison, that she left her to return to her 
own home, to demand the company of Jim on 
the expedition. 

When she was quitting the room, poor Mary 
called her once more to beg she would be sure 
to tell Patrick how finely she was going on, 
and not to be uneasy about her. 

What an inexhaustible mine of tenderness is 
there in woman's heart ! Here was this help- 
less creature, with a frame worn down by ill- 
ness, and a mind bowed by anxiety for a hus- 
band and child, and grief for the death of her 
infant, forgetting her own misery to send com- 
fort to her husband ; to that husband who had 
occasioned all her troubles by his obstinacy in 
rejecting her advice and entreaties, and who 
had plunged her in such alarm as to cause a 



THE REPEALERS. 147 

premature labour, and the death of her child. 
The thought that he would feel all this with 
bitterness and self-accusation, rendered her 
the more anxious to make him believe that she 
was doing well, for affection triumphed over 
all suffering and selfishness. Affection is the 
true, the only refiner of our natures ; and the 
humblest peasant in her cottage who feels it, is 
at heart more refined than the proudest prin- 
cess who is unconscious of its influence, but 
who would be shocked by an unpolished phrase 
or an inelegant expression. There is a wide 
distance between refinement of the heart and 
refinement of the manners ; and we see many 
instances of the latter, with a total deficiency 
of the former 



H 2 



148 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XL 

*' The virtues of others often serve as a light to illu- 
mine our own mental darkness, and to incite us to good- 
ness." 

Grace Cassidy returned with a heavy 
heart to her cottage. The resignation and 
meekness of Mary Mahoney had filled her 
with admiration and pity, and she accused 
herself of not having, with the patience of 
her friend, borne the trials that Jim's ob- 
stinacy had entailed on her. " Oh,'''' said 
she, " what were my trials to hers ? and 
how thankful ought I to be to God ! Short- 
sighted and ungrateful that I have been, how 



THE REPEALERS. 149 

have I lamented not being a mother ! and now 
that I know the misery children may cause, 
have I not reason to rejoice that this grief 
has not fallen on me, as I might, like Mary 
Mahoney, have seen my babe shut from my 
sight for ever ? Oh ! 'twas a bitter sight, to be- 
hold her pale face laid against the dead face of 
her infant, as she gave it the last kiss ; and her 
words, and, above all, the meek look of the 
poor creature, made me feel a choking that I 
have seldom undergone before. It reminded 
me so much of the old song of a mother to her 
dead child, which I used to think too sorrowful 
to be true, that poor Mary seemed the very 
person who made it, and it has been ringing in 
my ears ever since. 

" Oh ! sleep, my babe, on that cold bed 
On which I lay thy precious form ; 
I thought to pillow thy fair head 
Upon a mother's bosom warm. 



150 THE REPEALERS. 

*^ But death, cold death, has suatch'd my child, 
And sorrow fills my aching breast ; 
Nor can it soothe my anguish wild 
To know my darling is at rest. 

" Yes, precious babe, thou 'rt gone to sleep. 
Unknowing all the cares I feel ; 
Thine eyes had yet not learn'd to weep. 

When death thus closed them with his seal. 

" Oh ! take a mourning mother's kiss, 
Impress'd upon thy forehead fair : 
Ah ! why these tears ? for thou 'rt in bliss. 
While we in sorrow linger here/' 

" Sure, there is something in real sorrow 
that touches us all ; but v/hen it is borne as 
poor Mary bears it, one feels that God gives 
us such examples to teach us how we ought to 
bear the troubles He sends us. I hope the 
lesson won't be lost on me, for sure it was one 
that would touch a heart of stone. And there 
is poor Mary in that darkened room, the empty 
cradle before her that held her dead child, and 



THE REPEALERS. 15 i 

her sick boy, with his poor burning brow, 
and he that ought to be near to comfort her, 
locked up in a prison — and all this misery is 
within a few steps of me ; and here is the 
brilHant sun going to his bed, and drawing his 
bright crimson curtains around him, just as 
if he had not looked down on grief and sorrow 
this day. How many hearts have ached and 
eyes wept, since that sun arose this morning ! 
and there he is, going to sleep with as much 
splendour as if all below here was happy. 
Sure, it isn't natural ; I 'd like to see him look 
a little gloomy, with dark clouds about him, 
instead of all those gold and crimson ones, so 
that one might think he felt a little of the 
troubles of us poor creatures; and I don't 
like to hear all the birds singing so gaily, and 
to see every thing looking so beautiful, when 
poor Mary has such a heavy heart, and her 
innocent babe is just laid in the grave. But, 



152 THE REPEALERS. 

sure, I 'm a fool to have such thoughts, just as 
if the sun, who passes over such hundreds, ay, 
and thousands of people too, can mind us ; or 
as if the birds are sensible of our troubles ; 
but still it does seem unnatural to see every 
thing in nature smiling when our hearts are 
sinking." 

When Grace entered the cottage, she found 
Jim impatiently expecting her. " I thought 
you M never come home, Grace,"" said he ; " and 
the house looked so quare and so dismal with- 
out you, that I was quite lonesome." 

" I 'm glad you missed me, Jim dear,*" said 
Grace, " and I never felt more contented to see 
you. Sure, I 've been thinking Jiow thankful 
I ought to be to God, to have you safe by my 
side, and myself too in good health, God be 
praised ! when I don't desarve such blessings 
half so much as poor Mary Mahoney. Och ! 
Jim, it is she that bears her troubles. May 



THE REPEALERS. 153 

He who gave them, lighten them, and send 
poor Patrick safe out of prison, to be a com- 
fort to her ! And now, dear Jim, that my 
heart is full with all I Ve seen and felt the 
last few hours, let us both kneel down, and 
return thanks for all the mercies we have 
enjoyed, and the sorrows that have been 
spared us." 

The earnestness of Grace's manner, and the 
description she had given him of Mary Maho- 
ney's sufferings and resignation, touched the 
naturally good heart of Jim. They knelt 
and offered up their prayers, with hearts 
penetrated with thankfulness, and retired to 
sleep with more tranquil feelings than either 
had known for some time, and determined to 
set out to visit poor Patrick in prison next 
morning. 

When Grace and Jim liad finished their 
morning's repast, they made up a store of such 
H 5 



154 THE REPEALERS. 

provisions as they thought would be accept- 
able to the poor prisoner, and then pursued 
their way to Dungarvan. It was a lovely 
morning, and all nature seemed rejoicing. 
Birds carolled on every branch, and butter- 
flies sported in the air, " like winged flowers." 
The dew still sparkled on the leaves, and the 
atmosphere was redolent with the perfume of 
the wild-flowers, growing in abundance on 
every side. 

They were leaving this bright and beautiful 
scene to enter the gloomy walls of a prison, to 
comfort him, who was debarred from this plea- 
sant sight, and who was kept away from his suf- 
fering wife and child. They both felt this, and 
while it rendered them serious, it increased their 
tenderness to each other. Jim was more like 
the Jim of former days, than he had been for 
many months, and Grace had more hopes of his 
amendment. 



THE REPEALERS. 155 

" I feel, Jim dear," said Grace, while they 
pursued their route, " that my heart has been 
lighter since we knelt down and prayed toge- 
ther last night, than it has been for months. 
Oh ! if you knew the bitterness of feeling that 
while the lips are addressing God, the heart is 
beating for one that seems to forget Him ! 
Many 's the time I Ve got up from my knees, 
fearful of offending with lip-prayers, when my 
whole soul has been with you ; and, oh I the 
frightful thoughts that have come into my mind. 
I used to imagine, Jim, that if by prayers 
and good works I could merit Heaven, what a 
terrible thing it would be for me to be there 
without you; and the idea of our being- 
separated in the next world, was so fearful to 
me, that I have been afraid to pray. But then 
I considered in myself, and I came to the 
resolution to do all the good I could, and 
always to pray for you ; and since then my 



156 THE REPEALERS. 

mind has been easier, and I find I can give my 
whole thoughts to the prayers when they are 
offered for you ; whereas, when I prayed for 
myself, my thoughts were going after you. 
Jim, how completely a poor woman's happiness 
here and hereafter depends on her husband ! 
God forgive me, for I know it''s a terrible sin 
and weakness, but I'd lose the courage to 
pray if I thought you and I would not be 
united in the next world. So you see a man 
has a double sin to answer for when he neglects 
his religion, for he risks his own soul, and his 
poor wife's too." 

" Well, Grace, I give you my hand and 
word that, with the blessing of God, I '11 never 
miss joining with you in prayers for the future, 
for what you've just tould me shows your 
own fond loving heart so plain, that I 'd be a 
brute if I could let you have such thoughts 



THE REPEALERS. 157 

when I may prevent 'em by doing my duty. 
Sure, Grace, there 's something in a good 
woman that 's holy and purifying, and if all 
women were like you and Mary Mahoney, the 
world would be better. The only wonder is, 
how poor Patrick and I could ever be such weak 
fools as to vex ye day after day. God forgive 
us for our neglect, and keep us from doing the 
like again ! It 's a quare thing, Grace, but so 
it is, that whenever you spake to me from your 
head, that is when you spake plain raison to 
me, I don't mind it a bit ; but when you 
spake to me from your heart, I *'m ready to 
do anything you ask me, for my heart un- 
derstands yours just as if they were twins — 
but the heads don't agree at all; so when 
you want to get good of me, don't spake from 
the head, for I 'm no great hand at raison- 
ing, and am very contrairy likewise, but the 



158 THE REPEALERS. 

heart is right after all, and besides, Grace, 
that 's your own, so you may do as you like 
with it." 

Jim and Grace arrived at Dungarvan, and 
sought the prison, where, after some hesitation, 
they were admitted, and allowed to see the 
poor prisoner. 



THE REPEALERS. 159 



CHAPTER XII. 

False friends will seek you in a happy home ; 
But true friends only to a prison come. 

Old Play. 

After passing through various corridors, 
attended by the turnkey, whose services they 
retained by a present, they arrived at the door 
of the cell in which Patrick Mahoney was con- 
fined. 

" Well," exclaimed Grace, " what an im- 
mense place the gaol is, and what thick walls 
and gloomy passages ! Sure it 's a curious 
thing, if the country is so poor as people say, 
that they can afford to build such large strong 



160 THE REPEALERS. 

prisons; maybe half what it cost to build it 
would keep more than half the prisoners out of 
it. Sure it''s a sign they must have great call 
for 'em ; and, you see, it would make ten of 
the parish church." 

These reflections were uttered to Jim while 
they passed through the corridors ; but when, 
arrived at the door, Grace saw the turnkey fit 
in the ponderous key to the lock, and remove 
the chain that crossed the door, the sound 
grated harshly on her ear, and she involuntarily 
shuddered. 

" Here are some friends come to visit you, 
Mahoney," said the turnkey. " The ould saying 
goes, that people don't like to see friends in 
distress, and that 's the I'aison they never come 
to 'em in prison ; but I 'm sure the two 
that's come to see you are friends, and real 
friends too ; so I '11 leave you together." And, 
pushing them in, he closed the door, and they 



THE REPEALERS. 161 

heard him bolt and lock it again on the 
outside. 

Patrick Mahoney was sitting on the side of 
his wretched bed, the only piece of furniture in 
the cell that could serve as substitute for a 
chair. He laid down the book he had been 
reading, and advanced to meet Grace and Jim. 
He was pale and haggard, with a care-worn 
aspect, as if he had been months, instead of 
only a few days, the inmate of a prison. He 
was unshaved, and his dark beard made his 
haggard paleness appear still more striking. 

" Neighbours," said he, embracing them 
both, " this is a dismal place you behold 
me in, and it's only kind and constant friends 
like yourselves that would come here. Have 
you seen my poor woman, Grace Cassidy ?" 
continued he, a tear starting to his eye as he 
spoke ; " and my poor boy, that was ill in the 
fever, when they tore me away from 'em. As 



162 THE REPEALERS. 

for Mary, she always thries to make light of 
her own sufferings ; and when I got frightened 
at seeing the terrible paleness that came over 
her face, and the twitching about her mouth, 
when they were dragging me away, sure she 
cried out to me that she was not ill at all, and 
that it was only a stitch in her chest, that was 
gone in a minute. — Her face, just as she looked 
that moment, is always before my eyes, and I 
have not the courage of a mouse to bear up 
against all the frightful thoughts that keep 
coming into my head about her." 

Grace broke to him the real state of his wife 
and child, and the death of the infant, with 
all the kind and consolatory expressions she 
could use, and delivered the messages of poor 
Mary ; but nothing could soften the bitter- 
ness of Patrick Mahoney's grief, as he felt that 
he had brought all those troubles on his wife. 
Tears chased each other down his cheeks, and 



THE REPEALERS. 163 

he accused himself with vehemence of having 
caused the death of his infant, and probably 
that of his wife and son. 

"Oh! Grace Cassidy," said he, in answer 
to Grace's attempts at consoling him, " it 's no 
use talking; sure I know and feel I'm the 
cause of it all. Has not that blessed creature, 
for blessed she is, been advising me for months 
and months not to go against my landlord, and 
not to be attending the meetings or following the 
Repalers ? and she warned me of all that would 
happen ; but I, like a brute and a fool, wouldn't 
listen to her, though I beheld her getting paler 
and thinner every day ; and you see how her 
words are come thrue ! There she is, in her 
solitary cabin, on the bed of sickness and sorrow, 
to which my folly has brought her ; and I locked 
up here, without being able to go and nurse 
her, and half-maddened by the dismal thoughts 
that comes into my head continually." 



164 THE REPEALERS. 

Fresh bursts of tears and sobs followed each 
exclamation of Patrick, which were shared by 
his two friends, who left no means untried to 
comfort the afflicted and heart-broken man. 
Grace assured him that she would go and see 
Mary every day, and that she should want for 
nothing; that they would take back cooling 
draughts for the child, and whatever the doctor 
thought would be best for Mary ; but that, 
unless they could tell her that they left Patrick 
resigned to the will of God, no medicine v/ould 
do her good : and this argument had more in- 
fluence on Patrick than all the others. 

He dried his eyes, and said to Grace, " Och ! 
I never was desarving of Mary. Never did she 
give me a cross word or a sour look, though 
many 's the time I desarved both ; and when- 
ever throuble came on us, and mostly always of 
my bringing on, she bore it so patiently, and 
was always only thinking how she should com- 



THE REPEALERS. 165 

fort me, and never remembering herself. Only 
once she spoke of herself, and how often her 
words come into my mind since I have been 
here ! ' Patrick dear,' said she, ' I could bear 
anything; but to have you taken away from 
me, to see violent hands laid upon you, oh ! I 'm 
afraid it would kill me ! and then I know your 
good heart would make you be always blaming 
yourself, and even in death this would throuble 
me.' Yet after all this good advice, I went on, 
without minding it. 

" Och ! Grace," continued the poor man, 
after a pause, " when will the terrible effects 
of my folly and bad conduct be over ? I am 
committed here on the suspicion of a murder, 
a suspicion that never could have fallen on me 
had I not been known to keep irregular and 
improper hours; and now I have murdered 
my own child, and am killing its mother, 
by that most cruel death, a breaking heart. 



166 THE REPEALERS. 

Good as Mary is, and sure such goodness was 
never surpassed on earth, how can she ever look 
at me without thinking that I caused the loss of 
the child that we both looked forward to as a 
new tie to bind us to each other ? How can I 
comfort her for the throuble I Ve brought on 
her ? and when she thinks of her baby, and often 
will she think of it, won't the thought be mixed 
with the cause of its death ? — I am that cause.'' 
Grace said all that kindness and pity could 
prompt to console the sorrow and lighten the 
remorse of Patrick, and left him not until she 
had succeeded in reconciling him to himself. 



THE REPEALERS. 167 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Adversity, 'tis thine to prove 
The truth of friendship, or of love; 
Thy frown can send the false away, 
But makes the faithful nearer stay ; 
Thy chilling breath illusion rends, 
And is too cold for summer friends. 

Old Fable. 

The meeting between Colonel Forrester and 
his party with Lord and Lady Oriel, was mark- 
ed by the most affectionate cordiality ; the 
pale cheek, chastened expression of counte- 
nance, and timid manner of Lady Oriel in- 
creased the tenderness of her brother, and the 
deep interest she excited in the rest of his new 



168 THE REPEALERS. 

family. Mrs. Forrester and she became friends 
and sisters in heart, and perhaps it would be 
difficult to find two women so calculated to 
understand and appreciate each other. Young, 
handsome, and highly accomplished, married 
to men to whom they were fondly attached, 
and without any of the pretensions or rivalry 
that in general clouds the friendship of women 
so much as to render it apocryphal, they 
quickly formed an attachment that promised 
to be as durable, as it was sincere. 

The whole party soon felt as much at home 
with each other, as if they had been acquainted 
all their lives. Mr. Desmond accompanied 
Lord Oriel over his farms, and witnessed the 
improvements in progress ; and Mrs. Desmond 
drove or walked out with Lady Oriel and Mrs. 
Forrester in the beautiful park or its environs. 
The evenings were passed in cheerful conver- 
sation, enlivened by music, and the hours flew^ 



THE REPEALERS. 169 

with a rapidity only known to those with 
highly cultivated minds, and in congenial 
society. 

It was evident that the arrival of the party 
had produced the happiest effects on the master 
and mistress of Oriel Park. Lord Oriel, in wit- 
nessing the cordiality and admiration evinced 
by the mother and daughter towards his wife, 
gained more confidence, and was enabled to 
look forward to lier future position with less 
dread. Morning calls from all the distinguish- 
ed families in the neighbourhood poured in on 
them ; and the presence of two such irreproach- 
able women as Mrs. Desmond and Mrs. For- 
rester, failed not to have a great weight in re- 
establishing Lady Oriel in her former position. 
Colonel Forrester suggested to his sister the 
propriety of her giving frequent dinners; and a 
splendid ball, to which all the ball-going peo- 
ple in the vicinity were invited, was as numer- 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE REPEALERS. 

ously attended as any fete Lady Oriel had ever 
given in former days. 

At the first commencement of this series of 
entertainments, Lord Oriel betrayed a nervous 
anxiety, as if he doubted their success ; and the 
manner of Lady Oriel showed a timidity that 
denoted she no longer felt certain, as formerly, 
that she could not fail to please. Colonel For- 
rester observed this apprehension, and, with his 
knowledge of the world, felt and declared that 
all such indications of a consciousness of having 
been placed in a false position, must be sub- 
dued, and an air of unembarrassed ease and 
cheerfulness assumed. 

" But, my dearest brother," said Lady Oriel, 
" I feel so alarmed, knowing the frightful 
things that were said and believed of me, that 
though innocent, I am always afraid of ob- 
serving some incivility or slight in the persons 
who approach me ; and when they are kind, I 



THE REPEALERS. 171 

am so grateful, and think their conduct so 
good-natured, that I can scarcely conceal what 
is passing in my mind, or preserve the same 
ease of manner, as in past times."' 

" I can understand your discomfort, dear 
Louisa,'' replied Colonel Forrester ; " and, 
with your delicacy, and sensitiveness, it is 
but natural you should feel as you do. But, 
believe me, the world will always remember 
the reports in question still more, by your 
exposition of any consciousness of their ever 
having existed. Receive, with dignified equa- 
nimity, the respect and attention due to your 
station, and which you feel you have not really 
forfeited, however appearances may have been 
against you. But beware of showing either 
timidity or gratitude, or you will be oftener 
compelled to suffer from the first, than to have 
cause for the second." 

Each week brought an increase of visiters 
I 2 



172 THE REPEALERS. 

to Oriel Park, and its susceptible master no 
longer had cause to be nervous about the re- 
ception of his wife, in his own county at least. 
Lady Oriel rejoiced, for his sake much more 
than for her own, in having recovered her 
place in society ; for the great world, or rather 
the circles of fashion that compose it, had lost 
all charms for her, from the moment she had 
experienced its frowns, and she only wished her 
husband could be as independent of it as she 
was. She felt that a happy home with a few 
chosen friends, like those at present around her, 
was preferable to all the gaiety and splendour 
of a London life ; and she ceased to value the 
admiration she had hitherto so much desired to 
excite. 

Every trial with which we are visited in life, 
however severely it may be felt at the time, 
brings with it a corrective for some error, — 
correctives, that alas ! all of us but too much 



THE REPEALERS. 173 

require. Lady Oriel had suffered severely, and 
was chastened, but not soured, by the lesson she 
had received. In ceasing to seek admiration, 
she had learned to merit esteem ; and if she 
became a less fascinating, she became a more 
estimable woman. 

If, a few days before the arrival of her bro- 
ther and his party, any one had told Lady 
Oriel how advantageous its results would be 
in assisting her to regain her place in society, 
she would have doubted, or at least have not 
believed, the extent and the rapidity with 
which this object would be accomplished ; the 
anticipation would have appeared too flattering 
to her hopes. 

But now that it was achieved, was she as 
happy as might be expected ? Alas ! no ; ex- 
perience had taught her the little value to be 
attached to the occupations and amusements 
that had hitherto filled up her time, and had 



174 THE REPEALERS. 

also laid open to her the undue importance 
her husband placed on that fickle and hollow 
circle, denominated, par excellence, the fashion- 
able world. She saw that on this foundation 
of sand, Lord Oriel was still disposed to build 
his and her happiness ; and she felt grieved 
that he could not, like her, choose a more solid 
foundation. Loving her husband as she now 
did, even with more tenderness than ever, this 
want of sympathy was mortifying to her ; and 
she trembled as she reflected, that not on her 
future conduct, but on her reception by the 
fashionable world in London, would the tran- 
quillity of her husband solely depend. 

" Could we change situations," said Lady 
Oriel to herself, '* and that he, without a crime, 
had been censured and condemned by the 
world, should I refer to that world for peace 
of mind ? No, once assured of his honour, 
and possessing his undivided affection, I would 



THE REPEALERS. 175 

abandon the circle which had doubted him, and 
proudly confine myself to the narrow one of 
chosen friends, who knew how to estimate him." 
The quickness of perception of Lady Oriel 
had led her to detect every symptom of the 
thoughts and feelings of her husband ; and her 
heart sickened when she observed his nervous 
anxiety to ascertain the effect her presence 
produced in the society around them. To 
a woman of a proud and delicate mind, 
nothing is more humiliating than to observe 
in a husband the semblance of an appeal 
to the opinions of others in the estimation he 
forms of his happiness, or of the sources of it. 
She wished Lord Oriel to be happy, without 
any reference to the uncertain criterion of 
fashionable award ; and she was jealously alive 
to the conviction, now forced on her mind, that 
never would he be happy unless he saw her 
reinstated in the same brilliant position she 



176 THE REPEALERS. 

had formerly held, and which her pride shrank 
from ever again stooping to seek, while her 
feelings yet rankled under the indignity she 
had experienced. 

The agreeable manners and excellent qua- 
lities of the Desmonds and Forresters rendered 
them universally beloved and respected by all 
the visiting circle in the vicinity of Oriel Park. 
They were so cordially pressed to prolong their 
visit, that they consented to remain until 
March, when Lord and Lady Oriel intended 
to go to London for the season, and Mr. 
and Mrs. Desmond decided on opening their 
splendid mansion on an extensive scale of hos- 
pitality, for the alleged purpose of making 
their son-in-law personally acquainted with the 
large circle of their acquaintance, but really 
much more with the intention of establishing 
Lady Oriel in that circle. The delicate tact of 
Mrs. Desmond had prevented her ever touching 



THE REPEALERS. 177 

on the subject ; but Colonel Forrester, who was 
in the secret, observing the alarm and timidity 
with which his sister contemplated her return 
to London, acquainted her with the project of 
Mrs. Desmond, and assured her that, from the 
influence and popularity of that lady, it was 
certain of being crowned with success. 

How grateful did Lady Oriel feel for such 
true, such rare proofs of friendship ; and how 
did she thank her brother, to whom she fell 
she owed it, while he disclaimed all thanks by 
saying — "I cannot allow you, my dearest 
Louisa, to think you owe the aifectionate 
friendship of my wife and her mother to me ; 
you are only indebted to me for the acquaint- 
ance. Your own merits alone have secured 
you their love, and as they are as sincere as 
they are warm in their attachments, you may 
calculate on them for life. There is this differ- 
ence between them and the persons who com- 
I 5 



178 THE REPEALERS. 

pose the fashionable world, that no evil rumour 
could be for a moment credited by the first, 
and there is no extent of evil to which the cre- 
dulity of the last will not lend a willing ear. 
Such is the difference between true friends and 
worldly ones, between good people and people 
of fashion, and from the simple reason that 
each judges from self." 

Lady Oriel conducted her amiable friends to 
the cottages that were scattered in the vicinity 
of Oriel Park, where her presence never failed 
to dispense gladness ; and when Mrs. Desmond 
and her daughter saw the cleanliness and com- 
fort that pervaded the domestic economy of 
these humble dwellings, where good order, and 
a scrupulous attention to neatness, marked the 
habits of their inhabitants, they sighed at 
the contrast offered to them in the cottages 
round Springmount, which, with the exception 
of that of Grace Cassidy and Mary Mahoney, 



THE REPEALERS, 179 

presented melancholy proofs of the often- 
repeated fact, that Ireland is a century behind 
England in civilization. 

Encouragement had not been wanting on the 
parts of Mrs. Desmond and her daughter, to 
induce the lower orders in their neighbour- 
hood to adopt the improvements and comforts 
common to the English peasantry. At their 
■jwn expense they had chimneys built, instead 
of the old mode of a hole, with a parapet of 
dried mud round it, to let out the smoke ; and 
they had glazed windows made to open, to sup- 
ply the place of the small square of bull's-eye 
glass, that admitted but little light, and no air. 
They had brick floors, instead of the unequal 
mud ones, half-filled with lodgments of water, 
and the roofs were ceiled to keep out. vermin, 
and prevent their being, as heretofore, the re- 
ceptacles of typhus, the vapours of which had 
lodged in the unceiled thatch. These improve- 



180 THE REPEALERS. 

ments had been effected, with considerable ex- 
pense to the excellent owners of Springmount, 
but had failed, except in a few instances, to 
answer the desired end — of giving the peasantry 
a taste for comfort and cleanliness. 

" Sure, the chimney carries off all the hate 
of the fire with the smoke," said old Madge 
Casey, " and the cabin isn't half so warm as it 
used to be ; and then thim plaguy windows lets 
in so much light, that if there is a speck of 
dirt, they shows it ; besides, they Ve so aisily 
broken, and then the misthress and the young 
lady are vexed if we fill up the broken pane 
with a wisp of straw or ould rags, as we used 
to do with the ould windows. The floor, too, 
is so hard to the feet, and must be claned conti- 
nually ; and as for the roof, sure, it's as could 
as ice, and as white and shining too, and keeps 
none of the hate in, as you may see by its 
having none of the marks of the smoke on it. 



THE REPEALERS. 181 

Och ! it 's not to be compared to the elegant 
roofs we had before, with the sticks across for 
the hens to roost in ; and sure it was so com- 
fortable to have all the cocks and hens over our 
heads, crowing and fighting, and the pigs rout- 
ing on the floor, and muddling in the lochs of 
water running here and there between our legs, 
and putting their snouts into the iron-pots, 
just as if they were their own throufFs, and that 
they knew they had the best right to 'em, as 
sure they certainly had, for they were the rale 
rint payers. But now every thing is changed, 
and they want to make us English, which they 
never can do, barring we 're born over again ; 
and sure it 's a pity they won't let us be com- 
fortable in our own way. Sure, them English 
must work like galley slaves, or niggers, merely 
to keep the house clane ; and what fools they 
must be to be thinking of the comforts of the 
house, as if it was a Christian, instead of think- 



18^ THE REPEALERS. 

ing of their own. I dare say the ladies did it 
all for the best ; but we Ve never had a bit of 
pace or comfort since we took to their English 
ways ; and as for the poor pigs, sure they Ve so 
lonesome and low-spirited since they 're kept in 
their styes, instead of having the run of the 
house, that it 's dismal to hear the moaning 
and grunting of 'em. The poor cocks and 
hens, too, are quite on the shockarone ; and the 
young ducks and goslings, that used to be so 
happy, swimming in the little ponds of muddy 
water in the floor, are now straying about as if 
they didn't know what to do with themselves. 
Och ! it's a dismal thing to see a family scat- 
tered about in such a manner, that used to be 
all happy and comfortable under the same roof, 
fattening and thriving together on the same 
victual, and, as a body might say, having but 
the same bed and the same board. God for- 
give them that 's the cause of all this change- 



THE REPEALERS. 183 

ment, for I 'm sure they meant it for the 
best." 

Madge Casey spoke the sentiments of the 
greater part, if not the whole, of the old pea- 
santry round Springmount. They could not 
habituate themselves to the changes, which 
they were loth to consider improvements, in 
their dwellings. 

" I don't like their newfangled alterations," 
said Molly Macguire ; " sure, it isn't natural 
that we should be following fashions that those 
that were here before us never dreamt of. I loved 
my poor father and mother that 's gone to their 
long home, and I like to remember them sitting 
one at each side of the chimney-corner, their 
toes almost in the ashes, their heads resting 
on their knees, and their short dudeens* in the 
corners of their mouths, as comfortable as two 
poor creathurs could be; the house so gay 
* Short pipes. 



184 THE REPEALERS. 

with pigs, ducks, and geese, running about the 
floor, grunting, quacking, and squalling ; cocks 
and hens crowing over their heads so lively ; 
and the gossoons so happy, tormenting the cat 
and dog, and baiting their little sisters ; — sure it 
was a pleasant sight, and the ould couple seemed 
to enjoy it ! I could sit down and remember 
this, till it seemed to be all before my eyes. 
But now every thing is so changed, that I canH 
for the life of myself bring 'em back to me, 
and this bothers me, and puts dismal thoughts 
into my head ; for I seem to be an unnatural 
child to my poor parents that 's dead and gone, 
God rest their souls ! to turn their fine flouchoo- 
laugh* cabin topsy-turvy into an English cot- 
tage, as they call it ; so that, if they were to 
come back some night (and sure there's no- 
thing to hinder 'em, as many 's the spirits have 
done before), 'twould drive 'em stark mad to see 
* Irish for hospitable. 



THE REPEALERS. 185 

how every thing is changed, and that their un- 
natural children wouldn't be contint with what 
was good enough for them. Och, agrah ! when 
one has lost those that were near and dear to 
one, it seems so natural to keep everything 
the same as it was before they went ; for then 
it seems as if they were not gone quite entirely, 
and one can bring ''em before one's eyes just as 
they used to be." 

Mrs. Desmond and her daughter saw wi^h 
disappointment that the improvements they had 
made had not increased the comfort of the 
persons they were intended to benefit; and 
their efforts to ameliorate the condition of a 
people whose prejudices and habits opposed a 
powerful obstacle to their benevolent endea- 
vours, were, though not altogether abandoned, 
greatly discouraged. 

Grace Cassidy and Mary Mahoney profited 
by the countenance and support which they 



186 THE REPEALERS. 

received. Their cottages were as clean and 
tidily kept as in England, their gardens as redo- 
lent of flowers, and there was even a spirit of 
coquetry in the care bestowed in the decoration, 
particularly by Grace, who, having no children 
to occupy her time, had more leisure than Mary. 
The fresh nosegays ranged on the dresser as 
white as unsunned snow, and on which a goodly 
show of pewter and delf was set out ; the brick 
floor, cleanly swept, and as red as a cherry ; 
the windows rubbed bright, and all the rustic 
furniture shining from the efforts of Grace's 
hands — all showed the tasteful care, as well 
as cleanly habits of the tidy housewife ; and 
her person was as well attended to as her 
house. 

The old neighbours found out that " sure 
and troth Grace Cassidy was full of conceit, to 
have her kitchen as iligant as the parlour in 
genteel houses, and her garden full of roses, 



THE REPEALERS. 187 

and other fine plants, just as if it was a gentle- 
man's garden. Sure, poor people didn't want 
flowers ; they were only fit to devart the rich, 
who had nothing else to do with their money 
or their time; but faith the pride of some 
people was mighty great, to be setting up for 
such grandeur !" 

Thus, what ought to have insured Grace the 
approval of her neighbours, excited only their 
enmity, as they considered her habits a re- 
proach to their own. This feeling was increased 
by their jealousy at seeing the plain, solid, 
eight-day clock, brass warming-pan, gridiron, 
and frying-pan, that were presented to her by 
Mrs. Forrester, in order that her Irish cottage 
should have all the appendages of an English 
one ; and they were heard to say, that " sure 
there would be no living with Grace, now that 
she was setting herself up as a lady, with her 
clock instead of an hour-glass." 



188 THE REPEALERS, 



CHAPTER XIV. 

" We may consider ourselves fortunate when we can ac- 
quire wisdom by seeing the consequences of error illus- 
trated in the persons of others, instead^of in our own/* 

Every word which Patrick said, touched a 
chord that vibrated in the heart of Jim, and all 
the reflections and advice of Grace failed to 
produce an equal effect on his mind. Example 
is always more convincing than precept, and 
this was never more exemplified than in the 
altered tone of feelings with which Jim Cassidy 
returned to his home. Both husband and wife 
deeply sympathised with the poor prisoner 
they had left, and the serene aspect of nature 



THE REPEALERS. 189 

and the pure freshness of the air seemed, from 
the contrast of the heavy atmosphere and 
gloomy cell in which they had spent the last 
two hours, to be still more delightful. 

" When will poor Patrick be at liberty to 
enjoy all that is now refreshing us ?" said Jim. 
" Och ! Grace ma-vourneen, when I think 
that I might have been there in his place, and 
have seen you shut out from me as we were 
from him^ sure it makes the heart sink within 
me." 

"But you forget, Jim dear," replied Grace, 
" that 1, being your wife, should have a right 
to stay with you wherever you were, and there- 
fore I'd be with you in that gloomy, narrow 
cell, for I have no child to keep me at home 
away from my husband. If poor Mary had no 
children she would be with Patrick, and then 
he would not be so miserable, nor she neither." 

" That's just like your own womanly heart, 



190 THE REPEALERS. 

to think so," said Jim ; "but you don't know 
the heart of man, ma-colleen : we are proud and 
obstinate : we are like the oaks of the forest, 
that stand in pride to resist the storm, and re- 
fuse to bend to it, till it strikes us to the earth; 
but ye are like the delicate shrubs that yield to 
every breeze, and bend with it, so that ye are 
not destroyed as we are. If Mary was in that 
wretched hole of a cell, she would be content 
because she was near him^ and doing her duty ; 
but he would be always noticing the want of 
comfort around her, and dwelling on the dis- 
grace of having brought her there, with the 
bitter thought that it was by not discharging 
his duty that they were both there : so un- 
happy as he is away from her, I think he would 
be more unhappy to have her there. Then, 
Grace, every man has a pride for his wife, and 
though he can bear up against the affronts he 
has brought on himself, he couldn't bear to see 



THE REPEALERS. 191 

her with turnkeys and bad people about her 
A woman, that's what a woman should be, is as 
misplaced in a prison as a beautiful fresh nose- 
gay, the sight of which only makes one low- 
spirited, by reminding one of where it came 
from, and where it ought to be. One would 
like to keep the wife and the flowers for our 
own home."" 

" Yes, Jim dear, I can understand a man's 
thinking thus, but a woman never deems herself 
out of her place when she is comforting her 
husband. Sure, the very words, the holy words 
of marriage, says, they are never to forsake each 
other in sickness or in health, in riches or in 
poverty, and much more in sorrow ought they 
to be together ; but men are too apt, Jim dear, 
to treat women as flowers, that are for sunshine 
and happiness, instead of being charms in gloom 
and trouble ; whereas we are never so much at 
home as in comforting the afilicted, and making 



19^ THE REPEALERS. 

thole we love forget the cares and vexations 
that fall on all.'' 

About this period news arrived that Donelly, 
who had fled for the murder of the policeman, 
had fallen a victim to a drunken quarrel with 
some of his reckless associates, and his aged 
father and mother, whose sole support he was, 
were now plunged in grief, with no consolation 
left them, but that, had he been arrested by the 
police, his life would have paid the penalty of 
his crime, with all the ignominy attached to 
such a death ; and from this additional misery, 
his scarcely less disgraceful, though less pub- 
licly disgraceful, death had saved them. Their 
poor neighbours flocked round to comfort 
them ; and the worthy rector, Mr. Disnay, 
afforded them ample assistance. 

The unhappy parents, while receiving the 
generous stipend of Mr. Disnay, administered 
with no sparing hand, remembered with bitter- 



THE REPEALERS. 193 

ness, that their unfortunate and guilty son had 
been one of the most active of the ringleaders 
in opposing the payment of tithes, and acknow- 
ledged how admirable was the creed of that 
religion which repays injuries with benefits. — 
'' Och ! Mich," said the poor old woman to 
her husband, " isn't it a fine thing, and a won- 
derful thing too, to see Parson Disnay, and all 
his family, showing such favour to us after all 
the harm and mischief our poor boy that's dead 
and gone did to them and theirs ? Well, God 
rest his soul and forgive him his sins ! sure he'd 
be now alive if he hadnH followed bad advisers ; 
and it's only the good pattern that Parson Dis- 
nay sets us, in forgiving all our poor boy did 
against him, that keeps me from going down 
on my knees to give my ten thousand curses to 
them Repalers that led our child astray." 

Forgiveness acts as a salve to the wounds 
inflicted by unkindness, while revenge or ran- 

VOL. II. K 



194 THE REPEALERS. 

cour but serves to keep them unhealed. The 
Irish have not been taught to practise this 
virtue (for a virtue it positively is, and for its 
perfection requiring many others) ; but, unfor- 
tunately, their passions, quick to be excited 
and as quick to be appeased, have ever been 
encouraged to keep alive the spirit of ven- 
geance, as something praiseworthy ; while for- 
giveness they are taught to consider as a proof 
of a mean spirit and a dastardly nature. So 
little were the poor and ignorant peasantry 
capable of appreciating the conduct of Mr. 
Disnay and his curate, that the instances of 
their forgiveness of injuries, and repayment of 
evil with good, were sometimes reputed as in- 
dications of their cowardice, meanness, or cun- 
ning, or all three united ; and this opinion was 
entertained by a people eminently calculated 
by nature not only to appreciate, but to prac- 
tise the virtue they decried. It has been truly 



THE REPEALERS. 195 

said, that " happiness is but opinion ;" but, 
alas ! we see examples constantly brought be- 
fore us that virtue is equally a matter of con- 
vention ; and the sister-country proves, that 
from ignorance and superstition, two giant 
fiends, beneath whose shadow all goodness be- 
comes blighted, that which is most admirable 
in religion and morals may, even in the nine- 
teenth century, be as undervalued as it is mis- 
understood. 

In holding up Mr. Disnay and his curate as 
examples of the advantage to be derived to 
parishioners from seeing before them men 
whose lives accord with their professions, we 
would not have it imagined that good clergy- 
men are wholly confined to the established 
church. We have known many excellent and 
worthy priests of the Roman Catholic religion ; 
but many of their tenets precluded the possi- 
bility of their being equally serviceable to 
K 2 



196 THE REPEALERS. 

their flock ; and above all, the Divine precept of 
" Do unto others as you would they should 
do unto you" was never sufficiently inculcated 
or acted upon, to enable them to subdue the 
angry feelings or violent actions of their in- 
flammable flocks. 

It augurs ill for any religion, when the 
persons who profess it act in open violation 
of its dictates. Murder, violence, and rapine, 
speak little in favour of the manner in which 
the powerful influence, supposed to be held by 
the Roman Catholic priests over their flocks, 
is wielded ; and the constant repetition of 
such atrocities must dispose all reasonable 
people to conclude, either that the priests have 
no power — the most charitable conclusion, or 
that the country where such outrages stain the 
national character must have less religion than 
any other country on the face of the globe ; or, 
lastly, that the religion professed by the ma- 



THE REPEALERS. 197 

jority in Ireland is totally powerless in influ- 
encing their conduct or feelings — the chief and 
grand motive of all religion. We are told, and 
the statement is borne out by the accounts 
which every week reach us, that the priests 
are but as the tools of him who rules Ireland ; 
whose sceptre is a firebrand, never waved but 
for destruction, and the ignition of the passions 
of his deluded followers. 

What can be thought of ministers of the 
Gospel, sent to preach peace and good will on 
earth, who lend themselves to the further- 
ance of bloodshed, the violation of all laws, and 
the plans of those who oppose themselves to 
the legitimate rulers of the land, tracking the 
path of rebellion by the blood of their victims ? 
Let us in charity hope that the priests are 
powerless, that they only yield obedience 
to the reign of terror they cannot resist, and 
that when the strong and mighty arm of the 



198 THE REPEALERS. 

law shall have quelled the anarchy which has so 
long deluged Ireland in crime, they will show 
that what has appeared to be guilt, was only 
weakness, and lend their assistance to soothe 
angry feelings, and re-establish peace and good 
order. Let them, by their conduct, prove that 
the Roman Catholic religion never tolerates 
crime, whatever may be its object ; and we will 
be one of the first to render them justice. 



THE REPEALERS. 199 



CHAPTER XV. 

" Are we not join'd by Heav'n ? 
Each interwoven with the other's fate ? 
Are we not mix'd like streams of meeting rivers. 
Whose blended waters are no more distinguish'd, 
But roll into the sea one common flood ?" 



" Domestic happiness, the only bliss 
Of Paradise that has survived the fall !" 

Each day since their union had served to 
render Colonel Forrester and his wife more 
tenderly attached to each other ; a great simi- 
larity of tastes joined to excellent tempers, 
kept them in perpetual harmony, and the un- 
deviating affection with which Colonel For- 



200 THE REPEALERS. 

rester attended to the comforts of Mr. and 
Mrs. Desmond, was a new bond of union be- 
tween him and his excellent wife. She repaid 
it by the warmth with which she attached her- 
self to his sister, Lady Oriel, and the sweet- 
ness with which she soothed the occasional 
moodiness of her Lord. No day passed in 
which the Desmonds did not congratulate 
themselves on the son-in-law whom Providence 
had given them ; and as they marked the hap- 
piness of their daughter, how did they rejoice 
in her choice, and in their ready acquiescence 
in it. 

Mrs. Forrester was now as ladies wish to 
be who love their lords ; and this circum- 
stance seemed to complete the happiness of 
the whole family. " How I hope it will be 
a son !" said Mrs. Desmond, " that it may 
be named after you," laying her hand on that 
of her husband ; ^' it would give me such hap- 



THE REPEALERS. 201 

piness to see another Walter Desmond as the 
future master of Springmount/' 

" But, my dear," replied Mr. Desmond, 
" Forrester's is as ancient a name as ours, 
and it would be ungracious to accept this 
compliment from him, of changing the name 
of his first-born." 

*' Well, well," said Mrs. Desmond, " the 
truth must out, for I cannot keep this, the 
first secret that was ever between us, any 
longer. Forrester has told me that his first 
son is to be Walter Desmond, and that if 
God grants him a second, he is to be For- 
rester, with his English estate settled on him. 
All this he told me very soon after his mar- 
riage, but I won't tell you what he said, when 
he prayed that his first-born might resemble 
you in every respect, for I should make you 
too proud." 

" The man who was honoured by your 
K 5 



202 THE REPEALERS. 

preference, and blessed by your affection for 
twenty years, my dearest Louisa, must be 
already too proud to be spoilt by any other 
circumstance, however flattering ; but I feel 
deeply sensible of the affectionate delicacy of 
Forrester, and think we may consider ourselves 
to have indeed drawn a prize in the lottery of 
life, in having secured such a protector for 
our child, and such a companion for our- 
selves." 

The period had now arrived for the de- 
parture of the Desmonds and Forresters from 
Oriel Park for London, and they set out with 
regret from a place where they had passed 
their time so happily, and formed friendships 
which they felt would only terminate with their 
lives. The gentleness, and various powers of 
pleasing, which Lady Oriel so eminently pos- 
sessed, had excited an affection in the minds 
of her guests, which every day's knowledge of 



THE REPEALERS. 20S 

her served to increase, and she repaid it with 
warmth and sincerity. Mrs. Desmond she 
loved and respected as a mother, and Mrs. 
Forrester she attached herself to as a sister ; 
and as she had never known either of those 
precious ties, she yielded to the new feelings of 
affection which were developed in her sensitive 
heart, with all the tenderness that formed a 
part of her nature. In short, the united fami- 
lies presented the rare example of parting with 
increased regard, after having passed the dif- 
ficult ordeal of a sejour of three months in a 
country-house, and looked forward with im- 
patience to their meeting in London in a few 
days. 

Had Lady Oriel not been supported by the 
protecting presence of Mrs. Desmond and Mrs. 
Forrester, she dared not have contemplated her 
return to London ; and even with their support, 
she looked forward to it with dread ; her self- 



204f THE REPEALERS. 

confidence was gone, and she felt that a look, 
a whisper, or a cold reception, had power to 
overwhelm her with confusion and dismay. 
The conduct of the unfeeling Lady Borrodaile 
at Keswick, had sunk deep in her mind, was 
often reflected upon, and never without bitter- 
ness, not towards the obtuse and ill-bred ma- 
tron, but towards herself, for having so far 
forgotten her dignity as to have placed herself 
in a situation to be exposed to the rudeness 
of such a person. Had Lady Oriel known the 
motives of Lady Borrodaile's conduct, she would 
have smiled in pity at what had pained her, for 
the impertinence of that lady had proceeded 
solely from jealousy and envy, at seeing her 
daughter overlooked whenever she was in the 
same society with Lady Oriel ; a circumstance 
that excited in the mind of the mother, a dis- 
like to the fair and innocent cause, and which 
she seized the first opportunity that offered for 
displaying. 



THE REPEALERS. 205 

Had Lady Oriel known that this female 
dragon of virtue, who pulled her daughter 
away from a contact with a suspected woman, 
was in the constant habit of bringing her in 
close intimacy with women relative to whose 
reputations suspicion had long been exchanged 
for certainty, she would not have judged her- 
self so severely as she had done. But, with 
the delicate susceptibility of a pure and proud 
mind, she was more disposed to think favour- 
ably of the motives of others, than to find 
excuses for herself. Lady Oriel had yet to 
learn, that severity towards the errors, real, 
or supposed, of others, rarely proceeds from a 
love of virtue or detestation of vice, but are 
the modes in which jealousy and envy delight 
to avenge themselves for mortifications, of 
which, perhaps, she whose beauty or talents 
excite them, is the only person unconscious. 
An error in conduct may be overlooked, pro- 



a06 THE REPEALERS. 

vided the sinner is neither young, beautiful, nor 
cleTer, the qualities which, alas I most fre- 
quently lead to error, by exciting the adoii- 
ration that prompts women to listen to the 
tempter ; but if she be handsome, or clever, 
or worse — both, then must she expect no 
mercv from her own sex, and make up her 
mind to console herself with the occupation 
which talents never fail to give to those who 
cultivate them, and which always •* prove their 
own exceeding great reward." 

There are situations in life in which, because 
the evil qualities of our natures are not called 
into action, we believe we have them not ; and 
others, when, because the good qualities lie 
dormant, or are chilled by unpropitious cir- 
cumstances, we imagine they do not exist. 
Alas ! human nature is a web of mingled yarn. 
where good and evil are so closely woven toge- 
gether that it is difficult to separate them ; one 



THE REPEALERS. 207 

is sometimes more visible than the other, but 
both are to be found in all. the degrees differ- 
ing only in proportion to the excitement the}' 
find. 

Without the unfortunate dilemma in which 
Lady Oriel's imprudence had placed her hus- 
band and herself, the defects of Lord Oriel 
had probably never been observed, for it was 
this circumstance that encouraged their growth. 
He had now become so dependant on worldly 
opinion for happiness, that he lost much of the 
native dignity of his character ; and Lad}^ Oriel 
saw this defect with sorrow and self-reproach, 
attributing it to her own fatal imprudence. 
They left Oriel Park a few days after the 
Desmonds and Forresters had proceeded to 
London, and both entered town once more. 
with mutual fears for the future and painful 
retrospections of the past. 

The Morning Post announced the arrival 



208 THE REPEALERS. 

of the Earl and Countess of Oriel in Grosvenor 
Square ; and the same paper, among the fashion- 
able parties for the week, announced a grand 
dinner for Wednesday at the splendid mansion 
of Mr. and INIrs. Desmond, and a ball for 
Friday, to which all the elite of fashion in 
London were invited. Lady Oriel found in- 
vitations for both; and her brother, a few 
hours after her arrival, came to urge the ne- 
cessity of her appearing at them. 

The dinner-party consisted of the Duke and 
Duchess of Heaviland, the Marquis and Mar- 
chioness of Bowood, the Earl and Countess of 
Grandison, and two or three distinguished 
members of the House of Commons. The 
party had been arranged with a view to intro- 
ducing Lady Oriel into the circle to which 
Mrs. Desmond was most anxious she should 
belong — a circle wherein the aristocracy of 
reputation was considered to be versus that of 



THE REPEALERS. 209 

fashionable exclusiveness — the one in which she 
had hitherto figured. 

Lady Oriel could not resist casting a glance 
at her husband, when Mrs. Desmond presented 
her to the Duchess of Heaviland, the only 
lady there with whom she was not acquainted, 
though her acquaintance with the others was 
but slight ; and she observed that he anxiously 
watched her reception by a lady who was con- 
sidered so scrupulous as to female propriety 
as the Duchess. The accueil was peculiarly 
gracious, because Mrs. Desmond had spoken 
highly of Lady Oriel. The evil reports in 
circulation she had never heard, or, if heard, 
had forgotten ; and, even had they been re- 
membered, her knowledge of Mrs. Desmond's 
character and principles would have led her to 
disbelieve them. The other ladies behaved 
just as they would have done in former days; 
and after the first ten minutes of nervous 



210 THE REPEALERS. 

embarrassment were over, the marked affection 
of Mrs. Desmond and Mrs. Forrester, with the 
manly and dignified bearing of her brother, 
who being deputed by Mr. Desmond to do the 
honors chez lui, and as host, directed much of 
his attention to his timid sister, soon placed her 
at her ease. 

In the drawing-room, during the soiree, the 
Duchess expressed her desire to cultivate the 
acquaintance of Lady Oriel ; and a number of 
other ladies, who came in the evening, renewed 
with apparent pleasure their former intercourse 
with her. Lord Oriel observed all this with 
gratified feelings, and in returning home, re- 
marlced what an agreeable day they had spent ; 
a remark that elicited a smile from his wife, 
who, however satisfied she might feel at the 
flattering reception she had received on this 
her first entre into fashionable life since she had 
retired from it, had more than once mentally 



THE REPEALERS. 211 

confessed, that it was the only dull day she had 
passed in the society of the Desmonds and 
Forresters. 

She had been enjoying such rationally happy 
evenings during their stay at Oriel Park, that 
she found it difficult to reconcile herself to the 
vapid amusements of balls and routs ; and she 
resolved that, if she was fortunate enough to 
recover her former position in society, so as to 
satisfy her husband's susceptibility, she would 
confine herself as much as possible to the do- 
mestic circle, where she felt that true happiness 
could alone be found. 

Cards of visits and invitation came pouring 
in every succeeding day, to all of which Lord 
Oriel gave an attention very unlike his former 
indifference. He had become excessively scru- 
pulous as to the reputations of the ladies on 
his wife's visiting list, and requested her to 
avoid two or three who were considered un pea 



21^ THE REPEALERS. 

leste, but who were generally received in so- 
ciety. Lady Oriel ventured to observe, that 
having suffered herself from the malignity of 
scandal, she thought it wrong to show more 
prudery than other ladies towards the persons 
in question. But he with a sigh answered, 
that it was this very misfortune that rendered 
it so much more necessary for her to be scru- 
pulous; and though she felt the truth of the 
remark, it wounded her. 



THE REPEALERS. 213 



CHAPTER XVI. 

London, the mart of luxury and pride, 
Where wealth the sceptre holds, and gold's the guide 
That leads the crowd, while virtue, talent, sense, 
Must be their own exceeding recompense ; 
Hore scandal finds an ever-willing ear, 
And pity seldom stops to drop a tear ; 
On paper wings the piquant slanders fly, 
And sabbath moms see reputations die. 
False friends — true foes — alike press on to read 
The tale that dooms some victim's heart to bleed. 
Here Fashion, motley goddess, changing still, 
Finds ready subjects to obey her will. 
Who laugh at nature and her simple rules, 
Because they are not form'd for knaves and fools. 

London^ a Satire. 

An invitation to dinner soon followed the 
visit of the Duchess of Heaviland to Lady Oriel, 
and this seemed to afford extreme satisfaction to 
her husband. Heaviland House was consider- 



2H THE REPEALERS. 

ed one of the last strong-holds of aristocratic 
grandeur that London boasts ; the style of the 
mansion, the extreme richness and solid beauty 
of the furniture, and the almost feudal splen- 
dour kept up in the establishment, might well 
entitle it to this distinction. It was not more 
unlike the town mansions of the generality of 
our nobility, than were its owners. 

The Duke of Heaviland was a nobleman of 
high character, reserved and dignified manners, 
amiable disposition, and domestic habits. With 
a true taste for magnificence, he avoided all 
ostentation ; and though his immense fortune 
and high character gave him great weight, he 
took little part in public life, and contented 
himself with discharging the duties of his ele- 
vated station with scrupulous exactitude. He 
had filled the situation of Viceroy, in Ireland 
with impartiality and credit; had visited the 
French court as ambassador extraordinary, and 



THE REPEALERS. 215 

left behind him, in France, a deep impression 
of the splendour and hospitality of the English 
nobility, which few were so well calculated to 
represent with dignity, as the Duke and his 
amiable Duchess. The Duke's politics were 
high tory, and had always been so consistent, 
reasonable, and moderate, as to gain him the 
respect of all parties. 

The Duchess of Heaviland was exactly the 
wife suited to the Duke, and fitted to fill the 
high station she held. Sensible, mild, digni- 
fied, and perfectly unaff*ected, she pursued 
the even tenour of her way, avoiding all cliques, 
and confining her society to a select circle, as 
irreproachable in morals as elevated in rank. 
No petty competition, no political intrigues, no 
assumption of leading or driving the world of 
fashion, ever actuated the Duchess of Heavi- 
land's movements. She stood proudly aloof 
from the crowd, supporting with dignity " her 



216 THE REPEALERS. 

place of state," respected by all, and beloved by 
those who had opportunities of knowing her. 

It was during her Grace's sejour in Ireland, 
as the representative of female majesty, that 
Mrs. Desmond's acquaintance with her ripened 
into a strong and cordial friendship, and had 
since been maintained by frequent intercourse 
and correspondence. And it was at the desire 
of Mrs. Desmond that the Duchess cultivated 
the acquaintance of Lady Oriel, as hitherto, 
her Grace had rarely sought any intimacy with 
the members of the clique, to which Lady 
Oriel had formerly belonged, from their being, 
as she observed, too fashionable, and too gay 
for her sober habits. 

The gentleness and decorum of Lady Oriel's 
manners had strengthened the favourable im- 
pression given of her by Mrs. Desmond, and 
each interview increased the Duchess's admira- 
tion and good opinion of her. The Duke and 



THE REPEALERS. 217 

Lord Oriel also formed an intimacy which 
brought them often together; and the select 
and distinguished guests whom the Oriels fre- 
quently met at Heaviland House, all sought the 
acquaintance of Lady Oriel, who, as the con- 
stant associate of the Duchess of Heaviland, 
soon became as recherchee in the best society, as 
even her fastidious Lord could desire. Those 
who had formerly dropped off from her, now as 
eagerly sought a renewal of her acquaintance, 
and she conducted herself so mildly and decor- 
ously towards them, that they accused them- 
selves of inj ustice, in ever having doubted her 
purity. 

This was a triumph to Lord Oriel, and seem- 
ed all that was requisite to his happiness ; his 
pride in his wife no longer humiliated, he be- 
came cheerful and gay, and a succession of 
recherche dinners, and brilliant soirees, once 

VOL. II. L 



218 THE REPEALERS. 

more enlivened his elegant residence in Gros- 
venor Square. 

The Desmonds and Forresters, to whom Lady 
Oriel owed her reinstatement in society, were 
delighted beyond measure at witnessing the 
happiness they caused; and all was sunshine 
and gaiety in the two families, who never passed 
a day without meeting, and felt that each in- 
terview only rendered them mutually dearer. 
Colonel Forrester and his Frances made the 
house of Mr. Desmond so agreeable, that it was 
quoted as offering the pleasantest society in 
London ; and the worthy pair seemed to grow 
young in witnessing the happiness of their 
children. 

Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester were at the 
Opera, and Lord Albany entered their box. " I 
hope, ladies," said he, " that you are delighted 
with the ballet of Faust. You must admit that 
the music is as pretty as it is original ; and the 



THE REPEALERS. ^19 

March, infernal as it is meant to be, is very 
fine. I like the Opera better than any other 
theatrical amusement,'*'' continued Lord Albany ; 
" the hour is more suited to one's habits ; for 
really it is bien genant to be obliged to swallow 
one's dinner, and drive off in a state of personal 
discomfort, to arrive when half the new comedy 
or tragedy is over, and be told that the most 
effective scenes have passed. Then the sort of 
dinners one gets preparatory to a play — I think 
of them with horror ! To dine dans une bonne 
maison the day of a premeditated visit to the 
theatre, is out of the question ; so one is forced 
to hurry over soup and cotelettes, a la minute, 
at Crockford's, at the risk of burning one's 
mouth ; and drink wine half-iced, denying one- 
self the gentlemanly comfort of discussing a 
dessert ; and then ' to be taken (as the poetical 
apothecary's label directs) and well shaken' 
over the pave in a cabriolet, one is out of 
L 2 



S20 THE REPEALERS. 

humour before one arrives, digestion is de- 
ranged, comfort destroyed, patience put hors de 
combat ; and, consequently, one is little disposed 
to judge favourably of the entertainment, and 
one leaves the theatre, vowing that we have 
now neither dramatic writers nor actors; and 
all this because we have been derange^ and that 
if we will not change our hours, so they will not 
change theirs." 

" But would it not be a good plan to go to 
the theatre without dining," asked Lady Oriel, 
" and sup afterwards ? by which means, all the 
disagreeable effects you have so pathetically 
deplored would be avoided."" 

" Helas ! mes dames,'''' said Lord Albany, " I 
have tried that plan ; but it answers not. From 
going without dinner, one is apt to make a 
more substantial supper, and this banishes 
sleep. The ghosts of the murdered lamb, 
chicken, &c. sacrificed to our appetites, rise up 



THE REPEALERS. 221 

in judgment against one, presenting even more 
hideous visions than those which murdered the 
slumbers of Macbeth." 

" How much more you men think of dinners 
than we do !" said Mrs. Forrester. 

" I own that in general we do," replied Lord 
Albany ; " for la gourmandise is not a female 
vice. Still, who can deny that much of our 
comfort depends on our dinners? and he is 
therefore wise, who, reflecting that as we must 
dine three hundred and sixty-five days in the 
year, resolves to dine well, in order to spare 
the stomach and its poor dependant, the temper. 
I never dine with Lord Refton without feeling 
a happier and, I do believe, a better man for 
the rest of the evening ; ' my bosom's lord sits 
lightly on its throne,' because the stomach is 
not weighed down with any ' perilous stuiF.' 
His plats are so delicious, so tpure from all 
that is gross, that they can only send light and 



222 THE REPEALERS. 

agreeable vapours to the brain ; and this 
accounts for his being always gay, spirituel, 
and amiable.'' 

" I know not if this be the cause," said Lady 
Oriel, " but I am ready to admit the effect ; 
for Lord Refton is very agreeable and spi- 
ritueV 

" Oh ! I do assure your ladyship," replied 
Lord Albany, " that my theory on this point 
is irrefutable. Good cooks make agreeable 
men. Only compare the most gifted con- 
versationist, even Moore himself, after a dinner 
at Refton 's, or in an ordinary house with the 
same guests, and he would be no longer equally 
brilliant. I have thought of searching into 
history, to discover the materials of which were 
composed the particular repasts eaten by the 
remarkable men of the last century the day of, 
or the day previous to, any remarkable action, as 
I am convinced it would elucidate my system. 



THE REPEALERS. 22S 

Only fancy what a load of responsibility would 
be taken off from poor human nature, by disco- 
vering that all our crimes proceeded either 
from a bad dinner or the want of a dinner, and 
ascertaining that 

* When poor fellows go astray, 
Their dinners are in fault — not they.' " 

'* I must say, you talk con amove about din- 
ners," said Lady Oriel ; " you would almost 
persuade one you thought of nothing else." 

" Apropos to con amore^ as beauty always is 
to hearts," replied Lord Albany, " who is that 
very handsome woman opposite to us? she 
might make one forget dinner and supper 
too." 

" That lady," said Lady Oriel, looking at 
her through her glass, " is the wife of our most 
popular writer, and is remarkably beautiful ; 
features, complexion, expression, all are fault- 



224> THE REPEALERS. 

less. Mr. Desmond pointed her out to me the 
other evening as one of the very few perfect 
specimens now to be seen of a beauty peculiar 
to Ireland: hair like the wing of the raven 
seen with the sun's rays full on it, and skin 
white as the driven snow, with eyes of Heaven's 
own blue. The lady comes of an ancient Irish 
race, and belies not her blood, which sends that 
mantling rose-tint to her cheeks, ' as if she 
blushed because she is too fair.' " 

" A mauvaise honte^'''' added Lord Albany, 
" that few ladies are guilty of for such a cause ! 
Look into the parterre, and you will see talking 
together two of the men who have the most suc- 
ceeded in fiction — Moore the poet and Lord 
Fableton. Both have made reputations from 
the exercise of the same power — imagination ; 
but such is the prejudice of society, that while 
one is admired and followed as a poet, the other 
is decried and shunned as a liar. Imagi- 



THE REPEALERS. 225 

nation, which is the Eldorado of the poet and 
of the novel-writer, often proves the most perni- 
cious gift to the individuals who compose the 
talkers instead of the writers in society. How 
strange does it appear to casuists," continued 
Lord Albany, smiling, " that one man with his 
plume can soar into the regions of fiction, and 
gain immortality by a brilliant fable; while 
another, using his tongue instead of a pen, and 
adhering to prose instead of verse, becomes 
stamped with the degrading epithet of a liar, 
and all from a different use of the same faculty ! 
What a poet would my poor friend Lord Fa- 
bleton have made, had he turned his inventive 
powers to good account, instead of being, as at 
present, considered an emulator of the Baron 
Munchausen ! 

" I was present the other evening,*" con- 
tinued Lord Albany, " at the reading of a 
poem from the pen of a celebrated author. 
L 5 



226 THE REPEALERS. 

' What a brilliant imagination ! what invention !' 
was repeated at every side ; and albeit unused 
to the approving mood, I was forced to yield 
assent to their well-merited commendations. I 
left Grosvenor Square duly impressed with the 
advantages of imagination, and wishing that I, 
too, could find a ladder to mount into this 
palace of gold, and bear away even a little of 
its dust. With this feeling I entered White's, 
and seated myself, inwardly invoking the aid 
of imagination, until my invocations were in- 
terrupted by the voice of my imaginative 
friend. Lord Fableton, who related tales and 
anecdotes which satisfied many of his hearers 
that he was in his anecdotage, and stated as 
facts the bright eff*usions of his brain. The 
past, present, and future, were equally and 
impartially misrepresented, and the poem I 
had heard read in the early part of the even- 
ing, contained much less invention than his con- 



THE REPEALERS. 227 

versation. No sooner had he withdrawn, than 
the circle he had left commented most severely 
on his want of veracity. ' And this,' thought 
I, ' is the reward of genius, and such is the in- 
vidious distinction made between men of equal 
powers of imagination. One gains immortality 
by his pen, while the prejudices of society 
stamps my poor friend as a liar, only for having 
spoken his bright imaginings — he ought to have 
been a poet.' — The young lady next the Irish 
beauty is the authoress of * Romance and 
Reality,' and of several exquisite poems, full 
of imagery, and of a fancy that would not 
have shamed Hafiz himself." 

" I have read her novel," said Lady Oriel, 
" and think it exceedingly clever ; the dialogue 
epigrammatic and sparkling, displaying all the 
freshness and gaiety of youth, with the obser- 
vation of maturity." 

** How very well Lady Elsimore is looking 
this evening !" said Mrs. Forrester. 



22S THE REPEALERS. 

" She is very handsome certainly," replied 
I.ady Oriel ; " indeed so are all the family ; and 
I remember being particularly struck, when I 
saw her and her sister the late Lady Usridge 
for the first time, both fair and with an air so 
distingue and comme il faut, each adding to 
the charm of the other; indeed I never see 
the living sister without thinking of the lost 
one, the beautiful pendant that Nature gave 
her. Then in the box to the left, is the 
authoress of ' The Buccaneers,' one of the 
best novels that has appeared for a long time, 
full of incident and interest, powerfully sus- 
tained and clearly developed." 

" When you visit Ireland, dear sister," said 
Mrs. Forrester, '' you will be better able to 
appreciate the truth and beauty of this lady's 
Irish Sketches ; they are portraits from the life, 
and full of truth and beauty. The wife of one 
of my father's tenants, Grace Cassidy, with 



THE REPEALERS. 2^9 

whom I long to make you acquainted, is just 
the heroine for the graphic pen of Mrs. Hall, 
who alone could do her justice." 

" Mrs. Desmond has been telling me so 
much of this pretty peasant, this fourth 
Grace," said Lady Oriel, " that 1 already 
take an interest in her, perhaps not the less 
because I hear she is as pretty as good." 

" Who is that very pretty person opposite 
to us?'' asked Lady Oriel. 

" That," said Mrs. Forrester, " is Lady Kid- 
ney, who turned the heads of all our Dublin 
beaux, without ever for a moment losing her 
own ; I never saw a young person so little 
elated by un>'ersal admiration. The lady 
leaving the box next Lady Kidney's, is the 
authoress of, what shall I say, half the popular 
novels of the day, among which there is not 
a single failure ; her books give you all the 
sparkle of fashionable life, without any of its 



230 THE REPEALERS. 

inanity, and her fecundity of imagination is as 
extraordinary as her facility of language ; she 
appears never to tire herself, and certainly 
never tires her readers, for she is always bril- 
liant and often profound. 



THE REPEALERS. 231 



CHAPTER XVII. 

" The world's all title-page — there 's no contents; 
The world 's all face ; the man who shows his heart, 
Is hooted for his nudities, and scorn'd." 

" Ce ne sont ni les lettres ni les sciences qui nuiront 
jamais a I'energie du caract^re. L'^loquence rend plus 
brave, la bravoure rend plus eloquent; tout ce qui fait 
battre le cceur pour une id^e g^nereuse double la veritable 
force de Thomme, sa volonte. Mais I'^goisme systema- 
tique, dans lequel on comprend quelquefois sa famille 
comme un appendice de soi-m^me; mais la philosophic, 
vulgaire au fond, quelque Elegante qu'elle soit dans les 
formes, qui porte a dedaigner tout ce qu'on appelle des 
illusions, c'est-a-dire le d^vouement et I'enthousiasme, 
voil^ le genre de lumifere redoutable pour les vertus 
nationales." 

" And so you advise me," said the Duchess 
of Wellinborough to her Duke, " to continue 
to visit Lady Oriel." 



232 THE REPEALERS. 

" Decidedly," said the Duke ; " if, as you 
say, you believe her to be innocent with regard 
to the scandalous reports in circulation." 

" But what will the world say ? And if, as 
I suspect, a party is made against her, my 
single countenance can do her little good, and 
may do me much harm."" 

" My dear Jane, I am shocked to hear such 
sophisms from your lips. The same mode of 
reasoning has ruined many a woman ; because 
while each of her friends, if friends such calcu- 
lators might be called, stood aloof for fear she 
should be the only female ready to do a kind 
and charitable action, the poor woman has 
fallen to the deepest depth of the slough of 
despond, plante by those on whom she reckon- 
ed in her hours of need ; whereas, if each 
individual had had moral courage, and gone to 
the rescue of her whom they believed guiltless, 
they would quickly have found others to 



THE REPEALERS. 

follow their example. It is not the crime, 
but its consequences, that you all dread. Self- 
ishness has taken the place of all natural 
feeling : you are willing to be on terms of 
intimacy in society with those of your own sex, 
about whose conduct you cannot doubt, be- 
cause they happen to be received, yet draw oiF 
in terror from some you loved, and do not 
suspect, because scandal has seared what vice 
could not sully. If you were all ignorant of 
the misconduct of those you continue to visit, I 
should hold you blameless ; and if you believ- 
ed the scandal propagated against those you 
discard, I should consider you conscientious, 
but not cruel ; while as it is, I think you both, 
and so thinking, avow that selfishness and gross 
insensibility have demoralised you all." 

" How very harsh you are against the 
women !" said the Duchess, " as if they only 
were insensible and selfish." 



^S4f THE REPEALERS. 

" Pardon me," said the Duke ; " I am will- 
ing to admit that the disgusting defects I have 
named, are even more prevalent among men 
than women. With us, a man dare hardly per- 
form a service, attended even with the sem- 
blance of the slightest personal sacrifice, with- 
out the risk of being held up to ' the world's 
dread laugh,' and being pointed at as an 
enthusiast, un tite foible, a man who is the 
dupe of the designing. All this is very dread- 
ful ; for, be assured, when we are arrived at the 
point of considering generosity, disinterested- 
ness, and goodness, as proofs of weakness, we 
are not far from looking on their opposites as 
praiseworthy. Misfortune, however unmerited, 
and error, that existed only in appearance, 
and never descended to reality, meet with few 
advocates at present ; while undoubted guilt, if 
upheld by circumstances, passes current in 
society: and all this injustice proceeds alone 



THE REPEALERS. 235 

from selfishness, as people are neither more 
severe nor malicious than formerly ; they are 
only influenced by the fear of injuring self. 
This is felt in the senate, in the clubs, in fact, 
in all places. A charge likely to aflfect the 
reputation of any individual, however un- 
founded or improbable it may be, is sufficient 
to annul friendships of long duration; and 
former friends are content with hoping the 
charges may be untrue, instead of taking pains 
to prove them so. But en attendant, what could 
they do ? They could not act in opposition to the 
opinion of the world, and, therefore, the friend is 
sacrificed to the only friend of the egotist — self." 

" But as we cannot change the world," said 
the Duchess, " we must submit to it." 

" Yes," said the Duke, " on the same prin- 
ciple that you ladies spoil your femmes de 
chambrCy and having rendered them tyrants, 
instead of useful servants, submit to the nui- 



2S6 THE REPEALERS. 

sances you have made. Each of you women of a 
certain rank forms a pillar that supports the ar- 
tificial edifice, called the world of fashion. The 
pillars are of marble, substantial, and, alas ! 
cold, as well as polished ; but the edifice is but 
of gauze diaphane ; all that passes within is de- 
tected, as the gauze is too clear to conceal 
defects, though it shades slight spots ; and 
the pillars are considered, like those that sup- 
ported the skreen at Carlton House in former 
days, as good columns, but supporting nothingy 

" How very odd it is," said the Duchess, 
" that I should have fancied you would have 
rather approved than disapproved my leaving 
off" Lady Oriel ! I suppose, then, you will no 
longer object to my receiving Lady Bask er ton." 

'' Au contraire,''' said the Duke, " I will 
never consent to it. This is the first error of 
which Lady Oriel has even been suspected. 
You disbelieve the charge, and so do I ; but 



THE REPEALERS. 287 

admitting, for sake of argument, that she was 
not blameless, it is always charitable to look 
mildly on Si first faulty because it prevents the 
recurrence of many another: besides, 

' To err is human, to forgive divine.' 

But when error is repeated, and that, as in the 
case of Lady Baskerton, — 

' The last lover 's welcome as the first/ 

there can be no excuse for clemency. She 
has been warned by the oft-reiterated tales of 
scandal propagated at her expense, and should 
either have corrected the reality or the appear- 
ance that led to the rumours. You are unspotted 
in reputation, my dear Jane, and, therefore, can 
afford to be charitable to the erring or the sus- 
pected. This is one of the happy privileges of 
undoubted virtue, and the worst that can be 
said or thought is, that the undoubted virtue 
was naturally undoubting, one of the highest 



^38 THE REPEALERS. 

compliments that can be paid to your sex. The 
defalcation of such women as you, must pass 
the sentence of ostracism on Lady Oriel ; and 
could you, believing her guiltless, be the means 
of injuring her ?"" 

" I shall certainly call on her to-morrow," 
said the Duchess ; " for you will do me the 
justice of admitting, that I never oppose myself 
to your judgment."* 

"But to return," said the Duke, " to the 
subject of the systematic selfishness that per- 
vades society at present — I assure you, Jane, 
that it is distressing to witness it. In the senate, 
men are ashamed to give an elan to the noble and 
generous sentiments that animate them : at the 
bar, legal technicalities and satirical pleasant- 
ries supersede the bursts of eloquence and 
feeling that formerly resounded from the bar- 
risters, in defending virtue or exposing vice; 
and in society, men encounter each other 



THE REPEALERS. 239 

armed against any display of high feeling, lest 
they be laughed at as enthusiastic or romantic, 
two terms now received as the acme of reproach 
and ridicule. I wish a few of us plain honest 
men would take courage, stand by each other, 
dare to avow our pretensions to generosity 
and manliness, and show that there is a still 
greater ridicule than that of being considered 
unselfish and unknowing — the ridicule of being 
ashamed of being neither. Madame de Stael pro- 
foundly observed, ' that there are many men 
received in the best society, who, if accused of 
a dishonourable action, would reply. It is pos- 
sible that the action was wrong, but, at least, no 
one dare tell me so to my face."* She adds, ' No- 
thing can convey a stronger idea of the utmost 
depravation ; for where or how could society 
exist, if people were to kill each other ; to have 
the right to do all the evil possible ; to break 
one's word, and to lie, as long as it is not per- 



240 THE REPEALERS. 

mitted to tell the person he has lied — in 
fact, to separate honour from bravery, and to 
transform courage into a means of committing 
or defending bad actions ?^ It is thus, my dear 
Jane, that we lose the substance of all that is 
good and noble, and adhere only to the shadow; 
and this is the most hopeless of all states. Few 

pause to ask, is Lady C or Lady D 

really culpable ? the only question is, are they 
received ? and if they are, they may continue 
to enjoy all the advantages of a good reputa- 
tion, while they are universally known to have 
a bad one. Can any state of society be worse 
than that of receiving women, of whom nearly 
the whole of that society have the very worst 
opinion, and for receiving whom they can give 
no better excuse than that they are received 
elsewhere ? The same facility exists with our 
sex. I meet men continually in the best so- 
ciety, whose reputations have long ceased to be 



THE REPEALERS. 241 

doubtful, and have heard jokes passed on their 
alleged want of principle in the houses, and 
by the persons who invited them. One of the 
many bad effects of scandal is, that its general 
extension accustoms people to hear the most 
dishonorable reports, without being either 
much shocked or surprised. They think on 
these subjects as the French writer did on 
another, when he said, ' Ce n'est rien s'il ne le 
salt pas, et pea de chose s'^il le salt.'' The scan- 
dal, if true, is now of slight importance, and if 
untrue, of less, provided the person incurring 
it is supported by her clique ; and this, Jane, I 
call demoralization." 



VOL. II. 



2i2 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

** Society itself, which should create 
Kindness, destroys what little we have got; 
To feel for none is the true social art 
Of the world's stoics — men without a heart." 

" But this is worshipful society, 
And fits the mounting spirit, like myself." 

The Duke of Lismore, long the patron of 
arts and fashion, himself the nucleus of a circle 
round which were continually revolving all that 
was bright, fair, or gifted, now opened Lismore 
House; and ^ Lady Oriel, the Desmonds, and 
Forresters, were amongst the first invited to 
the concert and ball, with which his Grace 



THE REPEALERS. 243 

commenced the festivities of the season. Mrs. 
Forrester had been requested to chaperon Lady 
Lucy Forbes, a young female friend, just mak- 
ing her debut in the fashionable world, and as she 
joined Lady Oriel with her protegee, who was 
new to life, that is to say, " Life in London,"' 
the two ladies undertook to initiate her into a 
knowledge of the most distinguished members 
of fashionable society. 

" Who," exclaimed Lady Lucy Forbes, " is 
that beautiful woman with the oriental face ? 
How lovely she is, and what an intellectual 
countenance !" 

" That,'' replied Mrs. Forrester, " is the ce- 
lebrated Mrs. Grantly, no less remarkable for 
her beauty, than for her genius and talents. 
Does she not look the very personification of a 
muse.'^ What a classical style of beauty, and 
how much expression is joined to that oval face, 
and those exquisitely chiselled features ! how 
M 2 



244 THE REPEALERS. 

delightful to witness such a rare union of beau- 
t}' and genius ! Look at her deep lustrous eyes, 
bent in languor, as if she thought not how many 
were seeking to catch their recognition; and now 
look, she speaks, and raises those brilliant orbs 
as if to make us doubt which is most beautiful, 
their animation or their repose. Every line of 
her poetry is to me fraught with a recollection 
of her lovely face ; it haunts me, and is my very 
beau ideal of what a Corinne should be. For a 
long time, I was afraid to read the produc- 
tions of Mrs, Grantly, lest they should disap- 
point me. I thought it impossible that great 
talent could be joined to so much beauty ; but 
I have learned to estimate them for their in- 
trinsic merit, without any reference to their 
beautiful author ; and it is no faint praise to 
say, ' the mind keeps the promise we had 
from the face.' — That dark-haired lady with 
the fine expressive face, is the Countess of 



THE REPEALERS. 245 

Guernsey: is she not brilliant and sparkling? 
What eyes and teeth, and what a cream-colour- 
ed skin and richly animated tint on her cheek ! 
It was to her, or her portrait, that Byron wrote 
those exquisite verses lately published ; and it 
was of her that the Emperor Alexander of 
Russia observed, that she had too much beauty 
for a woman who wished to derive no advan- 
tage from it. Her reputation has, however, de- 
rived an advantage from it ; for she has proved 
the possibility of great personal charms and high 
spirits being accompanied by a retenue of con- 
duct that has defied even the suspicions of slan- 
der. Though an indefatigable leader of fashion, 
nay, by some considered an agitator, or dictator, 
s(ie has escaped unharmed from the dangerous 
ordeal of female prudence, and ranks high in the 
list of unexceptionable wives and mothers.*" 

" Who is that tall, noble-looking man, with 
a forehead resembling the busts of Demo- 



246 THE REPEALERS. 

sthenes, who is now talking to Lady Guern- 
sey ?" 

" That," said Lady Oriel, " is Lord Rey, 
the premier, does he not look formed to fill a 
high and important post ? What a dignified 
air and distinguished bearing he has ! He seems 
the very personification of aristocracy, from his 
intellectual-looking head to his finely-formed 
legs and feet. He is accused by many of being 
Jier, but the charge only arises in the accuser's 
ignorance of his character. If he hsis Jiertt^ it is 
only that of a proud consciousness of his own 
high reputation ; and who would not be proud 
' f it ? See him with his family and friends, and 
it is impossible to meet a person more natural, 
kind, and unpretending. 

" That fair, languid, handsome lady covered 
with jewels, is the Marchioness of Stuartville. 
She was an heiress, which, in general, might 
serve for a synonyme for ' spoiled child ;' 
but of how few spoilt children could it be only 



THE REPEALERS. 247 

said, that her sole besetting sin is a passion for 
diamonds, if it be a sin ? and she excuses this 
by saying, that they are the only bright things 
that do not fade." 

" Oh ! pray tell me who that dull-looking 
man is, that has fixed himself on Mr. Luttrell, 
who appears to wince under the infliction ?" 

" That," said Mrs. Forrester, " is a man, 
who, without any one qualification for shining 
in society, believes himself to have as many as 
Athenaeus thought necessary for the formation 
of a cook, when he states that a chef de cuisine 
ought to be a mathematician, a theoretical mu- 
sician, a natural philosopher, and a natural 

historian. Mr. is only a natural-fool ; 

but, unfortunately, he is filled with preten- 
sions, and consequently is a most tiresome 
personage. You observe that short gentleman 
near the Duke of Lenox .? He is the person of 
whom George the Fourth observed, on seeing 
him in uniform, that he must be a megalo- 



248 THE REPEALERS. 

saure, an antediluvian reptile, with paddles 
instead of legs, and clothed in mail." 

" Our host does the honours extremely well," 
observed Mrs. Forrester ; '' hov^ general his 
civilities are ! After all, politeness ought to 
be added to the list of the cardinal virtues, 
for how many of them depend on it ! At all 
events, politeness makes us forget the ab- 
sence of virtue, and the want of politeness 
its presence." 

"What!" interrupted Lord Albany, who 
overheard the last sentence, " moralising in a 
ball-room ? and eulogising virtue and polite- 
ness in a scene where only the semblance of 
both are tolerated ? Virtue, like a portionless 
beauty, has more admirers than followers ; and 
politeness, like love, is only approved when 
oneself is the object. I dare not remain to 
hear my aphorism refuted," continued Lord 
Albany, gliding away. 



THE REPEALERS. 249 

" No, stay until I have replied to your 
aphorism by another," said Lord Montagu, 
who joined them in time to hear the retreat- 
ing peer's observation ; " and do not fly like 
a Parthian, throwing a dart as you retire." 

" I fled, not from a dread of being refuted 
by you, Montagu," said Lord Albany return- 
ing; " it was the ladies," (bowing,) " that I 
feared; so now for your aphorism." 

" Remember," said Lord Montagu, " you 
depreciated politeness and virtue, and I say, 
' Les esprits legers font beaucoup de mat, 
quand Us se melent de juger les sentimens, 
qu'^ih ne sauraient comprendre.'''''' 

" And I must reply," said Lord Albany, 
laughing, " that I am willing to be ranked in 
the list des esprits legers, if you are in that 
des esprits forts r and the laughing Albany 
retired, leaving Lord Montague to continue his 
persijiage. 

M 5 



250 THE REPEALERS. 

" I have been pointing out the various per- 
sons who have passed before us to Lady Lucy," 
said Lady Oriel, " and fear I have but ill-per- 
formed my task. I should have had your Lord- 
ship5 or Lord Albany, to act as showman, and 
then I am sure Lady Lucy would have had 
a piquant epitome of the character of each 
person." 

" That depends," replied Lord Montagu, 
" on how the persons to be described stand 
with the world, for I confess that, from a na- 
tural indolence of disposition, I am rather dis- 
posed to think well of those who are well with 
the world, and vice versa, which verifies the 
proverb that * Le rnonde est imjoueur, qu'on a 
toujours de son parti quand on gagrie^ 

" And I," said Mrs. Forrester, ''am always 
disposed to doubt the justice of the sentences 
that the world passes on hearsay evidence, as I 
think the world a good witness on a trial, but a 
bad judge." 



THE REPEALERS. 251 

'• One thing you must admit,'' said Lord 
Montagu, " which is, ' Si mtchant que soit le 
monde, il ne nous ferait pas grand mal si nous 
tikions pas si souvent son complice.'"''' And so 
saying, the peer passed on, leaving Lady Oriel 
to reflect on the truth of the axiom, and to 
apply it to her own peculiar case. 

" On ne connait bien tout Vetendue d^uu 
malheur que lorsquon s^en accuse,''^ thought 
Lady Oriel to herself, as she recurred to the 
past; " I cannot blame the world for v/ounding 
me with the arms which I presented to it. 
The fault was all my own." 



252 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Les geus vertueux sont rares, mais ceux qui estiment 
la vertu ne le sont pas ; d'autant moins qu'il y a mille 
occasions dans la vie, ou 1 'on a absolument besoin des per- 
sonnes qui en ont. Marivavx. 

Lady Oriel observed, and the reflection 
sank deep in her mind, that all the charity 
shown in drawing favorable conclusions on her 
recent esclandre, emanated from those who 
were pure and unsuspected themselves, and 
who judged her by the criterion of their own 
hearts. In no instance had she met with 
slights from a woman of undoubted virtue; 
while, on the contrary, she had experienced 



THE REPEALERS. 25S 

various indications of rudeness from ladies 
who had been compelled to profit largely by 
the charitable interpretations put on their 
conduct, and who, feeling how little they 
merited the forbearance shown them, were 
disposed to believe that she too stood in a 
similar position. 

It is fortunate for the sinning, that there 
are many good and virtuous people in the 
world, otherwise how could one half of so- 
ciety meet the other? The vulgar phrase of 
set a thief to catch a thief, would be more 
than verified by the instinctive tact with which 
certain errors would be detected and exposed 
by those who had known them by personal 
experience ; confidence would be destroyed, be- 
cause one of its best guards, a belief in virtue, 
would no longer exist; and medisance, which 
always prevails in proportion to the degree of 
corruption in society, would become general. 



254 THE REPEALERS. 

The trial Lady Oriel had passed through, 
determined her on never ao^ain livinoc in habits 
of intimacy with ladies whose reputations were 
too apocryphal to admit of their judging with 
charity, or supporting a tottering friend. 

Among the acquaintances she now sought 
to cultivate, the wife of the Premier, and the 
Marchioness of Bowood, were distinguished. 
The first lady, from the high official station 
of her husband, was called to take a lead in 
society which her domestic habits had hitherto 
led her to decline, though her various accom- 
plishments and dignified manners peculiarly 
fitted her for the post of honour. Lady Rey 
was always cited as an example for mothers 
and wives; and her daughters emulated her 
virtues. Married in early youth to a noble- 
man no less distinguished for his high cha- 
racter than for his brilliant and solid talents as 
a statesman, and who sought for happiness and 



THE REPEALERS. 255 

repose from his political duties, where only it 
can be truly found, in the bosom of his family, 
— the domestic circle of Lord Rey had become 
proverbial for the exhilarating example it fur- 
nished of harmony and rational enjoyment. 
Even he, the supposed misanthropic poet, 
whose sarcasms have touched all circles, and 
spared none, never recurred to the family of 
the Premier without commendations whose 
warmth proved their sincerity ; and he has been 
often heard to say that one such family might 
reconcile even a sceptic to the belief in virtue 
and goodness. 

No Avonder, then, that Lady Oriel was 
anxious to become something more than a 
guest at the grand receptions of Lady Rey, 
and that she desired to be admitted to the 
more select re-unions, — a distinction that was 
soon accorded her. 

The Marchioness of Bowood had long been 



256 THE REPEALERS. 

on visiting-terms with Lady Oriel, who rarely 
missed any of the soirees at Bowood House ; 
and the amiability and kindness of its owners, 
so generally felt and acknowledged, had given 
a peculiar charm to its society. In the splen- 
did gallery at Bowood House, filled with the 
finest productions of art, might, during the 
season, be seen all that London could boast 
of rank, genius, and talent. Statesmen, poets, 
wits, authors, and artists, were here to be met, 
enlivened by a galaxy of female beauty, fur- 
nishing subjects of inspiration for the chisel or 
the pencil, or realising the dreams of the poet. 
Nothing could be more judicious than this 
blending of society ; and the soirees at the 
Marchioness of Bowood's were considered to 
offer more various attractions than those of any 
other house in London ; the very locale of the 
splendid suite of rooms assisting to give a 
charm to them. 



THE REPEALERS. 257 

" Pray look, Lady Lucy," said Lady Oriel, 
" and tell me if England has not reason to be 
proud when she can show such specimens of 
beauty as those in that circle; no other ca- 
pital in Europe could, I am sure, produce 
them." 

" Who is that handsome woman,^' asked 
Lady Lucy, " whose eyes outshine the dia- 
monds on her brow ? How very lovely she 
is ! and how completely aristocratic is the cha- 
racter of her beauty, — delicacy supported by 
conscious dignity, and Jierte softened by femi- 
nine mildness ! 

" That," replied Lady Oriel, " is the young 
Duchess of Lenox ; and that distinguished- 
looking woman on whom she leans, and who 
displays pearls, when she smiles, that rival the 
oriental ones on her neck, is her sister, the 
Marchioness of Burton. What a fine animated 
expression of countenance, fierce, and almost 



258 THE REPEALERS. 

stern in its expression when grave, but beauti- 
ful when she smiles. They are the daughters 
of the Marquis of Mona, and are justly consi- 
dered one of the handsomest families in England. 
Of them indeed it may be said, ' all the 
daughters are virtuous, and the sons brave.' 
That lovely blonde, who is speaking to the 
Marchioness of Burton, is the Lady Augusta 
Gearing. Is she not the personification of a 
poet's bright imagining, blooming as Hebe, and 
almost as celestial ? Purity and innocence are 
enshrined on that fair brow, and the fairy foot 
that peeps forth from her robe, might serve as 
a model to the sculptor." 

" She is indeed most lovely,'"* replied Lady 
Lucy ; " and so is that lady now entering." 

" That is the Marchioness of Glansicarde," 
said Lady Oriel. "Is not talent marked in 
every lineament of her beautiful face ? But 
how could it be otherwise with the daughter of 
such a father ? at least, according to my belief, 



THE REPEALERS. 259 

that talent is hereditary. The two ladies at 
the door are Lady Yesterfied, and her sister, 
Mrs. Branson. They might serve to personify 
the morning and evening stars; both charming, 
and yet unlike each other. Their family are 
remarkable for beauty, and I understand equal- 
ly so for goodness. That handsome woman is 
Lady Emeline Hart Burtley, a young poetess 
j^f much brilliancy and imagination. Her po- 
etry resembles the exotic production of warmer 
climes ; bright, luxuriant, and fanciful. The 
lady next her is a bas-bleu, in the best acceptation 
of the phrase, being not only highly learned, but 
full of talent. Mathias, than whom no better 
judge can be found, pronounces her the best 
Italian scholar of our day; and her transla- 
tions of Petrarca are the best I know. Lady 
Norely, who is now speaking to Lady Lacre, 
is another of our literary ladies, and is remark- 
able for the sprightliness of her wit and the 
soundness of her understanding." 



260 THE REPEALERS. 

" You are very kind, dear Lady Oriel," said 
Lady Lucy, " to have told me the names of all 
these beauties and bas-bleus, therefore I won't 
be so exigeant as to ask you to name the other 
lovely faces I see around. They look like a par- 
terre of the richest and rarest flowers, each ren- 
dering the other more beautiful by its vicinity." 

" How pleasant it is,'' said Mrs. Forrester, 
" to rest the eyes on such an assemblage of 
beauty ! and yet there is something melancholy 
too in the pleasure ; and I could almost weep, 
as did Xerxes when he contemplated his sol- 
diers, as I reflect how fleeting are the charms 
which now dazzle our eyes, and that a few years 
will have faded their lustre ! There is some- 
thing very touching in the wreck of beauty; 
it is difficult to believe that the silken tresses, 
starry eyes, cheeks of rose, lips of coral, and 
teeth of pearl, now before us, may be sought 
for in vain, some years hence." 

" We must only console ourselves," replied 



THE REPEALERS. 26i 

Lady Oriel, " with hoping to find a succes- 
sional crop of beauties, the daughters of those 
now before us, springing up to take their places. 
Are not the roses of this summer as fresh and 
blooming as those of the last ? and do we not 
look forward to seeing the next vernal season 
bring forth as bright ones? So it is with 
beauty — as fast as one race fades, another 
succeeds; and it is only eyes dimmed by age, 
which discover that the last are inferior to the 
first, for contemporaries deny this decline." 

" There are many specimens of the florid 
gothic here," said Lord Dorville, joining in 
the conversation, " that would confirm your 
last remark. Lady Oriel, which I inadvertently 
overheard, and which proves the truth of the 
old proverb, ' that listeners never hear good of 
themselves,' for I am old enough to have lost 
every trace of humanity, as far as externals 
go, and yet I passed in my day for what the 
ladies call a very pretty fellow. You look 



262 THE REPEALERS. 

very incredulous, fair ladies," said the fine old 
peer ; " but I refer you to your grandmothers, 
and to a certain portrait, by Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds. I come to assemblies like this once or 
twice a-year, and go home comparing notes 
between the beauties of the night and the beau- 
ties of forty years ago. On dit que les absents 
out toujours tort, and I believe it is so, for I 
find myself quite as well satisfied with the faces 
before me," (bowing to them,) " as I ever 
was with the beauties that charmed me in 
my youth, though the turbaned dames newly 
restored and varnished, whom I meet in the 
saloi observe to me how the present race 
ha degenerated, and call on me to furnish 
evidence of the superiority of the first, to 
the present, every look of theirs rendering 
the comparison almost ludicrous." 



THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XX. 

" Would you Fashion's temple see ? 
Lovely ladies, come with me. 
There you '11 find what's rich and rare, 
All that can adorn the fair ; 
Di'monds from Golconda's mine, 
Em'ralds, rubies, sapphires shine, 
Sending forth a thousand rays, 
Or concentered in a blaze ; 
Laces, satins, velvets sheen. 
That might deck the proudest queen; 
All for lovely woman sought, 
From remotest regions brought.^' 

Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester having 
promised to take Lady Lucy Forbes shopping, 
conducted her to Howell and James's, in Re- 
gent-street, an establishment that astonishes a 
novice in London more than any other, and 



264* THE REPEALERS. 

which quite bewildered the youthful Lady 
Lucy. 

" What a delightful place !" said she ; " what 
exquisite things ! Do you not come here very 
often, dear Lady Oriel ? Oh ! I must buy 
that wreath ; it looks as if the morning dew 
still trembled on its leaves, it is so fresh and 
blooming/' 

Lady Oriel, amused with the unsophisticated 
raptures of Lady Lucy, told her that she 
dared not come verj/ often to Howell's, for 
fear of making her too proud of belonging to a 
sex, in whose honour was raised such a temple. 
Behold,"" added Lady Oriel, '' the zephyry 
laces, more delicate than the finest web that the 
hapless Arachne ever spun, and diaphane 
gauzes from France, ethereal as the drapery of 
the cloud that deceived Ixion. See the rain- 
bow-tinted chintzes and muslins, with the soft- 
textured silks and satins of England. The 



THE REPEALERS. 265 

velvets of " Genoa the superb," the delicate 
poplins of Ireland, the cambrics of Scotland, 
the treasures of the Indian loom ; the brilliant 
gems of Orient dazzling the sight, and the per- 
fumes that " breathe of Araby the blest " 
stealing on the senses from their crystal pri- 
sons ; the most remote regions ransacked to 
bedeck us, and the productions of all climes 
brought to adorn us. All this," continued 
Lady Oriel, laughing at her own description, 
and the gravity with which Lady Lucy listened 
to it, " is calculated to impress a woman with 
too great an idea of the importance of her sex, 
for whom alone this splendid pile is reared, 
and therefore I do not indulge myself often 
by coming here." 

" And I," said the artless Lady Lucy, 
" should like to come every day, even if I had 
not the power of buying, merely to look at such 
beautiful things as I see around me." 

VOL. H. N 



266 THE REPEALERS. 

" You remind me," replied Lady Oriel, " of 
the naive question of a clever English child to 
her mother at Venice, on seeing the Place St. 
Mark for the first time. ' Pray, mamma, are 
people allowed to see this every day, or only 
on holidays ?' *" 

The rooms at Howell's v/ere filled with hand- 
some and well-dressed women, all admiring and 
admired ; and the suite where the jewellery is 
displayed, exhibited a " chosen race of fashion's 
favourite sons," examining the bijouterie, and 
deciding on the relative merit of turquoises or 
sapphires for buttons ; or whether a Trichino- 
poly or Maltese rose-chain was the most distin- 
gue for the evening. At one counter was a 
young lady with her mamma, choosing her first 
ball-dress, and in deep consultation whether it 
should be virgin white or couleur de rose; and 
^t the next were two pale and melancholy- 
looking women, selecting grey and black for 
their second mourning for a mother. 



THE REPEALERS. 267 

Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester both mused 
on the reflections the scene around them gave 
birth to, but Lady Lucy could do nothing but 
wonder and admire ; and when music stole on 
her ear, and advancing to the place whence 
it proceeded she saw an exquisite clockwork 
group of Chinese musicians, and a rope-dancer 
performing evolutions, and pointing the light 
fantastic toe with a precision worthy of Mon- 
sieur Paul himself, there were no bounds to 
her childish delight, and she stood quite as 
amused as the beautiful children who were near 
her, applauding the graceful dancing and per- 
fect time of the Chinese. " Happy age, when 
every thing can please !" thought Lady Oriel. 
" How long will it be ere this fair creature 
has learned to look on all that now enchants 
her as coolly as I do ? May she at least be 
spared the lesson that has for ever removed 
the veil of enchantment from my eyes, and 
N 2 



268 THE REPEALERS. 

never have to accuse herself of the folly which 
has purchased ray worldly wisdom !^' 

" I thought," said Mrs. Forrester, " that 
this establishment had been peculiarly dedi- 
cated to ladies ; but I see here all the young 
men of fashion about town ! Do they come to 
admire the ladies, or the scarcely less beautiful 
objects of taste around ?"" 

" Both, I would charitably suppose," re- 
plied Lady Oriel. " How busy they all seem ! 
That group of young men are selecting waist- 
coats of tints as various as the minds of the 
buyers, and which, ere a week has passed, will 
be adopted by all their set. Another are 
choosing brocaded satins for their rohes de 
chambre ; and the sentimental are debating 
whether a bracelet or a ring would be the most 
appropriate cadeau to the ' Cynthia of the 
minute' of their fancy. Husbands come here 
to select peace-offerings for petulant wives, or 



THE REPEALERS. 269 

souvenirs for tender ones ; lovers to bear away 
some gage d' amour to les dames de leurs pensees ; 
brothers to buy gifts for sisters, and sons for 
fond mothers ; and many a young man to pur- 
chase miUes jolies choses for the person dearest 
to him on earth, whose image, reflected in the 
glasses around, shares his admiration with the 
pretty things he is selecting; need I add, that 
person is — himself? Foreigners are more 
surprised at the magnificence of this establish- 
ment than at any other in London," continued 
Lady Oriel. " I once accompanied some French 
ladies here ; and they were so astonished at the 
display of riches at every side, that they could 
not for an hour pause to select the articles they 
came in search of. I remember one of them 
observed to me, that if Paris had such a house, 
half the husbands would be ruined, as French 
ladies cannot resist temptation as the prudent 
English do." 



^70 THE REPEALERS. 

It was not without repeated hints that Lady 
Oriel and Mrs. Forrester could get Lady Lucy 
away; and she left Howell's declaring that, 
now she found it was not dearer than other 
houses, and had so much more beautiful things, 
she never would go into another; holding up 
her empty purse in triumph, the contents of 
which had furnished her with, as she said, fifty 
of the loveliest, most useful, and tempting 
things, when she thought that twice the sum 
could not have purchased half of them ! 



THE REPEALERS. 271 



CHAPTER XXI. 

" Ye gods I ye gods ! and must I hear all this — 
And not e'en Joseph's arithmetic miss. 
Nor Cobbett's speech, to prove the rich and great 
The working classes wrong, defame, and hate — 
And, for a few good speakers, that are seen, 
* Like angel visits, few and far between,* 
To break the dull monotony around. 
And give us sounding sense, not senseless sound, — 
To hear night after night, and curse my fate, 
The same weak arguments and long debate ?" 

Si. Stephen's. 

Lord Oriel, Mr. Desmond, and Colonel 
Forrester, agreed to go to the House of Com- 
mons, to hear the debate on the Irish Bill. On 



272 THE REPEALERS. 

their way, Colonel Forrester proposed a wager 
to Lord Oriel, as to how many times within 
half an hour the two words " the people''' would 
be used in the first speech of a repealing 
member. 

This led to Mr. Desmond's observing, that 
these two words, though so continually used, 
never failed to produce a certain effect. 
" Joined together,'' said he, " they have a ma- 
gical influence that rarely fails to draw atten- 
tion, and acts as a claptrap to the lower classes 
of the community, as does some liberal senti- 
ment introduced into a dramatic performance 
and addressed to the gallery ; both are in 
general used for the worst purposes, and how 
seldom for any good ! Does a democrat wish 
to excite a tumult and draw attention, as a 
means of attaining some object of egotistical 
ambition, to gratify which the peace of his 
country would be readily sacrificed by him ? 



THE REPEALERS. 273 

' the people ' is the watch-word for revolt ; and 
repeated with due emphasis, gains him a crowd 
of idle followers, too lazy to work, but not 
ashamed to steal ; who throw up their hats, 
and give him their ' sweet voices !"' — the why or 
wherefore, they can hardly tell. Does a dra- 
matic writer bestow his tediousness on a suffer- 
ing audience, anticipating the fate of his maud- 
lin production ? he sprinkles it over with a few 
liberal sentiments, addressed to popular feeling, 
in order that the applause of the gallery may 
drown the disapprobation of the boxes and pit. 
Thus are the people and liberal sentiments made 
the tools of those, who never use them except 
for their own private ends, and who deride the 
folly by which they profit. It was truly ob- 
served by a French writer, that the people are 
always the instruments, and always the pretext, 
but never the object in a revolution ; and the 
termination of every revolution has proved the 
n5 



274 THE REPEALERS. 

truth of this observation — the people, who are 
the many, being sacrificed for the benefit of 
their democratical leaders, who are the few.*' 

They arrived in time to hear Mr. Manley 
make his admirable speech — a speech that posi- 
tively electrified the House ; and to witness the 
discomfiture of him, whose equivocating de- 
fence filled with disgust a nation accustomed to 
reverence veracity too deeply ever to shrink 
from its laws, whatever may be the conse- 
quences. Mr. Desmond had not been at the 
House of Commons for many years, conse- 
quently many of the faces of the members were 
unknown to him, but Lord Oriel undertook to 
point out the most remarkable of them. 

" That tall, thin, distinguished man, with a 
forehead that would have enchanted Gall or 
Spurzheim, I need not name to you, as every 
one knows Sir Francis Ramsbury, and I may 
add, every one esteems and respects him ; he is 



THE REPEALERS. 275 

an admirable speaker, and what is better, an 
admirable man. The person next him you 
of course know ; he is your Secretary, Mr. 
Manley, a man of great talent and power, and 
formed to take a leading part in political life. 
He has all the requisites for a public man : 
high personal and mental courage, strict prin- 
ciples, and eloquence that never degene- 
rates into bombast or hyperbole ; he is always 
listened to with attention by the House ; and 
the man whom one of the Irish members de- 
nounced as the most unpopular man in Ireland, 
has the consolation of being one of the most 
respected in England. It appears that the 
office of Irish Secretary, which certainly, how- 
ever it may be a post of honour, is decidedly a 
post of danger, may now be considered as the 
trial for young men of high talent. We have 
had three examples of remarkable men who 
have filled it; the Duke of Wellington, Sir 



276 THE REPEALERS. 

Robert Neil, and the present occupant ; and 
three such predecessors must always incite a 
successor to distinguish himself. By the by, 
there is Sir Robert Neil ; I hope he may 
speak, as few know Ireland so well as he, and 
none can describe what has come under his 
observation more forcibly, eloquently, or truly. 
He is an able man, and a perfect master of 
business; much too clever, and useful, not to 
make me wish he was employed. Such men as 
Sir Robert Neil, who have great stakes in the 
country, are the safest to be employed in steer- 
ing the bark of the state ; and we have too few 
who to great talents unite a large fortune, to 
spare the services of such a one, whose opinions 
carry so powerful an influence with the sensible 
part of the community, and who, having much 
to lose, cannot be suspected of being disposed 
to risk it by hazardous measures. That tall, 
gentlemanly-looking person, who has just en- 



THE REPEALERS. 277 

tered, is Mr. Hutler Lerguson, the warm and 
eloquent defender of the Poles. And there at 
his left you see the gifted author of a series of 
novels, any one of which must obtain for their 
author a literary fame rarely accorded to any 
author, but more particularly to one of his 
years, and still more rarely merited. That 
gentleman he is talking to, is his brother, a 
highly-gifted young man. The two gentle- 
men to the right are Mr. Errice, the brother- 
in-law of Lord Rey, and Mr. Makaully. The 
first is a most clever, sensible man of business, 
and the speeches of the other tell you better 
than I can, what his powers are. The Agitator, 
of course, you know by sight — there he is ; his 
countenance is good, and peculiarly Irish ; his 
voice well suited to the powerful bursts of elo- 
quence with which he inundates his auditors ; 
and it must be admitted, he is one of the most 
effective speakers in the world, as he dazzles 



278 THE REPEALERS. 

where he cannot convince ; and though he often 
leaves Reason free, he makes captive the Pas- 
sions, which but too generally prevent her using 
her freedom." 

*' You should see the effect of his eloquence 
on the Irish," said Mr. Desmond ; " it is ma- 
gical. When he said a day or tvvo ago that 
he represented Ireland, it was not so hyperbo- 
lical, as the expression borrowed from Louis 
XIV. by Napoleon, when he said ' Je suis la 
France P He represents the whole Roman Ca- 
tholic population of the lower class, for they 
only see, hear, believe, act, or think, as the 
Agitator tells them ; or rather should it be said, 
they represent hbn, being but the instrument 
of his will, wielded as he thinks fit. I wish 
Mr. Thiel would speak, though, perhaps, it 
may be as agreeable to read his speech, as to 
hear him dehver it. His mind is so imbued 
with poetry, that it comes forth without effort, 



THE REPEALERS. 279 

nay, as it were, malgrt hii, and his images are 
so poetical and forcible that one cannot help 
wishing they were embodied in a poem or 
tragedy, instead of in a speech. Thiel is a man 
of genius, and I am one of the many who wish 
that all such were addressing posterity by the 
midnight lamp at home, instead of addressing 
St. Stephen'*s, as it is easier to find good 
speakers than good writers; and of the best 
speeches that have been made on popular 
topics, how few will be read ten years hence ! 
I never come here," continued Mr. Desmond, 
" and hear the plaudits bestowed on any of the 
popular speakers, without reverting to other 
days, when Pitt, Fox, Grattan, Sheridan, and 
Canning, were wont to electrify the house. 
How often have I heard them, and owned the 
magic influence of eloquence kindled by genius. 
It seems to me as if the plaudits given to their 
successors awaken the echoes in the house of 



280 THE REPEALERS. 

death so near us; and that from their very 
tombs is sent forth a reverberation, to cheer 
others in the path in which they strove. From 
St. Stephen'^s to Westminster Abbey the dis- 
tance is short, but the road is difficult; and 
those who have traced it so gloriously, led on 
by genius, and supported by principle, sleep 
calmly the sleep of death, unmoved by all that 
could once animate their glowing souls, within 
a few paces of the scene of their past triumphs. 
What a contrast between the scene of turmoil 
and worldly cares before us, — the passion- 
stirring harangues, and the angry rejoinders, — 
and the awful silence of the house of God, 
where reposes all that was earthly of those 
deathless souls !"" 

Lord Oriel, seeing that the old man was moved 
with the reminiscences he had called up, and 
fearing the excitement might be too strong, 
proposed to leave the house, and they returned 
home. 



THE REPEALERS. ^81 

Colonel Forrester escorted Lady Oriel and 
his wife to Vauxhall, thinking that the more 
his sister was seen in public at the present crisis, 
the more advantageous it would be in checking 
the injurious reports circulated about her. 
Lords Montagu and Albany joined them ; 
the latter declaring that he had come to walk 
off the possible effects of a most inimitable din- 
ner at the modern Lucullus'*s, Lord Refton, 
where one was sure to dine in the salon of 
Apollo. 

" Youj Forrester, understand a dinner," 
said Lord Albany, '' and therefore I wish you 
had partaken of that which we enjoyed to-day." 

" Do pray, Lord Albany, instruct us novices 
in the mystery of la cuisine^'''' said Lady Oriel, 
" and tell us what you consider a good dinner ; 
and, if not impertinent, may I ask you to give 
us the menu of that which has elicited your 
commendation .?" 

" I am proud and flattered by the request," 



282 THE REPEALERS. 

said the peer. " Indeed I take a pleasure in 
seeing a taste for the table extending, and in 
forwarding this rational taste as much as I can, 
by judicious praise when merited, and disap- 
probation when otherwise. Hitherto it has 
been a general observation, that the English 
know how to eat^ but not how to taste, — a re- 
proach that almost stamps us as barbarians. A 
faultless cook was not only meant to satisfy the 
appetite, but to excite it; whereas our bar- 
barous Anglais look more to quantity than qua- 
lity, and are satisfied with thinking they are 
eating French dishes, when they are devouring 
some entrees that no gargotier on the Boulevards 
at Paris would acknowledge. But to return to 
Refton's dinner — he had la bisque d'ecrevisse 
bien lite sans etre tournee, rivalling that of the 
Rocher de Cancale ; le potage printanier, tout 
verdoyant de fraicheur, Vtternel turbot et la 
sauce d'^homardquifaisait ressortir sa blancheur, 



THE REPEALERS. 283 

et qui devoit lui rappeler le corail qiCil avoit 
quittee nouvellement, tel que safraicheur Vat- 
testoitS'' 

" You really get poetical in your descrip- 
tion,'' said Colonel Forrester ; *' hitherto I have 
been of opinion that poetry proceeded from 
the heart, but I now begin to think it may 
originate in a neighbouring region.'* 

" My dear Forrester, if you interrupt me, 
I shall never get to the end of my menu,^' said 
Lord Albany. " Le filet de hauf etonne de 
son deguisement a la Napolitaine, Le quar- 
tier de chevreuil, fdchS d'etre marine, pour 
etre p?esentable, et vexe de s'etre nourri d'herbes 
aromatiqiies en pure perte. Les filets de 
volaille a la Koyale. Les boudins a la Riche- 
lieu ; les cotelettes de pigeon a la Diisselle, 
la timbale a la financihe. Entrees parfaites 
qui attestoient et le gout exquis de Partiste, 
et les finances de Vhote. I have obeyed you. 



284 THE REPEALERS. 

Lady Oriel, and almost fear I have bored you 
too, as I have observed that in eating, as in 
all other sciences, it is necessary to discuss it 
con amove. But en verite, when I think of the 
vast obligation that this most admirable and 
useful of all the sciences owes to Refton, under 
whose fostering care it is daily extending, I am 
apt to grow enthusiastic."" 

The party were amused with the affected 
gravity with which Lord Albany dwelt on the 
subject, and Lady Oriel promised that next 
season she would consult him in the choice of 
an artiste de cuisine, as otherwise she should 
be afraid of inviting him to dinner. 

" Apropos to dinner,^' said Lord Albany. 
" A man is now passing, whom I cut last 
year for two reasons — first, that I found it 
easier to cut him than his fricandeauy which 
was impenetrable to the spoon, and the barba- 
rian advised me to try a knife; the second, 



THE REPEALERS. 2S5 

that the Goth had a puree de truffes ! Imaginez 
vons, a substance that should be croquante, 
served as puree! There was no speaking to 
him after such a solecism in civilization. I 
shall never forget the dinner he gave us that 
day. Soupe a la reine, tournee ; fish, guiltless 
of having seen its native element for weeks ; 
vol au verity qui auroit impunement affronte le 
vent cfest, les escalloppes de lapereau qui, comme 
dit Boileau, sentoient encore les choux dont Us 
furent nourris^ and the impenetrable frican- 
deaUf before named. I always judge of a man 
by his dinners ; and as they are the only things 
emanating from him that I can profit by, if 
they are good, I cultivate his friendship, if 
bad, I bow out of it, as no man ought to 
demand the sacrifice of his friend submitting to 
starvation or indigestion because he chooses to 
keep a bad cook. All men past twenty-five, 
and most men under it, seem to think — 



286 THE REPEALERS. 

' Their various cares in one great point combine, 
The business of their lives, that is — to dine.* 

' So much superior is the stomach's smart, 
To all the vaunted horrors of the heart.' '' 

'' What a strange creature is Albany !" said 
Colonel Forrester, as they drove off from Vaux- 
hall. " To hear him descant on the mysteries of 
the cuisine, one would suppose that he thought 
of nothing else, and yet he is, perhaps, one 
of the best-informed men in England, full of 
talent, and with powers of being satirical, from 
the lightness and plaisanterie of his coup de 
pattes, that few ever possessed without abusing; 
but he is so thoroughly good-natured, that, 
unlike the generality of wits, he prefers his 
friends to his jokes, and suppresses many a one 
calculated to set the table in a roar."' 

" This is a great merit," said Lady Oriel^ 
in an age when people attend so little to 
the feelings of others, and think more of mak- 



THE REPEALERS. 287 

ing a reputation for wit than they regret un- 
making the reputations of half their acquaint- 
ance, for one is very often the consequence 
of the other. Half the plaisanteries that do so 
much mischief, and give so much pain, pro- 
ceed less from malice than from the desire to 
shine ; and this desire is so general, that people 
attempt to say sharp things, who can only say 
coarse ones. It is like endeavouring to cut a 
hard substance with a paper-knife ; the intention 
obvious, but the effort is unsuccessful. If, 
therefore, those who have really power to shine 
at the expense of their friends and acquaint- 
ance, use it not, they have double merit, and 
the more so, because the world seldom gives 
them credit for their forbearance."''' 

" It is strange," said Mrs. Forrester, '' to 
see satirical people so well received in society, 
even by those who suffer the most from them."" 

" It is precisely because they fear to suffer still 



288 THE REPEALERS. 

more, that they act the aimable,'''' said her hus- 
band ; " but of this be assured, that if satire 
was not universally acceptable, we should have 
fewer satirists. The very persons who affect 
to be shocked at some cutting epigram, pointed 
lampoon, or piquant anecdote, are the first to 
engage the author, or to repeat the eff'usion 
with a moral disclaimer, of ' How very shock- 
ing it is !' ' How ill-natured V and a hope 
that ' there was no foundation of truth in it.'" 

" Why, my dear brother," said Lady Oriel, 
*' where can you have formed such opinions 
of the world .?" 

" In the world, my dear sister," replied 
Colonel Forrester ; and be assured, there is 
wisdom in the old proverb, 

* Chi pensa male spesso I'indovina.' " 

" I shall grow afraid of you,"*' said Mrs. 
Forrester, with a glance, in which less of fear 



THE REPEALERS. 289 

than love was visible, " as I shall begin to think 
you judge from self, and if you judge so harshly 
of the world, with such opinions, you cannot 
love.'' 

" Ungrateful that you are," said the adoring 
husband, 

Cara al mio cuor tu sei, 

Cib ch'^ il sole agli occhi miei." 

She placed her white and dimpled hand on 
his mouth, to stop the continuation of his 
address, and he kissed it fondly though she 
affected to chide him. 



VOL. n. 



290 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

" Think on mercy ! 
Mercy ! the brightest diadem of empire ! 
Mercy ! that does distinguish men from brutes, 
And kings, that use it right, from common men.'' 

" The good are better made by ill — 
As odours crush'd are sweeter still !" 

When we read the fearful catalogue of 
crimes that the Irish newspapers are filled with, 
it is difficult to believe that the people commit- 
ting them can have any of the good qualities 
with which we love to invest the Irish. Bravery, 
for which they are proverbial, is ill shown by 



THE REPEALERS. 291 

the most barbarous murders; and generosity, 
to which they are certainly not without claims, 
is not visible in the revengeful spirit that is but 
too often displayed in the vengeance with which 
they visit real or supposed offences. And yet 
they are brave, and generous, notwithstanding 
the enormities into which they are hurried; 
for their crimes, paradoxical as the opinion 
may appear, are but the excesses of the quali- 
ties we have named, and which, if cultivated, 
would produce flowers and fruit instead of poi- 
sonous weeds. 

Ignorance is the bane of the Irish peasant; 
it leaves him open to the tyrannical mental em- 
pire of those whom interested motives may 
lead to usurp it ; and, unguarded by principles, 
the only true barriers for resisting evil counsel 
or example, with excitable feeUngs, warm ima- 
ginations, and no judgment, he falls a ready 
victim to their designing arts. 
o2 



292 THE REPEALERS. 

" Don't you think, Jim dear,'' said Grace, 
" that it would be a good thing to write a line" 
(as a letter is always called in Ireland) '' to 
Miss Desmond that was, to ask her to spake a 
word to the dear ould masther, in favour of poor 
Patrick. Sure, if they were to transport him, 
'twould be a terrible thing ; I won't let myself 
think that they would do worse than that to 
him : but the notion of his being taken away 
from Mary, now that his eyes are open to his 
own folly, makes me very unaisy. Miss Des- 
mond, that is Mistress Forrester, would put 
in a good word to the ould masther, and the 
masther would spake to the King, and ask him 
lo write to the Lord Liftenant to let poor Patrick 
out of jail. Oh ! this is a good thought, and a 
lucky one, and I '11 write the letter before I 
sleep. Mistress Forrester is too good to refuse 
spaking to the masther. She was always kind ; 
and now that she has a loving husband of her 



THE REPEALERS. 293 

own, she '11 feel more than ever for a poor crea- 
thur of a woman that 's in danger of losing 
her's. The ould masther will never refuse her, 
for he is always glad to do a kind action ; and 
as for the King, I 'm not a bit afraid of his re- 
fusing the masther, for every one says he has 
the best heart in the world. The only one I 'm 
afraid of is the Lord Liftenant, for he being on 
the spot in Ireland, and seeing with his own eyes 
all the wickedness and mischief the foolish mis- 
guided people commit, won't be so aisy on pri- 
soners as the others ; but I don't think he '11 
refuse the King, if he writes him a line — and 
then we'll have poor Patrick home again with 
Mary." 

" Sure, Grace a-vourneen," said Jim, " the 
Lord Liftenant couldn't in dacency refuse the 
king, who 's the head of all, like : and he him- 
self, the lord liftenant I main, is one of the most 
forgiving, grand-hearted men in the world, so 



^94 THE REPEALERS. 

he 'U be sure to send down a pardon if he 's 
asked;' 

Grace and Jim made a detour, that they 
might visit poor Mary Mahoney, and found her 
better and her boy much less feverish. She 
was filled with thankfulness at the good ac- 
counts of her husband ; but still the love of the 
woman triumphed over the prudence of the 
wife, as she expressed her hopes that poor dear 
Patrick wouldn't take it too deeply to heart, 
nor blame himself too much for their trouble. 
Grace assured her that Patrick now had a per- 
fect sense of his own imprudence, adding that 
they found him reading his Bible, the salu- 
tary effects of which study were already visible 
in his altered sentiments. 

This last intelligence gratified Mary beyond 
measure. " This is indeed," said the poor 
woman, " happy tidings for me, for I know by 
experience the comfort that blessed book will 
give him. Many and many 's the weary and sor- 



THE REPEALERS. 295 

rowful hour that I have been relieved by reading 
it, when poor Patrick first took to following the 
Repalers, and that I fell into fretting. I never 
opened it but that the words fell on my heart 
just like, as they tell me, oil falls on the sea, 
making it quite calm. And sure, how can I be 
thankful enough for knowing how to read, 
which opened this blessing to me ! How often 
have I lamented that poor Patrick was not read- 
ing it with me ! But just see the goodness and 
mercy of Providence, that out of every trouble 
can make good : Patrick is taken up for a crime 
of which, God be thanked ! he is innocent ; and 
the separation from me, and the death of our 
poor infant, has turned his mind to the only 
true comfort that can be found. There he is, 
in that solitary cell, reading the word of God, 
and fixing his thoughts on Him in whom alone 
is safety ; and I am thankful that his eyes are 
opened, though at the price of so much grief." 
Grace Cassidy lost no time in addressing 



296 THE REPEALERS. 

Mrs. Forrester, or Miss Desmond, as she still 
loved to call her, and the next day's post saw 
the following letter dispatched. 

" Most Honoured Lady, 

" In all my troubles, and I have lately 
had my share, you have always appeared to me 
as the guardian angel that was to save me. I do 
not now address you for myself, as, God be 
thanked, Jim has grown wiser, and I trust 
will never again give me cause for unhappi- 
ness. But Patrick Mahoney is pining in a 
prison, and his poor wife, Mar}^ Mahoney, is 
lying on the bed of sickness and sorrow, hav- 
ing lost one child ; and the rosy-cheeked curly- 
headed boy whom you and the dear mistress 
used to admire, is dangerously ill, while the 
loving husband and fond father is kept away 
from them. 

" It is in your power, dear and honoured 



THE REPEALERS. 297 

lady, to extricate him from the doleful cell in 
which he is now shut up, with no other com- 
pany but his own sad thoughts, and his angry 
conscience always reminding him that, had he 
followed good advice, he would now be at 
home with his wife and child. I pity Patrick 
even more than poor Mary ; because her con- 
science has not fallen out with her, and must 
be saying comforting things in the midst of all 
her troubles ; and sure, dear lady, it is a bless- 
ing to have a companion which we never can 
be rid of, like conscience — a friend, instead of 
a foe. 

" I thought of all this when I saw how she 
bore her troubles, and laid her dead baby in 
the coffin, with a look which I never can for- 
get ; it seemed as if she had found courage and 
consolation from a voice within her own mind ; 
and sure enough, that voice must come from 
conscience. But when I saw the care-worn 
05 



298 THE REPEALERS. 

face of poor Patrick, and the tears falling down 
his pale cheeks — and oh ! for certain, 'tis a bitter 
sight to see a man weep — quite as different to 
the tears of a woman, as an April shower is to 
the pelting drops that are forced from some 
black cloud by the winter's storm — I thought 
to myself, dear and honoured lady, that it was 
a blessing when we had only to weep for mis- 
fortunes ; but that the scalding tears wrung 
from us by our own faults, if they leave their 
marks on the cheek, leave more fearful marks 
on the heart from which they spring. 

" Patrick is accused of being concerned in 
the murder of a policeman ; he is entirely in- 
nocent, God be thanked ! but he says, that if he 
had not been in the constant habit of leaving 
his poor woman, and being out at unseasonable 
hours in the night, he would not, he could not, 
have fallen under such a bad suspicion. What 
I beg of you to do, is to get the dear ould 



THE REPEALERS. 299 

masther to spake to the King; every one says 
he is a good, humane, tender-hearted gentleman, 
and to ax him to write a bit of a line to the Lord 
Liftenant, to let Patrick home to his poor 
wife. 

" What makes me so anxious at this present 
moment is, that the Irish Laider has been writing 
to tell us, that the soldiers are going to be 
let loose on us, like blood-hounds, and that in- 
stead of being tried by judge and jury, prison- 
ers are to be judged by young officers come from 
school, who would rather condemn 'em than 
not. I don't much believe all this, but still it 
frightens us ; so, for God's sake, send the ould 
masther to the King at once. Or may-be 
'twould be as well for yourself, dear lady, to 
spake to the Queen, for women are always ten- 
der-hearted, and can pity each other, and she 'd 
spake to the King, or may-be write to the 
Lady Liftenant to get poor Patrick off. 



300 THE REPEALERS. 

"Sure it would be a good thing, and a 
great service to Ireland, if the ould masther 
would just tell the King, that the quiet and 
dacent people in Ireland — and there 's many 
more of 'em than is supposed — are afraid of 
their lives of the wicked disturbers, that are 
bent on mischief, and are ready to kill, maim, 
or destroy all who won't join 'em. Many 's the 
poor men that goes with 'em through fear of 
losing their lives, or having their houses burned 
over their heads ; but if once they had soldiers 
and officers to take their parts, would give up 
all nightly meetings and disturbances, and sleep 
in peace. 

" Another thing that frightens the poor 
people here out of their wits is, that they 
are tould that there 's six hundred — I won't 
write the bad name — in the Parliament Com- 
mons, that 's determined to do 'em mischief. 
Until now they thought the English was their 



THE REPEALERS. 301 

friends, and they had confidence ; but you know, 
dear lady, how aisy it is to make a poor 
Irishman believe anything. My own poor 
honest husband was made to believe he was a 
slave and starving, when he was at liberty to 
attend all agitation meetings in the country, 
and had aten a hearty dinner off as elegant a 
piece of salt pork, as red as a rose, with cab- 
bage like the green leaves of young trees, so 
fresh and bright, and potatoes laughing out of 
their skins for joy at being aten. 

" How I wish you were all over here now ! 
The place is so beautiful, the sky looks more 
blue than ever, and the river more clear ; and 
as for the trees and flowers, sure they 're as 
bright in their freshness as if they came 
out spic and span new for the first time, 
though we 've now been looking at 'em, and 
a pleasant sight it is, for the last six weeks. 
The birds are singing on every branch, and 
more blackbirds and thrushes than ever; and 



302 THE REPEALERS. 

I 'm sure the English birds can't sing more 
sweetly, nor the flowers smell more delightfully, 
than they do at Springmount ; though all the 
world declares that everything in England is 
finer than here. 

" And now it 's time for me to finish this 
long letter. I know your goodness so well, that 
I 'm sure you '11 pardon my boldness in writing 
it ; and yet when I think how many long miles 
'twill have to go over, and the wide green sea 
to cross before your own pretty eyes will look 
at it, I don't feel half so courageous as when I 
used to be tould to walk, up to Miss Desmond's 
room at Springmount, and that I used to tell 
you all that was passing in my poor ignorant 
mind. But here, you had woods, and mountains, 
and flowers, and green fields, about you, and 
seemed as fond of 'em as I am, which gave me 
courage to spake to you ; for I used to say to 
myself, sure the young mistress, great a lady 



THE REPEALERS. 303 

as she is, loves all that I love, and therefore I 

needn't be afraid to open my heart to her ; but 

now you are in London, with only great large 

houses, and Lords and Ladies about you, I 'm 

almost afraid you won't feel the same to your 

poor country-woman, who is ever your obedient 

humble servant, 

" Grace Cassidy. 

" If not too great a liberty, might I beg my 
humble duty to the dear masther and mis- 
tress ?" 

Poor Grace's letter was read aloud at the 
breakfast-table by Mrs. Forrester, and though 
many passages in it elicited a smile, the sim- 
plicity and single-heartedness of the good young 
woman, drew commendations from all. 

Mr. Desmond observed to Colonel Forrester, 
that the naivete of Grace, in requesting that the 
King might be entreated to write to his Majes- 



304 THE REPEALERS. 

ty*s representative in Ireland in favour of 
Patrick Mahoney, reminded him of the Roman 
Catholic custom in Italy of praying to God to 
influence their patron saint ; and it would be 
difiicult, if not impossible, to persuade Grace, 
that the Lord Liftenant, as she calls the Vice- 
roy, is not in Ireland a more powerful person 
than the King himself. 

Instead of obeying Grace's desire of address- 
ing the King, Mr. Desmond wrote to the two 
most influential magistrates in his county to 
interest themselves for poor Patrick, and make 
^ his innocence manifest — a proceeding she would 
have thought much less advisable than that 
which she counselled ; as Grace, in common 
with all the persons of her own class in Ire- 
land, entertained an implicit belief that interest, 
and not justice, was the best thing to be sought ; 
or rather, that the latter could only be ob- 
tained by the former. 



THE REPEALERS. 305 

A disrespect for the laws has long been 
prevalent in Ireland, and has led to the certain 
and injurious effects of a scepticism in justice. 
A criminal entertains a strong hope that the 
interest of his landlord, or some one else whose 
interest can be obtained, will save him from the 
merited punishment of his crimes ; and the in- 
nocent, though conscious of his freedom from 
the guilt imputed to him, is " afraid he '11 
suffer, for sure he has no interest to get him 
out of his troubles." The demoralizing effects 
of such a state of things is best proved by the 
actual condition of Ireland, where Law and 
Justice are supposed to depend on power and 
interest. 

" Well, what if I did give Jack Brohy an 
unlucky blow, that knocked the breath out of 
his body, and sent him to sleep in the church- 
yard, instead of his bed, sure the masther can 
get me off; he knows all them that will be on 



306 THE REPEALERS. 

the jury, and they wouldn't like to affront him 
by finding me guilty. And does not he know 
the Judge himself ? sure they all go to eat their 
grand dinner at the great house.'' 

This is the wa}'^ of reasoning and thinking of 
the lower classes in Ireland ; and until they are 
taught to respect the laws, and look with con- 
fidence for justice, there is little hope or pro- 
spect of their amendment. 

Every day's post brought Mr. Desmond let- 
ters from his agent and steward, filled with 
alarming accounts of the increasing tumult and 
disturbances in his county ; many of the houses 
of his tenants had been attacked, and plundered 
of arms ; threatening notices had been served 
on all disposed to pay tithes, or take farms at 
a higher rent than the former tenant paid. 
The steward stated, that the English bailiffs 
of several of the gentlemen in the county had 
received notices to quit their situations or pre- 



THE REPEALERS. 307 

pare for death, and that he feared he should 
shortly receive a similar one, from the indi- 
cations of wrath and ill-will he saw in the per- 
sons around him. 

When Mr. Desmond communicated the con- 
tents of these letters to Colonel Forrester, the 
latter told him that he thought it was their 
positive duty to return to Ireland, and endea- 
vour, by their presence, to restore tranquillity 
at least to their own immediate neighbourhood. 
While admitting the propriety of the measure, 
Mr. Desmond sighed at thinking how little in- 
ducement his native country held forth, even to 
the best-disposed of her gentry, to make it their 
permanent residence, when he, who had done 
violence to his taste, in abandoning the society 
of his English friends and connexions from a 
sense of duty, and never placing himself on the 
decried list of absentees, found himself no longer 
beloved or trusted by those to whom he had been 



308 THE REPEALERS. 

an indulgent landlord and kind protector for so 
many years. 

When Mrs. Desmond and Mrs. Forrester 
were made acquainted with the intention of 
their husbands to return to Ireland, they de- 
clared their determination of accompanying 
them ; though both the gentlemen proposed 
their continuing in England, being fearful of 
exposing them to the dangers of a country in 
a state of turbulence almost bordering on open 
rebellion, as Ireland was represented to be. 
The gaieties of London Mrs. Forrester could 
abandon without a sigh, but she felt the deep- 
est regret at the thought of being separated 
from Lady Oriel, to whom she had become 
fondly attached ; though she was comforted by 
the reflection, that they should leave her re- 
established in society, and her husband no 
longer suffering from either slights or indig- 
nities offered, or supposed to be offered to her. 



THE REPEALERS. 309 

When the ladies drove to Lady OriePs to 
acquaint her with their approaching departure 
for Ireland, they found her with Lord Oriel, 
to whom she had been complaining of the fa- 
tigues, mental and personal, which she was 
suffering in consequence of the continued round 
of gaieties and constant late hours to which she 
had lately been exposed ; and he was admitting 
that she looked ill and languid, and wanted 
rest. 

No sooner had Mrs. Desmond announced 
their intended departure, and her deep regret 
at their approaching separation, with her hope 
that at some period Lord and Lady Oriel would 
come to Ireland and see the future estates of 
their brother, than Lady Oriel, stealing a sup- 
plicating glance at her husband, exclaimed, 
" Oh ! how I wish that we were going with 
you ! how delightful to see the Lakes of Kil- 
larney, and th fine woods and mountains that 



310 THE REPEALERS. 

dear Frances has been telling me so much 
about !" 

Mrs. Desmond expressed how much gra- 
tified her circle would feel at such a visit, 
and Lord Oriel, to the joy of all, declared his 
willingness to accompany them to Ireland as 
soon as they pleased. 



THE REPEALERS. 311 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

" Wealth is the magic wand that makes all fair, 
However foul it might have been before ; 
It hides deformity, gives youth to age, 
Makes dullness bright, and blockheads pass for wits; 
Nay, glosses o'er our crimes, and gilds our vices. 
There are but two things wealth can never do. 
Give happiness, or add one hour to life." 

Old Play. 

It was arranged that Lord and Lady Oriel 
should accompany the Desmonds and For- 
resters to Ireland, and that they should leave 
London in a fortnight, to allow time for having 
Springmount put in readiness for their re- 
ception. 



312 THE REPEALERS. 

They were all invited to a grand fete at Mr. 
Vernon's, whose wealth and splendid style of 
living made him a conspicuous character ; who, 
though sneered at by the beau monde, as im 
nouveau riche, and a parvenu, yet found his din- 
ners, soirees, and balls, attended by all the indi- 
viduals the most a la mode in that beau monde. 

The influence of wealth over those who can 
never, in any way, benefit by it, is as extra- 
ordinary as it is general ; and in no way is this 
more clearly proved than by the facility with 
which a supposed millionnaire finds himself es- 
tablished in the aristocratic circles in London 
on something even more than on equal terms ; as 
there is a pretension and purse-proud assump- 
tion in a parvenu that leads him to take liberties 
in retaining the position he has usurped, which 
a nobleman would never dream of practising. 

The fete to be given by Mr. Vernon was ex- 
pected to be the most brilliant of the season, 



THE REPEALERS. 313 

and Rumour, with her hundred tongues, was 
sending forth inflated descriptions of the pre- 
parations making for it. Temporary rooms, and 
new conservatories, were to spring up as if by 
the hand of enchantment, and all the flowers of 
all the gardeners around London were com- 
manded : nay, it was almost insinuated that a 
fine night was also commanded ; for what is it 
that wealth is not supposed capable of accom- 
plishing ? and that of Mr. Vernon was boundless. 

While all London, which means the fashion- 
able part of it, were anticipating the fete, let us 
take a peep at the givers, and, Asmodeus like, 
display the feelings that actuated two persons 
supposed to be amongst the happiest in London, 
it being the received and established opinion 
that wealth can buy happiness as well as other 
rare things. Were the interiors of many a 
mansion, where riches most abound, laid open 
to our view, we should discover the fallacious- 

VOL. 11. P 



314 THE REPEALERS. 

ness of this belief — a belief that forms no part 
of the creed of those who possess this envied 
wealth, though many have sacrificed youth, 
health, and affection to attain it, discovering, 
alas ! too late, that it cannot ensure that for 
which they have toiled. 

SCENE — THE MORNING ROOM OF MRS. 
VERNON. — A CONJUGAL TETE-'A-TETE. 

'' How often must I repeat to you, Mrs. Ver- 
non, that you mar all my projects, by the ex- 
treme civility of your manner ? I carefully ob- 
served your reception of our noble guests yes- 
terday, and blushed for the humility so appa- 
rent even in your curtsies. You were so little 
at your ease, and so thankful to your company, 
that you appeared more like the hostess of an 
inn^ receiving the gentry of her county, than 
the '<nistress of one of the most splendid man- 
sions in London, and the wife of one of the 
richest capitalists." 



/ 



THE REPEALERS. 315 

" I am sorry," replied Mrs. Vernon meekly, 
" that I have failed to meet your wishes. I 
am, as you know, naturally of a timid dispo- 
sition, and feel myself embarrassed among so 
many strangers. Besides, not having been in 
my youth accustomed to such elevated society, 
I cannot shake off a certain degree of shyness, 
when I see myself surrounded by persons of 
such importance, and hear announced the titles 
of individuals of birth, whom I never expected 
to know but by the newspapers/' 

" Pooh, pooh — that is all nonsense; recol- 
lect, that if the persons you now mix with have 
birth and rank to pride themselves on, (and 
proud and insolent enough are our aristocracy 
disposed to be, for these advantages) we have the 
aristocracy of wealth, which gives power and 
influence, and which we must make them feel, 
by receiving their advances with a careless 
politeness, which shows that we are by no 
means elated by them, but receive them as a 
p 2 



316 THE REPEALERS. 

right, not as a concession. My son quoted 
Bacon to me the other day, as saying that 
knowledge is power. This I deny ; wealth is 
power ; every day proves it ; and this. Bacon 
seems to have known as well as I, or why did 
he not content himself with knowledge, of which 
I admit he had a good stock, without seeking 
wealth by means which, if we believe his contem- 
poraries, were not always strictly honorable.'^" 

" If you allowed me to differ in opinion with 
you," said Mrs. Vernon, in her usually gentle 
tone, " I should say that I think our aristocra- 
tic friends much less haughty than the gene- 
rality of our acquaintance. It appears to me, 
that their positions in society being established, 
they are not compelled to remind people of 
their claims, and consequently are more at their 
ease, and allow others to be more so, than our 
less elevated associates, who are continually 
making efforts to retain the places they have 
usurped .""^ 



THE REPEALERS. 317 

" You are wrong, quite wrong," replied the 
obtuse husband. " The very ease you talk of 
is a proof of their insolent nonchalance, as the 
French call it, and is to me much more offen- 
sive than all the self-important airs of the 
Davisons, Rowlands, and all the other million- 
aires on whom those great Lords and Ladies 
affect to look down, and receive at all their 
grand parties, only because they are rich. De- 
fend me from the condescension of your people 
of fashion ! I know them, Mrs. Vernon, I know 
them." 

" Then why seek them ?" asked the wife 
quietly. " With your opinion of them, their 
society cannot contribute to your happiness." 

" Will you never understand me, Mrs. Ver- 
non ? Why did I toil for years, why risk the 
fortune so hardly earned, in speculations that 
might have beggared me, but to gain power, 
and to confront those proud Nobles face to face, 
making them feel that there is a still higher, 



318 THE REPEALERS. 

prouder aristocracy than theirs, that of wealth. 
Yes, I do make them feel this, and they hate me 
for it. Those on whose estates I have heavy 
mortgages, or who have political views which 
my interest may forward, are all civihty. But 
look at the supercilious politeness of those who 
stand in neither of the predicaments I have 
named ; observe the affected indifference with 
which they view my pictures, statues, gold 
plate, in short all that in their hearts they 
covet. And can you then wonder, that 
though I seek them because their presence ad- 
ministers to my vanity, I detest even while 
making use of them ?" 

Mrs. Vernon sighed, but answered not: 
experience had taught her that her gentle rea- 
soning fell unheeded on the ear of her selfish and 
wilful husband, or only served to provoke harsh 
observations on her want of knowledge of the 
world and proper spirit. 



THE REPEALERS. 319 

" Recollect, Mrs. Vernon," resumed the hus- 
band, " that I will have neither your sister nor 
my brother, nor their sons and daughters, 
invited to our fete. This I am decided on ; I 
will have none but the very elite of fashion, as 
the newspapers term it, as nothing is so vexa- 
tious as to hear people asking the names of 
those, they meet nowhere else, and to know 
that these unknown individuals are our bro- 
thers, sisters, nephews, and nieces.'^ 

Mrs. Vernon ventured to remark, that were 
their relations to be seen three or four times, all 
questions w^ould cease ; but her husband casting 
a half angry, half contemptuous look at her, 
repeated his decision, that they should not be 
invited, and quitted the room, leaving his good- 
natured wife deeply pained at the mortification 
she must inflict on relations who were dear to 
her, and whose society constituted her chief en- 
joyment. 



320 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

" Vous demar.dez comment on fait ces grandes fortunes ? 
c'est parcequ'on est heureux. Dfes qu'on est dans le fil de 
I'eau, il n'y a qu'a se laisser aller." 

Mr. Vernon, commenced his career as a 
merchant with a good capital, a cool and calcu- 
latino' head, a heart that had so little influenced 
his actions, or feelings, that not only his friends, 
but himself, almost questioned its existence, and 
a sound stomach; the indulgence of which 
formed one of his principal sources of enjoy- 
ment. He passed the days of his youth un- 
tempted and untempting, until chance threw 
into his path Miss Bosville, the daughter and 
coheiress of a rich city banker, and to this cir- 



THE REPEALERS. 321 

cumstance, and not to her beauty, accomplish- 
ments, or amiable qualities — and shewas rich in 
all these— did she owe the preference that Mr. 
Vernon professed, when he sought, and, aided 
by her father's advice, won her hand. 

The well-established reputation for exacti- 
tude and caution Mr. Vernon had gained in 
business, joined to his wealth and regularity of 
conduct, had won the approbation of Mr. Bos- 
ville ; and as there was nothing disagreeable in 
his appearance, and as he assumed a softness 
of manner calculated to please the young and 
amiable person he sought as a wife, she soon 
yielded to his suit, and in her twenty-third year 
became the wife of Mr. Vernon, who was ten 
years her senior. 

With little of the romantic in her feelings, 
and a less than usual portion of the imagination 
that falls to her sex, Mrs. Vernon possessed an 
affectionate disposition, an equal and sweet tem- 
per, great good sense, and an undeviating 
p5 



o22 THE REPEALERS. 

gentleness, joined to a natural timidity, which 
lent a grace to her manners knd rendered her 
peculiarly formed to make an excellent wife and 
mother, and to be the focus of attraction and 
happiness in the domestic circle. 

Soon after the marriage of Mrs. Vernon, her 
sister became the wife of a junior partner in the 
bank of her father, and continued to move in 
the unfashionable, but estimable sphere of her 
early friends ; while Mr. Vernon, aided by the 
large fortune his wife had brought him, ex- 
tended his commercial connexions, and Fortune 
seemed delighted to shower on him her choicest 
favours, by realizing even more than his hither- 
to ambitious dreams of wealth. 

Years had flown, and each succeeding one 
had added thousands to the wealth of Mr. 
Vernon : he became noted on Change, quoted 
in the City, a principal sharer in loans, a large 
landed proprietor, and an influential member 
of Parliament, who would shortly, report 



THE REPEALERS. 323 

Stated, be raised to the peerage. He was 
the father of tWo sons, both in ParUament, 
and of two daughters, on whom he meant to 
bestow fortunes that must entitle them to 
marry with the highest. His house in London 
was a palace fitted up with all that luxury 
could invent or wealth command : the finest 
specimens of art in painting and sculpture 
were seen at every side ; and not only Danae, 
but Venus herself, and all the beau ideals of 
mythology, had yielded to the golden shower 
of this modern corrupter, and left the land of 
their birth to decorate the walls or niches of 
the new temple of Plutus. 

The chef-cfauvres of Benvenuto Cellini, 
with all the treasures of the cinqua cento, 
filled his cabinets— treasures that afforded their 
owner no enjoyment save that of seeing the 
admiration and envy they excited. Vases of 
c vstal-de-roche, set in enamel, and enriched 
with sparkhng gems ; cups of onyx, and jars of 



32^ THE REPEALERS. 

lapis lazuli and malachite, with the rich and 
laboured bijouterie of the time of Louis the 
Fourteenth, were disposed on stands of silver 
and ebony of curious workmanship : while the 
costly porcelaine de Sevres, of Turquoise blue, 
or the pale rose of Dubary, were scattered 
through the various suites of rooms, all vouch- 
ers of the wealth that had given to their pre- 
sent owner the spoils of the once proud palaces 
of the Eternal City, of Genoa the Superb, of 
Venice the Gorgeous, and of Florence ; of whose 
merchant princes, the riches, love of display, 
and ambition of the present possessor of their 
treasures, reminded one, though not of their 
taste, — for in this ^Ir. Vernon had no rivalry 
with the Medici, though master of some of 
their finest specimens of art, — of the excellence 
that their taste had called forth. 

The Library of Vernon House was the r?e plus 
ultra of magnificence. Bookcases of carved 
rose-wood, supported by Corinthian columns 



THE REPEALERS. 325 

of the same precious materials, the capitals 
and frieze gilt, and crowned by antique busts 
of or-molu, contained all that ancient or mo- 
dern literature could offer. Large mirrors, de- 
scending from the architraves to the base, re- 
flected the fine proportions of the library, with 
the gorgeous bindings of the books, and the 
gilded busts and antique vases filled with the 
rarest flowers, that were distributed around. 
Behind the mirrors, which turned on a pivot, 
maps were arranged, and in recesses beneath, 
the celestial and terrestrial globes were divided 
by a facsimile of the Warwick Vase, in pure 
gold of colossal dimensions, filled with pot 
pourri, breathing of Araby the blest. Tripods 
of or-moki, bearing candelabres, were placed 
in front of the mirrors. The curtains were of 
crimson satin, trimmed with gold bullion fringe, 
and fell in graceful folds to the ground. 

The cornices corresponded with and joined 
the friezes of the bookcases, and, like them, 



326 THE REPEALERS. 

were in alto-relievo, representing subjects from 
the antique, executed in or-molu : the carpet 
was made to match the curtains, and its ma- 
terial was so thick that the foot fell unheeded 
on its surface, enhancing the luxury of the 
springy elasticity of its touch by its total 
absorption of sound. 

One end of the library opened into an 
orangery, with a marble fountain by Bernini 
in the centre, that sent its crystal streams in 
air ; and this again led into an aviary filled 
with the choicest singing-birds, whose notes 
mingled with the murmurs of the fountain, 
and led one to believe that one was far away 
from the murky atmosphere of London. The 
windows were of gold-coloured glass, reflecting 
a glowing radiance, and giving a Claude Lo- 
raine tint to all around. 

Wherever the eye rested, it was met by forms 
of beauty, and tints various as the rays of a 
golden sun setting into repose, that filled the 



THE REPEALERS. 327 

soul with delicious musings. The easy chair, 
the lounging sofa, the Grecian canopy, each with 
their table on castors, containing all the appa- 
ratus of writing, almost tempted the indolent 
by the facility they offered of describing the 
ideas the beauty of the scene was so calculated 
to give birth to. This was a sort of royal road 
to learning, where luxury wooed the student, 
presenting all that antiquity can boast to refine 
and elevate the mind, and all that modern 
civiHzation can afford for the luxuriant indul- 
gence of the person. 

Here, where genius might have essayed his 
pinions, and talent conveyed its impressions to 
ages yet unborn, the man of wealth, the 
heartless parvenu, made his notes of speculation 
of thousands to be acquired, influence to be 
gained, and friends to be left off, the scene pos- 
sessing no more power over his obtuse nerves, 
than the obscure counting-house where his 
ambitious visions first took flight. 



328 THE REPEALERS. 

Nothing in art can continue to dazzle but so 
long as we are unaccustomed to the contempla- 
tion of it. Let a person dwell for some months, 
nay, a few weeks, in one of the mansions that 
has the most struck his fancy, and he will 
find that by degrees his vision becomes so 
used to the objects which first enchanted him, 
that he soon ceases to be sensible of their pre- 
sence, or to feel aught more than that gene- 
ral complacency excited in the mind by 
being surrounded by agreeable objects. It is 
otherwise with the beauties of nature. The 
more the eye becomes accustomed to behold 
them, the more pleasure do they convey : each 
point of view gains a new interest by being con- 
trasted with others ; the diff*erent periods of the 
day or season change the appearance, and 
throw a fresh light over the scene, that prevents 
its ever becoming monotonous. 



THE REPEALERS. 329 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Uhuitre est malheureuse quand quelque longue mala- 

die fait qu'elle devient perle : c'est pr^cisement le bonheur 

de Tambition. 

Montesquieu. 

Mr. Vernon had neither grown wiser nor 
happier with his accession to riches. They 
opened new fields to his ambition, and as by 
degrees he reahzed the dreams which that en- 
croaching passion had engendered, he found 
the vista extended to an interminable distance ; 
the most remote point being always the most 
brilliant and seducing, holding forth hopes that 
there he might repose, and enjoy the good he 
had gained. But 

"Illusive hope still points to distant good." 



330 THE REPEALERS. 

A competency was the first object that lent 
activity to the exertions of Mr. Vernon ; this 
acquired, the prospect of v^ealth became the 
next point of attraction. But as wealth is com- 
parative, his ideas on this score enlarged with 
his means of acquiring it ; and he Avho would 
have considered himself at the acme of his 
ambition as master of a plum, had now arrived 
at thinking himself unlucky as a millionaire, 
unless a coronet glittered on his brow. 

But while seeking this imaginary good, a 
sentiment of dislike and envy to all who pos- 
sessed hereditary claims to its distinction, was 
prominent in his breast. He looked on their 
gaiety as insulting, their coldness as revolting, 
and their indifference as something not to be 
borne, at least, until he had gained the first 
step in the ladder that he meant to climb. 
He affected in conversation to despise the 
distinctions of rank, though rank was the 



THE REPEALERS. 331 

sole end and aim of his existence : and yet he 
has been known to break forth into disbelief 
and invective, when some person has inadver- 
tently stated the refusal of some very dis- 
tinguished commoner, — some Burdett of the 
day, — to accept the Peerage, as if such a re- 
fusal was impossible. 

Mr. Vernon was so intent in looking forward 
that he had forgotten to look back, else might 
he have remembered the former points of his 
ambition, — points that had receded as soon 
as reached, and were thought of no more. Ex- 
perience might have taught him, that hitherto 
success had but excited him to new exertions. 
But when did man profit by the lessons of 
experience ? 

" Man never is, but always to be blest ;" 

and as long as Hope, Fortune, or Ambition, 
has a bauble to lure men on, they rarely pause 



332 THE REPEALERS. 

until the grave receives them, and ends their 
illusions. 

This has been, and will be the history of 
man, as long as the genus exists, thinking only 
of that future that will end but as the past, 
in disappointment, or that he shall never see. 
He who calls himself prudent, laughs at the 
extravagance of the thoughtless dissi pater of 
wealth, who, determined to enjoy to-day lest 
to-morrow come not for him, spreads around 
him the enjoyments that gold can procure, and 
lives to want the comforts that he has bartered 
for luxuries. This to the prudent man seems 
madness, or folly ; and he says, " I will keep 
my stores until unbounded riches have given 
me the means of enjoying all, and then I will 
indulge to satiety." But he recks not that 
the sense of enjoyment will then have passed 
for ever, and that the cup filled by the syren 
Pleasure can charm no more — Ambition takes 



THE REPEALERS. 3SS 

the place of Avarice, as Avarice has usurped 
that of Pleasure, all doomed to the same end — 
disappointment. 

Mr. Vernon felt not that his days were fast 
fleeting in the pursuit of the imaginary good 
that had lured him on, and that enjoyment 
had not yet found him ; but he flattered him- 
self, that once elevated to the rank he had 
so long aspired to, he should enjoy repose when 
a coronet encircled his brow. But until that 
wished-for event, uneasy lay the head which 
anticipated it, though that head was pillowed 
on down, and had the supposed sleep-giving 
consciousnesss of being the master of countless 
thousands. 

Mr. Vernon possessed a vague idea that per- 
fect happiness was only to be attained by arriv- 
ing at the fourth step in the peerage ; but he 
tried to stifle this thought, because he felt that 
his age gave him little chance of accomplishing 



334 THE REPEALERS. 

it, and consoled himself with the hope that, once 
a Lord, his feelings would change, and that 
he should begin to taste the pleasures he had 
hitherto put away from him, lest they might 
interfere with the grand object of his pursuit. 

The eldest son of Mr. Vernon resembled his 
father in selfishness and in ambition. A noble 
or generous feeling had never had a place 
in his breast; for egoism, vanity, and conceit 
had left little room for other passions. With 
the advantages of having passed his boyhood^ 
at Eton — that Macadamiser of hereditary 
distinctions — he was much less impressed with 
a respect for rank than was his father. He 
had approached too near nobility to be imposed 
on by the false notions adopted by those who 
see it at a distance ; and he found that the 
Marquises, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Lord 
Johns and Lord Henrys, of the first and second 
forms, had nothing to distinguish them from 



THE REPEALERS. 335 

their untitled playmates, except what he could 
little appreciate — an open manliness and good 
breeding, the effects of that freedom from hau- 
teur and affectation that is, in general, a re- 
markable characteristic in the ancient nobility. 

This close contact with the young scions of 
aristocracy had taken off Francis Vernon's 
deference for them, and left him free from 
prejudices for or against them ; but Christ 
Church, with what he called its invidious dis- 
tinctions, excited his wrath ; and though he 
liked to lounge on the arm of a tufted col- 
legian, he disliked him for the badge that 
marked the difference in their birth, and longed 
for the period that would elevate him to rank 
and station. His father's well-calculated libe- 
rality had enabled him to maintain a promi- 
nent position at Christ Church : he had the 
best hunters, the best furnished rooms, gave 
the most recherche dinners the most frequently 



336 THE REPEALERS. 

of any man at Oxford, and piqued himself 
on having his rooms constantly filled with the 
elite of his circle, which he attributed to 
the attraction of his society, until a candid 
friend avowed, in a moment of abandon, that 
he, too, would adopt Vernon's mode of filling 
his rooms, by placing large mirrors in them, — 
the sure plan of collecting visiters, and the 
only reflections a la mode at Christ Church. 

During his visits to the paternal roof in 
London or in Wiltshire, Francis Vernon was 
sure to engage some of his titled companions 
as guests, proud to display to them the un- 
bounded luxury that reigned there, and glad to 
show his parents and sisters the perfect equality 
with which he treated the owners of the high- 
sounding titles that he abridged of their rank 
in conversation, which never failed to be re- 
marked and rewarded by a complacent smile 
from his father. 



THE REPEALERS. 337 

Henry Vernon, two years junior to his bro- 
ther, resembled his mother in gentleness and 
amiability, to which he united firmness and 
decision, with considerable talent and general 
information. 

The sisters were handsome, showy, and ac- 
complished ; skilled in all the arts of display, 
and as ambitious and aspiring as even their 
father could desire. They were ready to lend 
themselves to any scheme to procure their ele- 
vation into that third heaven of their imagina- 
tion, — some ducal family. 

To accomplish this desirable object, dinners 
and balls in the season, select parties at Vernon 
Villa at Richmond, and shooting-parties in the 
autumn and winter were arranged, to which 
two latter, none were engaged that could mar 
the projects of the inviter, or distract the 
attention of the invited from the objects of 
attraction held forth to them. Earls h?d 

VOL. II. Q 



oSS THE REPEALERS. 

danced and sighed, Viscounts had talked of 
the happiness of domestic life, and Barons had 
searched for the hidden shawls, or boas, and 
assisted the fair owners in enveloping their 
persons with them, evincing a tender anxiety, 
indicative of more than common interest ; but 
the Misses Vernons were not to be caught 
by aught less brilliant than the present pos- 
sessors or expectants of a Dukedom, and were 
voted by the aspirants to their favour as very 
amiable, but rather reserved, which was at- 
tributed to the old-fashioned notions inculcated 
by Madame Mere, instead of to the indiffe- 
rence of the young ladies. 

It is thus that vanity accounts for all that 
might be mortifying to self; and lucky it is 
that it has such consolation ! 



THE REPEALERS. 339 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

How many in the married state v;e find 
Wedded in person, but divorced in mind. 
Mezentius chain'd the living to the dead. 
Unnatural union ! which has horror bred. 
Though but one victim suffered from the chain, 
While Wedlock gives to two an equal pain. 

" Marriage" an old Poem. 

Mr. Henry Vernon had acquired riches 
more slowly than his elder brother, and was 
content to enjoy them less ostentatiously. Sim- 
ple in taste and cultivated in mind, he looked 
on wealth as a means, and not as the end 
of enjoyment, and really found gratification in 



340 THE REPEALERS. 

the choice works of art and well-chosen library 
with which he had enriched his spacious and 
richly-furnished house. 

One daughter was the sole offspring of the 
ill-assorted union of Mr. Henry Vernon with 
the rich and handsome — or rather let us pay 
respect to the gifts of Nature by placing them 
before that of Fortune, and say, the handsome 
and rich Miss Oswald. When Mr. H. Vernon 
wooed and won this lady, he was more attracted 
by the roses on her cheek, and the lustre in her 
eye, than by the thousands that composed her 
dower, or the large expectancies that futurity 
promised he . She was so young and lovely, 
that Scepticism itself could hardly have doubt- 
ed that one whose beauty was so calculated 
to adorn the domestic circle, should sigh for 
a more extended theatre to exhibit her charms. 

Henry Vernon was not the first, and will not 
be the last man, who discovers that a beautiful 



THE REPEALERS. 341 

exterior may cover a cold and selfish heart. 
Such discoveries, like all that depend on ex- 
perience, arrive too late to be of advantage 
to him who makes them. All are ready to 
admit this truism ; but who ever was willing 
to profit by the experience of others, though 
offered ever so much below prime cost ? Hen- 
ry Vernon soon found that he could neither 
expect a friend nor companion in his wife ; and 
that he must be content to abandon the hopes 
he had formed of cTieerful evenings at home, — 
his expected consolation for long hours of con- 
finement in his counting-house, — and return 
to his solitary hearth, to seek in the perusal of 
some new work to pass the hours wasted by his 
wife in a round of amusements, which appearing 
to her to be the sole end of existence, any at- 
tempt to interrupt them only produced re- 
proaches, ill-humour, and obstinacy. 

The birth of a daughter produced no change 
Q3 



34^ THE REPEALERS. 

in Mrs. Henry Vernon's feelings. The same 
round of heartless, joyless amusements conti- 
nued to fill up her time, interrupted by pe- 
tulant complaints of being left out of Mrs. 
Vernon'^s select parties, and expressions of an- 
ger and vexation towards her husband for what 
he could neither avert nor change. Henry 
Vernon had observed with pain his brother's 
intentional withdrawal from his society ; habits 
of youthful intimacy had cemented a brotherly 
affection on his side, which had never been but 
slightly participated by Mr. Vernon, and which 
pride and ambition quickly extinguished. 

Conscious that he was acting unkindly, he 
soon began to dishke the sight of his brother, 
because, by reminding him of his wilful neg- 
lect, it became a source of embarrassment and 
reproach. 

It rarely happens when we behave ill towards 
any one with whom we have lived on terms of 



THE REPEALERS. 343 

affection that dislike towards that person does 
not ensue ; and the less excuse we find in our 
own hearts for our unkindness, the more strongly 
do we entertain the disHke. We begin by being 
unkind, and we end by being unjust and cruel ; 
and it is well if we confine ourselves to feelings, 
and do not commit actions which wounded con- 
science will surely, though too late, avenge. 

Mrs. Vernon felt a sincere friendship and 
respect for her brother-in-law, whose society 
was so agreeable to her taste as to induce 
her to submit without a murmur to that of 
his wife, which was far from being congenial 
to her. She saw with regret her husband's 
cold and unbrotherly wish of withdrawing from 
anything more than an occasional intercourse, 
and felt pain at each interview, on observing 
the undiminished kindness of Henry Vernon's 
manner, which seemed like a tacit avowal that 
he knew there was no want of affection on her 



344 THE REPEALERS. 

part ; while the offended air and angry insinua- 
tions of his wife embarrassed and annoyed her. 

But if Mrs. Vernon felt pained at being com- 
pelled to withdraw from the intimacy of her 
brother-in-law's family, how much more deeply 
did she feel at being forced to confine her 
intercourse with a loved and only sister to 
occasional visits, formal dinners once or twice 
in the season, and now and then an affectionate 
tite-d-tite^ when both felt anxious to conceal 
from the other the consciousness that their 
intercourse was limited, and marked this con- 
sciousness by a careful avoidance of any refer- 
ence to the innumerable dinners, balls, and 
routs, the accounts of which so constantly filled 
up the columns of the " Court Journal," where 
the *' fashionable" or "elegant" Mrs. Vernon 
generally headed some leading-article in the list 
of fashionable intelligence. 

With that fine tact peculiar to women, and 



THE REPEALERS. 345 

which always exists in proportion to the warmth 
of heart and dehcacy of the person possessing 
it, Mrs. Burrell, the sister of Mrs. Vernon, had 
early observed the line of conduct Mr. Vernon 
had forced his wife to adopt, and that which 
she herself must follow, to save her affection- 
ate and sensitive sister from additional pain. 
Mrs. Burrell, therefore, avoided all allusion to 
the infrequency of their intercourse, and con- 
tented herself with showing an increased affec- 
tion in her manner when they met. 

By this delicacy, Mrs. Vernon was saved the 
pang of thinking, that while obeying the harsh 
mandates of a husband, she had either wounded 
or lost a sister's heart ; and the soft and con- 
tinued pressure with which she retained that 
sister's hand in her's marked how gratefully she 
felt this forbearing tenderness to her feelings. 

Less tact on either side must have led to 
most painful scenes. Temper, good-nature, 



346 THE REPEALERS. 

and aiFection, though precious in themselves, 
must fail to insure the happiness of those dear 
to us unless we also possess tact, the invaluable 
gift which is the true panacea that sweetens the 
cup of life, founded on forbearance, itself a vir- 
tue. Tact enables us to avoid wounding, and to 
repel wounds ; it is the sure indicator of good- 
ness as well as refinement ; for though the lat- 
ter lends additional charms to its practice, it 
is the former that gives birth to it. Tact, like 
Genius, must be inherent ; and cultivation only 
does for one what it does for the other, po- 
lishes and refines both, but cannot create either. 
I refer not to that spurious Tact, the off- 
spring of society, nursed by policy and edu- 
cated by deception, which enables people who 
dislike, or are indifferent to each other, to meet 
without any excitement or betrayal of angry 
feelings ; to show interest where none is ex- 
perienced, and to avoid all occasions of touch- 



THE REPEALERS. 347 

ing on disagreeable subjects. This, I admit, 
is best acquired in an intercourse with polished 
society ; but the Tact I worship is that which 
springs from the sensitive mind, with all the 
bland influences of kindness, blessed and bless- 
ing, the full-grown offspring of goodness. This 
Tact precludes the necessity of speech : a look 
suffices : a pressure of the hand, or total silence, 
is often more eloquent than all that language 
could express — 

" El silentio ancor suolo 
Haver prieghi e parole." 

Mr. Burrell, with all his wife^s affectionate 
nature, wanted her philosophy ; he felt morti- 
fied, not for himself but her, at seeing her left 
out at all the brilliant fetes given by the 
Vernons; and when their acquaintance, with 
that want of perception so remarkable in a 
certain class, dwelt on the newspaper descrip- 
tions of such fetes, and appealed to Mrs. Bur- 



348 THE REPEALERS. 

rell for the particulars, the embarrassed looks 
and heightened colour of his wife, who was only 
embarrassed because she felt what was passing 
in his mind, increased his displeasure. 

Mr. Burrell was justly proud of his wife; he 
was aware of her merits; he had been accus- 
tomed to see her looked up to and respected by 
all his friends ; and as his fortune and position 
were highly respectable, he was shocked and 
humiliated at finding her unappreciated by her 
brother-in-law : and secretly accused her sister 
of a want of respect for her, or a want of spirit 
in vindicating what was due to herself, in thus 
tamely submitting to the imperious and un- 
natural dictation of her selfish and worldly- 
minded husband. 

END OF THE SEOND VOLUME. 



PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY, BORSET STREET. ^ 


