O'DONNEL.



CHAPTER I.

TO THE EIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF ,

PALACE OF .

DEAR BISHOP,

- If our most serious resolutions are sometimes procrastinated, sometimes broken, may we not reasonably expect forgiveness, when occasionally found wanting in the discharge of our duties of.ceremony, or engagements of etiquette? I feel that I ought long since to have congratulated you on your advancement from your English Rectory to an Irish See. I have done it in fact; and for forms, you know how little I deal in them.

Since my arrival on my Irish estate, which I have now visited for the first time, I have been deeply involved in business. The renewal of old leases, reclamation of neglected rights, repair of highways, and restoration of all kinds of dilapidations, both in the house and demesne (the consequence of many years' absence and neglect), together with an almost endless labour through the labyrinth of minor law transactions, exclusively incidental, I believe, to Irish property, have scarcely left me breathing-time. So different is all this from the quiet tenor of my life at Glentworth Hall, that I scarcely know myself in my novel character of bustle and importance. However, my affairs are now nearly brought to a close; and though I should certainly prefer (being once in Ireland) a longer residence at Ballynogue, in order to become better acquainted with my tenants on this side the water, and more effectually to study their interests; yet so anxious is Lady Singleton to be off, that I think we shall return home early in the ensuing month. Lady Singleton, who is, as you know, a traveller by profession, wishes to return by Scotland, in preference to retracing our steps by Holyhead. I have therefore to beg a night's lodging at your palace for myself and family, en passant, for I understand the sleeping stage within a few miles of your residence is execrably bad. But should we change our minds, and not go by Port Pa—





Dear Bishop,—Patrick, Mr. Glentworth would have written, but I have snatched the pen from his hand, in the conviction that I shall come more immediately to the point. I know of old, that his head is by no means bien timbre for this sort of negociation: there is nobody so clever as Mr. Glentworth; but, as I used to say to poor dear Lord Singleton, men always fail when they come to les details. Allons done! I need not tell you how difficult it is to move Mr. Glentworth out of Derbyshire. During his twenty years' marriage with his first wife, he never (as he boasts) slept one night away from Glentworth Hall, except while he was attending Parliament: and though I have been constantly urging him since the day of our union to visit his Irish estates (for I heard there was every thing to do), I never could prevail upon him, until the falling in of his leases gave him no alternative; and so—here we are.

Oh, my dear Bishop, what a country! What room for change and improvement! or rather what a necessity for a total bouleversement of every thing! I have done a little; that is, I have undone every thing: but, for the present, I shall not have time to complete any thing. My plans, most of which I have drawn out myself, have quite astonished Mr. Glentworth's Irish agent; but, as is usual among the semi-barbarous, improvement is resisted as innovation ; and Mr. O'Grady has an obstacle to oppose to every thing I have suggested, because the old muddling system must go on for ever in the same old muddling way.





There is nothing so much wanted here as a canal from Ballynogue to Dublin: I have drawn out a plan

upon the Newcastle system, and but we will talk

all these things over when we meet. Now Mr. Glentworth is plante here, it is quite as difficult to get him back to England, as it was to induce him to leave it. We propose, however, bidding farewell to Ballynogue on or about the 18th of September; and as we shall go slowly (for we intend to travel with a set of horses we have made up since we came here), we may expect, according to my calculations, to be with you by the 21st. We left Charles Glentworth at Oxford, with your quondam pupil, Lord Boston. Our party therefore simply consists of Mr. G., myself, my two daughters, their governess, and five servants. Apropos of Lord B.: we met his mother, Lady Llanberis, in Wales, on her way to what I call her principality. There never was so bored a woman: though she talked in raptures of her " native mountains," when in London. They say she is journaliire—but she has an excellent heart. She expects the Savills at Llanberis; they are amazingly lies! What can that mean? She talks with great delight of her son; and, considering the care you took of his education, she might have done something better than placing you in a poor bishopric in the north of Ireit 2





land: however, this is but her pas aVavance for you. She will do more and better in time, for her five boroughs must carry every thing before them. I wish, however, you had consulted me, before you accepted the See: I will not pledge myself that my brother would or could do better at present for you; but he would have done as well, pour le moins.

Farewell, my dear Bishop: we all unite in congratulations, &c.

I am just going to walk to our little town of Bally nogue, with a new friend of our's (whom we found here, and who was quite, what is vulgarly called, a Godsend)—a Mr. Dexter, an amazing safe person, quite of the right side, and with a quantity of good sense: he agrees with me in every thing, but particularly on the state of this wretched country. He is settled at Ballynogne, and has promised in my absence to have a certain surveillance on things here, which is a great matter. By the bye, you have no idea what a sensation I create, when I go into the town of Ballynogue; for I make it a rule to enter every house sans facon, as lady of the manor. It is a sort of feudal privilege, you know; and I go on examining, changing, correcting, and improving, according to exigencies. In fact, a radical reform is called for; and I will lend my little aid to its completion. But Mr. Glentworth remains inert, and listens and smiles, and is not a bit the more complying; so that (plan as I may) the means are still denied me to execute. Once more adieu.

Yours truly,

C. Singleton. August the 28th; Ballynogue Castle, Ballynogue.





TO THE LADY VISCOUNTESS SINGLETON, BALLYNOGUE CASTLE, BALLYNOGDE.

MY DEAR MADAM,

I return your Ladyship, Mr. Glentworth, and the Misses Singleton, my most unfeigned and hearty thanks for your kind congratulations on my unmerited promotion to the distinguished situation which I now unworthily hold. My elevation to the See of took place

shortly after you left our ever, by me, esteemed and regretted neighbourhood in Derbyshire. The event, Lady Singleton, was unexpected, but the solicitude of my noble friends got the start of my humble desires. I trust I was contented with my former state; nor, indeed, was an Irish bishopric, with so small a revenue, and such limited patronage, an object greatly to be coveted: but I left every thing to the Countess of Llanberis.

I must certainly rejoice in any circumstance, which may bring your ladyship and Mr. Glentworth to this remote part of the world; and the best accommodation my poor episcopal residence (by courtesy called palace) can afford, is at your ladyship's service. The house, though old, is capacious; and you may judge that I have a tolerable number of lodging-rooms, when I inform your ladyship that at the time when I hope to have the honour-of seeing your family, I expect also as my guests, Commodore and Lady Florence Grandville, their friend Mr.

Vandaleur, and Colonel Percy Moclere, Lord B 's

second son, who is quartered in my neighbourhood. Commodore Grandville (with whose eldest brother, the present Earl Grandville, I was travelling, when I first had the honour of meeting your ladyship, and your respected late lord at Florence) is stationed off Lough Swilly. He has, I hear, taken, for the time being, a house prettily situated on the coast, and Lady Florence intends (as it is right she should) to spend the three ensuing months with him: she comes from her father's near Edinburgh; and the Commodore meets





her at palace, to give her convoy to Lough

Swilly.

Mr. Vandaleur, at one of whose unrivalled dinners in Portman Square I had the honour of meeting your ladyship, when I was last in town, is come over merely to see his friends the Grandvilles; and Lady Florence wrote me word she had appointed him to meet them at my place. I sincerely rejoice, therefore, that I have something to offer your ladyship which may serve as an inducement to you and Mr. Glentworth to remain a few days under my roof; and I hope Lady Singleton will believe that I am, with every sentiment of respect, and the highest consideration,

Her Ladyship's servant and friend,

Richard .

Palace of

September the 1st.

P. S.—I have been sadly oppressed with my old complaint in the chest ever since I came to Ireland. The moisture of the climate is much against me. I have, however, found relief for the present from a newly discovered medicine, a balsam I have got over

from London, recommended by my friend Judge .

I find here ample room for my little agricultural tastes, and I have a spot of ground near the palace, which I call my Pet Farm: it is, indeed, a nice thing in its way. Game is plentiful and excellent just about me; the salmon abundant and very good: but, as your ladyship observes, there is much to do to make things endurable. I hear but bad accounts of our friend the

Archbishop. Poor Mrs. B !I pity her most

sincerely. If Lord should succeed, there, for his

friend, I wonder who would get Lincoln.





TO THE BIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OP ,

PALACE OF .

DEAR BISHOP,

We have received your's of the first, and thank you for your offered hospitality. I happen to know all the party you mention particularly well, and shall be glad to meet them. How Lady Florence will get oh at Lough Swilly I don't very well understand, except the officers of the commodore's squadron go for something; however, her joining her husband is amazingly like her. She professes great respect for the bienseances, and she is quite right: it is that which precisely draws the line. I have often told her so: and, entre nous, when she was doing all sorts of foolish things, a few years back, I first gave her the hint. She has not let it lie idle, and gets on amazingly well in consequence.

Mr. Vandaleur's going so far from London surprises me; for though he always lies by at the right season, I never knew him before get' so completely out of the way of the world. I should like to know his real motive for this journey to Ireland. As to his friendship for Lady Florence, that is an understood thing to be merely a matter de convenance on both sides. I don't at all agree with you that his dinners are good. He likes to afficher the thing, I know, beyond any man in town; and any one may toady him, by praising his cook, Du Buisson; who, after all (as I told him the last day I dined with him) would at Paris be considered as a mere savant gargotier. We had an immense demele about him that day. He sent up (in his menu) "Des filets a la Berri," for the famous "filets de Bellevue, d la Pompadour." Now, when my brother went on his first embassy, we happened to have this precise dish, dressed by the son of Mad. de Pompadour's cook; for it was she that invented them for the "petifs appartemens" at Bellevue: whereas the other was a thing quite obsolete, and invented by the famous Duchess of Berry for her father, the Regent, ages before. I have been amazingly unpopular ever since





with Mr. Vandaleur and, indeed, I have more

than once got myself into scrapes with my English friends, by setting them right on subjects, of which, from the very nature and character of the country, they must be ignorant. Although, now and then, you will find things pretty fair at some of our best nobility houses, yet upon the whole England is, on this chapter, pretty much where it was in the days of Louis Quatorze, whose ambassador exclaimed, on his return to Paris—" Ah! quel pays etrange—vingt religions, et que deux sauces."

You used to have a good deal of savoir about these things yourself, at least in West India cookery. I remember, when you were travelling with Lord Grandville, you dressed for us at Florence some pilau, which poor dear Lord Singleton voted supreme. It was not, however, strictly West Indian; but it was a good thing in its way. .

You may certainly expect us about the middle of September: Mr. Glentworth says the eighteenth; I say the twentieth. Mr. Dexter has the horses in training every day, under my inspection. We have cured, between us, Mr. Glentworth's favourite mare of a disease, which Thompson, as usual, denies she ever had. You know Mr. Glentworth's way of going on for ever with his old servants, and suffering himself to be imposed on by them. I am convinced he is afraid of Thompson. What a quiet, half-alive person, the late poor Mrs. Glentworth must have been! Charles is like neither of them: he is a most headstrong boy. His getting a curricle was quite against my consent; for he happens to know just nothing at all about driving, and will take no hints.





Adieu, my dear Bishop—you will say I am veritable causeuse, to-day. I am, nevertheless, sincerely yours, Sept. 4th. C. Singleton.

Ballynogue Castle.

P.S.—I proposed to Mr. O'Grady to enrich the soil of the demesne with marl, as we did in Derbyshire; but he at once declined the experiment: first, because it was not adapted to this soil; and next, because, if it were, there is no marl-pit in the neighbourhood. How Irish! If I remained here I would carry my point, however, as I should about a road which I wanted to have proposed at the next county meeting. Mr. O'Grady says it is not to be done, unless the bog, across which I want to run it (to meet the new canal we were talking of), were drained. I told him of the artificial banks in Holland and other places; but he is entete beyond everything. I must say, Mr. Glentworth bears him out in all, because he is one of his "plain, honest, straight-forward men;" which7means, you know, persons who have not the ingenuity to be rogues, if they were ever so inclined. Adieu once more. Oh! by the bye, throw all your quackeries out of the window, and adopt my prescription, the simple, single sheet of paper laid on the chest, my old remedy, which you may remember never failed. I long to see your Pet Farm; but if you don't know the merits and property of Jiorin grass, you know nothing. We shall make hay at Christmas. I only heard of it this day, myself, and have not yet mentioned it to Mr. Glentworth or Mr. O'Grady. I am a great stickler for wooden shoes, instead of the horrible brogues they wear here. I got some made, and these miserable people will not be prevailed on to adopt them. In everything, how unlike the peasantry of France and Switzerland—at least what they were!





Ou the afternoon of the fourteenth of September, Mr. Glentworth, Lady Singleton, and suite, arrived before the palace gates of the Right Rev. the Bishop

of , almost at the same moment that Commodore

and Lady Florence Grandville, Mr. Vandaleur, and Colonel Moclere, were in the act of mounting their horses for a morning ride. While the obsequious prelate Stood upon the steps of his episcopal residence, bowing out one party, and bowing in the other, his guests exchanged their greetings and salutations, en passant, with all the nonchalante recognition with which people of the world hail people of the world; but somewhat enlivened by exclamations of surprise, at the remoteness of the scene in which they had met.

"Good heavens, how extraordinary! I should as soon have expected we should have met in the deserts of Arabia."

"Only think of a particular set from the neighbourhood of St. James's finding themselves accidentally re-assembled in the wilds of Ireland."

"Do you know, Lady Florence, it is quite a coup de tMatre, a thing for a comedy."

"Or a pantomime," added the Colonel, "hi presto popolorum! and here we are!"

"'Tis quite ridiculous."

The party then separated i the travellers to repose in their apartments, after the fatigue of their journey; the loungers to pursue their morning's amusements; and the Bishop to extend his pastoral care over his Pet Farm.





CHAPTER II.



The party, thus accidentally brought together, were of that class in society vaguely designated under the general term—people of fashion; and though no one individual was sufficiently distinguished to be placed at the head of his subdivision, yet were they all so far "fair specimens," that there could be little difficulty in determining their respective places in the arrangement of notoriety.

Mr. Glentworth alone was a variety, which chance had included in the general classification. He was a rich English commoner, and represented that best and most enlightened order in the population of the country, from which England, in her Augustan days, drew her statesmen, her patriots, and her heroes; and which still, perhaps, holds her up to the rest of the world, as a nation where political liberty is best understood, and moral probity best depicted. His character, firm, but mild, decided, but tranquil, was of an even temperature, remote from all extremes. A certain indolence, interwoven with his constitution, rendered him passive and yielding to the trivial impediments, or the petty concerns of every-day life. He ambitioned no supremacy in trifles; In essentials he admitted no influence. In these, his actions were invariably the result of his principles; and to them he adhered with a tenacity which set opposition at defiance, and left even persuasion hopeless. His life had been so prosperous, that, though prompt to relieve distress, he could scarcely be supposed to sympathise with misfortune; and so little had the varieties of human character been exhibited to his observation, that to their finer shades he was totally insensible; his discrimination was applied only to their extremes. The villain could not have escaped him; the rascal might have gone on imposing upon him for ever; but the candid and fair, the enlightened and liberal, would at all times have attracted his attention, and challenged his respect.





Lady Singleton had been the object of his first love, when she was young and handsome; but he was then a younger brother, and ambition decided against him. This lady, with all the importance, though without the title of an ambassadress, accompanied her brother Lord B. in his successive embassies to the courts of Florence, Vienna, and Paris. Poor, though well-born, her object was to make a brilliant alliance; and while her diplomatic brother was assisting at councils, which were to decide the fate of nations, she was, with no less exertion of political sagacity, endeavouring to determine the destiny of Lord Viscount Singleton, a rich and highly connected nobleman, devotedly attentive to his health, which he only preserved by living abroad. Lord S. was wholly averse from the state of matrimony, which he at last embraced, merely to rid himself of the importunities of the woman he made his wife. His property was entailed on the male heir; and he died, leaving two daughters and his widow, inadequately provided for. During life, his health had been his only concern, the supporting the family grandeur his only passion; and he died true to the principles in which he lived. Lady Singleton was more than disappointed; she was mortified and indignant. She thought she must have held a paramount influence over her husband, because she believed she had married a fool; and she failed, perhaps, because she was right in her conjecture.

While Lady Singleton was pursuing matrimony and politics abroad, Mr. Glentworth succeeded to twenty thousand per annum, and married at home; and when, at the expiration of twenty years, both parties accidentally met, free from the respective engagements they had formed in the interim, Lady Singleton again put her political sagacity into motion, and took into consideration the scantiness of her own jointure, and the value of Mr. Glentworth's estates. At that age when she had been alone susceptible of preference, Mr. Glentworth had been its sole object; and interest and inclination alike combined in urging her views on the heart and hand of her quondam lover. Lady Singleton was a fine woman, and a diplomatist: Mr. Glentworth was an English country gentleman, who knew no more of what is called life, than what was to be learned during his annual attendance on parliament: the odds were of course against him; and he lost his game, even before he suspected he had been drawn in to play it.





A long session favoured her ladyship's political arrangements: she talked of old times, till old feelings returned with old remembrances; and till the senses and the imagination became the dupes of the memory. Time was not challenged to account for the thefts he had committed, while prepossession supplied their loss; and by the day parliament was up, Lady Singleton went down to Glentworth Hall, as the bride of its excellent master. Dissimilar in -every point of character, they yet, by a happy discordia concers, went on well together. Her bustle was well opposed to his quietude." Her interference sometimes amused, if it sometimes annoyed him; and her judicious attention to his habits and comforts elicited his patience for her whims, his indulgence for her follies. An only son was the fruit of his first marriage; by his second he had no issue.

The force of health, and presumption of high spirits, had given to Lady Singleton the resemblance of that energy which belongs alone to genuine talent. Habits and manners, (acquired in countries, where woman is called upon to take a part in all the interests of society,) blended with her own complexional activity, created for her that species of character which the French have aptly termed " unefemme affairee." Idle from circumstance, restless by disposition; loving indolence, yet hating quiet; she was officious without being useful, and busy without being occupied. Always struggling for authority, she spoke only to dictate, and moved only to meddle ; while, in her furor for influence, she had not the tact to discern whether attention or neglect followed her counsels, or waited on her orders. To obvious contradiction, however, she was intemperately alive; and to obsequious flattery weakly susceptible: easy to dupe, but difficult to convince, she was sought for by the cunning, and avoided by the wise. Gay, dissipated, and amusing,—the giddy, the frivolous, and the inconsequent, always found their account in her society; and her foreign connexions, knowledge of the world, and (more than all else) the immense size of her house in town, gave her a distinguished place in the circle of fashion.





One eminent person in a family, generally, if not universally, produces a proportionate degree of mediocrity in the succeeding members: and extraordinarily clever mothers do not always produce extraordinarily clever daughters. Without pausing to seek this effect in its cause, or to produce a second instance to substantiate the position, it is certain that the Honorable Miss Caroline, and Miss Horatia Singleton, were as vapid and as dull, as their mamma was animated and sagacious. Destitute of common intelligence, they were still overbnrthened with accomplishments; but, old enough to take their parts in society among the corps de ballet of exhibited young ladies, they were kept in the back ground, on some principle which maternal wisdom had not chosen to divulge to them: and to this wisdom, which was' feared without being respected, they bowed implicitly,—submissive, but not resigned.





The Honorable Misses Singleton belonged to a large class of young ladies to be found in almost all societies, and who have for their prototype that intelligent young lady of other times, who wrote to the Spectator to know if "dimple" was spelled with two p's. The minds of the Misses Singleton had never elaborated a query more important, nor admitted a doubt more abstruse. 'No lowly consciousness, however, of their own unimportance disturbed the confidence of their self-sufficiency. Dull and giddy, conceited and flippant, they sneered, winked, and whispered to each other their mutual contempt of all who were excluded from their own little mysteries; of all whom they had been taught to regard as inferior, or to laugh at as quizzical. But the person whom they held in the most thorough contempt was their governess; by whom, it must be confessed, though they were sometimes entertained, they were seldom instructed. Passiveness, and seeming inanity, with some other prominent points in her character, favourable to their turn for a sort of maudlin ridicule, rendered her the perpetual object of their derision. To their attempts at ridicule, however, this lady, if she felt them, never replied, when alone with her pupils in their study; but when, in the presence of others, they endeavoured to show off their "pretty wit" at her expense, she had the art, or the artlessness (it was impossible to say which), by some unexpected look or word, to throw them into situations ludicrous beyond their power to extricate themselves; and then they wondered how a person, whom mamma called "bete," should blunder upon such things, and make them feel so uncomfortable. Still, however, they did not complain, lest they should get somebody in her place, less indulgent, less facile, and (as they expressed it) less quizzical than herself.





This governess, half Irish, half foreign, passing the first fourteen years of her. life in Ireland, and the last ten in Italy, was the only person who had ever retained the situation in Lady Singleton's family beyond the first six months: she had now held it nearly a year, and stood indebted for the circumstance, not to her merits, but her deficiencies.

When Lady Singleton was engaging her, a few weeks after her arrival in England, she observed—that she did not want a governess to meddle with the education of her daughters, further than as she directed; that she did not particularly desire to bring into her family une illustre malheureuse, blessed with fine talents, and superfine feelings; nor did she require a governess to out-dress herself and her daughters,—to play the agreeable, and to make one in her societies. To every clause of these stipulations a most implicit obedience had been observed by the submissive duenna. "In short, Miss O'Halloran," continued her ladyship, "my daughters do not now want a governess, so much as a companion; and my object in engaging you, is, that I am told you speak 'La lingua Toscana, nella bocca Romana.' Not that I quite think so myself, for your u is French.; however, I know nobody that speaks it better, and therefore I take you; and, par consequence, we must have nothing but Italian; French always goes on, one does not know how; but observe, we must have none of your Doric English; for your brogue is as pure as if you only left Ireland yesterday; as indeed has always been the case with every Irish person I ever met on the Continent."

Miss O'Halloran had not hitherto in any one instance violated this treaty; and the result of her docility and implicit obedience was, that Lady Singleton said she was ' bete,' and the young ladies believed it.

Though all governesses are interesting, by prescrip





tive right, yet Miss O'Halloran had so wholly neglected her privilege, that Lady Singleton and her daughters had as little to fear from her attractions, as to expect from her resistance: she had, however, a youthfulness of appearance, which is sometimes deemed beauty in itself; but this juvenile air was counteracted by an inertness and indolence of motion, which is deemed peculiar to senility. The abruptness of her manner, might perhaps, under the influence of prepossession, have passed for naivete, had it not always been followed by a certain vacancy of countenance, which changed the promised charm into an actual defect; while her smiles, which were "few, and far between," alone threw a ray of intelligence over her features, and seemed to struggle with their own acuteness, lest they should shame the stupor of her vacant eye. Either from a sense of her situation, the most arduous of all others, or from natural gravity, her conduct was distinguished by a reserve almost amonnting to sullenness; and yet she had the habit of bursting into an abrupt laugh whenever circumstances called upon her risible faculties: this she did, "not wisely, but too well;" for her laugh, though always ill-timed, was ever well directed. Lady Singleton had in vain contended against this obedience to a natural impulse: nature was still more powerful even than her ladyship; but as this was evidently a fault beyond the reach of art, Lady Singleton contented herself by telling every one who witnessed the incorrigible propensity, that the girl was rieuse par constitution; and having no other fault to find with her, she thought it a pity to part with her for that. For the rest, Miss O'Halloran was a mere dead letter in the splendid volume of society with which she was accidentally bound up; and she has only obtained her place in this catalogue raisonnee, from the accident of her association.





Commodore the Honorable Augustus Grandville was a brave, thoughtless, good-natured sea officer, destitute of domestic feelings, and consequently averse from domestic habits; admiring his wife as a fine woman (for which reason he had married her), and confiding in her as a heartless one: for he knew her cold, and believed her prudent. He loved his only son passionately, because he had nothing else to love; and being almost always on service, he considered his ship as his home; and on shore, felt himself only a visiter.

Lady Florence Grandville was a woman of fashion by etat, an observer of the decencies by profession, and a coquette by every charter, right, and privilege, with which nature, circumstances, and education could endow her: like the glowworm, shining without heat, at once vain and insensible, she was not to be misled by fancy, nor committed by passion: a wife and a mother, she was attentive, without being affectionate; and only gave to her family what the superfluities of self-gratification could spare from their own abundance. With some reputation for being brilliant, or at least attractive in conversation, she had in fact but just sufficient intelligence to lead her to the means by which her own views could be best effected; and she had early discovered the secret of purchasing, by well-directed bribes to the vanity of others, that distinction indispensably necessary to her own. The men, who followed her, were unconscious of the lure which led them; and knew not that they were less drawn on by the admiration they felt for her, than by the self-love flattered in themselves.

-A French philosopher, in a metaphysical work (and a French philosopher only would think of mingling love with metaphysics), has declared a platonic love to be the only love for a rich desceuvre; and a coquette the only mistress—" Et pour ce dernier, une coquette est une maitresse delicieuse," he observes*. Tried by this rule, Lady Florence Grandville was the person in the world to be the platonic friend of Mr. Vandaleur: such in fact she was, to the letter of the word.





Mr. Vandaleur was English by birth and education, Dutch by descent, dull by nature, rich by inheritance, and gallant by assumption. Labouring under the embarrassment of his opulence, which no extravagance of youth or of passion had decreased, he sought to extricate himself from his difficulties by a boundless indulgence in his dominant propensity. Gourmand by habit, he became by principle

u Un veritable Amphitryon -j-:"

and the science of his dinners obtained him a notoriety in London, where such science, though not promoted to the dignity of a professorship, boasts disciples as numerous and distinguished as any in the range of human acquirement. It also obtained for him the notice of Lady Florence Grandville, whose bon-ton gave the finish to his rising fashion; and who admitted him into the legion of her "thousand and one" friends, on the merits of his cbtelettes and filets. Time, habit, and an unsuccessful winter's campaign, favoured his promotion: from being an "amant de parade," he became a friend by profession. Thus associated by idleness and vanity, whoever could have given occupation to the one, or sensibility to the other, would have destroyed all grounds of connexion in both for ever. Meantime, Lady Florence afforded him her attention, without according him her preference; and he continued to follow in a kind of

• La plus forte passion de la coquetterie est d'etre adoree: que faire a cet effet? toujours irriter les passions des homines, sans jamais les satisfaire.—Helvetius.

,j- Le veritable Amphitryon

Est rAmphitryon ou Ton dine.—Moliere.

c 2





blind but tranquil devotion, which passion had never disturbed, nor love exalted; at once, the most obsequious and most indifferent of men.

The honourable Colonel Percy Moclere was a " young man upon town, whom every body knew." To give some little distinction to a character which naturally had none, he affected to possess in perfection that subordinate and innocent, but tiresome branch of ridicule, called quizzing; and as some excellence in that art can be worked out of the smallest possible quantity of ideas which can go to the formation of a human mind, there was no insuperable bar to the success of his attempts.

Such was the party which a six o'clock dinner-bell summoned, and re-united at the well-furnished table of the bishop.

The soups and fish were scarcely removed, and something like conversation was beginning to circulate, by Lady Singleton's attacking Mr. Vandaleur on the subject of his cook's want of science in the important article of filets, when one of Mr. Glentworth's servants approached her ladyship, and delivered her some message, in a low voice. "O, very well," she replied: "Edwards, go and see if you can be of any assistance to Mr. Dexter: tell him dinner has been served some time;" then, turning to the bishop, she added, " O, my dear bishop, I entirely forgot to mention that our friend Mr. Dexter accompanies us, and that I must beg you will extend your hospitality to him."

The bishop returned a " neat and appropriate speech," expressive of the pleasure he must feel in receiving any friend of her ladyship's; and Lady Singleton continued, interrupting something that Mr. Glentworth ntended to say—

"I can assure you, bishop, you will like Mr. Dexter of all things: he is an extremely sensible and obliging person, of the right way of thinking, and plays all sorts of games. He offered to accompany us as far as Donaghadee, merely to be of use to us on the road; for he says 'tis impossible for strangers to guard against imposition on Irish roads, except one has been long resident in the country, which is his case; and he knows exactly how to deal with them. He is our purse-bearer; but, farther than that, I am pretty equal myself to all the exigencies of a journey in any country."





Mr. Glentworth smiled, and said, "I am sure, my dear, 1 wish that in the present instance you had extended your confidence in your own abilities, and not taken advantage of Mr. Dexter's civil and accommodating disposition. I protested, from the first starting of the project, against bringing a man such a distance, merely to be of use to us, when it must undoubtedly be of great inconvenience to himself."

"O, but then, my dear Mr. Glentworth, you know you oppose every scheme in the first blush of its proposal."

"But where has this gallant convoy been detained," asked Lady Florence, "that he has suffered his charge to come on without his protection?"

"Why," said Lady Singleton, "he was so obliging as to ride back to the last stage, for a very valuable paper which I left behind me, in my reticule ; a draught of the plan and elevation of an aqueduct for Ballynogue, and a drawing of my Lancasterian schoolhouses."

"Does this Mr. Dexter live in the world?" asked Lady Florence.

Before the question could be answered, the subject of the conversation entered, with an air more of effrontery than of ease. He was a spruce, smart, dapper person, and received the bishop's welcome with a jerking bow, as obsequious as it was inelegant.





"Here, Mr. Dexter," cried Lady Singleton, "here is a seat, between Lady Florence Grandville and me."

Mr. Dexter smirked, and smiled, and wriggled to his chair; then rose, and bowed profoundly, as he received the honour of presentation to his noble and distinguished neighbour; and while his soup was preparing at the sideboard, he presented Lady Singleton's reticule, observing, in an affected tone of voice—

"I have had the good fortune to recover your ladyship's valuable—or indeed I should say, invaluable, drawings; not, however, till I had recourse to some little artifice, when threats failed; for, after all, you must ever meet the lower Irish with their own cunning. I know them well; and I am sure your la'ship would be much amused, if you knew the little stratagem I had recourse to."

"Politique aux choux etauxraves, eh I Mr. Dexter?" said Lady Singleton, laughing.

"Critically, Lady Singleton," said Mr. Dexter, with the air of one who really understood what she said.

"Well, but do let us hear, Mr. Dexter; I should like amazingly to know what use they could make of such drawings."

"That is exactly what I said, Ma'am, to the innkeeper; and, to tell the truth, the moment I saw the sign of St. Patrick over his door, I—but oh! Lady Singleton, such an affecting sight as I beheld since!!— the state of this country is too deplorable. A poor old woman, scarcely able to crawl!—such a venerable countenance too I seated weeping on the side of a ditch. I alighted, and inquired into the cause of her affliction, offering to carry her behind me to the next village. Poor soul I her little story was short and sad. She had been stopped, and ill-treated, and robbedj by a rebel *."

• In some of the Dublin prints this is a general epithet for all sorts "A rebel!" repeated the bishop; " God bless me I"





"Yes, my lord, a rebel. The wretch took from her her little tobacco, and her poor snuff-box; what further he would have done I will not presume to say, but that I appeared in view. Government, it must be owned, are obstinately lenient, and strangely blind to the internal state of this unhappy country. The lower orders are ripe, at this moment, for rebellion; and even the public roads are unsafe, except one goes in a kind of caravan, as I may say."

"Well, I must confess," observed Mr. Glentworth, "that I do not agree with you, Mr. Dexter, in this instance. The common people, about and on my estate, seem thinking of any thing, poor people, but rebellion; and as for the roads we have lately passed through, I think I would ride back alone, as far as we have come, T without the smallest apprehension." • "I can very well understand, Mr. Glentworth, that you do not, and indeed ought not, to agree with me on this subject; for you must, and ought, naturally to judge of the rest of the country by your own flourishing estate, and your town of Ballynogue (for I may well call it yours), where, by your extraordinary liberality and benevolence to your tenants, and the unexampled activity and spirit of reform which my Lady Singleton has"

"Nay, we must cry for quarter, Mr. Dexter," interrupted Mr. Glentworth, laughing.

"I believe, however," said the Bishop, " Mr. Dexter is quite right, generally speaking, with respect to the real state of this country: for a clergyman in my diocese gives pretty much the same account; and he has some right to know, for he acts in his district and parish, in the three capacities, civil, military, and clerical."



of criminals. A few days previously to the writing of this note, it appeared in a morning paper, that a rebel had fired at a soldier, but happily the rebel missed his aim.





"My lord, I am highly flattered by your lordship's condescension in agreeing with me upon any subject: and after all, who better than your lordship should know the real state of things in this unfortunate country; particularly that part of it in which your lordship holds so distinguished and so sacred a situation? But I must be permitted to say, Mr. Glentworth, that all great English landholders have not your confidence, on first coming to this country: indeed, so much the contrary, that a young gentleman, a friend of mine, who has an immensely fine estate in Leinster, and who for the first time came from England to visit it last summer, had the precaution to apply in Dublin for a guard of soldiers to protect him on the journey. Strange, however, to say, he was refused, and he had then recourse to a simpler means of protection : he engaged a celebrated piper, and made him play the whole way before him on the dickybox, wishing to try conciliation, and being well aware that the lower Irish are addicted to music, and that sort of idle things—and"

Here Mr. Dexter was interrupted by Miss O'Halloran's bursting into a violent fit of laughter, in which she was joined by every one at table, except Lady Singleton; for Mr.Dexter, not to be discountenanced by any event, joined the laughers himself, until, observing the displeasure of Lady Singleton's countenance, he abruptly composed ,his own, and with great gravity asked her to take wine.

Lady Singleton threw a look at her governess, and murmured " bite!" while Mr. Glentworth endeavoured to give another turn to the conversation; and Mr. Dexter addressed himself to Lady Florence, who, though she affected to give him a flattering and undivided attention, threw a sly glance of quizzing intelligence at the Colonel, who was only waiting for his moment.





Meantime Mr. Vandaleur had stood up to dress his salad at the sideboard, calling for trenchers and wooden spoons, and accusing the Bishop of being not orthodox, because he profaned his endive and cos with china and plate.

When the ladies withdrew, Mr. Dexter and the Bishop renewed the subject of Irish affairs; for the Bishop was a timid man, and Mr. Dexter soon discovered that he was so. As far as Mr. Dexter stood himself related, or in any way connected with Ireland, it is sufficient to say, that he lived by the country he reviled, like the wild and noxious weed that preys on the stately ruin out of which it draws its existence.

The gentlemen broke up early; the Commodore accompanied Mr. Dexter to the stable, he having told Mr. Glentworth that he would just take a peep at' his favourite mare, before she was done up for the night. The rest of the gentlemen proceeded to the drawingroom.

"I wonder who this quiz of a person is," said the Colonel, addressing Mr. Vandaleur, " that Lady Singleton has picked up?"

"I don't know at all," yawned Mr. Vandaleur; "but I rather patronise any one who makes the frais of conversation after dinner, and saves one the trouble of talking. I have a system, that silence aids digestion."

"Pray, Mr. Glentworth," said the Bishop, "is Mr. Dexter an Irishman?"

"I have not the least idea, Bishop. Lady Singleton can tell you more of him than I can: my acquaintance with him was quite accidental. Riding into Ballynogue one day, my whip broke in the market place: a gentleman perceiving it, stepped up, offered me his, and insisted on taking mine to mend. The next day he called at the Castle with it. We asked him to dinner, and—here he is. Lady S. has found him extremely useful, and goodnatured. He has kept our table in game, and been very attentive to a mare of mine, whom he cured of a vice, which, indeed, I never suspected she had, till Mr. Dexter found it out. I understand he is a man of small but independent fortune, and has accepted an appointment in the revenue, in our district, merely to have something to do."





"Upon my word," said the Bishop, "he appears to me to be a very sensible, intelligent young man, and of a very right way of thinking."

"Indeed I -believe he is," returned Mr. Glentworth, smiling; "and I have but one fault to find with him. He makes his responses so loud at our little church at Ballynogue, that he puts out the clerk, and disturbs the whole congregation.''

The gentlemen had now reached the drawing-room, and coffee was served. Shortly after a bell rang for evening prayers; but no one followed his lordship to the chapel except Mr. Dexter, and (by Lady Singleton's desire) the Misses Singleton and their governess.



CHAPTER III.



Not many years back, the few English persons of rank or consideration who visited Ireland, came only on the imperious call of business; and probably considered their journey as a mere pilgrimage of necessity to the - shrine of interest. Ireland, once interesting for her struggles and her sufferings, and distinguished by a fatal pre-eminence in the enormities of which she was the scene, had sunk, within the limits of little more than half a century, under the sullen torpor of unresisted oppression, and unrefuted obloquy. Silence and oblivion hung





upon her destiny*, and in the memory of other nations she seemed to hold no place. But the first bolt which was knocked off her chain roused her from paralysis; and as link fell after link, her faculties strengthened, her powers revived, till she gradually rose upon the political horizon of Europe, like her own star brightening in the west, and lifting its light above the fogs, vapours, and clouds, which obscured its lustre. The traveller now "beheld her from afar;" and her shores, once so devoutly pressed by the learned, the pious, and the brave, again exhibited the welcome track of the stranger's foot. The natural beauties of the land were again explored and discovered; and taste and science found the reward of their enterprise and labours in a country long depicted as savage, because it had long been exposed to desolation and neglect.

When the English travellers, who were now thus assembled, had been induced to visit Ireland by the necessity of their various and respective interests, they had taken pleasure into the account, no further than as it is implied in change of place. A trifling event, however, awakened curiosity, and gave birth to the unforeseen intention of visiting a spot still more celebrated than known, and of varying a journey of obligation by the episode of a party of mere amusement.

The Bishop had prevailed on his friends to remain at the palace a day or two longer than they had originally intended. On the evening of the second day, as the

• Those historians who have hrought the history of Great Britain down to the present reign, have, in fact, given no history of Irish affairs daring the period which occurred from the Revolution to the death of George II., and it is a melancholy fact, that, from the enactment of the Penal Laws till the first dawning prospect of their repeal, the " bulk of the people not only ceased to improve, but retrograded; they contracted habits of inertness for want of objects to act upon, and lived or died, as water-cresses and wild roots were plentiful or scarce."





whole party stood taking their coffee round the drawingroom fire, with the exception of the young ladies and their governess, Lady Singleton exclaimed —

"Oh, apropos to nothing at all, Lady Florence, do you mean to visit the Giant's Causeway, before you leave Ireland?"

"I have never thought of it at all," said Lady Florence, " further than that I know there is such a thing to be seen in this part of the world."

"Miss O'Halloran," continued Lady Singleton, " who is always poking her head where no one else would ever think of going, got into a sort of old diocesan library, somewhere adjoining the palace. Is there not such a place, Bishop?"

"There is a sad old ruin, with a few books in it,'' returned the Bishop, "which was a diocesan library."

"Well; there she found some extravagant description of the Giant's Causeway; and as she takes every thing au pied de la lettre, she has talked so much of its wonders to the girls (albeit unused to the talking mood) that they have been reading it to me while I dressed, and they are not a little amused at her believing such stuff *; what is still more odd, she has told them a parcel of Irish stories, which account for the Causeway, by supposing it the work of giants, especially of one Finma-cool, I think she calls him. However, poor Miss O'Halloran's nonsense apart, one thing is pretty plain, that the person who has written on the subject,—and it is an amazingly old tract,—knows nothing about it; and that he has never seen Mount Etna nor Mount Vesuvius, nor in the least understands the nature of those kind of things—of which I happen to know a little."



* The first account published of the Giant's Causeway, towards the end of the seventeenth century, is extremely wild and improbable, and was most probably the tract in question.

One of the old names of the Giant's Causeway, was JBinguthan, the Giant's Cape. Fin-mac- Cumhal, the hero of the Irish fable, was supposed (and is still supposed by the country people) to have been the architect of this stupendous edifice; as the basaltic regions of Iceland are attributed by the natives to their Giants—" the Sons of Frost," of the Edda.





"Suppose, my dear," said Mr. Glentworth, drily, "that you were to visit it yourself; you might, perhaps, give us some new theory of the phenomenon."

"I am sure there is no reason why we should not visit it," said Lady Singleton: "we are not pressed for time. What do you say, Lady Florence; shall we make a party?"

Lady Florence, who was flirting in an under-voice with Colonel Moclere, came eagerly forward at this proposal; for one more perfectly accordant to her wishes could not, under existing circumstances, be made. In the first instance, she loved parties of pleasure, as all persons of fashion do; in the second, she considered that all time passed in Ireland would go into the account of her conjugal duty, and that all time stolen from the solitudes of Lough Swilly was so much rescued from tedium and ennui. Her ladyship, therefore, seconded the motion with great warmth; and the question, being generally put, was carried without a dissentient voice: the Commodore closing the agreement, by asking them all to proceed from the Giant's Causeway to Lough Swilly, where, he said, he had rooms enough to lodge them, and ship-beef and sea-biscuits sufficient to victual a regiment during a month's siege: he was, however, himself obliged to return to his station on the following day. Lady Florence having pressed his invitation more decidedly, the whole scheme was concluded upon, with all the promptitude and facility peculiar to persons who have nothing to do but to seek amusement, and no way of obtaining it but by change of sensation and novelty of pursuit.





Every one was gratified by a scheme, of which, the moment before it was formally proposed, nobody had dreamed.

Mr. Glentworth, who trifled occasionally with natural science, felt a laudable curiosity, and anticipated satisfaction in visiting one of the most magnificent phenomena in the natural world. The Colonel gave his voice to the question, with an intelligent look at Lady Florence. Mr. Vandaleur inquired what fish the coast was famous for; and Mr. Dexter rubbed his hands, smirked, wriggled, and talked to the Commodore of Lord Nelson, the wooden walls of old England, and the many snug situations which a man, who had interest, might obtain in the Admiralty. But Lady Singleton, above any other individual, was placed in her own sphere by this arrangement ; for she objected to every plan proposed, to every hint suggested relatively, to their plans of progress. Her experience as a traveller gave her some undisputed importance on the occasion, and her decided tone of dictation set all opposition to her will at defiance. The Bishop's little study was ransacked for maps, gazetteers, and geographical grammars ; and she at once decided on making a circuitous tour by the coast, because somebody else had proposed making the journey shorter by avoiding it. As it was Lady Florence's and Mr. Dexter's interest to prolong the journey, they warmly agreed with Lady Singleton; and as it was a matter of indifference to every one else, she carried her point without dissension.

"But where are Miss O'Halloran and the girls?" asked Mr. Glentworth: "they must be called into our councils, since they have been the origin of our—"

'' Nonsense!" said Lady Singleton: "you know, Mr. Glentworth, I don't want the girls to come forward in any possible way; and as for poor Miss O'Halloran, the idea of making her ' a party' is rather too ridiculous."





"O, by the by," said Lady Florence, "do you know, I think she is an amazing odd person, Lady Singleton—I do indeed; she looks so strange, and her laugh yesterday —altogether, I never saw any thing so outre in my life."

"So she is," said the Colonel, "a regular genius, I dare say—eh, Lady Singleton?"

"A genius!" said Lady Singleton. "No, thank heaven, she is not quite so had as that; on the contrary, she is tant s'oit pen niaise, for I know not of any English term which would express the sort of foolish stupidity she at times exhibits."

"Exactly," observed Mr. Dexter, emphatically.

"What is very extraordinary, however," continued Lady Singleton, "her Italian is extremely pure, and indeed it is the only language she can speak, and the only thing for which I engaged her. Her father was an odd kind of person—an Irish artist, settled at Florence. He died in great distress there, and this girl was taken by Lady Hewson as a governess. Sir Harry was then Envoy at Florence. Now, you know, poor dear Lady Hewson is come from the menu peuple, and is upon the whole the vulgarest fine lady; so her recommendation did not go for much. The girl was a mere buffa in the family, and, I believe, kept more for the amusement, than for the instruction of their affected daughter, who i.s a complete petite maitresse, and a most tiresome little creature, with her accomplishments, trading upon one song, and making 'impromptus a loisir.' Well, Miss Corinna Hewson married, you know, last spring; and the buffa, with her Lingua Toscana, fell to my share. She has some relations in Dublin, whom we allowed her to visit, when, we were at Ballynogue Castle; and she came back with a worse brogue than ever."

"Precisely," said Mr. Dexter.





"O! then," cried the Colonel, "I beseech you, my dear Lady Singleton, let us have a little of her brogue and her buffo: only conceive, Lady Florence, what a melange I I certainly must make a better acquaintance with this Signora Katty Flanagan."

"Well," returned Lady Singleton, "don't carry the thing too far, and amuse yourself if. you will. If you can get her on the chapter of the Irish Giants, you'll find her amusing enough; at least the girls say so; but she never ventures to show off before me."

During this conversation the ladies, the Colonel, and Mr. Dexter, formed a little coterie, apart; and while they were still talking, tea, the young ladies, and their governess, all made their appearance together. The Colonel, with his glass at his eye, followed Miss O'Halloran's lounging motions as she proceeded up the room to the tea-table, where she took her seat ex-officio, the Colonel repeating, as he watched her—

"Monstrous outree! one sometimes sees very good arrangements in that line : I dare say she is an authoress, writes 'Lectures on various Subjects for Young Ladies,' illustrates the Bible alphabetically, with the addition of wood-cuts, abridges Buffon, and explains 'Mann's Catechism.'"

"Come and talk to her," said Lady Florence: and they proceeded towards the tea-table, where the Misses Singleton stood linked arm in arm—

"Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,

But yet a union in partition,"



whispering and smiling at the gaucherie of their governess, and throwing their eyes from the Colonel to Mr. Dexter, and from Mr. Dexter to the Colonel.

"O, Miss O'Halloran," said Lady Florence, " Lady Singleton has been doing the honours by your descriptive powers: she has set us all longing to hear your account of the Giant's Causeway."





"I beseech you, Miss O'Halloran," added the Colonel (bringing his glass close to her face), "I beseech you to indulge our longings ; ' let us not burst in ignorance.'"

"Come, Miss O'Halloran," said Lady Singleton, dictatorially, " you may once in away fairel'agreable."

"Miss O'Halloran will be too happy to obey your ladyship, I am sure," said Mr. Dexter. "Courage, Miss O'Halloran: there are none by but friends."

"Or if," continued the Colonel, "the Muse of Erin be unpropitious to our vows, would Miss O'Halloran but invoke the Muse of the Arno in our favour, we would give up Fin-ma-cool willingly for 'La Virginella,' or the 'Nina.' By the bye, Miss O'Halloran's countenance is finely adapted for the 'Nina pazza per amore.' I have not a doubt but she would rival Lady Hamilton in it. Miss O'Halloran's air has something naturally egare—that loose simple dress, too, and that downcast eye."

Miss O'Halloran, who, during the whole of this attack, had gone on quietly rinsing the cups and arranging the tea-table, now suddenly raised her head, and opened two large eyes on the Colonel with a look of such stupid amazement, that he involuntarily started back, and a general laugh at his expense disturbed, for a moment at least, the vein of his humour.

"So," said Lady Singleton, vexed that any command of hers should be disobeyed, militate as it might against all former and general orders—" so, the old proverbs are always right—

'Les grands talents se font prier.'"

"Critically," returned Mr. Dexter, who always translated her ladyship's French by the context of her looks.

"We have had quite enough, however, of this nonsense," continued Lady Singleton. "Pray get on with the tea, Miss O'Halloran. Come, Mr. Dexter, bring

D





me that spider-table and those maps. Very well—now cut this pencil—and some letter-paper, if you please. Bishop, I beg a book of the roads. And now observe, good people, I am prima donna upon this occasion, or I am nothing. Either you give up the arrangement of the whole tour to me, or je men tiens quitte de tout— I cut dead."

It was agreed, nem. con., that her ladyship should have all the superintendence of the journey, while the rest should enjoy all the pleasure it afforded. Mr. Glentworth alone smiled, and remained silent. The governess retired as soon as her office was over, and the young ladies took their station at the back of their mamma's chair, looking over her shoulder as she pursued her route upon paper, while Mr. Dexter stood obsequiously cutting her pencils, and occasionally making comical faces for the young ladies (who thought him the most amusing person in the world); but always drawing up his features into looks of profound gravity, whenever Lady Singleton raised her eyes.

"I am afraid," said Mr. Glentworth, "that poor Miss O'Halloran's feelings have been rather put to the test this evening; for without being particularly sensitive, or quick sighted, she must have perceived that you were all quizzing her unmercifully."

"Nonsense I" said Lady Singleton: "I like the idea of her being sensitive. Mr. Dexter, look out in the Gazetteer for ' Glenarm.'"

"I don't at all think," said the Colonel, "that she took my little gallantries amiss."

"Here it is, Lady Singleton—Glenarm. On the contrary, Colonel, she could not fail to be very much flattered by your notice. And indeed, from the little I know of her, I think I can assert that she was so," added Mr. Dexter, authoritatively, knitting his brows and nodding his head to give emphasis to his assertion.





"I would not hurt her feelings for a thousand worlds," said Lady Florence; "but she strikes me to be rather sullen than sensitive."

"Exactly, Lady Florence," returned Mr. Dexter; "that is what I say: but she is a most fortunate young woman to be where she is: and that she should refuse to obey any command imposed by Lady Singleton is a little strange."

"Yes," said Lady Singleton, " I think it is rather good, my governess refusing to do what I ask her." *

"Nay, my dear," said Mr. Glentworth, "she did not refuse; but the fact is, request followed request so rapidly, that she had not time allowed her to comply or to refuse. Observe, she was called on in a breath, for an exhibition of her descriptive powers, and for a scene from the comic, and the serious opera."

"Certainly, Mr. Glentworth," said Mr. Dexter, "what you say is perfectly just. She had not time to comply or to refuse; but, as her la'ship observes, she ought not to have refused implicit obedience to her la'ship's commands."

"Now, Mr. Dexter," said Lady Florence, throwing a rallying glance at the Colonel, " do you pretend to say that you would not refuse to obey any order Lady Singleton should impose, however irksome it might be?"

"I beg your ladyship's pardon; but I must premise, that no order of my Lady Singleton's could possibly appear irksome to me. But granting it were so, my obedience would be equally prompt: nor indeed, should your ladyship condescend to impose a command, would you find me slow to execute it."

"Then I have one ready for you, Mr. Dexter. Here is a broken bonbonniere. Do ride over to the next town, and get it mended for me."

"Lady Florence, I will have the honour of mending D2





it myself. I have a pretty little mechanical turn: it is just in my way. Besides, getting such a thing done in an Irish country town—ha, ha, ha !—I cannot refrain from laughing—but you would not get such a neat little job done in any town in Ireland, except indeed Mr. Glentworth's town of Ballynogue; for I may call it his, since bis extraordinary liberality and benevolence to his tenants, and the unexampled activity and spirit of my Lady Singleton"

"But I must have it- immediately, Mr. Dexter— I must indeed. You know I am dying of a cold, and only live from lozenge to lozenge."

"If these are your ladyship's dying looks, what

but you may depend upon my zeal and despatch; for when engaged in the service of the ladies, as the poet says"

"Which of the poets?" interrupted the Colonel: "major, or minor, Mr. Dexter."

"Which of the poets? Ha, ha, ha! very good, Colonel, very good. I hope, Lady Florence, you like poetry; and, above all, that you admire the celebrated Shakspeare,—a charming writer. That sweet little passage you may remember; hem—it begins so:

"She sat like Patience on a"

"Mr. Dexter," cried Lady Singleton, " do lay a chessboard for the bishop and Mr. Glentworth. My dear Mr. Glentworth, had you not better attack the Bishop at something? I cannot imagine how people can go on for ever, lounging about. I think, young ladies, you may as well wish us good night."

Mr. Dexter and the young ladies, equally obedient, complied with their respective orders. The Bishop and Mr. Glentworth took their seats at the chessboard, at which they were old competitors. Mr. Vandaleur, who had been slumbering on a sofa for a good digestion, was challenged to vingt-un by the Commodore, who had returned from answering some official despatches: and while Mr. Dexter sat by Lady Singleton, cutting pencils, pointing compasses, and displaying maps, the Colonel and Lady Florence took possession of a couch, and amused themselves by quizzing the whole party.





Devoid alike of that perception which rapidly developes the peculiarities of character, as of that humour which aptly exhibits them, their remarks went no further than the surface of manner; and their ridicule, lighting only on some little peculiarity or folly, which differed from their own, without being inferior to it, was as destitute of the wit that lends its excuse to sarcasm, as of the playfulness that deprives it of its sting. It was, indeed, like other similar attempts so often passed off in society for legitimate ridicule,—most "maudlin gaiety," most flippant dulness.



CHAPTER IV.



The necessary arrangements for the tour to the Giant's Causeway, and from thence to the Commodore's residence on the shores of Lough Swilly, were at last finally made, under the sole superintendence of Lady Singleton. Mr. Glentworth, Mr. Vandaleur, and the Colonel, travelled with their own horses. No servants were taken but such as were indispensably necessary; and, on the fourth day from the arrival of the travellers at the Bishop's gates, they took their departure.





Lady Singleton's travelling barouche was occupied by herself, her daughters, their governess, and Mr. Dexter; the Colonel drove Lady Florence in his curricle; and Mr. Vandaleur was accompanied by his valet-de-chambre in his own chaise. Mr. Glentworth rode his favourite mare; the ladies' maids took possession] of the dickeyboxes; and two outriders brought up the cavalcade. Before they started, however, Mr. Dexter stood up, to observe to the party in general, that he was ready to ride when Mr. Glentworth was tired of his horse—to drive when the Colonel was weary of the whip—to resign his seat to Mr. Vandaleur or Lady Florence, when either should prefer the barouche to the curricle or the chaise.

The cavalcade was then put in motion; the Bishop, mounted on a little ambling nag, accompanied his guests to the gate of his favourite farm, with compliments, and regrets, and acknowledgments for the honour they had done him: he then made his bow, and left them to pursue their journey.

"Pray, Lady Singleton," said Mr. Dexter, "may I beg to know how my Lord Bishop came to be raised to the dignity of the mitre; for I understand he was very lately nothing more than a private tutor?"

"How do you mean?" asked Lady Singleton.

"Why certainly your ladyship is quite right in asking how I mean; for of course his lordship obtained his present dignity by his eminent talents and great piety. He is indeed a most learned and pious divine, and I dare say a very good preacher."

"Yes," said Lady Singleton, "petit Bourdaloue d la table, if you will; for he understands those sort of things, a merveille: but he preaches like other people, I believe, prosy enough; and as for his learning, I have heard Lady Llanberis prdner him. He is not known, however, out of the families where he has lived: but they were persons of high influence, and he could not fail to be made a bishop."





"Could not fail to be made a bishop!" repeated Mr. Dexter, emphatically. "Very true, indeed; still it was great kindness in his noble patrons to"

"Not a bit of it," interrupted Lady Singleton. "It is a thing understood in great families: it makes a part of the attelage of household dignities. Had my Lord Singleton been blessed with a son and heir, I should have been amazingly annoyed if his tutor had not been made a bishop. However, I got our steward into the treasury; and my brother has pushed him up pretty high."

"Your brother has pushed him up, Lady Singleton?— in the treasury? And may I ask your ladyship what qualifications are requisite to fill a place in the treasury? Supposing a man had the good fortune to"

Here Mr. Glentworth rode up to the carriage, and interrupted the conversation by his remarks to Lady Singleton on the uncommon beauty of the weather, and the scenery through which they were passing; and though Mr. Dexter made several attempts, he could find no opportunity of renewing his inquiries relative to the treasury, and the talents which would qualify a man to become a candidate for one of its official departments.

As far as the romantic and beautifully situated little town of Larne, the travellers had proceeded without impediment, and with some degree of pleasure and amusement. Air and exercise promoted health and spirits; and the fineness of the weather, and the excellence of the accommodation, hitherto kept all in good temper, and got the start of expectation. Lady Singleton had, however, something to blame or to rectify every step she took. At Belfast, where they remained a day, she proved, as she stood on the bridge, that it should have been erected upon twenty arches instead of twenty-one; and endeavoured to convince a civil engineer, whom she accidentally met, that the canal which connects the harbour with Lough Neagh, was formed against every principle and system of inland navigation.





At Carrickfergus, where they were shown the spot on which King William landed, she discovered he had chosen the very worst place on the coast; and returned to lecture the inn-keeper severely for the state of decay in which she found the fortifications.

"It is not the fault of the town-folks, your ladyship," returned the man: " they have nothing to do with it. There is a governor appointed by government, and with a good salary, I warrant, my lady."

"And with a good salary!" repeated Mr. Dexter, knitting his brows.

"Then," said Lady Singleton, "I shall have the thing inquired into. This is the way government is always duped."

"Unquestionably," added Mr. Dexter. "I dare say it is a pretty lucrative post, Lady Singleton—Governor of Carrickfergus. And if a man has interest"

"The fact is," interrupted Lady Singleton, "this wretched country is wretched, merely because nobody thinks it worth his while to interfere and make things better."

"Critically," echoed Mr. Dexter.

In their approach to the town of Larne, the beauty of its situation attracted universal admiration. Its little bay, penetrating through a rocky entrance, and taking, in its sweep, the village of Glynn, the limestone quarries which skirt its coast, and the ruins of Olderfleet Castle, mouldering on the little peninsula of Curran, presented objects of great picturesque beauty. Miss O'Halloran, for the first time venturing at an observation, remarked to Lady Singleton, that the peninsula of Curran resembled the Sicilian Dripanon; which produced a decided dissent from her ladyship. This Mr. Dexter followed up by—





"Undoubtedly, Ma'am. It is totally impossible that an Irish scene could resemble any thing in Italy: the comparison is really quite comical."

"Were you ever in Italy, Sir?" drawled out Miss O'Halloran.

"No, Miss O'Halloran, not absolutely in Italy, though I have been abroad; but I think I know it as well from her ladyship's description, as if I had lived there all my life."

The town of Larne once passed, a new region seemed to present itself. The roads became less practicable, the scene more wild. The great and stupendous features which characterise the coast of Antrim, now gradually developed themselves, in all their rudest grandeur. Promontories, bold and grotesque; bays deeply insulating the mountainous shores; rocks fantastically grouped, were the objects forming the picturesque. Lady Singleton held tier carte du voyage in her hand. Glenarm was the next stage she had laid down, after Larne, and there, she had decreed, they were to dine and sleep. An avant-courier was therefore despatched, to make necessary preparations; the improbabilities of accommodation for so large a party not being taken into the account of her ladyship's calculations. The steepness and impracticability of the roads already began to undermine her patience, if they did not decrease her confidence in her own infallibility: but the surrounding scenery, though indescribably wild, was not wanting in attraction to fix attention on itself. The bold promontory of Ballygelly, abruptly exhibiting its enormous, but well defined/1 pillars, presented the first specimen of the basaltic region into which they were about to penetrate *. The ruins of Cairne Castle, mouldering under the shadow of its cliffs, were partially tinged with the mid-day sun, that poured its cloudless radiance on the wild heights of the Salagh Braes, which form the segment of a circle to the west of the coast, running from north to south. his neck, but hung behind like a mantle, with the sleeves unoccupied. Immense brogues, and blue stockings, were partially covered with black gaiters; and a pair of short canvas trowsers, reaching but a little way beneath his knees, completed his costume.





The sun had not reached his meridian, when the romantic and lovely village of Glenarm, with the broken outline of its hills, its limestone shores, its castle, and plantations, appeared to the eyes of the travellers, smiling amidst the surrounding wildnessf. At the entrance of the village the avant-courier, his horse smoking, rode up to the barouche, to say he had lost his way among the hills, and that he had but just entered the town, and discovered the inn: to this he pointed, and the carriages drove up to a neat, pretty-looking cottage, while Lady Singleton continued to lecture, without mercy, the intimidated courier. The second out-rider had already entered the inn, to call some one to attend; and Mr. Glentworth observed, as the carriages drew up—

"To expect accommodation in this little place, for such a party as ours, is quite too absurd."

"How could I possibly suppose," said Lady Singleton,



* The rock on which these ruins moulder is insulated at high water. Here, it is said, a northern chieftain confined his daughter, to secure her from the importunities of another Leander, who, however, succeeded better in his hazardous enterprise than the youth of Abydos, and bore away his Irish Hero, in spite of a tempestuous sea and a cruel father.

t When Lord Bisset fled from Scotland for the murder of the Earl of Athol, he was permitted to settle on this romantic spot by the favour of Henry III. He, however, forfeited his Irish possessions in the reign of Edward II. The Macdonnels of Cantire claimed and obtained 'the lands of their kinsman ; and the present castle of Glenarm sthe seat of their descendant, the Countess of Antrim. The ruins of a monastery founded by Lord Bisset are still visible.





"that Glenarm should only be a village, when I had set down in my own mind, that it was a large post town?"

The servant now came out of the house to say, that he believed the people were all abroad, getting in the harvest, for he could only find an old woman in the inn kitchen, and that he could not make her understand him.

"It's hard for her the cratur! when she's entirely bothered *," said a voice, which, from its peculiar tone and accent, drew every eye to the speaker. The person who had thus volunteered his observation, in all the unadulterated richness of a genuine Connaught brogue, stood with his huge arms folded, leaning against the side of the inn door, while a thick stick and a small bundle lay at his feet. The figure, thus disposed, was considerably above the ordinary height; muscular, but not full, it exhibited an appearance of powerful strength, united with a lounging air of habitual indolence; a countenance in which a sort of solemn humour was the leading expression, tinctured with an acute shrewdness, was shaded by long black hair, occasionally shaken back, while a pair of dark sunken eyes were thrown indifferently on either side, and only with a slight passing look, turned, as if by chance, on the splendid strangers whose showy persons and equipage seemed to excite neither admiration nor curiosity.

The dress of this singular person was as equivocal as the figure was striking: his coat might have been an old livery—might have been an undress military frock: it was a faded blue, with still more faded scarlet cuffs and cape. Though the day was sultry for September, he wore a loose, large rug coat, which was buttoned round

* Bothered—deaf; almost always used by the lower Irish to express deafness.





"A prize !" cried the Colonel, speaking through his hand to the party in the barouche. "The first genuine Paddy," he added, to Lady Florence, " I have met since I have been in the north of Ireland."

"Perhaps, Sir, said Mr. Glentworth, addressing the stranger, "you can give us some information as to the nearest town to this village, where we could get the best accommodation for so large a party as this."

"I can, Sir, to be sure—every information in life, your honour; not one in the barony can insense * you better, Sir;" and he took off his hat as he spoke, which he could not be prevailed on to resume: his dark countenance brightened into intelligence the moment he was addressed. \

"Come here, Sir," cried Lady Singleton, beckoning to him—" come here. Which is the nearest town to this miserable disappointing little village?"

"Is it the nearest town to ye'zf, Madam? Why then, Madam, the nearest town to ye'z, is the furthest off intirely, in regard of the short cut being broke up since myself passed the same last; but the directest way ye'z can take is to turn acrass by that bit of a wood to your lift."

"What wood?" asked Lady Singleton; "there is no wood that I can see."

"There is nat, Madam; but there's all as one—for



* Insense—inform.

-f- The distinction between addressing one or more persons is thus always marked—ye'z is used as ye.





there was a wood there in th' ould times, as I hear tellWell, ye'z lave the wood to the left, and ye'z will turn down, if you plase, right forenent you, and when ye'z come to the ind of the lane"

"Well, Sir!" interrupted Lady Singleton, impatiently.

"Well, Madam," returned the stranger, in a tone of sudden recollection, " the devil a foot further ye'z will go, any how, in regard of the floods, which has damm'd up the road, for all the world like the salmon lep at Ballyshanny*: but sure if ye'z will be qontint to go the ould way, ye'z have nothing to do in life, but turn round and go back straight before ye'z, and then, your honour, you'll reach Larne in no time."

This information, which excited a general laugh from all the party, except Lady Singleton and Mr. Dexter, was replied to by the latter, who exclaimed—

"Why, you stupid, blundering fellow, that is the very town we are come from."

"Is it, dear? " returned the Irishman, coolly, picking up his stick.

Meantime, as it was evident they had another stage to perform before they halted for the evening, hay and water were procured for the horses; and the master of the inn, who had come in from his fields, confirmed what they had suspected, that he could not accommodate so large a party, and directed them to a new inn f, on the sea coast, within a short distance of the next post-town (New Town Glens), lately set up for the accommodation of travellers to the Causeway.

"One of the most celebrated salmon-leaps in Ireland is near the entrance of the town of Ballyshannon.

+ It may be perhaps necessary to inform the English tourist, who may be induced to visit the Giant's Causeway, by the coasting road from Belfast to Bush Mills, that no such inn at present exists, as is here mentioned.





Lady Singleton had entered into conversation with a linen buyer, or, in the language of the country, a "webber," who was riding by, and to whom, from, beginning to inquire about the state of the roads between Glenarm and New Town Glens, she digressed to the texture and value of Irish linens, and gave him some hints relative to bleach-greens and other things connected with the manufacture.

While Lady Singleton was thus engaged with the itinerant merchant, (who, on his part, was recommending her to " their house at Colerain," if she intended to buy any linens, while in the very regions of webs and looms,) the rest of the party, headed by the Colonel, were amusing themselves with the Irishman. He, however, stood every interrogatory and attack with the utmost quietude, coolness, and gravity. On the subject of the place of his nativity (for the Colonel affected to think him an Englishman), he alone seemed a little puzzled: he repeated that County Donegal was his undoubted native place, though he had the good luck to be born in County Leitrim, Prowence of Connaught, which was all was left to the fore of poor ancient ould Ireland, barring Munster :—" for," he added, " every one of my people, grandfathers and grandmothers, from the beginning of time, barring myself, was born in and about Donegal town, till the English patentees and Scotch undertakers * drove us all, like wild bastes, into the mountains, and into the Prowence of Connaught."

"When the six counties in Ulster were escheated by James I., a few of the leading chiefs, particularly some of the O'Donnels, fled to Spain and France; the rest of the landed proprietors found asylums in Connaught. The inhabitants of these counties, even in the present day, are distinguished by the terms given to their ancestors in the statistical surveys of the county: in that of Donegal they are called patentee!, undertakers, and servitors or natives.



V





"Then you are not a native of this province?" asked Mr. Glentworth.

"Is it me, Sir? O I no, your honour, I am not: I hope I have done nothing, bad as I am, to be born in the black north, any way; ye'z might tell that by my English, for the cratures in these parts have no English, only Scotch-Irish, your honour*."

"We did indeed remark something peculiar in your English," returned the Colonel: "but may I presume to ask, what brings you into this province, since you seem to hold it rather in contempt?"

"What brings me into this Prowence, your honour? O, I'm a thraveller, Sir."

"I thought so; you have the air of a man who has seen a deal of the world."

"O, I've seen a power, Sir, in my day : sure I was twice't in Dublin, your honour." "Indeed! and no further?"

"No, Sir, no further: only once't in Jarmany, on a little business; and a little while back in the Western Indies f ; that's when I was sarving in th' army, your honour." "So then His Majesty has had the honour of retain ing you in his service?"

"O! he had, your honour: God bless him." "And, pray, Captain, to what regiment were you attached?"

"O ! your honour's going to the fair with me. nowt, any how; it never was Phaidrig (which is Patrick) M'Rory's luck, and that's myself, to be a captain yet, Sir, only a corpolar ;—and what was my regimen, why then, troth, I was mighty near listing with the Flaugh-nabalagh boys*, under the great Giniral Doyle (long life to him, wherever he is), only in regard of the master, who came home on account of the throubles. So I listed with him in the Irish Brigades; and so we went to fight the black Frinch negurs in St. Domingo. Of as fine a regimen of lads as ever you clapt your eyes on, not one of us but was kilt dead in the field, barring a handful, as I may say, and myself and the master."



* It is a curious fact, that among the lower orders of the natives of the other provinces, Ulster is always mentioned slightingly, and generally called the "Black North."

+ This is copied verbatim.

J A common expression, meaning " you are gibing rue."





"Why, you don't mean that a gentleman of your education and appearance is really in service?"

"Oil do, Sir, surely; and I'm the master's fosterbrother to boot, and has the greatest regard and love for him in life; but at this present spaking I may say I'm no sarvant at all, only a pilgrim." "A pilgrim! you!"

"I am, Sir, surely; an't I going to keep my station at Lough-Dergh, in respect of a vow I made for taking a drop too much on a Good Friday ; so with the master's lave, and the blessing of God, I'm going to do pinnence at the blessed and holy St. Patrick's Purgatoryf."

"Purgatory !" repeated Mr. Dexter, shrugging his shoulders: "so, I thought as much; and so, Mr. M'Rory, you are really such a superstitious blockhead as to believe in purgatory, are you?"

"I believe, Sir, in what my church bids me, and what my people believed before me; and what more does your honour, and the likes of you, do nor that? But, in troth, in respect of purgatory, Sir, myself is no ways perticular; only, bad as it is, sure your honour may go further and fare worse for all that."



* Flaugh-na-balagh, "clear the way"—the word with which General Doyle's Irish regiment rushed into the heat of a fierce engagement.

t For an account of this famous shrine of-^rilgrimage, see note at the end of the volume.





This observation, quaintly uttered with a mixture of quietude and humour, produced a general laugh at Mr. Dexter's expense, who replied with great acrimony of manner—

"So, Sir, it is very plain that you are a pretty bigoted, thorough-going Papist, and think that every man who is otherwise will be damned."

"No, Sir, I am nat; I'm a Roman*, and sweet Jasus forbid that every man shouldn't have a sowl to be saved, go what way he will! It would be a bad business, your honour, if heaven was like a poor man's house in a bog, with only one road to it. And divil a diffir I believe it makes in the end, any how, whether a man goes to mass or church, only just for the fashion sake."

"No, Sir, you don't think any such thing," replied Mr. Dexter, with increasing ill-humour. "I know what sort of person you are very well; you are one of those idle mischievous fellows, for I don't credit a word of your story, who go about the country, stirring up the poor deluded people, and raising a cry of emancipation."

"Of who, Sir?" returned the Irishman, coming closer to the barouche, in which Mr. Dexter had just seated himself.

"Emancipation I you heard me very well."

"I have no call to him, Sir: is he a freehoulder?"

"He, he, he!" cried Mr. Dexter, "that's just what he wants to be."

"Why then, no blame to him," returned M'Rory, "for surely it makes all the diffir if a man have a wote or have not a wote; that's when he gets into a scrim

• It is a singular circumstance, that the epithet Papist is frequently rejected by the lower Irish, as being a term of reproach; and that Archbishop Usher has clearly proved, that the supremacy of Rome was unknown to the earlierTJhristians of Ireland, having been first introduced into the country by Henry II., who came with a sword in one hand, and Pope Adrian's bull in the other. E





mage*: what compensation did I ever get for my poor brother, Randall M'Rory, who was kilt in a ruction, because I'd no gentleman to back me, having ourselves neither wote nor interest, and being Romans to bootf; for he was far away that would see me righted, any how, only he couldn't be in two places at once, like a bird, long life to him."

"And so," said Mr. Glentworth, willing* to give the conversation another turn, from that to which the folly and intemperance of Mr. Dexter was leading; "and so, my friend, you are going to perform penance for the crime of getting tipsy on a Good Friday: and how far have you travelled to-day?"

"Not far, your honour ; only from New Town Glens, where you'll get the best entertainment for man and baste, and elegant fish."

"Do you really mean that?" asked Mr. Vandaleur, who had hitherto remained silent, and lolling out of the window of his chaise.

"Troth, I do, your honour, every word of it; and it's what you'll get a bit of mutton there, that the Provost of Strabane needn't be ashamed to stick his knife in of an Easter Sunday; long life to him !—the real Raghery."

"Raghery I what sort of mutton is that?" demanded Mr. Vandaleur, with some eagerness.

"The elegantest, little, dear mutton, your honour, that ever you set your two good-looking eyes on; the leg of it, not bigger nor the leg of a lark, Sir J, to say nothing of the beautiful salmon fish that comes leaping into your arms, fairly out of the water—the craturs! with their tails in their mouths * ! and their elegant fin6 fins, twinkling in the sunshine, for all the world like that lady's eye, there," and he bowed low to Lady Florence, who, leaning forward, and smiling graciously, returned—



* "Scrimmage" a word so often used upon all occasions of riot or confusion, must mean a skirmish; as "ruction" though^exclusively applied to a riot, must come from insurrection.

f A remark made by Mr.Young inhis Irish Tour, vol. ii, which bears upon M'Rory's observation, holds good to a certain degree at this day.

£ The island of Raghery, off the Antrim coast, is famous for its small breed of cattle: the mutton is particularly delicate and sweet.





"Thank you, thank you, Mr. Rory. I assure you, I think you altogether a most anrasing person, and particularly gallant, and exactly what I should expect an Irishman to be."

"Why then, devil a much out you are there, Madam, or Miss; for myself doesn't know well which you are; its few of the likes of you comes into these parts any how, God bless you."

The horses being now fed, and Lady Singleton having made all the inquiries, and given all the advice she thought proper, called out to the party, who were still amusing themselves with the communicative Irishman, "Basta, basta, cosi; come, we have lost time enough; Thompson, get on: Mr. Dexter, put up the head of the barouche at your side. So, I have sent Edwards on before us to prepare for our reception."

The cavalcade now proceeded, and the Colonel, whose curricle was last, took off his hat with great ceremony to M'Rory, expressing a hope that they should meet again, and assuring him he was proud to have made the

• At the mouth of almost every river and streamlet in this county, there is a salmon fishery; the salmon-leaps are also numerous. Here, when the labouring fish does at the fort arrive, And finds that by his strength he does hut vainly strive, His tail takes in his mouth, and bending, &c. &c. &c.

Drayton.

This opinion also prevails among the fishermen of the salmon cuts in Antrim.

E 2





honour of his acquaintance. M'Rory, on his side, bowed with equal ceremony, and Mr. Glentworth, desiring the outrider to give him some money, followed the carriages.

The Englishman, who had been extremely amused with Pat, was much pleased with the commission; but with great difficulty succeeded in prevailing on him to take half-a-crown.

"Why then, see here, my lad," said M'Rory, putting it up, "it isn't in regard of the lucre of gain that I take their two-and-eightpence, but only to drink their healths this night before I sleep; and troth, every farthing of it I'll lay out for that same, if it was a golden guinea; so I will, for they are real and undoubted quality, surely; barring, indeed, that young man in the corner of the landau, who wanted to do me out of my dewotion. Well, see here; I'll bet a dollar (that's if I had it), that he's no gentleman, but some poor relation, or a follower of the family, like myself; and gets the run of the house, and sticks like a burr; for it's remarkable, that its always the likes of them takes most ou themselves; so it is all the world over."

The Englishman shook hands heartily with him,

said he was not much out; that he was a d d good

fellow, and he was sorry he could not wait to make more of his acquaintance; he then rode on.

The fact was, that Mr. Dexter, from an officious interference with every branch of Mr. Glentworth's household, had rendered himself unpopular with all the subordinate members of the family ; and the overbearing haughtiness with which he endeavoured to give weight to his usurped authority, did not tend to soothe away the prejudices, which that usurpation had excited against him.

Mr. Dexter was one of those worthy successors to the led captains of other times, who, without birth,





without education, without talent, make their way through the gradations of society, from their own original obscurity, by artful obsequiousness, and by flattering the foibles, courting the favour, and gliding into passive conformity with the passions and opinions of those, from whose rank they can borrow consequence, or from whose influence they may derive profit: nor was M'Rory far from the mark, when he likened him to an order of persons in his own country, who (too indolent to labour, and too poor for independence) rest their claims for idle maintenance on some distant relationship; and by an artful study of the character of those on whom they prey, govern while they adulate, and influence where they affect to depend.



CHAPTER V.



The tourists now proceeded along the wild and winding shores which skirted the northern seas, between the valley of Glenarm, and the little maritime town of New Town Glens. Lady Singleton, annoyed by the increasing badness of the rugged roads, or busied in invectives against their overseers (of whose negligence she threatened to make a formal complaint), at length became insensible to the peculiar features of the scenery; nor did prospects, however consonant to the fantastic genius of a Salvator Rosa, or the wild and gloomy imagination of an Ossian, compensate to the travellers for jolts which almost dislocated, and for ruts and dykes which threatened wheels, and put patent springs to the test. Mr. Glentworth, therefore, who still rode, in vain pointed out to them the beautiful inland views afforded by glens and mountains, and the distant villages of Glenclye and Carnalloch. Neither were they more struck by the bolder features of the coast, or by the romantic promontory of Garron*, which stretches along the coast, and opposes its sharp, salient angles, to the incursive turbulence of the waves. "Yes, yes," returned Lady Florence, endeavouring to screen her face from the sea air, " it is all very fine; but if you have a mind to charm me with a prospect, show me the chimney-tops of our inn."





They now continued to wind along the shores of the Red Bay, at the base of the heights of Craig Murphy. At no great distance from the ruins of Red Bay Castle, appeared a small neat house, and under a swinging sign, ornamented with the shamrock and thistle, was inscribed in large characters: "the Castle Inn, by Alexander M'Donald." The house was surrounded by very bold and romantic coast-scenery. The avant-courier had been more successful here than at Glenarm, and had obtained, at least, the promise of every due accommodation.

The first object with the travellers was a luncheon, and what Lady Singleton denominated une toilette de voyage: for she had previously stipulated with Lady Florence, that they should not throw off their travelling dresses for less convenient drapery, till they reached her own house at Lough Swilly: the toilet was therefore soon despatched; and a luncheon in the interim, consisting simply of potatoes and butter, was spread on an oak table, in the middle of a white-washed parlour.

Sharp appetites, however, furnished sauce piquante to the homely fare; and the party surrouaded the table, except Mr. Vandaleur, who stood aloof, looking on, with a countenance of utter despair.

• Garron, " the sharp point." The site of the fortress of Dunmall is still to be traced along this coast, where, tradition asserts, "all the rent of Ireland was once paid;" probably the revenues of the Dalatadians.





"This is a sorry prelude," he said, shrugging his shoulders. "I am afraid Mr. M'Rory's salmon and little mutton existed only in his own imagination."

"We shall know that directly," said Lady Singleton. "I have sent for our host."

"Meantime, then," said Mr. Vandaleur, "I'll try a biscuit," and he rang the bell for his own servant.

"You don't expect to get biscuits here, that are eatable, do you?" asked Lady Singleton.

"There are certain things I never expect to get good, any where out of my own house, Lady Singleton, except I carry them with me."

"All prejudice," said Lady Singleton—"and I would prove it, if I had you in England."

Here Mr. Vandaleur's Frenchman, who, when travelling, served him as cook and' valet-de-chambre (his own cook having stipulated never to leave London), made his appearance.

"Have we any biscuits left, La Tour?" demanded Mr. Vandaleur.

"Eh! mais oui, Monsieur."

"Bring in the case. Let me see what you have got." Lady Florence threw a sly and smiling look at the Colonel.

"What have you got there, Monsieur?" she demanded, as La Tour took a little canister out of a leather case.

"It is, Miladi, de cafe a la creme, pour prendre par le nez, qui dissipe les douleurs des yeux, et refraichit le cerveau par son odeur agreable et suave."

"But, La Tour," said Lady Florence, "we want to dissipate our appetites with something more than an 'odeur suave'"

"Eh bien, Miladi, voici des biscuitins d'Amerique— et la parfaite amour et—"

"Give me a biscuit, and a little parfaite amour," said Mr. Vandaleur, who sat listlessly looking on: "if any body chooses liqueurs, they will find some here worth tasting."





"I must beg leave to doubt that," said Lady Singleton, while La Tour helped the gentlemen: "there are now no genuine liqueurs to be had in England. I have a reason for knowing it."

"For which reason, I import my own," returned Mr. Vandaleur.

"So I should suppose," said Mr. Dexter, putting his throat to the torture, to get down a hot potato, that he might say something civil, as he took the liqueur out of La Tour's hand.

"Upon my word, this is exquisite," he continued, smacking his lips, "quite exquisite."

"No," said Mr. Vandaleur: "that which you are drinking must be very bad from its colour."

Mr. Dexter now observing that Lady Singleton had left the room, obsequiously repeated—

"Why, certainly, if you say so, it doubtless must be, Mr. Vandaleur; for you must be, out and out, the first judge of these things in Great Baitain."

"Yes, I think I know a little in that way," he returned. "Where did we get that wretched stuff, La Tour—from Paris?"

"Eh mais non, Monsieur," said La Tour, adding, with a contemptuous shrug—" Nous l'avons eu de ce Londres la bas!"

While the landlady, her daughters, nieces, and maids, were all put under requisition by Lady Singleton, who was bustling through every room in the house, the landlord attended Mr. Vandaleur's summons in the parlour.

Irish inkeepers are generally gentlemen: they are gentlemen farmers, gentlemen excisemen, gentlemen sub-sheriffs; but they are always gentlemen, and therefore most commonly above the subordinate situation of innkeepers. Mr. Alexander M'Donald, however, was not by extra profession a gentleman; not however that he was in the least more attentive or civil for being confined to what he professed: his manner and address were fair specimens of his class in the North of Ireland.





"Pray, sir, what can we have for dinner?" asked Mr. Vandaleur—" any thing?"

"Well, ye just can—any thing ye please to call for."

"Fish, for instance?" asked Mr. Vandaleur.

"Aye, troth, as gude as ever swam in the sea."

"What sort, pray ?—salmon?"

"Troth* I dinna ken, tull the boats come in."

"So then we are to depend upon wind and tide for our dinner, I suppose?"

"Nay, ye munna depend on that—the mestress has kell'd her peg to day; ye can tak your choice from head to tail."

"Of a fresh-killed pig?" returned Mr. Vandaleur, , with an inspiration amounting to a groan. "Have you not some small mutton peculiar to this country?"

"Not kell'd; but we wull the morrow. We have a nice wee bit of a haunch of venison in the house, but—"

"A haunch of what in the house?" interrupted Mr. Vandaleur, starting on his legs.

"A haunch of venison, sent my mestress in lieu of some spenning she git done for Belly M'Adam, my Lord's gamekeeper at Glenarm; but I doubt it's but just meddling, Thon* is too stale, I doubt."

"Too stale—impossible !" exclaimed Mr. Vandaleur: "let me see it immediately. But who is to dress it?"

"Well, the woman just will."

"The woman—what woman? No woman upon earth

Thon—that.





can dress any thing. My servant will dress it under my direction. I will go to your kitchen, if you will try and get your disagreeable turf not to smoke."

"Fin a hit it shall smoke, I warrant you," returned Mr. M'Donald, laughing. "Fin a hit*."

"Can I be of any use to you, Mr. Vandaleur?" said Mr. Dexter, stepping forward. "I once understood that kind of thing pretty well: indeed, I belonged to a beef-steak club. I have my little silver gridiron some-where; we wore it at our button-hole, with a rose-coloured ribbon."

"No, I thank you, Mr. Dexter; I'll try what I can do with La Tour; not that he is particularly excellent in that line." •.

"Pourtant Monsieur," returned La Tour, "je fais mon petit possible!"

"We shall see," said Mr. Vandaleur; and he left the room, accompanied by his valet and the host; while Mr. Dexter went to look after the stables, since he was not permitted to officiate in the kitchen.

During the culinary dialogue, Lady Florence and the Colonel, who stood leaning their fine figures against the chimney-piece, exchanging looks and smiles of ridicule and intelligence, now both burst into an immoderate fit of laughter at their friend's expense.

"Poor Mr. Vandaleur!" exclaimed Lady Florence: "he is an excellent person in his w^iy: I have a great friendship for him; I have, indeed."

"Which he returns," said the Colonel, "with an exclusive and profound devotion."

"No, I don't think that; but we go on very well together. You know the way one lets a man follow one, year after year, just meaning nothing at all. I wish he would marry."



* Fin a hit—devil a bit. "Scarcely a trace of Irish language, customs, or story, can be found along the north coasts. The few who use the Celtic at all, speak a mixed dialect called Scotch-Irish." See Hamilton's Letters on Antrim.





"If he did," said the Colonel, laughing, "it must be to Mrs. Glass, or the Complete Housekeeper."

And they were still laughing at this ben-trovato, when Lady Singleton bustled into the room.

"I have set," she said, "all the maids to scour the rooms, I have changed all the beds, and made the old Scotch-Irish landlady, who has la Crasse of both nations on her hands, stare her eyes out: and now we must all walk, and see what is to be seen, while we have an hour's day-light. I want to walk down to the shore. I have taken it into my head, from the view I had of the strand, that there is excellent stuff there for repairing the roads; instead of which, our host tells me, they are supplied from a whinstone quarry.—O! how Irish that is: the quarry is the least trouble. Mais alloris: Mr. Glentworth and the girls are waiting for us at the hall door, and Mr. Vandaleur is staying to superintend the venison: he would not even hear me speak on the subject."

The Colonel and Lady Florence followed her, with shrugs of annoyance: the amour-propre of each supplied food and occupation to the other. The Colonel (vain and indifferent) flattered, that he might be flattered in [turn; and Lady Florence, who saw, with

"equal eye," .

"A hero perish, or a sparrow fall,"

and who, in common with Madame de Maintenon, prized all conquests, from a porter's to a prince's, beheld with increasing satisfaction the progressive subjugation of the gallant Colonel; besides, being flattered that a man, who quizzed all the world, had not only entered into an alliance defensive and offensive with her, but was, in the truest sense of the word, quizzed by herself:—for though she threw out lights to mislead his vanity, she was in faet as indifferent towards him as to Mr. Vandaleur, and the rest of the world.





The party now proceeded on their ramble, led by Lady Singleton and Mr. Dexter, who descended towards the shore. --''

The sun was setting with greats richness'over the Heights of Sliabh-Barragh*. Volutiaes of purple clouds were floating in the atmosphere, and the glassy surface of the distant waters was here and there darkly spotted with fishing-boats. Along the remoter shores, the curling smoke of the burning sea-weed rose in azure columns, and broke into light vapours, throwing an aerial tint over the whole of the perspective. The entire foreground was bold and massive; the fantastic groupings of the rocks, scattered in grotesque forms along the shores of the Red Bay; the ruined Castle rising above the caverned cliff-)-, and the Heights of Sliabh-Barragh cutting abruptly against the declining sun's red light, presented a combination of scenic features of great vigour and boldness; a combination rude and wild, indeed, but highly picturesque, and finely set off by the lights and shades of the season and hour. The group, alone, accidentally placed in the picture, were incongruities in the masterly composition.

The tide was now coming in with such rapidity, that Mr. Glentworth proposed ascending among the rocks before they were overtaken by its insidious incursion;

• The Irish language is extremely copious and fruitful in terms of scenic description: they have various epithets' to mark observable heights rising above the surface of the earth. "Knock," signifies a low hill, standing single, without any continued range. "Sliabh," pronounced Sleeve, a high craggy mountain, ascending in ridges. Bienn, or Benn, a mountain of the first magnitude, ending in an abrupt precipice.

- -f' The caverns of this cliff consist of three chambers. They were once occupied as school-rooms, though the path leading to them is frightfully precipitous.





and when they had attained the summit of one of the lower cliffs, he pointed out some of the most striking features in the scene; observing that many of the rocks among which we had been a few minutes before confidently loitering, were now entirely surrounded by water, and apparently isolated from the main coast*.

"It would have been quite an adventure," said Lady Florence, who had now, in a tete-a-tete conversation with the Colonel, reached the very head and front of sentimental abstraction—" it would be quite an adventure to have been surrounded by the sea, while standing on one of those cliffs, wrapt in thought or heavenly pensive meditation."

"Pray observe that distant cliff to the left," said Mr. Glentworth. "Does it not represent just such an image as your ladyship has conjured up? If the situation were not impracticable to human foot, would you not say that some fool-hardy person had balanced himself on that rocky pinnacle?"

"I think, Sir," said Miss O'Halloran, abruptly, "it puts one in mind of the statue of Peter the Great placed on a solid rock."

Every body smiled, partly at the brogue, partly at the suddenness with which she broke through her long preserved silence.

"Your observation is very just, Miss O'Halloran," said Mr. Glentworth. "The form of that rock has, in the light we now see it, precisely the proportions and air of a well executed statue. It seems almost to move upon the sight."

"Good heavens I Why, it does move," said Lady Florence.

"La! so it does!" said both the Miss Singletons, in a breath.

• Doctor Hamilton, in his celebrated Letters on the Coast of Antrim, describes these shores as being fantastically beautiful.





"It is Peter the Great himself, no doubt," said the Colonel. "Seriously, however, Miss O'Halloran, there was a great deal of imagination in your remark."

"O, there is nobody so clever as Miss O'Halloran, I am sure," returned Lady Florence.

Lady Singleton, and Mr. Dexter, who was filling his pockets with pebbles at her ladyship's commands, now approached; and Mr. Glentworth pointed out the figure on the rock to her, saying—

"You may be certain that is the presiding genius of the shore; and he has risen from the waves, to accuse you and Mr. Dexter of the thefts you are committing on his territories."

"That," said Lady Singleton, raising her glass, "that is some foolish person looking for samphire; but I can tell him he is amazingly mistaken, if he thinks to get any on this description of rock."

"Mistaken, indeed," echoed Mr. Dexter.

"What!" said the Colonel, "Peter the Great transformed into a samphire-gatherer. What an anticlimax!"

"Whoever it be," said Mr. Glentworth, "he certainly appears to set no great value upon life; for, as he now stands, he seems (at this distance, at least) to be in a most perilous situation ; one false step would precipitate him into that mass of waters, which roars between the two opposite rocks."

Almost as he spoke, the person sprang from his giddy station, and to all appearance sank into the waves. The ladies screamed.

"It is some wretched suicide," cried Lady Florence, faintly. "I fear I shall faint—I shall, indeed: I have not nerves for this—"

"Fly, Mr. Glentworth, down to the shores," cried Lady Singleton: "let a boat be put out directly—he shall yet be saved."





Mr. Glentworth was already out of hearing-. He had sprung down the rocks with the agility of eighteen, followed by Miss O'Halloran; while the Colonel and the Miss Singletons remained with Lady Florence.

"Shall I go, and try to be of some assistance ?" said Mr. Dexter, without moving a step.

"No, no," said Lady Singleton; " sit down quietly here. Keep all your breath. We must save this poor man. You shall blow into his mouth and nostrils, Mr. Dexter: 'tis a thing done every day. I'll save him; only observe my orders. I am quite au fait to. suspended animation. I have sent some useful hints to the Society."

"But if the man is drowned?" said Mr. Dexter, in some trepidation, and seating himself as he was desired.

"No matter for that: mind me, and we shall recover him all the same."

Mr. Glentworth now waved his hat from below, and the next moment, followed by the governess, ascended the rocks.

"All is safe!" he cried out, a's he approached; "all is right. We could not see, at this distance, that the man jumped into a boat, anchored under the shadow^of the rock on which he stood; and not, as we supposed, into the sea. Neither is the rock so high and precipitous as the particular direction of the evening shadows makes it appear."

"How tiresome!" said Lady Singleton, disappointed that there was nothing to do.

"And to have one's feelings put to the torture for nothing," added Lady Florence, languidly; while, as the whole party directed their steps towards home (from which they were more than a mile distant), Mr. Glentworth pointed out to them the object of their former solicitude, rowing his little boat under the rocks, on which they were walking; his sole companion, a dog, Which sat at the stern, appeared, even at that distance, of immense size.





"The whole little set-out," said Mr. Glentworth, "partially tinged as it is with light, is extremely picturesque."

"Is it not very like a drawing we copied of La Porte's Horatia?" asked Miss Singleton.

"So it is, Caro; only there is no tree in the corner. I believe there ought always to be a tree in the corner of a real landscape."

The boat now disappeared behind a little promontory of rocks; and the ramblers, wearied of acclivities and declivities, descended (in spite of Mr. Glentworth's advice to keep on the heights) towards a sandy beach, where the tide had not intruded.

They were now within view of the inn, and scarcely half a mile distant, when they again perceived the boat undulating near the shore, and empty; a little in advance, the rower, with his gigantic dog lying at his feet, was seated on a fragment of rock, and seemed busily employed in breaking up some stones, which, as he effected, he threw into a little basket beside him. The party had now approached so near as to alarm the dog, who sprang forward with a dreadful yell to attack them. The ladies screamed, the gentlemen parried his attack with their canes, and the stranger, starting up, cried, with a voice deep as the tones of the gigantic animal they commanded, "Bran!" The dog crept back growling to his master's feet, who, removing the fur cap which covered his head, said—

"Pray pass on, there is no danger whatever to be apprehended from the dog."

When the ladies had passed, he resumed his cap and occupation, and began to hammer as before. The contrast exhibited in his person, manner, dress, and occupation, was so striking, as to keep the party for a moment silent, from surprise. They had supposed him a fisherman; but his address and air were not only those of a gentleman, but of a distinguished gentleman.





He was, however, pretty nearly clad in the costume of the profession they had assigned him; his whole dress consisted of a grey jacket and trowsers, a black silk neck-handkerchief, and a fur cap; but his person, though so little set off by the advantages of dress, was conspicuously fine. His height was majestic; and his head, for a moment exhibited, as he drew off his cap, was so little the head of a common man, that it had attracted the notice and admiration of Lady Florence, who exclaimed—

"What an extraordinary looking person! What a magnificent head! Take him with his eyes and his dog, altogether he is by much the finest thing I ever saw in my life. Who can he be?"

"Why, a surveyor of the roads, or something of that sort," returned Lady Singleton, with a tone of decision. "The innkeeper told me there was such a person in the neighbourhood; and indeed I meant to send for him before I leave this place, and rate him soundly for the shameful state in which we have found the roads; nay, I may as well take the present opportunity."

To Lady Florence's great satisfaction, and Mr. Glentworth's great dismay, she turned quickly back and approached the stranger, who rose as she drew near, keeping his hand on his dog's neck, as he also started up with a faint growl.

"I beg pardon, Sir," said Lady Singleton, "for interrupting your occupation; pray go on with your work."

"It was only the occupation of an idle man, Madam," returned the stranger, bowing; "and"

"I know very well what you are about," interrupted Lady Singleton, taking up some flints from his basket:

F





"pray, of what strata are these shores composed? I have a particular reason for wishing to know."

The stranger, with evident surprise marked in his countenance, replied, after a moment's hesitation, and throwing his eyes rapidly over the group—

"I have not accurately examined them, Madam, beyond the mere surface, but I believe this particular line of shore consists of a series of red sandstone, intersected by strata of granite, and containing, in certain directions, veins of calcareous spar."

Lady Singleton threw round a look at the rest of the party (who now, with the exception of Mr. Glentworth, encircled the stranger) as if to say—" you see I was right;" then addressing the stranger, she said—

"Well, Sir, I must say that you do not turn your knowledge to much account; for your roads are as bad as if you were totally ignorant of the materials which these shores furnish you to repair them with; and, I must also say, that I do not understand how people can go on for ever taking the King's money, without performing the services expected and required by the government. The using whin-stone is merely, I suppose, to make a job; as the quarry is private property, while the strand affords such pebbles as these.—Come here, Mr. Dexter, show this gentleman the pebbles we have picked up."

Mr. Dexter busily emptied his pockets into his hat, crying —

"The roads are, as her ladyship observes, in execrable order;" and he raised his eyes to the stranger's face, to discover the effect produced by the title of ladyship. But the stranger, exhibiting no other emotion in his countenance than the most profound amazement, observed—

"I beg pardon; but I rather suppose, Madam, you must mistake me for some other person."





"No, no," interrupted Lady Singleton, "I am not so liable to be mistaken. I know very well you are the person I wanted particularly to see—you are the surveyor or director of the roads here: I don't exactly know how you term the office, in Ireland."

"No, indeed, Madam," he replied, smiling, "I am not; I have not the honour to hold any place so ostensible."

"No I" said Lady Singleton, in a tone of mortification, "then I am sure I beg your pardon; but I naturally supposed, from your particular occupation, from having heard that one of the overseers of the roads was in the neighbourhood—but I beg pardon; I am sorry to have disturbed you."

The stranger bowed, and assured her all apology was unnecessary.

"I was not the only one deceived about you, however, Sir," added Lady Singleton, willing to throw a part of her blunder upon others, "for you have been an object of conjecture to all our party for some time back; and have been taken for all sorts and manner of things."

"You have indeed been an object of solicitude to us,'»_said Lady Florence, in a voice of blandishment, "andTliNjyt'ere at a loss to assign a motive sufficiently strong for the risk you incurred: the rock seemed quite a Leueadia, and your plunge into the waters, as we thought it, appeared a lover's leap."

"The rock, Madam," returned the stranger, with an air of pleasantry, "was not, I believe, quite so steep as the Leucadian promontory, nor was the motive of my ascending it so exalted, as to bring its excuse along with it for my risk:—I merely landed there to procure a specimen of zeolite, which now lies fractured in that basket."

"There is no spirit more daring," said Mr. GlentF2





worth, advancing with a slight bow, "than the enterprising spirit of science. I dare say, Sir, that the coast of Antrim affords an ample field to geological inquiry."

"I should suppose it must, Sir," returned the stranger, "from its general structure, particularly the basaltic districts; but I am myself an idle observer, and have rather admired than explored them. My knowledge of the region is almost wholly confined to the theories and principles which the industry, ingenuity, and experiments of others have applied to its phenomena."

"If I recollect right," replied Mr. Glentworth, with increasing interest, " Sir William Hamilton asserts that wherever basaltic pillars are found, a volcano must at some time or other have existed."

"I believe," said the stranger, "that the volcanic hypothesis has been generally applied to the Giant's Causeway; and what is rather singular, there is, I am told, an old Irish tradition which bears out the supposition.

"I shall never believe that," said Lady Singleton, "until I find some specimens of lava on these shores. I have some pieces of a lava in my possession at this moment. I got them in a cabinet of natural history I bought from a Jew at Florence. It contains all sorts of things; and I have added to it some pretty specimens of shells, which I picked up myself on the shores of the Mediterranean."

"It must be a most valuable article, that cabinet," said Mr. Dexter; "and your ladyship picked up shells yourself on the shores of the Mediterranean! How fine! What a savage little spot this must appear to you—for your ladyship might walk upon this strand for ever, without even picking up as much as a pretty little cockle-shell."

Here one of Miss O'Halloran's abrupt bursts of laughter startled the whole party, and almost threw Mr. Dexter into confusion.





The stranger, during this little dialogue, had directed liis glances to the group which had so unexpectedly appeared in a scene so little appropriated to such dramatis personae; but his eyes rested longest on the elegant form of Lady Florence, who, seemingly unconscious of his gaze, stood drawing a velvet mantle round her, in folds which a statuary would vainly have attempted to imitate. Miss O'Halloran's laugh, however, drew all his observation on herself; but her short clumsy cloak and deep straw bonnet, which gave her the air of a little Red Riding-Hood, or a Dutch toy, did not for a moment fix his attention: he again turned "to metal more attractive," assisting Lady Florence to gather up her mantle, which had fallen from her grasp.

The incorrigible risibility of the governess did not go unreproved by Lady Singleton, who lectured her in Italian ; while the Colonel declared that her laugh, which was quite fair, would make the fortune of a low comedy actress. Mr. Glentworth at once, to cut short further exposure of his own party, and further intrusion on the stranger's pursuits, now proposed to return, as the dews were beginning to fall; and taking, off his hat to the stranger, who bowed gracefully in return, he led the way back to the inn.

"I am much deceived," said Lady Florence, "if that is not a person of some consideration, notwithstanding his grey jacket and his little Montero cap."

"He is unquestionably a gentleman," added Mr. Glentworth, "and probably here on some scientific research; some amateur naturalist, perhaps."

"O! I am never taken in by un air imposant," said Lady Singleton, " and as to his science"

Before she could finish her sentence, the stranger reappeared, and, addressing Mr. Glentworth, he said.

"I beg your pardon—but I perceive you are returning to the inn, by the beach. Since you passed it, it is overflowed by the tide, which is a spring one; but if you will allow me, I will conduct you by another path."





Mr. Glentworth made due acknowledgments for this politeness, and thankfully accepted the offer. The stranger then led the way, by ascending from the shore, and conducted them through a bye road, while Lady Florence, patting his dog's head, drew him towards her, by expressions of her admiration at his favourite's size and beauty, and by inquiring if he was not of the Newfoundland breed.

He replied in the negative, adding, that it was the descendant of a race now almost extinct, for which the country was once celebrated—the Irish wolf-dog.

"I think you called him Bran," said Lady Singleton. "I don't think that is an appropriate name for a dog of this description."

"It is an old name, however, Madam," he replied, "for dogs of this race in this country. It was," he added, smiling, "the name of the favourite hound of one of our national heroes, Fionne-ma-cunihal; better known as ' Fingal *.'"

"Then," said Mr. Glentworth, "you still claim Fingal as your own, and really believe that such a person existed?"

"At least," said the stranger, smiling, " this is not a place to express scepticism; for we happen at this moment to inhabit a bardic region, and to tread on consecrated ground. We are now on the borders of the valley of Glenariff, or, the valley of the chiefs, which is particularly sacred to Ossian, and still retains some objects, distinguished by the names of his contemporaries. That hill, so remotely seen by the rising moonbeam falling on its summit, and which appears but an illuminated vapour, is called 'Luirg Eaden,' and still retains traces of a fortress, which the people of the country, to this day, call * Fort-clan-a-Mourna,' and is supposed to have been the garrison of Fingal, and his * Clan-na-Boiskine *.'"



* A mark is shown in a mountain in Tyrone, near New Town Stewart, which is said to be "the track of Bran's feet," the celebrated greyhound of Fingal, whose memory is held in reverence no less than _ his master's.





"These are curious facts, indeed," said Mr. Glentworth.

"Oh! beyond every thing interesting,'' said Lady Florence, "only the language is so difficult to pronounce —' clag-nag-bosk.' O! I should never manage."

"It must be owned," said the Colonel, throwing an intelligent look at her ladyship, "that it is a magnificent language—the Irish I only it is unpronounceable by an English organ. The 'aughs' and 'cloghs,' for instance."

"Oughs and doughs I" repeated Mr. Dexter, laugh , ing and winking at the Colonel jocosely, "oughs and cloughs! The fact is, the Irish is a most rude and barbarous tongue, and surprisingly discordant."

"It may appear so to those who don't understand it," returned the stranger, coolly: "those who do, are of a different opinion. I believe," he added, turning to Mr. Glentworth, " the topography of England has retained the language of the ancient Britons, in most of the prominent features of the country; and though to foreign ears I know it sounds barbarously harsh, yet, of course, it does not strike the natives of the land as being either rude or discordant. It is thus in Ireland, with us; and to our ears the cloghers and aughers are quite as harmonious as Gigleswick and Jingleput to natives of Derbyshire."

• The little village of Cushindall, " Cois-an-da-calladh." Tie river in the neighbourhood of Gleneriff, is supposed to derive its name from a predatory Scot, vcho fell by the hand of Oisin or Osian, "whose tomb many of the natives pretend to have seen on the coast."





"Or Asgrigg, or Dowgallscar," added Mr. Glentworth, laughing, "in the neighbourhood of which places we happen to live; so, Sir, you see you have produced a strong case in point."

"You are, of course, Sir, a native of this country," said Lady Singleton, " by your knowing so much about it. Will you be so good as to speak a little Irish?"

As she spoke, the stranger advanced to a little gate, and, holding it open as the ladies passed through, he observed—

"You have only to cross the meadow before you, and you will reach the inn in a few minutes: it lies to the left."

He then bowed, and, followed by his dog, walked away with great rapidity.

"How very odd !" said Lady Florence, casting a look over her shoulder; but he was already out of sight— "how very odd that he should go off so abruptly! there can be no question about his being a gentleman. What do you think of him, Colonel?"

"Why, he is a good-looking kind of Irish giant enough; but I observe that all men look well in that sort of dress. I should not wonder, however, if you were deceived in him."

"Nor I, in the least," said Mr. Dexter.

"Well, I should," said Lady Singleton: "there is something of the bel usage about him, not to be mistaken."

"Critically," observed Mr. Dexter.

"I wish, with all my soul, we had asked him to join our dinner-party at the inn, though very likely he would have declined the invitation," said Mr. Glentworth.

"Decline! I like that," said Lady Singleton. "I dare say he would be but too much flattered. Go, Mr. Dexter; pray run after him—you will easily overtake him, and ask him to dine with us at seven o'clock."





Mr. Dexter obeyed, or rather affected to obey; but returned in a few minutes apparently out of breath, asserting that he could not overtake him, without running the risk of losing his own way.

"Well, we shall probably find him at the inn, as, of course, he sets up there;" and in this conviction they arrived at the inn-door: the waiter, however, who was stationed at it, and who was immediately questioned by the two ladies, asserted that no such person had set up at the Castle; and that there was no one in the house at present, but their own party.

"O!" said Mr. Dexter, " your la'ship need be under no apprehensions; you may depend on it, he won't so easily lose sight of persons of such evident rank and fashion. This is all a little stage trick to excite curiosity. I am certain I have seen him before. If I mistake not, he was with a party of strolling players at Ballynogue. That description of persons has always a sort of a—kind of a—jargon that they pick out of the plays of the celebrated Shakspeare and others, which they pass for their own."

"You are quite wrong, Mr. Dexter," said Lady Singleton; but in a tone of voice which evinced that his opinion had made some impression on her.

"Certainly, if you say it, I must be wrong, Lady Singleton; and, indeed, I only hinted my opinion and belief, with due deference to your ladyship's."

This was strictly true. Mr. Dexter's mind was a tabula rasa, on which the person to whom he looked up, for the time being, for patronage and preferment, might indite what he pleased. No man exhibited more signs of intelligence on his own interests, yet the jargon of Lady Singleton, no less than her rank, had imposed her on him for a person of considerable influence and. interest. With the power and consequence of her brother, he was deeply impressed; and, like all persons





/



who have seen the great only at a distance, he thought they could do everything for those whom they protected; and that those whom they protected had nothing to do, hut to flatter and submit, in order to obtain everything they desired.

The ramblers, on their return to the inn, found Mr. Vandaleur full of the importance and success of his office. The venison was "done to a turn," and a boat full of excellent fish had been landed in time for dinner. Every body was pleased—'every body was in high spirits; and their ramble and adventure with "Peter the Great," as Lady Florence called him, afforded subject for conversation for the evening. While they took their coffee, the innkeeper was summoned to stand the test of their inquiries relative to the singular stranger, who, Lady Singleton insisted on it, spoke with a foreign accent.

"In gude troth, then," said Mr. M'Donald, "I warrant ye weel, 'tis my lord's ain gentleman; for my lord is now in the country, and mounseer looks as like a lord as his self; and he is a great fisherman, and has his own nice wee boat that he paddles about in."

Mr. Dexter smirked, wriggled on his chair, and threw a glance under his eyes at Lady Singleton; but seeing nothing in her countenance to sanction his smirk or his wriggle, he looked grave, and was composed again.

This information rather startled the whole party, with the exception of Mr. Glentworth, who exclaimed—

"No; the person we have met is a gentleman, and a gentleman of distinguished manners and appearance; there can be no question about it."

"Weel, I just doubt we have ony, the like, in these parts; and if he's a gentleman, he has not put up at the Castle, that's all."

With this observation Mr. M'Donald withdrew, and shortly after the party retired, in the intention of setting off the next morning with the sun; as, by the advice of





Mr. M'Donald, they meant to reach their last stage to the Giant's Causeway on the following night, and sleep at Bush-Mills, the point from which most of the votarists to this great shrine of nature start for the pilgrimage.



CHAPTER VI.



The travellers recommenced their journey on the following day, while the grey vapours of a line autumnal morning still involved every object in their misty hue: till the sun, as it appeared to rise from the brightening bosom of the ocean, gradually developed the bold features of that great sweep, which terminates in the mighty 'altitudes of the basaltic promontory of Benmore. The stage, however, performed before breakfast, is generally that least favourable to picturesque observations; and the venerable ruins of Kerragb. Castle, the bold promontory of Torr, crowned with its Giant's Fort and Grave *, and the magnificent spectacle afforded by the ocean and surrounding mountains, were alike lost upon the drowsy tourists. Their attention and interest were first awakened by the sight of a good breakfast, at the town of Ballycastle, which their avantcourier had ordered for them the night before.

As they had here some time on their hands, while the horses were resting, Lady Singleton proposed that they should employ it in visiting whatever was best worth seeing, in or about the town; and the local knowledge of their host was taxed to obtain the necessary intelligence.

He began by the coal-mines, of which, as a townsman,



* Torr, a hill or tower. The ruins of the Fort of Dunavarre may be seen on the point of the promontory of Torr, and is said by the people of the country to have been the work of giants. At some distance above it, is shown a spot called SleachUna-Barragh—the Giant's Grave.





he was justly proud; and he was proceeding with rather a tedious account of the different intervals in which they had been worked, when Lady Singleton interrupted him with—

"O, very good; but we happen to have no taste for coal-mines:—besides, I don't give any credit to your knowing how to work coal-mines in Ireland. You had better stick to your bogs—I can tell you that. But have you nothing about Fingal here? No place that Ossian mentions? We are told that this is the spot for this sort of thing."

The man, after some deliberation, replied that there was a fine old ruin near the town, about which the people had a great many stories: "It was called," he said, "the Abbey of Bona-Marga; and part of the cell of the famous 'Black Nun,' called Shelagh Dubh-navalone, was still to be seen."

"And what was she famous for?" asked Lady Singleton. "I rather doubt a nun's claim to celebrity."

The innkeeper had never heard, excepting that she was a great prophetess, and a saint and abbess of the.place *.



* Tradition says that this nun had a sister, whom she had occasion to blame for some impropriety of conduct; and though the offender had shown ample contrition, the recluse would not be satisfied. It happened, however, that the penitent was compelled one wintry night to beg shelter from her sister, who could not, from christian motives, deny her request; but resolved, rather than abide under the same roof, to pay her accustomed devotions in the open air. After remaining some hours at prayer, the devout woman looked towards the cell, and saw a most brilliant light. Struck with amazement, knowing that neither fire nor taper had burnt there for many months, she approached the bed on which her sister lay, hut only had time to hear her sigh out her last breath in praise of her Redeemer. The light had vanished—the recluse considered it as the sign of Heaven's forgiveness to her sister, and learned henceforward to be more indulgent to human frailty.

I have borowed this note from Dr. Drummond's beautiful poem of "the Giant's Causeway."





Lady Singleton, having asserted that it must be all a mistake, as she knew the Calendar of Saints pretty well, and no such name as Saint Shelagh was among them, complied, notwithstanding, with the wishes of the rest of the party, to visit this ruined abbey, whose curiosity this little legendary morceau of the innkeeper's had awakened and interested.

The day was fine, though somewhat gloomy; and the abbey was but a short walk from the town. Lady Florence, supported by her two friends, Mr. Vandaleur, and Colonel Moclere, followed the rest of the group, which was led on by Lady Singleton and Mr. Dexter— the former ringing the changes upon the dulness and inactivity of a monastic life; and the latter bearing testimony to the truth and justice of her observations.

The Abbey of Bona-Marga, founded in the sixteenth century by one of the M'Donald family, an ancestor of the Earls of Antrim, was among the last of the monasteries raised in Ireland. It had still, however, felt heavily the decaying hand of time; the cells and refectory having long fallen into undistinguishable dilapidation. The chapel alone appeared tolerably preserved, and still faintly exhibited some well-executed devices in bas-relief. A small edifice also remained near the great entrance to the chapel, which might have been the lodge of the convent porter, or the detached residence of some lay brother. Nothing, perhaps, could be more incongruous with the solemn scene of this venerable ruin, than the group which now intruded on its silent solitudes. The desolate wildness of its site, the turbulent ocean it commanded, the rocks, cliffs, and mountains, by which it was environed, the death-like stillness which hung upon it, the mortal relics strewed around, were grand and gloomy images, strongly contrasted by the flippant loquacity, rapid motions, and gay appearance of its unusual visitants. Lady Florence, trailing the drapery of an Indian shawl, which breathed of Indian roses, over the long rye-grass that rustled above the consecrated earth, where, perhaps,





"Many a saint, and many a hero lay,"

talked of the place, its wildness, and its gloom, with romantic enthusiasm; and, throwing her shawl over her head, folding her hands, and placing herself under the arch of a broken aisle, with no feeble effect, repeated—

"In each low wind methinks a spirit calls,

And more than echoes talk along these walls;"



then suddenly dropping her air and tone, she assumed a look of Beckyish simplicity, leaving it doubtful whether her abrupt transition was the by-play of affected coquetry, or the impulse of unaffected folly. Whatever it was, it appeared to enchant her two supporters, between whom she again took her station. Meantime the Misses Singleton were endeavouring to read an inscription on a tomb-stone, upon which Mr. Dexter lay sprawling, assisting them to decipher it, but skipping over the Latin, which occasionally obtruded itself, and declaring the whole thing put him in mind of the celebrated Mr. Gray's Elegy on a Country Church-yard in " Elegant Extracts," which began with

"What beckoning ghost"

Miss O'Halloran stood silently by, neither

"Touch'd, nor rapt, nor waken'd, nor inspired,"

and Lady Singleton was endeavouring to convince Mr. Glentworth that the founder of the abbey was wholly mistaken in the site he had chosen; for that she could, at that moment, point out twenty other situations, in every respect preferable.

"Very likely," returned Mr. Glentworth: "and since, my dear, I cannot possibly wish that you had lived some centuries back, I wish the old abbot were here at this moment present, to benefit by your criticism, lest he should, in some beatific vision, dictate the site of a future monastery to some future founder."





He had scarcely uttered the words, when Lady Singleton, with a scream, exclaimed—

"How can you talk such nonsense, Mr. Glentworth? I really thought I saw a tall figure gliding among the old ruins."

"Well," he returned, laughing, "'tis you who have conjured up the old Abbot of Bona-Marga."

Mr. Dexter, who had jumped on his feet upon hearing Lady Singleton's scream, and who now, at a cautious distance, went poking about the chapel ruin, started back in alarm, exclaiming: "Egad though, there is somebody there."

The stranger's gigantic dog now bounded forward, and the next moment, the stranger himself, with the air of one who is obliged to make his appearance malgre lui, advanced from among the ruins.

He saluted the party politely, but distantly, and, calling his dog to him, seemed as if he would have passed on; when Mr. Glentworth, advancing with a cordial smile to meet him, prevented the intention. The rest of the party, whose opinions floated between the opposite impressions made on their minds, by his distinguished air and and figure, and by the account of "my lord's gentleman," from Mr. M'Donald, kept a little aloof. Their curiosity, however, was strongly excited, and their first prepossession in his favour was increased, by a more perfect view of his countenance than the twilight of the preceding evening had afforded.

"You have got the start of us, Sir," said Mr. Glentworth, "though we fancied ourselves pretty early travellers; for we began our journey with the sun."

"I had finished mine, Sir, I fancy," said the stranger,





"before either your party or the sun had commenced their's. I travelled with a less resplendent companion," he added, smiling: "and set off at midnight with the man in the moon."

"Pray, Sir," asked Mr. Dexter, wriggling up to him, "does any cheap mode of conveyance, any stage or mail, run between New Town Glens and Ballycastle?"

"Not that I know of, Sir," returned the stranger, coldly.

"I beg pardon; I merely asked for information: for I took it for granted you were a resident in these parts."

The stranger made no reply; and Mr. Dexter, looking archly at Lady Florence and the Colonel, continued with unabated pertness: "I fancy, Sir, you had rather a cool ride along the coast last night: it was a sharp easterly"

"I did not ride, Sir," returned the stranger.

"Not ride! indeed, Sir! well, your walk kept you warm at least."

I did not walk, Sir," returned the stranger, fastening his dog's collar, which had loosened.

"Not walk! ha—odd enough I If it would not seem impertinent, I should like, just merely for information's sake, to know how you did perform that extremely bad stage; no offence, Sir, I hope."

The stranger raised his head, and, rolling his dark eyes over the insignificant figure of his pert interrogator, replied: "None intended, Sir, I hope."

"None in the world, Sir; none in the world," rejoined Mr. Dexter, shrinking back, and whispering Lady Singleton, while Mr. Glentworth addressed the stranger upon the subject of the interesting scene they occupied.

"Your ladyship may depend upon it," observed Mr. Dexter, " that Mr. M'Donald is right: for you observe, now, that his accent is quite foreign."





"Foreign or not foreign," said Lady Singleton, who never adopted the opinion of another, "he is a gentleman. I am not to be deceived, as Ninon used to say: 'Sur ce chapitre on peut se rapporter a moi.'"

"Critically," said Mr. Dexter, while Lady Florence stood in whispering consultation with her beaux, on the subject of the stranger's gentility.

Lady Singleton interrupting his tete-k tete with Mr. Glentworth by advancing towards him, and addressing him with some cordiality, regretting that they had not the pleasure of his company at dinner on the preceding evening.

"We made an effort for it, however," said Lady Florence, advancing, with one of her soft .smiles, and seizing on the sanction of Lady Singleton's authority to gratify her own inclination—" the gentleman, however, to whom we entrusted the embassy, had not the good fortune to overtake you."

The stranger bowed his thanks to both ladies, and replied, that he had immediately returned to his boat.

"At so late an hour?" asked Lady Singleton.

"Over the mere rambler, Madam," returned the stranger, smiling, "Time holds no jurisdiction; he is the slave of the elements, and must submit to be governed by a cloud or a sunbeam. The wind, weather and tide were so much in my favour last night, that I joined a convoy of fishermen, and anchored with their little fleet, about midnight, in the Bay of Ballycastle. I was repaid, however, for the exertion, by having enjoyed the prospect of some fine coast scenery, under the greatest possible advantages of light and shade, from the circumstance of a bright moon, and a quantity of massy clouds, drifting along the atmosphere by a vigorous sea-breeze."

"I should imagine," said Mr. Glentworth, "that the whole region would be best seen from the sea."

G





"Unquestionably," replied the stranger, "if the season is favourable: but a formidable sea, agitated by the western winds, which sweep over the Atlantic, frequently rolls along these shores, and renders it unpleasant, and indeed sometimes unsafe to coast them."

This observation led to some questions on the part of Mr. Glentworth, who informed the stranger of their intended route, and requested his advice. The stranger gave it with promptitude; and in detailing the objects best worth attention, unaffectedly exhibited an intimate acquaintance with natural science, and a very correct taste for the picturesque and grand styles in the higher order of landscape. Meantime Mr. Dexter, after many fruitless efforts, succeeded in drawing away Lady Singleton and Lady Florence, leaving Miss O'Halloran, who stood behind Mr. Glentworth, " sole auditress."

"I took the liberty of drawing you away, Lady Singleton," he said, "just to mention to you, that that person who is talking by rote something he has read in a road book, is neither more nor less than a gentleman's servant.'

"Impossible!" cried the ladies in a breath.

"Very likely, Lady Singleton, but I believe it is true nevertheless; for the Colonel and I, on examining the dog's collar, have discovered on it a crest and a coronet; so that in fact the dog must belong to the man's master: for the earl himself would not be vagabondising about the country in a shabby jacket, without servants, horses, equipages; and herding with filthy fishermen. All this, in my humble opinion, proves that Mr. M'Donald was correct, and that this person is my lord's valet."

"Not a bit of it," said Lady Singleton: "he is some Irish nobleman; or at all events, by his distinguished air, address, and manners, he is not a person ne d'hier."

"Critically," replied Mr. Dexter, and followed the ladies back to the stranger, whose conversation with Mr. Glentworth he abruptly interrupted with—





"Upon my word, Sir, that dog of yours is a charming fine animal; a very fine indeed:—a curious old collar enough; quite an antique; rather rusty, but the crest is plainly to be seen—a cross; the crest of some Catholic family, I presume, Sir?"

"When that crest was adopted, Sir, by many illustrious families in Europe, there were none oth,er but Catholics in Christendom," replied the stranger, coldly.

• Indeed, Sir! hem I that must have been a long time back, indeed, Sir."

"No, Sir, not so very long," returned the stranger, drily.

"And here, I think, is an earl's coronet," continued Mr. Dexter, drawing the dog to him, "and some letters not very plain. Pray, Sir, to whom does this very fine animal belong?"

"To me, Sir," returned the stranger, haughtily, and raising his voice.

"Indeed, Sir, so I thought ; so at least I presumed: a fine animal indeed—very fine."

Lady Singleton now expressed a wish to examine the collar.

"I have some right to understand antiquities of all sorts," she said: "I have lived all my life among this kind of things." *

The stranger took off the collar, which was of brass, very massive, and curiously wrought; it bore date 1603, and under an earl's coronet was traced in legible Roman characters—Tirconnell.

"It is a family relic," said the stranger, "and has lineally descended from father to son, till it came into my hands."

"Then," said Lady Singleton, "I presume we are addressing the present Earl of Tirconnell, a title well known on the continent?"

"No, madam,'' replied the stranger, reddening: "the G2





title has long: passed out of my family. I have no claim to it, whatever, though lineally descended from the first earl. My name is O'Donnel.

He moved his cap, and bowed gracefully round as he thus announced himself, probably for the purpose of avoiding any further interrogatories.

"And mine, sir," said Mr. Glentworth, bowing in his turn, " is Glentworth." He then, with the true politeness of good feeling, presented each individual of his party, in turn, to the stranger, not even forgetting the generally forgotten Miss O'Halloran, who dropt an awkward courtesy, and set the Misses Singleton and their friend Mr. Dexter, tittering.

"By the bye, Mr. O'Donnel," said Lady Singleton, "I knew a person of your name in Florence, above twenty years back, when my brother was envoy extraordinary at Leopold's court when he was Grand Duke of Tuscany."

"Very possible," madam, said the stranger: "the O'Donnel family is but too much distributed*: they are at this moment leaders in the armies of almost every state but their own."

"Yes," said Lady Singleton, "'tis a good name on the continent. There are the Spanish generals, and the Austrian generals, O'Donnel; but the person I mean was an Irishman of fortune; who made a sensation in Florence by losing his estate in two games of hazard to a certain English duke, whose name I shall not mention, as he happens to be my particular friend. O'Donnel only survived his loss three days; it was said he died of a broken heart. Was he any relation of yours, Mr. O'Donnel?"



* The fate of many branches of this ancient Irish family is alluded to in Mr. Moore's beautiful and characteristic poetry in the Irish Melodies. Ye Blakes and O'Donnels, whose fathers resign'd The green hills of your youth, among strangers to find That repose which at home you had sought for in vain, &c.





"The person your ladyship alludes to," returned the stranger, changing colour, "was, I believe, my relation."

Mr. Glentworth, who perceived the stranger's emotion, and who suspected it might arise from the disappointment of expected inheritance, endeavoured to prevent Lady Singleton from pursuing the subject, by observing that he thought the title of Tirconnell was in the Irish family of the Talbots*.

"About the period marked on that collar," returned the stranger, " Hugh O'Donnel, the celebrated chief of Tirconnell, fled, after the battle of Kinsale, to Spain, where he died. His brother Roderick took possession of the territories of Tirconnell; did homage to King James I.f and received the patent of an English earldom, on ceding the title of his Irish chieftancy; which he did to the great annoyance of the rest of his family. A few years afterwards, his possessions fell, with the five escheated counties of Ulster, to the king. Earl Roderick fled to Spain, and the patent of his earldom became cancelled. It was again revived in favour of a branch of the TalbotJ family; but from that family also it has long since passed by forfeiture. For," he added, smiling, "titles in Ireland are uncertain tenures; happily, however, high descent and antiquity of blood are beyond the reach of forfeiture; as independence of mind and integrity of principle are beyond the reach of high-sounding names to confer, or of power to take away or bestow."

"All very true," returned Mr. Glentworth, while

• The title has since been given to the family of Fitzwilliam, and a few years back was again bestowed by his present Majesty on General Carpenter.

♦ The letter of King James to the Irish chief on granting him the patent is extremely curious; it is on the Irish rolls. Through the kindness of Sir William Betham, Ulster King at Arms, I have been permitted to get a copy.—See note at the end of the volume.

J Richard Talbot, created Duke of Tirconnell, by James II.





Mr. Dexter whispered in Miss Singleton's ear, that that was a passage from " Elegant Extracts."

The party now descended towards the shore; and Mr. Glentworth, every moment more prepossessed in the stranger's favour, asked him if Ballycastle was his head quarters; and if they had any chance of his society at the Giant's Causeway the following day. The stranger evasively replied, that he had no fixed plan, and that his movements were uncertain: but that it was his intention to devote that day to the beautiful semicircular sweep between the majestic promontory of Benmore, and the basaltic rock of Carrick-a-rede: a fine feature on the coast toward the Giant's Causeway. The Causeway, however, he said, he had already twice visited, and he thought should not again explore; adding, with the air of a man who sought an excuse to part from his company, without committing a breach of good manners, by betraying his desire—" The person from whom I have hired a sailing-boat, is waiting for me amongst the rocks, where he has anchored my little barge, while I took a view of these ruins." He pointed as he spoke to a boat, whose little streamer floated gaily on the breeze. "In a few minutes," he continued, bowing, "the society I have the honour to enjoy will change the character of the gratification I derive from it, by forming a picturesque group in the distant view of my land prospect."

"Without wishing to spoil your view," said Mr. Glentworth, laughing, " I should prefer being the companion of your voyage."

"You are not singular in that wish," said Lady Florence, smiling; "and Lady Singleton and I have been just expressing our desire, a la derobe, that we could capture the vessel and commander for the morning."

"If your ladyship condescends to make the attempt," returned the stranger, " no glory will be attached to an enterprise, to which no resistance will be made. The boat and its commander are equally at your service."





Though this was said with the ease of a man in the habit of saying such things, yet it wanted that ardour and cordiality of look and manner which should have marked its sincerity. Mr. Glentworth was so forcibly struck by the apparent dilemma to which he had reduced the stranger's politeness, that he was about decidedly to decline the offer, when Lady Singleton decidedly accepted of it.

"This is an amazingly good idea," she said. "We shall have an opportunity of seeing Benmore; and you can put us on shore whenever we please, Mr. O'Donnel."

"Undoubtedly, madam," he replied, but with an air of absence.

"And as to our getting in late at Bush-Mills, there is a brilliant moonlight; so we will follow you, if you please."

Left without an alternative, the stranger led the way, and the party in a few moments reached the rocky beach, where the boat lay anchored. Some sea-water had got into it, and the man in attendance on the stranger was busy in emptying it out with his brogue, which he put on his foot the moment after, to the great amusement of the spectators.

The stranger, thus unwarily drawn in to belong to a party, which it was evident he had tried to avoid, seemed howevej to turn the necessity of the case to the best account he could. Active as vigorous, he towed the little vessel into a creek, where it was most accessible to the ladies, covered the seat destined for them with a large watch cloak; and, as they objected to the sail at first launching, took an oar himself, requesting any one of the gentlemen to take the other, that they might not be incommoded with his own boatman. Before any of the gentlemen could aecept or decline the offer, Lady Singleton had issued her command to Mr. Dexter.

"Come, Mr. Dexter," she cried, " you know you are to have the command of the pleasure-boat you are getting built for me, for the lake at Ballynogue; you shall now give me a specimen of your nautical performance—this is an excellent opportunity."





Mr. Dexter, with real reluctance, but affected readiness, took the oar. Bran couched at his master's feet, and the gaily freighted vessel put off from shore. Mr. Glentworth and the ladies were much pleased with the adventure ; the Colonel and Mft Vandaleur, with their usual apathetic philosophy, were resigned to their fate; and Mr. Dexter, disappointed that his hints and suspicions of the stranger had gone for nothing, was mortified and annoyed by the instructions and reproofs he received from Lady Singleton, who frequently took the oar out of his hand, to show, by example, how it ought to be plied. He appeared, nevertheless, the most satisfied of the party; his louring brow alone contradicting the evidence of his obsequious smile, to such as observed its involuntary testimony.

Meantime the stranger, whose graceful figure, when thrown into exertion, exhibiting a model of muscular force, proved himself

"No lounging landsman, labouring at the oar," and apparently more animated than fatigued by an exercise, which seemed familiar to him, he continued to converse with less reserve of manner than he had hitherto done, sometimes with the ladies, sometimes with Mr. Glentworth, but never with the two gentlemen, who had neither of them yet addressed him, and who sat with their eyes half closed, as if not quite determined whether they should or should not fall asleep.

The day was breathlessly still, and the calm unruffled waters presented a glassy surface of one broad sheet of silver light. But notwithstanding this apparent smoothness, a majestic swell, heaving grandly forward, seemed at times to threaten a danger to the little bark, which did not in reality exist; for the long-rolling wave was only dangerous near the coast, where, broken and fretted by the rocks, it threw back its spray in columns of foam.





The ladies, at first intimidated, were gradually reassured by the stranger, who took the best method of quieting their fear, by diverting their attention from its object.

Resting on his oar, he suffered the boat to float on the current towards the promontory of Benmore *; and as he directed their attention to the wild waste of basaltic columns, which, like some stupendous colonnade of art, spread beneath the mountain's towering heights, he observed to Mr. Glentworth, that he had ascended the promontory, from the land, to examine its gigantic architecture in detail; but that in order to judge of its altitude and extent, its true character of wild and savage sublimity, he perceived it must be viewed from the sea. "As we now contemplate it," be added, "at this favourable distance, with its enormous basaltic columns, and bold but formless precipices, it presents no faint image of the debris of some little world, which had become the sport of elementary revolution."

The Colonel whispered Lady Florence—"Quite Pindaric!" and Mr. Glentworth inquired if any measurement had been made of its elevation.

The stranger replied, that he understood its altitude, including the base, measured six hundred and thirtyone feet; that he had himself, on examination, found its pillars separable into smaller columns; the line of contact being obvious in some of the broken joints.

Lady Singleton observed, in direct opposition to bCr former opinion on the shores of the Red Bay (because weary of not observing something), that it reminded

• Benmore—the great head, the same as "Penmanmawr," the greater " Penman."





her so strongly of Mount Vesuvius, that she was pretty certain Benmore had heen a volcano, though she supposed nobody had had the industry or ingenuity to discover it.

"Your ladyship, then," said the stranger,, "is a disciple of the volcanic doctrine, and hold a belief in the identity of lava and basalt."

Lady Singleton smiled, and said—" Why, I happen to know something of these things, having lived in volcanic countries; and I dare say, Mr. O'Donnel, you and I should agree very well on these subjects. You have,been a good deal abroad yourself, I suspect; have been, perhaps, at Vesuvius?"

"No, Madam, never at Vesuvius, never at least sufficiently near to examine it; but I understand there are some basaltic pillars to be found at Mount Etna."

Lady Singleton immediately began a description of Mount Etna, in which she was interrupted by Lady Florence, who called the stranger's attention to a remarkable fissure in the side of the promontory, with an arch formed over it by the accident of a fallen pillar, and which her ladyship, in a plaintive voice, observed, seemed to threaten destruction to some wretched person passing underneath it.

The stranger assured her there was not the smallest danger; and added, that that fissure was called, in the language of the country, Cassan-an-Fhier Leith; or the Grey Man's Path: but that the Tradition which gave it the name was lost. "The person, for whom your ladyship's fears are excited, is most likely some peasant-sportsman, coming in search of eagles' eggs, which are frequently found among these pillared cliffs. Numerous birds, indeed, build among the rocks on this coast, whose eggs afford a luxurious sustenance to the neighbouring fishermen, and would enrich the menus of more sumptuous tables."





'' Indeed I" said Mr. Vandaleur, raising himself, and for the first time opening his lips since the commencement of the little voyage—" and pray, Sir, is there any game in this place worth speaking of?"

"A great abundance, Sir—plume et poile; the bernacle of this coast, the most delicate, perhaps, of the duck tribe, is particularly fine, and, in the language of the Almanack, has plus de sue et d' esprit, than almost any bird I know."

"I perceive, Sir," said Mr. Vandaleur, and his countenance brightened into intelligence, "I perceive that you speak en amateur." -.

"I do not merit that distinction, Sir," replied the stranger: "but I have lived where those things were., understood."

"In France, perhaps?" asked Mr. Vandaleur.

The stranger bowed assent.

"In Paris?" he added, with new interest.

"Many years," replied the stranger.

"Then, Sir," he returned with a sigh, "you have lived in the only place where the gastronomic science is really understood, and brought to perfection; though I am told it shared in the general shock of the Revolution. Not but we owe some excellent things to the nineteenth century. All the sautes au supreme, for instance, are strictly revolutionary dishes; but they cannot compensate for the blanc-mangers of the old regime. I don't believe you would find one French cook in London equal to the veau d la creme; nor, indeed, are they better off in Paris, as I understand."

"The secret, however, I believe," returned the stranger, "is still preserved in Languedoc, where it originated; and where I have often feasted on the various blancmangers of Montpelier."

"You are a fortunate man, Sir," replied Mr. Vandaleur, emphatically.





"Besides," continued the stranger, in the same tone of pleasantry, "we have come at the mysteries of Perigord, since the revolution; every restaurateur in Paris can now trufer son dinde."

"So I understand," returned Mr. Vandaleur, with great seriousness.—" Pray, Sir, had you ever the good fortune to eat of any of the dines-bruns, of Robert Uaini7 I am sure he is, out and out, the first artist of the age."

"I cannot say I have, Sir," replied the stranger; but I have tasted the petitspoix, of the celebrated Morillon; the dish which made his fortune, when he was but a simple restaurateur of the second class.

"Indeed I" said Mr. Vandaleur. "We had Morillon Jlls for some time in town. He came over on speculation, to found his own school here, but he had too much science for the beaf-steak and turtle palates of the English. I thought, myself, he was deficient in imagination. When you eat of one of his dinners, you eat of all. However, his Epigrame cTagneau must render his name immortal, if he never had dressed another dish. His fish salad too, with green jelly, was good, but inferior to the Bayonese of my own cook, du Buisson."

During this recondite dialogue, which had impressed Mr. Vandaleur with a high respect for the stranger, as being one who "had sat at good men's feasts," Lady Florence and the Colonel were exchanging looks of sly derision; Mr. Glentworth was listening, much amused: and Lady Singleton, who never listened, and never was amused by any conversation but her own, was haranguing Mr. Dexter and her daughters on the subject of volcanos, craters, and eruptions, rivers of flame, and beds of lava; in which scientific tirade she was interrupted by Mr. Glentworth, who proposed the hoisting of a sail, and their tacking for the Bay of Ballycastle; as it was now full time they should recommence their land journey.





"But, Mr. O'Donnel," said Lady Singleton, " what is there to prevent us coasting with you, as far as Carrick-a-rede, and having our carriages to meet us there? We shall have the benefit of better prospects, and of your information on the subject of these shores at the same time; and we go on with our journey, you know, all the same."

"My dear Lady Singleton," interrupted Mr. Glentworth, in some embarrassment, "this is taking a very unfair advantage of Mr. O'Donnel's politeness. Indeed, we must not think of intruding further upon his time and pursuits."

The stranger returned his offers of service with the same politeness he had first made them, though not with more ardour; and it was agreed that the party should proceed by water to the little sea-port village of Ballintory, near Carrick-a-rede, where their carriages should meet them. To insure this arrangement, a fisherman, who was preparing his nets at no great distance from their boat, was hailed; and consented for a trifle to carry their orders back to the town. Mr. Glentworth therefore wrote on the back of a letter to his own man the necessary directions. As Mr. Dexter was handing them to the fisherman, he threw an expression of disgust into his countenance, and before the poor man was out of hearing, exclaimed —

"Bless my soul! a savage-looking fellow: what a filthy beast!"

"Why you don't really expect, Mr. Dexter," said Lady Florence, with an ironical smile, "that a poor Irish fisherman is to be such a spruce, neat, nice-looking person, as you are yourself."

"No, Lady Florence, I don't expect that, nor any thing like that; but I should at least wish to see the same cleanliness and courtesy which is so remarkable in the English peasantry. The fact is so far from this, that the longer Irish are not a degree removed from the beasts they live with. They are perfect savages, and quite brutal in their manners, except when their cunning teaches them better. I think, Lady Singleton, I may be allowed an opinion on that subject; for I know a little of them."





"I know a little of them too," observed the stranger, "and I must beg leave to differ extremely in opinion with you, Sir."

"I can scarcely think that possible," said Mr. Dexter, "if you really know their ways well, Mr. O'Donnel."

"It is nevertheless true," said the stranger, coolly, taking his seat at the helm, and steering for Carrick-arede. "The habits of the genuine Irish peasants are, it is true, those of poverty and degradation.—Destitute of all the comforts of life, sometimes of its necessaries, they are negligent of order and cleanliness; but with their habits of life (the natural results of the former state of the country, and of their own penurious modes of existence), their conduct and manners bear no comparison; and so far are they from exhibiting in either, the ferocity of savage, or the rudeness of uncivilised life, that they are, perhaps, the most courteous peasantry of modern Europe. Long submission, indeed, to inevitable and conscious degradation, has almost given them a servile deference of manners towards their superiors; but it is impossible not to lament, that their natural tendency to civilisation should not have operated under a happier influence, and taken a better and more independent direction."

"I am very much inclined to agree with you, Mr. O'Donnel," said Mr. Glentworth. "I have an estate in this country, which I have only visited for the first time, a few months back; but I must say, that from the little I have seen of the lower orders of the natives, I am greatly prepossessed in their favour. Their shrewdness may sometimes pass for, and sometimes approach to, cunning (the natural quality of a people, who long had nothing but address wherewith to oppose force, or to disarm oppression), but as far as my own dealings have gone with them, I have found them more acute than over-reaching; more tenacious of guarding their own rights than of infringing on mine. With respect to their manners, they are quite a solecism in the character of a people so situated*. Indeed, I have often thought their extreme civility does border upon servility; to English ears, at least, their strong and exaggerated encomiums give no very favourable opinion of their sincerity.





"Apropos, we met a very genuine Irishman indeed, in the little town of Glenarm, who certainly showed himself deeply versed in all the ♦ small courtesies' of life, and who was as prodigal of his 'Sirs,' and his 'Madams,' of 'your honour,' and your 'ladyship,' as the people of this province are frugal of such epithete of distinction. I think he told us his name was M'Rory. His manner, look, and accent were extremely amusing." During this observation, the stranger had risen to arrange the sail; but he replied, when again seated at the helm, "There is certainly a strong line of demarcation between the peasantry of this and the other provinces. The former are indeed, from obvious causes, a distinct race of people; being chiefly, though not universally, descendants of the Scotch colonists, settled here by King James I. The existing descendants of these strangers resemble their progenitors, and are equally thrifty and laborious; and their defect of manner is balanced by a bold sense of rights, inseparable from

• In this opinion I am borne out by the testimonies of the agent of more than one great English landholder in Ireland, who from their situations have the best opportunities of knowing the lower orders. The English who visit, and the English who are resident in the country, are almost always its warmest eulogists, and best friends; and it is too certain, that the revilcrs of Ireland must not be sought for among strangers.





their Presbyterian creed. I do not, however, find that the very low classes are better educated than the same order of persons in the other provinces.

"So much the better, Sir," said Mr. Dexter, rubbing his hands, "though certainly their being Presbyterians and not Papists would make all the difference; for, it is my opinion, that when the lower order of Irish are educated, and get ideas, and all that sort of thing, there is an end of the country; nothing but bloodshed and rebellion can ensue. And this, I believe, is the opinion of all rational and loyal men."

"This is, indeed, Sir," said the stranger, "a very novel effect of education; and this singular re-action of its influence upon the people must be peculiar to this country. In the land, whose shores we can now almost discern, it has not, I believe, been found so great an evil."

"Certainly not," said Mr. Glentworth; "the Scotch peasantry are at once the most enlightened, and most peaceable, the most industrious, and most loyal peasantry of Europe. ' But I think, Mr. Dexter, you do not perceive the indirect libel of your observation upon the government, to which you are, I know, so sincerely attached. The purpose of education is to fit us for the enjoyment of civil rights, by moulding us to the performance of civil duties. National education can therefore alone be an object of jealousy and mistrust, when rights are withheld ; nor can it even be esteemed useless except by those governments, whose tenure being the sword, leaves the people no obligation but fear, no duty but obedience."

"It is a physical truth," returned the stranger, addressing himself wholly to Mr. Glentworth, "that the natural tendency of humanity is towards improvement; but generally speaking, it is reserved for legislation alone, to remove such impediments as may oppose the bias. In every state, where the civilisation of the people has been an object with the legislator, it has been proved that the moral education of the lower orders has re-acted beneficially on the sovereign who governs, and on the law which protects. The histories of all countries evince, that the age of public ignorance is the age of fanaticism; and fanaticism, to whatever point it directs its fatal zeal, must necessarily lead to anarchy and misrule; and consequently to the subversion of natural rights, and the dissolution of natural affections. In fact, public ignorance is the true source of public vice. For my own part, I have always thought less highly of Franklin,' for having drawn down fire from heaven, than for the moral light he laboured to diffuse over the darkness of the vulgar mind. As Bacon observes, 'Man is but what he knoweth,' and if knowledge is power in the abstract, it is not less virtue; its direct tendency, therefore, can alone be happiness."





"I must beg leave to differ with you in opinion^ Sir," said Mr. Dexter, pertly; "so far from knowledge being power, or any thing like it, I believe we all know, that the poets in all times have been as poor as church mice; and I fancy, if they had power, poor fellows, they would not starve in their garrets. Indeed, I know of no instance in which knowledge and power go together, except in our bishops, who certainly are powerful and learned both, though no poets. But, Sir, to turn your argument against yourself, if knowledge is power, that is the very reason why the Irish should get none; for then we should have catholic members of parliament, judges and generals; and then there is an end for ever of our glorious constitution, and the glorious ascendency, and all that sort of thing, as I may say."

"No constitution can be more glorious," said Mr. Glentworth, perceiving a look of indignant contempt in the eyes of the stranger, "than that, which, by equal

H





laws, equal protection, and equal privileges, engages every member of the community in the interests, defence, and preservation of the whole."

"It is, indeed," said the stranger, " an odd paradox, a most irrational expectation, that a participation in the blessings of good government, and a share in the conduct of the state, should dispose any set of men the more readily to conspiracy and rebellion. If these afford objects of apprehension and anxiety, what should not be feared from the jealousy of the excluded, and the despair of the disqualified?"

"Undoubtedly," said Mr. Glentworth. "And this very ascendency is not more an evidence than it is a cause of such apprehensions. Ascendency is a relative term; it is an assumption on one part of the population, at the immediate expense of the interests, happiness, and undisputed rights of the rest: not a superabundance of power and authority added to the one scale, but a portion of protection and security taken from the other. Where ascendency is claimed by one tribe or caste, over others, subsisting under the same government, there is little chance of internal union, or of safety for either party. For duties and rights are inseparable, and the voluntary dereliction of the first, necessarily implies an abandonment of the second. The surest pledge, therefore, which can be given of the loyalty of the excluded, is their constant and unremitting efforts to be admitted to the rights and privileges of the government under which they live."

"Why, undoubtedly, Mr. Glentworth," observed Mr. Dexter, obsequiously, " there is no reason why you should not be right, seeing that you are a member of the greatest of all senates; for such I may say it is, except the House of Lords, and the Privy Council. But I must say, Sir, with due deference, that the lower Irish are the most worthless, and, above all, the most idle race of"





"I must beg leave to deny your assertion, Sir," interrupted the stranger; "for a people who, under circumstances of the greatest hardship, emigrate annually to procure that labour abroad which is denied them at home, cannot naturally be an idle people, however the means of industry may be denied them."

"Poor people!" said Lady Singleton, who had listened with a mixture of attention and impatience, to a conversation in which she only waited for an opening to take a part. "Poor people; I am quite of opinion that they want nothing but manufactories, commerce and schools, to be a very clever people indeed; and you must know. Mr. O'Donnel, that I mean to establish a bobbinlace manufactory at Ballynogue. I have laid out, too, the ground for two school-houses, to be conducted upon the Lancasterian system, modified according to some ideas of my own. There is, however, a system which sets the Bells and the Lancasters quite in the distance, and which was practised by a German professor at Vienna, when I was there, with great effect. It was termed mnemonics, and was the most expeditious and extraordinary mode of giving instruction that ever was devised. I don't know how it was done; but it was a most ingenious thing; for without studying, thinking, or even learning at all (which certainly is a troublesome, slow process), all the languages and all the sciences were taught at once, in a few lectures, and to a thousand people together, as easily as to one. Now, Mr. Glentworth, I am sure we could make it worth the professor's while to come to Ballynogue and settle for a time; for, though at Paris, that stupid Dieu-la-Foi, at his vulgar Theatre de Vaudeville *, quizzed him most excessively, he was much admired by the English at Vienna. You

* Among the petits pieces brought out by M. Dieu-la-Foi at the Thiatre Vaudeville, is one in which the character of Professor FinMerle had much success.

H2





may laugh as you will, Mr. Glentworth, but such a person introduced in Ireland would be a public benefit to the country."

"True," said Mr. Glentworth, "the professor's system would not be ill-adapted to the meridian of Ballynogue; for I remember that it was objected against the mnemonics, that they were injurious to the thinking faculty,—an objection which could not apply in our case. For you know, my dear," he added, with a smile, "that since our arrival, the common people of Ballynogue have been saved the trouble of thinking themselves, by the kind and constant interference of their superiors."

"If that be the case," said Mr. Dexter, "there can be no great harm in educating the lower Irish: for provided no ideas were communicated with their learning, it would alter the whole affair: and, to be sure, it would be a fine thing to see the whole town and district of Ballynogue civilised, and taught, as I may say, at a blow."

"That, Sir, is no very new mode of instruction in this country," said the stranger, no longer able to suppress a laugh, in which he was generally joined by the rest of the party.

"What Mr. Dexter says, however, is very true," returned Lady Singleton, vehemently. "They would without loss of time or labour become well-informed people." "You would make scholars, then," said Mr. Glentworth, laughing, "of my Irish tenantry, as the Roman missionaries made Christians of the Saxons; and instruct a parish, as they converted a tribe, by one simple act of regeneration."

"I have no objection," said the stranger, "to bestow a little of the professor's mnemonics upon my countrymen. Kindness and attention, whatever direction it takes, will never be thrown away upon them. But, perhaps, in good policy, the first lesson you should teach the Irish, should be the art of forgetfulness."





CHAPTER VII.



The boat now glided through the channel of Slunk na Marra *. The island of Rathlen, or Raghery, rose on the horizon above the wild and turbulent sea which beats against its inhospitable rocks.

"Here now," said the stranger, "we may command a perfect view of the Ricini of Ptolemy, vulgarly called Raghery, or Raahery-Eirin, the "Fort of Ireland."

"Raghery!" exclaimed Mr. Vandaleur: "tbat is the name of the delicious mutton, which our Irish acquaintance chose to proner"

"The island is famous for a small breed of sheep, and of horses," returned the stranger: "and rude and insignificant as it now appears, it was once the scene of much monkish splendour. On it rose the Monastery of Columbus, or St. Columb-cill, the tutelar saint of these regions, whose rich shrine was ravaged by the piratical Danes! On it, too, still moulder ruins of the castle, which afforded an asylum to the gallant Robert Bruce, during the Scottish wars between him and Baliol." Then, turning to Lady Singleton, he said: "Your ladyship may here again find a parallel between the scenery of the Italian and Irish coast. The channel between Rathlen, and various points of the main-land, are supposed to bear a resemblance to the straits of Reggio, which separate Sicily and Calabria; particularly in the indenting of the shores, and the vortices formed by the counter-currents."

"I have those delightful shores full in my memory at this moment, but I confess I do not see the resemblance to which you allude," said Lady Singleton. • The Hole in the Sea.





"Not in the features of the scenery, perhaps," he replied; "but the comparison holds good in many points. Among others, I may mention that singular phenomenon, the Fata Morgana, which has several times been seen from the shores, and forms nearly as fine a spectacle as in the straits of Reggio."

"I have conversed with many persons, who have beheld that extraordinary spectacle," said Lady Singleton, "though I have not seen it."

"Nor would it be difficult to find people here to bear testimony to similar ''magical appearances, Madam. It is indeed the established belief among the common people here, that a green island, covered with groves and gardens, and peopled with gay and busy groups, rises every seventh year from the waves between this island and the promontory of Bengore, of which we now catch a view."

This led to a discussion between the stranger and Mr. Glentworth, which had the cause of such appearances for its subject, and in which the former showed no less acquaintance with the pages of Smith and Newton, than, to Mr. Vandaleur's imagination, he had exhibited an intimacy with those of the Commestibles de Paris, and IS Almanack des Gourmands.

This scientific dialogue was at length, however, interrupted, by an exclamation of timidity and surprise from the lips of Lady Florence, who drew the attention of the company to the rude rocks and hanging bridge of Carrick-a-rede, which, though it would have afforded a beautiful feature in an imaginary landscape, exhibited a frightful image in a real scene. The sun was hastening towards the west, and the lengthened shadows of the surrounding rocks were swept over the foreground of the coast, rendering it one broad expanse of massy darkness, save where a rude high cliff, projecting above the rest, caught on its points the rays of the sinking light. Carrick-a-rede, as it rose from the turbulent waves, seemed to have been wrenched, by the rage of some elementary convulsion, from the main-land cliffs, and separated from them by a frightful chasm of unfathomable depth. Between them, the sea foamed with horrid and incessant roar, even when all around was most calm and serene. Yet even amidst this desolation, the hut of some solitary fisherman sent forth its smoke from under the impending rocks. Even here the senses and imagination submitted to the government of necessity; and the passion of fear, amongst all that could most excite it, was subdued before the more powerful dictation of imperious interest. Across the frightful interval, which yawned between rock and rock, and at a most awful height, was suspended a light hempen bridge, for the purpose of facilitating the business of the fishermen, and with no security from destruction, beyond one single hand-rope, to which from its length no tension could be given, did they pass over the gulf, neither dazzled by the distance beneath them, nor intimidated by the raging of the sea, which lashed the rocks at its base.





The pilot had steered his little vessel in a direction favourable to the most picturesque view of Carrick-arede; and a variety of observations and remarks were offered by each spectator on an object at once so awful and so novel. The hempen bridge, though at the time unoccupied, was not to be viewed without sensations of dread and horror, as it evidently undulated even to the passing breeze.,

"The human figure," said the stranger, "has almost a supernatural appearance, when seen from the water, on that fanciful and aerial bridge."

"How very unlucky," said the Colonel, "that no accommodating fisherman places himself there for le bien du spectacle."

"Mr. Dexter," said Lady Singleton, " would you be afraid to make the attempt? You may depend upon it there can be no positive danger, since the thing is done every day. I will guarantee that."





"But if your ladyship commands it, though the danger did exist as much as it certainly appears to do," said Mr. Dexter, "I would not the more hesitate to obey. Only it is very evident, to say nothing of my light weight (which would make destruction inevitable), that it would be impossible to land upon those cliffs among such horrible breakers ; and therefore it is useless to attempt it."

"I should infinitely prefer," said Lady Florence, "seeing a picturesque figure upon that wonderful bridge, to the finest spectacle of the opera. I should not suppose," added her ladyship, turning her soft eyes on the stranger, " that there now exists a man, who, to gratify a woman's wishes, would place himself in so perilous a situation; and yet one reads of such things in the old legends and romances. L'dme paladin of a preux chevalier would not have refused such a test of implicit obedience to his liege lady; but the days of chivalry are over."

"That is undeniable," said the stranger; "but if ascending that bridge can amuse your ladyship's imagination by recalling such days, it shall be done. I must however confess, though it diminish a little the glory of the enterprise, that having seen even women and children pass it, in search of birds' eggs and sea-weeds on the opposite rocks, I have already made trial of my own head, and have passed and repassed it, without any tendency to vertigo."

He now lowered the sail, and rowed the boat towards a little creek, where the rocks were barely accessible, while triumph flashed from the bright eyes of Lady Florence, without one apprehension for the life of the person, at whose expense that triumph might be purchased. She thanked him with smiling graciousness. Lady Singleton, equally vexed at Mr. Dexter's refusal, and the stranger's prompt compliance with the wishes of Lady Florence, sat in sullen silence ; while Lady Florence ventured to repeat, " You are too good, Mr. O'Donnel; this is really too flattering. This is indeed Fame paladin, and beats Lord Herbert of Cherbury out and out."





The gentlemen could neither express a doubt of the stranger's safety, since he had asserted it, nor oppose Lady Florence's wishes, so directly expressed; they therefore remained silent.

The stranger, requesting Mr. Dexter to hold the rope he had thrown round a rock by way of anchorage, was already on the edge of the boat, and about to spring upon one of the slippery projections of the rocks, when his arm was suddenly arrested, and a voice murmured in his ear, " You are going to risk your life, and to be laughed at for your weakness."

"Laughed at!" he repeated, in a tone of astonishment, as he turned round. The only person near him was the governess; and surprise for a moment so wholly overcame him, that he remained motionless. The little scene' passed unobserved by all, and in the moment of suspended action, a wave, which rolled silently forward, dashed the boat from its precarious moorings, and threatened imminent danger to the passengers. The ladies screamed: the boat, thrown among the breakers, was with difficulty prevented from oversetting. Mr. Glentworth and the stranger raised their voices in supplication, that the ladies would not crowd towards the helm. They then recovered the oars, and with some skill, and more presence of mind, rescued the boat from its difficulties; and at the entreaty of Lady Singleton, and her frightened daughters, they rowed into the port of Ballantry.

Lady Florence was mortified that her triumph was incomplete; Lady Singleton was not displeased to witness the disappointment of her vanity; and the rest, relieved from the fears awakened by their recently impending danger, congratulated themselves on their escape and safety.





The carriages were now seen moving along the high road, at the distance of half a mile, and the party ascended from the beach to join them. The stranger remained a little behind to give some orders about his boat to a fisherman on the strand, while the group in advance discussed the necessity of offering an invitation to accompany them to the Giant's Causeway, and from thence, at Lady Florence's suggestion, to follow them to Lough Swilly. Lady Singleton thought it their interest to attach him to their party, since he was so intelligent a cicerone; Mr. Glentworth asserted that common politeness, and gratitude for his attention, demanded they should make the offer, even though the talents and manners of the stranger did not render it their interest to do so; Mr. Dexter " engaged " that he would be happy to accept such an invitation, and cultivate such an acquaintance; the Colonel thought he certainly appeared a gentleman-like sort of person; and Mr. Vandaleur observed that there was, at least, a tone of savoir vivre about him, which, if it did not make a gentleman, went very near to do so. Lady Singleton said she would ask him for the Giant's Causeway; and Lady Florence took upon herself to make the invitation for Lough Swilly.

"And he can send orders to his servant," said Lady Singleton, " to follow him with his things."

While the party were thus engaged as they ascended the hill, the stranger followed them, and passed the governess, who loitered indolently along, a few paces behind ; but suddenly turning upon his steps, he joined, and abruptly addressed her.





"May I beg to know," he asked, " upon what grounds you accused me of weakness a little time back, and for what reason you supposed I should be laughed at?"

"You were going to do a foolish thing, to gratify a foolish person," she returned, with equal abruptness: "when people do so, I think they are generally laughed at: don't you?"

"They at least deserve to be so," said the stranger, smiling : "but I do not allow the act was foolish, though I cannot answer for the wisdom of the person who commanded it."

"For the act, that is according to the value placed, or not placed, upon the life which would, I am certain, have been lost in its performance," she replied, carelessly.

"In that point of view, then," said the stranger, "the act was perhaps indifferent. Life, however, has not become less valuable for the effort made by your humanity to preserve it."

She replied negligently :—" I thought it a pity that a man should be dashed to pieces for a lady's morning amusement, so I interfered; that was all."

"Well, madam, whatever was the motive of your interference," he returned, " I am willing to credit, what you seem determined to suppose, that I am indebted to you for the preservation of my life, and this is to acknowledge no trivial debt of obligation." *

u O then you think I made an extraordinary exertion for you? No, I acted on the impulse—I should have done the same for any one."

This blunt speech, abruptly uttered, made the stranger smile, but it was not the smile of gratified self-love: and perceiving Mr. Glentworth turning back to meet him, he advanced with alacrity, as if not sorry to break up the irksome conference with his humane but ungracious companion. Mr. Glentworth took his arm, and as they approached the advanced party, he cordially urged his request that the stranger would not deprive them of the pleasure and information afforded by his society, sooner than his own pursuits positively required. Lady Singleton then offered him a seat in her carriage, and expressed a hope that he would accompany them that night to Port Rush, and proceed with them, the following morning, to the Giant's Causeway; while Lady Florence, with much grace and courtesy, followed up this invitation by her own. To the surprise of some, and the disappointment of the rest of the party, the stranger politely but decidedly declined. Good-breeding prevented importunity, and the stranger having assisted the ladies to their carriages, and given some directions to the postilions, took his leave, and returned towards the shore.





It is a false maxim in the code of sentiment, that the "absent are always in the wrong *." Absence, on the contrary (like death, which it represents), may absolve error and cancel injury, when no toleration is allowed in the actual and present existence of the object. Human infirmity seldom stands the test of close and perpetual communion, except where passion misleads, or sympathy weakens the judgment. When placed, therefore, in accidental intimacy with persons, to whom we are at least indifferent, we become disgusted with faults and annoyed by follies, which, when viewed at a distance, and through the medium of memory or imagination, become but sources of ridicule or subjects of pleasantry.

The absence of the stranger, and his polite but firm rejection of further intercourse with his accidental acquaintances, rather raised than lowered him in the general estimation ; but Mr. Glentworth was, at once, his sincerest admirer and warmest eulogist; for the stranger had fascinated him.

"I have always heard," he said, "that an educated * "Les absens ont toujours tort."





and travelled Irishman made the most finished gentleman in the world. Unfortunately, however, these advantages are generally purchased at a melancholy price; for, the Irishman, being driven by religious and political disqualification to other countries for education and employment, his own country remains deprived of his talents and his services. Whether this Mr. O'Donnel has been a traveller from necessity or inclination, he has certainly derived all the benefit which travelling can bestow, or education lend to native ability: he has more than once accused himself of being an idler: it is melancholy to think he may be so from necessity."

"In my opinion," said the Colonel, " his manner is a little quizzical, and is much too maniere for our idea of ban ton; too much of the old school—handing in and handing out the ladies, like a master of the ceremonies at an assize ball, and all that tiresome gone-by thing."

"Precisely, Colonel," said Mr. Dexter : " but I dare say he knew what he was about there—he, he, he! I think upon the whole there is something equivocal about him; for he certainly had a very shabby jacket on, rather thread-bare, for so fine a gentleman. Did your ladyship remark that?"

"No," said Lady Singleton, "I never looked at his jacket; but his figure is that of the fighting gladiator in the palace Borghese, which is by much the finest thing in the world."

"Critically," said Mr. Dexter, "which makes one wonder the more he had not a better jacket on."

"I should not be surprised," said Lady Florence, '" if he was a very vain and cold person. He seems to admire nothing but his great dog; and his refusing to accompany us was so very odd."

"I don't at all doubt that he is an eccentric man," said Mr. Glentworth : "the objects of his present pursuit, and the manner in which they are followed, evince that. The impression given too by his air and manner, is that of a person of a certain high-toned character, little calculated for the rough brakes of every-day life; and with all his foreign air, he is still very Irish,—quick, sensitive, I had almost said irritable; and I dare say, with all the pride of all the Milesian O's and Mac's in the kingdom into the bargain."





"Exactly, Sir," said Mr. Dexter: "he has a sort of a way of reddening up, and of agreeing only when he likes himself, which, considering the company he had the good fortune to get into, was very impertinent, and at least impolitic. As to his refusing to join this party, I dare say, he thought it would lead him into an expense he could not afford—for the poorer the Irish are, the prouder they are."

Here the entrance of a late dinner, or rather an early supper, put an end to the conversation; and the next morning, the travellers, accompanied by such guides as their host recommended, continued their tour to the Giant's Causeway.



CHAPTER VIII.



A Sudden change in the weather, guides ignorant and officious, and, in a word, the satiety of tastes only to be gratified by the novelty of a pursuit, rendered the Giant's Causeway an object of disappointment, rather than of admiration, to its capricious visitants.

The wild grandeur of Pleaskin, the scenery of PortNoffor, and the sublimity of Bengore, were lightly passed over, and the inconveniences of bad roads and worse inns. were not compensated even by the unrivalled phenomena of nature, where she appears most awful and sublime, "with all her great works about her."





After, therefore, a cursory view of this magnificent basaltic region, which none enjoyed of the party, save Mr. Glentworth, they gladly directed their route towards Lough Swilly by Londonderry, where they remained a day, and then crossed a narrow part of the Lough in a barge commanded by the Commodore himself (who came to Londonderry to meet them), and gallantly manned by the officers of his own ship.

Among the latter were two young men of rank, known to all the party; and this reinforcement to their society was an unexpected acquisition. Lady Florence also met her only son, who was a midshipman at eleven years old, and for whom she exhibited much picturesque affection. Every caress was a study; her graceful fondness excited general admiration, and continually reminded Mr. Dexter, in particular, of some passage from " Elegant Extracts;" but whether it was Andromache and her son, parting from Hector, or something about Venus and Cupid, he could not exactly remember.

The large and commodious bouse occupied by the Commodore* was the deserted mansion of an absentee, raised on a commanding eminence, which united in its prospect all the most romantic features of the most opposite style of scenery; the sea, lakes, and mountainsglens, valleys, and smiling plantations.

The usual resources, which people of the world seek against the intrusion of tedium and sameness in places of retirement, were here eagerly pursued and quickly exhausted. Mr. Glentworth had nothing to read; Lady Singleton nothing to order; Mr. Vandaleur nothing to eat; the Colonel nothing worth quizzing; and Lady Florence nothing worth flirting with. Mr. Dexter alone found constant occupation; playing chess with Mr. Glentworth, backgammon with the Commodore, cards with the ladies, and shuttlecock with the Misses Singleton,



* Although the banks of Lough Swilly (which is an arm of the sea meeting the river Swilly) exhibit many dreary tracts of mountain in a state of the rudest nature, yet some of the low grounds are very rich, and some beautiful seats are to be seen in a high state of cultivation and improvement, dropt, as it were, in the midst of a region savage and wild beyond description.—^e Statistical Survey of Donegal.





Notwithstanding, however, the resources afforded by Mr. Dexter's talents, each began to think it time to porter leur ennui ailleurs, in spite of Lady Florence's entreaties to detain them, when an unexpected order reached the Commodore from the Admiralty, to join the

fleet off . Two days after the receipt of the order,

he sailed with his little squadron, leaving the delighted and enchanted Lady Florence to settle with the agent for the house, and to return to England with Lady Singleton, who had also invited Mr. Vandaleur to be of their travelling party. In something more than three weeks, therefore, from their arrival on the shores of Lough Swilly, the tourists recommenced their travels, and at last set out for Donaghadee.

They had now no longer the accommodation of the barge: their land journey was not only extended, but lay through a mountainous region, with which they were best acquainted on the map; but Mr. Dexter having undertaken to conduct them the first stage, with which he said he was perfectly acquainted (having ridden there with one of the officers), the party then began their journey under his guidance: for their drivers were their own servants, and consequently strangers to the roads.

The travelling arrangements had undergone some change since they had first set out from the Bishop's. It was now the middle of October; the weather was severe for the season; and Lady Florence, obliged to resign her seat in the curricle, took the vacant place in the barouche. Mr. Dexter resigned his to Mr. Glentworth; and, keeping to the spirit of his original agreement, accepted the command of the curricle, in which he led the van. The Colonel chose a more comfortable situation in Mr. Vandaleur's travelling chaise; while the servants were despatched on the preceding day to make the necessary arrangements for sleeping at the





town of , the intended termination of their first

day's journey.

- Their road, if road it could be called, on which the wheels of any vehicle had seldom tracked, lay through the wild and mountainous region, which skirts the western shores of Lough Swilly. High unbroken mountains, rude and dark heaths, fractured and disjointed rocks, dismal in hue, and dismantled of herbage, were the prominent features of a route, which presented nothing curious to excite wonder, nothing sublime to awaken admiration. The carriages proceeded slowly and perilously over fearful acclivities, or through more fearful ruts. Scenes of melancholy wildness and desolation succeeded each other; and though the best road was bad, Mr. Dexter had, in the confidence of ignorance, chosen the worst.

His carriage skimming over a surface which put the more weighty vehicles to a dangerous test, he proceeded with velocity; and, wholly engaged in managing the safety of his own limbs and life, was careless, or rather unconscious, of the risk encountered by those who were blindly following their ignorant leader.

The cheerless noon of a cloudy day had already elapsed; the shadows of the overhanging mountains produced a premature evening; and the sea-blasts rushing along the ravines, foretold a rising storm; when the travellers, emerging into a new region, found themselves on the edge of a heath, varied only by a few shattered rocks overgrown with a brown'moss, that almost confounded them with the heath in which they were embedded A new range of mountains, to which a faintly marked road conducted, extended themselves along the now distant horizon.





"A fine champaign country!" cried Mr. Dexter, standing up, and hallooing through his hands; then whipping his horses, he, with some skill, and a good deal of difficulty, continued his rapid route across the plain, and soon distanced the cavalcade, which had chosen him for its leader. v

The champaign country was indeed a flat and tiresome expanse, two or three miles in length; but it was at the same time a treacherous bog; its deep pools were concealed by rushes, and its deeper ruts covered by moss, which trembled even to the lightest pressures. The road, artificially constructed, was rudely put together for the mere purpose of drawing turf, and therefore not calculated to sustain a heavier vehicle than those used for that purpose. The gentlemen, who, even in the light travelling chaise, followed Mr. Dexter, non passibus aquis, were at last obliged to alight, and assist the coachman in dragging the unencumbered vehicle over a "bad step;" that is, a spot where the stony foundation of the road, sinking engulfed in the soft bog, had intersected the passage with a deep and almost impassable slough.

With much labour, and some slight injury to the springs, their purpose was effected: when, resuming their seats, and casting many anxious glances after their leader, they proceeded toward the mountains, in the true egotism of their caste; wholly bent on self-preservation, to the exclusion of every thought for those who followed.

Meantime, with more difficulty and more danger, the heavier carriage endeavoured to keep pace with those which had preceded it. The horses, labouring through the swampy soil, were frequently unable to get on, though the postilion, on foot, drew forward the leaders. In spite of every care, on their arrival at the "bad step," which the light chaise had so difficultly passed, the leaders sunk shoulder deep into the bog, and in the effort which they made to extricate themselves, with a furious plunge drew forward the carriage, and overturned it. Luckily, upon the first alarm, Mr. Glentworth and the ladies had alighted; and, notwithstanding the increasing darkness, the sharpness of the sea blast, and the heavy drops of rain which fell at intervals, the ladies persisted in walking on, until the carriage should have passed the perilous swamp, and have regained the comparative safety of the mountain road.





Mr. Glentworth, therefore, and his fair charge proceeded at a rapid pace till they reached the extreme verge of the bog. Here three cross roads presented themselves to their choice; but to whatever point they turned their eyes, neither curricle nor chaise could be perceived. The good sense of Mr. Glentworth could only afford a general idea of the route which they should pursue. He knew it must be to the south-east; but as they could not proceed without running the risk of missing their carriage, which, from the increasing darkness, was not yet in sight, he placed the ladies under a cleft in the rocks, to shelter them from the rising storm ; and, impatient at the protracted delay, was about to return to expedite the carriage, when one of the postilions arrived with the intelligence, that, in raising the coach, the springs had given way, and that it was impossible to go forward without more assistance.

The vexations of life are not always to be estimated by their dignity; and there is, perhaps, no annoyance more perplexing than the cross accidents of a journey, sharpened by the accumulated evils arising out of time, place, season, and weather. In a wild and unknown region, on the eve of a dark and stormy night, without any appearance of human habitation or relief, Mr. 12





Glentworth found himself surrounded by five helpless and complaining: women, unable alike to go forward or to return, and without even a spot to shelter them from the inclemency of the night. Lady Singleton, instead of soothing, added to his vexation, by laying their misfortunes to his.account.

"If, Mr. Glentworth," she cried, in a tone of peevish impatience, "you would have suffered the postilions to drive on fast, and keep up with the curricle, as I ordered them, and- as I knew was right, this would not have happened."

"Even so," said Mr. Glentworth, "we should but have anticipated our misfortune, and we should now be in the middle of that horrible morass, instead of enjoying the comparative protection of these mountains; for, slowly and quietly as we drove, you see the carriage was not proof against the treachery of these swampy roads."

There being no person present to admire her fortitude, or observe her equanimity, Lady Florence gave way to the natural feebleness of a character, to which vanity alone lent an affected firmness. Her vague and tiresome complaints, her asserted causes of danger and fear, afforded sanction to the tears which flowed from the excessive timidity of the Misses Singletons, who saw nothing but wolves and banditti, and all the horrors conjured up by her nervous imagination.

In the meantime, Miss O'Halloran, laying aside her usual indolence and heaviness, climbed from rack to rock, with something of the fearless agility of the mountain-goat; and soon returned with intelligence that the road towards the left led to the shores of Lough Swilly, though at some distance; and that the grey smoke of a cabin chimney was visible among the rocks in that direction. Mr. Glentworth, who had been turning all possible resources and plans of action in his mind, received this information with great pleasure, and applauded Miss O'Halloran's acuteness and presence of mind, who, after all, had taken the best, though not the most ordinary, way of relieving them from their difficulties.





He now, therefore, despatched the postilion to fetch back one of the horses, and to bring him a brace of loaded pistols; leaving the rest of their travelling arms with the coachman, and the other postilion, to watch the carriage and luggage. Mr. Glentworth's plan was now to make for the habitation discovered, or supposed, by Miss O'Halloran; and, by the direction of its inhabitants, to send his postilion forward to the nearest town, from whence proper assistance could be procured. The chance of overtaking the other carriages, that night, he gave up as hopeless; when, therefore, the postilion returned with a brace of pistols, and one of the horses which he led, the party proceeded with timid and cautious steps through the narrow defiles of the mountains towards the point whence Miss O'Halloran had perceived the smoke ascending.

The rocky shelvings of the mountains, as* they advanced, almost met above their heads: sometimes abruptly receding, they admitted the storm in all its force; and again closing with a cavernous effect, they threw the uncertainty of profound darkness over the steps of the dispirited wanderers. No grey smoke was visible; no ray of twinkling light streamed from the "loop-hole window of clay-built habitation:" all was darkness and doubt, or fancied, or real danger. Lady Singleton's fertility of resource wholly failed her; her subdued spirit, unable to dictate, found vent in complaint and reproach, which flowed alternately against Mr. Dexter, Mr. Glentworth, the coachman, Miss O'Halloran, and, above all, the country itself—the savage, wild, neglected, barbarous, inhospitable country.

Mr. Glentworth, less to refute the invectives of Lady Singleton, than to engage the attention of his timid friends from their fears, answered her with great pleasantry; defending in turn all the parties accused, and asserting that their adventure was in the true spirit of romance, inevitably incidental to their situation as ramblers; and for the savage wildness of the country, he observed, that he could point out scenes as wild in their native Derbyshire.





While he spoke, the postilion, a stout lad, endowed with an increase of spirit by the possession of his pistols, stopped his horse, and, after a moment's pause, cried aloud—" Who goes there?"

At this sudden interrogatory, the affrighted women clung round Mr. Glentworth with stifled emotion, who asked of the postilion, in an angry voice—" What do you mean, John, by that question—who are you speaking to?"

"Look, Sir," replied John, "on the top of that rock to the left: do you see nothing like a ghost, or a highwayman, clinging, as it were, to the branch of a tree?" "Nothing, John," replied Mr. Glentworth, coolly, "that in the least resembles either;" but, as he spoke, he drew forth his pistol, for he did perceive a large figure stealing down the frightful acclivities of the mountains, which, hidden for a moment among the underwood, again emerged more distinct and obvious to the view.

Mr. Glentworth silently put the women behind him, under the shelter of a rock, watching the motions of the figure; while John, impatient, either from fear or courage, cried out again: "I say; who goes there?"

""lis me, dear," answered a voice from above; and the figure of the speaker, more distinctly seen than it had yet been, gradually descended the perilous heights, carrying down with every hazardous step masses of rock, of herbage, and of earth.

Meantime Mr. Glentworth awaited the result of this descent with all possible coolness; and as the person appeared alone, without any apprehension, while John again repeated: "Who goes there? Speak! who are you; or I'll blow your brains out."





"Divil a foolisher thing then, ever you did," replied the voice, "in the way of getting information:" and, while the speaker continued to descend, he added: "Who is it I am, you want to know? why then, bad luck to the bit of myself knows who I am, nor where I am; for sure I've lost myself intirely among these thieving mountains, and my curse on them; they're the divils! God pardon me for saying so, in regard of putting one astray on a dark night." "M'Rory I" cried Mr. Glentworth, by degrees recognising the curious accent and idiom of his quondam acquaintance at Glenarm.

"Who calls?" cried M'Rory, springing from a rock at a fearful height, and coming down upon his feet with a weight sufficient to have dislocated every joint in a less powerful frame: a quantity of loose earth, and disjointed rock, fell with him.

"Then I am right," said Mr. Glentworth. "M'Rory, do you not remember the travellers you met at Glenarm?"

The ladies now rushing eagerly from their hidingplace, approached the astonished and bewildered Irishman; all addressing him at once, without leaving Mr. Glentworth an opportunity of asking a single question; while M'Rory stood motionless in the middle of a circle, which seemed conjured round him by enchantment, and on which a rising moon now threw from the scattered clouds a feeble light.

"The Lord Jasus be good to me, now, and evermore,

amen!" cried M'Rory, crossing himself; "for surely

this bates the world, fairly, so it does; to see the English

quality that I left safe and snug in their coaches, as good as

a month ago, now upon the shaughran *, I may say, this

• Shaughran, a very expressive Irish word in frequent use, meaning unprovided for, or on the look out.





blessed night, among the mountains of Kilmacrennanj the leedies, and the famales and all; sure I took ye'z for the good people * at first, so I did :" then rubbing his knee, he added—

"Oh ! musha, but I got a cruel joulting off that thief of a rock,; but any way, ye'z are all heartily welcome to County Donegal. So ye'z are," and he made a low bow to the whole party.

Mr. Glentworth then informed him of their misadventure, in a few words, and begged his assistance; observing that they would deem themselves very fortunate if they could obtain shelter for that night, even in a cabin, if no better asylum could be procured.

"A cabin!" repeated M'Rory: "troth, and I'd be heartily sorry to put the likes of ye'z in a cabin, any way, while the fine ancient ould Abbe has a house over his head; which'he hasn't in regard of his being dead and buried these two months—pace be with him! But you and your's, your honour, shall be remarkable welcome to the best the place affords, and a snug little place it is, not a stone's throw off, neither, as I may say."

Although this speech of M'Rory's was rather unintelligible, yet, as it evidently included an invitation for the night to some house in the neighbourhood, superior to a cabin, and as they had no alternative, Mr. Glentworth resolved to accept the offer,and desired M'Rory to lead on. Lady Singleton, however, who had now sufficiently recovered her spirits to be able to dictate, drew him a little aside, and accused him of imprudence in thus throwing them into the power of a person of whom they knew nothing, and whose appearance in such a place, at such an hour, was at least suspicious. Mr. Glentworth argued, from the honest countenance of M'Rory, his frank and simple manners, and the dilemma to which they were reduced; Calling upon her to propose some better plan than that which he had adopted.



* Good people, the fairies, great frequenters of IriBb. mountains.





"I will, at least, sift him well," said Lady Singleton, "before I put myself in his power;" and, turning to M'Rory, she said—

"Mr. M'Rory, I must observe to you that I think it rather extraordinary we should find you in such a place as this, at such an hour; and I must insist on knowing what brought you here, for it is a suspicious circumstance."

"Why then it is remarkable extrornary, Madam, sure enough; and it's little I thought of meeting the likes of you here 'bove all places in the world; troth, and I thought it looked mighty Ugly at first when I saw ye'z all below me, for I was crassing the mountain, after going as far as Kilmacrennan church *, with a dacent young man, a friend of mine, who went to be buried this morning; and when the dark came on, I lost my way fairly, so I did, among these divils of mountains."

"So, you were returning from a funeral; but before I proceed any further, I must know exactly whereabouts we are, Mr. M'Rory."

"Why, Madam, you are at this blessed moment, above all the days in the year, in the Prowince of Ulster, County Donegal, Barony of Kilmacrennan, district of Clonaghneally, and the parish of Bailemagrabhartagh f."

"Well then, lead on, Mr. M'Rory," cried Lady Singleton, in a tone of command; and the party proceeded down a gloomy ravine in the mountain.



* Kilmacrennan, a poor depopulated town. Part of the friary founded here by the O'Donnels still remains. Near to this town is a rock, on which the O'Donnels, Princes of Tirconnel, were always inaugurated.

Ware Annal. ,f- The Abbey of this name, in the Diocess of Raphoe, was founded by St. Colomb-kill: St. Columb's celebrated relic (now in the O'Donnel family), called the Cathach, was said to have been preserved there. 'Sec note at the end of the volume.





"But," continued Lady Singleton, "if we are really in a parish, I must beg you will take us to the rector's or the curate's, or whoever the resident clergyman is."

"O! not a residenter, in the way of a minister, there is, Madam, in the whole parish, nor protestant neither, though it is a mighty fine parish and great tithes *; but sure, if the great bishop of Derry was hard bye, convanient, you should put this night over ye'z at the master's any way, which is just at the end of the turn to the lift among the rocks towards the Lough, down forenent there."

"You are conducting us then to your master's house," said Lady Singleton.

"No, Madam, I am nat; but to the fine ancient ould Abbe's—God rest him—th' Abbe O'Donnel—Father Malachy O'Donnel."

"O'Donnel I" repeated Mr. Glentworth.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Lady Florence; "how odd! Is the Abbe a tall distinguished looking person, rather handsome?"

"He is, my lady—that is he is nat, in respect of being dead and buried; but he was as purty and as fine a looking old gintleman as you'd wish to look on, and mighty like the master—only not so young in regard of his being his grand-uncle. He had a mighty elegant herring f, and was laid in the very Abbey grounds, his own ancestors founded before the flood: for we carried him all the way to the Abbey of Donegal % by his own particular desire; the master attended the corpse, and there wasn't a dry eye in the place."



* " I have found parishes in my Diocess that never have seen a Protestant minister."—Bishop of Limerick's pastoral letter.

-f Berring. funeral—from burial.

X The Abbey of Donegal is romantically situated on the bay of that name. A monastery for Franciscan Friars was founded here in the year 1474, by O'Do Roe O'Donnel, Prince of Tirconnel, and by Tub wife Fionguala, daughter of O'Brien, Prince of Thomond,—O'Do died 1505. Roderic O'Donnel, Bishop of Derry, who died 1550, was interred here. There was in this house a well-chosen library.

Ware—Monasticon.





"What is your master's name?" asked Mr. Glent- . worth, impatiently, in the hope of obtaining a direct answer by a direct question.

"What's my master's name, your honor? Why, Roderick—Roderick is his Christian name; I ought to know that well, any way, being christened at the self same time with him myself, for sure we are fosterers; Roderick O'Donnel is his name; colonel Roderick O'Donnel, and a real undoubted prince if he had his due."

"And where is Colonel O'Donnel?" demanded Mr. Glentworth, eagerly.

"Why then, troth, your honor, I couldn't tell yon that, barring I'd tell you a lie, for I parted with him at New Town Glens when I went to keep my station; and I never set eyes on him since, only by letter; for from the blessed hour his uncle went to glory, he never cared to keep at home, but he's wandering about with a bit of a boat he has; and not at all hearty nor merry, but quite the contrary; and if he was in it, its himself would give you the cead-mille-faltha *, so he would; but ye'z are welcome any how, and the best that the place affords is at your service."

"Then you are taking us to your master's house in his absence?" asked Mr. Glentworth; while the rest of the party agreed, in a low voice, that this Colonel O'Donnel could be no other than the Cicerone of the shores of Benmore.

"I am taking ye'z to the ancient ould Abbe's house, which is the master's now by will; and it's little enough for a man who owns the county round from Derry-gates

• Ten thousand welcomes.





to the Bridge of Brundorush; that is, his people did in the ould times, the princes of Tirconnel; though divil a prouder prince among them all nor himself; and well he may, long life to him."

"This is quite an unexpected adventure," said Lady Singleton, "and almost worth the purchase of our fatigue. I expect a great deal from it."

"It is unfortunate, however," added Lady Florence, "that Colonel O'Donnel should not be at home to receive us."

Mr. Glentworth now obtained the best information he could from M'Rory, relative to the nearest town, from whence they could get assistance for the carriage; and M'Rory promised to find a messenger immediately to despatch for that purpose: adding, that he would see the sarvants and the cattle taken care of, that night before he slept; and that Larry M'Quire, the smith, would mend up the coach in no time, once he set about it, "for he is a fine mechanic, your honour, and would earn as good bread as any man in the barony only for the whiskey."

The wanderers now issued from the gloom of the mountain ravine, into a glen formed in the midst of an amphitheatre of rocks, which, by an abrupt opening, admitted a full view of the noble estuary of Lough Swilly *. The drifting winds, which swept over the waters, had scattered away every vapour from before the face of the heavens; and the moon, broad and resplendent, threw a flood of silver light upon a scene indescribably wild and romantic. On the summit of one of the shelving rocks, a ruin of some extent was visible; and underneath its shadows, and almost of one substance with the clifF of which it seemed a part, a small house

• There are many romantic little glens among the wildest of the Donegal mountains.





or cottage was rendered most distinguishable by the smoke of its chimney. It was a formless but picturesque structure (evidently created out of the materials of the ruins which mouldered above it), situated within view of a steep torrent, which, descending from the mountains, dashed from point to point of the rocks, over which it flowed, and formed a small but noisy stream, on its passage through the glen to Lough Swilly.

All about the house was dark and silent, and M'Rory endeavoured to obtain admittance by a door, which, he said, "opened at once't into the master's own room;" but it resisted his efforts.

"Well," he said, turning round, "the divil isn't able for this door when it takes the staggers *, as often it does."

He then advanced to the hall-door, and gave so gentle a rap, that Mr. Glentworth observed, it was impossible any one within could hear.

"Why, your honour, there is nobody at home, only ould Mary, and I wouldn't wish to disturb the cratur but as little as possible, for I'll engage she has tould her padreens t and gone to rooste long since."

He then knocked a little louder, and in a few minutes a person appeared at a window, and spoke to him in Irish; he replied to her at some length in the same language, pointing to the party, who accompanied him, and the door was opened, and an old woman appeared with a light in her hand. She curtseyed low, and addressed the party in Irish, while M'Rory apologised for ber, by saying,

"The cratur has no English I, being an ould Irish servitor; but she welcomes ye'z all heartily." The party now followed M'Rory and the old woman into a sort of room on the ground-floor, which resembled the idea generally' formed of a Spanish inn. The earthen floor was neither very clean nor very level; the rafters of the ceiling, through which the thatch was visible, were black with smoke. A large cavity under the chimney, faced with two posts supporting a third, laid horizontally along them, formed the fire-place; and a quantity of turf, heaped on the extensive hearth, was kindled into a flame by the old woman, who had squatted herself before it, and was blowing it with her petticoat. A few wooden shelves, on which some culinary articles were arranged, occupied one side of the walls; and on the other stood a large old cumbrous settle.



* Literally copied. t Padreens—beads.

X The remains of the old Irish clans are to be found in the mountain regions of Donegal, and there English is very little known.—Statistical Survey of Donegal, page 101.





Notwithstanding the fatigue and disappointment which the travellers had undergone, surprise and curiosity now mastered every other feeling. In Mr. Glentworth alone a sentiment more profound prevailed,— compassion for a man, who, with talents so distinguished and a character so interesting, was destined perhaps to wear away the vigour of his life in a solitude so remote and dreary, in a dwelling so comfortless and lowly: for, whatever might be the story of this- singular and accom'plished gentleman, Mr. Glentworth could not discard the suspicion, which had forcibly obtruded itself on his mind, that his fortunes were at variance with the loftiness of his spirit, and with the refinement and elevation of his character. He rejoiced, therefore, that the stranger was abroad, and not in the way of having his feelings and his pride put to the blush by the unavoidable exposure of his circumstances, which, on the first appearance of things, seemed to be so much below mediocrity.

While the ladies were crowding round the fire, and casting their eyes in every direction, M'Rory, who had for a moment left the room, returned with a bottle and glass in his hands, saying,—





'"I humbly ax your pardon for showing ye'z into the kitchen, but Mary will take in a gridle full of kindling to the master's room in no time; and I advise ye'z all to try the least taste in life of this—divil a harm it will do ye'z—no, but all the good in the world; and I'll engage it will warm your hearts, better nor all the fires that ever were lit on a St. John's Eve."

"Why, this is whiskey, Mr. Rory," said Mr. Glentworth, tasting it; " smoked whiskey."

"It is, Sir, surely; the real Innisowen, the best Potteen * that ever was brewed."

The ladies, however, declining to taste the Innisowenf, M'Rory put it aside, and went to assist Mary in making a fire in his master's room. In a few minutes he returned, and conducted them into the little parlour, which he had vainly attempted to enter by the door, that had " taken the staggers."

A turf fire already blazed; and M'Rory lighted a little lamp which hung from above the chimney-piece.

"And now," he said, "before I look to getting a toothful for your honour and the ladies, I'll just step and send your servant boy back with a drop of comfort to the crature in the bog, that are watching the coach ;" and if your honour will be plased to consint to it, we'll bring the cattle here; for there is room plinty in th'ould cow-stall, and a lock of hay to boot, for the craturs; for if they were left all night in the bog, your honour, they'd be after getting the cruppan in respect of eating the keebduh J, and when the tide is but, your honour, which it will be before eight o'clock, plase God, we can send the boy and the baist across the strand to the town, for Larry M'Quire and his tools."

* Whiskey made illegally in a small pot. f Innisowen is famous for this liquor. J Cruppan, a disease contracted from eating the black bog rush; Keeb-duh, a black rush.





As nothing better than his plan could be suggested, Mr. Glentworth expressed his approbation and thanks to M'Rory for proposing it, who went immediately to put it into execution, crying—

"O J you're no ways obliged to me, at all, your , honour; troth, I wish I could do any thing to sarve you or your's, and I'd do it with all the veins *."

When M'Rory had withdrawn, the attention of the party was attracted to the style and furniture of the little room which they now occupied, and which excited, while it amused, their idle curiosity. The floor, only better than that of the kitchen by being cleaner, was uncarpeted ; the windows, though screened by shutters, were uncurtained; the hearth was ungrated, and the walls were simply white-washed. A large old-fashioned sofa, a few deal chairs, two oak tables, a reading-desk, and some hanging shelves, comprised the whole furniture: but the shelves were laden with books in almost every language. The larger table was covered with the results of scientific research, mingled with papers, manuscripts, and some mathematical instruments. A large book lay open on the reading-desk; the character was beautiful, and the vellum pages illuminated. An antique sword, of most curious workmanship, was suspended over the chimney-piece; and the pedigree of the O'Donnel family, beginning with Niall, of the nine hostages, hung beneath it. But the object which most attracted, and longest fixed, their attention, was the picture of a man in a religious habit. Between this picture and the stranger, they observed a striking resemblance. Time, however, and deep thought, seemed to have given lines to the countenance of the picture, which could not be traced in the stranger. Imagination would have placed such a head on the shoulders of Cardinal Wolsey, in his disgrace. The expression was, * With all the veins in my heart.





grief and disappointment, preying on the energies of genius and ambition. The picture appeared to be impannelled in a door.

"This must be the Abbe M'Rory spoke of," said Lady Singleton, "by the petit collet. I dare say he was a pretty dangerous sort of person. All Abbes that I have ever known were tracassiers; and that must have been a Jesuit by his countenance."

"He was much too handsome for an Abbe," said Lady Florence: "quite as handsome as his nephew, only not so young."

"It is, indeed, a most acute countenance," said Mr. G lent worth.

Here M'Rory entered, and having informed Mr. Glentworth that he had despatched provisions to the craturs in the bog, he begged to know what the ladies would plase to have.

"There is as nice a bit a bacon to the fore," he said, "as ever hung in a chimney corner; and in regard of a fresh egg, I'll pit the brackit hen against the world; and troth, if she never laid an egg, the cratur, we would keep her for luck sake* ; and sure, if the master was in it, it isn't with a rasher and egg I'd be putting off the likes of you;,but the best of tay and coffee for the leedies I'd have."

Mr. Glentworth entreated M'Rory not to make himself uneasy; said his bill of fare was very good, and that they were all in a state of appetite, which did not render them particularly nice.

When M'Rory retired, Lady Singleton, who had been tossing over the papers, and prying into every thing, observed, that she began to have suspicions about the stranger, not much to his advantage; and quoted several

• " Brackit" speckled.^All speckled animals are esteemed lucky. There are many stories cuwent of the magical powers of the trout.

K





observations of Mr. Dexter's, which Mr. Glentworth endeavoured to refute.

Lady Florence said, that it was at least a singular thing, for a man of his appearance to live in such a solitary and savage place; and that his evident wish to escape them did not argue much in his favour.

"As to his being a colonel, as M'Rory called him," said Lady Singleton, " that is merely, as it strikes me, a nom de guerre; however, I shall find out from M'Rory the history of that before we go."

Miss Singleton said, she thought he looked very like a captain of banditti she once drew standing under a rock; to which her sister implicitly agreed.

Miss O'Halloran, for the first time breaking silence, coolly observed that the picture of the Abbe was in motion.

She had scarcely announced the extraordinary fact, to the consternation of the whole party, when the picture was pushed forward, and the stranger himself appeared occupying its place, wrapped in a long dark cloak, which added to the natural height of his stature. The effect produced was no less striking than the event was unexpected. The stranger, for a moment, stood motionless at the threshold of the door; the dark rocks without forming a strong relief to his figure, on which the light of the lamp flashed brightly. Surprise and confusion characterised the group within. The stranger at last advanced, closed the pictured door, and bowed to all with an air of courteous recognition; but his courtesy could not disguise the profound mortification and amazement which were visible in his countenance.

"I am afraid, sir," said Mr. Glentworth, "that this is as unseasonable as it is an unexpected event; but we are still destined to be your debtors; and that, without even the interference of your volition, or our own." He then briefly related the circumstances of their accident—their meeting with M'Rory in the mountains; his promise of shelter for that night; and their discovery of the name of the person under whose roof they were to find an asylum.





"The necessity of the case must plead for our intrusion," he added: "and your advice, perhaps, may assist us to shorten its duration."

The stranger's answer included all that politeness, and even kindness, could dictate on the occasion. He took upon himself to make all necessary arrangements for refitting the carriage; urged the necessity of their remaining where they were for that night; and repeatedly expressed his regret that the hut, of which he was but recently the master, and from which he had been for some weeks absent, could so ill, in any way, accommodate them. "However," he added, "it would at least afford shelter from the inclemency of a night, which was wery moment becoming more wild and dreary." Though all this was said with an apparently cordial sincerity, it was still evident that feelings of pride and hospitality, of politeness and annoyance, were strongly at variance; and that though he wished to have been of use to his guests, he would have preferred being so by any other mode, than that he was obliged of necessity to adopt.

"Well," said Lady Singleton, " here we are, however, bongre, malgre, and a most dreary adventure we have had of it, Mr. O'Donnel; or, I beg your pardon, Colonel O'Donnel; for we have learnt your military rank from your servant; but I cannot imagine what you can have been about, wandering in such a night as this among these horrible mountains."

"I was endeavouring, madam," he replied, smiling, "to get home as fast as I could, after a ramble of more than six weeks, and"

While he spoke, the door was opened by. M'Rory, who entered, laden with things to lay the table for

K2





dinner; who catching a look of his master, exclaimed: "Why, then, blessed Virgin! is it the maister I see there, opposite forenent me ?—Ah! sir, dear, how did you get in? Sure it must be by the little back door in the front of the house.—Och! Bran, my baste, are you come back to me, agrah !—Well, what luck I have, and the quality here and all!—and soon as I lay the table, I'll attind your honour, and get you a change, sir; for I'll engage you are well wet with the rain, colonel."

During this address, M'Rory was laying a clean, but coarse cloth, with every thing else of suitable plainness; and his master, with an air of great discomfort, was looking silently on, while Mr. Glentworth begged he would stand on no ceremony, but retire and change his dress, which the rain had penetrated in spite of his watch-cloak :—" For you ought to remember," he said, smiling, "that we are less guests, than intruders."

This speech awakened O'Donnel from his silent reverie, and suddenly recalled to himself, he hastily replied:

"I only lament I cannot do the honours of a host by such guests, as they ought to be done; but I have been an absentee from this little retreat almost from the moment I became its master."

M'Rory, followed by the old woman, now entered with the dinner, which exceeded the letter of his bill of fare; for in addition to the rashers and eggs, appeared some excellent dried salmon, and some potatoes and butter, which Mr. Glentworth assured M'Rory were a feast in themselves.

"O! it's true for your honour: they are surely," returned M'Rory: "they're the real ' blacks.'"

M'Rory then placed chairs round the table, invited the company to be seated, and appeared much delighted, when he saw with what goodwill they partook of the simple fare he had prepared for them: while his master, who refused to join his guests, on the plea of having dined, stood silently leaning against the chimney-piece; the colour varying in his face whenever M'Rory opened his lips; and the confusion of mortified pride increasing on his countenance with every trivial incident that tended to wound it. But when M'Rory, after waiting in a formal attitude for a few seconds behind Mr. Glentworth's chair, stepped forward, and said in a loud whisper, "Does your honour know what's gone with the bottle of wine, was left out after the wake?" he suddenly left the room, followed by M'Rory, who continued to repeat—' I disremember me intirely about the bottle of wine, so I do; which is remarkable."





"So," said Lady Singleton, " it is pretty evident that this man is bored to death by finding us here; and it does not look well to see him so gene by our presence."

"It at least looks natural," said Mr. Glentworth. "His manner arises out of his feelings, which are those of a proud, and I fear a poor man."

"Of a very vain man, I believe," said Lady Florence. "Upon the whole, he gives me the impression of being an amazing coxcomb."

The entrance of M'Rory interrupted the conversation. He came forward with a countenance dilated with pleasure; and laying two bottles of wine on the table, he said—

"There is a bottle of Madayra for your honour, and some Port for the leedies.—And ye'z shall have as beautiful a cup of tay as ever was made; and Mary has the cake on the gridle ; and the maister desires respects, and he'll wait on ye'z as soon as he is dressed; and troth, and he's heartily sorry he has nothing better to offer ye'z; but sure if it was gold ye'z should have it just the same—and long life to him, for his like is'nt this night on the floor of God's creation, though he's rather crass to myself to-night, any how; and divil a know I know for why, if it is not for making so free with





your honour: for, as I tould him, if I would'nt make free with the likes of you, who is it I'd make free with ?— Sure it's the real quality takes less on them always."



CHAPTER IX.



When the cloth was removed, and M'Rory had placed the table near the fire, and the chairs round it, he still seemed to linger with an obvious anxiety in the room. It was evident, by his efforts, that he was solicitous to excuse his master's absence, and apparent neglect of those hospitable rites, which, in the estimation of this genuine Irishman, were the first of virtues.

Lady Singleton, who always suspected something, even where there were least grounds for suspicion, merely to show her superior acuteness and penetration, now observed in French to her party, that the sudden retreat of the master, and the lingering of the servant, were odd circumstances, that the whole had une mauvaise mine, and that she wished they were safe out of the horrible mountains, where none but a man of desperate fortunes would reside. "She did not like," she added, "the air of the place altogether," and observed, that the immense sword or sabre over the chimney-piece was a singular piece of furniture, in any place, but the retreat of a captain of a band of " White Boys," or some such outlawed desperado. As she spoke, she directed her eyes to the sword; and Mr. Glentworth, laughing at the folly of her suspicion, said aloud, that "he supposed the sword was some family relic."

"Is it the sword, your honour?" said M'Rory, whose eyes were fixed on the strangers, though he was affecting, in his own words, "just to ready up the place."





"Yes," said Mr. Glentworth, "it looks as if it had seen service, M'Rory."

"O! then it's itself that has," returned M'Rory, taking it down, and blowing the dust off it: "many a tall fine fellow it laid low in its day, any how, I'll engage."

"Indeed I" returned Lady Singleton, looking round significantly at her party, while her daughters and Lady Florence turned pale: "so it has committed great havoc, has it?"

"It's truth I am telling you, madam; the world wouldn't get the marks of the blood out of the blade, so it wouldn't. They say it is the blood of an O'Neil, which an O'Donnel killed in these very mountains."

"Indeed!" said Lady Singleton, becoming gradually the victim of her own idle imaginings; "and pray, Sir, whom does this sword belong to?"

"To the great O'Donnel, my lady, who bate the English troops fairly out of the province."

"Lately ?" asked Lady Singleton, eagerly.

"O yes, Madam; that's when the master's people were kings of the county round, I may say, and bate the world before them, which they did in great style."

"You mean, I suppose," asked Lady Singleton, in a tremulous voice, "in the late tumults which we have heard so much of in England, as disturbing this country?".

"O yes, my lady, I do !—surely."

"And pray, Sir," asked Sady Singleton, still more faintly, "do the White Boys, or the Oak Boys, prevail in these mountains?"

"O, my lady," returned M'Rory, "we have no call to the likes of them at all, at all; there never was any ruction to signify in these mountains since the ould times, when the great O'Donnel Baldearg, that's' O'Donnel the Red,' cleared the country fairly with this same sword, of all the rogues and rapparees, that wanted to drive us into the bogs and mountains like wild bastes, when he fought at the battle of Balintubber for the glory of Ireland.





"And this O'Donnel the Red," said Mr. Glentworth, who had been much amused with the equivoque of a dialogue he had hitherto forborne to interrupt; " and this O'Donnel the Red was, I suppose, some famous ancestor of your master?"

"O! he was, your honour, the 'Star of the North' he is called to this day,—long life to him!"

"An ancestor!" repeated Lady Singleton, recovering from her transient panic: "oh, that is another thing."

"Stay, Madam!" exclaimed M'Rory in a hurry, putting up the sword and running to a book-shelf, from which he took down a little volume in primer size: "see here, my lady, sure here is the whole story, covered with elegant red morocky; and, troth, and it will amuse you greatly till the master comes; you'll be highly delighted with it, I'll engage. Myself used to get it by heart of a winter's night. That's the fine ancient ould copy of it, which was wrote with Abbe O'Donnel'8 own hand; but the master got this done out fairly by Torney Costello's clerk."

Lady Singleton took the book; it contained but a few pages, and was done in a neat printed hand. M'Rory trimmed the lamp, put fresh turf on the fire, and wishing them " every amusement in life," left the room; when, at the request of all, Lady Singleton read as follows :—





O'DONNEL THE RED,

OR

THE CHIEFS OF TIRCONNEL.

A FRAGMENT.



The Irish annalist has hoasted—the English historian has avowed, that Ireland first submitted to England in the reign of James the First; and his Irish subjects fondly believed that in his veins flowed the blood of their own royal line*.

Till that period, the English settled in Ireland, neither "governed the land in peace by law t, nor could they root out the natives by the sword in war J."

Till that period, the few eastern districts which the Saxon arms had won, were, by harassing encroachments, partially extended; but the Irish chiefs of the north, of the south, and of the west, nay, even those who raised their castles on the borders of the pale, were of necessity left to the enjoyment of their own rude independence §. Their septs, in the days of Elizabeth, as in the days of Henry the Second, paid submission only to their respective chiefs, and lived in federal alliance with each other. When in amity with the English power, tney were termed friends and allies ||; when refractory, they were called "the Irish enemy." The epithet of rebel was not applied to them, till, by being admitted to the benefit of the English laws, they were considered as subjects; which did not take place till the twelfth year of James the First's reign.



• " It was not till the 12th of James I., 1614, that the Irish were considered as subjects;" they " were then taken into his Majesty's gracious protection, under one law, as dutiful subjects."—Borlase, p. 188.

f Sir J. Davis.

+ They offered the English sovereign 8000 marks to grant them the benefit of the English law, and were refused. {Sir J. Davis's Historical Relations.) They were, therefore, governed by their own laws so recently as the reign of Henry VIII., for the then Chief Baron observes, " Those laws and statutes, made by the Irish on their hills, they keep firm and stable, without breaking them for any favour or reward."—Baron Fingloss, Breviate of Ireland.

$As in the instance of the O'Beirnes, Chiefs of Glen-Maluva.

H " They were sworn to keep the peace, but in every other particular retained their own distinctions and independence."—Leland, v. ii.





In the latter days of Queen Elizabeth, flourished Calvagh O'Donnel, chief of Tirconnel*.

On the north-west of Ulster, over a region of rocks and marshes, of lakes and mountains, deeply indented with the sea, and skirted by precipitous headlands, the chiefs of Tirconnel had reigned in a regular, though not tranquil, succession from the tenth century.

Their national title was Tanist, or chief; that bestowed on them by foreign potentates bore a loftier sound.—Henry III. of Englandt solicited their alliance by the title of "King X;" Francis I. of France, sought their assistance by the name of "Sovereign Prince;" and the Roman pontiff and Spanish monarch gave them these titles so lately as in the days of Elizabeth.

To the chiefs of Tirconnel stood opposed the powerful sept of the O'Neils, chiefs of Tyrone. Descended from the same stock, they were yet hereditary rivals, and waged a warfare for ages against each other, under the operation of all those passions which break out with greatest violence among a people unsophisticated and unrefined §. Hugh O'Neil, the celebrated Earl of Tyrone, alternately the favourite and the foe of Queen Elizabeth, who, in the end, threw off allegiance with his English earldom, and re-assumed the state and independence of an Irish prince ||, saw and loved the Lady Johanna O'DonneMl; and the feuds of ages were extinguished upon the altar of family alliance. The fandaughter of Tirconnel became Countess of Tirowen, and the nuptials were celebrated in the Castle of Donegal, in all the rude magnificence of the times, and consequence of the parties.



* Tirconnel, modern Donegal.

f The letter of Henry III. to the Irish Chief, is extant in Rymer, volume i. page 426. In which he writes to him, "Rex, Donaldo Regi de Tirconnel, Salutem."

| Francis I. failed to induce the Irish Chief to unite with him against Henry VIII. And James I. acknowledges the hereditary fealty and attachment of the O'Donncls to the Crown of England, until the Irish Lords President and Deputies drove O'Donnel the Red to desperation in Elizabeth's reign. This acknowledgment is made in the King's letter to Earl Rodwick O'Donnel, the brother of the deposed Chief, extant in the Irish Rolls.

§ It was between these haughty Chiefs that the well-known anecdote occurred, of " pay me my tribute or else," &c. &c. &c.

|| Annals of the Four Masters.

*[ Hugh O'Neil, Baron of Dungannon, lived much in the court of Elizabeth, had command of a troop of horse, and received letters under the great seal of England for the Earldom of Tyrone, &c See Morris's Ireland.





The septs pledged each other in draughts of "meadh" from the "corna," which had so often sounded them to battle*; and the bards of the O'Neils and of the O'Donnels swept their harps to the praises of the descendants of "Niall of the Nine Hostages."

FRAGMENT II.

The nuptial feast, according to the boundless hospitality of the times, was held for many days; and the carousal was only interrupted by an event, which spread desolation and misery in the house of O'Donnel, caused the annihilation of its glory, and gave birth to conflicts, from which Ireland had not recovered at the end of the succeeding century t.

In the family of the chief of Tirconnel a star had arisen, which, though but just verging above the horizon of life, already shed around a light destined never to be quenched but with the independence of the land, which it for a brief period illuminated. Hugh O'Donnel, called O'Donnel the RedJ, the eldest son of Calvagh, a boy in years, a hero in spirit, a being "out of the common roll of men," had already given proofs of such extraordinary valour and virtue, that in the language of the chronicle " his fame had gone throughout the land §." He had assisted at the nuptials of his beautiful sister, and on the third night of the carousal, had risen from the nocturnal revels, to enjoy the fresh sea-breeze on the ramparts of the castle; thither he had been followed by two young and gallant friends, John and Henry O'Neil. As they descended towards the shores, a sound, sweeter than their native harp, caught their ear: it came from a rocky cove, where a Spanish vessel, which had put in a few days before, lay anchored.



* See note, at the end of the volume.

f The successes of O'Donnel and O'Neil had unquestionably a great influence upon English affairs in Ireland, for a considerable time after even the death of those celebrated chiefs.

X O'Donnel Baldearg, or O'Donnel Roue, from a red mark in the centre of his forehead.

$ See note at the end of the volume. All the accounts given of this Chief, both by friends and enemies, represent him as a most extraordinary person.—See Leland, Abbe Gaghagan, Annals of the Four Masters, Qc. He was as remarkable for his eloquence and personal beauty, as for his humanity and military prowess.





This ship was said to be the property of a Cadiz merchant, and had furnished out the marriage feast with the racy wines and luscious fruits of Iberia. The Spanish captain had, by his urbanity and fair dealing, won upon the opinion of the inhabitants of the town and castle of Donegal, and received a promise from the younger chiefs to pledge him to the health of his king on board his vessel.

As O'Donnel and his friends approached the cove, they perceived a Spanish minstrel seated on the prow of the bark, and accompanying with his mandoline the sweet strain which he had raised over the stillness of the moonlight waters. The youths approached and mounted the deck; the minstrel changed to a bolder measure. He sung of the common origin of the Spanish and Irish nations; of the prowess of the sons of Milesius; of the times gone by, when the O'Donnels raised the standard of their blood-red cross in the fields of Aragon, against the Pagan Moors *. The spirits of the listening youth kindled at the song of the strangers. O'Donnel pointed to the cannon mounted on the ramparts + of his castle, which the king of Spain had presented to his father. The captain of the vessel sent round the cup, and pledged the chiefs in the name of his sovereign. The sailors who manned the vessel, a hardy band, crowded on the deck, gazed with respectful wonder on the grandeur of the young chief's powerful figure; approached—surrounded him.

FRAGMENT III.

It was midnight—the torches were extinguished in the castle of Donegal; the watch-fires on the faugh-guard were lighted. The warder paced the ramparts, and threw from

• In all the accounts of the capture of the young O'Donnel, these arts of seduction were attributed to the feigned captain of the vessel. f Historic.





time to time a look towards the beach; for the young chief and his friends had not yet returned from their visit to the Spanish vessel.

The moon went down; a profound darkness settled over the face of the deep; no noise was heard but the murmur of the refluent tide. The dawn broke, the night-guard was relieved. The warder descended the rock towards the seaside; he secretly condemned the want of dignity in the young Irish lords, who condescended to join in the nocturnal wassailage of a foreign trader. He turned his eyes towards the cove, where the vessel had been moored, but he saw not the glittering of the white sails amidst the darkness of the cliffs. He turned his eyes to the north, and to the south, to the east, and to the west; but all, to the utmost verge of the horizon, was one broad expanse of illuminated waters. The sun rose magnificently from the ocean, but no vessel speckled its placid bosom. The truth flashed like lightning on the warder's mind —the heir of Tirconnel had been carried off by a stratagem; he flew to the castle with the intelligence, but he had not power to tell the tale to the aged father—he fell speechless at the feet of the venerable chief.

FRAGMENT IV.

The seeming Spanish vessel was an English frigate, fitted out by the Lord Deputy Perrot, for the purpose of betraying into his power the young heir of Tirconnel. The youth and his friends, surrounded and overcome by numbers, were placed under the hatches, conveyed to Dublin Castle, and thrown in the depths of a noisome dungeon. The reason assigned for this act of treachery, which filled a whole province with dismay, was that the Earl of Tyrone having married the Lady O'Donnel, would inevitably seduce the chief, his brother-inlaw, to unite the forces of Tirconnel to those of Tyrone, in opposition to the English power, from which the Earl was suspected of deserting; and that the great promise of the youthful chief bespoke a fearful enemy in future times*. Five years elapsed; and the first emotions of rage and grief, which preyed upon the life of the young O'Donnel, resolved themselves into a rooted principle of hatred to oppression, and vengeance on his own oppressors.



* Annals of the Four Masters. Others assert that Sir J. Perrot, by this act, sought to conciliate the English government, -whom he had displeased by his lenient measures in Ireland. But though Sir J. Perrot planned this scheme, the severity of its execution was left to his successor, Sir W. Fitzwilliam.





Of the feelings which belonged to his age, hope only remained; and her cheering dream was nearly realised by the ingenuity and efforts of his young fellow-sufferers. The O Neils, less strictly guarded, because of less consequence than O'Donnel, contrived their own and their friend's escape; broke his chains; and unsuspected, unobserved, in the midst of darkness and of danger, crossed the castle fosse, escaped the vigilance of the guards, and fled to the Wicklow mountains.

Overcome at last by suffering and fatigue, torn and wounded by the briary underwood, which crept over their perilous and unfrequented paths, they at last grew desperate, approached a human dwelling, and sounded the horn that hung suspended at the gate of the Castle of O'Tool. The warder appeared, and they claimed protection for the son of the great O'Donnel, of Tirconnel. O Tool granted a seeming protection, but betrayed his trust. The next day the youthful chief was delivered into the hands of the English government, conveyed to the Castle of Dublin, and with his young and faithful friends, was again consigned to captivity, and loaded with irons heavier than before *.

Another two years of captivity elapsed, when the attachment of one of the warders of the castle to his young and unfortunate prisoner again procured his escape t. His keeper knocked off his irons, and conducted him and his friends beyond the gates of the city. The fugitives sought once more the intricate wilds of the Wicklow mountains, where the passes were alone unguarded. The depth of the snows, the darkness and horrors of the night, the apprehension of pursuit, distracted and bewildered the unhappy wanderers; and in the confusion and precipitancy of retreat, the younger O'Neil was lost. The voices of his friends were in vain raised; in vain O'Donnel and his brother turned back, at the risk of liberty and life, to seek him—he was gone for ever! In distraction and despair, the brother and the friend pursued their dreary coursej amidst the horrors of the night*. The strength of the surviving O'Neil failed. O'Donnel, more vigorous and robust, in vain supported him in his arms—O'Neil sunk under his suffering. O'Donnel laid him under the shelter of a rock, in the Valley of Glendaloch; stripped off his own wretched garb, and placed it over the shivering body of his friend f, and stretched himself beside him, in the hope of communicating warmth to his chilled and lifeless limbs.



* His manner of usage was most dishonourable and discommendable, and neither allowable before God or man; for O'Donnel being young, and being taken by this stratagem, having never offended, was imprisoned with great severity, and many irons laid upon him, as if he had been a notable traitor," &c.—Lee's Memorial to Queen, Elizabeth. MSS. Trinity College.

•f The great tie which existed between the keeper and his prisoner, was, that he spoke Irish, says the Chronicle.





On the borders of the Valley of Glendaloch stood the Castle of Maluva, the ancient seat of the O'Beirnes. It was reserved for the chief of that powerful sept to discover, amidst the rocks which screened his castle, two youths nearly buried in the snow. The one lay dead in the other's arms; the other was alive, but speechless; and when the humane attentions of the chief, who summoned his attendants to the spot, restored the faculties of the survivor, O'Beirne found in the object of bis charity the son of a prince !—the son of his own kinsman and friend, the chief of Tirconnel!

The body of the unfortunate O'Neil was consigned to the abbey of Glendaloch J. O'Donnel was carried on the backs of some of O'Beirne's sept to the defile of Glen-Maluva §His name, his youth, his rank, his misfortunes, had gone before him. The clan of the O'Beirnes came forth from their strongholds to receive him. They met the northern chief, the descendant of the royal line of Eirin, with shouts of exultation, mingled with expressions of implacable animosity to his enemies.

FRAGMENT V.

The flight of the illustrious captive was soon discovered. The Lord Deputy posted guards on the fords of the Liffy, to prevent his escape; but the chief of Glen-Maluva, true to his trust, risked his own life to save his friend's. He placed himself at the head of a troop of horse, and conducted O'Donnel towards Dublin, foreseeing the security of the attempt in its unsuspected boldness. As he imagined, the fords so near the capital were carelessly guarded, and on the banks of the Liffy the friends embraced and parted. When the aged warrior wept, the eyes of the young chief were not dry; national suffering had not yet subdued national sensibility.



* Annals of the Four Masters. t Ibid.

+ The ruins of this abbey are still visible in the beautiful valley of Glendaloch, in the county of Wicklow.

§ Annals of the Four Masters.





A messenger, in disguise of a harper, was sent before the fugitive, to prepare the old chief of Tirconnel, for the return of his son. Accompanied by eight horsemen only, O'Donnel took his perilous way through the heart of the English pale*, passing near many an English garrison, beholding in distance the night-fires of many an Irish Faugh-guardt, retreating among the heights of the mountainous region of Sleeve-gullion, while the troops stationed in Balbreken Castle wound along the river beneath. He successively caught a view of Rose Castle |; of the blue waters of Lough Erne, and the banner of the chief of Fermanagh, floating on the mast of the barge, which the brave M'Guire had prepared to carry him across the lake, to the foot of his father's fortress at Bally shannon. Soon distinguished by the friends of his house, the long-stilled cry of "O'Donnel aboo §," rent the air. Borne in joyous triumph over the waters of the lake that bathed his native domains, he was received by the inhabitants of Tirconnel, who came in multitudes from the remotest districts, to hail the restoration of their betrayed chief to liberty and to his country||. They knelt in his path; they kissed his feet; they clasped his hands; and, in the midst of the acclamations of thousands of voices, the aged Lord of Tircorincl resigned his chieftancy to his son, to give him a free scope to avenge his own injuries, and to protect his people. O'Phryle performed the ceremony of inauguration*, and the harpers of the family sung the feats of the heroes, which it had produced; calling upon the new chief to emulate the glory of his ancestors.



* His way lay through Meath, Louth, Armagh, and Fermanagh. The ruins of the fortress of Ballyshannon still remain; and the town takes its name from a ford, where the old chief of Tirconnel was drowned. Ballyshan Eye, the mouth of the ford.

T Faugh-guard—a fort on an eminence.

% The frontier castle of the pale, on the western borders of Louth: it was built by Rose Verdan, an heiress of the English Pale, who married Lord Bellew. According to the Louthiana, it is still the property of the ancient family of Bellew, and exhibits a fine ruin.

§ Each chieftain has a war-cry peculiar to his sept; as 'c O'Donnel abua"—" Butler abua." The illustrious house of Fitzgerald, of which the Duke of Leinster is the head, have retained theirs as their motto —" Crom aboo."

|| This account is strictly historic. He was captured at fifteen, and escaped at one-and-twenty. See note at the end of the volume.





FRAGMENT VI.

Indignant feelings of personal oppression and injustice sharpened the sympathy of national suffering. The outrages committed by the Lords Presidents of Ulster and Connaught suffered not the wounded spirit of O'Donnel to heal. While his limbs were still galled from the weight of the chains he had so miraculously broken, the protection of his arm was claimed by the cries of his countrymen t. All Ulster rose, and ranged itself under the red banner of the O'Donnel and the O'Neil; and he, whose young and balmy blood had been so early "turned to gall," whose warm and amicable feelings had been so prematurely roused into vindictiveness, was elected the champion of the oppressed, and triumphantly styled by compatriots,

"The invincible hero of the north,"

for, in the successive conflicts which tore and distracted his country, he was invincible.

• A kind of Bardic priest; the hereditary performer of this ceremony.

-f The injustice and atrocities committed on the Ulster and Connaught chiefs, by Bagnall and Bingham, in their presidencies, were, by all cotemporary historians, assigned as causes of the insurrection in those provinces. Queen Elizabeth was so well assured of it, that she publicly accused them of their enormities, and thus alludes to it in her instructions to the Lord Deputy :—

"For that our subjects of that realm have been grievously oppressed by certain ill-affected of our garrisons serving there, which have been partly a cause of the alienation of the good-will, which they (the Irish) before did bear unto us ; and as such abuses as have hitherto been committed by such captains as have had heretofore regard more, to their own particular profit, than to thedischarge of their duties, maybe met withal, &c., &c."—Desiderata Curiosa Hibern. vol. i. p. 38.

Queen Elizabeth made frequent attempts in favour of the Irish ; but "her gracious intentions were neglected or disobeyed by her principal ministers in that kingdom."

L





The young chief of Tirconnel soon spread the fame of his prowess throughout the kingdom. Those who had wept his unbought misfortunes, now triumphed in his unequalled successes. In a short space of time he had overrun the province of Connaught, restored those chiefs who had been deposed* punished others who had become apostate t, expelled the unjust stewards of an abused sovereign, and scattered those "bands of landless resolutes who had been sharked up J" by borrowed power to spoliate his own possessions, and lay waste the land of his fathers §. Pursued by disciplined armies and distinguished leaders, he turned back upon their multitudinous forces with a desperate, but successful valonr; overcame the troops of the famous General Norris at the battle of the Curlieus, and routed the English army, though led on by the gallant Clifford, in the plains of Dunaveeragh; held parleys with the Essexs and the Mountjoys, and won "golden opinions" alike from the enemy he vanquished, and the friend he redressed.

FRAGMENT VII.

O'Donnel, covered with glory, retired to the castle of Donegal, to celebrate his union with the fair object of a longcherished and romantic passion. The Lady Avelina O'Neil, the daughter of the Earl of Tyrone, by a former marriage with an English lady, had alone shared with his country the feelings of his heart. To years of suffering, disquietude, and hardships, some months of domestic felicity succeeded; when the family compact, formed by double alliance between the chiefs of Tirconnel and Tyrone, obliged him to draw his sword in a cause, which, unlike all the other contests, in which he had engaged, brought not its excuse along with it.

His fortunes changed with the cause, in which he was led,

• The sheriffs and other officers of the Lords President followed their example; entered the several counties, attended with large bodies of armed men, pillaging the inhabitants, whom they affected to despise. —Leland's History of Ireland, p. 302.

+ O'Rourke. J O'Connor Don.

§ A great part of the unquietness of O'Donnel's country came by Sir W. Fitzwilliam placing there one Willis, as sheriff, who had with him three hundred of the very rascals and scum of the kingdom, who did rob and spoil the people, &c. &c.—Lee's Memorial to Queen Elizabeth, MSS. Trinity College.





by his ambitious kinsman, to embark them. The unexampled rapidity of his marches from the north to the south of Ireland, his distinguished feats of personal prowess, availed him not; the red cross banner of the O'Donnel was trampled in the dust before the walls of Kinsale; his castle in Donegal was seized, and garrisoned by the English forces; his life was forfeited with his possessions; but his first and last defeat, though it maddened *, did not subdue him. After wandering, with a few faithful friends, through the bogs and mountains of Munster, with nothing left but his life, his honour, and his sword, he escaped an ignominious death by flight from his native land; and (in the words of the chronicle) sailed, " with his heroes for Spain.'' The little vessel in which he embarked anchored in the port of Corunna, 1602+, under the mouldering tower of Breogan J, named after the hero who was supposed to have raised it, and from whom the first conquerors of Ireland were descended.

The exiled chief knelt and kissed the earth, consecrated by the memory of his progenitor, and hailed the tower of the son of Milesius, as a happy omen on the arrival of his descendant in a strange land.



FRAGMENT VIII.

The King of Spain received the Irish chief as a sovereign prince, promised him redress, and established him in a royal palace at Corunna. But the king slumbered over his promise, though the spirit of the chief slept not. Ireland, the land of his affections, was the goal of his hopes. Soon weary of his splendid dependence, he panted to behold his country, his children, his wife: his patience brooked not delay; he had not been used to wait upon fortune, but to command her. Though worn out and exhausted by bodily and mental anguish, he pursued the king to his court at Valladolid, and within view of the Moorish palace where the sovereign

* O'Donnel (says the Irish Chronicle) grew desperate and furious after his defeat at Kinsale; so that he would neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, for three days and three nights successively.—Annals of (he Four Masters.

f Historical. t Annals of the Four Masters.

L2





resided, the Irish chief died in the arms of his attendants *. His heart was broken; his gallant spirit fled for ever in its last struggle for independence.

"Peace to the soul of the hero."



CHAPTER X.



Pride, however diversified its features, is the mere offspring of weakness. In its best sense, perhaps, it is but the mean which gives to vanity the air of virtue; in its worst, it is a puerile veneration for the accidental circumstances of life; a rigid exaction of respect from others, for things or qualities, independent of all will or power inherent in ourselves.

The pride of the Irishman was immoderate. Still, however, it might find its apology, if not its justification, in the circumstances of his life, and the history of his family. The one had been an incessant struggle between a lofty spirit, and an untoward fortune; the other was a register of the deeds of chiefs, of the feats of heroes; interwoven in the history of his country, sharing its glory, and participating in its misfortunes. The high and inherent sentiment, nurtured rather than weakened by physical sensibility, sharpened rather than obliterated by moral suffering, was now deeply wounded, not in its most vulnerable, but its least laudable point; not where it was felt with most acuteness, but where it was sustained with least dignity.

Though one "out of suits with life," he disdained complaint, he contemned pity, and shrunk from displaying his unhappy fortunes before those from whom he could not hope for sympathy, nor have accepted relief.

* Annals of the Four Masters.





The chances were now against him; he was haited to his den; and what was still worse, he had exposed a weakness of feeling; he had deprived poverty of that dignity which could alone have rendered it respectable.

Blushing for the involuntary error of mortified pride, and anxious to repair it, he returned to his guests, just as Lady Singleton had laid aside the little historical fragments of his family memoirs; and with all the sterner feelings of his nature, relaxed into the smooth courtesy of high and polished refinement, he apologised for his absence, and excused it by the arrival of some letters from the continent, in which he was much interested, though they contained no public news.

Meantime the ladies discovered that not only his manner, but his appearance, was much improved. He had changed the rude habit of his wanderings, the threadbare jacket, which had shrouded his gentility from Mr. Dexter's eyes and observation, for a suit of deep mourning. With an excusable foppery, natural to the soldier, he had also assumed the order of Maria Theresa, and the cross of St. Louis, both the badges of distinguished military merit; and though in his marked and intelligent countenance a mind was depicted which

"O'er-informed its tenement of clay,"

yet the enchantment of a noble form absorbed his spectators in the first moment of his return, and left them no leisure to reflect upon the moral superiority, by which it was evidently accompanied and dignified.

As soon as he entered the room, he informed Mr. Glentworth, that he had procured a messenger from a neighbouring cabin, to go to the town for proper workmen, to refit the broken vehicle; and begged to know if he had any commands, of which the man might be the bearer.





Lady Singleton, having suggested the necessity of acquainting their fellow-travellers with their situation and misfortunes, wrote a note of three pages to Mr. Dexter, made up ot orders and reproaches, interwoven parenthesis within parenthesis.

"And now,'' said Colonel O'Donnel, assuming a cheerful face, "I shall not importune you with apologies or excuses; the master of a hut can only offer the best his hut affords; and to confess the truth, mine contains but one sleeping room, and an adjoining closet with a camp-bed; yet are there five fair candidates for a complete repose, after so much discomfort and fatigue."

"And does this old sofa go for nothing?" said Lady Singleton. "Leave it to me, Colonel. I remember travelling in Germany with some men of very high fashion, and we all were obliged to sleep in one wretched apartment upon mattrasses."

Lady Singleton then went to look at the rooms, and make arrangements herself. On her return it was settled with much good humour, that the sofa was to be wheeled into the bed room, and prepared by the old woman, to the best of her' ability, for the accommodation of the ladies; and that Mr. Glentworth should tete-d-tite with his host in an arm-chair. The party then surrounded the tea-table, at which the governess presided; and conversation circulated with freedom and gaiety : for the absence of the two vapid men of fashion, and of the pert presumptuous man of no fashion, was a sensible relief to the Irish host.

Surrounded by women thrown upon his hospitality, and in communion with a man, whose liberal and enlightened mind assimilated with his own, O'Donnel gradually unfolded into confidence, and brightened into cheerfulness. A true Irishman—warmly reflected upon by the circumstances of society, his spirits took their tone from his situation; and his conversation, at once amusing and desultory, was brilliant as the eyes, from whence, perhaps, after all, he chiefly drew his inspiration.





"But, Colonel O'Donnel," said Lady Singleton, admiring some remark he had made in unison with her own opinion, "I cannot at all understand how a man of your time of life, professional rank, talents, and accomplishments, can choose to bury yourself in this wild and solitary place."

O'Donnel bowed to the compliment, and replied to the curiosity which had given birth to it—" It is not, madam, exactly a matter of choice,"

"Oh dear I then, I dare say your history is quite a romance; pray indulge us with a little biographical sketch."

"You do not, my dear, consider," said Mr. Glentworth, "that our short acquaintance with Colonel O'Donnel does not warrant this intrusion upon his confidence, and that we are already too much his debtors, to ."

"There is nothing," interrupted O'Donnel, " in my short life worthy your attention, nor has it even the merit of singularity. It is an oft-told tale, repeated in my family from generation to generation, for three hundred years back."

"Any tale of which you are the hero," said Lady Florence, with a smile full of blandishment, "cannot fail to interest us."

"Your ladyship is very flattering," he returned, slightly colouring, as he met those soft eyes, which gave so good a comment upon the text her lips had expounded: "but in this instance I must believe with Rousseau, that, il vaut mieux offenser les grandes dames, que de les ennuyer; whichi nevitably would be the case, if I became the hero of my own story."

*' You are quite mistaken," cried Lady Singleton: "a story never can ennuyer; we have already been entertained beyond every thing with a little family romance of yours, put into our hands by M'Rory, called 'O'Donnel the Red;' pray, was he an ancestor of yours, Colonel O'Donnel?"





"My immediate ancestor, madam," he replied: "a very brave and very unfortunate man, who lived the lord of this region, and died with only this sword to bequeath to his posterity."

Mr. Glentworth made some just observations on the causes which had driven the chief of Tirconnel to the measures he had adopted;—and Lady Florence said that Colonel O'Donnel must be amazingly vain of being the descendant of such a hero.

"No, madam," he replied : "I may say in this instance, as the old Earl of Tyrone did, when his harper, striking up a martial strain, sung the heroic conduct of his ancestors: 'I ambition not so much,' said he, 'to derive honour from my ancestors, as to reflect back upon them the lustre they have shed upon me.' I am, however, justly proud of the character and virtues of Hugh O'Donnel."

"I am astonished I never heard of this O'Donnel," said Lady Singleton, "for I am a pretty good historian.'' "You will find his name mentioned with honour," he Returned, "in all the histories of Ireland, whether traced by her enemies or her friends*. But I believe the most authentic, though the simplest account of him, will be found in the old national chronicle, called the 'Annals of the Four Masters,' from which the pages you have read are extracted."

As he spoke, he took the volume which lay on the

desk, and running over its pages, he said—" This is one

of our most curious chronicles extant. The late master

of this retreat, my dearest friend and nearest kinsman,

* See note at the end of the volume. was engaged in translating from it the history of our family, when death closed his own. Here is a part of his manuscript, which his own hands placed among these pages."





The stranger sighed deeply; and every one examined the book, and the loose leaves it contained: they were a rough draught of the fair copy, from which Lady Singleton had read the little story of the chief.

"You must perceive," said their host, "that what has been done by my late venerable kinsman, has been done carelessly, and is indeed rather a loose abridgment, than a just translation; exhibiting that want of connection, so frequently obvious in the last efforts of declining intellect; when all links of association hold feebly together, when the mind only recovers itself by starts, and imagination, if not wholly extinguished, sends forth but brief and sudden sparks from its decaying fires; yet the author of these feeble fragments, the original of that interesting picture (pointing to the portrait impannelled in the door) had once nerve, spirit, and talents, adequate to fill the highest station, to crown the boldest enterprise. The Abbe O'Donnel distinguished himself in the diplomacy of Spain. His services, however, less known than felt, were marked rather by their success than their recompense."

"It is lamentable," said Mr. Glentworth, "that talents, so rarely found, should be employed in the service of any country but their own."

"True," said O'Donnel, "it is indeed lamentable— destructive to the country, and fatal to the individual. But to command the services of genius, it must be unrestricted. It is the equal right, the equal hope, shining on all alike, which gives vigour to ability, and a right direction to the vague impulses of ambition. Sink the individual in the scale of social consideration, withdraw from him the natural motives, which should give strength to resolution, and energy to action, and you banish or degrade him: he remains at home, alternating between the torpor of disgraceful indolence, and the wildness of sullen disaffection; or he retires to other countries, to offer those talents, those energies to foreign states, for which he finds no mart at home. Like the liquid element, the human mind flows cloudy and polluted through narrow and prescribed channels; and derives its brilliancy, its purity, its wholesomeness, and its utility, alone from the freedom of its course, and the agitation of its own natural and unrestrained motions.





"To this alternative of idleness or banishment, were the gentlemen of Ireland reduced by religious disqualification, at the periodwhen the original of that picture, accompanied by a younger brother, bad adieu to the land of his fathers. The brothers offered their services in causes with which their feelings held no alliance. The younger O'Donnel entered the Austrian army, where so many of his kinsmen had already distinguished themselves. He rapidly attained the rank of a general officer—lived in honour, and died in glory. The elder brother, with an early imbibed taste for philosophical diplomacy, became an efficient agent in the court of Madrid, and expiated his illusion by his disappointment. He found himself involved in the narrow and illiberal views of a crooked and intricate policy; and discovered, too late, that the labours of an unfortunate alien, received alternately with an enforced confidence or a natural distrust, are accepted with reluctance, and rewarded with parsimony.

In a moment of this melancholy conviction (his strong passions ever veering to extremes) he abandoned the world, and threw himself into the Abbey of La Trappe *. He was soon, however, again sought for, because his talents were soon missed; and the royal entreaty and papal authority once more dragged him on * See the account of Abbe Hussy in Cumberland's Life.





the scene of life, at the moment he was found digging his own grave. Yet when death, after a course of years, robbed him of the prince he served, he remained unrecompensed, unprovided for; advanced in life, and careworn in spirits. Then it was that his affections (having completed the circle of objects, which in turn possess the bosom, and mark the stages from the cradle to the tomb) returned to the goal from whence they started. His country, his home, awakened his heart's last warm impulsion: and the fond desire, so common among the Irish, that his eyes should be closed by the hands of kindred affection, led him back to that paternal roof, and to those ties, whose images time and absence had rather strengthened, than obliterated from his remembrance.

"He had left an elder brother, the representative of the faded honours and lessened fortunes of his family; and to the sons of this brother he looked forward for the bright reflections of his own ardent youth—for the solace of his declining years. He returned after thirty years of exile: but found nor home, nor brother, nor brother's children."

The stranger paused; then, with some emotion, and great rapidity, he added :—

"There was at the period to which I allude a penal statute * in force, which struck at once against the law of God and man, and tore asunder the holy bond, which forms the type of every social institution—the tie of filial and parental love. By this law, it was enacted, that the son of a Catholic parent, by conformity to the established church, could legally possess himself of the property of his family, and for ever alienate it (when so gained) from the rightful heirs. A crime thus sanctioned, did sometimes, (not often,) find its motive in the sordid selfishness of human depravity^ Oh! then many a blessed tie was rent asunder—many a grey head was bowed with shame and sorrow to the grave. Brother raised his hand against brother."—He paused again in emotion—and again continued:—" In a word, such was the event which hailed the Abbe's return to this country—the youngest of his two nephews had abjured a faith which only entailed misfortune; and reaping the fruits of his apostacy by taking the letter of the law, left his family and its natural heir destitute. The injured brother, maddened with the double wrongs of himself and his infant son, gave vent to nature's bitterest indignation. The brothers fought—fratricide was added to apostacy; and the guilty survivor, not able to appear on the scene of his crimes, left his country forever.



* This law, which in the present age requires not to he characterised by its appropriate epithets, was enacted at a period when the worst passions were admitted to legislate for Ireland. It has long since ceased to disgrace the statute book; the abrogation of it being one among the first remission in the severity of our penal code. The legislation of every country has had some cause for blushing; and if we have fallen upon happier times, let us pity rather than reproach the errors of our ancestors; or rather let us forget them for ever.





"He who was thus at once bereaved of property and life was—my father!

"The venerable exile, thus welcomed to his native land, sought his lost asylum among these mountains; and, with the poor remains of his hard earnings, raised this shed, in a region over which his ancestors had reigned, and at no great distance from the rock, on which, in ruder times, they were inaugurated.

"Here, too, he watched over the infancy and boyhood of his orphan grand-nephew; and gave up the first sixteen years of his solitude to my education. Thus, but for him, I should have remained for ever ' one of the wild shrubs of the wilderness *;' to his learning and science am I indebted for whatever information I possess; to his taste I owe that cultivation of mind and love of letters, which is now almost my only enjoyment. * See note at the end of the volume.





"Having thus bestowed upon me all that he had to give, he sent me, as he himself had been sent, to earn an honourable subsistence in a foreign land. After many years of absence, the public events, which changed the face of Europe, once more brought me back to these solitudes. I returned with that sword, which I had taken out with me, my only property, and this riband, my only reward. I found my venerable kinsman, with the extraordinary energies of his character still unsubdued, approaching to a patriarchal age, and still devoting his lingering faculties to letters and to science.

Permitted at length to serve my king and country, I again left the asylum of my early home, and drew my sword with a joyful emotion, suited to the cause in which I was allowed to embark; but on my return from a short and fatal campaign in the West Indies, circumstances of necessity, as well as feelings of attachment, drew me back to these solitudes; and I arrived in time to fulfil my aged kinsman's long-formed wish.— But he died in my arms, and his eyes were closed by the hand of kindred affection."

The stranger ceased: he had been listened to with attention; but there were few among his auditors who had directed their interest to the point which naturally called for it. They thought not of causes, though they were moved by effects. Even the matter of the relation struck them less than the manner. It was the rapid modulation of the speaker's voice ; the changeful expression of his countenance; it was the warm effusion of a soul prone to enthusiasm; it was the language dictated in the energy and emphasis of the heart, which charmed their imagination, and held attention captive.

Mr. Glentworth sighed and was silent; Lady Florence fixed her full eyes on the narrator's face; and Lady Singleton said:—

"I wish you would give me the heads of this little story, Colonel O'Donnel. I know a lady who would work it into a charming pathetic tale. I am very glad those stupid penal laws are at an end: I suppose they are all long since repealed?"





"Not all," said O'Donnel. "It is but just, however, to observe, that the wisdom and policy of the present times have done much towards their total abrogation; and that great and noble sacrifices have been made of ancient prejudices and exclusive privilege, to general benevolence and national prosperity. To these sacrifices I pay a willing tribute of praise and gratitude; for I do not agree with Fra Paolo*, that mat alcuno si pretende obligato a chi Thabbifatto giustitia. I acknowledge the good that has been done, and I look forward with patient expectation for the final completion of this great work of national justice."

"We have already done so much," said Mr. Glentworth, laughing, " that I suppose you think we may as well throw you in the little that remains. For myself," he added, more seriously, " I have always felt an interest for this country, for which, it has been truly said God has done so much, and man so little; and I have always lamented those religious disqualifications, which, in all countries and in all ages, have equally produced evil to the rulers and to the people. The penal statutes of Queen Anne against her catholic subjects; and the revocation of the edict of Nantz by Louis XIV. (the exterminator of French protestants,) are alike, in my opinion, abhorrent from good policy, as they are shocking to good feeling: nor can anything be imagined more injurious to the cause of religion, than thus to arm it with the authority of the law, and make it the scourge of opinion. To

Employ the countenance and grace of Heaven,

As a false favourite doth his prince's name,

In deeds dishonourable,



Is surely the worst impiety."

• On the Venetian government.





"Oh! then," said O'Donnel, with enthusiasm, "liberal and enlightened, benevolent and temperate, as you appear, remain amongst us. Extend your pacificating influence to the utmost verge of your sphere; and encourage by the success of your example, our other great English landholders, who draw their ample revenues from our plenteous soil, to visit, to know, and to acknowledge us. Let them come with minds detached from every bias, which can influence passion, or revive prejudice; let them come unfettered by office, unsuing for place—more prompt to heal than to irritate, to soothe than to excite. With such high examples of conciliation, we should sleep over the memory of past sufferings, which would, indeed, be forgotten were they not industriously revived by many a commemorating distinction: for though the tint of a flower, or the colour of a riband, the echo of a song, or the triumph of a toast, be but idle and puerile causes of irritation; yet upon imaginations, too prone to kindle, upon hearts too prompt to feel, upon spirits too apt to swell against the appearance of insult, they must, and do, produce a more than adequate effect; and are borne, perhaps, with less patience than more serious grievances *."

The stranger paused abruptly: " I fear," he added, "you will think me an enthusiast; I am nothing less: —at least I would not be one; but the little circle in which I am now placed is not calculated to chill reflection, or subdue fervor. The imagination of an Irishman will kindle when his country is his subject, and woman his auditor: and an Irishman's heart will expand, when an Englishman advocates the cause of Ireland, sympathises in her destiny, and acknowledges her merits."

O'Donnel, with that brilliant illumination of countenance, which caught its fire from the soul, stretched out his hand to Mr. Glentworth, who shook it with cordiality



* Les personnes, a qui la fortune n'est pas trop favourable, sont, je ne sav comment, plus soupconneuses que les autres, et prennent tout en mauvaise part Terence de Dacier, Les Adelphes.





and emotion.

"I shall not," he said, " Colonel O'Donnel, love and admire this country less for having known one who reflects so much honour upon it."

"I assure you, Colonel O'Donnel," observed Lady Singleton, "I like your enthusiasm of all things; and I wish it was bon-ton in London to be enthusiastic; but it is not. I was myself quite an enthusiast when I was abroad. By the bye, I wonder we never met. You say you were for twelve years upon the continent."

"In the Austrian service, I suppose, Sir?" said Mr. Glentworth.

"I served six years in the Austrian service," he replied. "The name of O'Donnel carried a certain influence with it, from the fortunes of my kinsmen; one of whom, at the time I entered the service, was field-marshal, governor-general of Transylvania; and grand croix of the military order of St. Theresa *. My rapid promotion followed of course ; and an act of boyish temerity was so far rewarded beyond its merits, that I was made by the imperial order, lieutenant-colonel of the Emperor's body guards.

"But this irregular promotion of a foreigner over the heads of a national corps was not suffered to pass unnoticed ; the intruder had literally to fight his way to the distinction, vainly lavished on him by the sovereign. Every officer was anxious to prove my claim on the point of his sword. After being wounded in the sword arm, I declined contesting the matter further. I felt that these brave men were right f. 1 felt too that I was a stranger; and with the folly of a hot-headed Irishman, I yielded to my first impression of mortified pride, and

* This General O'Donnel was a great favourite and friend of the Empress Queen. -r

t See note at the end of the volume.





took my leave of the court of Vienna, receiving this order as a bouquet d'adieu, and a letter of introduction from the emperor to his illustrious kinswoman, the beautiful and unfortunate Maria Antoinette. Thus presented, I could not fail to succeed. In a few years service I had risen to the rank of colonel of cuirassiers, when the French revolution took place.

"A devotion to hereditary monarchy has always been attributed to the Irish gentry, even by their enemies. To this of old they owe their misfortunes; to this in the present times they may look for the full restitution of their rights. With an inconsiderably few exceptions, the Irish gentlemen, whose misfortunes had driven them into the French service, were faithful and loyal to the king they served, as they would have been, if so permitted, to the natural sovereign of their native realms. The six regiments of Irish brigades were, to a man, true to the cause of royalty; and after fighting well, and suffering much, in the allied armies, the officers repaired to their native land, obtained leave to raise regiments, succeeded in the attempt, and were permitted to enrol themselves in the British army, under their old designation of the Irish brigades *.

I had followed the course of these brave men; and when sinking under infirm'health, from two wounds, which had nearly proved fatal, I was ordered to try my native air. Obliged to leave the army in Flanders, where I was serving as a volunteer, I again, on my recovery, joined the new-raised corps of a friend and fellow-soldier; and too happy to be employed in the service of England against regicide France, I accepted

a majority in the regiment of Irish brigades, and

embarked for £t. Domingo. There, in a sanguinary

and remorseless war, contending with the climate,

famine, and the sword, amidst royalists and republicans,

* See note at the end of the volume.

M





negroes and maroons, I left many a gallant countryman and friend unburied on the burning sands of that pestiferous region, and have returned once more to these solitudes, perhaps, as their last tenant used to say, with little else to do, than to dig my own grave and die."

This was uttered with a smile, but it was a smile saddened by despondency.

"You surely do not mean to give up the service?" asked Mr. Glentworth.

"The service, I fear," he replied, "means to give me up."

"Have you applied for, or been refused, your military rank?"

"I have no interest in this country, no kinsman high in the service; and my letters of nobility, which served me abroad, would here be ridiculous."

"Still you ought to have applied."

"I did apply, for a majority, a company, a lieutenancy *: I did not succeed, and I went no lower. My relation, General O'Donnel, of the Spanish service, has offered me a majority in his own regiment; but having once fought in the cause of England, I will never draw my sword against her. But," he added, cheerfully, "though I state facts, I do not complain of grievances. I know not how I have been induced to enter upon this tale of egotism: it is in truth an ungracious subject to me, as it must be tiresome to you."

He then gave a new turn to the conversation, by displaying some very fine fossils, which he had himself collected; and shortly afterwards the ladies retired for the night.

* See note at the end of the volume.





CHAPTER XI.



The next morning Mr. Glentworth and his host walked to the heath before the ladies had risen, and found the workmen employed upon the carriage, which was by no means so much injured as might have been supposed, and which would be ready before noon for use.

On their return to the cottage, the ladies were at the breakfast table, and M'Rory (though he had relieved guard on the carriage in the middle of the night) brisk, and busied in attendance; doing the honours by the griddle cake, pledging himself for the freshness of the eggs, and eulogising Katty Mulloy's elegant butter, which was "in the churn surely not one hour ago, my lady."

When the salutations of the morning were mutually exchanged, Lady Florence declared she had dreamed of Irish chiefs and heroes the whole night: the young ladies expressed their pretty fears, to which the dashing of the torrent had given birth every time they awoke; and Lady Singleton observed that she had never closed her eyes all night, from the variety of schemes and plans which were working in her brain, relative to a new mode of legislation for Ireland;—to cultivating bogs, opening roads through mountains, and raising a supplementary corps in addition to the Ballynogue Legion, of which she should make Colonel O'Donnel the captain. "Though Mr. Dexter," she said, was an excellent officer, owing to some hints of her own, and a book she had put into his hands (for he had only got his commission in the Legion since their acquaintance with him), yet as he had not seen foreign service, Colonel M2





O'Donnel would naturally be of all possible advantage, and "v

Before she could finish the sentence, the entrance of the hero of the Ballynogue Legion put all her schemes to flight; nor could Mr. Dexter's pleading look, submissive bow, and contrite visage, save him from the lecture, which her ladyship had prepared for his reception, whenever he should appear.

Mr. Dexter heard her out uninterruptedly, in silence, (standing beside her chair, with a countenance in which he endeavoured to mingle an expression of grief and penitence,) till she was checked in her career by Mr. Glentworth's observing with a smile:—

"Come, Lady Singleton, if you do not intend imposing a fast, as well as a penance on Mr. Dexter, I think you had better defer for the present the conclusion of this exordium and reproof, and suffer him to get some breakfast."

Mr. Dexter now took the opportunity of laying his misfortunes to the darkness of the night, and the intricacies of the roads ;' but confessed that his crime, his only crime, was, in the first instance, having neglected to avail himself of her ladyship's advice—a crime he had expiated by the most miserable night he had ever passed: for though part of his sufferings were abated by his knowledge of the safety of his friends, conveyed by her ladyship's note, yet her displeasure alone was more than he was able to endure; and he had the most horrible nightmare in consequence, that had ever disturbed repose.

At this contrite speech, all Lady Singleton's anger vanished; and Mr. Dexter having received his pardon at her hand in the form of a cup of tea, resumed his natural pertness. Having paid his compliments to Mr. Glentworth and the ladies, and given a familiar nod of recognition to Colonel O'Donnel, he wriggled about the room, threw his eyes from the earthern floor to the old sword, and from the old sword to the old pedigree: he then smiled, and smirked, and took his seat at the table; helping himself to the hot cake, and recommending it to the ladies, to whom he handed it round. In reply to Lady Florence's inquiries for her two friends, he assured her ladyship that they had got safe into the town, about an hour after himself; and that he left them in bed sleeping away their fatigue; while he had risen before daylight, had been the means of sending off the workmen at so early an hour, and had only waited till the lazy Irish hostess was up, to give orders for their reception; as, not exactly knowing the state of the carriage, he was uncertain how long they might remain at the inn.





About an hour after breakfast, notice being given that the carriage was ready, and the horses harnessed, the party set out, accompanied by their host, and walked to the opening on the mountain ravine. After a few paces, however, O'Donnel was obliged to return to the house for a tippet, which Lady Florence, whom he escorted, had forgotten, and left behind. As he was proceeding to join the party, he was met by Mr. Glentworth, who, taking his arm, abruptly accosted him.

"Colonel O'Donnel," he said, " I am an Englishman: mine is not the country of professions: it is not our way to say more than we mean: it is perhaps our affectation to say even less. When, therefore, I make you an offer of service, I trust you will understand me to the letter, that I mean what I say. Interest, at the

present moment, I have none, but "he paused,

and raised his eyes furtively to O'Donnel's face. A deep crimson burned on the cheek of his host, and Mr. Glentworth quickly added, "But should you ever deem it possible, that I could in any way be of use to you, I hope, I trust, you will call on me. Under all circumstances I shall expect you will give me an opportunity of discharging some small part of the obligation I owe you, by becoming my guest, as soon, and as often, as you can. We propose returning to Ireland in two years; and pray believe me, that we shall not be less interested to do so, from the hope of enjoying more readily the pleasure of your society; mean time, however, we shall hold you in our remembrance, as an expected guest at Glentworth Hall, whenever it may answer your con-' venience to afford us your company."





To this invitation, and to the offer which preceded it, Colonel O'Donnel had only time to make his acknowledgments by a bow; for Lady Singleton, catching the last words of Mr. Glentworth, turned round and added:

"I beg leave, Colonel, to join my request to Mr. Glentworth's, that you will give us the pleasure of your company in Derbyshire. As to London, I say nothing, though I should be happy to meet you anywhere; but the fact is, for the short three months one is in town, one is so entraine by the set one lives in, so borne away in a sort of turbillon of engagements and dissipations, that one sees nobody but those one meets every night in the rounds. I long, however, to show you our improvements at Glentworth Hall, all made since my residence there; and you must try and come over to us in the dead time of the year, when one can afford to be a little rational."

O'Donnel again bowed his thanks; and Mr. Dexter observed:—

"If Glentworth Hall be anything superior to Ballynogue, it must be a paradise of a place; which, indeed, being in England, it cannot fail to be."

"O, I hope you will judge for yourself, as soon as possible, Mr. Dexter," returned Lady Singleton. "I trust you will endeavour to make such arrangements that you will be able to follow us about Christmas."





As Mr. Dexter liked to hear this invitation repeated as often as possible, and had merely made his remark for that purpose, he now bowed and smirked with great satisfaction, and assured her he would sooner give up his paltry situation altogether, than fail in paying his respectful devoirs at Glentworth Hall, in the Christmas holidays; for his place was no further of value in his eyes, than as it gave him something to do. He hated lounging about on any pretence; but if he did forfeit his place to his feelings, yet there might be something as good on the cards for him in store; and the exertion of a little interest might yet turn up a lucky trump in his favour."

As he concluded his speech, his voice lowered; and the last observation met Lady Singleton's ear only, who replied:—

"Well, I am sure you have my best wishes at all events."

They now reached the extremity of the mountain. The, party placed in their carriage, and Mr. Dexter on the favourite mare, which the avant-courier had rode, they made their acknowledgments and adieus to their host, and drove off, while M'Rory, bowing and scraping behind his master, took off his shoe, and flung it after the carriage for luck-sake, crying—

"Well, God speed them, and send them safe, I pray Jasus; for if I never see them again, nor any belonging to them, they shall have my good word, for they are the real sort: long life to them I Amen."

Colonel O'Donnel, when he had caught the last view of the carriage turning the angle of the mountain, sighed, and returned towards his hut. Of a sanguine and social disposition, prompt to receive favourable prepossessions, and easily won upon by an appearance of confidence and kindness; to part was, with him, under such feelings, always to suffer. The persons with whom he had become so accidentally associated, and whose recent intrusion had, in the first flush of wounded pride, given him much annoyance, though they were not on his level either in feeling or intellect, were yet persons of education and refinement, of elegant habits of life, and of liberal modes of thinking. Such was the society in which he had hitherto lived, and from such he was now utterly secluded.





There were many cogent reasons to confine him within the boundary of the rocks, which enveloped his retreat. The few persons at all within his reach were of an inferior description; and as he had no mode of returning their civilities (if they had been inclined to offer them), he scrupulously avoided their society. Almost all the great landholders for twenty miles round were absentees; and to the few who had visited the country, since he had taken up his residence in it, his existence was unknown.

Thus condemned by the elevation of his character, and the poverty of his circumstances, to abstain from all neighbourhood and communion, he saw with something of regret the departure of his polished guests. Though in their two first interviews he had endeavoured to escape any farther intimacy with them, yet during the few hours they had been his guests, they had won upon his partiality. The beauty and pointed attentions of Lady Florence had awakened certain sensations, not quite strangers to one, who had taken his course in the lists of foreign gallantry. With Mr. Glentworth's character he was infatuated; with Lady Singleton's he was amused. The Misses Singleton and their governess alone went for nothing. The slight mortification, which the latter had given to his vanity, had died away, and no succeeding brusquerie had tended to revive it; for they .had held no further intercourse, than what the morning's salutation had included.

Though O'Donnel had as much confidence in Mr. Glentworth's sincerity of profession, as so short an acquaintance could warrant, he yet felt that he never could have an opportunity of putting it to the test. He had himself confessed that he had no interest; his kindness, therefore, could only exhibit itself through a medium, at which he thought Mr. Glentworth had himself glanced—pecuniary assistance; and from that proof of his friendship the spirit and feelings of the gentleman alike revolted. The delicacy, however, of the offer, and the kindness which dictated it, were appreciated and felt; and O'Donnel's heart told him, that in parting with his acquaintance he was losing a friend.





Influenced by these emotions of regret, although he thought his acquaintance with the English tourists had ended among the mountains of his own solitary retreat, he was by no means prepared to learn with indifference an event, with which he accidently became acquainted about six weeks after their departure. One morning, as he was arranging some family papers, M'Rory, whom he had sent to the post-house to inquire for some expected foreign letters, entered the room, holding a torn newspaper in his hand, and exclaiming in a whining voice—;

"Here is a pretty bit of news I have for your honour. —Jasus preserve us all, evermore, I pray Christ! Amen. To think of the craturthat stood here in the same room, brave and hearty, little more nor a month ago, being dead and buried; and far from his place,—the sowl !— And an undoubted gentleman he was, any way. And isn't it the best always goes first? Sure it is: and I'll engage it's long till that spalpeen, that wanted to do me out of my dewotion, would be after taking himself ofF. Well, pace be to him any how: and troth, and I'd buy a mass for the rest of his sowl with all the veins, so I would, only that he would have no faith in it himself, which is remarkable; only nobody's affair but his own: and any way he shall have my prayers, f6r I am entirely obliged to him for his extraordinary kindness in regard of the two golden guineas he gave me, going away, long life to him! and troth, and if it was the last farthing I had, I'll change one of them to drink a glass to his memory, this blessed night, before I close my eyes, so I will."





Colonel O'Donnel bad frequently asked, "What is the matter, M'Rory? Who is dead?" during this funeral oration, which was pronounced with great feeling and emphasis: for though the lower Irish are strangely careless of life, yet death is always to them a subject of lamentation and moralising, even when they are indifferent to the party deceased.

Before M'Rory had got to the peroration of his mourning eulogium, his master had taken the newspaper from his hand. It was the fragment of an Edinburgh paper, nearly a month old, and in the obituary column, Colonel O'Donnel read as follows:—

"At Berwick-upon-Tweed, died of a three days' fever, Charles Frederick Glentworth, Esq., of Glentworth Hall, Derbyshire; twenty years member for , in successive parliaments. Mr. Glentworth's death was the result of a severe and neglected cold, caught on his unprosperous voyage across the channel, on his way from Donaghadee to Port-Patrick. Mr. Glentworth was returning from visiting his Irish estates, accompanied by his family, and some persons of distinction, who had joined his travelling party. He is succeeded in his large estates by his only son, Charles Glentworth, Esq., of Christ Church, Oxford."

This melancholy and unexpected intelligence gave a natural shock to the feelings of Colonel O'Donnel. Besides a personal regret for the death of this excellent and enlightened Englishman, he felt as an honest man feels for the loss of an honest man, in a world where it is so difficult to fill up the place he has vacated.





CHAPTER XII.



Two years sound but as a brief term of time, as a point in the interminable scale of eternity; and even in the short period of human life, they are considered as trifling in anticipation, and as nothing in regret. Yet, in that "petty space," what events may there not be crowded, to frustrate the calculations of human probabilities !—what changes may there not be produced in the condition of an individual, of an empire! There is nothing, perhaps, which reduces the importance of the whole system of existing things so low in the estimation of the philosopher, as this rapidity of succession, which dissolves the most important combinations of society, and gives to the circumstances of life, the fugitiveness of a dream.

Two years had soon elapsed from the time at which the English tourists bade farewell to their solitary host, on the wild shores of Lough Swilly; yet, swift as its flight had been, it had been productive of unlooked-for change to all. To him alone, whom they had left behind, in solitude and obscurity, time had brought in its course no alteration: with him it had moved on in the slow and tiresome succession of undeviating uniformity, unmarked but by artificial notices ; for, in him, no consciousness of existence arose from the testimony of new and successive sensations. All was blank, and season followed season in a cheerless series, undistinguished by action, unvaried by event, and unblessed by reciprocrated feelings or social enjoyments. The vigorous passions, the inherent energy of O'Donnel, struggled hard against the obvious torpor of his destiny; his spirit, though overborne, was not subdued ; it brooded in silence over the hopelessness of a life which offered its possessor no portion but obscurity and neglect.





But, though days and weeks of listlessness may be endured, yet, when year follows year, and in its flight brings no hope, no promise of alteration, the mind must lose its elasticity, and assume a tone proportioned to the trifling call which is made upon it for exertion. By degrees, therefore, O'Donnel remitted from his accustomed amusements, and sullenly rejected those resources which in the first period of suffering had cheated the heart of its anguish, and spared the intellect the horror of contemplating its own ruin. He now ceased to find distraction or relief in the researches of science, gave up his wanderings and his books, and suffered the principle of life to prey upon itself. He had no longer a motive to excite volition, nor impulse to rouse to action. Had there been difficulties to vanquish, he had wrestled with their force; the contest would have sharpened his skill, and strengthened his nerve; but he had only to submit. Poverty closed against him every road to occupation and subsistence, such as a gentleman and a soldier could pursue: nor did any method present itself, by which he might hope to be restored to the walks of enlightened and refined society. In all probability, a few more years of inactivity and neglect would have bowed his high spirit to a melancholy acquiescence with his fate, had he not been roused from his increasing lethargy by an effort of petty and local oppression, and by a sentiment of generous and compassionate feeling.

In almost all the villages and little towns of Ireland may be found a sort of petty plebeian oligarchy, composed of beings, whose sole distinction consists in belonging accidentally to what Edmund Burke has happily called * "The Master Caste;" who feel and assert a sort of

* See letter to Sir H. Languish, by the Right Honourable Edmund Burke.





constitutional superiority over the less fortunate of their immediate neighbourhood. At the head of such a ruling faction, in the village nearest to Colonel O'Donnel's retreat, stood a Mr. Brian Costello, Attorney-at-Law, a man who had raised himself from the lowest class of society, by arts, which enable such men to attain to a state of comparative affluence, and who finally became agent of the gentleman, in whose kitchen he had often plied as a menial.

Mr. Costello had, upon speculation, purchased a large tract of mountain, and obtained a considerable portion of commonage attached to it; he had also become master of some small but fertile farms, of which he had obtained perpetual leases of his own employer, and which, as is common in Ireland, he again let out at premiums to tenants-at-will. Among these tenants, was the late Abbe O'Donnel. The little sum of ready money, of which he was master on his arrival in Ireland, he had expended in purchasing the romantic site of his cottage and small garden, and he took of Mr. Costello a little farm in the neighbourhood, from which he derived the whole means of his subsistence.

As the Abbe led the life of a hermit, and was too much a cynic to interest himself in the concerns of others, he had lived in his retreat more feared than known, and was suffered to remain unmolested. By some he was deemed a saint, by others a wizard, and by many as little better than a maniac. The high-spirited and impetuous boy, whom he had made the companion of his solitude, felt the superiority which nature, birth, and education had given him over the little great of his neighbourhood; and as his youth and activity carried him in more frequent contact with the vicinage, he took little care to disguise his opinion of himself and them. But to the natives of the soil, the poor Irish servitors, he was condescending and gentle; for he considered them as the descendants of the brave peasantry who had so often fought the battles of his ancestors. Without losing sight of his own dignity, he mingled in their sports, and carried off many a prize of superiority in their athletic exercises.





The impressions which he left behind him, when (yet a boy) he quitted the country to enter into a foreign service, were revived when he returned in manhood; and, though his paternal lands were situated in another part of the country, the name of O'Donnel was still loved and revered.

Since his return, he had more than once been the advocate of the unfortunate, and the champion of the oppressed. Though a tenant-at-will for the spot, which afforded him his sole means of subsistance, to Mr. Brian Costello, he had, in a feeling of indignation for violated justice, opposed his power, in an instance, which too often occurs, and too often is past over in Ireland unnoticed and unstigmatised. Costello had let some of his mountain land to cotters, at a rent far beyond its value; and, to reconcile them to a bargain closed under the pressure of necessity, he had allowed them a certain portion of commonage. To the cultivation of these wild spots, the cotter had given the overplus of his time and labour; but when they began to wear the air of cultivation, to repay his industry, and assist him in paying off a part of his exorbitant rent, the sordid landlord, contrary to all equity, and to his compact, inclosed the ground, and deprived his tenant of the only means which could make his bargain tolerable *.



* To causes such as these, Mr. Young, the learned and impartial English traveller, in his Irish Tour, vol. ii. attributes all the tumults which so long disturbed the interior of Ireland, and were committed by the cotters and lowest classes of the people, under the name of " White Boys." These were chiefly Roman Catholics: but the insurgents who appeared in Ulster, under the name of " Steel Boys," " Oak Boys," "Peep of Day Boys," were the manufacturing Protestants and Dissenters of the north, and their, insurrection arose exclusively from some





An instance of this kind had occurred in the case of a poor man, to whose door it Drought ruin. After the manner of the lower Irish, when they appeal for relief in their necessities, he had thrown himself on his knees at O'Donnel's feet, to supplicate his interference with his landlord. That he was the brother-in-law of his own foster-brother, M'Rory, was not his faintest claim to the service he demanded. O'Donnel, much against his inclination, condescended to intercedetwith Costelld: to argue, to entreat; but failed in every attempt: he then informed this equitable landlord, in language no way equivocal, of his opinion of the whole transaction; and it required no very acute powers of induction on the part of Mr. Costello to draw from the peroration of O'Donnel's speech, that he believed him to a rascal. So satisfactorily to his own mind had he, indeed, concluded upon this point of the Colonel's creed, that he wanted only courage to call him out: he did, however, what he thought safer, and quite as much to the purpose—he gave him due notice to quit his farm, unless he chose to continue a tenant at a rent somewhat more than double the possible product of the land. The result was, that O'Donnel was ejected, and left destitute of all means of subsistence beyond the produce of a scanty garden.

There was, indeed, other ground within his option to take at a lower price; but it had much to create, much to reclaim; and O'Donnel, full of spirited activity in other fields, was no agriculturist, either in practice or speculation. His sword lay idle in its scabbard, and yet he knew not how to "turn it into a plough-share." From his early habits of life, he knew nothing of the less dignified, less refined, modes of existence, so necessary in the common order of things, but so little attainable by those, whose lives have been a series of brilliant

variations in the manufactures, &c. They were, however, all confounded in one; and the causes so "instigating, were neither inquired into nor known." See Young's Tour.





emotion, or whose characters can only be influenced by strong and powerful excitements. With Want thus knocking at bis door, Charity still found an altar beneath his farm: the day after Mr. Costello had turned him out of his farm, an aged female presented herself to his notice, claiminghis assistance, as her nearest surviving relation. Of her person he had no recollection, though he had seen eyes that resembled the still bright and keen orbs, which, unextinguished by time, still sparkled in the stranger's head; but, when she mentioned her name, and alluded to her story, he acknowledged without hesitation, the only sister of his deceased kinsman.

It is not long since, a mesalliance in an ancient Milesian family, was deemed no less degrading by the good gentry of Ireland, than by the highest of the French nobility; for they claimed the few distinctions left them with religious pertinacity. Honor O'Donnel, once the beauty of her time and country, had made an unfortunate match, and had been thrown for ever from the bosom of her family. After a long life of suffering and misfortune, reduced to the last extremity of want, of misery, and of age, she sought relief from the only one of her kindred, who had not yet rejected and disowned her: the last appeal she had made to family compassion, was the first which had not been refused. O'Donnel considered her rights to the little possessions of her late brother, as, at least equal to his own; and her age and indigence as still more importunate than his own misfortunes: he resigned, therefore, to her, for her life,the cottage and the garden, which was all he could claim as his. The one afforded her the first home, of which she had been mistress, since (forty years before) she had fled clandestinely from that of her youth: the other was sufficient to supply her few wants: and the vigorous old woman, who had served her brother, was a fit attendant for her years and infirmities.

For himself there now remained but one step to take,





but one effort to make: and that was once more to seek a foreign service. This was a step abhorrent to his feelings; for he fondly hoped, that having once served his own king and country, he should never have been driven to serve another: but it was a step he reconciled to his principles and loyalty: for he resolved to perish with want, rather than raise an arm against the banner of an empire, of which he was a natural subject, and in whose cause he had before been proud to spill his best blood.

Austria was then in alliance with England, and both were opposed to France. His nearest kinsman and friend was a general in the Austrian service, and to him he wrote, in the certainty of receiving a commission in his own regiment; desiring him to direct his answer to the General Post-office, London, where he hoped to be able to meet it. Such, indeed, was his intention: to remain where he was, was impossible; and even if there was a chance of failing in his application to General O'Donnel (which scarcely could be, since he had pressed him to accept a commission a few years before), he resolved once more to make an effort for obtaining even an ensigncy in the British service; or if all failed, to go out as a volunteer, and subsist on the pay of a private.

But the obstacle which impeded these speculations, moderate as they were, was want of money, even to bear the expenses of his journey. He had distant relations of his own name, both in the south and in the west of Ireland, who, though the original splendour of their family greatness was " something obscured," still enjoyed rank, opulence, and high consideration. But he shrunk from claiming the privileges of poor relationship; and from every branch of the O'Donnel family, still remaining in Ireland, he had carefully concealed his situation and circumstances. His books, left him by his uncle, were valuable, though few; and he had obtained a due

N





price for them from a bookseller at Belfast, to whom he had sent the catalogue: but the sum he obtained did not make up the third part of that which was requisite to defray the expenses of his journey to the continent, even without a servant, with which he would be obliged to dispense, though that servant was the faithful and warm-hearted M'Rory. He had, besides his books, but two articles in the world, which he could turn into money; and when they suggested themselves to his mind, the blood rushed from his heart to his face, and again returned to its source with an icy coldness: these articles were the sword, which still hung suspended over the chimney-piece, and a small diamond ring.

He was alone in the parlour of the cottage, which he now no longer considered his, when the necessity of parting with these, to him, holy relics, suggested itself. The ring was suspended round his neck by a riband.— He drew it forth and gazed on it: a train of intimate associations arose in quick succession as he read the date engraven on its " golden round." That ring was all that remained to him of the earlier and most brilliant period of his existence, when (full of hope and joy,) his light and gallant spirit had received no impression from time, save such as love and glory gave;—when new to life, and flushed with passion, he feared no change, and suspected no illusion,—when alternately bound in the silken cords of pleasure, or braced with the rude hardness of war, he sprang from the couch of voluptuousness, to rush into the field of combat, and to carry with him, even into scenes of warfare, that buoyancy of spirit, which once distinguished the gallant leaders of the Gallic armies, and which lent to the rudeness of the camp the gaiety and grace of the drawing-room.

He had won that little ring at a court lottery at Versailles, when the loveliest sovereign that ever received the affections of a devoted and loyal people, distributed the prizes. From the hands of Maria Antoinette he had received the ring, on the night





before he accompanied his regiment to the fields of .

The ring was his talisman—he confided in its influence as the pledge of his success; and the distinction he obtained in that year's campaign, procured him shortly after the military rank, which rendered him the youngest colonel in the French service.

The intrinsic value of this trinket was inconsiderable; but it was the bequest of a beautiful woman, and an unfortunate queen; and there was still enough of the spirit of a Milesian cavalier in his breast, to estimate the gem by the standard of sentiment, and not by the cold calculation of a lapidary. He kissed and replaced it—arose from the table at which he sat—walked towards the chimney-piece, and fixed his eyes on the sword of the hero, whose memory he revered, of whose kindred he was so proud, of whose character he was enamoured.

With that sword, the chief of the O'Donnels had avenged his own wrongs, and redressed those of his country. O'Donnel took down the sacred weapon— sacred at least in his estimation,—and examined it with the scrutiny of one who beheld it for the first time; but it was in fact, with the emotion of one who feared he was looking on it for the last.

The basket of the weapon was of pure Irish gold, such as is frequently found in various forms, in the bogs of Ireland *; and he supposed from the price obtained by his uncle for a golden corslet, that its value

• The handles of the swords of the ancient Irish were frequently incrusted with gold. According to O'Halloran, 1744, some goldhandled swords and golden gorgets were found in the bog of Cullen, in Tipperary, which is since called by the country-people, "the Golden Bog." Several golden corslets were also found in Kerry.—See O'Halloran; and Smith's Kerry.





could not be under one hundred pounds. This was a considerable sum to a man who had scarcely a guinea, and he resolved on the sacrifice of a relic, dear alike to his pride and his affections. Yet as he drew the blade from its scabbard, he stooped his head so close to it, that it touched his lips; and a tear dropped upon its rusted steel. He hastily pushed it back into its sheath, and with an unsteady hand, was endeavouring to replace it in its old station, when M'Rory entered the room. His arms were laden with books, which he was about to pack up to send by a carrier to Belfast. He threw them beside a box that was to contain them; and kneeling down to pack them, he turned up his eyes, and perceived O'Donnel replacing his sword.

"Will I give the hilt of that a rub your honour, with the shammy," he said, "for it's mighty dusty?"

O'Donnel made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed, lost in thought.

"I wonder, your honour," continued M'Rory, going on with his employment, "I wonder if it be's true, what I hear tell from one of the followers of the O'Connors, when I was keeping my station at Lough Dergh, this time two years; that the great O'Connor Don, of Cloonalis, sowld the fine ancient ould golden crown of the family, which the Kings of Ireland, his own kin, long life to them! used to wear in the ould times, Sir •„ The cratur!—well, it was hard run with him, before he did that same, any how, I'll be bound. And well it might, in troth, in regard of his extraordinary hospita



* This affecting circumstance, which occurred a few years ago, is so generally known, in Ireland at least, as to need no comment. Two golden crowns also were found in the Bog of Cullen: the first, of chased work, and without a cross, was purchased by the Cumerford family: the second was bought by Mr. Kinshanlloe, a jeweller in Limerick; it weighed six ounces, and when melted, had very little

alloy See Harris's Works, Vol. ii, and O'Hallorari's History of

Antiquities of Ireland.





lilies. Divil a one ever left the gate of an O'Connor yet dry or fasting, and signs* on them, God hless them: in respect of selling the fine ancient ould crown, the sowls!"

"I am certainly not ruined by my hospitality, M'Rory," said O'Donnel, starting from his reverie, and affecting a tone of cheerful firmness; "and yet I must part with something I value quite as much as my kinsman O'Connor did his crown."

"How is that, your honour?" asked M'Rory, raising his head.

"The fact is, M'Rory," returned O'Donnel, in a hurried voice, "I cannot go on here any longer, for many reasons. I mean to pass over immediately to the continent, and to enter the Austrian service. I shall have no means to defray the expenses of my journey, but by raising money on this sword, and I wish you to take it with you to-morrow to Londonderry, and to dispose of it."

"Is it the sword, Colonel?" , "Yes, yes," returned O'Donnel, with humour, and annoyed by the expression of M'Rory's countenance.

"O, very well, Sir; surely I will; that is, I'd rather nat, if your honour plases, for a raison I have. Quit the place! to be sure, your honour, why wouldn't we quit; what use is there staying, when we havn't as much ground we can call our own, as we could lay the track of our foot in, in regard of that dirty spalpeen, Torney Costello, bad luck to him; it's little the likes of his mother's son ever thought he'd see the day that he'd turn one of the great O'Donnels out of their own real and undoubted lands, and within view of their own rock f, as I may say, barring the mountains of Kilmacrennan that's between us and it. But he's come of

* Signs on them: the sign or symptom of it apparent on them. f The rock of Inauguration.





bad breed, any how; the scum of the earth. But as to parting with the sword, your honour, it's what I'll never consint to, while I breathe the breath of life: for what would you part with her, Sir? Is it the great O'Donnel Bal-dearg's sword you'd be after selling in the face of the whole country: wouldn't it be a burning shame, that they should have it to say: and what would the family in County Leitrim say to it *, and the family of New Port, and the family in County Waterford? and what would yourself say, Colonel, if ye heard of the gold rings being sould that were found on your great ancestor's fingers f, near Ballyshanny, that your third cousin, once removed, wears to this day in Spain, that's if he is in it; or if you heard of your own cousin-german in France, selling the blessed and holy Cathach which was bequeathed to the family by the greatest of saints, Columb-killJ."

"It is no matter, M'Rory," said O'Donnel in a decided tone, "what any one thinks; the sword I must and will part with; nor is that the most difficult effort I shall have to make, for I must part with what I prize still more than the sword."

O'Donnel sighed deeply.

"And what's that your honour?" asked M'Rory, in a subdued voice, sighing in his turn, and putting in and taking out the books, as if thoughtless of his occupation. "Is it Bran, the baste, in respect of the trifle of mischief he does, betimes, among the neighbours' cattle? Sure, if they'd let the hound alone, he would never ax to trouble them; but they worry the life out of him, fairly, so they do; that's the gossoons, Sir."

"No," returned O'Donnel, with a forced smile; "I

* Where the different branches of the O'Donnel family have their seats.

-f. See note at the end of the volume.

f See note at the end of the volume.





don't mean to sell Bran; but I fear I must part with one quite as faithful, and much more valued."

O'Donnel paused for a moment, and then with an effort at firmness, yet with a tremulous motion of the under lip, he added :—

"In a word, I must part with you, M'Rory."

The books dropped from M'Rory's hold; and still remaining on his knees, he clasped his hands, and with a look of grief, almost amounting to despair, but in a tone at once supplicating and determined, he replied :—

"Oh! no, Colonel—Sir, if you plase, you will nat— part with me! For what, Sir? for why would you part with me? Sure if I have offended you, Colonel, dear, I ax your pardon now, on my two bended knees— take my life, Sir—isn't it your own? Who saved it for me in the wars, when I fought cheek by jowl with you, Sir?—only yourself, Colonel: troth you did, and for why would you part with me, Phaidrig M'Rory, if it was only in regard of being your own foster-brother, who took the same mother's milk with you, and who was a hurler* with you, when we were gossoons together, playing among the mountains? And wouldn't I have followed you to foreign parts, when we were grown up fine slips of lads, only the mother that bore me left her dying curse on me, if I deserted my fine ancient ould father, until God had taken him; which he didn't till five years ago, come Lammas: and for all that, didn't I go into foreign parts to see you, Sir, and brought you the present of the finest mare that was ever strode, following you through the world wide, into Germany, without knowing a word of any foreign language, good or bad, but my own. I never came acrass you, till I saw you go to mass in your elegant regimentals, with the

• The hurling matches were frequently played, even within a few years back, by the youth of two counties opposed to each other, and frequently led on by young men of birth and fortune.





King and Queen, and all the Royal Family*, long life to them; and when you came back here after the throubles, Colonel, didn't I list with you in the brigade, and follow you to the wars, Sir? and from that blessed moment to this, hav'n't I been your true and faithful servant; and why shouldn't I, Colonel? what abler boy in the barony could you get to serve you? a'n't I your honour's own age, thirty-four last Holy-eve, and your own honour's height, six feet? and if I don't answer you Sir, shew me the lad that will, Colonel, to say nothing of fosterage."

During this appeal, in which one association had arisen rapidly out of another in the mind of the affectionate and devoted M'Rory, his master vainly endeavoured to interrupt him, to raise him from his supplicant posture, and before he had concluded, which he did with tears in his eyes, he vainly endeavoured to recover back his own firmness, which the looks, even more than the words of M'Rory, had put wholly to flight.

"No, your honour," said M'Rory, when Colonel O'Donnel stretched out his hand to raise him, "I have made a vow to myself, neverf to rise off my bended knees, which is as good as being book-sworn, until it's what your honour recalls your words, and says, " Phaidrig M'Rory, I'll never part with you, as long as you can be of the laste use in life to me, Phaidrig ;" and for why should you, Colonel?"

"Because, M'Rory," returned his master, with a mixture of kindness and irritation in his voice and manner, "because I can no longer either repay your services, or maintain you; for I am a man of desperate fortunes. I am about to seek the means of supporting life in a foreign land by my sword; nor can I think of

• See note at the end of the volume. -f A very old Irish custom.—When the celebrated Earl of Tyrone went to demand assistance from the King of Spain, ho made a vow, not to rise from his knees till his request was granted.





rewarding your generous attachment so ill, as to take advantage of your disinterestedness, and involve you in my uncertain destiny, my certain difficulties. But should anything like independence ever again be mine, my friend, believe that you shall share it, aye, to the last farthing, M'Rory."

"Shall I, Sir?" said M'Rory, starting on his feet with a look of wildness ; and then pausing for a moment, he ran out of the room; returning, however, almost immediately, and emptying the contents of an old worsted stocking on the table, he cried :—

"There are four of the ten golden pieces your honour gave me for a keepsake, when I brought you the mare to foreign parts. There is the five pound note the fine ancient ould Abbe left me by will, and there is the silver gilt watch which ould Thady Dogherty, my father's old croney, left me with his dying breath ; and you know right well Sir, that when I offered you this same to help pay the fine for the farmf, to that thief of a Costello,you wouldn't intirely oblige me by taking it; and now you see, it will maintain and keep me, till we land in foreign parts, when your honour will be a great general, and myself a corplar, I'll be bound, for your sake, Sir; so you see, Colonel, I'll be no throuble in life to you, and never ax you for bit or sup, only your ould coats; and now, Sir, there is no delay in the world, only to pack up the portmantle, and quit the place, which is to the fore for your honour, whenever God takes the fine ancient ould gentlewoman, your grand-aunt, Mrs. Honor Kelly, to himself."

As the attachment and resolution of M'Roy were now evidently firm and unvanquishable, and as his master was well assured that he would follow him at all risks, if he were not permitted to accompany him,

• A Bimilar fact of an Irish old servant 'was related to me a few years back, by the Rt. Hon. Lady E. B—r.





Colonel 0'Donnel,"unconsciously pleased to shelter his own inclinations under his servant's, replied:

"Well, M'Rory, be it so, if you are willing, for my sake, to encounter hardships without the hope of recompense: if you are satisfied to take the wages of kindness

and confidence instead of "He paused in some

emotion, and unable to groceed, he smiled benevolently, and held out his hand to his now happy servant; but M'Rory, bowing down to the ground, retreated respectfully, deeming himself unworthy the high honour tendered to him, and with a cry, that something resembled the funeral "ululation" of his own country, he rushed out of the room.

: Within the space of a few days, O'Donnel received the money for the books he had sent to Belfast; perfected a deed, by which he put his kinswoman in possession of the cottage during her life; had a case placed over the picture of the Abbe' O'Donnel, which he commended to her care; and made the few arrangements necessary for his journey to Dublin, where he meant to dispose of the basket of his sword, to a liberal purchaser of such articles, and whence he meant to sail for England.

On the evening previous to his departure, as he was wandering thoughtfully at sunset along a ridge of rocks which hung above the ravine leading to his cottage, he perceived a man on horseback riding beneath, and stopping at the cottage-door. He saw M'Rory receive a paper from his hand, and point to himself. The man threw his eyes upon the heights where he stood, and suddenly galloped away. Before O'Donnel had reached the glen by the most rapid descent, the echo of the horse's feet had died into silence. M'Rory advanced towards him with a letter, or rather a small packet.

"Here is a letter for your honour," said M'Rory. "God send it may bring good news. I tould the young man that brought it, that he'd have his answer in a minute, if he'd step in and take an air of the fire, and give his baste a breathing time; for troth th' animal smoked like the kitchen chimney."





While M'Rory was speaking, his master was employed in breaking open cover after cover: one blank envelope succeeded another; and he began to think that all was a blank, and that the whole was some stupid practical joke, when he at last came to the letter thus carefully enclosed, and found within its folds two English bank bills of a thousand pounds each. The letter only contained two lines, which alluded to the inclosure : they ran as follows :—

"Use it freely, for it is your own;

Use it discreetly, for it is a. woman's gift."

M'Rory stood watching the rapid changes in his master's countenance, as he cast his eyes from the bills to the letter, and 'from the letter to the bills, and alternately examined the seal and the direction: the former was simply the impression of a dial-plate, the motto—

"CHETO FUOR, COMMOTO DENTEO."

On the letter there was no post-mark, no post-town; it was simply superscribed to Lieutenant-Colonel O'Donnel.

"I am afraid no good comes of that letter, your honour," said M'Rory, anxiously.

"Would it be possible to overtake the messenger?"

"O! it would, Sir," said M'Rory, eagerly; " that is, your honour, it would nat; but morally impossible in respect of hjs being at th' other side of the mountain by this. Jack o' the lantern was nothing to the lad, in regard of his being mighty quick.

"' Are you Colonel O'Donnel's servant?' says he.

"' I am, Sir," says I, ' in lieu of a better.'

"' Is he at home?' says he.

"< Yes he is,' says I, ' as you may see ;' and I pointed to your honour on them rocks, with the sun setting like a glory on you. With that, he says no more, hut gives me the letter, and claps spurs and away with him, though I kept calling to him to come back for the answer; but sure I'll go to the village and inquire for him, your honour, for he must bait there any how, Sir."





"Pray do then, M'Kory," said O'Donnel, with his eyes fixed on the letter.

"O, I will, your honour; I'll be there in a whiff, though I wouldn't know the fellow's face again, in respect of never seeing it, for his hat was flapped so in his eyes, Sir, and his surtout was wrapped round him; but I'll go, your honour, and look for him."

Still he lingered with an expression of countenance that O'Donnel happily construed, and he observed—

"You may set your heart at rest, M'Rory: there are no bad news. This letter is from a friend; but I wish to return an answer, so much, that I will walk to the village myself, and inquire for the messenger." And he proceeded on with a rapid step.

"Well, God be praised, Sir; for I had mighty ugly dreams last night, and thought I saw the ancient ould Abbe, sitting on the rock of Kilmacrennan, bidding us good bye, which is as much as to say we shall never tread this ground again any way; and Mary says the bracket hin never roosted the whole night long, only flitting about. Well, she's a wonderful bird."

During these observations, M'Rory was walking after his master, and having opened the little gate for him at the end of the glen, he took out his beads and prayed his way back, observing at every decade, "Well, that letter must mean something good or bad, any how, to say nothing of the dream, which was remarkable."

Colonel O'Donnel returned late to the cottage, and much heated by the rapidity with which he had walked; but all inquiry had been fruitless. No person to answer the description of the messenger had been seen in the village, or had stopped to refresh himself or his horse at the public-house.





He remained, therefore, lost in amazement at an event so extraordinary, so unexpected, so mysterious. The number of envelopes, which he had to undo, were intended probably to give the messenger time to escape, for there could be no other clue to discovery. Who, then, was this invisible and guardian angel, who thus secretly and unostentatiously administered to his wants. It was evidently a woman, as it was asserted to be: it was a woman's hand, a woman's pretty seal and device; and the act, at once delicate in its conduct, as prodigal in its nature, was a woman's; but what woman? His thoughts suddenly reverted to the English tourists. They wandered for a moment to Lady Singleton. Nothing could be less like her, than the mystery with which so liberal a benefaction was conferred: they fixed on Lady Florence. She was nobly born—might be noble-minded, and perhaps imprudently generous. Two years were a long space to elapse without testifying this liberal interest in his favour, which now fell like a thunder-bolt on him: yet if it were not her, it was utterly impossible to fix on any other. Her eye and her smile still lived in his memory; for since he had beheld her, no eye so bright, no smile so bland, had met his view to efface their influence.

Every man is vain, where woman is in question; and though O'Donnel was as little so as most men, yet the play of Lady Florence's vanity had been so successively directed against his own, that even at this remote period, it influenced his conjectures; and he remained almost convinced that she was his invisible benefactress. The person intrusted with the commission was well acquainted with the intricacies of the mountain roads and the site of his retreat; and the admiral's domestics knew the country well.





He sealed up the bills, and placed them in a letter case, till on his arrival in London be should have an opportunity of returning them to the prodigal donor; resolved that no want, no misfortune should ever induce him to touch a shilling of a bounty, which, coming as it did, he would have deemed it nothing short of infamy to touch. Few women are so situated as to be able to make such donations, even when the object sanctions the liberality ; and a married woman could scarcely do it without the knowledge of her husband, still less probably with his permission: but from any woman, under any circumstances, he would have shrunk from receiving pecuniary assistance. The very idea wounded the finest feelings of his nature, humbled his pride, and revolted his principle.

With respect to his worldly circumstances, this princely gift, therefore, went for nothing; but it interested and perplexed him, and kept his spirit buoyant, which would else have sunk, as he again saw himself on the point of quitting the shades of his youth, and thrown destitute on the world, with a mode of existence to seek at fourand thirty. Where now were the hopes that misled, the illusions that dazzled, the motives that impelled, and the fresh unworn imagination that threw its brilliant halo over all? Time and experience had damped or dispelled them; and he was now undeceived without being insensible; he felt not less deeply, indeed, but less promptly; and above all, he expected nothing, for he had been disappointed in every thing.

The poor and the peasantry of his neighbourhood, who heard of his intended departure, crowded the avenue of his dwelling, on the morning of his journey, and followed the chaise that carried him to the town where he was to take the mail. While M'Rory, who would not be prevailed to go inside, sat on the portmanteau behind, shaking hands with some, waving his hat to others, bidding farewell, and giving a tear or a prayer to all; while Bran, with his old collar newly furbished up for the occasion by his friend M'Rory, followed the carriage and shared the adieus and good wishes of the affectionate crowd.





CHAPTER XIII.



In Dublin, Colonel O'Donnel received the full value for the basket of his sword, carefully preserving the blade till better times might enable him to remount it; and the day after his arrival in the capital of his country, he sailed for Holyhead, in the Dublin packet, in the hope of making acquaintance with its popular commander, of whose urbanity and attentions Mr. Glentworth and his party had spoken much and gratefully*.

Pursuing their route to London by the mail, the Irish travellers reached the metropolis of England in less than two days; and M'Rory having discovered a countryman in one of the waiters, at the house where the coach stopped, procured through his recommendation lodgings more adequate to the pecuniary resources of his master, than to his spirit or rank. But M'Rory, who loved change, and loved travelling, and who was in high spirits, declared the place was nate and clane, but the floor mighty slippery, though no ways damp, but quite the contrary, which was remarkable.

The morning after his arrival, O'Donnel's first intention was to seek out the residence of Lady Florence Grandville. He had no interest in renewing his acquaintance with any other of his quondam guests; for, with the exception of him who was no more, he considered them as mere people of the world, disciples of that

* It is unnecessary to mention Captain Skinner.





doctrine, whose wisdom is to make the most of the present. In the memory of such he well knew absentees have no place: the few who contribute to their immediate amusement, or supply their actual want, make up to them the whole sum of society; and even those few, adopted rather than chosen, tolerated oftener than preferred, occupy attention but for the existing moment; and then, as chance or interest decides, pass on, like the little circle which preceded them, to make room for others, who in succession amuse, and are forgotten like themselves.

O'Donnel knew enough of life to feel that with such persons a permanent connection was not to be expected; and that fortune, rank, and consideration, could alone give body to a floating prepossession, or durability to fugitive esteem. Too proud to seek, where he was certain he should not be sought, he confined his researches in the Red Book to the residence of Commodore Grandville. Upon this point, however, he obtained no information from its pages. The house of his brother, Earl Grandville, he found was in Portman Square, and thither he directed his steps.

As he was proceeding along Bond Street, he heard his name loudly pronounced, and turning round, perceived a footman running after him, and still calling him by his name. He stopped till the man, bustling through the crowd, could come up to him and deliver his message ; which was, that his lady, Lady Singleton, begged to speak with him.

O'Donnel followed the man, and perceived Lady Singleton's head stretched out of her carriage window, at a considerable distance

"Colonel O'Donnel," she exclaimed as he approached, "I am quite rejoiced to meet you here. How long have you been in town? Why did you not call on me? Do you know I have sent you three letters successively, these three last days, begging you would come over as quickly as possible."





"Indeed," said O'Donnel, involuntarily gratified by the unexpected cordiality of her manner, and astonished at the nature of her communication: "three letters to me, madam!"

"I have a great deal to say to you," she continued, "here, John, open the door. Pray come into my carriage, Colonel, for a few minutes."

O'Donnel prepared to obey; but the thing was impossible. The vis-a-vis was so heaped up with books, papers, parchments, patterns, new music, and old china, that not only O'Donnel could not get in, but a quantity of the light freighting fell out. "What a bore!" said Lady Singleton. "Take care John, of that piece of silk; pick up Davy's Researches. There is Lady Llanberis's^/erme-ornee entirely spoiled!—Oh heavens! the Dresden cup ! and poor Winter's MS. ballet!"

O'Donnel and the footman had by degrees reinstated all these valuable and incongruous articles; and her Ladyship, satisfied of their safety, again addressed the former, with an air of confidence and mystery. "I must see you," she said, "immediately, I have something to communicate which cannot fail to gratify and interest you. There is a person extremely anxious about you, —a distinguished person."

"About me I " interrupted O'Donnel, eagerly, hoping that he had come at the clue of his mysterious benefaction. "I can tell you nothing now," she continued; "for here is the shopman with my lace. I am, as usual, accablee with business. But will you dine with me today in Baker-street? No, not to-day. By the bye, we all meet this evening at my brother's to sign the marriage articles. To-morrow then—but to-morrow Horatia is.to be married. However, you may breakfast with me to-morrow before the fuss begins: we don't go to

o





St. George's till eleven."—O'Donnel accepted the invitation, and the next moment, perceiving her Ladyship deep in all the treasures of Mechlin and Valenciennes, he made his bow, and retired from the carriage, resolved to postpone his inquiries after Lady Florence, till he heard more of the distinguished person who was so deeply interested for him. Aware, however, of the inconsequence of Lady Singleton's character, he resolved not to intrust her with a confidence which she had not the delicacy to estimate. It was not his own secret, but that of another which he held in keeping; and Lady Singleton was perhaps the last person in the world to whom such a trust should be confided. He remembered "the discretion" recommended, and felt no inclination to swerve from the counsel.

The next morning he was punctual to his appointment, and found her Ladyship in her dressing-room, (as he had found her in her carriage,) encompassed by all the insignia of the bustling office which she had assigned to herself in the world. Lady Singleton was no longer the personage she had been: she was no longer upheld by the influence of twenty thousand per annum, by the respectability of her late inestimable husband, nor by what in London tells more than all, the size and situation of her house. She had lost her hotel with its court and porte-cochere, and lived in a comparatively small house in Baker-Street. • .

Her character had also undergone some modification, as well as her state. Her self-importance was diminished. But though in herself she had very limited materials to work upon, her wonted restlessness and inherent tendency to dictation still found vent, and was officiously busied for others. She made good matches, broke off bad ones; directed the fetes she could no longer give, and made lists for assemblies she could no longer hold. Still preserving the bon odeur of her former fashion, she was consulted as counsel, or accepted as umpire, in contests between those rival follies, which so often wage mutual and unrelenting war amongst the great. She was the oracle likewise of all those who were not, could not, and yet would be great; and was assiduously cultivated by the nouveaux nobles and the nouveaux riches. She gave the tasteful direction of fashion to the innumerable fopperies, in which new-gotten wealth sports away the burthen of its superfluity. There was one person, however, to whom she was at this moment exclusively devoted, whose rank, fashion, and opulence, gave consequence to the connection, and whose character and pursuits afforded ample materials for her " strenous idleness" to act upon. This person was Adelaide, Countess of Llanberis.





"Well, Colonel," said Lady Singleton, extending her hand to him as he entered; "here you find me, as usual, sur le grand trottoir, in the service of my friends. You do not know that I have been yourproneuse en titre since we parted: I have indeed, and to some purpose too. I have not forgotten L'dme Paladin, as Lady Florence used to call you."

'" Where is Lady Florence?" eagerly interrupted O'Donnel.

"Oh, poor Lady Florence I you have not heard then? However, you have no loss: she could be of no use to you in London. They had a wretched twopenny house, and lived entirely among their own knot. The Grandvilles are poor as poor can be. Still, however, she was good ton; but there is an end of her. She had twins! —Only think of Lady Florence having twins I She lost her health after a bad confinement, and with it her beauty—and you know she had nothing else. She is ordered to the Madeiras, as her last hope, where the Admiral (for he is now an admiral) is stationed. There, ihey have been these twelve months; and there they are o2





likely to remain, as my daughter Vandaleur tells me, who heard from her friend Lady Florence last week."

"Your daughter Vandaleur!" repeated O'Donnel, endeavouring to recollect the members of the group, of whom few had made any great impression upon his memory.

"Then you did not hear that my daughter Caroline had married Mr. Vandaleur? You know he could not really follow his friend Lady Florence to the Madeiras; not that he is less devoted. But exclusively of the necessity of observing the decencies, it could not be expected that a njan whose habits are made up in London life, would expatriate himself out of sentiment. Au reste, he lived in the same set with my family, and you know, men like to marry in their own set; and so cela va sans dire! It is a good match, but not so good as Horatia's, which I call my match; for Mr. Henshaw is one of the most rising young men of the day, and heir to the richest commoner in England. Of course, you read his maiden speech. I have had every thing my own way, from the bridal veil to the jointure. Indeed, I had no one to act for me ; for a melancholy change has taken place in my family and circumstances since I saw you, Colonel O'Donnel, which of course you heard."

She paused and sighed, and after a silence of some minutes, which O'Donnel, absorbed in feelings of unaffected regret, did not interrupt, she again resumed:—

"My step-son is gone to the Greek Islands with Lord Boston, the son of my most particular friend; but apropos of this friend, for we have not a moment to lose. There is, as I mentioned to you, a very distinguished person very much interested for you indeed: and not to faire valoir my little services, I must confess it was I who first mentionedyou to her; and that, too, in a manner calculated to make the impressions she had received in your favour lasting: for je connais. ma femme! She expects you at her villa, to which she has particularly invited you. Her invitation is now on its way to Lough Swilly; but it shall be repeated immediately, in due form, as I shall write this day to inform her of your arrival in London.





"I should not be so anxious to bring about this acquaintance, but that I know, in the end, you will be both mutually obliged to me. She has a powerful interest, great influence; and whatever may be your views.,(for I suppose you have done nothing yet), she cannot fail to forward them, if her prevention in your favour continues; and this will depend on yourself. Your talents and accomplishments are just the sort of thing to catch her. Indeed, from my description of you, and all that sort of thing, she is already quite iprise, on ne le peut plus. I promised her, when I thought you in Ireland, that you would come over, and spend the Christmas holidays at her 'palais d'Alcine,' for such her villa literally is. Now that you are here, there can be no question about it; for you are not aware how much she is your friend."

"And who, Madam," said O'Donnel, at last getting an opportunity to ask the question, as her ladyship paused for breath, -" who is this unknown, but propitious deity? Under what name is she to be invoked and thanked?"

"Why the person in question," said Lady Singleton, importantly, "is no other, than Adelaide, Countess of Llanberis, Baroness Boston of Llanberis in Wales, and of Boston Hall in Somersetshire; an heiress in her own right, at the head of a Welsh principality, and an English estate, which would make the territory of a German prince. She holds five boroughs in her hands; is mistress of one of the largest hotels in London, and one of the most delightful villas in Surrey: and to this, that she is supreme bon-ton, a widow in the prime of life, with an only son not yet of age; and that nothing can exceed her societies in London, except her Christinas and Easter parties at Longlands. There you are sure to find whatever is most recherche. I must tell you, also, that Lady Llanberis is quite in our way—not the least English. She is a Welshwoman, with strong feelings and great animation of character; and, as we would say in France, loute petillante. She married, unhappily, at eighteen, was a widow at twenty, and has maintained her enviable independence for seventeen years, refusing the best matches in England—But I must be off; there are the carriages drawn up. I am obliged to accompany the bridal party to Shropshire, to Henshaw's uncle's; but I shall certainly meet you at Longlands in less than ten days; for you must go immediately, if you mean to go at all. Meantime, leave me your address, for I shall inclose you the Countess's invitation the moment I hear from her. I am now sending her off a packet of music and china, and 'shall have an answer by express to-morrow; for she has as many expresses on the road as your Irish secretaries.





Remember, Longlands is near the town of ."

O'Donnel gave his card of address for a coffee-house in the neighbourhood of his obscure lodging; and Lady Singleton, witnout affording him time or opportunity for reply or observation, rung for her woman, and bade him a friendly good-by; adding that all this time her daughters were waiting for her in the bride's dressingroom.

The character, which Lady Singleton had given O'Donnel of Lady Llanberis, appeared to him romantic, as was her predilection in his favour, which evidently arose out of Lady Singleton's exaggerated descriptions; and now thoroughly convinced that Lady Florence, poor id absent, could not be his unknown benefactress, his Bons turned upon this "distinguished person," whose immense wealth, caprice, expresses, and above all, sending six hundred miles to ask a stranger, unseen, unknown, to become an inmate of her family, seemed to warrant any unlikelihood imagination could suggest. He deemed it next to impossible, that he could have been invited to come such a distance, for anything but his own benefit and advantage; and he had nearly decided on accepting an invitation, which, as he could not expect an answer from Germany for a fortnight to come, would at least involve him in no difficulty, or lead to any inconvenience; but which would enable him to verify or disprove his doubts, and perhaps become the means of discharging an obligation, by which he was still resolved not to benefit. The length of his visit would of course be determined by circumstances; but as pe paid it with reluctance, he calculated upon its being short. To one in] his tone of mind and spirits it could pot fail to be wearisome and oppressive.





The next evening he received the following letter from Lady Singleton.

Dear Colonel,

I enclose Lady Llanberis's answer and invitation. You will perceive our Countess is quite tete montee about you. Yours, a la hate et

au revoir, C. Singleton.

Letters inclosed.

TO THE LADY VISCOUNTESS SINGLETON.

'my Dear Lady S.

The arrival of our hero is really quite too good, too lucky an event. My secret is, however, I hope quite safe. At all events send him off without a moment's delay. I want to have him here before the house fills, that we might understand each other a little, I beg— I command! Adieu,





Adelaide Llanberis.

CARD.

The Countess of Llanberis requests the honour of Colonel O'Donnel's company, during the holidays, at Longlands.

Dec. 20th.

O'Donnel had scarcely run his eyes over these notes and card, when be wrote and despatched the following billet.

To The Lady Viscountess Singleton.

Dear Madam,

I beg earnestly to know whether I am concerned in the "secret" alluded to by the Countess of Llanberis; entreating your ladyship to suspend your judgment on the seeming impertinence of a curiosity, which is, however, justified by the feeling; out of which it arises. I am, dear Madam,

Your Ladyship's most obliged,

and obedient servant,

O'donnel.

London, Dec. 20th.

In return to this note, he received a little twisted paper, containing the following answer.

Mais quelle bevue! to send you Lady's L.'s letter. The fact is, I scarcely read it; but you ought not to have seen it. I entreat that you will not notice the secret, when you see the Countess. She will take her own time for explaining herself to you ; suffice it to say, she did not ask you from Ireland for nothing. She has views in your favour, which—but I cannot tell you more without telling all. Only think of Mr. Henshaw forgetting the ring, and no one minding it till the ceremony was half over! Lady Llanberis will expect you without delay: pray don't disappoint her. She has the best heart in the world: but she is not used to disappointments.





Adieu, dear Sir,

C. S.

These notes fully justified O'Donnel's suspicion. It was this "best heart in the world," to which he was known only by his misfortunes, that he stood so largely indebted; but with something of the reluctance with which pride owns itself indebted, and with something of the eagerness with which self-love longs to behold the person who has done the honours by its feelings, he resolved to set off the next day for Longlands. When there, he determined to abide by Lady Singleton's advice, and suffer the generous delicacy of his unknown benefactress to take its own time for explanation. He thought it natural she should wish to know the object of her beneficence, and felt uncomfortable at the difficulty, which must arise in rejecting a gift, bestowed with such confidence in its acceptance.

There was one term, however, he did not like in Lady Llanberis's note: it was the term, "our hero." He had all the susceptibility to ridicule which men feel who have lived in the great world, and know its influence. What exaggerated descriptions could Lady Singleton have made in his character, to obtain him what was in his own opinion so ridiculous a sobriquet. He trembled, lest, when forced upon the irksomeness of speaking of himself, he had let fall some idle word, out of which the busy fancy of his auditress had woven a tale of wonder. Conjecture, however, was idle. "Time and the hour" would unravel all. Having first, therefore, expended more upon the equipment of M'Rory than his circum





stances could afford, and committed Bran to the care of his landlord (who consented to take him en pension till his master's return), O'Donnel and his servant set off in a hack chaise for Longlands.

This magnificent villa was but fifteen miles from London. Although every object was involved in one hue, by a deep snow which had fallen on the preceding night, still it appeared an highly ornamented spot. It was near three o'clock in the afternoon, when he arrived; and he was evidently not the first guest; for his humble chaise was for some time prevented from drawing tip to the door, till a carriage, which had arrived a few minutes before, was unloaded.



CHAPTER XIV.



When the carriage which had preceded O'Donnel's had driven from under the porte-cochere, the folding doors were shut; for the porter supposed that the hack chaise, which followed, contained some of the servants, and would drive to the offices. Though several servants appeared at the windows of the ante-rooms on either side the hall, yet the porter, when apprised of his mistake, had rung his bell repeatedly, before any footman or groom of the chambers appeared to receive a guest, who approached in so humble a vehicle.

The appearance of M'Rory, who was the first to leave the chaise, and who stood gazing with astonishment at the splendour of the hall, was not much calculated to do away the impression, which the shabbiness of their equipage had made. With the little sum which O'Donnel had spared him, he had purchased a tawdry livery of some long-past shrievalty, which was so much too small for its gigantic wearer, as to suspend his arms at a considerable distance from his sides.





O'Donnel had not perceived the outre appearance of his man, until he had taken off his great coat in the hall; but, mortifying as it was, the circumstance was then irremediable.

M'Rory's strange figure instantly excited a titter amongst the servants, which the distinguished air and appearance of his master as instantly suppressed.— O'Donnel gave in his name, which M'Rory (though previously instructed) had forgotten to do; and leaving his servant in the hands of the footman, was ushered by a groom of the chambers through a suite of rooms to the saloon, which terminated the range. It was a room of great dimensions and magnificence. The servant announced him in a low voice, and O'Donnel walked to the,head of the apartment, which he perceived was already occupied.

On two lounges, at either side of one of the fire-places, sat, or rather reclined, two gentlemen, evidently but just arrived. The one with his hand in his waistcoat pocket, and his eyes half-closed, leaned back upon a pile of cushions ; the other, a little more upright in his posture, though not less torpid in his air, sat in motionless contemplation of the seal of his own watch. To O'Donnel's slight bow, they returned an almost imperceptible inclination of the head; and though he remained standing for nearly ten minutes at the fire, they neither moved nor spoke.

O'Donnel, to relieve the awkwardness of his situation, then walked to another fire-place, and taking down a volume of Voltaire's plays, which lay upon the chimneypiece, soon lost sight of his silent and unsocial companions, in the sufferings of " Merope."

A silent quarter of an hour had thus elapsed, when





the gentleman of the seal, addressing the other in a low voice, said:

"Charles, did you observe any thing near the third mile-stone?"

"A man hanging from a tree?" asked Charles, in the same tone and key.

The interrogator nodded assent, and Charles nodded an affirmative. Another ten minutes of silence ensued: and it is impossible to say how much longer it might have lasted, but for the interruption of sounds of distant laughter, which, though they made O'Donnel start and turn round, effected no change of position in either of the silent gentlemen.

A scarlet curtain was now suddenly drawn aside by a little page in a fantastic dress, who came from behind it, and held back a glass door, which disclosed a beautiful conservatory, " redolent of spring," amidst the snows of December. Along this conservatory glided a group on the very tiptoe of high spirits, preceded by one who appeared to be the leader of the party in the most literal sense of the word. It was a woman, who seemed to have just touched on that period of life, ou Ton nest plus jolie, metis ou Von est encore belle.. Her figure was distinguished, her air decided; and there was in her countenance and laugh (for she was still laughing when she entered the saloon) an exuberance of spirits, beyond what habitual cheerfulness, or even casual gaiety, bestows.

Without observing O'Donnel, who stood parallel with the door of the conservatory, she advanced to the gentlemen at the head of the room, and giving her hand to the knight of the seal, who but half rose to meet her, exclaimed:

"Good heavens, Duke! who would have thought of finding you here? Why this is really too good! I did not expect you these ten days.—Lord Charles, you never wrote me a syllable of this." As sbe spoke, she put her hand into that of the other silent gentleman, with a little air of intelligence, which spoke much more than her address to him conveyed.





"I thought," she continued, " you could not possibly get off that Lady Loton's invitation, and her plays, and all the rest of her set-out."

"It was not easy," said Lord Charles: "but my brother at last decided upon not going to her, and came to you by preference."

"This is all de meux en mieux," said Lady Llanbens (for she it was), with the most lively satisfaction in her countenance. "People imagine it is easy to get good society in their villas; it happens to be just the contrary, especially good men: and this, perhaps, Lady Loton will find, notwithstanding her French plays—but, oh! I wish you had come a little sooner: we have been really quite amused this morning."

While her ladyship went on, the rest of the party, who knew the Duke and Lord Charles, made their bows and nods; and those who did not know them, grouped round the fire, "We are just returned from theferme ornee," she continued, "where we had quite a scena between my Scotch steward and Mr. Dexter. You must know Mr. Dexter, Duke; he has asked me for a letter of introduction to your grace, which I mean to give him. Yon will like him most amazingly, I promise you; be was introduced to me by Lady Singleton. He is passionately fond of agricultural pursuits, and brought me a letter from her to permit him to visit myferme ornee: well, he wanted to try a mode of fattening turkeys here, which he has effected with great success at the late Mr. Glentworth'splace in Ireland : and which is, by cramming them with pebbles. We all went with him to be present at the experiment, andout of two turkeys only-oneTM choked. But so bored a person as poor M'Farlane! he stood by, absolutely writhing in agony for the fete of his turkeys, till unable any longer to suppress his emotion, he burst out in such a tirade of Scotch invective I oh! he is worth any thing! his accent alone is worth his wages; nothing can be more ridiculously entertaining. I shall certainly raise his salary next year, and then, Mr. Dexter—by the bye, Miss Carlisle, what has become of Mr. Dexter?"





"Why, don't you remember," replied the young lady, laughing, " that you sent him for some sort of patent cork, he recommended for shuttlecocks: he will be frozen to.death, poor man, on the top of that horrible, stage, Lady Llanberis:"

"Poor man! so he will," returned Lady Llanberis: "but it was his own fault; he was in such a hurry to deliver his letter of introduction to Lord N. which I gave him; for he wants something in the Treasury, I don't know what; and when the Treasury is in question, Lord N. is the person beyond every one,—but, good heavens!" exclaimed her ladyship, in a tone of amazement, to Lord Charles: "who is that very magnificent looking person at the lower fire-place?"

"Don't know at all," replied Lord Charles, coldly.

"Not know! Was he here before you?"

"I rather think not."

"And was he not announced; and did you not hear his name?"

"Not exactly. I believe it was a major something, or a colonel somebody—Major O'Flaherty, perhaps; for it was an O, and sounded Irish."

"O'Donnel?" said her ladyship, eagerly.

"Possibly," replied his lordship, languidly and sunk again on his cushions; while Lady Llanberis bounded forward to welcome her unknown guest. With equal ease, though not equal eagerness, Colonel O'Donnel advanced to meet her ladyship.





"I am afraid," he said, with a smile, " that 1 am reduced to the awkward necessity of announcing myself to the Countess of Llanberis."

"No, no," she interrupted: "there is no necessity. You are," she added, throwing her eyes rapidly over him, "not to be mistaken, Colonel O'Donnel."

O'Donnel bowed, and her ladyship seating herself on a sofa near the fire-place where he stood, motioned to him to take a seat beside her, and began a conversation with him with all the ease of familiar acquaintance. The group at the other fire-place raised their eye-glasses, directed their glances to the stranger, and, after, a few vague inquiries of "who is he?" "does any one know him?" they turned away their eyes, and resumed the topics of conversation, which their curiosity about the stranger had for a moment interrupted.

Meantime, Lady Llanberis had run over a variety of subjects with astonishing rapidity, which Colonel O'Donnel endeavoured to follow, without being able to join; she asked several questions about his romantic retreat in Ireland; talked of Milesian chiefs and heroes; of the Emperor of Germany and the late Queen of France; of Irish mountains and foreign courts; of Voltaire's little theatre at Ferney, and the wonderful bridge of Carrick-a-rede; of her obligations to Lady Singleton, for presenting so desirable an acquisition to her circle of friends, and of his kindness in so readily accepting her invitation. She then, failing to prevail on him to take some refreshment in the adjoining coffee-room, proposed that they should walk on the terrace, which skirted the back of the house, from whence the view at sunset was splendidly fine; and rung for her page to bring her snow-shoes.

"I know," she continued, "you are a worshipper of the picturesque:—I hear there is nothing so beautiful as your descriptions; and I expect, after having seen Longlands with you, that I shall have a much better opinion of it; for, I am told, you give interest to the most trifling object by your mode of detailing it; but, as Lady Singleton says, that is a gift from Heaven. I really long, Colonel O'Donnel, to hear some of your beautiful Irish stories. I love stories beyond every thing, and I hear you are a raconteur of the very first order." To all this, her guest had only an opportunity to bow or smile; yet, pleased with an empressement so flatteringly in his favour, struck by the freshness of a character, which seemed but too romantic for the circumstances of its owner, he forgave the incoherence, the whim, and idle curiosity, which accompanied them. . While her ladyship was still talking, in expectation of the snow-shoes, a gentleman advanced from the group at the further end of the room, and in passing her, threw a fine, rather than a gentlemanlike figure, into the most extraordinary pantomimic contortions.





Lady Llanberis burst into an immoderate fit of laughing: "Go, Mon Arlequin," she cried, "you are too ridiculous." Mon Arlequin now twisted his head upon his shoulders, with a celerity of rotation not inferior to that of Grimaldi himself; and, affecting to make a vaulting leap, jumped through the door, and disappeared. Lady Llanberis observed, still laughing, "I suppose you know who that is, Colonel O'Donnel?"

"No, indeed, madam," said O'Donnel, unable also to repress a laugh: "I have not that pleasure."

"Indeed! I thought everybody knew him; why that is the celebrated green parrot."

O'Donnel opened his eyes.

"Yes," continued her ladyship, seriously, "that is the famous Mr. Frederick Carlisle, who made the fortune of my masquerade, and of his own reputation, last winter, in the character of a green parrot. Nobody had ever heard of the Carlisles: they were complete mauvaise ton, or rather no ton at all; till Lady Singleton, who picks up all sorts of odd people, met them at a lady mayoress's assembly, where the two Mr. and three Miss Carlisles made the whole frais of the night. The Mr. Carlisles did a number of comical tricks, and danced a pas de deux upon stilts, and Miss Carlisle turned a wax candle into a city procession, making such astonishing likenesses of the mayor and sheriffs in a few minutes, that models were taken from them the next day, I am told, by Bacon. Then, the other misses waltzed and sung glees with their brother; and, in short, there was nothing so good, as Lady Singleton told me; so I had them all at my masquerade; the girls played, sung and danced, as Savoyards; Mr. Carlisle went first as a Hessian boot; and then imitated a knife-grinder's wheel, till all the teeth in the room were on an edge; but Mr. Frederick Carlisle completely carried the night,





"Since that, the whole family are quite recherches; they make everything go off well; and if they refused to come to me, I should certainly shut up my house. There is a tiresome old mother, who always insists upon being asked with them, and that is a bore; but it is always the case: whenever you pick up a genius, or something amazingly amusing, you are sure to have the clog of a vulgar father, or a quizzical mother, or something of that sort; but the fact is, everything has its price, and if one must be amused, one must pay for it, that's all."

As her ladyship concluded this speech, a tall, pale, shadowy looking young man, with his mouth and eyes puckered into a look of thoughtfulness, and a pair of black-rimmed spectacles raised above his eye-brows, entered the room, and laid at Lady Llanberis's feet a large book, bound in green velvet, applying to the act, p





the worn-out French anecdote of the court wit to his queen: "L'uni-vers est a vos pieds *."

"Is that your own, Mr. Mussen?" asked her ladyship: "it is very pretty. Well, have you written quantities of pretty things in my album ?" turning- over the leaves carelessly.

"No, madam," he replied, with an air of pedantry: "Queen Mab hath not been with me; the muses have turned jilts; Pegasus become restive; and the waters of Helicon muddy as a London fountain."

"O, by the bye, Mr. Mussen," said her ladyship, yawning: "do repeat your impromptu on Frederick Carlisle, for Colonel O'Donnel.—Colonel, I beg to present Mr. Mussen to you." The gentlemen bowed.

"Pray excuse me,' Lady Llanberis. I never could repeat from memory any thing I either said or wrote; besides, it was severe, and I wish the thing to be forgotten."

"Not at all," said Lady Llanberis, yawning again with an increasing languor, as if she had exhausted her vitality: "you know he likes to be talked of, well or ill. I have been just telling Colonel O'Donnel, what an amazingly clever person he is. Don't you think so, Mr. Mussen?"

"Why, Mr. Frederick Carlisle has his talent, madam," replied Mr. Mussen: "he has what Gall names the Organ of Pantomime in great perfection.

"Organ of Pantomime !" repeated Lady Llanberis, reviving by the force of her own laugh. "Oh, how good; I must read Gall; you must write to town for me for Gall, Mr. Mussen; you must indeed: is be a poet?"

"On the contrary, madam, he is a German physiologist. I believe his system to be the most ingenious thing

* A bad French pun—the queen was sitting on the edge of a bowling green, uni verd.





in the world, and I think we have now pretty substantial grounds for believing that there is an organ in the brain, for every affection of the mind, for every act of volition, from the whipping of a top to the writing of epic."

"I must have that book by return of post, Mr. Mussen; I must, indeed. Sit down immediately and write for a set; nay, you may as well write for two or three sets, one for each of the rooms. Those are just the kind of books one should have lying about, they are so very amusing."

"I will obey your ladyship this moment," returned Mr. Mussen: "but I must first give this little volume of Rousseau to Lady Mary Savill, which she begged me to bring her."

"Well, there she is at the other fire-place," said Lady Llanberis; and as he moved away, she observed :— "That is an amazingly tiresome young man. At first I thought him amusing enough, but he hangs so on hands after a little. He is a protege of Lady Mary Savill's, who is at the head of all the bas-bleus in town. There, that is Lady Mary, that lady netting, who looks so triste, but who has no reason in the world for it, only that she likes a little misery. The Dowager Duchess of Belmont, a great friend of mine, and out and out the most brilliant person I ever knew, says Lady Mary always puts her in mind of the French actress, Dumesnil's, speech: 'Ah! c'etoient des beaux jours; j'etois bien malheureuse alors.' However, Lady Mary is a very clever person, and nearly connected with the present Duke of Belmont, whom I believe you found here on your arrival, with his brother, Lord Charles Savill; and, as 1 happen to live particularly with that family, she is often with me: but come, Ml present you to them all."

Lady Llanberis then arose and led the way, accompanied by her new guest, and followed by the dwarf page and the snow shoes.

P2





Colonel O'Donnel was now introduced in form to the Duke of Belmont, and Lord Charles Savill, General and Lady Mary Savill, Mrs. Carlisle, her eldest son, and three daughters, a Sir Gilbert Curzon, and a Mr. Augustine Wharton: the latter gentleman was so like, and yet so unlike, Lord Charles Savill, that it was quite a puzzle to discover where the similitude or the dissimilitude existed. He was younger by some years, and yet he had his lordship's air of languid gravity, and cold reserve: he was lower by a foot, and yet he had his lordship's dignified elevation of carriage; while his dress, even to the fold of his cravat, was a fac-simile of Lord Charles's. He was, however, no relation to the house of Savill: he was merely Lord Charles's double, whom he considered as the mirror of fashion, the standard of bon ton,

"The glass, indeed, in which each nohle youth

Should dress himself."



As soon as Lord Charles left the room, which he did almost immediately on being presented to O'Donnel, this "shadow of a shade" arose also from his pile of cushions, and with the self-same step and stride, followed his prototype. After the bow of introduction was over, the group fell into their previous positions. Old Mrs. Carlisle was trying to keep the Duke awake, by an enumeration of her daughters' accomplishments, and the pains she had taken with their education. Lady Mary sat netting a purse in hair, while Mr. Mussen read to her in a low murmur the Pygmalion of Rousseau. She threw her eye, however, occasionally on the General, as he sat flirting with the eldest Miss Carlisle, who, as well as her sisters, was giving the attention of her eyes to Colonel O'Donnel. Sir Gilbert Curzon was playing tetotum by himself, at a spider table, and winning every game with an exclamation of triumph of*-" Well done, egad I A, for all," every turn.





Lady Llanberis, who was beginning to yawn, suddenly roused, on perceiving the book which Colonel O'Donnel had inadvertently carried with him from the other chimney-piece.

"What have you gotten there ?" she asked.

"I have just opened the Merope," he replied.

"Voltaire's Merope !" said Lady Llanberis, with the most pleasurable surprise marked in her countenance. "You admire, then, Voltaire's tragedies?"

"Some of them; at least, I infinitely prefer him as a dramatist to any other French writer, as being less cold, less declamatory, and —"

"You do," interrupted Lady Llanberis, smiling; " how very extraordinary!"

. "I am afraid, then," said O'Donnel, " my preference is not sanctioned by your ladyship's opinion."

"On the contrary; I quite idolise the tragedies of Voltaire; there is nothing like them. Now pray, Colonel O'Donnel, tell me which of his pieces you prefer."

"It is so long since I looked over any of them, Madam, that I am at a loss how to offer an opinion; but, as well as I recollect, I preferred Mahomet for its strength, and Merope for its situations; but by far the finest acting play of all is, what the French called La Tragedie Chretienne, Zaire."

"Zaire!" repeated Lady Llanberis, in a tone of ecstasy; "you really prefer Zaire? Good heavens, how extraordinary!"

All her ladyship's first brilliant flow of spirits now returned.

"Colonel, get me a chair, and another for yourself, and let us talk over this subject. How very odd!"

O'Donnel obeyed, wondering in what the oddity of his opinion consisted, which evidently had her approbation; yet extremely reluctant to renew a conversation which he conceived would lead to the common places of verbal criticism, upon works and subjects long worn out; which he considered as the very worst taste, and fit only for the insipid discussions of blue-stocking ladies and literary young gentlemen.





"So," said Lady Llanberis, seating herself, and drawing the chair she intended for O'Donnel close to her own, and towards the fire-guard—" so you prefer Zaire, Colonel O'Donnel?"

"Not perhaps critically," said O'Donnel, "but sentimentally, or rather by association. Many years are gone by, since I saw it acted at Paris. I was then at an age to be pleased with everything, and most of all with such highly wrought struggles between feeling and principle, love and religion, as are exhibited in the tender character of Zaire. I was enchanted with the over-strained sentiment of

"Je me croirois hai, d'etre aim£ foiblement;"

and looked down upon everything less energetic than

"Je veux avec exces vous aimer et vous plaire."

"A note for your ladyship," interrupted a groom of the chambers.

"Go on, Colonel O'Donnel," said Lady Llanberis, taking the note off the salver, and twisting it in her fingers, while her countenance, lighted up by the most brilliant animation, exhibited the varied expressions of amazement, triumph, and satisfaction.

"No, Madam," said O'Donnel, laughing, "I believe I have just stopped where I ought."

"On the contrary, you have no idea how interesting, how peculiarly delightful"

The page now advanced and said—

"Your ladyship's snow shoes."

"Snow shoes !" she replied angrily; "I don't want snow shoes, I am frozen; take them away and bring the fur basket. So, Colonel, La tendre Zaire is your favourite, and le grand Orosmane"





"The footman waits for your ladyships answer to the note," said the man.

"What footman? Whose note?" said Lady Llanberis. "There never were such tiresome servants/! I have no note."

"Dear," said Miss Carlisle; "you have torn it to pieces, Lady Llanberis."

"Well then, why will people send their notes so mal apropos?"

"Who is it from, Saunders?"

"From the Lodge, my Lady; from Mrs. St. Leger."

"Oh, I thought so," said Lady Llanberis; "that woman has such a rage for note-writing. Well, say I am busy, I am engaged.—I'll send an answer; there, go."

The servant retired.

"I thought," said Lady Mary, who had advanced upon hearing the last quotation from Voltaire: " I thought Mrs. St.Leger was a great favourite ; you talked of nothing else last winter."

"Yes, last winter, Lady Mary; but one cannot really go on admiring and talking of the same person, winter after winter; besides, all that sort of thing depends upon the set you live in. In the winter, and in the country, Mrs. Leger was all very well; but when I returned to town in the spring, it was quite another thing. It is impossible to get any one in London. You know my affection for my aunt Selbourne; it amounts to a positive passion: yet, though we live within two streets, I never could contrive to see her during the whole of last season. She lives among a description of persons with whom it is impossible to get on."

"I know very little of Mrs. St. Leger," said Lady Mary, "but I think her interesting. She is very unhappy," added Lady Mary, with a sigh, "in her married life, and this vein of sadness runs through all her tales: there is an exquisite pathos in all she writes: do you not think so, Mr. Mussen?"





Mr. Mussen, who never spoke but "in quaint and courtly phrase," and who, though but a blockhead by nature, was a coxcomb and a pedant by assumption, was marshalling his critical forces for an answer, when Lady Llanberis exclaimed, in her usual quick way—

"I think her still a very charming writer, Lady Mary, if you mean that; and I have indeed a very high opinion of her taste and discrimination. Last winter, Duke, when I was so low, at the time of your sister-in-law's death, poor Lady Charles, I was going to give up the world; and I entrusted Mrs. St. Leger to make out a list of particular friends for me, with whom I meant to live exclusively. I left it all to her; but you know I did return to the world, and the list went for nothing. However, I'll ask her here, Lady Mary, if you like; she only lives at the end of the park. Stay, my page shall write to her."

She beckoned to the page, a French lad of the most diminutive size, with a face, in spite of ugliness, full of intelligence. He was now holding the fur basket, as he before held the snow-shoes.

"Mon nain," said her ladyship, "va-t-en micrire le plus joli billet du monde d Mad. St. Leger, et pries la de nous dormer sa societe."

The dwarf, with a familiar grin, flew to obey her orders, and to write "le plus joli billet du monde," upon any subject it pleased heaven.

"Oh, stay, mon nain, don't trouble yourself. Lady Mary, we will walk to her cottage some day and ask her. She likes people of fashion to visit her cottage. There, Florio, you may go. Did you ever see such a little monster?" she continued, looking after him with a smile Of admiration: "he is such a treasure. I have been teased to death with pages: they would all grow so tall, and just as one has broken them in."





"I think, however," said the General, "your la'ship has nothing to fear from the aspiring views of that young gentleman, nor Mrs. St. Leger from the charms of her correspondent."

"Is Mrs. St. Leger," asked the Duke, gradually rousing from his stupor by the excitement of reiterated pinches of snuff—" is Mrs. St. Leger the woman that writes the books?"

"Yes," said Lady Mary: "your grace must have read her 'Tales of Sorrow,' her ' Tears of Sensibility,' and ' Luxury of Woe.'"

"No," replied his Grace: "I make it a rule never to read any thing which can affect me. I dare say she is a very larmoyante personage. Lady Llanberis, a'n't she?"

"On the contrary, she is extremely amusing, and tells very good stories. I think you will like her of all things, Duke."

"Does she tell as good stories as the Duchess?" asked Mr. Carlisle.

"Good heavens I no; there is nothing, there never was nor could be any thing like the Duchess."

"Of course you mean the Duchess par excellence," said the General; "the Duchess Dowager of Belmont."

Lady Mary and Mr. Mussen sneered.

"To be sure," said Lady Llanberis, " there is no such creature. I intended to surprise you all, but truth must out: she comes here to-day."

A pretty general exclamation of pleasure followed this intelligence. Mr. Carlisle spoke of her in raptures, and his sister said she was a talented creature. Lady Mary and her tall thin sentimental looking friend were silent, and exchanged looks.

"I wonder she is not arrived," said Lady Llanberis, impatiently: "pray, General, step into the ante-room and send one of the grooms of the chambers to the porter, to know if any of her people are come."





At that moment a servant entered and uttered something in a low voice to Lady Llanberis, who returned-—

"Oh, very well: I'll go directly." She then in a half whisper said to the Duke: "Lord Charles is in my dressing-room; will you join us?"

The Duke nodded his head. Lady Llanberis then left the room, and the circle broke up.

O'Donnel, happy to be released, and more fatigued than amused by all that had passed, retired to the apartment prepared for him, under the guidance of one of the servants; and then throwing himself into a chaise-longue, he endeavoured to form some opinion of Lady Llanberis's character, from the little he had seen of her. He well knew that it was the natural tendency of power, in whatever form it came, to swell the human heart; but its effects in her seemed only to have unbridled the imagination. It was difficult to form an estimate of her character on so short an acquaintance; but she appeared to him to be a person possessing great natural vivacity, feeling quickly, acting promptly, and deciding ^inconsiderately. Her approbation of such a character as Mr. Dexter, and other little instances of false judgment and idle whim, he considered as vices common to her class, when undistinguished by natural superiority of character or education; as generic rather than individual, and as by no means incompatible with that generous prodigality which had lavished its bounty on a stranger at the mere representation of another.

Her enthusiasm about Voltaire he did not all understand; neither did he enter into her regret for the loss of Lady Charles Savill, when, by Lord Charles's summons to her dressing-room, he appeared to be her favoured lover; but least of all did he understand her inviting himself, at a distance of six hundred miles, to





her house, after having already done so much in his favour. What further benefit did this warm-hearted and prodigal woman mean to confer upon one, who had no claims upon the generous interest which she took in his fate? If she had interest to restore him to his rank in the English service, it would be romantic folly, little short of madness, to decline it; but her money, her pecuniary benefaction, on that subject he had no second opinion, and he resolved on carrying her letter and its contents, which he had brought from London, always about with him, for the purpose of being always ready to return it, whenever the wished-for opportunity should



CHAPTER XV.



In addition to those who already had made their appearance in the saloons, a few strangers took their place at the dinner-table, at which conversation circulated languidly, in murmurs neither general nor audible, save only on the part of Lady Llanberis, who talked chiefly to her maitre d'hotel, as he stood behind her chair, in terms of reproof or approbation, of the several dishes which decked the table. The duke, who sat on her right hand, and Lord Charles, who was on her left, commended or disapproved, as their opinions dictated. Before the second course was removed, the sound of carriage-wheels passing the dining-room window caught Lady Llanberis's ear.

"It is the duchess," she said, dropping her knife and fork; and she immediately sent one of the servants to know if it was, indeed, this ardently expected guest. The man returned with answer, that it was the French cook, going to town for the opera.





"How tiresome!" said Lady Llanberis: " poor Le Maitre's passion for the opera amounts absolutely to folly. Do you know, he might have had double the wages he gets from me, if he would have engaged with the Irish Lord-Lieutenant; but there is no opera at Dublin, and he refused *. But I wonder what can detain the Duchess."

"I did not know you expected this new passion of yours," said Lord Charles, peevishly.

"Who—the dowager? To be sure, you are quite right: she is my passion, I confess; there is nobody so amusing, nobody so brilliant. Is it not so, Duke?"

"She is very out of the way, I think; very eccentric. Don't you, Charles?"

"Eccentric enough," returned Lord Charles, with an equivocal smile, between superciliousness and irony, which was immediately repeated by the servile muscles of Mr. Wharton.

"A little too eccentric," said Lady Mary, with a contemptuous laugh, which was re-echoed by Mr. Mussen. Every symptom of irritation now exhibited itself on the countenance of Lady Llanberis, and her delightful smile was instantly overshadowed. She struggled a little with her peccant humour, and then with a laugh, more in anger than in gaiety, she said—

"Oh I you are jealous of her, Lady Mary; you know you are."

"Who, I, Lady Llanberis?" said Lady Mary, colouring deeply; "of her? of such a person as that?"

The General threw a fearful look at his wife, and affected to laugh.

"Oh I yes, you know you are," said Lady Llanberis, gaily, and now quite composed by the discomposure of her guest. "You know that it happens to be just now

• A feet. The anecdote occurred to the late Duke of Richmond.





the fashion to admire such a person as that, and the

general"

"Les gens, les gens," said the Duke, looking round at the servants; and Lady Llanberis, with difficulty submitting to the prudent caution, added, " Well, I have done; but you may all say as you will; you men, at least, either are, or must be in love with her. She will be a personage with you all, yet, I promise you that."

"Elle Test, le Jut, ou le doit etre, I suppose?" said O'Donnel.

"Exactly," said Lady Llanberis. "Colonel O'Donnel, I'll take wine with you. Saunders, go to the porter, and inquire if any of the Duchess of Belmont's people are come. By the by, Duke, I hear she has retained all your uncle's old establishment."

"Very possibly," returned the Duke. "We are not particularly interested in her arrangements," said Lord Charles, drily.

The conversation was now changed by Sir Gilbert's giving an account of a riot at the opera, which every body had read in the "Morning Post;" and before the servant had returned, the object of his inquiry was, for the present at least, forgotten.

When the ladies rose from the table, the noble hostess appointed Lord Charles to do the honours, and as she passed O'Donnel, who stood up to open the door, she said, with a gracious smile—

"I shall tell the Duchess of your prophetic quotation, you may depend upon it."

The gentlemen sat but a short time after the ladies; and though O'Donnel took no part in the conversation, which was at once cold, feeble, and desultory, he was happy to be released from a situation, in which, in every sense, he found himself a stranger. Accustomed to foreign manners, he disliked a mode of society which excluded that sex upon which the variety and contrast, that give charm to all society, depend. With woman there is always some point of sympathy to be found; but men, holding together in accidental societies, chiefly by general discussions, are repelled rather than attracted, by the display of opinion, which, from the varieties of habit, interest, and education, seldom tends to agreement. What, therefore, such conversations gain in strength they lose in enjoyment, even at the time when social pleasure is, or ought to be, the sole object of pursuit. With women, on the contrary, conversation rarely dwells upon abstractions. Feelings the most gracious naturally arise, and insensibly animate the speakers, by an almost imperceptible play of the passions, imparting to discussion a charm, rather felt, perhaps, in its operation, than understood in its cause.





O'Donnel loved in the sex that heart which never lays by, that imagination which never reposes, and even that little vein of honest coquetry, which exists more or less in all, from the desire, almost innate in woman, of pleasing, and being pleased. As far as he could judge, he would not have chosen his friend, still less his mistress, from the circle he was going to join ; but, after all, they were women; and the first view of their light draperies, as he entered the drawing-room, gave a cheering impulse to his spirits, which the coldness and insipidity of the party he had left, had sunk to their lowest ebb.

Notwithstanding the little severities which had passed between Lady Llanberis and Lady Mary Savill, he found them amicably seated over a chess-board; Lady Mary very philosophically sustaining a complete defeat; Lady Llanberis in all the wildest intoxication of conquest. It was impossible to conceive spirits more raised, by a cause more trivial. Lady Mary refused to play any more: Lady Llanberis had declared she would play all night, and that all amusementsin the world were reduced to nothing, when placed in comparison with chess.





"Come then, Colonel O'Donnel," she added, on his making some observation on her excellent play, "you shall convince me I am the best player in the world; for I dare say you are the next best, and I mean to beat yon."

"I hope your ladyship will pardon my firm resolution to disappoint you," said O'Donnel, taking Lady Mary's seat. "I have an hereditary right to be a good player: there was even a tenure in my family held upon a game of chess *, the moves of which are only made once in a century."

"Oh, charming! delightful!" said Lady Llanberis, arranging her men with the greatest eagerness. "I expect every thing from this game. Now, do your worst; and do not act as Mr. Dexter does,—play like an angel, till the game is nearly ended, and then let me win it, one cannot tell how. Not but I should infallibly beat him, at all events: hut one would like a little play for it."

"Mr. Dexter, perhaps," said O'Donnel, "is like Voltaire's protege, who made it a point to let the philosopher beat him at chess; for chess, like the toothach, is too much for even philosophy itself. I mean the Pcre Adam, who, however, was not le premier des hommes."

"Who? Mr. Dexter," said Lady Llanberis, making her first move.

"I was speaking of Le Pere Adam," said O'Donnel, drily.

The game went on now with great spirit on the part of Lady Llanberis, who exclaimed from time to time, "There is no such game, nothing like it. I shall certainly introduce chess-parties, regular chess-parties, in London—there, check again! you may as well give

* See Miss Brook's relics of Irish poetry.





over, Colonel; you are beaten or next to it; you are, you may depend on it."

O'Donnel was indeed playing with great carelessness; in the first instance, because he at once perceived her ladyship's play was without plan or system, and might be overtaken whenever he pleased; in the next, because while her ladyship thought him pondering over a move, his attention, for the last five minutes, had been wholly engrossed by another subject.

It, was fixed upon a person, a lady, who, unannounced and unperceived, had entered by the folding-doors at the extremity of the room, and gliding up to the further end, was received by a burst of pleasure, which marked her a most desirable acquisition to the group, now closely circled round her. In the mere act of thus passing up the room, there was nothing—the manner was every thing. It was that playful, stealing motion, at once childish and dramatic; it was the finger pressed upon the lip to solicit silence, from the only person in the circle whose eye observed her; it was that light, noiseless step, "d tatons," which became an accomplice in her attempt at surprising the unwary; it was, in a word, that mixture of feminine grace and infantine playfulness, which (charming in a child) would have made the fortune of an actress.

Of the face of this welcome intruder O'Donnel could not judge, for he had but a transient view of her profile, as she emerged from behind a screen at the back of Lady Llanberis's chair. The figure, however, was rather picturesque than fine; and seemed to borrow its chief charm from the attitude and motion into which it was thrown. A travelling Polish dress announced the stranger to be a fresh arrival. A sable cap, held a little forward in the right hand, left a head still more sabla exposed to view.

"Allons, Colonel," said Lady Llanberis, impatient for his move, while meditating her own. "Your hereditary talent is deserting you fast. I perceive we are playing this game, as if it were for the tenure you mentioned."





"May I beg to ask your ladyship," said O'Donnel, making a careless move, " who is that lady who has just entered?"

"Lady! what lady?—there I check again—that? that is the Duchess—miserable, miserable! Is that your best play? Let me see—the Duchess of—What are you dreaming about?—the Duchess of Belmont."

"The lady you have so ardently expected. The vent, vidi, vici lady?" asked O'Donnel, in a tone of astonishment.

"Yes, the same; there—so much for your Bishop," continued Lady Llanberis, wholly occupied by her game, and indifferent to all the ladies in the world.

O'Donnel, a little amused, and a good deal surprised, now gave himself up to his game, took piece after piece, beat his fair antagonist from right to left, recovered his ground, and in spite of the increasing irritability and peevish exclamations of Lady Llanberis, had nearly brought the game to an issue, when Miss Carlisle, running up to the table, said—

"Oh! Lady L. you are losing every thing; the Duchess never was in such force ;—she has been overturned, got into a public-house for shelter, and has made such a story out of it I"

Repeated laughter at the head of the room attested the veracity of this account; and Lady Llanberis, reduced to the last extremity, with only a piece and two pawns remaining, and now as much annoyed as before she had been elated : out of temper, and out of patience, arose from her seat:—

"There," said she, "take the game, Colonel; it is not worth holding out," and away she flew with a newly'? Q





awakened enthusiasm, while O'Donnel cried after her, laughing, "La dameprend la dame;" and convinced that Mr. Dexter and le bon Fere Adam were very sensible men, pushed away the board, threw himself upon a sofa near it, and contemplated the party at the further end of the room.

The Duchess was carelessly seated on the arm of a sofa; Lady Llanberis reclined on a tabouret at her feet; every body else stood in a circle; and though he could not hear what her Grace was saying, he perceived she spoke with great animation of gesture, and was listened to with attention and applause.

Satisfied with this view, O'Donnel's thoughts turned on himself, and the contrast of his own actual state with the brighter destiny of these children of fortune and prosperity. Exiled by necessity, almost proscribed, without a home, without a friend, without even means of subsistence, beyond the hoped-for reward of services yet to be performed, in a cause unanimated by patriotism, in which no feeling was interested, no ambition roused. He knew that he had no place in the society upon which he now looked, but that which whim had accorded, or charity bestowed. He knew the place to which his birth, his talents, and character, entitled him: but did others acknowledge the claim which he could so proudly have supported, had he been put to the test? Oh no I —the poor, the disfranchised Irishman, the disbanded officer, in vain sought to support his flagging spirits with dreams of what had been. True, he was descended from the powerful and the great; allied to warriors and chiefs; the blood of princes ran in his veins; the spirit of the soldier and the gentleman guided his actions. It mattered not. What was—was felt. Poor, unknown, without rank, without consideration; without even those arts by which the sordid rise, without acquiescence or toleration for that weakness and vanity, which reward the hypocrisy, of which itself is the dupe, he felt more than ever the desolation of his fate; and he regretted more than ever that he had been led into a society, from which he could expect neither similitude, sympathy, nor coincidence; and whose brilliancy served only to cast a browner shadow over the darkness of his own contrasted misfortunes.





He now wished he had intrusted his secret to Lady Singleton, and remained in the humble obscurity so suited to his circumstances. The wish, however, was vain; and he was still turning in his thoughts how he should lead Lady Llanberis to the subject which had placed him in this disagreeable situation, when accidentally turning his eyes towards her, he perceived hers fixed on him, as if he were at that moment the subject of her conversation with the Duchess. They had both been withdrawn from the circle which had now broken up; some were at cards, others gone to the music-room, and some to the billiard-table. O'Donnel was upon the point of retreating to avoid this scrutiny; for the Duchess also seemed to direct her glance upon him; and her he wished particularly to avoid. All that had been said, for or against her, had alike disposed him neither to admire nor approve. To her partisans she seemed rather to be an object of caprice than of esteem; to her opponents, and they were members of her own family, she was rather a subject of contempt than dislike. These inferences, indeed, he felt were hastily drawn, from the very little he had heard of her; but whether just or false, ht had no inclination to be known to a woman, whose rank and fashion promised only those light and tinsel qualities, with which his own morbid feelings and sickly view of things would so ill accord. 'In the very act, however, of rising to depart from their gaze, the two ladies advanced towards him, arm in arm; but, contrary to his expectation, and much to his satisQ2





faction, they passed him by, and left the room together. He had now a full and close view of the Duchess's face. He was satisfied that that face was not unknown to him; and notwithstanding the seeming impossibility, he was almost persuaded, almost certain, that the Duchess Dowager of Belmont, and the sullen, blunt governess of Lady Singleton, were one and the same person.

He resumed his seat in the most profound astonishment, still bordering on incredulity. He endeavoured to revive in his mind the faint impressions, made by a person, in whom he had seen nothing to admire, and who had excited no further interest than was natural to feel for one, who had expressed an anxiety for his safety, and perhaps eventually had preserved his life. But if the Duchess of Belmont and Miss O'Halloran were indeed the same, which still he doubted, he was ready to ascribe to the acquisition of rank, power, and fortune more than he had ever before attributed to their influence. If it were Miss O'Halloran, how could Lady Singleton have remained silent on the wonderful metamorphosis of .her daughters' governess; even the bustle of the wedding, and her eagerness in Llanberis's service, did not satisfactorily account for the omission. Miss O'Halloran, too, a wit I Her slightest observation " erige en bon-mot "—It was almost impossible.

While he was still lost in thought upon this miraculous, but still doubted transformation, Lady Llanberis returned to the room, and seated herself by him.

"By the by," she said, "Colonel O'Donnel, I quite forgot that you must natuVally have seen the Duchess of Belmont, when she was with Lady Singleton in Ireland."

O'Donnel, now confirmed in his suspicions, replied laughing—" And I dare say, Madam, her Grace has forgotten the circumstance also."

"No, no, indeed she has not, I assure you; and she meant to have presented herself to you; but her stock of spirits were quite run out, between her break-down on the road, and her little exertions since her arrival; for she has really been quite charming. I must get her to repeat to you her adventure at the cabaret. Now, however, she is quite abattue. But so it is; we are all the slaves of nerves and spirits."





"And situation," added O'Donnel, amused at the idea of Miss O'Halloran's nervousness, whose image he had now before him, as he had seen her standing in her little red riding-hood on the shores of Glenarm.

"And of situation!" returned Lady Llanberis. "The Duchess will not come down again to-night, and I am going to sup with her in my dressing-room. There is certainly nobody like her. I have all my life preferred that sort of persons, who come from nobody knows where; they are so much more amusing than people of fashion, who are nothing else but people of fashion. The persons, of all others, I should have preferred knowing, were the first Catharine of Russia, the Polly Peachum Duchess of Bolton, and the "tub-woman," who became grandmother to Queen Anne. Now the Duchess of Belmont, besides being one of this class, which is an immense thing in itself, is really a most extraordinary creature, and has all sorts of talents: like yourself, she has the gift de raconter in great perfection; makes a good story out of nothing at all; and mimics in a manner which is nothing short of miraculous. Then you know her voice alone would faire fortune: that sort of a brogue which some of you Irish have, so soft and so caressante; the 'ah! do,' and the 'ah! don't;' besides, her laugh is quite charming. It was her laugh which first won the old duke's heart, as she sat at the foot of her father's easel a mere child. But you know her story, I suppose?"

"Not one word of it," said O'Donnel, now much amused, and not a little interested at her ladyship's





enumeration of the charms of her favourite friend. "But I am sure," he added, "I could not hear it more to the duchess's advantage, than from one so favourably disposed towards the subject as your ladyship."



CHAPTER XVI.



"Oil assure you, Colonel, it is quite a little romance, and I wanted Mrs. St. Leger to make something of it, but she does not think the Duchess has the least of the heroine about her; for in fact she is not sentimental. However, I don't think the duchess of Bolton's story anything like so extraordinary; for, after all, there is nothing so very surprising in a duke's marrying an actress. Actresses are so very amusing, and have so many green-room anecdotes—Well, then, for our heroine: her father was an Irish artist, O'Halloran, who went to study in Italy; a man who lived very celebrated, and died very poor. I am told he had all sorts of talents, wrote as well as he painted, and was extremely eccentric in all his modes of thinking; hi a word, just a person to catch the late Duke of Belmont, who resided at Florence when O'Halloran came to settle there. Every body knows the Duke's character—gine by the forms and decencies of English society; loying every country better than his own: a virtuoso, a roue, a very profligate and very agreeable creature. Well, he lived in Florence, en Prince, and was constantly surrounded by needy geniuses. At the head of these was O'Halloran. The duke could not exist without him: and he made him his companion, without being either his patron or friend. O'Halloran's evenings were

passed in dissipation at his palace: and the duke *





mornings in vertil, at the painter's easel. The duke came there at first for the sake of the father, and at last for the sake of the daughter, though old enough to he her grandpapa: for he was quite a second Marshal Richelieu; there never was such another superannuated debauche.

Well, this daughter—she had all the talents, and almost all the eccentricity of her father; living entirely among clever men, and left to educate herself, as it pleased heaven. She was at once the most naive and clever little creature in the world. When the duke first discovered her, she was a mere child ; but amazingly droll and out of the way, and quite a thing to captivate the worn-out taste of a man, who was blasi sur tout; so he began to try the effect of his sexagenary charms on the heart of the naive Lolotte (for that was her father's nom de caresse for her): and Lolotte, as she has since told me, was charmed with the old beau's wit, humour and pleasantry; for .all that he had.—But to come to the catastrophe: after trifling at O'Halloran's easel for two or three years, where the daughter used to assist in filling up parts of the father's pictures, the enamoured duke found an opportunity of making his little proposal, and of offering her a carte-blanche, and a separate establishment, that should rival his old duchess's, who was playing away the remnant of her life over a card-table in Bath.

"Lolotte neither took this offer en heroine, nor in good part; for, neither won or irritated, it only made her laugh, ready to die; and she gave the old duke some good advice, which, if he had taken, she would not now have been Duchess of Belmont. But he did not take it. More in love than ever, from the obstacles he encountered, he persevered, he persecuted, he prayed, he threatened; and Lolotte was reduced to the necessity of confessing all to her father, from whom she had hitherto concealed it, from motives of solicitude and tenderness; for she had a sort of adoration for this eccentric father, which was quite extraordinary,





"Well, this Irish Apelles, a mere red-hot OTrigger in points of honour, and all that sort of feeling, turned the old innamorato out of his work-room, made a most frightful esclandre of the whole affair, and drew so ridiculous a caricature of the duke, as a Silenus pursuing a nymph, that the duke left Florence and returned to England. In a year or two after, O'Halloran died in great distress, leaving his daughter quite unprovided for. Her talents, however, could not fail to insure her subsistence; and she entered into the family of Sir Harry Hewson (then envoy at Florence), as governess to his daughter. I am afraid she rather quizzed poor Lady Hewson, who happens to be irresistibly ridiculous; for they sent her off, the moment she had done with their daughter, though quite destitute, in England; and she then fell to the share of Lady Singleton, with whom I dare say she was uncomfortable enough; for though Lady Singleton is an excellent and well-meaning woman, and happens at this moment to be the most in my confidence, of any one whatever, yet her little weakness (and who is without their little weakness) is, to be the personage in every thing; the beginning and end of all; so poor Lolotte's naiveti, and acuteness, and talents, went for nothing; and she was thrown twenty fathoms deep into the shade. Mr. Glentworth, who was a most worthy man"

"He was, indeed," interrupted O'Donnel, emphatically, "a most snperiqr man."

. "Well, Colonel, that excellent Mr. Glentworth did much to soften the situation of the little gouvernante; and when he died she would remain no longer in the family. Hating the line of life altogether, she began once more to cultivate her talents for painting, and set up as a portrait painter.





"Meantime the old duke had lost his old duchess, and for want of something else to do, placed himself at the head of the English cognoscenti, to whom he was the law and the prophet; for having given up originals, he now devoted his time exclusively to pictures, and was seen poking his head into every exhibition in London. In one of these he discovered a. pendant to an unfinished picture of O'Halloran's, which he had in his collection, and which he greatly prized. He learned from the cicerone of the place, that the picture had been partly done by O'Halloran, and finished by his daughter, who was then painting in London. This was quite a sensation for the old duke. He purchased the picture, and sent to the fair artist to know if she would finish the companion to it, which he had in his gallery, offering a liberal sum for the price of her labour. Lolotte was too poor to refuse the offer, too prudent to feel any other sentiment than pity for the old disappointed Damon, and too devoted to her father's fame and memory, to suffer his work to fall into the hands of persons, who knew nothing of his peculiar style, or prima intenzione; she consented to finish the picture, and before it was finished, she was Duchess of Belmont.

"Well, the event made a great noise for a week or ten days; and then the Duchess of Belmont went on, toute comme une autre. The duke, however, had been a valetudinarian for some years, and she was little more than his nurse during the few months which he lived after their marriage; and either to vex his nephews, whom he hated, as men sometimes will hate their heirs, or to reward her attention to him, he left her every thing he possessed unentailed. She got through her widowhood with great decency; that is, she kept out of the bustle of last spring, and only saw a select society at home: but she is amazingly the fashion, and will be followed next season beyond every thing. She only threw off her weeds yesterday; and according to a promise, made me long since, she has given me the premices of her gay colours and intentions to-day.





"Besides being extremely glad to have the pleasure of her company, I was anxious she should meet the Savill party, who have all rather set their faces against her; the duke, because Lord Charles has a prejudice against her; and Lady Mary, because her noble blood rises against the plebeian alliance (for Lady Mary is doubly connected with the Savills, in her own person and by marriage): but the true secret of her ladyship's aversion is, that the duchess has more wit than herself, though perhaps less reading; and still more, that the General is the least in the world in love with the Duchess; which, to do his liberal feelings justice, he is with whatever comes out last in the season. Now this is a kind of folly that I make a point to set my face against; for as the Duchess says, 'When a woman completely finds a man out, to go on jealous by lustrums, from five, to ten, to fifteen, to twenty years, O then she should meet no quarter; for she deserves none.' However, I think I am pretty certain I shall bring Lord Charles over to the Duchess's side, though he is now the most inveterate; and then all the rest will follow of course, for he is the leader."

"And pray, Madam," said Colonel O'Donnel, extremely amused with this brief chronicle of her Grace's history, "how does the Duchess wear her new honours? Do they already cling gracefully to her, 'without the aid of use ?'"

"O I very fair indeed," said Lady Llanberis; "a little odd now and then, and upon some occasions shows up a want of tact; perhaps on the whole she is not quite pose enough for a woman of fashion; but all that will come in time, and the worst of it isr—that it will come; for then she will be as dull and quiet as if she were born a duchess, and not the least amusing."





"And how did Lady Singleton take this extraordinary event?" asked O'Donnel.

"Why she was bored to death by it; first, because she did not intriguer the thing herself; next, because the Duchess takes precedence of her; and above all, because she never discovered, during their acquaintance, that Miss O'Halloran was any thing but a Becky. Indeed, she persists still in throwing out some hints that the Duchess is the least in the world bete; and that people will find it out, sooner or later. Meantime she affects to patronise her; treats her with great condescension, gives her a hint what to do, or say in great societies, and tells people they must assist her in bringing forward her parvenu Duchesse, her good Lolotte, who conducted herself with the most perfect propriety, when she was governess to her daughters, though fit for any thing but a governess, poor thing."

"Well, I confess," said O'Donnel, "I was almost as deficient in penetration with respect to her Grace's merits as Lady Singleton, during the short time I was accidentally thrown into her society."

"Very true," said Lady Llanberis: "she was with Lady Singleton in Ireland, when they had that delightful adventure in the mountains, and discovered your romantic retreat. You cannot imagine how struck she was when she saw you here. I am sure it brought her former uncomfortable situation to her mind."

"I am sorry," he returned, "I should form a link in a chain of such melancholy association."

"It is quite over," said the Countess, "and we have been laughing this hour back at Lady Mary. But pray tell me, what you thought of the future Duchess, when she was Lady S 's governess? Did you not think





her pretty?"

"Scarcely," returned O'Donnel. "I thought her a Goody-two-Shoes looking person; for her figure, which was not a Sylph's, though the old Duke's might have been a Silenus, owed very little to her dress; and her face was so concealed by her deep bonnet, that I did not get a very perfect view of it. However, she was a true Isis, worthy the mysterious motto of ' I am what I am,' and reserving the elevation of her mystic veil for no hand but her own."

Here the entrance of the supper trays reminded Lady Llanberis of her assignation in the dressing-room, and she arose to go, when with a sudden recollection, she turned back, and said to O'Donnel:—

"Colonel O'Donnel, I have a great deal to say to you, that relates only to yourself: will you walk with me in the grounds to-morrow, after breakfast, and I will endeavour to keep myself disengaged?"

O'Donnel, on the very tiptoe of expectation by this speech, bowed his acceptance of the nattering proposal.

"But," continued the Countess, "tell me how long you can assure me the pleasure of your company— remember, the longer the better. I have a particular reason for wishing that you will allow me to reckon on you for three weeks, or a month at least. Come," she continued, observing bis hesitation, and with a smile full of irresistible persuasion, "you must, you shall, promise me. I have some views in your favour which cannot be realised before that time. Consider, three weeks— what are three weeks? three minutes."

"Passed here," returned O'Donnel, bowing; " but out of Alcina's Palace three weeks will go into the common account of time; and when duty calls for the reckoning"

"Why then send her to me," she replied, laughingly,





"and I will settle with her; so remember, for three weeks at least, the gates of Alcina's Palace are shut on you."

And she glided gaily away, leaving O'Donnel charmed with her kind and cordial manner; and more than ever convinced that this powerful, thoughtless, and heartwhole woman, was indeed his concealed benefactress.



CHAPTER XVII.



The next morning Colonel O'Donnel descended to breakfast, hoping to find his noble hostess, and to get an opportunity of reminding her of the promised walk; but a few only of the party were assembled, and the Countess was not among the number. Adjoining the breakfast-room was a kind of bar, where breakfast was prepared and served according to orders; and among the trays sent to different dressing-rooms, he perceived that one was carried by the Countess's page, and the other was sent to the Duchess of Belmont. Giving up all hope, therefore, of seeing Lady Llanberis for some time, O'Donnel breakfasted; and after a little conversation with General Savill, a good-humoured gentlemanly man, whose manners retained a tinge of the vieille-cour, he went to the book-room, and had employed himself more than an hour in looking over some political pamphlets, when he' caught the sound of Lady Llanberis's shrill clear voice in the adjoining billiard-room.

To the billiard-room he immediately went, and found the whole party assembled. Lady Llanberis either did not notice his entrance, or was too much engrossed to mark that she did; for she was deeply, exclusively, engaged in taking a lesson in billiards from General Savill. All energy, all eagerness, her life seemed staked on the game, which Lord Charles, her opponent, was playing with the utmost languor and listlessness, smiling at her ardour, and amused by her anxiety; while every ball she pocketed was not only applauded loudly by herself, but followed by the echo of brava! from nearly all the rest of the company.





The simple Sir Gilbert, who was playing cup and ball, betted desperately on her side against Mr. Carlisle; while, apart from the group assembled round the billiard-table, his listless length stretched on a Grecian scroll, and a book half open in his hand, lay the Duke of Belmont, talking, or rather listening to his Dowager aunt, who sat a little in advance before him, on a low tabouret, drawing viewless figures on the carpet with the end of a billiard mace.

By the gradual brightening of his countenance, the Duke seemed to yield himself up to the pleasantry of her conversation; for she was talking with much animation, and he was listening with a smiling attention. There was in the look, position, and gesture of this metamorphosed person, such an alternation of gaiety and thoughtfulness, of deep reverie and spirited vivacity, that O'Donnel in vain sought for the former " Goody Two Shoes," in the Sybil, the Pythoness, that now fascinated his gaze. He could understand that her figure, which was round and piquante, but not of the sylphid slightness on which drapery could be disposed with advantage, had lost by being clumsily muffled; and that her well-turned head had gained, by the absence of the dowdy bonnet, which had also shaded her fine eyes: yet still he found it difficult, even with the most scrupulous examination, to trace the unattractive Miss O'Halloran in the attractive Duchess of Belmont.

Her eyes and her smile were singularly fine. Her eyes when thrown down (their large dilated orbs starting beyond the full and heavy lid, and gleaming through their long dark lashes,) had a melancholy wildness in their expression, too often the character of overwrought genius, or high-wound sensibility; when suddenly thrown upwards, there was a flashing brightness in their expression, which marked a great rapidity and quickness of thought and of feeling; when fixed on vacancy, they had all the stupor of Miss O'Halloran's heavy look. Her smile, playfully brilliant, was at times too acute to be contemplated without exciting a fear of the spirit, from whence it drew its arch intelligence. But her countenance, when at rest, exhibited no expression to give assurance of such a mind as beamed in her eye, or animated her smile.





The science of physiognomy, as it bore merely upon structure, O'Donuel considered as the dream of imagination; but though he did not think a nose could indicate passion, or a mouth express genius, by their form alone, he yet had confidence in those external indices of the moral character, which may be sought in the play and change of countenance.

He was therefore struck by the variety and transition of expression which flitted across the face he now contemplated; and though he could still trace there Miss O'Halloran's features, yet he was puzzled to guess what magic had lent them the soul by which they were now animated. Was it love? was it vanity? was it the influence of rank, fortune, and fashion, and conscious power, and high consideration? or was it all acting, all "false seeming?" But in this case, which was the actress; the governess, or the duchess; or was there some third character, superior to both, which assumed and discarded either, according to the circumstances and exigency of the moment? From Lady Llanberis's description of her, he drew no opinion, for it all came to this, that she amused her—but so did Mr. Dexter.





While he was thus endeavouring: to get at the character, here "wrapt up in countenance," the Duchess suddenly turned round her head, and met (at least he thought she met) his eyes; but she averted her head so quickly, that it left the matter doubtful, whether she really did, or did not see him. In a few minutes afterwards, she looked at him and bowed slightly. O'Donnel, however, thought this bow, together with her conversation the last night with Lady Llanberis, authorised, or rather called on him to advance and pay his respects; and yet with the timidity of pride, always apprehensive of self-commitment, he was slowly and even reluctantly approaching her, when he observed her conversing so earnestly with the Duke, that he conceived his addressing her now would be nothing short of intrusion: and he stood near the tabouret on which she sat, mortified that he had advanced so far, and meditating a retreat, when he was suddenly transfixed to the spot by the unexpected appearance of M'Rory's head thrust through the folding doors of the room; who, with a brogue more than usually broad, cried out:— "Is the master here?"

This extraordinary head, voice, and inquiry, attracted an instantaneous and universal attention, and was followed by a general burst of laughter.

"I ax pardon," humbly cried M'Rory, as he advanced

beyond the door, and took off his hat; "but I'd just be

glad to spake a word to the master, if he's in the place."

"Who is your master, Pat?" asked Mr. Carlisle,

holding his sides.

"The Colonel is, your honour; Colonel O'Donnel," returned M'Rory, with his eyes following a billiard ball that was rolling now unheeded into one of the pockets. O'Donnel, mortified, irritated, and annoyed, beyond all endurance, and unprepared by previous feelings to stand the brunt of the scene, which he guessed, would





naturally ensue, was shrinking back on the first impulse of his feelings towards the shelter of a large screen, behind which a door stood half open, when he was arrested by a hand, a voice, and the words, " Courage, or you are lost." It was the same hand, the same voice, which had arrested his steps at Carrick-a-rede.

All this had passed with the rapidity of lightning; and M'Rory having now caught a sight of his master, coolly shut the door by which he had entered, and advancing with his hat and shillelagh in one hand, and dragging the other along the rim of the billiard table, he addressed O'Donnel with—

"I just made bould to step in, Colonel, to be after mintioning to your honour, that"

"I will speak to you in the ante-room," said O'Donnel, with a smiling composure, which did honour to the Duchess's inspiration; and he motioned to M'ltory to leave the apartment; who turned back, crying:—

"O, very well, Sir; that will do every bit as well."

"No, no, pray, Colonel, speak to him here," said Lady Llanberis, throwing down her billiard cue in the middle of the game, which had so deeply engrossed her a moment before. "I dare say this is a most entertaining person: if you -have nothing particular to say to him, Colonel O'Donnel, pray let him speak to you here."

M'Rory turned round, and made her a low bow, which, whether humorous or not, had all the effect of being so, on the risible muscles of his spectators.

O'Donnel threw round a quick glance to observe if among the men one smile was transferred from the servant to the master, with a feeling at the moment, which would have rendered it a desirable event, to have had some excuse to fight them all round. To him, however, no smile, no eye was directed. M'Rory was the lion of the moment, and occupied a place, which heroes, orators, actors, jugglers, ministers, and dancing dogs, had all in

R





succession occupied before. The interest which his appearance and his brogue had excited, was considerably increased by his bow, and when Lady Llanberis repeated, "He is, I dare say, a particularly amusing person, and I beg he may not be sent away," he replied, with another bow, more profound than the former.

"I am entirely obliged to you, Madam, for your civility; troth, I am; and I humbly ax pardon of the quality for making so bould as to come in among them; but I just stepped in to tell the master, I must quit the place; for I wouldn't stay in it, great as it is, if they made me Provost of Belfast, in regard of the uncommon affronts put upon me, Madam."

"Indeed!" said Lady Llanberis, "then pray inform me who has offended you, for I am the person to apply to, you may depend on it."

"Oh! no, Madam, if you plase, I will not; for if I turned informer*, I'd be the first of my family, kin, kind, or relation, that ever turned that same, any how; but axing your ladyship's pardon, humbly, might I inquire if you are the mistress, Madam?"

"Oh, yes," said Lady Llanberis, joining the now subdued but still general laugh; "I am the only mistress here."

"Why then troth, a beautiful fine lady you are, God bless you, and long may you reign, I pray God. And a poor set of craturs you have under you, any how, as ever broke the bread of life; and many a great house I was in, though never none as great as this, barring Dublin College, and the Castle-yard; and devil of the likes of such servants as these I ever seed, in regard of being no wise agreeable, but remarkably the contrary; and so with your honour's lave, Sir, I'd rather quit the place intirely,

• The lower Irish have a settled hatred and contempt for an informer, which speaks volumes against the character of the government of the last two centuries.





and keep with Bran, the baste 'till your honour comes back to us—God bless you."

"No, no," said Lady Llanberis, earnestly, "you must not go, by any means. I invite you to stay here, and I insist on knowing in what manner you have been offended."

"No offence in life, my lady," returned M'Rory, bowing low, " only that I have got the worst of usage, from the moment I crassed the threshold to this blessed hour as I may say: for sure, Madam, I hadn't stepped out of the Po' Chay, and just put my foot in the entry, when I sees them all sneering and jogging each other; and when the master was showed into the parlour, didn't they gather round me, as if I was one of the seven wonders? and kept axing me what outlandish gentleman I was; and where I kept when I was at home : but myself didn't care to be answering them, in respect of not knowing the ways of the place; only I saw the craturs had no manners at all at all: and so I took up the portmantle to the master's room, and laid his things out for a change, and then I thought I'd just step down to the kitchen and take an air of the fire; and so away I goes down this lobby, and up that lobby, and crasses this entry, and passes that, until I comes to the kitchen, sure enough; and an elegant fine kitchen it is, any way; and the greatest of plinty there is in it, surely: I don't know, my Lady, did ever you see the College kitchen? well, troth, I wouldn't know this same from it, if I was blindfold—but I hadn't gone the length of meself, Madam, in it, when a garlagh* of a lad comes up to me, in a clane white apron, and says he to me: 'This here place is no place for you, my good feller, and so you must not stay here no longer.'

A general laugh at M'Rory's attempted imitation of

* " Carlagh." Base-born; a term of contempt.

K2





the English accent, and Cockney dialect, now interrupted the narration; and O'Donnel; still fearing to share the ridicule of the moment, half angry, and yet almost amused, was again tempted to put an end to the absurd scene, when the eye of the Duchess fixed him, and her uplifted finger, raised in token of command, operated like a spell on his faculties. He smiled, and remained motionless.

Meantime M'Rory, elated by the attention he commanded, and the applause he received, joined heartily in the laugh he supposed he had raised against the cook's apprentice; and to Mr. Carlisle's assurance that nothing could be better than his imitation, he replied:—

"Why then, troth, Sir, if we hadn't better English nor that at the other side of the Shannon, our schoolmeasters ought to be indited."

"But go on," cried Lady Llanberis, impatiently. "Pray, Mr. Carlisle, don't interrupt him. He is quite as good as Irish Johnstone—Well, Sir?"

"Well, my Lady—' Stay here no longer,' says he: them were his words: but I thought him intirely benathe me; and I kept on, never minding, only looking at a bit of a coley*, that was running round and round in a wheel, by the hob, as if the divil was after th' animal: God pardon me for saying so! when a leprighaunf of a cratur, in a white night-cap, who was standing in a kind of a sort of a pulpit, jabbering for all the world like a monkey on the top of a show-box, keeps crying to me, 'Vat you vant here? de kitchen be no place for de sarvant.' 'Is it the kitchen no place for servants ?' says I, looking up at him: 'O, be aisy, Mounseer,' says I: 'is it to the parlour you'd have us go?' 'Get you gone; go, go,' says he, for all the world as if I was a dog. 'Well, see here, Mounseer,' says I, clinching my crubeen * at him—but somehow the heart sunk within me. Not but I could have crush'd the poor cratur between my finger and thumb; but of a sudden I got such an all-overness upon me, you wouldn't give a halfpenny for me, my lady; for I thought of my own poor old country, where the kitchen door was never shut in the stranger's face yet, and where the best potato in the pot, and the best seat at the hob, was never denied him: and so, Madam, I turn'd quietly away, not choosing, just for pride sake, to let them see that the eyes of me were as full as the heart—and troth, and that was full enough. So, I quit the place sad and sorrowful, Ochone!"



* Coley.—The general name for a little black dog. f See note end of the volume.





"Poor man!" cried Lady Llanberis, with a voice and countenance of unaffected sympathy, "Poor man!— Well, and where did you go to?"

"Well, my lady, so I went groping about in the passage, for it was beginning to get dark; and finding an elegant fine fire in the room off my right, I turns in, and seeing it was quite impty, in regard of nobody being in it, I sates myself at the fire; and the head being heavy, and the heart full, I fell asleep, and wouldn't have waken'd till th' end of time, only for the hunger, and the smell of the mate; for when I opened my eyes, my lady, it was just all as one as if the fairies had done it, madam, for an uncommon fine supper there was, surely, spread before me, and remarkable handsome to he sure I thought it of them. But, madam, before I had helped myself to a cut of mutton and a potato, out there comes from behind a sort of skreen, the very moral of that same near the master there, as elegant a party of quality as any here to the fore; and divil of such laughing and giggling ever I heard; only one of the gentlemen snatches the knife out of my hand,

and bids me quit 'For,' says he, 'though this is a

• Fist.





vastly good joke, my good feller, yet you must go; for the leedies and gentlemen of the steward's room don't admit livery servants to their table. Here,' says he, railing to a gassoon who stood grinning at the buffet, 'Thomas, show this here person to the hall.'—' For what should he show me to the hall, sir,' says I. 'Wasn't I and my master, ax'd here, to put over the Christmas?'—'There is no use in argufying,' said the gentleman: 'you cawnt stay here, my good roan; and if you are not willing to go out of this here door, I shall take the liberty of sending you out of that there winder.' • You will,' says I. 'I will, 'pon my word,' says he. 'Well, well,' says I, ' it's a folly to talk any more; but it's my real and undoubted opinion, that there is not a bone in your ugly carcase but ought to be broken fairly; and I, Phaidrig M'Rory, am just the boy to do it; and, in regard of sending me out of the window, dear, only let me see the gentleman among ye'z that says he'd be the man to attempt that same, and I'll engage I'll lay my mark on him, which he would carry to his grave, if he lived these thousand years. Upon that, madam, the leedies and the faymales sets up a thousand murthers; and 'take away the frightful Irishman,' says they: O, how frightful we are!" added M'Rory, with an arch smile of self complacency, and throwing his eyes from his own figure to his master's; while a general laugh followed the observation and the look. Lady Llanberis alone did not join the merriment of the moment, but exclaimed with earnestness :—

"I really see nothing to laugh at: this poor man has been extremely ill-used, and I shall not let the business lie here. Go on M'Rory.—M'Rory is your name, you say?"

"O, it is, my lady, in lieu of a better, madam; so, without more to do, my lady, seeing I didn't lave a word in their mouth—that's in the gentlemen's, I takes up my caubeen*, and I quits the place intirely, not caring to have any thing more to say to the likes of them; and the gassoon, who was standing still at the buffet, kept running after me, and he ups and he tells me that the leedies and gentlemen bates the quality fairly, in respect of being mighty high and conceited; and he told me the servants' hall was the place for me, and that the bell had rung for the footmen's supper, and the rest of the under servants; and he shows, me into the place very civilly.





"And so I went in, and I made them a mannerly bow, as I thought, and says I, 'much good may it do ye'z,' for they were acting; upon which they sets up a laugh: but I drew a chair, and was goin' to throuble the fat gentlewoman at the head of the table for the laste taste in life of any thing was going, when a young man, all powdered and scented, with every stripe of gold on his cape the breath of my hand, steps up to me, and says he: 'In what capacity do you serve?' 'In every capacity in life,' says I. 'You do,' says he. 'O, I do,' says I, 'surely.' 'Then you look after your master's horses,' says he. 'Is it himself you'd have look after them?' says I; and I made him that same answer for a raison I had. 'Why then,' said he, 'you must go to the outoffices, for the out-door servants doesn't ate in the hall, for we wote the smell of the stable a bore.' 'Ye'z may wote it what ye'z plase,' says I, 'agrah! but the devil bore me, if I move a foot out of this, till I finishes my bit; and the first man among ye'z that lays a finger on me, (barring it's a faymale,) by the crass I'll not lave a whole bone in his skin;' with that, my lady, they all set up a laugh you might hear from this to Howth; for they were hearty sowls as I found after: and I ate my supper in pace, and never tould nothing to nobody of what had happened—that is to his honour the Colonel, • Caubeen—an old hat.





thinking there was no use in complaining, as he was a stranger in it himself, long life to him!

"But this morning, my lady, the master of the hotel, as they call him, comes to me, and tells me all as one of that I must not take my mails in the servants' hall, in respect of the head footman having tould him I was only an out-door sarvant, so seeing the common affronts that was put upon me, I thought I would just get lave of his honour to quit the place intirely; though it's little I guessed it would come to that this morning; for no later nor last night you would think they never could make enough of me in the sarvants' hall, for when the heart of me begun to warm after supper, I sung them a rale good ould Irish planxty, and I danced the step that cost my mother the dollar, for the young faymales, who were far more agreeable in my mind, than the leedies in the steward's room;—they took to me greatly, the craturs I"

By an instantaneous transition of feeling, Lady Llanberis's countenance changed from an expression of pity to a look of the most vivacious eagerness.

"Then, M'Rory," she said, "you must sing the Irish planxty for us this moment, and dance the step that cost your mother the dollar: but first you must have some refreshment. Sir Gilbert, do go into the ante-room and order some Madeira and water here, and now let us make a little room. Mr. Carlisle, you understand these things; pray make a clearance. General, do put aside that skreen. My dear duke, gather up your eternal legs: so now we are all attention. O I here is the wine and water;—and now, M'Rory, you shall drink to my health, and then we'll have the song first and the dance after, for I long to see an Irish jig. It is not for me," she said to the maitre d'hotel, who approached with a salver with wine and water: "it is for that person," pointing to M'Rory.





The maitre d'hdtel, without the least symptom either of surprise or mortification, from the service imposed on him, poured out some Madeira, and was about to add the water, when M'Rory checked his hand, crying,

"O! no, sir, many thanks to you, I'd rather the wine; I'm no wise particular."

And bowing humbly to Lady Llanberis, he said—

"Here's long life to your ladyship, and long may you reign, and may the sun that rises on you every morning find you happier than the day before, though you live for a thousand years, and that you may, I pray God, amen."

Then bowing to the rest of the company, he drank off his wine.

"Thank you, thank you, M'Rory," cried Lady Llanberis: " and now come, we must have the song. I dare say it is out and out a better thing than one hears on the stage—come, M'Rory, begin."

M'Rory did not immediately obey, in spite of her ladyship's impatience, or that testified by the rest of the company. He stood in the centre of the circle, moulding his hat and twirling his stick in every possible way, still in the midst of his triumph and exaltation of spirits, directing his looks to his master, with an expression of shyness and apprehension.

"Certainly," said O'Donnel, nodding his head to him, and knowing opposition was now vain: "Certainly, M'Rory, obey any commands her ladyship may please to honour you with."

"Thank you, Colonel," said Lady Llanberis, advancing and offering him her hand. "I must say I am very fortunate to have made the pleasure of your acquaintance; and your Irish servant is by much the most amusing person I ever met with in his way; and now we are all attention, M'Rory."

"I'll just humour the tune a little, my lady," said M'Rory, imitating the movements of a piper on his stick, and running over a sort of wild prelude with his voice, abruptly pausing to ask,—





"I don't know, my lady, if ever you heard a bit of a planxty, called Plae Raca na Ruac; or O'Rourke's Noble Feast * ?."

"Never, never," said Lady Llanberis, impatie Uly.

"Well, it goes mighty well, madam. I'll just give it to you in Irish first, my lady."

"In Irish by all means," returned Lady Llanberis, eagerly.

M'Rory then began one of the most spirited compositions, which the genius of his countryman, Carolan, has produced; and to the tones of a deep clear voice he added such extraordinary rapidity of articulation, and such an inimitable humour of countenance and manner, as to excite not only a general applause, but almost as general a sympathy, as if the language in which he sung had been understood by his auditors: and, amidst their bravos and bravissimos, he concluded his song with a scrape and a bow.

"And now, my lady," he said, "would you like to have that same in English."

"Not now, not now, thank you, M'Rory," cried Lady Llanberis, yawning. "Come, this has all been very good, indeed, and will do very well for the present: so we will not detain you any longer; thank you, thank you.''

M'Rory, evidently amazed by this unexpected dismissal, with a look of mortification proportioned to his previous exhilaration, hastily snatched up his hat, and was hurrying out of the room with a hasty bow, when the duchess, springing forward, took Lady Llanberis's hand, and with a countenance, whose archness and irony gave great effect to the mock vehemence and affected gravity of her manner, she exclaimed,—

* See note at the end of the volume.





"O, Lady Llanberis, is it thus you protect merit in distress? Is it thus you dismiss from your presence the liberal contributor to your morning amusements— the admirable Creighton of the day? Is it like your usual liberality and justice to send him from your presence with all his talents unrewarded, and all his wrongs unredressed?"

"Certainly not, Duchess," returned Lady Llanberis, evidently worked on by her Grace's appeal: "Certainly not; but what can be done ?—However, ring the bell, General. Mr. Mussen, pray call back M'ltory, and send for the maitre d'hStel; and I will at least try what is to be done. Come in, M'Rory."

And a moment after, the maitre d'hotel appeared.

"O, Saunders, I wish to mention to you, that I think you and the rest of the people in the steward's room have behaved most particularly ill to a very respectable and a very amusing man."

Saunders bowed low, but made no answer.

"And I really do not choose to have any person whatever made uncomfortable in my house, and least of all such a person as Colonel O'Donnel's servant, whom you have all, I find, used most scandalously."

"Beg pardon, my lady," bowed Mr. Saunders, submissively, "but it would be against the rules, and against your ladyship's own orders, to admit a livery servant into the steward's room upon any pretence whatever, my lady."

"Yes, my orders! but I am not talking of my orders, Mr. Saunders; and I must say, that I have no idea of such airs as the upper servants sometimes give themselves; they are quite too ridiculous, particularly in the instance of the person in question, who happens to be much more amusing than all my establishment put together, and much more clever in every sense. He has a pretty opinion of you all, I can tell you, and has shown you all up completely; besides, Mr. Saunders, I choose to be obeyed, and not argued with."





Mr. Saunders bowed again more obsequiously than before.

"And I desire that Colonel O'Donnel's servant may be most particularly attended to, and made as comfortable as possible; and since the ladies in the steward's room find him such a frightful Irishman, and are too fine to admit the colonel's servant to their particular society, he shall dine with my page; and I desire a cover may be laid in Florio's room for him to-day."

"Certainly, my lady."

"And—but stay; send the butler to me in the anteroom: I will give orders myself, and then there can be no mistake."

And she hurried away, followed by the maitre d'hote], bowing and scraping, and by M'Rory crying at every step,

"I'm intirely obliged to you, my lady; don't trouble yourself, Madam."

A few general observations on M'Rory, a few questions relative to his character, asked of O'Donnel, and an attempted imitation of his brogue and manner by Mr. Carlisle, exhausted the subject; and the party broke up, dispersing different ways after the different pursuits, by which they might contrive to fill up the time till dinner. The duchess was the first to leave the room, which she did, humming a waltz, and taking no further notice of O'Donnel, who remained in the billiardroom the last of the party.

This conduct rather astonished than displeased him. He thought it extraordinary that a woman, who had assumed a command over him, which should belong only to the privilege of intimacy, or the empire of affection, should leave him without assigning any further mark of notice or recognition; yet he felt that he would not





much regret if this digressive sort of acquaintance were to drop here, since it was associated in his mind less with pleasure than with mortification; for in the only two instances in which, at the distance of two years, they had held any intercourse, she had assumed an air of protection over him so imposing, that it almost convinced himself he stood in need of it.

The time-piece over the billiard-room fire-place now struck two. There was still time for the promised walk with Lady Llanberis, in which he trusted an opportunity would be afforded him of returning her munificent gift, by her leading, herself, to the subject. He was crossing the book-room to seek her page, when he perceived the duchess standing before a book-case, holding a heavy volume, which dropped on the ground, as she started from the sudden clapping of the door, which had slipped out of O'Donnel's hand. He apologised for the abruptness of his entrance, and picked up the book, pausing for a moment in the hope of finding something to say; not, however, particularly desiring it, but believing that it would be expected; yet when he raised his eyes there was such an extraordinary expression of demureness in her countenance, that instead of encouraging, it confounded him. They both silently stood holding the ponderous volume between them for near a minute, when the duchess letting go her hold, he placed it on a reading-desk, which stood near, and asked if he could be of any further use to her.

"Perhaps," she said, "you can save me the trouble of looking through this voluminous German dictionary, for half a dozen words that have puzzled me in reading Schiller's Mary Queen of Scots."

And she presented him a slip of paper, on which the German words were written.

O'Donnel wrote down the translation opposite to them with his pencil, observing as he wrote—





"It is so long since I have had an opportunity of speaking German, that I almost forget the language."

"Have you not been abroad," she asked, "since I had last the pleasure of seeing you on the shores of Lough Swilly?"

"No, madam; I have since then been leading a life, as it were, by stealth; and had not an unexpected necessity led me to England, I believe I should have grown to the rocks on which your grace left me, and

'Forgot myself to stone,'

or turned parasite to the only tree that shaded my hut, and been confounded in the end with other vegetating things identified with its trunk."

"Then I hope," said the Duchess, "you have left none of your parasitical properties behind you; for you will find them of much more use here, than in the wilds of Lough Swilly."

"I hope, madam," said O'Donnel, quickly, and inferring more from her smile than her words, "that your grace speaks more for the sake of the figure, than in belief of the fact."

"O ! as to belief," she returned, carelessly, " I believe nothing and deny nothing: to doubt is my creed, and not to wonder my motto."

"This is the true doctrine of scepticism, indeed," said O'Donnel.

"And the only doctrine that can be applied to all the paradoxes, incongruities, chances, changes, and follies of life," she replied, gaiiy.

"And did you never profess any other, madam?" he asked with earnestness, endeavouring to read through her eyes the secret of her character.

"I at least did not profess any other when I at first saw you on the rocks of Glenarra."

"Indeed!"





"It is quite true. I believe I was the only one of the party, on which I hung—I must not say to which I belonged,—who were not amazed to find a man of the world playing the part of a hermit; nor am I now surprised to see the hermit playing the part of the man of the world, or the philosopher of the mountains quitting his beloved 'savagery of nature,' to launch on the summer seas of pleasure, and obsequiously follow in the wake of a first-rate woman of fashion."

O'Donnel, at once amazed and amused, yet scarcely knowing how to receive the irony couched under this vein of raillery, endeavoured to take her on her own tone, and replied—

"You are quite mistaken, madam; I do not belong to the service to which your grace alludes. I am again indeed put out to sea; but I am but a solitary skiff, blown for a moment into the halcyon tract, where I now float, by the elements of which I am the sport."

"A solitary skiff!" repeated the duchess, with her sybil smile and shake of the head. "A privateer, you mean, Colonel, furnished with letters of marque, sails crowded, colours flying, and in full chase of a prize. But," she added, pointedly, " learn from an experienced mariner, that there blow no trade winds here; and though the 'dew dropping south' breathe to-day, the shrill north-east may come, and send you adrift to-morrow."

With these warning words, emphatically pronounced, she was leaving the room, when suddenly turning back, she added—

"O! by the by, ought I to apologise to you, or you offer acknowledgments to me, for my interference in the billiard-room? But the fact is, I acted, as Lady Singleton would say, ' enfemme qui connoit son monde' Had you betrayed your annoyance at M'Rory's abrupt appearance, you would have given the Messrs. Carlisle a subject for mimicry, and the rest of the party no favourable impression of your tact; as it was, we have the laugh on our side, for you know, 'I too am an Athenian.' M'Rory had, as I guessed he would, 'un grand succes;' and you had the amusing spectacle of seeing bon-ton frivolity exhibited in all its idleness and vacuity, without being in the least involved in the absurdities of your servant, who, after all, was far from being the most ridiculous personage in the scene."





O'Donnel thought his acknowledgments were now so directly called for, that he was about to make them, but the Duchess, throwing up the sash of a window, near which she stood, told the Misses Carlisle, who were walking with all the beaux under it, that she would join them in a minute, as soon as she could wrap herself up; and she flew out of the room to execute the intention; to seek a party which, the moment before, had been the object of her derision; leaving O'Donnel overwhelmed in astonishment at all she had said, all she had looked, and all she had hinted at.

"What an extraordinary creature!" he mentally observed; "how kindly she has acted by me, and yet how lightly she seems to think of me; still tendering me her protection, suspecting my weakness, and exhibiting her own strength! To what can her mysterious words allude; or, meaning nothing, does she speak in point, and talk in metaphor, merely to show off her wit, and sink the memory of Miss O'Halloran's dullness in the vivacity of her Grace of Belmont i Brilliant she is ; acute she may be; and cold and vain she must be: for with discernment to detect, and talent to deride folly, she yet evidently courts its suffrages, administers to its vanities, and has eagerly fled to join a group which was the moment before the object of her sarcasm and ridicule. But enough of her: in a few days this parvenue Duchess will be to me what the blunt governess was before, a thing to hang upon the memory, rather than live in the recollection."





O'Donnel then pursued his original intention, and sent a servant to Lady Llanberis to know if he should have the honour of attending her in her walk; but the man brought back an answer from her page that his lady had driven out in her garden-chair, attended by the Duke and Lord Charles, and would not be home till dressing-time. O'Donnel, therefore, gave up all chance of eclaircissement for that day: nor was the evening more propitious to his views; the Countess's whole attention was devoted to the Messrs. Carlisle, who struck up a sort of Ombres Chinoises, in which they were themselves to be the sole actors behind the illuminated sheet. The Misses Carlisles accompanied the spectacle on the harp and piano-forte, and Mr. Mussen was to recite Collins's Ode on the Passions between the acts. Lady Llanberis was amazingly delighted, until she began to be amazingly weary; and before Mr. Mussen had finished, and love

Shook thousand odours from his dewy wing,

she cried out with a stifled yawn,—

"Come, that's very well—that will do; and now let us have in supper; and then, Mr. Frederick Carlisle, you shall sing the 'Poor old Woman of Eighty,' and send us all laughing to bed; for," with another stifled yawn, "I have been so amused, that I am tired to death."





CHAPTER XVIII.

The following day, being Sunday, and a very fine day, was devoted to the health of the souls and bodies of the guests of Longlands. Lady Llanberis, who from time to time, rather piqued herself upon being religious, was now in one of her pious crises, from an accidental glance into the Methodist Magazine, which her maid was tearing up for papillotes, while she dressed; her ladyship therefore insisted on every one accompanying her to church, except Colonel O'Donnel, to whom she sent word that there was a chapel within a few miles of Longlands. When church was over, the party drove to Lord B.'s seat, to look at an aviary, which the Countess intended as the model of one at Longlands; and they only got back in time to dress for dinner.

O'Donnel spent the day alone, reading, writing, and wandering about the grounds. In the course of his ramble he came to an unfinished building in a dark fir grove, about a mile and a half distant from the house, and so encompassed by trees and underwood, that it was almost impossible to get at it. He at last, however, made his way to a gate, which seemed the entrance; but above its arch was written in large letters,

"NO ADMISSION HERE."

O'Donnel drew back from the prohibited and mysterious edifice, and inquired of a man whom he met in his way back, what that building was.

The man replied, that though he was one of the workmen employed, he did not know what was intended by it; that it was a secret between her ladyship and the master builder; that the Countess was not pleased when any body made inquiries about it; and, that he believed, not one of the quality in the great house knew a word about it; but for his part, he suspected it was intended for a chapel or a meeting-house; for they were putting up benches and pews, though as yet he saw no sign of a pulpit.





O'Donnel supposed his conjecture was right, and resolved not to mention his accidental discovery to the fair foundress of this secluded temple. Not a little amused with this new trait in the variegated character of his whimsical and prodigal hostess, he returned to the house, just as the empty carriages of the church party were driving from the hall-door.

A few of the neighbouring gentry enlarged the dinner party; the spirits of Lady Llanberis always increased with the number of her guests; and they were now in their fullest flow, when towards the end of the first course they received a sudden check, by perceiving that the Duchess was not at table. Every term of wonder and astonishment was exhausted on the subject of this event by her ladyship; and servant after servant was despatched with messages of inquiry to her Grace, before the first envoy could possibly return with an answer.

"When she desired to return after church," continued Lady Llanberis, "I thought it was because she hates going to see sights. I have seen her once or twice sit upon the steps of a show-house, and quiz all those who went any further; but this looks as if she were ill,

or"

Here the return of all the messengers in a body cut short the Countess's doubts and conjectures, which at all times she preferred to certainties and convictions. A groom of the chambers informed her ladyship that the Duchess was very well, but that she had ordered a

s2





chicken in her dressing-room, and was so much engaged with a book, that she begged to be excused dining; below.

Although it was a mere chance whether Lady Llanberis had, or had not, remarked the absence of her whimsical guest; yet having observed it, and at a moment when she wanted one of the Duchess's "droll stories/' to bear out the exuberant flow of her own high spirits, she now found the cause assigned for absence inadequate to the disappointment it created; and all disappointments being of equal importance in the eyes of Lady Llanberis, as all crimes were of equal enormity in the opinion of the Stoics she now gave way to the influence of a sullen ill-humour, which dimmed the lustre of her smile, and hung like a stormy cloud on her contracted brow.

"Engaged in a book !—humph!" she repeated two or three times; while Lord Charles smiled triumphantly, and Lady Mary, with a supercilious smile, repeated —" L'aimable capriciease!"

"Well, that is just what she is," said Lady Llanberis, her countenance suddenly brightening into animation, and roused by Lady Mary's ironical attack on her absent friend: for with one whom she pleased to hold up, she did not choose another should find fault; glad, too, to have an opportunity of venting her acrimonious feelings, she continued—" L'aimable capricieuse is a very fit name for her; and I must say I prefer her little whims to the eternal sameness of some people's good sense and dull uniformity, a thousand times over. Go, Willis, go to her grace, with my love, and that I am sorry we have not the pleasure of her company, but that she is quite right to do the thing she likes best; and Willis, request the Duchess to let me know what book she is reading."

The man obeyed, and her ladyship continued—" I dare say it is something very new or very amusing, or she would not be so empressee about it. I would rather take a book of her recommendation than any one's else whatever; she hits upon such very odd things."





Mr. Mussen observed, with the air of a man who had taken too much pains with the phrase and matter of his speech, to doubt its success—" The Duchess is indeed very unique in all her views of things. She may be likened to one of those meteoric bodies, bright but eccentric, whose course it is so difficult to follow, and whose aphelion it is scarcely possible to guess at."

"Is not Mr. Mussen very eloquent?" asked Lady Mary, in a whisper, of Lady Llanberis.

"I don't think so at all," returned the Countess, abruptly.

"You did think so once," returned Lady Mary, in a tone of pique.

"Yes, once, Lady Mary, perhaps; but one cannot really go on thinking the same thing for ever."

Here Willis returned, and laid a slip of paper before his lady who read aloud—" Le Pere Pascal."

Every body present, who knew any thing of the author or the reader, smiled: Mr. Mussen ironically, because Lady Mary smiled ironically ; and Mr. Wharton sneered maliciously as double to Lord Charles.

"Le Pere Pascal is not exactly the book I should expect to find in her Grace's hands," said Lady Mary. '"O, you mistake her quite then," returned Lady Llanberis, "for though I understand her father, like the late poor duke, was a very free-thinking, unhappy man, yet she is extremely proper on such subjects, and her devoting Sunday to Pascal, is not at all unlike her. By the by, I must get her to order me down some copies of Pascal. One should always have such books in the way: but since good Dr. Sandford, my son's late tutor, and now an Irish bishop, left us, we have been sadly off in these particulars. Apropos, Mr. Mussen, I hope you did not order that stupid work upon ' organs,' you were mentioning: if you did, pray recal your orders. There is no use in throwing away money upon such stuff, when one has not a Pascal in the house. Indeed, while I think of it, I'll send to the duchess to make a memorandum of it. Willis, hring me a bit of note-paper."





While she wrote her request with a pencil, Mr. Mussen kept assuring her that her change of opinion was unfortunately too late, for that three copies of 'Gall' were on the road. Meantime her ladyship, wholly intent on her note, heard him not, and wrote during nearly the whole of the second course; she then twisted up the paper in curious folds, and despatched it. Mr. Mussen, admiring the ingenuity with which the paper was twisted, entered on a discussion on note and letter folding; observing that he was engaged in a poem called the "Billet," which brought down the history of note and letter-writing from the days of Cicero to those of Mrs. Elizabeth Carter; in which he gave not only specimens of the various styles of celebrated epistolary writers, but fac-similes of all the modes of folding letters; with an historical treatise on stationery, the introduction of note-paper, device borders, French mottoes, &c. &c. &c.

The Countess was delighted with his plan; begged he would put her down in his subscription list for twenty copies; and no less charmed with a concetto he hit off for the head of notes of mere compliments of inquiry, she requested she would order ten or a dozen reams. "Observe, Mr. Mussen," she repeated, "I do not say quires, but reams; quantities of reams."

During the whole of these discussions, O'Donnel had preserved an unbroken silence ; involuntarily meditating on the character of the whimsical Duchess, who had, either from genuine inconsequence or affected eccentricity, made herself the subject of malignant aniiuadversion and ridiculous conjectures. The sullen, subdued, unobtrusive Miss O'Halloran would oppose herself in his mind to this "scorner of opinion;" but whether the vain ambitioD of singularity lay at the bottom of all this; or whether, understanding the characters among which she was involved, she was merely "fooling them up to their bent," he was unable to decide.





When the gentlemen adjourned to the drawing-room, they found the ladies all thickly grouped round one of the fire-places, and, not as usual, broken into little sets, or parted into tete-d-te.tes. The tie which connected them was an argument which had been carried on for some time between Lady Mary Savill and the Duchess of Belmont. Lady Llanberis stood leaning on Lady Mary's arm, with a countenance expressing the most vehement interest in the subject of discussion; animating the cold sententious delivery of her orator, by her own rapid exclamations of. " Certainly—unquestionably—you are quite right—that is not to be refuted," &c, while the Duchess stood leaning against the chimney-piece, like one "wondering with a stupid face of praise," and making a droll contrast by the niaise look of Miss O'Halloran, which she had assumed, to the impetuosity of Lady Llanberis's countenance, and the frigid superciliousness of Lady Mary's looks. The argument, however, was nearly brought to an issue, when O'Donnel and some of the gentlemen approached the group. The Duchess seemed to have sustained a defeat, and Lady Mary was triumphantly winding up her argument with—

"And now, having backed my opinion of Pascal by Dr. Johnson's, I presume your grace will give up yours, except," added her ladyship, with an ironical laugh, "you appeal from Dr. Johnson."

"I appeal!" exclaimed her Grace, coming forward with an air of evidently mock earnestness, "from Dr. Johnson!"





And from Dr. Johnson to whom ?" asked Lady Llanberis, with great vehemence. "I like the idea of appealing from Dr. Johnson to any one. I like indeed the idea of people setting themselves up in opposition to the greatest writer of the age, or of any age, or any country."

The greatest moralist of any age, undoubtedly" added Lady Mary, "and therefore the properest umpire upon the present question."

"Unquestionably," nodded Mr. Mussen.

"And a man," said Lady Mary, "who, in piety and ardour of devotion, was not even second to Pascal himself."

"Exactly," said Lady Llanberis, vehemently.

"And who," continued Mr. Mussen, "had he entered the church, would have merited a mitre; and had he been called to the bar, might have obtained the seals."

"Beyond a doubt," echoed Lady Llanberis.

"He lamented himself that he was not in Parliament," continued Mr. Mussen: "for he was was aware that he would have made a great legislator: he was, all in all, a great, a truly great man."

"As far from a great man as I am at this moment," said the Duchess, laying her finger on Mr. Mussen's sleeve, to identify her proximity.

"Duchess, what can you mean by this ?" asked Lady Llanberis, almost in a passion: "How can so young a woman set up her own opinion against the opinion of the world, at least of the wisest part of it?"

"On the contrary," said the Duchess, coolly, and endeavouring to light a pastile on the chimney-piece, "I am agreeing with the wisest people in the world— with your ladyship and Lady Mary Savill;—who disagree with poor dear Dr. Johnson in every single point yon have alluded to—in politics, morals, manners, and religion ; particularly Lady Mary."





At this observation, the two provoked ladies laughed violently, joined by Mr. Mussen, who cried :—

"O, very good, 'pon honour!"

While Lady Mary said :—

"Oh, we beg of your Grace to explain to us this discordance, which your sagacity has discovered; for until your superior penetration found to the contrary, I conceived myself to have been a mere devotee to Dr. Johnson.''

"No," said the Duchess, with gravity, "you are a mere heretic, Lady Mary; and think, and believe, and act in direct opposition to the Johnsonian creed in every single article of faith."

"To begin with one, if you please," said Lady Mary, throwing round a sarcastic look at the circle, who seemed much amused by a discussion carried on in a manner so very unequal.

"Come," added Lady Llanberis, "to begin with one, as Lady Mary says ; morals, for instance."

"There the difference is the most striking," returned the Duchess,—" What made a part of the Doctor's moral system, would have been deemed by Lady Mary, very justly, downright libertinism. For what can her Ladyship think of a man, who asserts that 'it is not natural for man and woman to live together in the married state,'* and that a ' husband's infidelity is nothing?' You will, I believe, find it at page seventy-one, in the third volume of his life, Lady Mary ; and moreover, the Doctor often observed to his own 'she-elephant'—' my dear, women should not trouble themselves about infidelity in their husbands!' Now I appeal from Doctor Johnson; and to you, Lady Mary, if the General made such an observation to your ladyship, would you either call, or think him the great moralist?"



* Life of Johnson, vol. iii. page 71.





Every body smiled, and Lady Mary tossed her haughty head, and flirted her fan. "Then," continued the Duchess, "then, Lady Mary, what, must a woman of your feeling, who wrote the pathetic little poem of 'My Infant,' in answer to the other pathetic little poem of 'My Mother,' think of the cold selfishness of a man, who declares he never could have liked a child of his own, and never wished to have one? Then, for his manners, which come in under the head of minor morals, what an inelegant, what an anti-sentimental brutegiving the 'reply churlish,'—here—' the countercheck quarrelsome' there—and 'the lie direct' everywhere:— eating with the disgusting voracity of a famished wolf and moving with the awkward gait of an half-taught bear!"

"That is all too true, I am afraid," said Lady Llanberis, loosening Lady Mary's arm, and leaning on the Duchess's.

"Then, my dear Lady Llanberis, may I not appeal from Doctor Johnson to you on the subject of religion— you, who have given an opinion so just of the true piety of Pascal? Conceive a man so childishly credulous, as to believe he heard his mother crying, at a hundred miles distance, so—' Sam, Sam, Sam !'"

Lady Llanberis could contain herself no longer: " Go on," she cried, bursting into a fit of laughter, in which indeed she was generally joined; for the Duchesss imitation of an old woman's voice was inimitable.

"And for no motive on earth," continued the Duchess gravely, "but to scare poor Sam out of his life. Then, conceive him drawing away one of his hoofs from the threshold of the door, because it was unlucky to come with the left foot foremost; turning his tea-cup in a particular way, to read his fortune; summing up the evidence of an old woman's witchcraft; and making a serious inquiry into the merits and veracity of the Cock Lane ghost!"





"Brava! brava!" exclaimed Lady Llanberis, setting the example of another general laugh, which, with great good will, was generally followed; for the comic humour of the Duchess's countenance, gesture, and manner were perfectly dramatic.

"And now, Lady Mary/' added Lady Llanberis, "what have you to say to all this?"

"Oh," said Lady Mary, coldly, "I beg to decline the subject altogether; for the defence of Doctor Johnson by one lady, would be quite as ridiculous as the attack by another. I must, however, just beg to say, that though her Grace's statement be amusing, to those who are not nice upon that point, yet it is partial and unfair; and that many things she has quoted against him were not his serious opinion. I believe it is well known, that Doctor Johnson often ' talked for victory,' as he has indeed himself confessed."

"O, the rogue!" exclaimed the Duchess, archly, "there is another simple sin in him. And so he has been playing with us all this while ; and we have erected his sallies into maxims, proverbs, and aphorisms. Well, now, who would have thought that an ingenuous mind would have supported so many false positions, in so serious and so solemn a manner, that one would never suspect they were not his real sentiments? And so, after all, he perhaps did not believe in ghosts, nor hear the voice of his good old mother at a hundred miles distance; and all these buggy-boos were conjured up to frighten the second-sighted imagination of poor devoted Bozzy."'

"As I do not understand Irish persiflage," said Lady Mary, haughtily, "I shall leave your Grace to amuse with it those who may."

"But you confess before you go," observed the Duchess, playfully getting before her, "that Doctor Johnson and your ladyship differ in all serious points, for that is all I want to establish."





Lady Mary stalked away, Mr. Mussen stalked after her, and Lady Llanberis cried, with a yawn, "Come, this has all been very good indeed; and now let us have some music. Where are the Carlisles? They have promised me Handel's ' Hail-stone Chorus.' I always like to begin music on a Sunday evening- with Handel. Come, Mr. Carlisle, sound the tocsin for the musicroom.'' Mr. Carlisle, snatching up a tambourin, beat a muster, and was followed by the party; three persons only remaining behind—the Duchess, and on either side of her the Duke and Colonel O'Donnel.

"Do you know, Duchess," said the Duke, " that yon have been amazingly entertaining to-night—you have, indeed."

"Then your Grace was amused by my Irish persiflage ?" asked the Duchess, laughing.

"Very much indeed: it was extremely fair. I like your brogue of all things. You don't really mean to get rid of it, and speak like every body else, I hope. You must not indeed lose the pretty brogue."

"No," said the Duchess, " since your Grace approves it, I will cherish it, and for your sake—' spare the glorious fault.'"

The Duke bowed slightly, and looked pleased; and Lord Charles, coming up to him, took his arm, affecting to have something particular to tell him, and led him away."

"Aye," said the Duchess, shaking her head after them, "carry him off, as you may now, vi et armis; I will have him yet on my side."

"You must know," she said, turning to O'Donnel, "that, in spite of a family prejudice, existing against me in the Savill family, the Duke has all the inclination in the world to take me, as a sort of occasional elixir, or a kind of chasse-cafe; and that Lord Charles does not choose I should administer to his noble, goodnatured, indolent brother, in any way; who, if he were only a little lightened of the embarrassment of rank, riches, and bon-ton, would be a most excellant person."





"If the Duke takes your Grace for a chasse ennui," said O'Donnel, " he certainly understands the properties of his specific; at least, your conversation had that effect on my spirits to-night. It has ' ascended me into the brain,' and driven thence ' all the foolish, dull, and crudy vapours which did environ it,' when I left the dining-room."

"No, no," said the Duchess; "my nostrum does not apply to you; and I dare say you deem it mere quackery; but it takes here amazingly. The fact is, bon-ton does stand indebted to me now and then for a sensation. My attack upon Dr. Johnson was merely a pinch of cephalic, thrown at random, to keep all alive."

"No more?" asked O'Donnel.

She paused for a moment, and then added: "Why, yes, a little more, I am afraid. I was not sorry to have an opportunity of entering the lists against Lady Mary Savill, upon any point. She is one of those women, who, affecting a high tone of sentiment and feeling, have all the littleness of mind which belongs to the most vulgar illiberality. Since I have come into her family, she has treated me with a contumelious severity, partly from the prejudice of family pride, but chiefly because I do not flatter her pretension to talents, nor join the herd of depending dunces, who feign to take her opinion for their law. Besides, in a general sense, I hate bigotry and dislike dogma, whatever form they take; and the bigotry of blue-stocking doctrines, or the dogma of bonton literature, are of all things the most tiresome, because both go by prevention, and have all the moroseness, without the enthusiasm, of zeal unfounded in examination or belief. Now the has blues of Lady Mary Savill are not 'celestial blue,' they are indigo. She is at the head of a set of witless literati, who have for their corporate maxim,





Nul n'aura de l'esprit tors nous et nos amis,'

who, the moment you open your lips, knock you down with Doctor Johnson; and before you are able to rise from the overthrow, beat you again over the head with Mrs. Elizabeth Carter: I therefore avoid the blow, as they do in Ireland, by giving it first. The truth is, your smatterers in literature, whether bon-ton or mauvais ton, dearly love a good stout overbearing dogmatist, who pins them down with an opinion, as they do others with an authority. This is the Pope for their church, and this is the Pope from whose infallibility I appealed, when you joined our little conclave. I dare say you were surprised at my temerity."

"A little surprised by your courage," returned O'Donnel, "and a good deal amused by the ingenuity of your attack. There were, however, some serious truths in the positions you so sportingly advanced. All is, as the old Provencal maxim has it, heur et malheur, even in literature; and Johnson owes much of his celebrity to the critical hour in which his writings appeared. The inventor of a new style, at a moment favourable to any strong peculiarity of composition, he gave the air of novelty to opinions long established; and added authority and weight to others, which ought long ago to have been exploded. Although he has made no positive addition to the stock of human science, discovered no fact, invented no hypothesis, nor demonstrated any verity, he has acquired an influence over society, greater perhaps than either Locke or Newton at present enjoy; and by entangling the public mind in the net-work of his sophistry, he has more than assisted in checking its progress during the last half century, and in giving to the age in which he lived its peculiar character. With conceptions as circumscribed as his learning was extensive, he brought the whole' weight of his erudition to support the grossest superstition, and the most abject notions of temporal government. Entertaining no very profound respect for truth, he was content to bully, where he felt he could not convince.





He scorned those common wares to trade in,

Reas'ning, convincing, and persuading,

But made each sentence current pass,

With puppy, coxcomh, scoundrel, ass.—Churchill.

"While thus he silenced the timid, the groanings of bis religious terrors were mistaken by the good for piety; and his old Stuart doctrines of divine right (cast by a pension, at the feet of his legitimate sovereign) passed current with the loyal for affection to the king, and devotion to the state. But perhaps I speak under the influence of prejudice: for I cannot readily approve the writer, and still less the man, who has profaned the sacred names of Russel and of Sydney, with epithets of vulgar virulence and coarse opprobrium. Nor, perhaps," he added, smiling, "will your Grace forgive me, for thus hanging the clog of my dull comment upon the soul and spirit of my text."

"If you mean to apologise for talking sense to me," she returned, " spare yourself the trouble: it is at least gracious for its novelty."

A silence for a minute ensued. The Duchess seemed to have fallen into a reverie; her eyes were fixed to the ground, with their look of melancholy wildness; and the gaiety of her countenance fled. She appeared to have retired within herself: and some thought of latent regret seemed to revive amidst the associations of her playful mind, and hang its cloud upon the lustre of her susceptible spirits.





O'Donnel fixed his eyes on her face, wondering at its rapid change of expression. "What an extraordinary mind !" he mentally observed—" what an extraordinary countenance! Does any heart accompany all this? or is all acuteness and vivacity, vanity and exhibition?"

Almost as he asked himself the question, her eyes abruptly met his; she as suddenly averted them, and accompanied with her voice the symphony of an air which was playing in the adjoining room. "Had we not," she said, "better join the musicians ?" and immediately she moved forward. O'Donnel followed, and saw her the next moment the centre of a group, composed of the foolish and the vain, the dissipated and the dull. Miss Carlisle had just finished a fine bravura of Winter's, well executed and well accompanied, when Lady Llanberis approached, the Duchess, and kneeling on a cushion before her, said, "I come with a petition. I know you do not sing out of your own house, but you must not, cannot refuse me."

"We vote this petition frivolous and vexatious," returned the Duchess in parliamentary language; but after much solicitation and much refusing, she suffered herself to be prevailed on, and was led to the instrument by General Savill. O'Donnel followed the group, who encircled her, mentally inquiring if this were the same person, to whose acute observations he had listened before, with so much pleasure.

The subject now in debate was, what she should sing —an Irish melody, or a Savoyard ballad. She ended the long-agitated question herself. "Come," said she, " I will sing you a little French romance, which you will all like, I answer for it."





"Oh, I adore French romances," exclaimed Lady Llanberis.

"It is composed," said the Duchess, gravely, "on three notes; on three notes only."

"How wonderful!" was echoed from every side: "three notes! only think of that I"

"And it is played upon two instruments," continued her Grace, drawing the harp close to the piano-forte.

"Charming! charming!" was the general exclamation. "Two instruments !—how odd!"

"To add to the interest, it is composed, words and music, by Jean Jacques Rousseau *!"

"Good heavens! Duchess, will you ever begin?" exclaimed Lady Llanberis with vehement impatience.

The Duchess threw her right hand over the strings of the harp, with the left touched the keys of the pianoforte, and thus accompanied with a common chord, an air as simple as its three notes could make it. It was scarcely possible to judge of her voice, she sung in so suppiessed a tone; and it was impossible not to accuse her of affectation, from the peculiar look she threw into her eyes and countenance. A rapturous applause followed the indifferent execution of this indifferent composition; "Brava, bravissima," resounded on every side, and an "encore," was called.

"No, no," said the Duchess, " I never repeat myself in any possible way; but I will sing you an Irish howl, if you will."

"By all means," cried Lady Llanberis :—" an Irish howl I how odd!"

The Duchess now drew the harp towards her, and swept with a light and brilliant finger a characteristic prelude over its chords. She chose a very fine, and very

• Perhaps Rousseau's little romance, beginning " Que le jour me dure," which is composed on three notes.

T





ancient Irish melody, but having gone through the first part in a manner totally different from her former style of singing, she rose from the instrument, and, either through weariness or caprice, refused to finish it. As the whim of this proceeding was at least worth the rest of the song, it only rendered her more popular than ever with Lady Llanberis, who went on exclaiming, " What a delightful creature! there is nobody so amusing. It is all envy and prejudice, endeavouring to cry her down; and she is quite right about Doctor Johnson—the tiresome man with his hoof and his tea-cup."

The Misses Carlisle and their brothers now began an old canon at the request of their mother, who went about canvassing applause for her musical offspring, crying herself, while she affected to beat time, "a charming strain!"

O'Donnel had left the apartment before the Duchess had risen from her harp. He was alone, walking up and down the drawing-room, when she entered it in search of her reticule.

"Alone, Colonel!" she said: "has our music banished you?"

"Yours, Madam, has had that effect," he returned smiling.

"Indeed!"

"Yes, indeed."

"You resemble then a very illustrious countryman of ours*, who, though an enthusiast in Italian music, would not suffer an Irish air to be sung in his hearing; for I perceive you did not leave the room till I had begun my Irish howl. You do not like Irish music I presume."

"I do not like the influence which Irish music holds over me," he replied, " in spite of my reason, and against my will."

* The late venerable and respected chymist and plulosopher, Mr. Kirwan.





"You would then resist any influence," she said archly, "which militated against your reason?"

"At least I would try. I do not say I should succeed: indeed, from the experiment of your Grace's song, I feel I should sometimes fail." t

"This is very gallant," she replied, seating herself upon a couch, against the back of which O'Donnel leaned.

"It is very true, however : and to qualify a little what your Grace calls my gallantry, I will confess that your French song pleased me as little, as your Irish air pleased me too much. You surely forgot the advice of your author, so peculiarly applicable to his own simple compositions :—Ilnefaut, pour chanter la romance, qu'une voix juste et nette, qui prononce bien, et qui chante simplement."

"That may do for you and Rousseau, Colonel O'Donnel; but I sung for my audience; and your simple style would stand but a poor chance against my little mignauderie. 'What did you think of my face when I sung? I always make a pretty face upon those occasions. You cannot think how it tells. Nobody sees that I call up the same look for all sorts of sentiments, from 'Nina pazza,' to the 'Blue Bells of Scotland.' I make the face, and they all cry 'how interesting she looks when she sings!' The truth is, the world loves a little acting; and, as Queen Elizabeth said of the ritual, she was making for her prayer-loving subjects, 'they shall get enough of it.'"

O'Donnel laughed, and returned, "Since your Grace encourages my frankness by your own, I do confess I perceived you were endeavouring ' to look delightfully with all your might,' and where you made no such effort, I thought you succeeded better. There have been periods in Irish story, when the policy of a foreign ruler should have prohibited the singing of such a song with such a countenance."





"At that moment Lady Llanberis entered the room. "Oh, Duchess !" she exclaimed; but perceiving O'Donnel leaning over the back of her Grace's seat, she suddenly stopped; and then added, with pointed coolness: "I beg pardon; I did not know your Grace was so particularly engaged; " and immediately flounced out of the room.

"How extraordinary !" said the Duchess, rising in some confusion. "What can she mean? Pray follow her, Colonel,"

"To what purpose?" asked O'Donnel, surprised at Lady Llanberis's manner, but still more at the emotion of the Duchess, whom he believed beyond the.possibility of being moved by anything.

"Then I will follow her," she said, and flew into the music-room, while O'Donnel, taking a book, retired to his own.



CHAPTER XX.



The next morning O'Donnel took the opportunity of finding Lady Llanberis at a window in the breakfast room, where all the party were assembled, to remind her of the appointment, which had been broken, or to induce her to renew a promise she seemed to have forgotten. She received his address with coldness, and made some evasive reply. O'Donnel was for a moment thrown back. He feared he had offended, and yet was unconscious of his fault; he ventured, however, to express a hope that the honour she had proposed conferring on him, was not withdrawn, but delayed. Lady Llanberis replied, with an air of humour, that "nothing under a Laplander would walk to-day. The ground is frozen over, and you cannot expect me to skait a walk, Colonel, I suppose?"





"I expect nothing," returned O'Donnel, a little surprised, yet endeavouring to avoid the appearance of chagrin, he gaily added, " but skaiting a walk is neither so impracticable nor disagreeable a thing as your ladyship may suppose; at least, I once skaited a journey in Holland, and found it a pleasant and expeditious mode of travelling."

"Skaited a journey I" echoed her ladyship, her face brightening into smiles of pleasurable'amazement; " how very odd I how very delightful! You must tell me all about it, Colonel O'Donnel. General, pray come here. Only think! Colonel O'Donnel has skaited a journey!" "I have skaited some leagues myself in Holland," said the General:—" I was once famous at that work, and belonged for some years to the skaiting club of Edinburgh. But I don't think we English make good skaiters, Colonel."

"We used to think abroad," said O'Donnel, "that you performed feats of great agility on the ice, but that your skaits were not well constructed."

"Colonel O'Donnel," said Lady Llanberis, with great eagerness, " will you do me the favour of giving a plan for skaits to my smith: we'll have a number of them made directly. There will be no end to this frost, you may depend upon that. I dare say the Duchess skaits like an angel, and I know you might light fires upon the great pond in front of the house. General, pray ring the bell: stay, Colonel, will you walk with me to my smith's forge? We will go this moment: there is nothing on earth like a skaiting party. What attitudes Mr. Carlisle will make I I'll just get on my pelisse and snow-shoes, and you shall meet me in the hall."

O'Donnel, laughing to himself, yet glad to have the opportunity of the walk, followed her out of the room. As he passed the Duchess, who was in conversation with the Duke, he perceived her eyes fixed on Lady Llanberis and himself; and when he stopped to make the salutations of the morning (for she had recently entered the room), she said significantly, "You had better proceed."





While he waited for her ladyship in the hall, her page brought him a message that she begged he would go to the forge by himself, and bespeak the skaits, for she found it too cold to go out. O'Donnel, again disappointed, prepared to obey the request, when throwing up his eyes to the gallery, which ran round the hall, he perceived Lady Llanberis and Lord Charles passing along it together. The sudden change in her intention was now accounted for. He had, from various circumstances, not to be mistaken, concluded that Lord Charles was the acknowledged lover of Lady Llanberis ; and Miss Carlisle, who was as liberal of her communications as of Ver attentions, had, indeed, hinted to him, that as soon as the widower's mourning was laid aside, he was to become the husband of his late wife's dearest friend. Yet nothing could be more coldly indifferent than the manner of the lover; nothing more careless and general *!>an the conduct of the mistress. Lord Charles, to all outward seeming, was a phlegmatist by constitution, and an egotist by system. The exclusive selfishness, which stood in the place of every better feeling, and betrayed its influence through all the openings of his unamiable, character, evidently lent its frigid colouring, even to his preference for a woman to whom he had long given the eclat of his attentions.

He stood, indeed, at the head of that class of apathetic men of gallantry, qui se laissent aimer, and who are, perhaps, peculir r to the age and circle in which he lived; who, if they sometimes commit the feelings of the objects they select, never risk their own; who lounge away their mornings in boudoirs, their evenings in assembly -rooms; correspond voluminously on notepaper; enter into all the little gossip and frivolous anecdote of the day; and plot, manoeuvre, and intrigue, according to the interest and the views of that heartless vanity, in which





They live, and breathe, and have their being.

Less anxious to be loved, than to be adulated—to awaken a sentiment, than to expose a triumph,—they demand obvious attentions, rather than hidden devotion; nor seek in the equivocal tie, which springs so much oftener from general suitableness than particular sympathy, the exclusiveness of friendship, or the tenderness of passion.

This heartless connection (the lady's fair character alone excepted) frequently recalled to O'Donnel's mind those no less cold, but more profligate, liaisons which marked the exhausted gallantry of French society, in its last stage of moral degradation; where virtue was violated from no stronger motive than the gratification of vanity, or the removal of ennui; and vice sought neither its charm nor its excuse, in the tyranny of the senses, or the illusions of love.

The day passed over O'Donnel's head unoccupied and unenjoyed. He had rambled abroad without interest, and had returned without object. The comfortless grandeur of a great house struck him in all its coldness, where the fireside niche, the central point of domestic sociality, is always wanting; where there is so frequently solitude without privacy, and loneliness without retirement; and where the feelings, like the guests, are dissipated and abroad, for want of some attractive influence to fix and concentrate them at home. The large, empty, and splendid rooms looked gloomy and comfortless, unoccupied by the gay groups of the evening, which were now all dispersed. O'Donnel, a stranger to all, and assimilated to none, had not been invited to join in any pursuit, or to attach himself to any party. Cheerless and low-spirited, he involuntarily looked forward towards the evening, when lights and noise would reflect upon his imagination, and when perhaps the brilliant pleasantry and gay acuteness of the Duchess might chase the demon of spleen; and if they awakened not interest, at least bring distraction.





In this hope he was deceived. The Duchess played all night at piquet with the general. Mr. Frederick Carlisle, who wished to advertise himself as her lover in the most extravagant sense of the word, with no other view than the hope of participating in her notoriety, hung over the back of her chair, murmuring his homage in such scraps of Italian verses as memory supplied him with, from his sister's music-books. Meantime, Lady Mary sat near the table, dispensing criticism and sentiment to Mr. Mussen, for ready approbation; and looks of keen reproach at the General, for his equal want of dignity and of taste. Mr. Wharton dozed on one ottoman, because Lord Charles dozed on another.. An4 Lady Llanberis played vingt-un with the Duke. , The rest of the party were divided between a round game, and the billiard-room, with the exception of Miss Carlisle1 who had singled out O'Donnel, and with an earnestness quite irresistible, had insisted on his becoming her pupill at a Trou-Madame board, a game of which he had nn-1 luckily declared his ignorance, in order to avoid playing-. Miss Carlisle's eyes had already told him, among other I1 "fair speechless messages," that he was the handsomest >, man in the world: and that the opinion might not be "wholly drawn in the flattering table of an eye," she confessed that she had modelled his head in wax, and that it precisely resembled an Antinous, she had done some time before, from.the bust in D House,





Naivete was Miss Carlisle's profession; and she was as naive as young ladies generally are, who have passed the last fifteen years of their lives in the bustle and intrigue of what is termed ' the world.'

The duchess retired early, before Miss Carlisle and O'Donnel had finished their game; and though she paused for a moment near the table, to speak to Mr. Frederick Carlisle (who had followed her with the goodnight speech from Romeo and Juliet) and to return Miss Carlisle's bon-soir, yet she passed on without noticing her opponent. It did not escape O'Donnel that he was not included in her salutations, and he was yet more struck with the consciousness that he had deserved it. He began to think she was inclined to play the fine lady to its utmost extravagance, and that she had even taken the April-day conduct of the constitutionally capricious countess for her model.

"So much the worse for her," he mentally observed. "Her original sins are delightful, if they are not respectable: but when she becomes the copyist of another's follies, she ceases either to pique or interest." He was surprised to find that, with respect to himself, she had already done both.

O'Donnel had but just finished his game, when Lady Llanberis sent for him to join her supper-table. He entered more than usual into general conversation, from the circumstance of her having introduced Ireland as a topic; and she had led him so deeply into its antiquities, that, enamoured with the subject, she begged for memoranda of Grose and Vallancey's treatises, that she might consult them at her leisure.

Although he had been much animated by the discussion, yet, when at a late hour he rose from table, he felt piqued he knew not with whom; disappointed, he knew not by what; and he retired to his room discontented with himself, and with every one about him. His former fastidiousness respecting society returned upon him; and wearied by the folly and emptiness, which on the preceding night had amused, if it had not interested, he blamed others for that, which was only, perhaps, pitiable in himself.





Languid and frivolous as O'Donnel still found the circle in which he was so strangely included, he had (without giving it more of his approbation), insensibly granted it more of his indulgence. Although he knew not where his repugnance ceased, or his toleration began, he was still aware that his impatience for an eclaircissement with Lady Llanberis, which would probably terminate his visit, did not increase with the delays it had experienced; and he felt that he became every day less uneasy under the difficulties which impeded his return.

Another and another day elapsed. New visiters brought new engagements. Lady Llanberis was wholly engrossed with the strangers, as long as they were strangers, and O'Donnel found no opportunity of addressing even a word to her. The parvenue peeress seemed an object of great curiosity to the new arrivals, who were persons of high rank and fashion. She was continually drawn out by her fair hostess, herself "nothing loth:" and remained the leading feature of attraction and interest, during the short stay of the noble guests. Lady Llanberis was delighted with her own character of cicerone to her favourite of the hour; called on her fo» the droll story she had told on such a day ; the pretty song she sung on such a night; insisted on her remembering such an impromptu, or repeating such- a bon-mot; would fain have nfede her dance a buffa pas de deux by herself, and maintain over again her Johnsonian dialogue with Lady Mary, without the aid of an interlocutor. The duchess exhibited freely, and only stopped short of the ridiculous; but when Lady Llanberis happened to go too deep within the





lines of bad taste, her lion always turned restive; and upon one occasion she said to O'Donnel, almost loud enough to be heard by all:—

"Allons, Mademoiselle, parlez philosophie, pour Monsieur, et puis nous aurons la iheologie:" thus drawing a parity between herself with Lady Llanberis, and the Duchess de Ferte with the first celebrated Madame de Stael; and convincing O'Donnel that governed, though not deceived by her own vanity, she secretly ridiculed the folly, of which she was at once both the agent and the object.

Her character, indeed, as he endeavoured to catch its features through the inequalities of her manner and conduct, gave endless play to conjecture, and room for observation: there was something so pleasantly incongruous in her mingled cynicism and gaiety, her knowledge of human weakness, and liberal contribution to its absurdities, that he was amused even where he was not particularly interested; and fascinated even when he did not quite approve. But, either by system or inadvertency, she had latterly found her way to his consideration, through the medium of his self-love, and excited interest, where, perhaps she only sought to win applause. For the appeals which her better sense made, at times, to his good opinion, betrayed an anxiety to obtain it, through the real or feigned indifference of her general manner. The energy of mind she evinced in some of their particular conversations, when he was "sole auditor," contrasted with her general frivolity to others, rendered her more attractive, in proportion as this distinction was more flattering; while by increasing'the originality of her character, and adding to the inconsistencies of her conduct, it gave, perhaps, to both a charm, which more uniform excellence could not have possessed.

But the credit she thus far obtained had its balance on the contra page of his opinion. The disguise in which she had wrapped her character, while in the family of Lady Singleton, betrayed a command of feeling little consonant to the prompt sensibility of her age and sex, and excited wonder that





"One so young could give out such a seeming"

And her marriage with the Duke of Belmont led him to suspect that she was deficient in that feminine delicacy, without which a woman was to him a thing unsexed. Like all men, whose strong passions and peculiar modes of life have led them to seek the rounds of pleasure in their least excusable form, O'Donnel had raised a rigid standard on the ground of his ill-bought experience; and was severe and fastidious on the subject of female conduct, in proportion to the opportunities afforded him of viewing it in its coarsest aspect.

The want of delicacy in woman was always, in his estimation, proportioned to her want of sensibility—the quality most necessary to the self-love of man, and, therefore the most reluctantly dispensed with. But of the Duchess of Belmont's natural coldness, he had the most thorough conviction; and he believed that her spirit, like Beatrice's, was invulnerable against all assaults of affection ; her careless gaiety, her general indifference, her vanity, and even her idle encouragement of the vain and frivolous Frederick Carlisle, were all proofs to him of her inherent hearllessness; for though it was evident that the ambition to which she had immolated taste, feeling, and natural antipathy, would never permit her to "abase her eyes" on one who would render the sacrifices she ha4 already made to it abortive, yet she evidently encouraged his attentions, merely that he might serve as a mark for her pleasantries, and contribute -tu the gratification of her vanity.

On the same day on which the flying visiters took their leave, O'Donnel received a message from Lady Llanberis to attend her in her dressing-room. His hour he believed was at length arrived. Whatever were the views which had induced this whimsical but generous woman to invite him from Ireland, they would now be revealed, even if they were not accomplished; and the opportunity would be of course afforded him of returning her money. He was, however, disappointed to find her ladyship not as he expected, alone, but looking over some books at a table, at which also stood the Duchess and the two elder Misses Carlisle.





"Come in, Colonel," as soon as he appeared, "we want you here most amazingly, to explain all these engravings, and some Irish poems: for here are the books you mentioned; and my bookseller has sent me besides every thing that he could collect on the subject of your interesting country."

O'Donnel took his place at the table; the ladies drew round him : and in this enviable and distinguished situation, he was discovered by Lord Charles Savill, who had advanced some steps into the room before he perceived O'Donnel on the other side of the table.

"You are just come in time, Lord Charles, to be amazingly amused," said Lady Llanberis: but before she finished what she meant to add, Lord Charles had left the room.

Lady Llanberis, too much engrossed with "faughguards," "tumuli," and "round tewers," scarcely perceived his exit, and made no comment on its abruptness. Before, however, she had quite got through Grose's plates, she began to yawn, and had more than once gone as far as—" Come, this is very good," when the ,dressing-bell released her; and the little society of the d*essing-room broke up.

As they passed along the gallery leading to their several apartments, the Duchess observed in a low voice to O'Donnel—" If Lord Charles Savill is ever elected President of the Antiquarian Society, I do not think he will readily consent to your admission into it; for it strikes me he was not particularly pleased at our learned little body resolving itself into a committee in the Countess's dressing-room, and making you its chairman."





"What reason has your Grace to suppose so ?" asked O'Donnel.

But she only smiled, and entered her dressing-room, without making any reply. O'Donnel had asked this question of the Duchess idly ; for he too had been struck by the sudden retreat of Lord Charles Savill, and still more by the expression of his countenance; for when he had raised his head at his entrance, their eyes had met full, and O'Donnel had read there more than he would be justified in noticing; yet something, which he longed Lord Charles would transfer from his eyes to his lips, and by this (giving it a less questionable form) enable him to meet it as it merited.

From O'Donnel's first arrival at Longlands, Lord Charles had treated him with a marked coldness, which at least indicated repugnance; and whether he conversed with Lady Llanberis or the Duchess, or received the civilities of the Misses Carlisle, or of the passing female visitants, to whom Lady Llanberis presented him, the supercilious looks of Lord Charles still pursued him; hastily withdrawn, indeed, when the eyes of O'Donnel met his, but always accompanied by a smile that indicated irony, if not absolute derision. It was, however, a delicate point to call a man to an account for looks and smiles; O'Donnel therefore waited with more patience and temper than naturally belonged to his impetuous character, for some less equivocal proof of his lordship's tendency to insult.

In the evening, as the gentlemen stood round the fire, taking liqueur after coffee, Lady Llanberis resumed the subject of the Irish antiquities, and again assured Lord Charles that he had had a great loss in not remaining in her dressing-room.





"Credat Judceus!" replied Lord Charles, smiling sarcastically.

"What do you mean by that, Lord Charles?" asked Lady Llanberis, eagerly.

"Nothing," said Lord Charles, drily: "but that I am not over credulous with respect to any thing that is Irish."

"Has your Lordship any definite meaning attached to your words?" asked O'Donnel, in a tone equally significant.

"I believe, Sir," said Lord Charles, haughtily, "I am not bound particularly to account to you for the meaning of any words I may utter."

"No further," answered O'Donnel, "than as one gentleman is bound to another, to do away any unpleasant impression, which words, casually spoken, may, from a wrong inference, have made on his mind."

What Lord Charles meant to have replied, if he meant to have replied at all, was lost by the sudden diversion of his attention from O'Donnel to his own personal safety, and the injury sustained by one of his very handsome legs; for the Duchess, with a startling scream, let fall a cup of hot tea, and, not only spoiled for ever her own spotless white satin dress,-but scalded Lord Charles's instep sufficiently to oblige him instantly to leave the room, and get his stocking drawn off, before the skin adhered to it. He retired to the door, followed by the Duchess and Lady Llanberis; the latter lamenting that he could not skate for a week; the former deploring and apologising for the accident, holding out her own dripping gown, and exclaiming against Mr. Frederick Carlisle as the real author of the accident, whose elbow, she said, had come in contact with hers, because he would stand in an attitude—so. Here her close imitation, not only of Mr. Carlisle's attitude, but even of his canvassing look for admiration, glanced furtively from under the eyes, threw Lady Llanberis into a violent fit- of laughter, and had the effect of restoring the merriment of the whole party, which Lady Llanberis's observation to Lord Charles had for a moment interrupted. Her Grace and her nephew returned almost at the same moment to the room; Lord Charles limping with his leg tied up; while the Duchess, with her spoiled satin exchanged for a plain white muslin dress, and a veil thrown around her, entered with a wild and frantic look, and sung the mad song in "Ninapazza" with great effect, to the surprise and amusement of the whole company; then suddenly changing her countenance and air, she succeeded still better in a buffa, in the style and jargon of a Sicilian peasant. Lady Llanberis was in raptures, and so often assured Lord Charles that all this was done to conciliate him, and make amends for the accident, that he at last seemed not only to credit the fact, but to be gratified by the intention. This was indeed the first symptom of conciliation which his plebeian, but unbending aunt, had ever paid him; and as inordinate vanity is as easily soothed as it is readily wounded, he was not incredulous to the assertions, which fed and flattered the dominant passion of his nature.





Mr. Frederick Carlisle was then called for his amende honorable; and though mortified and piqued, even into low spirits, by the Duchess's accurate imitation of his affected peculiarities, yet he could not resist the opportunity of exhibiting. With very little pressing, therefore he suffered himself to be prevailed on, and performed a number of harlequinade tricks and attitudes, which he concluded by vaulting over a sofa table, coming down on the other side in the position of a cobler at his work, and singing Jobson's ballad, '* He that has the best wife, #c." The room rang with applauses, and the evening concluded with the greatest good humour and gaiety. Lady Llanberis, from the variety of the exhibitions, had not one pause allowed her for a yawn, and in the fervour of her delight, she could not refrain from saying, " Well, Duchess, if you had not scalded poor Lord Charles's leg, I must say that your spilling the tea was a most lucky accident. You have broken my Dresden cup all to pieces, but I would give twenty Dresden cups for one such evening as this."





O'Donnel alone had felt neither pleasure nor gratification from this eventful evening; and before the Duchess had begun her buffo song, he had left the drawing-room, and retired to his own apartment, with feelings of the most unqualified discomfort. He almost regretted his hastiness to Lord Charles, and his having given way to the powerful feeling of the moment. Yet to go on longer under the same roof with a man, who evidently considered him with suspicion, if not with a more invidious sentiment; to feel the influence of looks and eyes, and yet to be scarcely justified in noticing their unequivocal expressions, was a state scarcely endurable to one, whose pride was but too prompt to take offence, and whose spirit was not always regulated by prudence, or tempered by reflection. He therefore resolved on taking an early opportunity of leaving Longlands, and (waiving any further ceremony with respect to Lady Llanberis's secret) he determined on mentioning his suspicion of her liberality on the following day, and, if possible, on bringing her to the point so long desired by him, and so long protracted by her.

In these resolutions Lord Charles was not alone the

person who took a part. The Duchess of Belmont's

conduct had thoroughly (it was a strong term, but he

repeated it to himself) disgusted him. Her evident

u attempts to adulate Lord Charles, the moment after she had witnessed what had passed between them, and had heard his pointed expression of contempt for her country, of which some portion must necessarily fall upon herself; the extravagance of her exhibitions, far beyond what he had before seen her attempt; and even her ridiculous mimicry of Mr. Carlisle, the last person on whom she ought to have exerted her dangerous talent, overthrew every sentiment of prepossession which he had conceived in her favour. He felt that he never could again seek her society, nor be seduced by her pleasantry and conversational powers.





Yet that enjoyment lost, what was there to detain him longer at this splendid villa, or to render it preferable to his own solitary and obscure lodging in London? There, at least, his time was his own; and there, he was neither constrained to be amused, expected to be gay, nor condemned to be happy, in spite of every reason to be otherwise. It was also self-evident that he. was not in any respect calculated for the meridian of the society to which he was attached. With modes of thinking as strong as his feelings were acute and his spirits susceptible, he was continually risking beyond some landmark of prevailing opinion; startling a cherished prejudice, or treading upon a darling prepossession. Neither did he possess exhibiting talents of any description, so necessary in contributing to the levy, which the indolent and the rich are perpetually raising upon the spirits and exertions of all who are admitted to their community. Prompt, as qualified, to bear his part in an enlightened and liberal conversation, upon whatever point it turned, he shrunk from being at all times en spectacle, either as actor or auditor. He could not feign a leap nor force an attitude; he could neither grind knives with his teeth, nor play the short-armed orator; and added to all these

deficiencies, he hated "hot cockles," disliked "blind i





man's buff," and played with so little success at "four corners," that he was sure to be left fool in the middle whenever he attempted it.

On the following: morning, as O'Donnel was crossing through the hall from the breakfast-room to the saloon, in search of Liady Llanberis, to execute the resolves of the preceding night, he perceived her ladyship and the Duchess leaning over the balustrade of the gallery above, in earnest conversation.

"Stay, stay, Colonel O'Donnel," cried the Countess; "you are the person in the world I want to speak to ;" and she hurried down with her hands full of letters. "Come into the saloon," she said; "I have something particular to say to you."

O'Donnel followed her.

"Now, Colonel O'Donnel," she said, laughingly, will you answer me a simple question?"

"Certainly, Madam," he replied in some emotion; "if I can."

"Has Lady Singleton, or has she not, turned traitress?"

"What does your ladyship mean?"

"Has she, or has she not, betrayed to you a little secret, I intrusted to her keeping, and in which you are involved?"

"Never, Madam, never, at least directly or intentionally, upon my honour; but I have, partly by accident, party by inference, been led to suspect that there was a secret, that"

He paused for a moment, felt for the two thousand pound bills, and hesitated whether he would not at once cut the matter short, and, without further observation, return the money into her hands.

"Come," said the Countess, "I see you know all; and, indeed, I meant long since to have talked to you about it, but I have been so hurried and engaged, by all u2





the tiresome people that have been here, that it quite went out of my head, till a letter from your friend, Lady Singleton, this morning, has rendered me more anxious than ever to complete the business, for many reasons which I will mention to you: but first tell me, are you satisfied with"

"Satisfied!" interrupted O'Donnel in some agitation, and drawing the letter, and its enclosures, from his pocket. "Satisfied, is a cold word: but while I offer your ladyship my sincere, my grateful acknowledgments, I trust you will suffer me to decline, not your good-will, but the medium through which it flows—in a word, Madam"

"Nay," interrupted Lady Llanberis, eagerly, "I did not mean to dictate: I acted only in conformity to the character given of you by Lady Singleton: her description of you altogether.—In a word, it struck me that nature herself had intended you for ' un role distingue;' and I thought it was but just that our hero should"

"Nay, indeed, Lady Llanberis," said O'Donnel, confused, yet smiling at her new enthusiasm in bis favour: "I cannot hear you further; your ladyship and Lady Singleton have both been most kind, most flattering, and"

"Not the least of it," said Lady Llanberis; "and the fact is, I shall consider your refusal as mere false modesty, false delicacy; you can start no reasonable objection. In short," she added, with some symptoms of humour, "I am not much in the habit of being refused when I stoop to solicit, and before you decide, I think you had better consider a little, for your rejection will do me a very serious injury, and render abortive all that I have been working at for these two months."

O'Donnel, equally distressed and astonished, exclaimed—





• "Good God! how can my refusal or acceptance be of any moment to your ladyship, further than as your generous feelings in my favour"

"Why," interrupted Lady Llanberis, "it breaks up all my scheme, and disappoints all my triumphs, over a person who is most justly and deservedly odious to me."

"You amaze me !" said O'Donnel.

"It is nevertheless true," added Lady Llanberis; "and therefore it was necessary the whole should be kept secret, till all was ready beyond the chance of disappointment; nor had I any confidant in the whole plan but Lady Singleton and Lord Charles. The person to whom I alluded," she continued, "is Lady Loton, a creature of yesterday; whom, before she became a personage, I happened to treat a little de haute en has, and since she has become the wife of that Croesus, that old nabob, Sir Samuel Loton, who got his money in India, heaven knows how—she has endeavoured to pay me back—not, however, in kind—there I defy her insignificance; but by ruining herself to annoy me. You know how people are led in London by dinners, and suppers, and lions, and champagne, and all that sort of thing; and this Pagoda Lady has so timed her good things to come in opposition to mine, that she actually, last season, emptied my rooms twice in one month, and carried off some of my best men from my opera suppers. Well, this is not all: last autumn, her foolish old husband, at her instigation, bought Lord S—'s beautiful villa when he went to Germany. Now this villa is only five miles distance from Longlands; and when the report got about that I meant to fill my house at Christmas, and ask some amusing people here, she instantly gave out that she meant to have private theatricals, some of Moliere's 'petits pieces;' for she has an emigre, a kind of ami defamille, such as it is the fashion to have now, who is the first comic actor in the world, the Chevalier St. Ange; and they were to commence with an English tragedy and les Precieuses Ridicules for a force. She had, however, a theatre to build, and I was determined to meet her in her own way. My theatre is nearly finished, and hers is not roofed; and before she can bring out her Tamerlane and French farce, I shall have represented my Zaire and my English farce; for I have cast all the parts myself, and have gotten them written out. We have now a fortnight before us: we may be all ready for the first rehearsal by this day se'nnight, and on that day week, we may perform, to Lady Loton's surprise and confusion, and the astonishment of all the world, for I shall ask all the world.





"Still, however, I was not certain of Zaire till this post; though Lady Singleton has been intriguing the business for me this month back; for my Zaire is no other than the once famous Comtesse de Pompeignan, whose Thiatre de Societe was the first thing of its kind in Paris, and who, though rather too old for your tendre Zaire, is still a delicious actress. Now the Chevalier St. Ange is the cher ami of Madame de Pompeignan, as well as the ami de la maison with Lady Loton; and though these ladies are the greatest friends in the world, yet there are constant littleyVacas between them, of which the poor dear Chevalier (himself no chicken) is the subject. Lady Singleton has been in the neighbourhood with them all, and has played her part so well, that, on a late quarrel between the two rival queens, she has actually carried off Zaire with her to town, engaged her in our schemes, and set her at eternal war with her Chevalier and her false friend, who is young and pretty enough to excuse the Chevalier's desertion, that is certain. We are to have both ladies here in a few days; and Madame de Pompeignan is already aware that she is to have the handsomest 'Orosmane' in the world; for, in fact, as Lady Singleton said to me, when we first wrote to you, the part seemed written on purpose, as if Voltaire had you in his eye at the time.—Stay, here are all your parts, and here is my little bill of fare: you will perceive that I have enlisted some emigres too, as well as Lady Loton. I am to send the carriage for them to Lady Singleton, who is to get me a whole batch. I have cast the play so:—





Orosmane

Lusiguan

Nerestan



Chevaliers Francais.

Fatime •





Colonel O'Donnel.

Chevalier de Tours.

M. de Mercosur.

Messrs. Carlisles, &c.

Lady Singleton.





Zaire .... Mad. de Pompeignan.

DEVIL TO PAY.

Sir John Loverule, . Sir Gilbert S.

for he has a sweet little voice, and you know it's a poor part.

Jobson Mr. F. Carlisle.

He will be delightful.

Butler .... Mr. Carlisle.

Footman . . . The Duke of Belmont.

and so on.

"Well, here is your part, written out by Florio; and if you have nothing better to do, suppose you walk to the fir grove and look at my theatre, and try your voice. I have given a thousand orders about the soundingboard. Do you remember—

"Je veux avec exces vous aimer et vous plaire?"

"You little thought then you were giving me a specimen of your dramatic powers; so you see your refusal of the premier role comes too late."

Her ladyship having now presented the written part to her hero, was gliding away; but O'Donnel, who, from the length of her speech, had time to recover gradually from his astonishment, followed her, and entreated another moment of her attention. . "Well," she returned, "it ipoist be only a moment, for I am now going to the Carlisles, to set them to work at the Devil to Pay."





"May I then," said O'Donnel, "beg to know, if your ladyship ever did me the honour to write to me upon any other subject to Ireland, than that of a mere invitation to your villa?"

"No," said Lady Llanheris, "never. Why do you ask? I even cautioned Lady Singleton not to mention a word in her letter of the plays, but merely to request the pleasure of your company at Longlands, for, independent of Orosmane, I had an amazing curiosity to see you. I assure you, I consider you as a genuine Irish chief; and what Lady Singleton told me about your being kidnapped in your youth, and confined in the castle of Dublin, rendered you most amazingly interesting."

O'Donnel, little as he was disposed to be amused, could not help smiling at this identifying of himself with " O'Donnel the Red;" but as the eager lady was again hurrying away, he again followed her, and putting the letter he had received into her hand with the bills, begged to know if that was her seal.

"No," said Lady Llanberis, reading the motto; "but it is an amazing pretty device. I will have a seal cut after it directly: it is really extremely ingenious. Will you give me leave?" and tearing off the seal, 'she glided away, repeating the Italian motto to herself.

O'Donnel stood motionless where she had left him, holding his f rench part in his hand, more bewildered, more to seek than ever. It was impossible to mistake Lady Llanberis's manner, and it was as impossible not to feel that he had hitherto wholly mistaken her character. It was evident that he was simply the object of a caprice; the instrument of a scheme; and that he had no further interested her feelings in his favour, than in as much as he had excited her curiosity) or amused her imagination; and it was clear, that, though pleased, as she was misled, by the account of the kidnapped chief, she had neither sympathy nor interest for the unfortunate gentleman.





The approach of some one towards the door, opposite to that near which he stood, hurried him away; and he had already reached his own room, before he discovered that he had not picked up his letter and bills, which Lady Llanberis had carelessly let fall, with her wonted giddiness, when she tore off the seal; and that he now only held in his hand the written part of Orosmane.

In some trepidation, he hurried back to the saloon, and was equally mortified and surprised to see the Duchess of Belmont standing, where he had stood a few minutes before, and holding the envelope of his letter in one hand, and one of the bills between the finger and thumb of the other.

"Oh! oh !" she said, "you are the careless person, then, Colonel O'Donnel, who flings his thousand pound notes about, as if they were blank paper. There, take it, I read your claims in your countenance, and have read nothing else, I assure you." And she presented him the letter and the bill. "Don't be frightened," she added, sportively; "I have only this moment picked it up; 'tis all safe. But pray be more cautious in future. Cold, pausing caution, to be sure, is not the virtue of a hero, and least of all of such a hero as le Grand Orosmane''

O'Donnel started and coloured. The' Duchess was just where she had been in his estimation the night before; he was not, therefore, much disposed to be amused by her pleasantry, and still less was he disposed to become the butt, or object of her ridicule. He was about at once to deny all knowledge of the part assigned him by Lady Llanberis, till a few minutes back, when, the Duchess interrupted him, saying—





"The Countess has just told me all, Colonel, and I quite agree with her, that you are the very figure for the 'superbe Orosmane ;' yes, there is 'ce bras puissant,' 'cet aimable front, que la gloire environne."

O'Donnel was turning away, but the Duchess detained him.

"Nay, you must not go for a minute or two," she said. "I am so full of this French play, I can think and talk of nothing else. You have no idea how much I admire private theatricals; but your Zaire—what a Zaire they have given you! poor Madame de Pompeignan! Thirty years ago she was the heroine of her own theatre, and the worst of it is, the play, you know, opens so—

'Je ne m'attendais pas, jeune et belle Zaire.'

Now, vanity apart, I think I should have played it better. Stay, I'll just give you a specimen ;" and placing herself opposite to him after a moment's pause, and with an instantaneous and extraordinary change of manner and countenance, she addressed herself to O'Donnel, in the tender expressions of the devoted Zaire.

"' Helas j'aurais voulu qu'a vos vertus unie,

Et meprisant pour vous les trones de l'Asie,

Seule, et dans un desert avec mon epoux,

J'eusse pu sous mes pieds les fouler avec vous.'"



"Good heavens!" exclaimed O'Donnel, while his imagination was thrown into disorder by the exquisite, the almost passionate feeling of the Duchess's voice and manner; " Good heavens! what an actress you are!"

"Well," she said, recovering her usual tone, "I told you so; but my merits are here wholly overlooked, and instead of the Christian heroine of the French tragedy, I am destined to play the cobbler's wife in the English farce;" and she began to hum, with great taste and playfulness—

"' Of late I was a cobbler's wife.'"





"Then your Grace," said O'Donnel, pleased and detained against his better reason, "your Grace really means to perform?"

"To be sure," she replied, " and don't you?" , " Me!" said O'Donnel—" You cannot seriously suppose it."

"Indeed I do suppose and believe it most seriously and truly," said the Duchess. "How can I doubt it, when you have come six hundred miles on Lady Singleton's invitation, for the express purpose? for this, as I learnt from our noble hostess this morning, was the 'wind, of which you were the sport,' and which blew you into those ' halcyon seas,' you talked of some days back."

O'Donnel now, more to exculpate himself from so ludicrous an imputation, and to escape being the subject of one of her humorous grace's good stories, than from any desire to make a confidant, where he almost feared an enemy, candidly confessed the motive which led him to seek the Countess's acquaintance, and to accept her invitation to Longlands, alleging the fact of his visit to England being merely the result of his own situation and affairs; and his never having received the invitations she alluded to, which he had reason to believe did not reach Ireland till he had left it.

"And this then," said the Duchess, emphatically, "is your knowledge of human nature. After having lived 'where bells have tolled to church,' in great cities and in great courts, you have yet to learn, that those who go furthest for their own gratification, are those who move least to promote the good of others; that. extravagance of conduct holds no inseparable connexion with liberality of sentiment; and that, what is vulgarly called a good heart, is as inferior to a right mind, as instinct is to reason, and impulse to principle. But to quit this ton d'exorde. Since Lady Llanberis is not the





invisible deity who showers her ill-bestowed benefits on you, have you no suspicion who is?"

"None in the world," returned O'Donnel. "Why should any one suppose I wanted the money? or why should any one suspect that I would accept so large a sum, coming in so questionable a way !—a sum which might be reclaimed when I was least able to return it; and by one, perhaps, from whom I should shrink to be obliged."

"Nay," said the Duchess, " I dare say you suspect the whole transaction to be the act of some foolish, inconsiderate woman, who, without rhyme or reason, would do that and more, pour I'amour de vos beaux yeux.'

O'Donnel raised his eyes to the Duchess's, and was hurt beyond the power of concealing his mortification at the look of irony which beamed in them.

"I am not," he said, in a quick tone, "quite the consummate coxcomb your grace seems to suppose, and"

"Ah ! there he is," interrupted the Duchess, with a dramatic air. "Ce superbe Orosmane! Well, I beg pardon; but the fact is, I have a sort of a feeling of old acquaintanceship with you, which leads me to take these little liberties. It is now I think more than two years since we first met; and though your notice was neither very marked, nor very flattering, yet while you were cultivating an intimacy with Lady Florence's eyes, < Goody Two Shoes' was making an acquaintance with you; for those who ran might read. The style, though high flown, was clear enough."

"Lady Florence's eyes, and Goody Two Shoes!" repeated O'Donnel, half pleased, half vexed, at Lady Llanberis's treachery, and at once amused, softened, and flattered, in spite of himself.

"Aye, Lady Florence's eyes," returned the Duchess. "That woman knows you all. She piques your selflove at the first set out; and she judges by experience that all the rest will follow of course. Now, that is the very spirit of the laws of coquetry, and all the rest is mere verbiage. But the truth is, Lady Florence's attentions did touch you, Colonel, and home too—you know they did. You were caught, not by admiring, but by being admired."





"The attentions of any woman would touch me home," replied O'Donnel, warmly; "and I will not answer for the extravagance to which the attentions of some women might drive me. But Lady Florence would be as little likely to produce that effect, as any other cold and self-possessed woman, who through all her fascination clearly shows that she lives only for the gratification of her own vanity." "Indeed!" said the Duchess, drily. "You like then to find a woman, as the Parisian gourmand liked to find his goose, tendre comme Zaire. O'Donnel could not help laughing at the ridicule of the image.

"Well," said the Duchess, rising from the chair, on which she had seated herself during the conversation, "all I can say is, since you have honoured me with your confidence, that I think you had better advertise these troublesome notes, as things lost or mislaid, stolen or strayed; or lay them by for the present, till called for by the right owner. For since, as the French song says, 'on ne donne rien pour rien,' when nothing comes of it, and it is seen that you have not had the tender intuition to discover who really is the benefactress, the money will perhaps be reclaimed, and given to some more grateful and quick-sighted object. Meantime, however, observe, that Madame de Pompeignan will be here to meet her Orosmane, so you had better set about your part."

"So very little idea," he replied, " have I of playing any part here, that I mean to return to town to-morrow."





The Duchess turned back, with some surprise marked in her countenance.

"Indeed !" she said, with earnestness. "Return so soon to London! Why Lady Llanberis has just told me that you have promised to remain here for three weeks, certain; and as much longer as you could. She counts on you, and .... in short, you must not go; for you cannot tell her that you will not stay, because she did not send you two thousand pounds: though, if that is your price, and you will not remain a shilling under, why, I can answer for her, that sooner than lose her Orosmane"

"I perceive," interrupted O'Donnel, with some humour, "there is but one aspect of things for your Grace, and that is the ridiculous."

"To be serious then," said the Duchess—" which is the only ridiculous thing after all; if you are only driven away by the fear of being dragooned into the part of a hero, you may trust me, that your compliance will never be put to the test. For persons of Lady Llanberis's class there are no meditated pleasures; with them, 'nothing pleaseth but rare accident.' The amusement long planned is seldom attained; the scheme long contrived is rarely realised. The sicklied imagination droops over its own reiterated dreams; the mind, satiated by the facility with which its devices are accomplished, loses its spring, and foregoes its object: and when the strong excitements of doubt and hope, and solicitude and impatience, cease to play upon the exhausted spirits; when the intrigue and the manoeuvre, the obstacle and the difficulty, are all at an end—the charm is over, and weariness or disgust takes its place. In a word, by the time the theatre is finished, the parts filled, and all bids fair for speedy representation, I will venture to affirm, that the whole thing falls to the ground. If, therefore, you should behold the theatre turned into a chapel of

use, or the petits loges into dovecotes, and you should express your astonishment at the transformation, her ladyship would coolly answer you, with Scagnarelle— 'O! nous avons change tout cela!' So far, therefore, you need have no apprehensions. But still, if you are weary of this place; if business calls; or pleasure awaits you in London, in that case •"





"No, Madam," returned O'Donnel, insensibly pleased by the serious and friendly tone she had assumed— "neither pleasure nor business recall me to London, which is in fact to me a desert.

"I am at present in a state of suspenseful expectation about letters from the continent, which may, or may not, arrive in a week or ten days ; and I cannot take any decided step in the business which brought me to England till I receive them. Yet, still, why should I remain—to what purpose—for what object?" and he sighed profoundly.

"Nay," she said, in a tone of some hesitation, "if, indeed, you have no inducement to remain"

"Perhaps," he returned, smiling, "after all, I want rather an excuse than an inducement."

"If that is all," she replied, gaily, "I will give you an excuse. Suppose I desire you to stay."

"I fear," said O'Donnel, half inclined, yet half afraid, to credit the expression of her countenance; "I fear my imagination will not go so far."

"Come then," said the Duchess, "we will leave supposition aside, and call obedience into action, I command you to remain," she added, imperiously.

'' Indeed !" returned O'Donnel with animation; " then you shall be obeyed. But remember, that to command obedience, is to imply protection; and that in our's, as in all bonds of allegiance, the sovereign and the subject stand respectively committed."

"Well, well," said the Duchess, moving towards the door, " I will protect you, if that be all: but," she added, turning suddenly round, "I must do it in future at a cheaper rate than I did last night; for really I cannot afford a white satin gown in your defence, every time you mount your griffin as the champion of your country, and cry, 'Hola there—O'Donnel for Ireland, against St. George of England!"





"What does your Grace mean?" asked O'Donnel, anxiously.

"Why, I mean that poor Mr. Carlisle was as innocent as a cherub of the fall of my tea cup, though I so cruelly 'shook the fabric of his folly ;' and that at the expense of my dear nephew's instep, and my own pretty new gown, I stopt short the 'keen encounter of your wits,' and perhaps prevented some other ' keen encounters ;' for all the rest of my fooleries during the remainder of the evening went to the self same time and tune: and thus, perhaps, I imperceptibly diverted feelings, which more serious and more obvious efforts would neither have soothed nor controlled. But observe, that, as you respect the vow of allegiance, now pledged, I charge you not to throw yourself at Lord Charles's head, because he refuses to believe that Fin-ma-cool was nine feet high; or because, when he intends to smile, by an unhappy mistake of nature's, he seems only to sneer. Dear Lord Charles is the least in the world of an—but as he is my nephew,—I'll tell you more another time."

She was now gliding away, when O'Donnel following her a few steps, with a thousand reproaches knocking at his heart, took the end of her scarf, as if to detain her. "Well," she said, "have you any thing to say?" "Much," he returned in emotion; and he involuntarily kissed the drapery he still held. Yet, as he remained silent, the Duchess gently drew away her scarf, and went off singing,

"Of late I was a cobler's wife"





CHAPTER XX.

Notwithst A NDiNGLady Llanberis had imposed silence on O'Donnel, with respect to the French plays, he found after dinner, when the servants had withdrawn, that every member of the society had shared a confidence, which he had believed almost confined to himself. Most of the party had walked to the fir grove, and had been permitted to look at the theatre ;and Mr. Carlisle had ventured to efface the monosyllable " no" from the inscription over the gate. Nothing else but the plays were talked of during the early part of the evening, till Lady Llanberis herself changed the subject, of which she was grown weary, by crying, "Come, this is all very well; but really one cannot go on ringing the changes upon the same tune eternally. One would soon grow weary even of private theatricals, if one is to hear nothing else from morning to night."

The Duchess threw an intelligent look at O Donnel who, with this encouragement, approached her, notwithstanding she was still in conversation with the Duke. At the same moment, however, Lady Llanberis called to the latter, "Come, Duke, I must tear you from La belle tante: we have not had any brag since last you were at Longlands, and I have promised Lord Charles to make up a table."

The Duke rose out of one arm-chair, and threw himself into another; and the brag table was made up.

"That is an excellent person," said the Duchess to

O' Donnel, as he took the vacated seat by her: "but he

nevertheless reminds me continually of the sleepy man,

in Queen Anne's reign, who slept for show; and who in

x the syllabus of his somniferous performances detailed, 'that the first hour he yawned, the second grew drowsy, the third dozed,' and so on. But of such beings, in their various modifications, is supreme bon-ton by profession, composed. This, however, by no means includes, in its rigorously drawn circle, all the rank of the country."





"From the specimens I have seen abroad of your nobility," said O'Donnel, "I have conceived that the English aristocracy was not only the most dignified, but the most enlightened of Europe; partaking fully with the people in the blessings which flow from a well understood liberty. But it is still but too true, that the society which your grace calls bon-ton by profession, is distinguished by a languor, which, in the Parisian circles of my day, would have passed for mere dulness; and would have proved infinitely tiresome and monotonous to a nation, whose constitutional vivacity gave a natural and unforced life and spirit to their social intercourse. For, after all, much of that which is attributed to the influence of the morale, ought more properly to be ascribed to constitution; and I cannot but think, that those causes which idealists deem subaltern and inferior, have, in fact, a primary influence upon the springs of intellect (about which so much is said, and so little understood) ; and accelerate or retard their play, by means but too mechanical."

"Possibly," said the Duchess; "but whatever be the cause, nothing can be more contrasted than the effects. Conversation here is a dull game of chess; carried on by slow moves, and deliberated checks; while the Parisian makes it a game of shuttlecock, by the lively bounding and rebounding of opinion; the argument thrown lightly to and fro, caught and returned with equal ease and dexterity, and dropt at last accidentally, before either of the players are weary of the contest."

"This is, indeed, the true theory of society," said





O'Donnel. "I wish your grace would become the founder of a sect, by preaching it; which might put the quietism of bon-ton to sleep, and—

"Quench the zeal of all professors else."

Here the entrance of two young gentlemen, whom O'Donnel had not before seen at Longlands, gave another turn to the conversation. The strangers advanced into the room, arm in arm, with looks of the most solemn gravity. They were received by Lady Llanberis with a cordial welcome, while they bestowed a silent shake of the hand to some of the men, and a cold nod of the head to a few of the women.

"Pray observe," said the duchess, "those two young men, who, like Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, move together, with measured steps, and looks of mutual intelligence. It is rather a late hour for their arrival; but you will find their tardy movements are, some way or other, connected with the fate of the nation."

Lady Llanberis now reproached them for not coming to dinner; and one of them replied, "The house sat so late."

"There—I knew it," said the Duchess. "But what do you think they said in the house ?—nothing. They have never opened their lips in it, since they made their maiden speeches. All maiden speeches are splendid things, and make a great noise in—the particular circle of the speaker; but these gentlemen are among those termed, rising young men; and their maiden speeches placed them at once above the common roll of legislators. Great hopes are entertained of them, and doubtless you will soon see them high ministerial characters, each of them at the head of some important department of the government."

"But with all due deference to their precocity," said O'Donnel, laughing, " I should imagine, since political

x2





sagacity does not, like 'reading and writing, come by nature,' that their youth would for a little time stand in the way of their preferment."

"Quite the reverse," said the Duchess: "the old maxim of young warriors and old statesmen, is long since gone by. It is no longer necessary to reach power by the laborious gradations of public service; nor is a knowledge of the constitution the preliminary for obtaining distinction in the senate. We take, therefore, our Cecils from the forms, and our Harleys from the universities. As far, however, as this experiment has yet gone, 'there's never any of these demure boys come to any proof,' as Falstaff says."

"But do all your demure boys," asked O'Donnel, "wear this solemn air and thoughtful brow, in which 'men read strange things'?"

"Yes," said the Duchess, "all; and they speak too in diplomatic mystery, with 'nods and becks,' but not with ' wreathed smiles :' oh! no—

'Seldom they smile, or smile in such a sort,

As if they- mocked their spirits, that could be

Moved to smile at any thing.'"



"This, however," said O'Donnel, " was not, I believe, the youth of the Burkes, the Foxes, and the Sheridans, nor even of the Sullys*, or the Colberts."

"No, no," said the Duchess; "the star which arose so brightly on the horizon of their lives, kindling while it guided, and sometimes perhaps dazzling while it illuminated, sheds no influence on these, our * wise men of the east;' and if therefore they should in the end prove fallible, they cannot plead that—



'The light which led astray was light from heaven.'"

• The Due de Sully was not a very [young diplomatist when he danced in a ballet, at a court christening. I believe the juvenile politician of our present day never outsteps the gravity of a waltz.^





"Talking of lights which lead astray," said O'Donnel, *' I have not been able to ascertain by what means your grace has preserved your lustre in a sphere so likely to dull it; or how, with so much natural brilliancy, you have yet attained to such supreme bon-ton."

"You mistake; I am not bon-ton. We Pamelas, who make a step over half-a-dozen ranks of society, to repose ourselves on a red bench, and set the world staring, to know how we have got there, are never supreme bon-ton. No, we are at best but 'the fashion: we are for a time shown about, and followed and gazed at; and we exhibit and are exhibited: and after all, are but the .fashion. This is a poor distinction; for any one may be the fashion. But what fashion is, how procured, or how retained, 'tis impossible to say :—

''Tis something, nothing; 'twas your's, 'tis mine,

And has been slave to thousands.'



Bon-ton, on the contrary, is less an accidental endowment, and more a prescriptive right. To be legitimately bon-ton, one should be high-born, apathetic, and reserved: constitutionally cold, and habitually silent ; talked of by many, known to a few, devoted to none, and ennuyi by all. In a word, you must be, what Lord Charles Savill is, and what the Dalai lama is supposed to be— a thing absorbed in itself, and perpetually engaged in the contemplation of its own divinity.



CHAPTER XXI.



On the following morning Lady Llanberis communicated the contents of a letter to the company assembled at breakfast, which, from the excessive satisfaction it appeared to afford, presented her in a new and amiable light to O'Donnel. The letter was from her son, and





dated off . She had not heard from him for some

time, and now received the unexpected, and apparently most welcome intelligence of his immediate return. Although O'Donnel had frequently heard her speak of her son with great affection, yet as his going abroad was entirely against her will, she had always mingled some little bitterness in her expressions of maternal fondness. He was now, however, returning sooner by six months than she expected; and, what much added to her joy and satisfaction, he was bringing over with him a Greek servant, an Egyptian fire-eater, and an Indian juggler. She would not hear any other subject mentioned or discussed, but what bore upon the return of this prodigal son, and his imported natural curiosities.

Another event, which occurred on the following day, gave an additional subject of occupation and interest to her ladyship. Lord Edward Savill, brother to the late, and uncle to the present Duke of Belmont, was seized with a dangerous illness, and an express had been despatched for Lord Charles, whom he had made his heir. The two noble brothers, therefore, left Longlands together for Northumberland, where Lord Edward then was at his own seat; and Lady Llanberis, always pleased by a new and unexpected event, inasmuch as it created a new sensation, appeared deeply interested in the cause of their departure. She entreated their return as soon as circumstances would permit; and declared no sort of amusement should go on during their absence, except it happened that her son and his "people" should arrive in the interim, which was very improbable. Her ladyship, therefore, now endeavoured to establish quiet reading parties, and "rational conversations;" and invited Mrs. St. Leger to Longlands, who had hitherto been quite forgotten. She would have no small games played, less intellectual than proverbs—" qui vent vendre le Corbillon ;" and "bouts rimes." She cried down blind-man's buff, and "petit paquet," as boisterous and tiresome; and placed Lady Mary Savill and her friend Mr. Ovid Mussen, as perpetual dictators over the rational pleasures of Longlands. The intellect of the whole society was now put into requisition, and "raisonner fut Vemploi de toute la maison."





Lady Llanberis was delighted with the new system of things, but could not help expressing her amazement, that two such clever persons as Colonel O'Donnel and the Duchess of Belmont were less expert at " small plays" of wit and sentiment, than even Mr. Wharton, who was always a very useless person in a house; or poor Sir Gilbert, who, though a man of good fashion, was proverbially dull. Lady Mary and her protege, however, supplied all deficiencies; and prodigal of their talent, made "iin grand depense d'esprit,"

Although the Christmas party at Longlands was every day contracting its circle, and its amusements became less varied, still O'Donnel found the place more tolerable, and suffered another week to pass over his head without ever observing its flight. Though the prevailing tone of society was neither more animated, nor more interesting, yet he felt towards it more toleration and indulgence; or rather he sought beyond its pale an enjoyment above its power to bestow, or its intelligence to appreciate.

A sort of conversational intercourse had established itself between the Duchess and himself, which, though free from familiarity, had still a general coincidence and mutual understanding, which approached to intimacy, and which rendered the mornings short, and the evenings delicious: for she frequently lingered to a late hour in the breakfast-room; and at night O'Donnel had always some excuse in the unfinished subject of the day's discussion, to approach and address her. Her acuteness, her animation, her power of generalising, and rising beyond the narrow compass of detail, the flimsiness of personal observation, or the repetition of every-day anecdotes (which so frequently occupy the minds of the idle great, as of the vulgar little, with frivolous importance *), chained him near her. With her, discussion took a liberal scope, pursuing conjecture beyond the pale of stale opinion, neither guided by a theory, nor checked by a system; while her vivid fancy threw a halo of brightness over the sobriety of reason, and mingled the charm of playfulness with the gravity of thought.





Evidently owing much to nature, and nothing to education; without learning, as without its pretensions, she never wearied, because she was always original. Quick in perception, rapid in combination, she illuminated a subject, as a sunbeam plays on a point, glittering and disappearing in the same instant; and seeming to reach by intuition what she had not the faculty to pursue by reflection. Careless, indolent, and variable, she threw out ideas as they arose; which, though sometimes incorrect, might sometimes have afforded the elements of future systems, for the brain of sages to work upon; while her mind, as it appeared through her intelligent but playful conversation, might be best imaged by the light and elegant definition of that smiling philosophy, which has found its place in the French Encyclopaedia, under the simple article of" Gaiety f."

O'Donnel had, in common with most other men, a well-founded prejudice against, what Moliere calls, leaFemmes Docteurs; who invent nothing and criticise every thing; who declaim without conversing, display their acquirements the better to conceal their innate poverty; and who are always tiresome, because they are never natural. But, between the Duchess of Belmont and Lady Mary Savill, the line of demarcation was too strongly drawn to suffer their characters to be confounded or mistaken. Still, however, the literary lady would have imposed on a thousand, where the woman of genius would scarcely be understood by one: for, in the particular circles of private life, it is alike with the highly gifted of both sexes: arrogant pretension will still take the lead of conscious ability, and the assuming dunce will win the triumph of the hour; while careless genius laughs at the undiscerning umpire who bestows it, or acute sensibility burns with indignation against the injustice which awards it. The public, the true and final judge, is sure to repeal the sentence of particular society; and merit receives immortality from its hands, while mere pretension is sent back to its original' obscurity.



• Savez vous (disoit la Soeur Marie) que la mere Cecile et la mere fherese viennent de se brouiller? Mais vous etes surpris?—qooi? tout de bon; vous ignorez leur querelle—et d'ou venez vous done?

The Soeur Marie is not confined to the plebeian circles of life.

f Si j'avois a peindre d'un seul mot la Gniete, la raison, et la volupt£ re-unies, jc les appellerois la Philosophic—Diderot; mot Gaiete.





While the character and mind of the Duchess of Belmont thus grew on the estimation of O'Donnel, he began to discover, or to suppose, that there was more of design than vanity or frivolous ambition in her conduct; and, from many things she accidentally let fall from her lips, he was convinced she was acting up to that true doctrine, which best applies to the world in general, and which blends the sarcasm of gaiety with the indulgence of contempt. But, while he daily felt increased admiration for her shining qualities, and the careless simplicity of manner which accompanied them, he was still left ignorant whether any touch of feeling accompanied this superior mind, or if the heart was as cold as the imagination was warm.

Meantime he gave himself up to the spell of her society with unsuspecting confidence; and it had become





his necessity, while he merely considered it as his resource. Still he felt that she was a woman—and a fascinating woman; and he was but too well versed in the exercise of the passions to be ignorant of their progressive and insidious influence. He was fully aware by what insensible shades of feeling, repugnance may soften into toleration, indifference warm into preference, and preference rise to devoted, zealous, exclusive attachment. With respect to the duchess, he had more than once brought his feelings to the test of his former experience; but he believed that there were two insuperable bars between them, which would inevitably prove the security of both—his own poverty and unprosperous circumstances, which rendered honour more tenacious and pride more lofty; and her passionless and ambitious character, which indicated no tendency to disinterested attachment, or proneness to generous sacrifice. It was impossible he could act so as to commit his conduct, and subject his actions, to the imputation of sordid venality; or if he could, he had not, from the Duchess's general manner towards himself, any grounds for suspecting (save such as a coxcomb might advance) that he would succeed. It was true, she conversed more with him, than with any other man in their circle; but of what men were that circle comprised? Since the desertion of Mr. F. Carlisle, who had never pardoned the wound she had given to his vanity, there was no one who seemed particularly anxious to obtain her exclusive attention, or to dispute with him that place he was so anxious to secure.

The Duchess had more than once let fall observations which seemed intended to convey to him the conviction, that she had no object in the preference she gave his society, besides the mere passing of the hour. "Surrounded as I am," she said to him, one day, "by the flippant or the languid, by the over-strained or the undertoned, it is quite a relief to get some one of a humorous melancholy like yourself, who is by inheritance the victim of the graver follies and more serious absurdities of mankind, and who will kindly step with me behind the scenes of life, and assist me to laugh at the melodrama enacted on its stage. For, after all, I am afraid we must laugh or weep; we must consider it as the farce of ' Tom Thumb the Little,' or the tragedy of 'Alexander the Great.'"





"You do me much honour by the election," said O'Donnel; "and whatever may be the motive of the distinction, it is but too gracious and too flattering; yet, I must confess, that to look on life with the philosophical sang-froid, with which your grace seems to view it, one ought not one's-self to belong to the woeful pageants in the scene: they only 'jest at scars that never felt a wound.'"

"Nay," she replied, laughing, "my first appearance on any stage was by no means a splendid debut. I did not come out as Tilburina, nor as her confidante, in the humbler guise of white dimity. I was a mere mute, a supernumerary in the troop of society. You saw me enact the subordinate part under the overwhelming influence of Lady Singleton, and you will allow it was neither very interesting nor very distinguished. However, I laughed at the whole business of the stage, as I do now—aside, I grant you, yet still I laughed, and thought it all a monstrous farce."

"Since," said O'Donnel, eagerly, and glad to catch her at this point, "your grace has brought in review what you were with what you are, I must own that I have not yet been able to reconcile in my mind the Duchess of Belmont and Miss O'Halloran."

"O!" she replied, carelessly, "the story of Sixtus Quintus over again, who went double as a cardinal; but who, having once placed his foot on the first step of St. Peter's chair, stood lofty, vigorous, and erect, and cried aloud to the shallow conclave who had placed him there, ' Sono Papa.'"





Further than this, O'Donnel had never found her inclined to go, on the subject of her transition of character. Whatever she had been, he felt that what she now was, was but too fascinating; and he already contemplated his departure from Longlands, from England, with an emotion of increasing regret, as a period which would snap asunder one of the few golden threads accidentally woven in his dark and tangled " web of life."

As his third week at Longlands was now expired, he despatched M'Rory to London to inquire for letters at the General Post-office, in the hope of receiving his answer from General O'Donnel. At all events, however, he was resolved in a few days to quit his Alcina's palace, and again to shroud himself in the obscurity of his lodgings, so conformable to his fortunes and circumstances, should the expected letter not have arrived.

As the Duchess had foretold, the idea of the private theatricals had, by degrees, quite faded away. The primary motive of their institution was, indeed, removed by an unexpected accident; and Llady Llanberis, who had got tired of hating Lady Loton, was not sorry to be called on for a feeling of a very opposite nature. Lady Loton had been driven from her husband's house in shame and disgrace; the Chevalier St. Ange cited to appear in Doctors'-Commons, by the injured nabob; and la tendre Zaire was in the last stage of a nervous fever, occasioned by the treachery of her friend and the desertion of her lover.

Lady Singleton, by a happy change in her circumstances, was now relieved from the humble task of catering for the amusements of others, and was once more about to set up for herself. Mr. Glentworth, who resembled his father only in the natural excellence of his disposition, but who was not "du bois dont on fait les grands passions," was already becoming the victim of that ennui, which the necessary idleness of great opulence brings with it, when not counteracted by great intellect or great energy.





He had, in common with his friend Lord Boston, become weary of playing the " Anacharsis," which he had only enacted, because it was the fashion; and, tired of every thing he had seen abroad, he now resolved on being something considerable at home. After many debates within himself, whether he would be a "rising young man," a leader of the "four-in-hand," or "a giver of good dinners," he at last resolved on the latter, wisely assuming, that though rising young men and driving barouches might go out of fashion, good dinners in London never could. He wrote therefore to Mr. Vandaleur to choose him a cook; and, as the "true Amphitrion" ought to be a bachelor by profession, he wrote also to invite his bustling step-mother to preside over the details of his menage, and to fit up his house in Portman-Square.

Lady Singleton, full of the importance of a woman, who considers herself placed in the way of influencing a young unmarried man of twenty thousand a year, wrote to Lady Llanberis an epistle more concise and less sycophantic than usual; excused her attendance at the plays; lamented the disappointment of "Zaire," and promised to look out for some other French woman of fashion, who was au fait to that style of part. But the offer was rejected. Lady Llanberis declared she could not even bear to hear the plays mentioned, now that they only served to remind her of those unfortunate persons, Lady Loton and the Chevalier St. Ange; for in the deficiency of some new sensation to occupy her, she gave herself up to the most lively sympathy in the misfortunes of the former object of her rivalry and dislike.





One morning, O'Donnel, with almost all the persons who now remained at Longlands, was looking over the papers, when Lady Llanberis entered the room, accompanied by a servant carrying a basket heavily laden.

"There," said she to him, in a hurried and petulant manner; "there, take them to Colonel O'Donnel. There, Colonel, there are your skates."

"My skates I" repeated O'Donnel, in a tone of amazement.

"Yes," she said, "you know you bespoke them; though certainly I cannot see any particular use skates are of, when there has not been any ice this week back. They may skate in Ireland without ice; as they fly, I hear, without wings; but it won't do here, I promise yon," and she laughed satirically.

O'Donnel stood motionless with amazement, at this unexpected attack, while the Duchess, who was present, gravely said —

"I did not know, Lady Llanberis, that you took Colonel O'Donnel for Joshua."

"What do you mean?" asked Lady Llanberis, haughtily.

"I did not know you believed Colonel O'Donnel could make the sun stand still; and keep him a la derobe for the benefit of theskating party at Longlands. Though, upon second thoughts, he may, perhaps hold some undue influence over the winds; for the' flying wild Irish, you speak of, did keep up a sort of visiting acquaintance with the Lapland witches; and it is possible that with them, he has taken out his patent of magic, and may be, for ought we know, a sorcier a brevet."

"I dare say he-is," said Lady Llanberis, with an ironical smile, "for he seems to have bewitched your grace." With these words she turned away, and desiring the footman to carry off "those stupid skates," she left the room, 4lf O'Donnel felt far from comfortable at this unexpected attack, the Duchess was covered with evident confusion at the innuendo of Lady Llanberis's speech. The blood mounted to her cheek, and again left it colourless; but perceiving the smiles of the men, and the whispers of the women, she recovered, with an instantaneous effort, all her wonted spirit and presence of mind, and turning to O'Donnel, she said, with a natural laugh,—





"Come, Mr. Merlin, will you make the 'charm firm and good,' by accompanying me to the music-room? I want you just to touch the bass of a sonata of Cramer's on the violoncello;" then turning round to the company, as O'Donnel opened the door for her, she said with a nod of the head and a smile,—" Now, good folk, as Sir Peter Teazle says, I leave my character behind me."

When they had entered the ante-room, she paused and observed:—

"If once you give the whip hand to the world, you must expect to be driven by it for the rest of your life: —but now, having made my pas de charge upon the force I saw marshalled against me, I will make a skilful retreat, and leave you, Colonel O'Donnel, to follow Lady Llanberis, and make your peace with her, for I believe it is still in your power."

"Make my peace!" returned O'Donnel, in a tone of increased amazement.

"What then," said the duchess, as they both approached the fire-place, "is it possible you have not perceived that for these few days back you have—

'Sail'd in the north of my lady's opinion?"

"No," he said, with earnestness. "I believe I have of late perceived nothing, but have dreamed away existence, and lived independent of perception."

"And is that a gracious mode of being?" asked the Duchess, smiling, and leaning her arm on the mantelpiece.





"In my instance," he returned, "it is more gracious than either safe or lasting; for from such dreaming I shall be too soon obliged to awaken."

"But why not try then, 'to sleep and dream again,' like Caliban?"

"When such efforts are made, the reverse of our desires too frequently occurs: and the former bright illusion is only followed up by some frightful catastrophe. I thought," he added, with another involuntary sigh, "that I at least had done with dreaming !—but enough of dreams and dreamers—can your grace assign any cause for my present unpopularity with our noble hostess?"

"Assign a cause!" repeated the Duchess, laughing, "why you speak as if you were filing a bill, instead of treating on the subtle and delicate subject of a fine lady's caprice: however, not to go back to the trade winds we talked of some weeks ago, and which, notwithstanding my warnings, you seem to have expected, it is certain

you appear to have lost ground, or rather '•' she

stopped short, and then, with a countenance full of meaning, added—" Come, you know where you are, precisely, with Lady Llanberis."

"What can your grace mean?" asked O'Donnel.

"Psha, psha! you are at no. loss for my meaning. The thing is, to

'Catch, if you can, this Cynthia of the minute.'

Lord Charles is away: you are here; you have relaxed something of your petits soins ; Lady Llanberis is piqued. Now, then, is the critical moment, which the true tactician will aptly seize on; and when some well-advised little cupid in his service, might, with security,

'Take his stand

On the rich widow's jointur'd land."1

O'Donnel started. "Your grace's meaning is now pretty obvious.' he returned, coldly. "And though you are right in supposing that poverty may authorise 6uch suspicions; yet the fact is, I am so poor, madam, I cannot afford to be a rascal."





"Nonsense! what has rascal to do in the business?" she returned with an incredulous smile.

"More than the gentleman," he replied quickly; "for to seek a means of subsistence by the assumption of sentiments foreign to the feelings, and to pursue a woman for the mere purpose of obtaining a benefactress"

"Nay," interrupted the Duchess, "that is taking up the subject in a strange perverted sense. You would not object to Lady Llanberis, merely because she is rich?"

"I should certainly be the less apt to seek to interest her because she is rich," he returned: "but, as under any circumstances she would not be the object of my choice, I should the more abhor the idea of making her the victim of my sordidness; for, though I am poor, and an Irishman, still I am not a fortune-hunter; nor have I, in this instance, the remotest reason to suppose I should succeed if I were."

A pause of a moment ensued, and the Duchess then said: " That you are an Irishman, genuine and thorough bred, there can be no doubt; with your porcupine spirit, rising before it is assailed, and throwing its quill before it receives a wound. With you, one never knows whether one is on the point of touching the life-pulse of pride, or the tremulous nerve of honour: however, if I have offended, I beg pardon; if I have been pert, I am sorry. So we will shake hands, part friends, and before I again commit myself on such points, I will carefully read over Vincentio Saviolo, on honour and honourable quarrels."

As she spoke, she extended her hand to him with an air of friendliness not to be mistaken.

It was a beautiful hand; and O'Donnel's eyes had a y





thousand times dwelt on it in ardent admiration; yet now, withheld by some unaccountable feeling, he forbore to seize what he had so often coveted to touch, and to avail himself of her conciliating and condescending offer. "Oh, you won't then?" she returned playfully— "your voice is still for war: and, as Touchstone says, 'seven justices could not make up this quarrel.'"

"How can you !" exclaimed O'Donnel, in a tone of great emotion, "you know not what you do." He paused, and covered his face with his hands. "Very well," she said, affecting a pouting tone— "remember, if we fall out for ever, 'tis not I who am to blame. I offered you the hand, the very little hand, which saved your life at Carrick-a-rede, and you refused it."

O'Donnel raised his eyes to her face; she turned away, and moved towards the door ; he sprung after her, and, seizing her hand, which she endeavoured earnestly to withdraw, the reiterated pressure of his lips crimsoned its snowy surface, and overwhelmed the Duchess with amazement and confusion. Before she could liberate it from his grasp, Lady Llanberis stood before them, but suddenly retreated, and closed the door violently after her.

"Colonel O'Donnel!" exclaimed the Duchess, in a tone of indescribable emotion, "you have cruelly committed me!"

"Committed you!" he repeated, in great emotion, but she was gone. "Oh, no!" he added, " it is I only who stand committed: committed in every sense."

He threw himself on a sofa, in great agitation of mind and feeling. He could scarcely recal his confused thoughts to any one direct point of reflection. All was the tumult of contending passions, the conflict of opposed sentiments. He knew not what to suspect, what to hope, what to fear.





The fatal influence which the Duchess of Belmont had acquired over all he had left of happiness, was now too strongly felt to admit of any further self-deception. She had taken possession of his mind, his senses; and how little government he now held over either, he had recently but too well ascertained. Yet, hopeless and unaspiring as he really was, he believed that by the extravagance of his conduct—by looks that would not be commanded—by lips that not "bywords spoke only"— he had put her to the alternative of believing him to be either a coxcomb or a knave; to have presumed on her condescension, or directed towards her those sordid views she had accused him of entertaining towards another.

Yet what could she mean- by drawing him gradually on to commit his own feelings, and the respect due to her character and situation. Cold and passionless as she herself was, she was still but too acute, but too sagacious, and too well versed in the springs of human passion by which others were actuated, not to know how readily they vibrate when skilfully touched. "To what purpose, then," he mentally asked, "has she been bringing me to the test of her philosophical acumen? Is it to discover the full extent of my weakness, merely to add me to the results she had already drawn from her experiments upon human folly; and thus, 'winning me by honest trifles, to betray me to deepest consequences?' Or is it—can it"

He arose in great emotion: he dared not follow the illusive light, by which hope was leading him beyond the bounds of probability: beyond the line which pride and honour had marked out to direct his conduct. He hurried away from a spot so fatal to the association in which he was involved; and was crossing the hall on his way to his own apartment, when Lady Llanberis quickly passed him by, but as quickly turning back, she said—

"Oh, Colonel O'Donnel, I am afraid I was Madame Y2





de Trop a few minutes back, in the ante-room. I intruded quite unintentionally, for I really wish you every possible success in the affair; and I think it will be a very good arrangement: besides the Duchess's jointure lies partly in Ireland, and"

"I beg to assure your ladyship," interrupted O'Donnel, earnestly, and in confusion, "that you quite and totally mistake; that your finding me in the ante-room with the Duchess—in a word, madam, I have no designs in any possible way upon the Duchess of Belmont's jointure, lie where it may, nor if I had, have I any reason on earth to suppose they would avail."

"0 I " returned Lady Llanberis, " that is your affair: I don't at all want to force myself on your confidence; but from your attentions to the Duchess, and you Irishmen being always so fortunate on these occasions; and —but my noticing it at all is extremely mauvais-ton, and the mere result of accident; and so, if you please, we will drop the subject;" and she passed on.

O'Donnel now with indignation discovered that he stood precisely in the same point of view to both ladies; and he thought it was not impossible that he might even be considered as a mere Irish fortune-hunter by the whole society of Longlands. His irritable and oversensitive feelings took the alarm: he bitterly lamented the weakness which had led him on, from day to day, to prolong his visit, after the eclaircissement which had taken place between him and Lady Llanberis ; and, under the impulse of new and overwhelming feelings, the most consonant to his character, temper, and prejudices, he resolved on quitting Longlands the following day, and on banishing from his recollection the heartless circle he should leave behind him; but above all, he determined to forget her who alone had been the spell of his detention, the cause of all he now felt, and now suffered.

On reaching his own apartment, his resolution received





a fresh spur from two letters, put into his hands by M'Rory. The one was from General O'Donnel: it was friendly and favourable as his most sanguine desires could lead him to expect. To many professions of kindness, was added an offer of a majority in his own regiment of hussars. O'Donnel sighed deeply as he folded up this letter. Though gratified by its general tone of friendship, his acceptance of the offer it contained was more than ever the result of his dire necessity, and equally foreign from his feelings and his choice.

The other letter, as M'Rory in great emotion informed him, had the post-mark of Bailimagrabartagh on the cover; and on opening it, he found it came from the priest of his own parish, and ran as follows :—

Sir,—I take the liberty of addressing you, at the dying request of the late Mrs. Honor Kelly, your grandaunt, to whom I yesterday administered the last offices of the church, and who expired this morning, of the disease by which she has been so long afflicted.

She bequeathed you all she had to leave—her blessing and her grateful thanks for your goodness to her; and requested that you would depute some person to take possession of the premises you assigned to her during her life, as she had reason to fear, from a threatening letter received after your departure, that an ill-disposed person, nephew to her late husband, will lay claim to the place, as heir-at-law to any thing she might be possessed of. As this may occasion some trouble, though such a claim could not be established in the end, I take the liberty of advising you, Sir, to appoint some person to take possession forthwith; and, further, if you mean to dispose of the place, to put it up to auction. Many gentlemen in the country might be glad to obtain it, either as a sporting or fishing lodge; for the neighbouring mountains, lakes, and sea-coast, make it a very desirable spot for that purpose.





I would offer my own services on this occasion with great pleasure; but that, having been for some time back uncomfortably situated with Mr. Costello, who carries every thing before him in this little neighbourhood, and who protects Mr. Kelly, and has him at this moment writing in his office, I would not wish to interfere.

I remain, Sir, with great respect,

Your obedient servant,



Arthur Murphy.

January 19th.

P. S. The remains of the late Mrs. H. Kelly are to be interred in the Abbey grounds in the mountains tomorrow morning. She left a gold cross, which was all she died possessed of, to defray the expenses of her funeral, about which she was very anxious to the last. The old woman will remain in the house till your orders arrive: I have offered to take her to mine, but she has a nephew in the neighbourhood willing to receive her.

O'Donnel communicated the contents of this letter to M'Rory (who stood anxiously watching his countenance), and asked him if he would have any objection to go off immediately to Ireland to take possession and dispose of the little property, which had thus, so unexpectedly, fallen again into his hands.

"No objection in life, your honour, but will go with all the veins," returned M'Rory, his countenance brightening up at the prospect of again seeing Ireland, and the certainty that his master's very slender finances would be considerably the better by an event, which he, nevertheless, pathetically deplored.

"And so Mistress Kelly's dead, your honour: well, see that!—why then, troth, I am heartily sorry for her, the cratur! for she was just such another kind-hearted ould gentlewoman as her brother, God rest him !—who was a rale O'Donnel, and never had the hand closed till the day of his death. I'll be bound, your honour, she'll have an elegant herring, for the sake of the family. Well, that Torney Costello's the devil; God pardon me !— And so ould Mary is goin' to live with her nephew, Brian Dogherty. O! I know him well, Sir, and not a dacenter lad between this and himself: he lives near the four roads, near to Aughinunchen mountain.—Well, troth, he cannot but have a blessing for that same, in regard of giving his ould aunt her bit and her sup for the rest of her days, God help her I"





"And we too, M'Rory, poor as we are," said O'Donnel, "we must assist Brian, in doing something for poor Mary, out of whatever you may receive for the sale of the place."

"O! I'll engage you will, your honour; long life to you! You never was backward yet, in respect of goodness, never was; and it's pity but what you had all Donegal to your own; troth, it is; which you would surely, if every one had their right, Colonel." • "That is nonsense, M'Rory," said O'Donnel. "I have every thing I have a right to; but we must lose no time. I shall have my letters ready in an hour, and you can go on the top of the stage that passes the park gate at five o'clock."

"Oil can, Sir, surely."

"And I wish you to proceed by the night coach to Liverpool directly, and take your passage for Londonderry, which will shorten your journey by three or four hundred miles, going and returning; and I beg that you will make the best speed back, as time is precious."

"Oil will, Sir, surely; what would ail me but be back soon any how, plase God!''

O'Donnel now seated himself at the writing table, and had made some progress in his letters, supposing M'Rory to be gone, to make the necessary arrangements for his departure ; when a noise at the door of his room induced him to turn round, and he perceived M'Rory still stand-* ing near it, and playing it with the handle of the lock.





"Have you any thing to say to me, M'Rory?" asked O'Donnel, resuming his writing.

"Is it me, Sir? 0I no, Colonel, I have not; nothing in life," returned M'Rory, advancing to the table, and taking up a shoe-buckle, which he began to rub with the sleeve of his coat with great violence, "nothing in life,

After a pause, O'Donnel, raising his head from the paper, asked rather impatiently:—

"Only what, M'Rory?"

"Only in regard of the little still-room maid."

"Of who? " asked O'Donnel, turning round.

"Of who, your honour, is it? why of a tight little bit of a girl, your honour, who does be in the still-room, and warms the hot water for your dressing-room, Colonel; and made the barley drink for your honour, when you had the cowld, Sir."

"Well remembered," said O'Donnel. "I think you may as well make a remuneration to any of the servants who have been in attendance on my apartments, M'Rory: there is my purse, and here is a note for yourself, for your expenses on your journey; and I think you may as well take all my things to town, except what I shall want to dress to-day; for," he added, with a deep sigh, "I shall leave Longlands to-morrow for London myself; and remember my strict orders not to mention my address in town to any human being here."

"Oh I I'll be bound I won't your honour, nor never did."

O'Donnell now returned to writing, but hearing M'Rory hem several times, he said :—

"Why don't you go, M'Rory ? pray leave the room."

"I will, Sir; I am just going; only I thought I'd be after making bould to mintion to your honour——"





O'Donnel, now throwing down his pen, arose and said—

"What is the matter, M'Rory?"

"Nothing is the matter to signify, Sir; only if you hadn't sent me back to Ireland to-night, Colonel, I thought, with your leave, I'd just have been married to-morrow, Sir."

"Married!" returned O'Donnel, in utter astonishment; "you married!"

"O, yes, Sir, if your honour was no wise contrary; for I got the girl's consint a week ago, and my own, Sir; that's the girl in the still-room, Sir; for sure I never got a taste in the room with that foreign tawny young master after the first day; but was put down to get my bit in the still-room, with the young man there and the two maids; and more comfortabler I wouldn't wish to be than there, any way; and I used to help Martha, the little cratur, to wash up the cheney, and make the whitewine whey; and while we were over the whey, I used to discoorse her; and so, your honour, I don't know how it was, but it seemed the most natural thing in life; and I—and so she—and then we thought we'd—and so we are to be married to-morrow, Colonel, barring I go to Ireland to-night, Sir."

"How is it possible," said O'Donnel, equally vexed and astonished by this intelligence, "that, being, as you are, an honest and a worthy man, you have entered on so serious an engagement, circumstanced as you now are?"

"Sairious, your honour! O, I think nothing of it, Sir, at all, in regard of being married once't before ; when we were in barrack, Colonel, before we went to the Western Indies, and a nice little girl she was; only the day after the wedding, her first husband came to claim her, and listed in the regiment; and when he was killed at St. Domingo, she wanted to prove her right to me, Sir, and followed me to Donegal; but 1 would have no call to her then, in respect to a turn I took to leading a bachelor's life."





"Then I am sure, M'Rory, you had much better abide by that resolution, than involve this unfortunate young woman in your own precarious situation; for, when we go abroad, which we shall do immediately, what would become of your wife?"

"O! God would take care of her, Sir, till I came back, or had the way to send for her over; besides, sure, I'd sind her my pay, every sixpence of it; that's when I'm a corplar, Sir."

"In fact, M'Rory," said O'Donnell, "for your own sake, and for the sake of the inconsiderate person who has accepted of you, either you must for the present give up her, or give up me. If you marry her, you are bound not to desert her, and you must remain to assist and support her. If, on the contrary, you choose to go abroad with me—but observe, however, I insist on nothing; I only present you an alternative. Go then, consult, with this young woman; make known honestly to her your situation, your inability at present to provide for her, or to take her with you; and when you have consulted together, return and let me know your intentions."

M'Rory, with an agitation of countenance, which betrayed no feeble conflict of mind, dropped his head on his breast, uttered an ochone! and slowly left the room.

This extraordinary involvement of the susceptible and inconsiderate M'Rory, awakened a train of thought in O'Donnel's mind, but little propitious to his epistolary engagements. M'Rory's conduct in this instance was perfectly Irish, as it touched his own rank in life; and O'Donnel felt also that it was perfectly human. He almost regretted, while he condemned those feelings, which, unregulated and unrestrained, sought by the lost direct means the possession of their object; and

i





without reference to consequences, embraced the present good, as an indemnity for the uncertain future—the disappointing past.

Under what an opposite influence did he act, and how different were the results of his conduct. Living in continual struggle with himself; pride at variance with fortune; honour with interest; and a morbid sensibility, the result of a lofty spirit, and an adverse destiny, discolouring even the few bright tints which still lingered upon the gloomy horizon of existence—else, why was he so prompt to construe negligence into slight, and slight into insult? Why did he shrink from the advances of friendship, lest they should cover the bondage of dependence? or why, when the woman who had now obtained possession of his whole being, met those eyes, that had no longer power to conceal the secret of his heart, did he suddenly withdraw them with the consciousness of guilt, merely because she was prosperous and rich, and he

"Sick in the world's regards, wretched and low?"

Yet, while he thus dreaded the world's cold distrust, were his feelings less pure, his motives less disinterested, than if fortune had placed him beyond the aim of suspicion? He continued to muse himself into new misery; and thoughts came crowding with a painful velocity on his mind; for reflection is always an enemy to the unhappy: till at last he endeavoured to rouse himself from his "moody melancholy," and to chase away its influence by again resuming his writing.

He had just finished his last letter, when M'Rory entered the room. He stood silently behind his master's chair, while he sealed his letters, and O'Donnel then turning round, perceived that his eyes were red; and pitying the imprudence, which he had almost been led to envy, his heart softened towards him.





"Well, my poor M'Rory," he said.

"Well, your honour," returned M'Rory, in a low tone, "I am ready to go, sir, now."

O'Donnel was affected by the break in his voice. "You have acted then like an honest man," he returned, "and sacrificed your feelings to a sense of right."

"O, I have, sir!" said M'Rory, with a deep sigh.

"Well," said O'Donnel.

"Well, sir, the girl is no ways unraisonable, but quite the contrary; and I tould her all your honour was saying; and she said it was mighty right; but she cried a power for all that, sir, the cratur, as well she might; and so I pledged my troth to her never to marry, good or bad, till I saw her face again; and I gave her the goold pieces I had; and broke a straw with her *, which is as good as if I put the ring on her finger ; and am booksworn to write to her, and manes to bring her a gift from Ireland, if it is only a pair of Connemara stockings; and troth and I wish they were Limerick gloves, for her sake."

O'Donnell now expressed himself in the warmest terms of commendation of M'Rory's conduct, and with gratitude for the new proof of devotion he had given to himself; and M'Rory, whose affection for his master was the dominant passion of his nature, gradually cheered up, as he listened to his own praises, from one so loved and reverenced; and he replied: "I 'm intirely obliged to your honour for your good opinion, and I hope I'll merit that same to the day of my death. And sure, sir,

• II faut rompre la paille. Une paille rompue

Rend, entre les gens d'honneur, une affaire conclue.

Moliere.—Le depit Amoureux. This is a custom of great and universal antiquity in Europe, and is still preserved in Ireland. It is retained in England, under the rustic ceremony of the cracked sixpence. Anciently, it formed a part of compacts, the greatest and the gravest among princes; and hence the Latin verb stipulbr, from stipula; and perhaps, also, fosdus is etymologially connected with the Irish fodar, straw.





if it's the will of God, we may come together yet, as I tould her; and return together to my own ould country, long life to it; and when your honour marries some fine rich foreign lady in foreign parts, and brings her over to Ireland, and lives there in great state, Martha and me will live with ye'z, in the capacity of a housemaid; and I'll engage there's luck, and great luck, in store for us all yet, Colonel."

O'Donnel smiled at this prosperous conclusion, which M'Rory's warm imagination conjured up; and having given him all necessary instructions as to the commission assigned to him, and some letters for the London post, he dismissed him, and went to dress for dinner, though but ill-disposed to join society of any description; and equally averse in his present state of feelings to meet either the eyes of Lady Llanberis, or the Duchess of Belmont.



CHAPTER XXII.



The dinner-bell had rung some time before O'Donnel left the room; and when he took his seat at table, he perceived a new guest, whom he had not before seen at Longlands. It was a gentleman of the most imposing appearance, who, in spite of a fine figure, and a countenance full of animation, was evidently approaching his climacteric. His blue riband did not more bespeak him a person of distinction, than his air, his address, and that indescribable ease and charm of manner, which nature and the world sometimes combine, in those who have had the good fortune to be eminently favoured by both. He sat between Lady Llanberis and the Duchess; and O'Donnel could not help perceiving, that though





he listened and answered Lady Llanberis, yet he was most pleased when he gave his attention to the Duchess. He thought there seemed to be a certain intelligence between them. They talked of persons known to each, of evenings passed at Belmont House in the late duke's time, of observations formerly made, and of jests and badinage applicable to some particular circle, in which they had lived together. O'Donnel felt more than curiosity, more than impatience, more than he had ever felt in his life before.

The Duchess, he thought, seemed almost studiously to avoid his eyes, although she sat directly opposite to him; and all the intelligence he could gain respecting this interesting stranger was, that he was a Lord S., and but lately arrived from the continent.

When the ladies retired from table, and the fewgentlemen remaining at Longlands drew their little circle round the fire, an observation from Lord S. on climate drew a rejoinder and an agreement in opinion from O'Donnel. Subject grew out of subject; and the sympathy which always exists, and generally manifests itself between intelligent minds and refined tastes, soon engaged them in a sort of tete-a-tete conversation, which only terminated when they arose to join the ladies. Lord S., on entering the drawing-room, immediately took his seat on an ottoman next the duchess; and O'Donnel, with a feeling of misery, which he had not the courage to analyse, and was unable to controul, left the drawingroom, and threw himself into a chair in the half-lighted and empty ante-chamber.

It was the last night he intended to pass at Longlands: and although very little ceremony was observed about departures, (the visitants being used like the ghosts in Macbeth, to " come like shadows, so depart,") yet he felt it something like a duty to mention his intention to Lady Llanberis, and even to make his acknowledgments for the hospitable attentions he had received at her hands: but he had no power, no spirits, to bend his thoughts to ceremonies. He resolved, therefore, on putting off the effort till the moment of his departure; and had resigned himself to a train of feelings, into which every emotion connected with painful and uncomfortable reflections had a share.





In this gloomy state of meditation, Miss Carlisle perceived him, as she was passing through the ante-room > and with her usual naivete, she approached and rallied him freely on his solitary disposition, and Orlando-like appearance. Finding him, however, but ill disposed to take her on her own tone, she changed it, and began to talk of Lord S. in terms of such admiration, that O'Donnel, though he scarcely understood why, secretly accused her of malice. From general encomium, however, she digressed into particular history; and O'Donnel, in answer to some questions, which he conceived he had artfully, though negligently made, learnt that Lord S. was one of the last survivors of the Duke of Belmont's particular set; that he had lived a good deal at Belmont House during the first months of his marriage with the present Duchess, of whose talents and conversation he was a great admirer; that he had passed the last year and a half abroad; and that she believed it would excite no great surprise, if he were to offer his hand to ths widow of his old friend: "And," she concluded, " he is such supreme fashion and bon-ton, that I cannot conceive any woman's refusing him: can you, Colonel?"

"Who, I?" said O'Donnel, starting from the suddenness of the application. "I really am not at all qualified to judge."

"The old Marquis of B., his father, is still alive," she continued, "and would not consent to the match; but otherwise there could be no obstacle; for the Duchess has proved that where rank and fashion are to be had, she is not over-nice as to age or character. Lord S., like the late duke, has been rather a roui"





Here the conversation was broken up by the entrance of the youngest Miss Carlisle, who was sent by Lady Llanberis to collect every one to play "what's my thought like?" and when O'Donnel begged to decline the summons, the two sisters declared, that if he did not return with them, they would inform Lady Llanberis of his desertion. O'Donnel, as much to get rid of their importunities, as to avoid the appearance of singularity, accompanied them back to the drawing-room. The circle was already formed, and "what's my thought like?" was asking round with great rapidity by Lady Llanberis. It was likened to the sun, moon, stars, elements; to any thing and every thing. Lord S., who was the first asked, had said a watch; when it again came round to him, Lady Llanberis asked, "Why then is the Duchess like a watch?"

"This is a very odd coincidence," said Lord ,

instead of replying directly to the question. "Three years ago, playing this game, in a family circle at Lady Singleton's, I hit upon the same object, and found it applied to the same subject: I remember answering, by applying the device,

"Cheto fuor, commoto dentro ;"

and I have since given myself credit for my penetration which discovered, through a demure shyness and silent reserve, " that within which passed show."

"Cheto fuor!" repeated Lady Llanberis: "why I have a seal somewhere with that motto."

"The Duchess had one," said. Lord S—: "if I remember right, your grace adopted the device of a dial plate with that motto."

." No, no," said Lady Llanberis, "it was not the duchess. O! I remember, it was with you, Colonel O'Donnel; it was on some letter you were showing me."

A sensation, like an electric shock, passed through the frame of O'Donnel: he scarcely heard, and did not answer Lady Llanberis's question. His eyes were fixed on the countenance of the Duchess, which exhibited every symptom of confusion and profound emotion. Lady Llanberis looked at them both alternately, with amazement, and every one present seemed struck with the incident. Colonel O'Donnel had a letter in his possession with the Duchess's seal—he had shown it to Lady Llanberis. The Duchess was confounded, O'Donnel was confused. Lady Llanberis seemed interested without being displeased. Each drew their particular inference; O'Donnel was suspected of having played the part of a lover to both ladies. How much further surmise would have gone, it might be difficult to say, had not Lord S— rallied the attention of the party to their game, by giving in a ring as a forfeit, and declaring, that however the similitude held good between the watch and Miss O'Halloran, it was lost between the watch and the Duchess of Belmont: he then reminded Lady Llanberis that the game stood with Lady Mary, and thus again set it afloat.





As soon as decency would permit, and before prudence warranted it, O'Donnel left the circle, and retired to the desirable solitude of his own apartment.

He had now, by means the most purely accidental and unforeseen, come at the mystery which had so long distanced conjecture, and had discovered his liberal benefactress in the last person on whom his suspicions could have fallen. In the first instance it would have been utterly impossible to have directed those suspicions to a poor and destitute girl, who was herself labouring for subsistence; and for the rest, there was nothing on the part of the Duchess of Belmont, since he had known her as such, to lead him for a moment to suppose, that such an extravagant and unwarrantable liberality belonged to her character. She had also talked over the matter with such easy indifference, and treated the whole with such pointed irony, that she had never for a moment occurred to him as one whose feelings of sympathy would rise beyond the level of prudence and moderation.





He was then the object of her pity and relief—of her compassion and her bounty. His meeting with her at Longlands was accidental on her part, as unexpected on his; and having generously lavished on him the means of existence, as she would perhaps upon any other unfortunate, similarly situated, she was careless where that existence, to whose maintenance she had contributed, might be obscurely dragged on. Even now, that they had met under circumstances favourable to their knowledge of each other, this was not a matter of great importance to her. Was it not, indeed, supposed that she might at no distant day be married to a man who had known and admired her for three years, and discovered, even under the impenetrable reserve of Miss O'Halloran, the talents and charms of the Duchess of Belmont?

"But of what moment is it to me," continued O'Donnel, as he paced the limits of his room with hurried steps, "who admires her—to whom she may be married? For me there is now nothing left to do, but to state the discovery I have made, to offer her my acknowledgments, and return her her money."

For this purpose he sat down at his writing-table ; and discontented with every form of expression into which he endeavoured to throw his conflicting thoughts, he at last produced a few incoherent lines, dictated between the shame of mortified pride, and the ardour of heartfelt gratitude; while passion, struggling with prudence and jealousy, betrayed its energy, even where it restrained its tenderness.

At variance with himself, with her, with the whole world, he more than ever lamented the infatuation that had led him to' throw the little wreck of his happiness into the keeping of one, whom, though so lately the source of all human good to him, he now devoutly wished he had never known; since she had only served to fill up the measure of his sufferings, and to add the pang of disappointed passion to the misery of indigence. Good and evil have existence only in relation to the beings to whom they are referred; and man, measuring jail things by the standard of his own feelings, applies those epithets to circumstances, as they do, or do not, co-ordinate with his own powers of enjoyment: while these are flattered, " whatever is, is right;" displace him, and he accuses the universe of disorder.





After a night of sleepless misery, he descended, on the following morning, to the breakfast-room, with the intention of putting his letter into the Duchess's own hands, without coming to any further explanation; and of informing Lady Llanberis of his intended departure. No opportunity, however, was allowed him of doing either. The Duchess breakfasted in her own room, and Lady Llanberis was so full of news, letters, and engagements, that there was no chance of addressing her. She read a letter from her son, dated from Portsmouth, who had just landed, and was to arrive at Longlands the following day, with his friend Mr. Glentworth. She mentioned another letter, which she had received from Lord Charles Savill, announcing the death of his uncle, and the obligation he was under of visiting the estates, left him by this. j,emise, in Scotland, before he returned; and also a third letter from Lady Singleton, proposing herself and Mr. and Mrs. Vaudaleur, and Mr. Dexter, to come down in a few days to Longlands, to meet Mr. Glentworth. A new dramatis persona, therefore, was about to appear upon the scene, and Lady Llanberis was as happy as a new set of sensations could make her. Having detailed her news .with great animation and delight, she was hurrying out of the room tovisit General and Lady z2





M. Savill, who did not appear, in consequence of the intelligence, which the post had brought in of their uncle's death, when she caught O'Donnel's eye.

"Colonel O'Donnel," she said, coldly, "if you mean to return to Ireland shortly, Lady Singleton has sent you a commission to procure her some of those little horses, which are sold by the dozen in your province. I don't exactly know what she means, but you do, I suppose. However, here is her letter; you will find it somewhere or other. There is nothing particular in it: ay, here it is, here is her coronet: she has no pretty devices. Poor Lady Singleton ! the chetofuor would never do for her." And with rather a sarcastic smile, she gave him the letter, and left him not more comfortable, nor at ease, from her manner and innuendo, than when he had entered the room. He, however, followed her into the hall, in the hope of obtaining an audience of leave; but almost in the same moment Lord S. met and turned back with her.

O'Donnel entered the saloon, the door of which stood open, and remained a considerable time leaning against a window frame, lost in thought, and almost unconscious that he still held Lady Singleton's letter in his hand. The pointed coldness of Lady Llanberis's manner mortified him, and urged his immediate departure. It was evident that he had survived his popularity, and even, humiliating as was the idea, outstayed his welcome. Resolving, therefore, not to remain another hour under a roof, where he might be deemed an intruder, nor to make any further effort to obtain an interview with his capricious hostess, he opened Lady Singleton's letter, to read aril return it, with a note to the Countess, in which he meant to take leave.

In the supposition that the commission alluded to might be written in the envelope, he glanced his eye over it, before he took the trouble of looking through the enclosure; but it was a blank, except that at the top of the page was written,





"My dear Countess's devoted friend, C. Singleton.

London, January 20th.

Baker-Street.



O'Donnel turned to the half sheet of note paper inclosed, which seemed by the abruptness of its beginning to be only a part of her letter, commencing with his own name. He read as follows :—

"For O'Donnel—your 'copper Colonel,' Chevalier, Comte, or mi Lord O'Donnel; for all these he has been in his day, I dare say, and more."

O'Donnel started—paused—doubted the evidence of his senses—took up the note-paper again—again read these words—hurried back his eyes to the signature in the envelope—to the seal, the address—it was Lady Singleton's signature and seal; the address was to Lady Llanberis; the post mark London; the date the preceding day. He again, therefore, recommenced the perusal of this extraordinary letter, which he naturally supposed Lady Llanberis had put into his hand for some particular purpose, which might develope itself as he read on, and without pausing he went through the whole.

"For O'Donnel—your ' copper Colonel,' Chevalier, Comte, or mi Lord O'Donnel; for all these, no doubt, he has been in his day, and more too: I must confess I was a little surprised to hear, by your letter, that he was still at Longlands, nor have I the remotest idea what it means. Your engouement for this soi disant Irish Chief I thought was pretty well over, after the first ten days of his residence with you; as you seemed to Have discovered that he was neither particularly useful nor ornamental, and you appeared rather to vote the illustre malheureux a bore! But now that, having given up the French plays, you can possibly have no further use for this sublime Orosmane, I see no reason on earth why you should give him any more encouragement to remain under your roof. Of all the pets that a woman of fashion ever hit on, to run tame about her house, a pet Irishman is the most extraordinary, as well as the most disreputable.





"Your asking rae so seriously my opinion of him at this time of day is rather too good, and made me laugh heartily; but really, my dear lady, one cannot go on for ever repeating, Irish fortune hunter, adventurer, &c. &c. That he is, even from his own account of himself (as you have heard it), an equivocal character, is pretty obvious; and in my opinion, at least, there is nothing in his person or manners to discredit the inference. I have before met with a few of these Counts of the Holy Roman Empire, who were, for the most part, accommodating, pliable gentry enough; but this presuming and self-opiniated coxcomb would fain play the Hero* a" Opera, of which, by the by, he has exactly the air; and seems only to doubt whether he will throw the handkerchief at Lady Llanberis, or at Pamela Duchess of Belmont, who is completely in his own way. As, however, I think all equivocal characters are dangerous, in as much as they have nothing to lose on the side of reputation, and therefore may fairly go what lengths they please, I advise you to let this Irish, French, German, Colonel, down softly. He will soon find out what you mean, and make his bow, before he is too far shown ;up to make his way elsewhere; for you may be sure he will present himself in town as fresh from Longlands, with the sanction of your ladyship's notice, and the certificate df his gentillesse obtained from your favour. And now, as, in the midst of all my unpleasant bustle here, I have contrived to fill three sheets of Mr. Mussen's pretty deviced note-paper, and even to write this last half sheet crossways twice over, I hope you will give' me due credit for my devotion, and excuse me, if, for want of room, as well as want, of time, I forbear to add more than what will cover this little French motto—namely, that I am, as ever, your slave, &c &c.





C. Savill.

O'Donnel had with great difficulty got through this letter. The cross-writing was not easily deciphered, and the mingled emotion of surprise and indignation at Lady Singleton's supposed duplicity, and cruel attack upon the character of a man, whom she had herself introduced-into the house whence she endeavoured to chase him with obloquy, left him scarcely patience or power to come to the end. Still, however, hoping to find some authority, reason, or excuse, for this sudden change in her ladyship's sentiments, he read on, till the signature of Lord Charles Savill explained at once the whole mystery, and convinced him that Lady Llanberis, with her usual giddiness, had, by mistake, put part of Lord Charles's letter into Lady Singleton's envelope, instead of her own. The first flush of strong and indignant feeling soon subsided. This event rather steadied his nerves than shook them; and by giving a direct object to his floating emotions of misery and indignation, it served rather to tranquillise than to disturb him. After nearly an hour spent in walking up and down the room in deep reverie, he went to his own apartment, and wrote the following billet to Lady Llanberis:—

"Colonel O'Donnel presents his compliments to the Countess of Llanberis. Business of an urgent nature requires his immediate presence in London; and as her ladyship's engagements may not afford him the opportunity of paying, in person, his farewell respects, previous to his departure this day from Longlands, he seizes on the only mode left him to make his most grateful acknowledgments, and to offer his hest wishes for the continuance of her ladyship's health and happiness."





O'Donnel then took his letter for the Duchess, and after much irresolution, resolved on presenting it himself at the door of her dressing-room, whither he proceeded. Her maid answered to his knock, and as he put the letter into her hand, he perceived the Duchess standing at the fire-place in earnest conversation with Lord S. He drew back—the door closed. He would have given all the world to have recalled his letter, and to be able to return its inclosures in a blank cover: it was now too late.

He had previously given orders about having his things sent after him by the stage to the coach-office; so, sending Lady Llanberis his note of adieu, by a footman he met in the hall, he hurried from the splendid mansion of Longlands, in a state of feeling even more wretched than he had entered it. He had then only misfortune to endure—he had now passions to combat. As he passed through the porte-cochere, he perceived Lord S.'s carriage, and out-riders approaching it. He was then returning to London also; but, "Oh!" thought O'Donnel, "under what different circumstances!" Fearful of being seen by Lord S. he avoided the high road, and proceeded, on foot, across a dreary heath, chilled by the sleeting showers of an inclement day, and

Wrapt in dismal thinkings. Independent of the last-born suffering, which lay brooding at his heart, he was weary and sick of a state of fortune, which subjected him to shameful suspicions, and exposed him to the shafts of obloquy and contempt, the more insupportable, because he had

No signs, save men's opinions and

His living-blood, to show the world he was

A gentleman.





CHAPTER XXIII.



O'donnel arrived in town late in the evening. It had snowed heavily, almost from the time he had left Longlands; yet though he was chilled hy the intense cold, and his clothes were wet through, he proceeded at once to Belmont House, to inquire Lord Charles's address; Lady Llanberis having spoken, that day, of him as being still in Northumberland. The porter could give him no certain intelligence, but directed him to Lord Charles Savill's own house. Thither he directed his steps, and learned from the house-steward, that his lordship, in a letter of that day, had ordered all letters

to be directed to , Northumberland, until the

8th of February, when his letters were to be forwarded to his agent's at Edinburgh; in the neighbourhood of which he intended to remain for some time.

O'Donnel now proceeded to his own comfortless and obscure home, where no fond or cordial reception awaited his arrival, save what his faithful dog bestowed on him. Yet so anxiously does the heart of man call for some reciprocation to its feelings, that even the caresses of Bran were gracious to the heart of his master.

He learnt from the person of the house, that M'Rory had set off for Ireland the night before; and he received from him a small iron box containing some family documents, which he had entrusted to his care on his departure for Longlands. They were only deeds of estates long passed out of his family, the letters-patent of nobility long since forfeited, and some original letters from crowned heads to his ancestors, which were as intrinsically valuable to the mere antiquarian, as to the descendant of the persons to whom they were addressed. Yet with a fondness, a pride, which perhaps bordered on weakness, O'Donnel prized and preserved these relics of former greatness, and intended to carry them with him to the continent, already the depository of so many of the family archives of Ireland.





Notwithstanding a feeling of fatigue and exhaustion, and that it was much too late for the post, O'Donnel addressed the following letter to Lord Charles Savill, before he retired to rest, enclosing with it the letter and envelope he had received from Lady Llanberis.

My Lord,

The enclosed was put into my hands for my perusal by the Countess Llanberis, as a letter from Lady Singleton. Involved in her ladyship's mistake, I read it under a similar impression ; but I did not read it through' without twice referring to the signature in the envelope. The appearance of your lordship's name at the end of the enclosed page dissipated my error, and left me nothing to regret in the discovery, but that I had obtained a knowledge of your lordship's opinion of my views and character, by means, which, though unsought and unavoidable, were the last I should voluntarily have chosen. For the rest, my lord, all comment would be equally idle and vain. You must either immediately state through me to the Countess of Llanberis, the facts upon which the opinions of the enclosed letter are founded, or unsay all you have said; or you must afford me the only redress in your power to make, or in mine to receive. As my stay in England is extremely limited, your lordship's answer in due course must determine whether I am to await your arrival in town, or to follow you into Scotland.

I am, my Lord, &c. &c. &c.

O'donnel. London, Coffee-house, Street.





O'Donnel arose the next morning at day-light. The perturbation of his spirits would not suffer him to rest, or even to remain in bed; and though a feverish heat burned in his veins, and the cold and wet, to which he had exposed himself the preceding night, already exhibited its effects in symptoms by no means equivocal; yet as soon as be was dressed, he went himself to the post-office with his letter. He did not act thus to ensure the safety of his letter; but guided by the influence of that restless impatience, which torments the minds of those who suffer.

As he was returning home, an incident occurred under his eye, which not only lowered his spirits but his purse, and induced him to spare from his scanty resources more than in a cooler moment prudence would have permitted him to bestow; but in the sympathy of affliction, his hand and his heart now went together.

When he arrived at his lodgings, he found himself too ill to remain up any longer. His looks alarmed his landlady. A sick stranger in a common lodging-house is always an object of apprehension to those who preside over it; and neither the distinguished appearance of O'Donnel, nor the boastings of M'Rory, had produced such an effect on the master and mistress of the house, as to render them quite easy as to the circumstances of O'Donnel, who, besides being sick and unknown to them, was—an Irishman. The one teased him with questions—" If there was no friend he wished to send for;" and the other so incessantly importuned him to have a physician called in, that O'Donnel on the third day consented to the proposal; and an expense was daily incurred, which had become as necessary to the preservation of his life, as it was unsuitable to the state of his finances.

The forlorn patient was slowly recovering from a nine days' fever, and had dismissed his physician, when he received the following answer to his letter, from Lord Charles Savill, dated from Edinburgh.





"Sir,—I am not much in the habit of retracting my words; nor, in the instance to which you allude, can I assign any reason to myself for doing so. Declining, therefore, the alternative you condescendingly allow me, and leaving you to make what use you please of a lady's mistake, and your own discovery,

"I remain, Sir, &c. &c.

"C. Savill."

This letter was put into O'Donnel's hands on the first day he had left his bed; and his landlord expressed his surprise, when his invalid lodger, giving the iron box and his dog once more to his care, informed him that he was going to the country for some days. The landlady, too, a sort of Lady Singleton in her little way, endeavoured to represent to him the madness of going out at all, while still labouring under the remains of his disease; and begged to be permitted to go and ask the doctor's advice, who had been dismissed the day before. But O'Donnel replied in so peremptory a manner,that neither husband nor wife offered any further remonstrance or advice. On the following morning O'Donnel took his place in one of the North coaches, carrying with him what money he was master of, and a few changes of linen in a small portmanteau.

That he had not heard from M'Rory in the interim, caused him some anxiety and uneasiness ; but he endeavoured to think that his silence was the result of a tedious passage; and he left a letter for him with his landlord, in case he should arrive in England before his own return, which (if indeed he ever returned) was most probable.





CHAPTER XXIV.

An early sessions had produced an early winter in London; and by the middle of February, most of the neighbouring villas were emptied of their splendid societies.

Lady Llanberis had left Longlands; and, armed with her newly-arrived son, his fire-eater, and his juggler, began her campaign for the season, with additional vigour, brilliancy, and fashion. Lady Singleton was wholly engaged in forwarding the views, and multiplying the amusements of her step-son, well aware how much her own consequence in the world would depend upon her interest and influence over the mind of a young man, who was single, and in the possession of a large estate.

Lady Mary Savill had resumed her evening reading parties and literary conversations, where every one came to exhibit, and no one was amused; where all came to be heard, and no one to listen ; where all was effort and affectation, vanity, and ennui. The duchess dowager of Belmont continued to be more talked of than known; and, contrary to expectation, received a very limited circle at home, and went not much abroad. Her exclusiveness paved the way to her future bon ton; the difficulty of obtaining her society considerably enhancing its value. More odd and more whimsical than ever, her originality procured her a reputation, which mere genius could not have obtained; while her cynicism, which became every day less sportive and more severe, rendered her at least as much feared as liked. Still, however, she was amusing; and in that she possessed a quality adapted to the tedium and apathy of the age and circle in which she lived, which secured her toleration, if it





could not obtain popularity.

* *******

One fine frosty morning in the latter end of February, a lady, who was walking in St. James's Square, followed by her servant, was struck by the appearance of a fine dog, of gigantic size and great beauty; and, as she ascended the steps of a house, called to the man who led him, to inquire if it was for sale. The appearance of the man warranted the supposition. His figure was gaunt and meagre, his countenance haggard, and his dress the habiliments of poverty.

"Is it me, Madam," he said, "sell the dog? Oh no, Madam, I would not, by raison of it's not being my own, but another gentleman's."

"Pray step in here, however, for a moment," said the lady, as the hall-door opened.

"Surely I will, Madam," replied the man, taking off his hat, and leading the dog into the hall; while the lady bending over it, patted its head for some time in silence. Then raising her eyes, she said—

"I presume you are an Irishman."

"Is it me, Madam? O yes, Ma'am."

"And this dog," continued the lady," is it Irish too?"

*' Troth, Madam, I could not tell you, barring I'd tell you what I don't know."

"How came you by him?" she asked, motioning him to follow her into an adjoining room, and shutting the door.

"How came I by him, ma'am? Oh, I have no call to him at all, at all; only just when the lodger, who owns him, goes out, I don't care to lave him behind; for one of the childer is mighty arch*, and he's worrying the animal ever. So as the lodger took off his ould collar, I just tie this bit of a rope round his neck, * Arch—mischievous.





and bring him out with me, when I go of an errant, and isn't at work."

"And what is the name of the lodger?" asked the lady, still bending her head over the dog, and caressing it.

"Why then troth, I cannot tell you that, Madam, either; and sorrow bit of me ever thought of the same till this blessed hour, so I didn't; but sure he is a rale gentleman; and the blessing of me and mine go with bim."

"Has he been a friend to you?" asked the lady.

"Has he been a friend to me, Madam? oh then it's himself that has, God bless him!" and bowing low, he added, "for you see, Madam, I am a poor county Sligo boy, that corned over to Liverpool for harvest work, four years ago, and devil a work I got, or rap I earned, only the shaking faver, God help me. And the woman that owns me followed me, the cratur; and the greatest of hardships we suffered undoubtedly; until it plased the Lord to send us work, and I got to be a paver, Ma'am; first in Liverpool town, and then in London. But the times is mighty hard, and it was the will of God the childer should come fast, and troth and we were sorely pinched to keep the life in us, so we were; or a rag to our back, God help us."

"Go on," said the lady impatiently. "And the gentleman—he relieved you, I suppose V . •

"Well, Madam, as I was saying, one morning, very early, as I was at work, making up a bad step in High Holborn, little Kateen, the biggest of the childer, and the sweetest little sowl that ever breathed the breath o' life ; I may say it now, God help me, that she is taken from me, my poor infant.—Well, one morning, little Kateen corned to me with my breakfast, as it was her custom to do, poor child. While I was finishing my drop of milk, she sat beside me on the pavement playing jack-stones, the little jewel! when, whisk comes by, for all the world like a flash of lightning, a corricle, and runs over the leg of my child, and smashes it to pieces, before I could bless myself; and the rogues that were in it (my curse light on them, and it will surely) never cracked cry, till they were out of sight.





"There I stood, for all the world as if I was stunned with a stone, leaning over my poor infant, who lay stretched for dead, as I thought, and bleeding a power, saving your presence, Madam; and the sight fairly left my eyes, and not a stir could I stir, when a gentleman, with this same dog after him, corned by, and lifts up the child in his arms, and without more to do, runs in with her to the 'poticary's shop hard by, and holds her in his lap himself, the blessed Virgin reward him, while the young man in the shop dressed the leg; and seeing that I trembled like a lafe, he carried her home himself to the coort; and when he asked her some questions, and found we were his country people, and sorrow poorer breathing, he gives us three guineas to pay the 'poticary, and help us on. But och hone! it was not God's will to spare her to us, the jewel, so it wasn't, for she dropped off like a flower, as I may say, of that cursed mortification, that all the doctors living wouldn't cure, as they tell me. And the gentleman, who owned the 'poticary's shop, far from taking any thing for his trouble, gave me a guinea himself—for the English are fine people, and mighty charitable. Well, after burying Kateen, we had three pounds ten left, and a great sum surely it was; and, 'Larry,' says Judy to me (for my name is Lawrence Cologhan, Madam, at your service), 'Larry,' says she, 'let us lay up this for a sore day.' And so, Madam, we turned it, and turned it in our heads; and at last we thought what better could we do with it, nor buy a feather-bed*, and a tight bit of a bed we got that was but little worse of the wear. And we put it up in the closet in the back room, which is an excellent room any how. For, Madam, my employer lets me stay in a condemned house, in lieu of a little work I be's doing for'm in off hours."





"What do you mean by a condemned house?" asked the lady, who continued to walk up and down the room during this narration.

"Why see here, Madam, a house that is condemned to be thrown down : but as luck would have it, my employer, who is the owner, has a differ about the primises ; and when the roof was off, and the upper story nearly down, the work was stopped; and so, till they settle the differ, he lets me keep in the bottom part, God bless him. So Madam, when the bed was up, we thought we'd let good dry lodgings, and puts up a bill."

"Well, and then you got a lodger?" interrupted the lady, stepping before him.

"Och I did, Ma'am, and an excellent good one; for one fine morning, a month and more, after little Kateen's death, who should step in, as he passed by, but the gentleman, to ax after her; and so we showed him into the back room, because it is far more dacenter, and we tould him as much as that we had laid out his money well— the saints reward him,—and were going to let dry lodgings, so we were. And to be sure, it surprised myself greatly, and Judy too, when such an iligant fine gentleman offered himself to lodge with us. 'And little fit the place is for the likes of yotr, Sir,' says I: but he said, all as one, as that it would do well enough for a time; for

• A feather-bed is always considered as a valuable acquisition by the lower Irish, under two points of view. First, it is looked upon as a kind of property, which may be farmed out at good interest. Having "a bed to let" among two or three lodgers, is a common mode of subsistence. Secondly, to have "a bed to die on," is a mark of respectability.

AA





all he wanted was to he clane, and would never ate ltit or sup under the roof, only sleep, or write a letter, or the like. And though we axed hut five thirteens a week, he gave us eight; and paid us a month's lodging in hand. But not a farthing of it but we laid out on the back room, and a pretty nate room it is. So I may say, we're not a tester the better for him yet; but we won't he so long, plase God; for sure, won't it be clear gain after the first month? and so I went for his portmantle and things: and you see, Madam, that's how I came by this fine animal of a dog, and no wise dishonestly ; for if I'd sell him, sure I'd make a good penny by him, any way, before now, so I would. But I didn't, and never will, plase God."

The lady seemed lost in thought for a few seconds, and then quickly replied—

"My good man, I am a countrywoman of yours, and inclined to serve those who leave Ireland from motives of industry, and have not been altogether as fortunate as they expected. But I have been so often imposed on, that before I offer you or your family any assistance, I must inquire into the truth of your statement. Leave me word where you live, and I myself will visit your family; and if all is as you say, I will endeavour to be of use to you."

"You will, Madam? Why then, my blessing, and the blessing of my infants, go with you, I pray God; and wasn't it my luck, and my great luck, to meet you, Madam. And it's where I live, Madam, is in Tucker'sconrt, in Seven Dials; and you can't miss the bouse, Madam, by raison of its being the only one in the place; the others being fairly pulled down."

The lady wrote down his address as he dictated it, asking as she wrote, " At what time is your lodger at home, for I do not wish, my good friend, to be seen on these occasions?"





"Indeed, Madam, mostly at night; but he is no way reg'lar. But any way, there's no fear of his being in the way, for he has no call to our bit of a room, only the ould door that's between the two rooms; and Judy has papered up the broken panes, so she has."

"Well then," said the lady, opening the door, and speaking to him in the hall, where several servants stood round the fire, "since the dog is not yours to part with, I cannot of course be the purchaser; but I will go and see your family, and if I find them worthy of my attention, they shall obtain it.''

"Long life to your honour, Madam, and God pour a blessing on your head, amen!" With this prayer the Irishman left the house.

The person, who had thus formed the resolution of visiting the abode of poverty, was one, whose mingled benevolence and eccentricity had often led her thus to indulge her feelings; sometimes at the expense of her delicacy, sometimes at the risk of her safety; for where she discovered suffering or want, there she administered comfort and relief. This person was the Duchess of Belmont. Her servants, therefore, were too well acquainted with her charitable disposition, and singular modes of gratifying it, to feel any surprise when she ordered her carriage, at four in the afternoon, and gave orders to be carried to a wretched court in Seven Dials. At the entrance of this court she got out, and, followed by her servant, advanced along a miserable passage, dark and gloomy from the lateness of the hour, and almost impassable from the quantity of rubbish which filled it. The only house which remained stood open. Desiring her footman to wait in the passage, she entered a little room on the right hand, which seemed one of those last resorts of wretchedness,

'Where lowly poverty retires to die.

Aa2





It was partially illuminated by the embers of a fire, and by a light proceeding- through a dismantled half glass door. It was empty—all in the house was silent as death. The desolate appearance, and close and noisome air of the room, would have been perhaps sufficient to chase away the benevolent visitant, in spite of the perseverance of charity, but that the interior of the adjoining apartment, seen through the only remaining pane of the middle door, fixed her attention, and left her without the will, as without the power to move. The room was hid in darkness, save only one spot in the centre, where the rays of a miserable candle, which burnt on a table, partially dispelled the gloom, and threw " its red and fleery light" upon the head of a man, who sat writing before it. On one side of the table lay a small iron box, on the other a pair of pistols. Some sealed letters were scattered round with other papers, and a dog lay sleeping at his feet. The Duchess's hand fell, with a faint noise, from the door against which she leaned. The writer started, held up the candle above his head, looked round, and replaced it on the table: the dog also rose, but again lay down.

The master paused for a moment, before he resumed his occupation; and in that pause, the flickering light flashing strongly on his broad forehead, discovered the countenance of O'Donnel, his dark eyes burning brightly in the shade of their sunken sockets, his complexion livid beyond its natural paleness, and indignation, tinctured with despair, forming the "charactery" of his sad brow.

After leaning for some time on his hand, in seeming melancholy reverie, he resumed his occupation, and folded and sealed the paper he had been inditing; then for some minutes fixed his eyes upon the direction, and with a sigh "not loud, but deep," dropped his head upon his hand, and remained motionless; till suddenly starting from his seat, as if to shake off this " slumberous agitation," he stood erect, and took up one of the pistols which lay upon the table.





The duchess saw no more: she threw open the door, rushed silently forward, and seizing the hand thus fatally armed, held it tremblingly in her own; looking upon him in silent agitation, without power to move or articulate. He too stood aghast and motionless. His eya*, "with a frenzied stare, were fixed upon her face— his unnerved hand remained cold and powerless in the grasp of hers—while the dog, who at her first appearance had sprung fiercely towards her, now crouched at her feet; probably in the recollection of the caresses which she had lavished upon him in the morning. A breathless, awful silence of some minutes ensued. At last the duchess, drawing the pistol from his unresisting hold, laid it gently on the table, and in a low but firm voice asked, "Am I right in supposing that I have providentially arrived, to prevent an attempt on your own life?"

"Certainly not, Madam," replied O'Donnel, emphatically; yet, while he spoke, his looks were wild and wandering, and seemed to contradict his words.

"These pistols—" said the duchess, shuddering and averting her eyes, unable from emotion to proceed.

"These pistols," he repeated with an obvious effort to collect his thoughts, "are not here, as you suppose, for the purpose of self-murder."

"Not for self-murder !" repeated the duchess, throwing her eyes from the pale and haggard countenance of O'Donnel to the instruments of death, and from them to the iron box. A new feeling of horror seemed to seize her mind; she trembled and grew pale, but spoke not.

"Why do you tremble, Madam?" he asked, with sternness. "What is it you suspect or fear? or rather, what has led you to a spot so suspicious and so fearful? For what purpose are you here?"





The Duchess replied inarticulately, intimidated by his darkling brow and hollow voice—" Motives of charity."

"Oh, madam!" he interrupted her quickly, and with a disdainful smile, "you mistake; I want no charity, and least of all from you."

"Gracious God!" she exclaimed, struggling with her emotion and with her tears: "how can you suppose —charity to you, Colonel O'Donnel! oh, no. I came here to relieve a poor distressed Irish family, whom accident discovered to me this morning."

"For that purpose solely?" asked O'Donnel, in a softened voice.

"No," said the Duchess, resuming something of the native spirit of her character, "not solely; I came here also on the suspicion, almost in the hope, that you were that benevolent and generous benefactor and tenant, of whom the master of this abode spoke with such gratitude and reverence."

"Well, madam, your suspicion was, you perceive, just. I am the lodger with that poor and wretched person, to whom your universal charity extends itself. I am the tenant of this squalid abode, where I thought a man, who, in spite of adversity, had still preserved the spirit of a gentleman, might at least hide his head in safe and undiscovered obscurity; but I find I was deceived. Being then the identical person your Grace suspected, may I beg to know what are your commands?"

The Duchess stood for a moment silent; passions of a conflicting nature seemed to struggle in her mind, by the rapid changes which took place in her countenance; at last she said, with a determined air—

"For what purposes do these pistols lie here?"





"For no dishonourable purposes," returned O'Donnel' indignantly, and, placing his hand upon his heart, he added, solemnly: " I pledge your grace my honour to this assurance; but whatever are your suspicions, or your commands, I must entreat you to be brief. This is not a place where a person of the Duchess of Belmont's rank and character should be discovered. . The poor people, to whom this asylum of misery belongs, are gone, a little while back, to the funeral of a deceased countryman, and may soon return: perhaps it were as well that your Grace returned instantly to your equipage, and if your charity pointed to their relief, they can at another moment"

"My charity," interrupted the Duchess, " led me to seek them; my interest to discover you: for I came not here to offer you my services, Colonel O'Donnel, but.to solicit yours."

"In what way?" asked O'Donnel, in an hurried voice. "I am a very destitute, a very forlorn person— your Grace must mistake."

"Be you what you may," she returned, earnestly, "you alone can save me from ruin!"

"You!" exclaimed O'Donnel, eagerly, and in great emotion; " You—I assist, serve you! how—where? command me to the uttermost—my time, my efforts, my life."

The duchess turned aside her head for awhile, and covered her face with her handkerchief; then advancing towards the door, she said—

"You are right in your observation on the impropriety of my remaining here; but if you—" she paused and sighed.

"I will wait on your Grace at your own house," he returned quickly, understanding her meaning.

"Can you with safety?" she demanded, in a tone of hesitation and anxiety.





"Yes, certainly, with safety; for though to such places as this

'Death and danger dog the heels of crime,'

yet I am at least free from guilt."

"Suppose then to-morrow," she said.

"No, not to-morrow—to-morrow I go a short journey on urgent business, and my return is uncertain; but this evening, if your Grace will allow me."

"Then," said the Duchess, eagerly: "this evening— this evening, at eight, I shall expect you."

"You may, Madam," he replied, "I will not fail."

She now moved towards the door, and O'Donnel followed her with the light. She glanced her eye for a moment back on him. All the severity of his countenance was fled; his brow had lost its gloom; a faint hectic burnt on his cheek, and a passionate melancholy softened the sternness of his eyes: he paused at the first door,

"I dare not light you further," he said: "but I can follow you till you are under the protection of your servant."

"My servant awaits me in the hall," she replied: "there is no danger."

O'Donnel bowed his head, and retreated to lay aside the light; but when she had reached her carriage, she perceived that he had followed her to the entrance, and his lofty figure appeared under the shadow of the archway, as she passed it.





CHAPTER XXV.

The clock of St. James's church struck eight as O'Donnel ascended the steps of the Duchess of Belmont's house. A servant ushered him into a drawingroom, which communicated by a folding door with a library. The servant, when he went to announce O'Donnel, left this door partly open, and O'Donnel, to his surprise, almost to his consternation, perceived the Duchess had company. The group, which stood round a table examining some books, were strongly exhibited to him by the bright light of a pending lamp: it consisted of two ladies, the one elderly and plain, the other rather young, foreign-looking, and beautiful. The only

gentleman present was Lord S . The Duchess was

in another part of the room, seated pensively on a sofa. The servant paused for a moment in search of her; but when he approached, and announced O'Donnel, she immediately came forward, and drawing the folding door after her without quite closing it, she approached, and offered him a hand, which, though he bowed on, he scarcely touched.

"When you had the goodness," she said, "to offer me your company this evening on a business so important to my interests, I forgot to mention to you, that I had some friends in the house with me; but when I tell you who they are, you shall judge for yourself, and join our little party or not as you think fit. Mr. Maunsel, my uncle by marriage, an Irish lawyer of some eminence in his profession, and of a character distinguished by its singleness and integrity, is come over to this country on the subject of the suit, in which I am unfortunately /





engaged; he is my agent as well as lawyer, and is, indeed, my zealous and anxious friend. Though he has a large family, he would have been but too happy, to have received me as a member of it in my less fortunate days, if I could have submitted to dependence. He and my aunt are, at present, both my guests, but he is this evening engaged to a dinner with a countryman of his, high in office here. There is also a charming Florentine on a visit with me, from whom I received many kind attentions, when I stood most in need of them abroad, and who placed me under the protection of the English family, with whom I returned to this country. As for our gentleman," she added carelessly, "who came, indeed, uninvited to dinner, you know

him: it is Lord S . He is, at present, attending a

dying father, who, indeed, has been so these twenty years. And now, knowing of whom my little fire-side circle is composed, will you join it?"

O'Donnel, in a few cold words, decidedly declined the invitation; but his countenance was that of a man whose heart was too full for speeches or ceremonies.

The Duchess then pointed to a chair, near the fire, took another herself, and rung for coffee. When the servant had retired, and a silence of some seconds had followed a few common-place observations, O'Donnel suddenly raised his eyes to the Duchess's face, and perceived that hers were fixed on him, with an earnest and melancholy gaze.

She appeared something confused as their looks met, and said, abruptly—

"Good heavens! Colonel O'Donnel, how changed you are: surely your health must have suffered much since I last saw you."

"It has suffered a little, Madam," he returned, with an air of increased dejection.

"Haveyou passed that interval in London?" she asked.





"A very short portion of it. Business called me from town, before I was quite recovered from a fever, which confined me the day after I left Longlands; and a severe relapse was the consequence, under circumstances the most unfavourable."

"How do you mean?" asked the Duchess, anxiously.

"My illness seized me on a distant journey in a remote and desolate situation, where little aid of any description could be procured; where I had not even the attentions of a servant to trust to; my recovery was, therefore, only short of miraculous."

"Good God!" exclaimed the Duchess, in great emotion; "but where was your faithful Irish servant— where was M'Rory?"

O'Donnel paused for a moment—his lips quivered— his eyes glistened.

"Where he still is," he at last replied: "in prison in Ireland, and on my account."

The drops fell plenteously from the eyes of the Duchess, though she silently struggled with her emotion.

"Your Grace is very good," replied O'Donnel, " very benevolent: poor fellow, he is not undeserving of your sympathy. I hope his usual health and spirits will not desert him, till something can be done for his relief. He is at present, unjustly I believe, a close prisoner in a gaol, in the north of Ireland, without money to support him, or friends to redress and assist him."

"He shall have both," returned the Duchess, with earnestness. "Every thing shall be done for him that can, if you will put me in possession of the facts upon which to go. Mr. Maunsel is a resident in the north of Ireland; he is a person of considerable influence: he returns thither in a few days, and I shall put M'Rory into his hands. He cannot possibly be placed in better."

"God bless you!—God bless you!" returned O'Donnel, in great emotion, involuntarily rising from his chair; and covering his eyes with his hands, he remained leaning in silence against the mantel-piece for many minutes.





"You shall speak of him yourself to Mr. Maunsel," said the Duchess, "and give him instructions as to what steps may be taken."

"This letter," said O'Donnel, drawing one from his pocket, "will inform Mr. Maunsel of all the circumstances of which I am myself acquainted. It is from M'Rory, and composed with his usual prolixity. It arrived during my absence from London ; unfortunately, therefore, it has remained a month unanswered."

The Duchess took the letter, and placed it in a writing box.

"And now, Madam," said O'Donnel, resuming his seat, "that you have removed from my mind a canse of very great and just anxiety, and given up your generous feelings to the interests of others, I beg to know in what way I may be of use in promoting your own?"

"I will endeavour," said the Duchess, recovering herself, "to be as succinct as possible. You are perhaps aware that the property, of which your uncle defrauded you, was lost by him at hazard, to the late Duke of Belmont, my husband." O'Donnel nodded assent.

"And perhaps you may have also learned that this Irish property, which has more than doubled its value within the last thirty years, makes nearly the whole of my jointure; being the only unentailed possession in the late Duke's power to bequeath."

"I did not hear the fact, Madam," returned O'Donnel, "but I thought it probable."

"You thought it probable," repeated the Duchess, pointedly, " and you yet rejected the miserable offering which justice made to your wrongs."

"Which prodigal, princely generosity made to my misfortunes, you mean, Madam," interrupted O'Donnel, in some agitation. "But that is passed; though the gratitude it awakened can cease to exist only with my life. It is, however, your Grace's interests, not mine, that we are at present discussing."





The Duchess shook her head, and smiled reproachfully; then, after a moment's silence, she continued— "Shortly after your abrupt departure from Longlands, I returned to town, and found, on my arrival, a legal notice of a process commenced against me by a person of the name of O'Donnel, who, though an American by hirth, has revived some claims on the property assigned by your uncle to my late husband,. Although the deed of gift passed from the late Mr. O'Donnel to the Duke is perfect, yet other deeds and pai ers are requisite to substantiate his right to the propeiR, and that of your father, his elder brother, from whc m it was so fraudulently alienated. Mr. Maunsel, as my law-agent, is come over here for the purpose of obtaining from you the papers he requires, for he is informed that you are the only person likely to hold such documents; but all research after you, both on his part and on mine, have proved abortive until this day."

"Well, Madam," interrupted O'Donnel, quickly, " I have to congratulate you and myself, that the lingering weakness of family pride, may be the means of securing you that property, which you so nobly employ. I have preserved with sanctity all that remains to me of the possessions of my ancestors. They are reduced to a few shrivelled parchments and mouldering papers; but they are sufficient to prove your right to the bequest of the Duke of Belmont, as substantiating the claims of my family to that remnant of the property which was secured to them by law. When the Revolution was finally settled, trustees were appointed to inquire into the disposal of Irish forfeitures, and for that purpose a Court of Claims was opened. The decisions of that court were in many instances favourable to the Roman Catholics, and amongst others, to that branch of the O'Donnel family, of which I am lineally the representative. The attempts made by another and remote branch of the family to put aside these claims proved abortive; and though, through the influence of the penal statutes, passed after the Revolution, my uncle found means to obtain the property of his elder brother, yet, till that period, it was unalienable; besides, I have several letters by me, which passed between my father and his uncle, the late Abbe O'Donnel (at that time in Spain), on the claiM| of these American O'Donnels, which were madaM B fortvwHR back, and put aside in a court of equity. These lone would be sufficient to make good y^fl Hghts."





"And where,^ ^^Cuch ess, "are these valuable papers, which are t^save me from comparative indigence, to be got at?"

"They are in a small iron box at my lodging," he replied. "It was lying on the table when"

He paused in some emotion.

"Yes," said the Duchess, " I perceived that box—I remarked it particularly."

"■■ought it over for the purpose of carrying it with me to Germany."

"To Germany !" returned the Duchess, in an amazement that almost amounted to consternation, "to Germany!"

"I have again," said O'Donnel, " accepted, of necessity, a commission in the Austrian service; for, he added, with a melancholy smile,

'I am sworn brother to grim Necessity,'

i

and must obey his mandate."

'' And how soon do you leave England P"





"I cannot precisely say. I do not wish to leave it without M'liory; but—" he paused and sighed.

"And the papers you have offered me?" asked the Duchess.

"Under all circumstances, shall be yours," returned O'Donnel: "they shall be delivered to you early tomorrow morning."

"But Mr. Maunsel will, I am sure, think it necessary to see you, to examine, perhaps, these papers in your presence."

"I hope to be able to wait on him at any time after to-morrow," said O'Donnel.

"May I," said the Duchess, ^hgreat earnestness, "depend on this promise?"

"If*I live," said O'Do lei, "I Re myself to obey any command you may lionoi

"And, to-morrow," said the DuHs, with anxiety— "to-morrow you leave town."

"I am obliged," said O'Donnel, "to accompany an old friend a short way into the country."

"You have friends in London, then?"

"I have a friend whom I accidentally met in a coffeehouse, who served with me in the Irish brigade, and who is now happily married in this country." ^L

"And you are accompanying him into the coHfry?" repeated the Duchess. "Perhaps," she added, with hesitation, "on an affair of honour."

"As your Grace is ignorant of his name and person," returned O'Donnel, "and can make no use of the information, I may confess to you that it is."

"And his unfortunate wife!"

"Is ignorant of the whole transaction."

"Those pistols then that I saw on your table?" asked -the Duchess.

"Are his," he replied. "He gave them to me to get them repaired."





"It is a melancholy alternative," said the Duchess.

"It is, however, generally speaking, an unavoidable one," said O'Donnel, rising to depart.

"I will not press upon your time," she replied; "yet, if you could remain, till Mr. Maunsel's return—" and there was a softness, a solicitation in her voice which O'Donnel found it difficult to resist.

"I have some business to transact to-night," he replied, " which obliges me, of necessity, to decline your Grace's invitation."

"You are not then to be seduced?" she asked, with a smile.

"I hope not," he^replied, in emotion, and averting his eyes.

"Nor even to be commanded now," she added, pointedly, alluding to Aj Etance which O'Donnel but too well remembered.

"The result of my former obedience," he returned, in a hurried manner, "was not of a nature to"

He paused abruptly, took his hat, and added—

"I fear I detain your Grace from your guests ;" and he moved towards the door—the Duchess followed him; and, before she rung the bell, she held out her hand.

"I^ould ask you," she said, smiling, "to renew your vow of allegiance, now that I am about, seriously, to call upon the services of my subject, but that I know of old how lightly he holds such vows."

O'Donnel took the offered hand, and held it for a minute in his, while his eyes wandered over her face and person, with an expression as wild as it was passionate; then, suddenly dropping it, and without uttering a word, he departed.

The Duchess, under pretence of reading a letter, remained in the front drawing-room, and taking M'Rory's voluminous epistle from her writing-box, the following account of his misfortune met her eyes.





"Colonel.—Sir,—This comes to inform your honour, according to promise, that I was safely lodged in the county gaol, last Thursday evening, to my entire amazement ; little expecting that same, nor never should, plaise God, only in regard of Torney Costello, who hates the ground I walk upon, and would murther me fairly, so he would, only for defending your honour's rights, Sir, which I will, while a drop of blood runs in my veins ; and why wouldn't I? and so I'll just be after telling your honour the whole transaction, just as truly as if I was book-sworn, before a registered magistrate; and if Torney Costello says to the contrary, the devil take the liars, I say; and that's all the harm I wish him, any how, bad as he is, the spalpeen!

"So, your honour, as I was saying, I got safe and well, God be praised, to Liverpool; and to be sure, it's a wonderful country! and neither poverty nor pride in it, Sir; not like our own poor island, long life to it— and every cabin along the road fit for a lord, surely, and noways ill thatched, Sir, and the iligant little slips of gardens before the doors; and pace and plenty, within and without, and nobody caring whether it's to mass or to church a body goes, as I hear tell from a young man on the top of the coach, only quite agreeable throughother, which is remarkable! Why, then, Sir, I wonder what it is makes the differ between the countries? for sure they say Ireland bates the world in regard of the soil, to say nothing of the beautiful rivers, and every convainience in life, which there is, surely; and what is most particular, and mighty extraordinary, is that for all that, one half of the inhabitants lives in London (that's the quality), and the other half is in America, or, like your honour, fights in foreign parts; and them that is left at home, is neither contint or satisfied, but quite the contrary; that is some of them, Sir. So, as I am tell

B B





ing your honour, Sir, we landed safe in Lough Foyle, and a great passage we had, surely; and I thought, Sir, I heard M'Swine's Gun *, before we were half ways, but I didn't, only the ropes when I was asleep, Sir, and it being Sunday, I thought I'd get mass at our saint's place f, before I left the County Derry, and so I walk'd to Cluainenagh J, three miles from Derry walls, and put up a sincere prayer for your honour, and all your undertakings, Sir, and then I thought I'd step across the country to our own place; and where should I light the first night, but at Brian Dogherty's, and a hearty kind welcome they gave me, God reward them, and ould Mary, the cratur! troth, Colonel, you'd think she'd ate me up alive with the joy, for sure, Sir, they turn'd her out intirely from the primices, as you shall hear, Sir, in due time; and she bid me tell your honour she left the place nate and clane after her; and that the fine ancient ould gentlewoman, your aunt, died a great christian; and left her curse on Corney Kelly, her thieving nephew; and her elegant gold cross to Father Murphy, to bury her. And she desired him to let you know she was dead, Sir, and hopes you will put a stone at her head, aged seventy; she having no ability to do that same; and so, the next morning, I set off from Brian's before sun-rise, and reached the place, just on the turn of the evening, and a poor wilderness of a place it look'd; and it wasn't with dry eyes I saw it again; God knows it wasn't, and the door lying open just in the ould way; so I turns into your honour's own room; and who should I see writing before a fine turf fire (the last sods ever we cut, Sir, in Muckish Bog), but Torney Costello; and troth, the heart sunk fairly within me, when I saw him there; and I show'd him my instructions, in your honour's own hand, and

* See note at the end of the volume.

f St. Columb-kill.

,j This abbey was founded by St. Columb-kill.—It is now a chapel. tells him it's little I expected to find him there, any way (but mighty civilly); and that I'd just trouble him to quit the primices if he plaised, his horse being saddled under the ould tree.





But I just wish your honour had seen the face he had on him, when he turned round and saw me. He was as white as the paper he was writing on; and seized the poker, Sir, and asked what call had I to him? and that if I didn't make off, he'd lodge me neck and heels in the county gaol: and that he had taken possession of the tiniment in right of his client, Cornelius Kelly, Esq. and that he wouldn't stir a foot until Cornelius came home from fishing on the Lough; and with that he brandishes the poker in a most uncommon way; and so I just tells him, mighty civilly, that it was a folly to talk; that neither he nor Corney Kelly, Esq. had any call in life to the primices, only your honour, who was the rale and undoubted owner; and that as my master, Colonel O'Donnel, had sent me to get possession and sell the place, before he went to foreign parts, that I must throuble him to quit, or I must be after showing him the way out, in a manner that mightn't be quite agreeable; upon which he bids me touch him if I dare, and that if I came within a yard of him, he'd swear the pace against me, and have me transported for an assault; and that your honour was no colonel, but a French crimp and a spy, and no gentleman. O! then, devil a much he said after that any how; for I quietly lays down my bit of a twig, and, springing on the fellow, before he could bless himself, I wrings the poker out of his hand, and taking him up quietly in my arms, (though he wriggled like an eel, Sir, and almost bit the ear off me, Colonel,) before he knew where he was, I had laid him down quietly on the wrong side of the door, which I barr'd fast too, and throws him out his hat and his papers from the little window in the loft, wishing him safe B B 2





home, and I hears him gallop off, Sir, quick enough, 111 engage; and then I shut up the house, and was going to lie down upon your honour's bed, having washed the blood off my ear, when a great rapping comes to the door; and sure enough it was Corney Kelly, Esq. as he tould me himself, when I ax'd who he was; but I gave him a bit of advice not to lose time, as the night was cowld, but to follow Torney Costello; and, troth, and I'll always say that for him, that he is mighty 'cute at a hint; for I saw him running as if the devil was at his traheens *, that's through the little loft window, Sir, in the gable. And so making down a fire, I fell fast asleep, and dreamed I was hag-ridden, and that Mrs. Honor Kelly had a fast gripe of me; Christ preserve us! And sure enough, I was not much out, Sir, for when I waken'd, who should I see houlding me fast, but old Barney M'Guire, the constable, and two other young men, and Torney Costello at the foot of the bed, and Corney Kelly.—And sure they wouldn't scarcely give me time to put on, but hurried me away to Torney Costello's office, and swore examinations against me for an assault; for since we quit the country, your honour, Costello is made a registered magistrate, and was chief evidence against me to himself: and then I was walked off to the county gaol, and reached it the next evening. And you wouldn't think, Colonel, that the little loft window was the cause of it all, bad luck to it, in respect of their getting in through it, which was what I never dreamed of, Sir; but an honest man is no match for them thieves of the world. And so, your honour, here I am, a close prisoner, at this present writing, Sir, without one friend near me, good or bad, to see me righted, Colonel; only your honour, who is far away; God help me I And sure, Sir, mayn't they hang me fairly, or transport me;

* Metaphorically, heels — literally, stockings without feet, generally worn by the Irish peasantry..





troth they may, and nobody ever know a word about it, barring myself and themselves; for Torney Costello tould me in his office that I was a mark'd man, Sir, and my sister and brother-in-law too; and that he had his eye on us long since, only waiting for a fair opportunity. Them is his own words, if I was dying, Colonel; and I trust in God and your honour to relieve me, and not to let me rot in a gaol, Sir, nor starve alive, which I'm likely to do, in regard of not having a rap to crass myself with, only the gaol allowance, which is bread and water, Sir; by reason of my giving half what I had left of my travelling expincis to poor Mary, Sir, not waiting for the price of the place, to do that same, as your honour bid me; and leaving the rest in my little bundle, with my silver gilt watch, at the cottage; for not a rag, Sir, they'd let me stop to take with me, nor to look for my bundle, only my hat; and sure one was no match against five, any how; and what could I do, Colonel? And so I'm to be tried and found guilty at the next 'sizes, Sir, which comes on this day six weeks as I hear tell: and may be your honour will be in Germany before that day, Sir, and why wouldn't you! Sure I couldn't expect you'd stay back for the likes of me; God forbid: and whatever comes of it, Colonel, I invite all the saints of heaven to pray for you and bless you, Colonel, to the ind of time; and grant you a happy death, and a long life and prosperous. And whatever happens to me, dead or alive, the last prayer ever I'll utter, will be a blessing on your head, Sir, any how, for your great kindness to me and mine, who am,

Your Honour's

Humble and faithful servant,



and most loving foster-brother,

Phaidrig,

(alias Patrick) M'rory.





P. S.—I hope your honour's goodness will excuse the great liberty in regard of Martha, the cratur! to tell her, Sir, that if she never sees me again, 'tis no fault of mine, only my misfortune :—but not to grieve her, Colonel, by telling her my mishap; for what use is there in it; and that I hope she'll keep the two goold pieces I gave her for my sake, and make what use she plases of them; and that I don't write to her for araison I have, she not knowing how to read. And in respect to Bran, the baste! I hope your honour will look to him yourself, and that the next boy you get, Sir, will take as good care of him as 1 did; and troth, and I'd share my last bit with him this moment, my poor animal. Which is all at present from, Colonel, your humble and loving servant, P, M.

N.B.—I didn't tell your honour that my sister, and James Mulloy, her husband, went for America the very week before I got here, in respect of great hardships; and they tell me it's a great place—and sure, Colonel, the brackit hen is there to this day, and roosts under the chimney of your honour's room in the thatch, Sir; and ould Mary says that the neighbours will never be persuaded, Sir, but she's Mrs. Honor Kelly *, in regard of flying in the face of Comey Kelly, the first day he put his foot in it; which ould Mary will take her book oath of—Och! but she's an uncommon bird!

P. S.—I send this in two letters, Colonel, divided to save the double postage; not that your honour would grudge it, Sir, only there's little use in throwing away money these hard times.

P.M.

* A belief in this sort of transmigration, is a common superstition in Ireland.





CHAPTER XXV.

On the following morning, at an early hour, the iron box, accompanied by a note to Mr. Maunsel, was delivered to the Duchess's porter; and her Grace was engaged with her uncle in examining the curious and ancient deeds, and other documents among the O'Donnel papers, when a servant came into the study, to inform her, that Lady Singleton was in her dressing room, and requested to see her upon urgent business. This was a tiresome interruption, and the Duchess with great reluctance obeyed it.

Lady Singleton was walking up and down the room in some perturbation.

"Well," she said, "my dear Lolotte, here is a fine business! You have no idea how annoyed I am. I know I shall be brought into the scrape. Neither Lady Llanberis nor the Savill family will ever forgive me, for bringing forward this person. She is the least reasonable of all human beings, and the Savills are the victims of prevention; so that if this unfortunate man is hanged, for the murder of Lord Charles"

"What man ?" asked the Duchess, in great alarm.

"Why, this unfortunate Irish O'Donnel, whom I so unluckily presented at Longlands, merely to gratify Lady Llanberis's whim about odd people; for after all, one must keep well with persons of her influence, to get on at all, when one is not at the head of a great establishment. But if I am cited to appear on the trial, I shall

certainly give the counsel a hint, which may Good

Heavens, Duchess! what, what is the matter? Why, you are as pale as death ! and there is a frightful blackness about your mouth and eyes."





The Duchess faintly smiled, but sat motionless in her chair. Lady Singleton emptied a bottle of eau de luce on her face, and was about to ring the bell for assistance, when the Duchess, recovering by the violent remedy applied to her senses, cried :—

"No, no, don't ring; I am well, quite well, only a little surprised, go on. Let me hear."

"Then you have not heard of the duel betwet * Lord Charles and Colonel O'Donnel."

"Duel!" repeated the Duchess. "Yes," she replied, "and Lord Charles was killed."

Lady Singleton now paused, and fixed her eyes with a look of penetrating curiosity on the Duchess's face: observing in a pointed manner,

"Who would have thought that you would have had so much feeling for a nephew, who never owned you as a relation; and who has more than once said to me, 'My dear Lady Singleton, that little gouvernante of yours '"

"Is Lord Charles Savill killed?" interrupted the Duchess, with great vehemence of manner.

"Well, you shall hear. I was just sitting down to breakfast, when Mr. Dexter (who, by the by, is getting

on amazingly with the N s) called in, and told me,

with great horror at the whole transaction, that as he was calling at Belmont House, to leave his letter of introduction for the Duke, who is but just returned with poor dear Lord Charles from Scotland, he met the body of Lord Charles, carrying out of a coach, into the great hall at Belmont House; that he had a sight of the General and several surgeons, but that he could not get to speak to any of them; and only learnt from some of the attendants, that Lord Charles had fallen in a duel with an Irish gentleman of the name of O'Donnel, who was taken into custody on the spot; which shows that there was some foul play, as Mr. Dexter says. So, luckily, my





carriage was at the door, and I drove off to Belmont House—butno admittance there; and no positive account of the affair, nor any intelligence whatever, save that surgeons were probing the wound, and that"

"Then he is not killed?" exclaimed the Duchess, breathlessly.

"Well, who would have expected this sensibility from you? isked Lady Singleton, " whom I always thought

"Pray go on," interrupted the Duchess, faintly.

"Well, I then drove to poor dear Lady Llanberis's; who, after all, if Lord Charles dies, will be the person to be pitied, for their marriage was a settled thing; but she had just gone with Lady Mary to Belmont House. I saw her own woman, who told me she was grieved and afflicted d Voutrance, and was quite wild. She had also, I learnt, sent for me, in the first instance; but whether to reproach, or condole with me (for she hates to be alone, when she has a grande crise d'emotion), I cannot guess. However, I left a line for her, to say I would not go home till I had seen her; and that I would not leave the square, but remain with you till she returned."

The Duchess now, in a composed tone, inquired if Colonel O'Donnel was in custody, with whom, and where. But before Lady Singleton could answer, the door opened, and a servant announced the Countess Llanberis: and her ladyship, rushing into the room, fell into a chair, and burst into a violent fit of tears.

Lady Singleton hastened to her friend's assistance, prodigal of all the eaux, essences, and esprits on the Duchess's toilette; and still more prodigal of consolations and regrets, invectives and dictations. But Lady Llanberis, suddenly recovering, exclaimed—

- "If any thing should really happen to Lord Charles, I must say that you, Lady Singleton"





"Then he is not even in imminent danger?" asked the Duchess tremulously.

"Not, I believe, in such imminent danger, as was at first supposed; but I have left word at my house, for General Savill to follow me here, who promised to come in half an hour, and tell me every thing."

"And Colonel O'Donnel?" said the Duchess.

"Oh I he, the wretch! he is safe enough, I dare say. He is gone off; at least no one knows any thing about him. He'll take care of himself."

The Duchess leaned her face over the back of her chair, from which she had risen; and Lady Llanberis continued with great vehemence of manner and gesture: "If any thing should happen to poor dear Lord Charles, I shall certainly look upon you, Lady Singleton, as the cause.—I shall indeed."

"Upon me I Lady Llanberis?" returned Lady Singleton, colouring.

"Yes, certainly, upon you, Lady Singleton: with your tales of wonder about kidnapped chiefs, and the Castle of Dublin, and his fighting a whole German legion, and all that nonsense, at which poor dear unfortunate Lord Charles used to laugh till he was ready to die. He said from the beginning that O'Donnel was some adventurer, with his air of 'heros a" opera;' but you would have him from Ireland; he was then, you know, quite your engouement outri."

"Your engouement outri, your ladyship means," returned Lady Singleton, struggling between temper and policy. "You would not let me speak of any other subject, after I first, by chance, mentioned him to amuse you, because you are so partial to out-of-the-way people, of odd and extraordinary adventures : and as to O'Donnel's, I only mentioned them to you as I heard them myself."





"O! yes ; mentioned, Lady Singleton; but you must know the man was no more the thing you described, least that I expected. He was, I think, pretty much like other persons, but not in the very least amusing, if you mean that; indeed quite the contrary; and if he even was, as no one knew the least in the world about him, one did not quite desire to see him niche in one's family in the manner that he was. However, as you invited him over, you know, Lady Singleton, one was obliged to abide by it, not expecting that he was to cut every body's throat in the end, who did not do him homage, as Lady Mary says."

"I invite him over I Lady Llanberis," repeated Lady Singleton, in a tone of great vexation—"I invite Colonel O'Donnel? Was it not by your own particular and earnest desire? Had I not three expresses of a day on the subject? had I not too"

"O! yes, expresses; but that happens to be nothing to the purpose, my dear Lady Singleton; just nothing at all: for it was then, you know, a question about those French plays. You, yourself, you must remember, cast him the part of Orosmane; you really cannot deny that I hope; and as you were at that time mistress of the menus-plaisirs at Longlands, you managed every thing your own way."

"Menus-plaisirs f" repeated Lady Singleton, struggling with her temper. "I am sure I wish from my soul I never had interfered at all, for this is generally the way one is served in the end by your great ladies."

"Well, Lady Singleton, I wish you never had interfered, with all my soul: we should then have known nothing of this Irish duellist, and poor Lord Charles!"

Here the contest was broken up by the entrance of a servant, who informed Lady Llanberis that General Savill was in the drawing-room, and had called by her order.





"Oh!" said Lady jLlanberis, "show him up by all means. I suppose, Duchess, you will give me leave."

"Certainly," said the Duchess, and flew out of the room to receive him herself.

He was answering some question she had asked, when they entered the room together.

"Oh! my dear General," exclaimed Lady Llanberis, bursting into tears, as she gave him her hand—" this is an horrid business—good heavens I was there ever any thing so unfortunate. Pray tell me every thing. Lady Mary communicated to me the contents of your note, but that was written two hours back. I sent to three surgeons and a physician myself: did they arrive in time? How is Lord Charles? Why would not the Duke see me? Is that blood-thirsty Irishman in custody? Pray, General, tell me every thing: I have a right to inquire. The husband of my late dearest friend: the woman on earth I loved best: I speak not of my own personal regard for Lord Charles; of the great friendship that subsists between us, if"

Here the violence of her ladyship's tears, and a slight tendency to hysteric affection, interrupted her words, and gave the General, after a little pause, an opportunity of answering some of her questions.

"Colonel O'Donnel," he said, "is not in custody, nor is Lord Charles in the imminent danger your ladyship supposes: neither is the Colonel, I assure you, a blood-thirsty Irishman. His conduct throughout the whole transaction has been fair, cool, and honourable. Upon the whole," he added, "report has exaggerated and distorted the facts most amazingly."

"Well, then," said Lady Llanberis, suddenly drying her tears, and resuming her air of composure, "since, General, our dear friend is out of all danger, and one may hope the best, I beg you will relate the whole affair, from beginning to end: now pray be circumstantial. When nothing very serious comes of a duel, it is a very interesting thing, and nobody can raconter better than you, General, when you please."





"Yes," said Lady Singleton, "I should like to know if what I heard was strictly true about Lord Charles's jealousy."

"Pray, General," said the Duchess, earnestly, who had hitherto preserved a profound silence, "pray go on."

"The cause, then, of this unlucky affair," returned the General, "was a lady's giddiness."

"Indeed!" said Lady Llanberis, drawing her chair closer to the fire, and looking at Lady Singleton. "He certainly ought not, I mean this O'Donnel, to have been thrown at the heads of people in the manner he has been, without any one's knowing who, or what he was. A lady's giddiness, General! go on—you see, Lady Singleton."

"Yes," said the General. "Lord Charles had not conceived a very favourable impression of Colonel O'Donnel; from what cause it would be now useless to inquire; and with more candour than prudence he gave his opinion of Colonel O'Donnel, in a letter to a lady, who put this very letter into the Colonel's own hands."

"Indeed!" said Lady Singleton, throwing her eyes on Lady Llanberis: "thank heaven, it was not me. I never was tracassiere, among all my faults, I have always kept clear of that."

"It was no tracasserie," said the General; "it was pure mistake on all sides. You, Lady Singleton, sent a commission to Colonel O'Donnel, in a letter to Lady Llanberis. Lady Llanberis put a part of Lord Charles's letter into your envelope, and gave it by mistake for your's to Colonel O'Donnel, who very naturally read it under the same erroneous impression."

"Who, I did this!" exclaimed Lady Llanberis, in amazement, but still not displeased. "How very odd— it may be, though, as you say, General; for I never since thought of the letter, the commission, Colonel O'Donnel, or even poor Lord Charles's opinion of him; which, however, I now remember was pretty severe ; for I think he said he was a swindler, or something very like it. Do you know this is quite a sort of a dramatic incident, and altogether not un-entertaining; yet, if any thing melancholy really comes of it, I shall always lay it down to the account of your tiresome Irish horses, Lady Singleton."





"I think you had better lay it to the account of your ladyship's usual inconsequence about letters," replied Lady Singleton, "which I have so often cautioned you against."

"Pray, General; proceed," said the Duchess, with great earnestness.

"The Colonel's conduct upon this occasion,"continued the General, "was such as might be expected from a man of feeling and spirit."

"Poor man !" interrupted Lady Llanberis.

"He called upon Lord Charles, by letter, to retract his words, or assign the facts upon which his opinion had been founded. Lord Charles refused both; and Colonel O'Donnel, not perfectly recovered from a severe lit of illness, followed his lordship to Edinburgh. When he arrived there, Lord Charles had proceeded towards the Highlands with his agent, to take possession of the estates left him by his late uncle. Colonel O'Donnel, having obtained his address, followed him. During the whole of his journey to the north, he had struggled against the return of a disease, which was preying on him when he left London: and within two stages of Lord Charles's residence, in a wretched mountain village, he was seized with so violent a fever, that his senses deserted him, and his life was despaired of by the host of the little inn where he had stopped. In this situation





he was found by a Scotch clergyman, travelling through the village, who sent to the nearest town, whence a physician could be procured. After three weeks' confinement, a good constitution prevailed over the disease, and Colonel O'Donnel was enabled to proceed on his route. This I had from himself. He is indeed much changed."

"Poor man I Poor man I" exclaimed Lady Llanberis, with a deep sigh: "he has been altogether very ill used."

"On arriving at Castle," continued the General,

"he found that Lord Charles had left it a week before, for England; and in the latter end of the ensuing week, he arrived himself in London, and an old brother officer, a Major M'Carthy, delivered his cartel to Lord Charles Savill. Lord Charles did not conceive himself called upon to meet a person, whom he did not know to be a gentleman, and I, as his lordship's friend, was deputed to see Colonel O'Donnel at the coffee-house, where he had given his address, to explain to him Lord Charles's scruples; well aware that the Colonel had it in his power to answer and remove them. In the first instance he was rigidly unbending. He refused all proofs, all testimonies of his being by birth, what, in my opinion, he evidently is by education, by conduct, and manners— a gentleman. At last, his friend, who was present at our interview, uniting his solicitations to mine, he reluctantly gave up a letter, written in his favour from the Emperor of Germany to the Queen of France, mentioning him as an accomplished Irish gentleman, of illustrious descent; who had left his country from the circumstances of religious disqualification, and • who was kinsman to the late Field-Marshal O'Donnel, to whose military exploits Austria stood so highly indebted. The Imperial Seal was attached to this letter, and that of course was sufficient. This morning the meeting took place: of the unfortunate consequences you are aware. It is but fair, however, to mention that Colonel O'Donnel's conduct was equally distinguished by spirit and sensibility. A man of firmer nerves in a similar situation I never saw; but when Lord Charles fell, that firmness deserted him. He flew in great agitation to his assistance—he supported him in his arms, while we were preparing the means of conveying him to town; and though he said but little (for his emotion was deep and silent), yet that little was at once feeling and manly."





"He is an amazing fine creature," said Lady Llanberis, wiping away her fast falling tears. "He is, indeed, quite an hero! If any thing happens to him in consequence of this unfortunate affair, I shall never forgive myself, and my inconsequence. But nothing can happen, nothing will; and I trust, before long, I shall have him and Lord Charles together, once more, at my house; for there is no reason in the world why they should not become great friends in future. So that, upon the whole, my showing the letter by mistake, was not so unlucky a thing as at first one thought."

"Nor my tiresome Irish horses so much to blame," said Lady Singleton, with point; "and I think after all, Lady Llanberis, this adventurer, with his air <Theros eCopera, is the true Orosmane."

The General now arose, and the two ladies first remembered that the Duchess had hurried out of the room on a servant's putting a note into her hands, and had not returned. Lady Singleton shook her head, and looked full of meaning. Lady Llanberis fixed her eyes upon her, and asked: "What is the matter, Lady Singleton?"

"Merely some odd ideas that have come into my head," returned Lady Singleton, smiling.

"Dismiss your carriage, then, and come home with me in mine," said Lady Llanberis.





Lady Singleton consented, and the General, handing them to the carriage, they took leave and departed. The note put into the Duchess's hands ran as follows:

"Colonel O'Donnel presents his compliments to the Duchess of Belmont. Being permitted to return to town this day, an event on which he could not depend, when he had the honour of seeing her Grace last night, he begs to suggest the necessity of his immediate interview with Mr. Maunsel, as circumstances may render Colonel O'Donnel less master of his own time than he is at this moment. Colonel O'Donnel is now at the

coffee-house, Mary-le-bone, and will remain there

until four o'clock to receive Mr. Maunsel's commands."

"Wednesday, two o'clock. Coffee-house."

In consequence of this note, Mr. Maunsel waited upon O'Donnel within an hour after its receipt; and without referring to the event of the morning, entered at once, as a man of business, upon the affair which had brought them together. To many questions relating to the O'Donnel property, and the deeds, in examining which he had passed the morning, he received full and explicit answers: he declared, however, that the presence of O'Donnel would be indispensably necessary, as an important evidence, not only to attest some facts on oath, of which he was master, but to swear to the handwriting of his grand-uncle, the Abbe O'Donnel, and to his own father's.

"The assizes," said Mr. Maunsel, " open in the town

of , where the cause will have its trial early in the

ensuing month. I leave London for Ireland to-morrow. My wife remains with the Duchess till I come back for her, some time hence; and her seat in my chaise is at your service. I have a place within twenty miles of the

town of , and I hope, for the sake of the accommo

cc





dation, as well as for the pleasure which your society will confer on me, that you will have the goodness to remain my visiter as long as you stay in Ireland. Perhaps too," he added, "Colonel O'Donnel, it may be no faint inducement to you to accompany me back to Ireland, that you can be on the spot yourself, to assist me in releasing the worthy M'Rory, (whose letter has interested me for his own sake, poor fellow,) and in punishing the delinquency of Mr. Costello; and if you still persist in disposing of your romantic little domain among the mountains of Lough Swilly, I shall be glad to become a purchaser; for I have accidentally seen it since you left the country, and, in common with Corney Kelly, Esq., have cast on it a longing eye for a fishing lodge."

To all this O'Donnel slightly inclined his head, and when Mr. Maunsel had ceased to speak, after a pause of some minutes passed in deep rumination, he abruptly said—

"Well, Sir, if my presence in Ireland can in any way forward the interests of the Duchess of Belmont, I will attend you: name your time."

"To-morrow, at eight o'clock in the morning, I propose starting."

"Then I shall be here ready to accompany you," said O'Donnel.

"Have you a servant with you?" said Mr. Maunsel.

"No," said O'Donnel, slightly colouring: "I have only a very favourite and faithful dog, who will follow the chaise."

"O! Bran, I suppose," said Mr. Maunsel, smiling.

"How did you know his name?" asked O'Donnel, eagerly.

"By M'llory's tender recollection of him?" replied Mr. Maunsel.

O'Donnel sighed, and having expressed himself obliged by Mr. Maunsel's hospitable invitation, accepted of it, during- his stay in Ireland, and thanked him for his intended interference in the case of M'Rory. He promised to be ready at the appointed hour, and Mr. Maunsel took his leave.





He had not been gone many minutes, and O'Donnel was still walking up and down the room in great perturbation of mind and spirits, and occasionally throwing his eyes over a newspaper, which he held in his hand, when his friend, Major M'Carthy, was announced. He had, at O'Donnel's request, been at Belmont House, to learn how things were going on, and now brought the welcome tidings to O'Donnel, that the ball had been extracted without much danger or difficulty; that he had seen General Savill, who gave the most favourable accounts of the patient, and had made many handsome observations on O'Donnel's conduct.

"So far so well!" said O'Donnel; then, after a short pause, he drew a diamond ring from his finger, and with an air of affected carelessness, he asked—" M'Carthy, do you remember this ring?"'

"Yes, I think so; it is the ring given .you by the Queen of France, that made such a coxcomb of you at the siege of ."

"The same," said O'Donnel. "What do you think it is worth? Observe, I don't mean in the eyes of an officer of the French brigades, who has an almost religious devotion to the royal family of France, but intrinsically."

Major M'Carthy took the ring, and replied—

"Faith, O'Donnel, I am not a judge of these things; but I should suppose it worth eighty or a hundred pounds. I would be glad to give double the sum, for the sake of the relic. I saw her who bestowed it," he added, with emotion, "when she first rose above the horizon, decorating and cheering the elevated sphere cc 2





she began to move in, glittering like the morning star, full of life, and splendour, and joy"

"And little," said O'Donnel, catching the enthusiasm, "did we then drpam that we should have lived to have seen such disasters fallen upon her, in a nation of gallant men, in a nation of men of honour, and of cavaliers *."

"Give me the ring," he cried, snatching it eagerly: "I cannot part with it, though I perish with want."

Major M'Carthy seized his hand.

"Part with it, O Donnel! Perish for want! you! Great God! Have you then no recollection of the ties which mutual misfortune once bound round us? Have we not fought together amidst hundreds of our exiled countrymen, mourning the wounds which bled—not in defence of our own dear land? Have we not escaped together from anarchy and carnage, and been exposed alike to the same vicissitudes, to which religious and political disqualifications at home, and revolutionary horrors abroad, subjected us? and yet, has your false pride concealed your wants from a friend whom fortune has now placed beyond the reach of adversity. Fie, fie upon it, mon Colonel. Must a man be a General to be permitted to oblige you? Will you not stoop to receive a kindness from your poor old major, who often stood cap in hand to receive your orders before your tent?"

"My dear M'Carthy," said O'Donnel, shaking his hand, and in an emotion which he endeavoured to conceal by an air of pleasantry—" the fact is, I have in the course of my short life tasted of almost every ill but two, and of those I am determined to keep clear till the last—debt and dependence; and I will not now borrow money even from you: therefore have I concealed from you my real situation, which, after all, is but that of hundreds of my countrymen all over Europe: the outline of the story is simply this :—I was, as I mentioned to • Burke.





you, on the point of joining my cousin O'Donnel's regiment in Germany, when this business with Lord Charles Savill took me into Scotland: and the long journey, the long time that elapsed, and two severe fits of illness which required medical assistance, so exhausted the little funds which I had intended for my journey to the continent, that, on my arrival last week in town, I was master of but three guineas in the world: two of these I paid in advance to the wretched master of a wretched hovel, where I have hid my head at night; and the other guinea has kept me in coffee and biscuits at this house. The moderate resources I expected from Ireland are still delayed by the imprisonment of my servant and foster brother, who went over to receive them; and I was now reduced to the necessity of parting with this ring, which, through all my difficulties, I had still preserved, when it struck me that perhaps you would lend

me on it a small sum sufficient to"

"Come along, my dear colonel," said M'Carthy, taking him by the arm: "come with me to Coutts's: I will lend you two, three, four hundred pounds on your ring."

"No," said O'Donnel, smiling, "I will borrow on it but half its own intrinsic value, whatever that may be." Major M'Carthy endeavoured to expostulate, but O'Donnel was inexorable, and M'Carthy was obliged to submit with a sulky reluctance, strongly contrasted to the former animation of his naturally animated manner. O'Donnel gave him the ring until in happier times he could release it, and received in return fifty pounds. He informed his generous friend of his being obliged to set off for Ireland on the following day, on a subpoena to attend a trial, and also in the hope of releasing his faithful Irish servant, and recovering his little property out of the hands of a swindler.

As O'Donnel had refused to dine at Major M'Carthy's





house for many reasons, the friends then parted in mutual emotion; for their accidental meeting had revived many faded ideas, and awakened many endearing associations, which time, absence, and vicissitude, had lulled into forgetfulness.



CHAPTER XXVII.



The following morning, Mr. Maunsel's carriage was at the coffee-house to the moment of the appointment, and drove up as O'Donnel, followed by Bran, and Lawrence Cologan, carrying his portmanteau, approached the door. O'Donnel had been a little after day-light at Lord Charles SaviU's house, to inform himself of his state. Lord Charles had passed a good night, and was doing as well as possible. When the two gentlemen were seated in the chaise, the conversation turned on the duel of the preceding day, which was now an open subject of discussion, having found its way into the papers of the preceding evening; but that subject exhausted, no other was started. O'Donnel, during the rest of that day's journey, was sunk into profound reverie; he sighed frequently, and when addressed by his companion, started, like a man suddenly awakened from a disagreeable dream. Mr. Maunsel, therefore, forbore to disturb his moody meditations after the second stage, and amused himself with a book he had luckily put into the pocket of the chaise.

During the second day's journey, Mr. Maunsel, without any apparent effort to draw his companion from his melancholy musings, talked to him rather than with him, and imperceptibly won upon his attention, and dissipated his reserve, till monosyllables swelled into sentences, and mere rejoinders flowed into dialogue.





O'Donnel, whose thoughts were full of "busy matter " when he had first met Mr. Maunsel, saw only in the Irish lawyer a zealous bustling man of business; he now, however, upon a more intimate acquaintance, discerned in him a rare combination of shrewd acuteness of mind, and humorous simplicity of manners, which finely reflected on each other, borrowing and lending effect. Very fluent and a little quaint, he made his points tell in conversation, as much by the originality of the phrase, as the strength of the idea. Evidently more indebted to native sagacity than to foreign acquirement, always humorous, sometimes witty, he exhibited an intimate knowledge of the folly and errors of human nature, rather than an acquaintance with its turpitude and its vices; and illustrating his experience with more playfulness than gravity, he sketched by a trait, and painted by a word, what a paragraph might have failed to delineate, or a page to describe. More courteous than polished, more cordial than refined, his manners were yet as easy and as unconstrained as his conception was quick and apprehensive. A rich and unaffected brogue seemed so peculiarly to belong to his style of character, that the man and his accent appeared made for each other. O'Donnel, as they grew more intimate, became more interested and pleased with the conversation and society of the Irish barrister, a character which individually holds so high a consideration in the best society of the country, and which, taken as a body, is universally supposed to concentrate much of the talent, the knowledge, and the probity of the nation.

As the travellers, mutually satisfied with each other, were crossing the Welsh mountains, O'Donnel, after a pause, which had accidentally occurred in conversation, drew a newspaper from his pocket, and was reading some paragraph with great attention, when Mr. Maunsel asked him if there was any news.





"It is an old paper," he replied: "a fortnight old, I believe. I have been looking over a passage that concerns the Duchess of Belmont."

This was the first time her name had been mentioned since their journey. Mr. Maunsel took the paper, and read as follows:—

"If we are to draw any inference from the frequency of an earl's carriage, with an <S under the coronet, being

before the door of a certain dowager duchess, in

Square, we should suspect a matrimonial alliance to be carrying on in that quarter; for maugre the well-known gallantry of the gentleman, the correctness of the lady's conduct is so well determined as to have raised her to the rank she now fills."

"O yes, I have seen that nonsense before," said Mr. Maunsel.

"There is, I suppose, some foundation for the report," said O'Donnel, with hesitation.

"Nay," said Mr. Maunsel, smiling, "I am not permitted to reveal the secrets of the prison-house."

"I beg your pardon," said O'Donnel, hastily; and the conversation was never after renewed.

The travellers remained but one day in Dublin, at Mr. Maunsel's house, and then set off for the north.

"The agencies of two large estates, which I possess in Leitrim and Donegal," said Mr. Maunsel, as they proceeded on their second day's journey, " have induced me to purchase a small, but improveable place, at no great distance from either; rather than adopt the taste which generally prevails among the inhabitants of Dublin of all descriptions, of taking a villa in the neighbourhood of Ballybough, or a lodge in the vicinity of Booterstown, within view of their own town-house chimneys. Every inhabitant of our metropolis, no matter of what rank or circumstances, must have 'a little place in the country' to ' breathe the fresh air,' and ' be con





venient to the salt water for the children.' The remoteness of my retreat is an immense annoyance to poor Mrs. Maunsel, who had set her heart upon Ruby Lodge, or Elm Forest, or Rock Villa; and cannot bear the sound of Ballynaclush, the original name for the town-lands I have purchased. Now Ballynaclush is a respectable farm, with a comfortable house on it; and Ruby Lodge is a little red brick edifice on the Black Rock road; Elm Forest, half an acre of new plantation, and Rock Villa, a cottage on the sandy beach of Clontarf, confounded among jingles, bathing-boxes, and jaunting cars."

On the morning of the third day the travellers reached Ballynaclush; and O'Donnel, stopping only one night to rest, set off the following morning on an hired horse, to work the liberation of M'Rory. Mr. Maunsel had in vain attempted to detain O'Donnel, by alleging that his presence was unnecessary, and that his own interference by letter would answeT every purpose; but feelings would not pause to listen to reason. Having procured, therefore, letters to the chief magistrate, and the gaoler of the place, from Mr. Maunsel, stating the circumstances, and offering himself, in conjunction with Colonel O'Donnel, as bail for M'Rory's appearance at the approaching term, O'Donnel departed on this little pilgrimage of affection, gratitude, and justice.

It was night when he reached the town of ,

and consequently too late to transact any business; but there was yet time, by the indulgence of the gaoler, to whom he presented Mr. Maunsel's letter, to visit M'Rory. O'Donnel followed a hatchman to the little prison-room, where M'Rory was confined. He was alone, and lying in his clothes on a straw mattress. At the sudden glare of light, which flashed from the hatchman's lantern, he covered his dazzled eyes with his hands.





"M'Rory !" said O'Donnel, in a tremulous voice.

M'Roiy started up, clasped his hands earnestly, and throwing round a wild look, exclaimed—

"Jasus preserve me! Didn't I hear the master's voice?"

O'Donnel came forward, and M'Rory, with a shout of joy, fell at his feet.

O'Donnel was much moved, for M'Rory was greatly altered, and looked worn and haggard: yet he endeavoured to soothe and raise him; and informed him that he had come for the purpose of releasing, and affording him all the atonement in his power, for the suffering and injustice he had undergone on his account. M'Rory looked, and listened to him with evident incredulity, as if he doubted his own senses. But O'Donnel repeated his assurances, shook him by the hand, and made some observations on his altered appearance, adding, that change of air would soon restore him to health and spirits. The tears stood in M'Rory's eyes; and after a pause he said—

"Troth, and your honour looks far from well yourself, and mighty thin! Well, I cannot believe my own eyes—to see you here, Colonel, after all. Didn't I think, Sir, that you were gone to Jarmany, forgetting me intirely, or thinking me dead, in respect of never getting the letter I wrote to you; and that Torney Costello and Cornelius Kelly was carrying the world before them, and would hang me fairly, or transport me, in regard of having nobody to back * me, Colonel. Well, the Lord be praised for his goodness to me, a sinner, in sending you to my relief, Sir; for I am ready to go now, Sir, you see, at a minute's warning."

He advanced eagerly to the door, but O'Donnel with great regret informed him, that from the lateness of the hour, he could not have him liberated till the next morning; but that he would send him a good supper from the inn, to cheer him in the interim. Having informed him of the cause of his letter not having been answered, until a day or two before he left England to come to his relief (which answer was then lying at the post-office), he took his leave, and left the overjoyed M'Rory, for the purpose of procuring him some sustenance, of which, from his wan and emaciated looks, he evidently stood in great need.



* This backing is universally deemed by the Irish peasant, an essential element of justice in his case: and he is often right in the belief.





The statement made by Mr. Maunsel in his letters, and the bail of Colonel O'Donnel, were sufficient to procure M'Rory's liberation; and O'Donnel, according to a promise extorted from him by Mr. Maunsel, to return with all possible expedition to Ballynaclush, left

the town of next morning, accompanied by M'Rory,

on another hired horse. No trace of his misfortunes now remained on M'Rory's mind: his looks alone bore testimony of the privations and confinement he had endured; but his spirits were in a state of intoxication, from the sudden transition he had experienced, from despair to his best idea of felicity. Though he had little more than the history of his own sensations to give, he contrived to find subjects for his garrulity during the whole way.

Towards evening, as they beheld the setting sun reddening the Bay of Donegal, and approached the romantically situated little town which gives its name to the county, M'Rory, riding up to his master, asked, in a voice of some emotion—-" Do you know where your honour is now?"

O'Donnel sighed, and made no answer. He was returning by another road than that he bad taken in going; and he now, for the first time, beheld the ancient castle of his ancestors, still noble in decay, and attesting its former greatness, even in its ruins.





"Why then I'll tell your honour," continued M'Rory: "You are in the Barony of Tyr-Hugh; which was called after your great ancestor, Hugh O'Donnel the Red *; and there is the fine ancient ould Abbey, Sir, and the cloisters to the fore, still, you see; which was founded, Sir, by Odo-Roe O'Donnel, a great saint in the family f ; and just right fornent you, Sir, is the great ould castle J, and a beautiful fine edifice it is; and there is the hall, Sir, standing to this day.—Och I my blessing on it; for it's there the rale hospitality was, in the ould times. And sure they say, Sir, the castle is standing six hundred years and more."

"You are a great antiquarian, I perceive, M'Rory," said O'Donnel, with a faint smile; while his eyes stiU rested on objects, which, to his feelings at least, were at once so melancholy and so interesting.

"O, I am, Sir, and so was my mother before me. Not a thing ever happened in the family, from the beginning to the end of time, but she knew. She had fine Shanaos §, God rest her; and I mind me now that when we came over together from County Leitrim, to see your honour, when you first returned from foreign parts, we passed a day intirely in this town, among the ruins. She showed me a room, Sir, in the castle, that if all the sands in the bay was heaped in it at night, would be swept clane by morning: and great rustling of silks heard; for they say, a Lady Fionguala O'Donnel haunts that room to this day. And there is the spot on the side of the Bay, where O'Donnel the Red jumpt off from on hoard that thieving Spanish ship, which was no Spanish ship at all, Sir. 'And Phaidrig,' says my mother, * I wouldn't wonder if Master Rody's heart would swell too big for his breast, when he looks on this place ;' for she called you Master Rody, Colonel, to the day of her death; troth she did, loving you all as one as myself, who was the only child ever she had, barring my sister; and good right she had to love you, God bless you, Sir, for the great kindness you showed her all the days of her life; and often she said so, God rest her; for it's little ways my poor earnings went in supporting ould father and herself, only for your honour's bounty to them; for the best of foster children you were, Sir; and a great fosterage it would have been for us, if your honour had been the great Earl of Tirconnel, who lived in the ould times. But if my earnings was small in the ould Abbe's sarvice, sure my work was light, till I went into th' army with you, Colonel. But they're all dead now, God rest their sowls, and send them a happy judgment. Amen."



* Tyr-Hugh, the Land of Hugh.

f Founded in 1474.

X This beautiful ruin is situated in a fine view of Donegal Bay. The castle was first built in the twelfth century. It was tho stronghold of the O'Donnels, during the Tirowen wars in Elizabeth's day; and what remains of the original building is in good preservation.

§ Shanaos, a sort of genealogical gossip, derived from the word Seanacha, the genealogist or historian, an hereditary office in all great Irish families. They recorded in a kind of poetical stanza; and resembled, insome respects, the French and English heralds of the middle ages.





The day after O'Donnel's arrival at Mr. Maunsel's, a letter was received, in answer to one which Mr. Maunsel had written, on his arrival in Ireland, to Mr. Costello. It ran as follows :—

TO E. MAUNSEL, ESQ., BALLYNACLUSH.

"Sir,—I hasten to reply to your letter of the third ultimo, the contents of which surprised and mortified me not a little; as I find by it that I have been egregiously imposed upon by Mr. Cornelius Kelly, with respect to the place I undertook to recover for him. His statements on this subject were such as will justify me in your opinion, when I shall have the honour to meet you personally, and detail to you the whole business. Kelly has within these few days absconded in my debt to some amount. The cottage, therefore, and the little premises belonging to it, are at Colonel O'Donnel's disposal; for I wash my hands of the whole business, and am sorry I ever interfered in so paltry a concern.





"As to Patrick M'Rory, he certainly behaved to me in a most improper and disrespectful way; but as yon, Mr. Maunsel, have taken up the business, I will not proceed further against him, but shall give up the prosecution, as you seem to think he has been hardly dealt with. This, however, I assure you is not the case; but I perceive your goodness has been much imposed on by an ex parte statement.

"It is reported here that you are to be returned by

Lord for the borough of ;if so, I beg leave

to offer my congratulations and my services, which must always be at your command; as is, Sir,

"Your most obedient servant,

"Terence Costello.

"P. S. There is a watch and some other articles of Patrick M'Rory's at my house, safe and ready for him, whenever he claims them. I am a little surprised at Colonel O'Donnel's return to thi3 country, as I understood he was gone back to France. I take the liberty of enclosing him a little bill for repairs done at the cottage, which is much more comfortable than when he left it."

"I have not, however, done with you yet, Mr. Terence Costello," said Mr. Maunsel, after he had read the letter to O'Donnel; "nor shall we defray this bill, Colonel, until we see what repairs have been made. I say we, because I now conceive myself a party concerned in this mountain hermitage of yours."

The conversation now turned on the scenic beauties of the Abbe O'Donnel's retreat; when, from something which Mr. Maunsel accidentally let fall, O'Donnel had reason to suppose that he was the person commissioned by his niece to deliver him the mysterious gift, which had so long set conjecture at defiance. Mr. Maunsel perceived the mistake he had committed ; but O'Donnel, observing his confusion, affected not to have noticed the tendency of his remark.





A bargain between two honest men is soon struck. O'Donnel asked what he thought the value of his little territory, and Mr. Maunsel willingly gave it. The new proprietor immediately despatched his servant with orders to have the cottage fitted up as a sporting lodge, and prepared for his reception; and O'Donnel promised, that when the trial was concluded, he would accompany him thither on his way to Derry. From this port they both meant to sail; Mr. Maunsel in a Liverpool packet, and O'Donnel in a Hamburgh vessel, which he had by accident learned, had put into Derry, and was to return to its own port in about three weeks. O'Donnel wrote to the captain of the vessel to secure his passage, and then gave himself wholly up to examining the papers, with which he had furnished Mr. Maunsel, and 'in making such notes as might be of service in conducting the trial.

In the mean time he had the pleasure of learning from Major M'Carthy, that Lord Charles was rapidly recovering from his wound; and on the morning previous to the opening of the assizes, the two gentlemen, after ten days' residence at Mr. Maunsel's house, adjourned to the county town, where Mr. M. had much business to transact.

The cause pending between a branch of the family of the O'Donnels, and the relict of the late Duke of Belmont, for a property of such considerable value, had excited much interest and curiosity in the country. The former great possessions of the O'Donnels in Ulster were known both by tradition and history; but the person who now sought to establish his claim was descended from a very remote and younger branch. He was by birth an American, a man advanced in years, who had been instigated to engage in this suit by an Irish attorney, who had urged him to this step, more from his own interests than those of his client.





When, therefore, Colonel O'Donnel appeared in the

sessions house of , to substantiate the claims of an

English holder to an Irish property, by proving the right of his own forefathers ; when all the circumstances were detailed by which bis uncle had obtained the power of alienating the family inheritance; and when in the end it became generally understood, that the noble and distinguished looking person, who stood forward from a sense of equity as principal evidence, in spite of every national and hereditary prejudice, was himself, by the law of nature, the true heir, and only dispossessed by a passing penal statute long repealed, a general murmur of interest, curiosity, and admiration, ran through the crowded court. The contending parties, the English peeress, the American claimant, were forgotten; the witness became the chief object of attention, and the whole interest of the cause was transferred to him. When, therefore, the suit was concluded, and judgment given in favour of her, for whom this witness had come forward, it seemed, by the congratulations offered to O'Donnel, and the acclamations which followed him from the court, that he had been the victor, and had struggled and conquered for himself.

M'Rory had, however, materially lent his assistance to produce this unexpected effect. He had diligently attended in the court, during the whole of the trial; he had followed his master through all his evidence, the counsel through all their pleadings, with the most evident attention; exhibiting his intense anxiety through the medium of shrugs, gesticulations, hullaloos, and ochones; attracting the attention of all, and exciting the risibility of many within the court. At last he had so heated his confused brain, and disordered his unregulated imagination, that he became persuaded his master was fighting his own cause, and had actually regained all the ancient possessions of his family. As the town was full of peasantry and of mountaineers, by whom the name of O'Donnel was still revered, M'Rory's communications to many of his old friends and neighbours obtained implicit credence; and a crowd of persons, led on by M'Rory, followed O'Donnel to Mr. Maunsel's lodgings, crying—





"Long life to you, Colonel O'Donnel!—long may you reign I—the O'Donnels for ever! Tirconnel aboo."

They then quietly dispersed, and O'Donnel severely chided M'Rory for his imprudence and folly, informing him as clearly as- he could of the true nature of the case.

"Why, your honour," he replied, much grieved at being undeceived, "if you haven't got back your own, sure, it's what you ought to do; haven't you every right in life, Sir, to the finest estate in the county, if you had your due, Sir?"

"I am weary of refuting this nonsense, M'Rory," answered O'Donnel, "which, without believing (for that is impossible), you persist in asserting. Now, M'Rory, you are, I dare swear, aware, that the O'Donnels were not, even anciently, the original possessors of the land over which they reigned for centuries, which they won by the sword, and which the sword partly won in turn from them."

"O, I hear tell that, Sir; and that the Firbolgs were, Sir, th' ouldest Irish of all; and the great Milesian O'Donnels bate the Firbolgs fairly out of the place, only the world will never make me believe, Sir, but that suit you gained for that fine rich young lady, that I seed at Longlands, ought to be for yourself, and will, plase God, some time or other; for sure if the world went right, which it doesn't, nor never did, in my mind, your honour

J> D





ought to have the best part of the Donegal estate, any way; to say nothing of county Leitrim and the Rosses, Sir, in right of your father and grandfather, Sir; that's barring you'd been born a feymale, which you weren't, for then, surely, your property would have gone by right, and not by roguery, to that thieving uncle of yours, axing your honour's pardon for calling him so, Colonel; or his son, Sir, if he had issue; but he hadn't, nor never will, plase God! in regard of his being dead these twenty years and more. So that there isn't a man breathing to stand between you and it, only the young lady, who has no more right to it than Terence Costello, bad luck to him."

In this conviction, O'Donnel was for the present obliged to leave M'Rory, for he perceived that he had not only heated his imagination by intensely pursuing the same subject for two days together, but that he had taken a more effectual mode to confuse his head; and when O'Donnel good-humouredly hinted his suspicions, he replied—

"Oil see, your honour; you think I have been looking at somebody drinking. Why then, Colonel, 'tis yourself knows well it's little I care for it, Sir, barring when I'm in great grief or in great joy, as I've every right to be now, in respect of your honour's great luck this day, though it's Lent itself, Sir; nor wouldn't taste a drop if my church had forbid me; but it didn't. Long life to the Council of Trent any way, that put the fast on the mate, and not on the whiskey *."

Although O'Donnel had been seriously annoyed by the effects of M'Rory's folly, he was yet touched by the testimony of affection, which had that morning been evinced to the name of his family. He sighed to think that, under other circumstances, he might have claimed by inheritance, might have won by acts of benevolence, the fealty and affections of a people, who, though sometimes ridiculed as uncouth, or calumniated as barbarous, possess that ardour of disposition, which is the true soil of national goodness. Neither prejudiced by his wrongs, nor misled by his imagination, he felt, that in Ireland (as in all nations), what is won by the sword becomes legitimate property ; that time sanctions usurpation ; and that possessions long maintained, however gotten, are consecrated by the lapse of ages, and held by the best of all tenures, prescriptive right. He was of opinion, that what was forfeited by a violation of the law, was justly forfeited; but to the loss of inheritance, torn from its ancient possessors as the forfeit of an opinion, by the transient tyranny of a temporary penal statute, which brought down heaven to divide the earth, breathing its unholy mandate alike in defiance of the law of God and of man, he felt it difficult to submit without repining. That law, however, was now repealed; and though he was too near the period of its operation, and too deeply involved in its consequences, to be thereby reconciled to its dispensation, or insensible to its injustice, he yet gave no utterance to vain and unavailing regret: he respected the peace and better order of existing things, and he was well aware that a spirit of accommodation and conciliation in all parties would prove the surest, safest, and speediest means of union and prosperity to the whole.



* A common Irish saying.





CHAPTER XXVIII.

Mr. Maunsel was detained by the business of one of his agencies in the town some days after the assizes were over. O'Donnel, both from a feeling of kindness and from necessity, consented to remain with him; and they both agreed upon passing the interval between that period and their embarkation, at the cottage on the shores of Lough Swilly. To the whole of this arrangement O'Donnel was obliged to submit; but to his feelings it was equally irksome and oppressive. His spirits were at the lowest ebb—his mind was almost wholly subdued; a secret suffering preyed upon his heart, whose cause he scarcely acknowledged to himself, for it militated alike against pride, prudence, and common sense. The sensible pleasantry and playful humour of Mr. Maunsel no longer interested or amused him. Miserable, oppressed, and dejected, he passed his mornings in long and fatiguing rambles, without either object or interest, and returned weary and sad, complaining of an insupportable headach, and retiring early, not to rest, though to bed.

.The day after that, on which the suit of the Duchess of Belmont had been so happily concluded, Mr. Maunsel sat down to acquaint her Grace with her victory.

"By the by, Colonel," he said, "will you not be the recorder of your own successes? Here, take the pen: you shall write an account of your victory to her Grace yourself."

"My victory !" said O'Donnel, rising from his chair, and throwing aside the book he was reading.

"Yes," said Mr. Maunsel; "it is you who have rendered our arms victorious; we have only fought under your banner: without your assistance, I can tell you, the foe would most likely have remained master of the field."





"I have observed, Mr. Maunsel," said O'Donnel, with the air of a man who had not been attending to what was said to him—" I have observed that you have not mentioned your niece's name since we have been together."

"Very possibly!" said Mr. Maunsel, carelessly : " I have been too deeply occupied with the suit, to think of the client; too much interested in saving the property, to talk of the proprietress. I love and admire her, however, very sincerely; though in most things she is rather a cut above me, and makes me stare a little: yet her mind is so right, and her heart so warm, that"

"Her heart!" interrupted O'Donnel: "do you think she has a heart?"

"Nay," returned Mr. Maunsel, laughing ; "that is no easy question to answer. A young widow's heart is''

"I mean," again interrupted O'Donnel, eagerly, " has she any sensibility; for I do not want to inquire into the state of her Grace's affections?"

He grew confused, and taking up his book, added,

"Pray go on ; don't let me prevent your writing: you will be late for the post."

"No," said Mr. Maunsel, rising from the writing-table and seating himself by O'Donnel near the fire. "I have two hours before me yet, and I do not see why I may not, at this moment, execute a commission from the Duchess to you which I was about to talk over with her in my letter, before I finally concluded it."

"To me !" said O'Donnel, turning pale.

"Yes," said Mr. Maunsel, taking a paper from his pocket and presenting it to him. "In case the Irish property bequeathed to her by her late husband was established hers by this suit, I was to present you with this deed; if we had failed, I should not have had any thing to offer you but her gratitude and her thanks."





O'Donnel took the paper with an unsteady hand — opened, and read it. It was a deed of gift, making over to him an estate of one thousand a-year, in the County of Leitrim. The paper fell from his hands, and Mr. Maunsel, either not perceiving, or not choosing to notice his emotion, continued:—

"Although I cannot always follow my niece's flights, yet I confess, in the present instance, I approve the feelings under which she has acted. A sense of justice, gratitude, and, if you will, a natural disposition to generosity, have formed the groundwork of this act, which some would deem prodigality; but she is aware that the property you have secured to her ought to have been your own; she condemns the means by which it has eventually become hers; and she feels for the fate of a brave and gallant gentleman, who is reduced to live exiled from his own country, because in others only he can find a mode of suitable existence. For the rest, this deed was executed before we left London; but though I heard you talking of going abroad, 1 did not mention it to you till I was certain I could do so securely. As the Duchess of Belmont will, of course, marry, she also wished to make use of her liberty, while she possesses it, in the disposal of this portion of her property. You know, I suppose, Colonel O'Donnel, that the estate she has assigned to you is that on which your grandfather had raised a mansion-house, at the time when some of the ancient inheritance of your family was granted back to various of its branches by the Court of Claims appointed to inquire into the forfeitures of the country. The house, though out of repair, is capable of being made a very comfortable residence, and, indeed, a few rooms can be made ready for your reception immediatelyWhen I last went there on manorial business, an old man, bending under the weight of years and infirmity, showed me a room, where, he said, the present great Colonel O'Donnel was born, and his father before him: so you see you will not return a stranger to the home of your fathers.''





"Enough, enough," said O'Donnel, rising in great emotion, and taking up the deed. "You say, Mr. Maunsel, you are going to write to the Duchess: will you have the goodness to inclose a letter from me?"

"Certainly," he replied; "and I will leave you to write it."

He then quitted the room, and O'Donnel wrote as follows:—

To The Duchess Dowager Of Belmont. Madam,

It has been my good fortune to have rendered you a service by performing an act of common justice, and it has been your Grace's pleasure to cancel the obligation by proffering me a most disproportioned reward. I have been told, Madam, that your prodigal liberality has been directed to me, not only by what you deem a principle of equity, but by a feeling of compassion; but while I wholly differ from your Grace in my estimate of rights, and cannot feel the slightest shadow of claim upon your justice, you must allow me to add, that, to be the object of the Duchess of Belmont's compassion, is the last condition to which I could voluntarily submit myself. . No, Madam, while you are thus anxious to render me your debtor, it is my triumph to consider you as mine ; for you have only offered to bestow upon me what perhaps you can well spare; I have thrown into your possession all I had on earth to give—my peace of mind and wreck of happiness. Adoring in the proud and sullen secrecy of unrequited devotion, I have long loved nothing better than yourself; save only that honour, which doomed me to silence, and forbad me to hope: oh surely





It were as well to love some bright

Particular star, and think to wed it,



as to have sought to draw you from the elevated sphere in which I saw you moving, with all the cloudless lustre of that virtue which placed you there. I will not, however, vaunt a self-denial which would have been superhuman, had it rested solely upon the disinterestedness of scrupulous honour. Had I traced in your feelings the slightest reflection of that ardour which consumed mine, I should not, I fear, now stand acquitted in my own esteem. But your Grace's indifference left me no excuse for self commitment. It was not concealed from me, that there was a prospect of your forming a connexion suited to your rank and elevation; nor that, while you stooped to relieve me, you were about to bless another. And yet, Madam,

If crooked fortune had not thwarted me,

I would not have shrunk from entering the lists with those destined to love you; and (warranted in avowing it) would have trusted to time and assiduity, to cares that win, and vows that persuade, to the zeal of exclusive devotion, and the perseverance of immutable attachment: with what success, it is now unavailing to calculate. Situated, however, as I am, I would have died the master of my life-wearing secret, rather than reveal myself to you; but that bending beneath the weight of your generosity, I would at least justify to yourself the prodigality of your conduct, by thus convincing you of the true claim, which the object on whom it is lavished has acquired to your notice. Even this wish should not have prevailed, but that I am well aware no result can arise from the avowal; since, before this letter shall convey it to you, the writer will have bidden an eternal farewell to the realms you inhabit.





Yet should he again be led by sentiment, or by adversity, to return to that dear, still dear land, where he trusts you will dispense protection and relief to those over whom you are placed, it will be, Madam, at some for distant day, when he can have nothing to hope, nor you to fear, from the repetition of his avowal; when time shall have dried up the sources of exhausted sensibility, and palsied the energy which gives genius its spring, and passion its vigour: when even you, so lovely and so loved, though never forgotten, shall be but remembered as the brightest vision, among the few, which memory may reflect upon the cheerless evening of sinking existence; and when of all those finer ties which bind man to life, that only remains, first formed on entering it—love of country! For the weary exile's latest, lingering hope, when all other hopes are fled, is still, to die at home at last.

I am, Madam, &c. &c.

O'DONNEL.

O'Donnel folded this letter, and inclosing with it the deed, put it into Mr. Maunsel's hands, who instantly despatched it with his own; but appeared, from his subsequent manner and observations, to have no suspicion of its contents, nor its inclosure.

"There is now an end of your passage in the Hamburgh vessel, I trust," he said—" but I shall not let you off your promised visit to our cottage."

"I do not mean to be off;" said O'Donnel—" for I must at all events go to Derry."

To avoid all remonstrance and expostulation on the part of Mr. Maunsel, O'Donnel meant to conceal from him his fixed intentions, till the last moment; and though Mr. Maunsel more than once end eavouredto bring him back to the point of his niece's liberal donation, yet he contrived, with some ingenuity, to avoid giving a direct answer.





At the time originally appointed the two gentlemen set off for the shores of Lough Swilly, in Mr. Maunsel's curricle. Their servants were to follow them the day after, with their dogs.

M'Rory had long perceived the alteration of his master's looks and manner: though he had not been able to discover the cause, notwithstanding many ingenious and indirect efforts, he yet sympathised in the effects ; and while he was engaged in packing up O'Donnel's things, in the room with Mr. Maunsel's servant, he uttered so many broken exclamations, and deep sighs, that his companion, who was similarly engaged, at last asked him—

"What ails you, man?"

"What ails me, Tim, is it? Why, every thing in life ails me; and no wonder; to think of our being halfway to foreign parts three months ago, and now to see us just going back to the Lough I as if we never quit the place at all at all; and to think of the master going for to come for to get back his own property for another young,lady, that's neither kin nor relation to him: and now that he has fairly put down Torney Costello, and them American O'Donnels, and shown himself the greatest man in the prowence, any how, to think of his going to quit the country again.—To say nothing, Tim, of the girl I was telling you about, that's far over seas, and will be further, the cratur, when I am made a foreign corplar, Tim—and the master's crassness bates the world, Tim; which is what grieves me most of all. O, not a word passes the threshold of his lips to me, barring he axes for his hat: and sure in the worst of times be was mighty mild, and no ways crass, God bless him!—And now he is rip and dressed at day-light, before I can get his coat brushed; and every sighth* he gives, you'd hear, sir, from this to Cork."





"May be he is in love, Pat," returned Tim.

"Troth, and I believe you a'n't much out there, Tim, dear; for often I thought that same—the devil a bit of me knows with whom though, barring some great lady in England; but any way, he wouldn't have no call to any of them, as he tould me, in regard of Martha, the cratur, without having wherewithal for them; for he's mighty proud, Tim ; and sure a king's daughter wouldn't be too good for him—troth she wouldn't. Now did ever you lay your two looking eyes on a finer gentleman, Tim? Why, boy, you'd think the whole world was looking after him and Bran, the baste I when they walked out together in London streets: myself used to look after them out of the window, till they turned the corner, God bless them. Its seldom the likes of them was seen in that city any how; and for all that, to think of the master being so cruel unaisy, and nobody knowing for why."

Here O'Donnel's voice calling to M'Rory in a sharp tone, put an end to his digressions; and running down the stairs with a small portmanteau on his shoulder, he cried—

"Sure I'm coming, Colonel: I am here, close fornent you, Sir, and the things."

Mr. Maunsel had some business to transact with a gentleman who resided at the little post-town in the neighbourhood of O'Donnel's cottage, which, on arrival, he found would prevent their eating their chicken at the cottage as they had intended, the servants, there, being prepared for their reception. He proposed, therefore, dining with the friend whose business detained * Sighth—Sigh.





him. To this arrangement, O'Donnel, as far as he was concerned, objected; he pleaded his eternal head ach, low spirits, and utter disinclination to go into the society of strangers, who would call upon his attention, without affording him either distraction or amusement.

Mr. Maunsel, who seemed to enter fully into the peculiarities of his character, on which he sometimes rallied him, did not press him to remain; but requested him to take on the curricle, and send it back for him. This proposal O'Donnel positively refused. The day had been intensely cold; he had been cramped up in a carriage for many hours; and as the distance was but a few miles, and the road across the mountains but too well known to him, he preferred walking.

The distraction which bodily exercise produces, and that restless desire of motion, which results from the sympathy between the moral and physical faculties, in the crisis of mental agitation, rendered the mere act of walking almost an enjoyment to one, whose mind was goaded by conflicting passions, and harassed by feelings the most tumultuous and unsettled. Not a ray of daylight lingered on the mountains when O'Donnel left the town, and pursued his lonely way through paths dreary as his own thoughts. All was wild and gloomy; and as he advanced towards the rude and desolate shore, the sea blast, gushing with a shrieking noise through the insterstices of the rocks, and the hoarse murmurs of the distant breakers, added sounds of corresponding wildness to the savage bleakness of the scenery.

As he passed through the rocky defile, which led immediately to the humble residence of his youth, the memory of former times rose vividly upon his mind. He recalled in a rapid review the several periods at which he had formerly passed this little ravine, when each time, as he thought, he was never to behold it more. In boyhood, when warm and aspiring, unworn in spirit, and fresh in feeling, he forgot the dark destiny which urged on his wandering steps; and saw only the beacon light of hope, which guided him to glory and renown. Again, when his fortunes having fallen with those of an empire, after a short interval of repose, he had left the temporary asylum of its solitudes, to draw, for the first time, his sword under the consecrated shadow of his country's banner. In a still more mature period of life, he sought, for a third time, among these rocks, a shelter from poverty and despair; but rising again superior to the wreck of all his hopes, he had again gone forth to earn subsistence by his sword. Not glory, not renown, were then his objects; for such dreams were over. In heartless despondency he had last left this commemorated spot; in heartless despondency he now unexpectedly returned to it; with one woe, added to those he had borne away with him, in the existing moment of heartfelt anguish sharper than all the rest. The feeling which woman could awake in his breast, was not the sickly sentiment of romantic phantasy, nor the vapouring extravagance of fierce but short-lived emotion: it was passion, genuine, unmixed passion; partaking alike of all the imperfections and all the perfections of his nature; to which he would have sacrificed every thing but the well-being of its object, and that honour, dearer still than love itself. As he approached the cottage, and looked upon its dark outline, as it lay half concealed in shadow, he remembered the affectionate smile, which so often lingered on the lip of age, to welcome home the truant boy—to hail the long-expected return of the matured man. He was now about to be received by a servant, and that servant not his own. The place itself too, endeared by many recollections, had passed into other hands; yet, led by the mechanism of habit, he walked directly to the small door, which held immediate communication with the little parlour, as he had formerly done, when no ceremony attended his admittance. The door, however, was not fastened, and when he opened it, he found the room lighted with a brilliancy, partly derived from its contrast with the darkness of all without; yet O'Donnel saw, or thought he saw, through the rays which dazzled his sight, a woman, seated at a table, engaged in the earnest perusal of a letter: her back was towards him—he paused, amazed by an appearance so unexpected. The lady turned round her head, with a faint exclamation; and, rising from her seat, stood before him, pale and agitated, yet smiling. O'Donnel advanced a few steps, started back in breathless wonder, believing the vision, which blessed his sight, was but the phantom of his own over-wrought imagination; but the smile which beamed on his gaze was no visionary smile; its image was traced on his brain, and was never to be forgotten. With a deep inspiration, as if he endeavoured to throw off, by a single effort, the load of sensation which oppressed him, he fell at the feet of—the Duchess of Belmont.





There are emotions, which sometimes occur through the languid sameness of life, which no eloquence could depict, which good taste would shrink from attempting, and which, however strongly conceived by the mind, or pourtrayed by the fancy, become feeble and faded through the coldness of detail.

An hour had elapsed, and within its fleeting space, the history of feelings had been detailed sufficient to have occupied a life. Affections long resisted, emotions long combated, found a ready utterance, and the intoxication of unexpected happiness chased even the memory of the despair, to which it had so suddenly succeeded.

O'Donnel was still at the feet of his benefactress, his friend, his mistress, when the tender and passionate woman again resume the spirited vivacity of the humorons Duchess; and, touching a hell which lay on the table, she exclaimed—" And now to summon the agents who have





'Done my spiriting gently.'"

As she spoke, Mr. and Mrs. Maunsel ooeyed the signal, to O'Donnel's amazement and annoyance, and he hastily endeavoured to rise, but the Duchess, affecting playfully to detain him in his suppliant attitude, exclaimed—" Aye, come in, good people: it is you who must attest to an invidious world that I was not altogether won unsought. There he is you see, after all— 'There lies honour P

And here," taking up O'Donnel's letter—" here is honour's last dying speech and declaration, signed, sealed, and delivered; by which, I trust, I should stand acquitted of lez-pruderie in any high court of discretion in Christendom; and oh !" she added, in a tone of more feeling than gaiety, "how long did I silently lie in wait for this little testimony, which was to sanction a wellfounded preference, and to confirm the hope that such a preference was not unreciprocated! But for this, the prejudices of honour, of pride, and decorum, would have carried the victory, and happiness would have been sacrificed on their altar; while the supposed heedless, heartless, Duchess of Belmont, would have gone on, to all appearances, just the same, laughing at the weaknesses of others, the better to conceal her own: her mind, like the dark mine, which gives its lustre to the world, but remains itself wrapt in cold and cheerless gloom: and her spirit, ever at odds with her feelings, yet disdaining by a single effort to

4 Raze out rotten opinion, that had written her down after her seeming.'"

"I am so little used to happiness/.' said O'Donnel, throwing himself into a chair, and covering his eyes with his hands, "so little, that even now, I distrust the evidence of my senses."





"I thought," said Mr. Maunsel, "we should have surprised you this evening; but you little suspect that I have been a sort of acting manager in getting up the whole piece from the beginning, particularly the last incident: scene, a cottage—time, evening: for, though my niece chose me for her 'Norah in white dimity,' some time back, and threw her secret into my keeping, yet her courage forsook her as we approached the denouement. She talked of my having committed her, and all sorts of delicate distresses, and threatened to throw up the part, if I violated the confidence of my heroine."

"You have, at least," said the Duchess, laughing, "violated the unities, and hurried on the catastrophe, without any regard to the laws of the drama."

"Because," returned Mr. Maunsel, "wind and tide will not wait on dramatic laws, nor a Hamburgh merchant-man stop a single day for the better carrying on of the plot."

"Then we will end the play for this evening," returned the Duchess, "as Moliere does one of his, by calling for supper:

"La comedie ne plut mieux finir, et

Nous fcrons bien de demeurcr la.'"





CHAPTER XXIX.

Early in the month of April, the following article made its appearance in many of the English and Irish newspapers.

"Married, by special licence, at the seat of James Maunsel, Esq., county of Donegal, Roderick O'Donnel, Esq., formerly a Colonel in the French Guards, Lieutenant-Colonel of Cuirassiers in the Imperial service, and

late a Major in the regiment of Irish Brigades, to

Charlotte, Duchess Dowager of Belmont. Immediately after the ceremony, the bride and bridegroom set off for Tirconnel House, in Leitrim, the former residence of that branch of the ancient Irish family, of which Colonel O'Donnel is the representative. It is a circumstance worth noting for its singularity, that Colonel O'Donnel, by his union with the relict of the late Duke of Belmont, has become re-instated in some part of the vast possessions of his ancestors, forfeited at various periods by the vicissitudes of property incidental to the former unhappy state of Ireland. Within a few miles of the mansion house, the horses were taken from the carriage, which conveyed Colonel O'Donnel and his noble bride; and surrounded by a tenantry, whose forefathers had fought under the banner of his illustrious ancestors, the brave descendant of the Chiefs of Tirconnel returned to the domains of his inheritance."

The domains surrounding Tirconnel House were not, it is true, those anciently possessed by the ancestors of O'Donnel; they were only granted by the Court of Claims a century back, as a small remuneration for the territories of which they had been deprived in Ulster. But the clans or followers of all the ancient Irish families partook of the fortunes of their chiefs, and transplanted themselves from province to province, as impelled by want, or driven by the sword.





It was, not, therefore, without emotion, that O'Donnel beheld the descendants of those who had shared the fate and fortunes of his forefathers: that he beheld the hall where the harp of Carolan had so often reverberated. Nor was it without emotion that he hung once more the sword of O'Donnel the Red, which he had re-purchased, and again placed over the mantel-piece of the domestic hearth; while his faithful Irish wolf-dog lay at his feet, and his affectionate Irish follower stood proudly by, the happy witness of his prosperity.

Yet still, over these joyous emotions, some feeling of melancholy would at times throw its shadow.

He was willing to owe his best felicity to the hand of love; but he would have wished to have obtained the re-possession of his rights by means more consonant to the spirit of the gentleman, the dignity of the man, and the general interests of his country.

Whatever were the feelings of O'Donnel, those of M'Rory at least were feelings of unqualified delight. In the first transition of his master's fortunes, he lived in a sort of delirium. His brain was "confusion worse confounded;" and his own identity lost in that of the God of his idolatry. He neither thought nor cared how far he was to benefit by the prosperity, which he witnessed with such lively transport.

Conscience, and a letter from Martha, first awakened him to a sense of his own individual existence; for M'Rory, like most of his countrymen, was rather ardent than constant in his loves; and his susceptible feelings were now recalled to their duty, more through the medium of his easily awakened pity, than his principles of fidelity.





One morning, as O'Donnel was going through the grounds, a short time after his marriage, followed by his steward and Bran, he perceived M'Rory sitting under a tree, moaning over a letter.

"You, seem to have received some bad news, M'Rory," said O'Donnel as he passed him by.

M'Rory started on his legs, thrust the letter into his pocket, and following his master, said:—

"Is it me, Sir?—Oh, no, Colonel, I have not—no news at all, Sir, to signify, only ould news;" and he sighed deeply; and when the steward had concluded some observations he had been making, on some land he was about to reclaim, M'Rory continued—

"Well, Colonel, if I had tould your honour this day six months, that the time was no wise distant, but mighty near, when myself and Bran, and Mr. Muckleroy, the baste! (that's Bran, Sir I mean) would have been following your honour through your lands, where it's often your father and grandfather left the track of their feet (God rest them), sure, Sir, I'll be bound you'd have called me a natural, troth you would, and no blame to you, Sir; for surely, though I knew there was luck, and great luck, before you, Colonel, the likes of this same I never draymed of any how. Well, well, it bates the world fairly, to think of marrying an iligant fine young lady, and mighty pleasant, Sir, troth she is; and no ways high, though a great Duchess, long life to her, and getting back to your own rale property, that's the Leitrim estate ; and to see the people doting on the very ground you walk, for the sake of the family;—and the coach, and th' arms, and fine ould ancient red liveries, and the silver buttons, and the crust on them; and my own elegant new shuit of blue. O, murther! I only just wish they were after seeing me go to mass next Sunday, Sir, in England; or if they saw me, sure, Sir, in our own £ E 2





steward's room, king of the place* as I may say, and I . believe it is not in it, I'd get the turn out, any how: and God be with her, that gave me my bit and my sup in the still-room, the cratur! never a tay-cup I'll see washed to the day of my death, but I'll think of her, if I never see her again, the little sowl! that's Martha, Colonel. And sure the lady's maid, Sir, Mrs. Martin, who knows all the ladies and gentlemen at Longlands, had a letter from Mr. Willis, Sir, and another inside it, but not to Mrs. Martin ; and she tells me, Sir, that the mistress, that's the Duchess, is going to send over to London, for one Lawrence Cologan, an Irish boy, and his wife, and childer, and to make them a lodge-keeper at the gate in the new avenue, near Pat Mullen's meadow. 'And troth, then,' says I, 'Misthress Martin, while your lady's hand's in for doing a good turn,' and it's herself that has the notes for it, God bless her; and sign is on her, Colonel, for she has the prayers of the poor, high and low, since she came home to the place, short a time as it is, in regard of ordering them spinningwheels, Sir, and the male, and the flax, Sir, and the power of good she has done already. And I was saying to Mrs. Martin, that as Lawrence Cologan was coming over, and that as he wouldn't answer for a housemaid, that's his wife, Sir"

"That Martha would, M'Rory," observed his master, smiling, and guessing at last at what his indirect harangue had pointed at. "Well, do you and Mrs. Martin consult on the best mode of getting Martha to Ireland, and I will supply you with the means; and then you shall choose a farm for yourself, and live an independent, though still, I hope, an industrious man."

M'Rory continued to- follow his master's steps in silence for some moments; then, with great difficulty of articulation, he said—





"I hope I have done nothing to offiend your honour, Sir. Sure, Sir, if I am not fit to be a walley * to you any longer, I might stay in the place, any way, to brush your coats, Colonel, and look after your things: for as to a farm, many thanks to your honour, Sir, for that same, I don't regard it a straw, in comparisment of being under one roof with you, Colonel, and seein' your face, Sir, when I stand behind you at dinner; and your honour's allowing me to make so bould as to talk to you, Sir, betimes."

» Well, well, M'Rory," said O'Donnel, "you shall do and be what you please: provided you are happy, I am satisfied. It is among my first wishes to reward your fidelity and affection; but you are certainly yourself the best judge of the means, and shall therefore dictate them."

"I shall, Sir?—Why, then, your honour, Iamintirely obligated to you, and bound to pray for and serveyou, Sir, which I do day and night, God bless you: and Martha and I would rather be your own man, Sir, and undertake the capacity of a housemaid, which she is fully equal to; that's as she tells me herself, Sir; this day I had a letter under her own hand, written by the under butler, Mr. Kelso; and many a prayer she put up for you and your's, and well she might! And so I'll just step in, Sir, and talk about it to Mrs. Martin. Long life to you." And M'Rory was out of sight in a minute.

The intelligence of the Duchess of Belmont's marriage with Colonel O'Donnel, had no sooner appeared in the English papers, than, among several other letters of congratulation, it produced her Grace the two following :—

TO THE DUCHESS DOWAGER OF BELMONT.

Ma chere Lolotte,—Your marriage with our Irish chief has not the least surprised me. 1 foresaw it all

» Valet.





from the beginning. It is at least for him un tres bon parti, and I hope you may not be disappointed. I would advise you both to settle in Ireland for many reasons, and take a house in Dublin: a title, you know, goes a great way there, and a duchess might carry every thing before her: now here, you know, that sort of thing goes just for nothing at all, if not borne out by fortune, and fashion, and bon-ton, and so forth. Your sudden flight from town in the height of the season, and soon after Lord Charles's accident, made une grande sensation: observe, ma belle, you ought to have remained in town till he was declared out of all possible danger, merely for la bienseance. Apropos tobiensiance, I must remark (parparenthese) that you geniuses neglect it too often, and that your conduct with respect to Lord S. (now Marquis of B.) was extremely imprudent, though, as it appears, innocent enough essentially; and the Morning Post, I must say, was very favourable to you, to give the thing the turn it did; but had not the old father died most apropos, and the clandestine wife come forward, just in the nick of time, Lord S 's attention

and your secret flight, my dear, might have given a very ugly air to the whole thing. Indeed, I cannot yet myself make out the story very clearly, and request you will let me know if the following statement is correctthat an Italian lady of good birth, who used to briller in the Duke of Belmont's societies at Florence, captivated Lord S. when he was in Italy, that she refused his carte-blanche, and that he returned to England; that, unable to conquer his passion, and despairing of the old marquis's consent to hi3 marrying a foreigner without a shilling, he went to Vienna, where the lady had got a place about the Empress, and married her clandestinely; that on the news of his father's illness, he came over to England; and that you, at his entreaties, accepted the mysterious wife into your house, in gratitude to her5 for her kindness to you when you were a poor destitute girl at Florence, and partly out of friendship to Lord S. who lived so much at Belmont House, during the short time you were mistress of it.





Now, all this may be true as holy writ, but all we can say is, that " le vrai nest pas toujours le vraisemblable." Be that as it may, as soon as I saw the thing announced in the papers, 1 left my card at the door of the new marchioness, and I am told that Lord S. (I mean Lord B.) has just made the finale that all these roues and old bachelors by profession are sure to do— married imprudently, and fallen in love with his own wife. I saw Lady Llanberis last night at the Opera, looking in high beauty, and her box, as usual, crowded with men. Lord Charles is all but quite recovered, and if the town is to be believed, they are to be married immediately. I should imagine it would bore them both amazingly, but I don't see how they can well be off. Lord Boston lives behind the scenes at Drury-Lane, and it is supposed he will elevate one of the "Heroines des Coulisses" to the dignity of the peerage—not a chance of the Grandvilles returning; and I hear there is not a trace left of Lady Florence's beauty. The twins, however, are flourishing—how excedee she must be by these little masters, Castor and Pollux. Have you seen Lady Mary SaviU's new novel? if not, get it by all means. Its title is " Despair and Rapture, or Contrasted Passions," by a lady of rank, interspersed with poems, by a friend. The friend, of course, is Mr. Ovid Mussen, her Monsieur Trissotin, her " hero d'esprit," and the poems are quite as fade as the author. She has dedicated the work to her husband. The dedication is much admired, and

begins so,

"To him," &c. &c. &c.

I forget the rest; some people, however, quiz amazingly, as it is pretty generally known that they don't live very well together, and that the poor dear General never read a book in his life, except an almanack or an orderly; however, it is the fashion to dedicate to one's husband or one's wife ! or some near connexion ; for sentiment, you know, runs amazingly high just now. After all the trouble I have taken in fitting up the house in Portman-square, and in making out a good society for Charles Glentworth, he is, I fear, falling fast into his poor dear father's habits, and will in the end sell his Town house, and live wholly in that tiresome Derbyshire. He is there at present, and we are to follow him in a few days ; I say we, for of course you have seen my marriage with Mr. Dexter in the papers before now, and most likely our congratulations may pass each other in crossing the channel. I know it is an arrangement that will "faire hausser les epaules a qvelques unes," but I think I may, at this period of time, be allowed to judge for myself; and without discussing how far my own feelings have gone in the business, I must say, it was the only effectual means to forward the interests, and call forth the talents of a very clever, sensible young man. Although he has been extremely taken up in England, indeed, by persons of the first consideration; yet still he wanted connexion to push him up the stick; and my brother, for his own sake, must now make an effort for one, too nearly allied to him not to interest his pride, as I am sure he soon will his esteem: besides, he is the greatest possible favourite with my step-son, to whom he has made himself extremely useful, from his intimate knowledge of all sorts of field-sports. They go together to fish in May, in South Wales. I should not in the least be surprised if Charles returned him for the Borough of Ballynogue, which, entre-nous, is rather an object with Mr. Dexter. And now, my dear Lolotte, having come to my fourth sheet of note paper, I think you will not complain of the shortness of my epistle: but I assure you, I take a great interest in you, and think you have done very wisely to retire from the scene in time; for when the first flush of passion passes over, with respect to you parvenues ladies, you are left pretty much to yourselves. I envy you the quantity of things you must have to do on a neglected Irish estate.





Adieu, m'amie. P. S. I have not mentioned to you your ci-devant pupils; for they have conducted themselves in such a manner on my marriage with Mr. Dexter, owing to the sot orgueil of their two stupid husbands, that it is impossible I can ever see them again. Horatia's husband is, out and out, the greatest fool I ever knew, notwithstanding his maiden speech, which I am sure was made by his tutor; and Mr. Vandaleur is just what he always was; I cannot say worse. However, they are both well matched ; for a couple of more heartless, brainless, young ladies it would not be easy to find than their wives; so that, take them altogether, one cannot well imagine a more lourde assemblage. Thus then, my dear Lolotte, deserted by my own children, who can blame me for attaching to me for life, by indissoluble ties, a devoted and disinterested friend like Mr. Dexter, who must, one day or other, justify my choice by the figure he will make in the world?

Encore a vous,

C. Singleton.

London.

I suppose you have heard that Miss Carlisle has at last caught poor Sir Gilbert Curzon—an immense match in point of circumstances ; but he is, you know, un franc nigaud. However, she is old enough to be his mother — so, Us sont quittes tous deux.





TO THE DUCHESS OF BELMONT. MY DEAR DUCHESS,

You have no idea how extremely amused and delighted I was by the account of your marriage with Colonel O'Donnel. I assure you I think it is by much the finest thing I have heard of for an age ; there is something so extremely out of the way in both your histories and adventures, and both are so clever and so odd:—and then your restoring to him all his vast possessions, and his chieftainry. Good Heavens! what a happy woman you must be I I have no idea of any thing finer than being the wife of a chief.—Even the wife of a captain of banditti is an interesting situation—but to go on for ever in the same round, in the same eternal quietude, security, and abundance; to have nothing to expect, or desire, or wish for I—If you had married Colonel O'Donnel in London, and gone on in the general way, I should not have been in the least interested; nor indeed was I, when I suspected you of such designs at Longlands; but your following him to Ireland—the Duke of Belmont having left you the property that once had been his— in short, it is all a romance, and I wish Mrs. St. Leger would take it up.

How delighted you must be with your old castle, mouldering round you, and your Giant's Causeways, and lakes and mountains; to be sure, there are mountains enough about my place in Wales; but then one really cannot go on for ever looking at Welsh mountains, and I am sick of the very sound.

I have an idea that Ireland is by much the wildest and most interesting country of the world. I thought so of Switzerland till I saw it. But I have a presentiment that your emerald isle (good heavens! what a sweet idea), and the harp being strung and unstrung, and all that kind of thing; but the fact is, if ever I am my own mistress, I will go over, and pass a winter with you in your castle, but I fear I never shall. I suppose you have heard of my intended marriage with Lord Charles Savill? You know the way the world thinks and feels, and makes arrangements for one; and then you know one is committed without knowing the least in the world how, or why, or wherefore; but there one is plantee. It is really altogether too tiresome. Lord Charles is certainly a most excellent person, and a man of the very highest fashion and supreme ton. But there is nothing particularly singular or out of the way in that. A woman of fashion marrying a man of fashion happens to be a pretty worn-out story enough. I must confess that I believe the truest happiness is to be found in the most unequal matches; not but I do remember when Lord Charles ,in the lifetime of poor dear Lady Charles—; but it is past, and there's an end of it. Apropos, to unequal matches. What think you of our dear Lord S—'s? What a man that is to be sure! I am dying to know La bella Italiana. I dare say she is a most delightful person. But in your life, did you ever know or hear of such a thorough ridicule as Lady Singleton's arrangement, and her expecting that, because she brings in a man on a fiddle-string, and chooses afterwards to marry him, one is to take him up? I like that!—and for no other reason on earth, that I can see, except that he plays shuttlecock well, as I told her, when she wanted me to have him among my exclusives. "In the country, at Christmas," I said, "It is all very well; but as one cannot play shuttlecock over a suppertable after the opera, I must beg leave to decline." This was rather treating her de haute-en-bas; but it is her interest to keep well with me, so she took all in good part. But, entre nous, she has lost herself amazingly, as these clever bustling women generally do in the end, I think, and must be content to be just nothing at all for the rest of her life. Addio cava—I am going to drive Lady Loton to the park. By the bye, she is by much the most delightful person I know. The old man has failed in getting a divorce, and has taken her back; so you know one goes on with her pretty much the same as before. There is a little shyness among a particular set; but we'll get over that. Every thing considered, she is more to be pitied than blamed. Poor soul! her situation is singularly interesting. Pray, make my best recollections to Colonel O'Donnel. I shall expect you will both join some of my festivities at Longlands. Apropos—I have got the most delicious plan from Lady Loton for turning the theatre into a rustic dairy. It is to be lined with Dutch tiles. I shall live in it, until it is finished.





Addio,

Adelaide Llanberis.

P.S.—Some very odd things have come out this season. A Greek gentleman, and by much the most sagacious tortoise that ever was heard of. He does all sorts of things. I am to have them both on Thursday next. What has become of the Irishman, Colonel O'Donnel's servant? How very amusing he was!

The Duchess of Belmont had just finished this letter, when M'Rory came into the drawing-room, with a message to her Grace from his master.

"M'Rory," said the Duchess, "here is a very great lady making inquiries after you."

"There is, Madam! Why then I am intirely obliged to her, my lady; and I hope she is well. Might I make bould, your Grace, just to ax who she is, Madam?"

"Lady Llanberis, who took so much notice of you at Longlands."

It is, Madam? Why then a great lady to be sure she is, though little notice she took of me, my lady, from that blessed day to this. But I'll ingage, your Grace, she is heartily glad to hear of our great good luck, for surely the greatest of luck it is—to think of our not being obligated to go to Jarmany, Madam, nor to quit the place—and the Colonel gettin' all his own again, that's the Leitrim estates, my lady—and the high honour of marrying a great lady, and an illigant fine lady—and being as happy as the day is long—and mighty hearty, not all as one as we used to be. And sure, my lady, what greater could he be, long life to him, except being a parli'inint man ?—and he'll be that surely yet, in good time, I'll ingage—what would ail him, but be in it? Hasn't he every right to love the country well, being born on the soil, and all belonging to him from the beginning of time, and knowing it well, Madam? And hasn't he fine larning? Show me a gintleman has more in the barony round, or in the whole country, or the province, or the kingdom itself. And in regard of bravery, does there breathe a braver on the floor of God's creation, or one that served his king or country better, my lady—that's when he got lave; and would again, plase God, if he was wanting—why wouldn't he? And hasn't he now a rale and undoubted fine estate, and an illigant fine tinnantry, long life to them, that doats on the very sod he treads on? And show me a gintleman pays his minister's money with more heart, and helps the clargy besides, Madam, and the taxes, Madam —and sure, if he wouldn't put in a good word for us, who would, your Grace ?— and it's himself that would; and troth, he'd bother them all fairly; for he has that way with him, my lady, when he spakes from the heart out, that he would coax the very birds off the trees, so he would, for he is an illigant fine speaker, anyway, and has beautiful English I And so, my lady, if it was God's will, there is no rayson in life why he shouldn't be a great parli'mint man, Madam."





"None—at least, that you and I can see, M'Rory," returned the Duchess, smiling.

"It's true for you, my lady," returned M'Rory, bowing himself out—" In troth it is."





NOTES.



Lough-Dergh, page 48.—This famous pilgrimage is in the parish of Templecarn, and barony of Tyrhugh. On this lake there are several islands; the largest is called the island of St. Dabcoc; some call it St. Fintan's island, and others the island of Saints.— Richardson's Folly of Pilgrimages.

In this island was a priory of Canons Regular, following the rule of St. Augustine, which was dedicated to the Saints Peter and Paul, founded, as some say, by the great Apostle of Ireland; but others give the foundation of it to St. Dabeoc; (Annal. Munst.) This saint was also called Mobeoc and Beonan; he was brother to St. Canoe, who flourished about the year 492. St. Dabeoc is patron of this church; where three festivals are held to his honour yearly. It had a fine chapel, with convenient houses for the monks, the remains of which are yet to be seen. One of the St. Patricks was pr ior here about the year 850.— (Ware Mon.)

Notwithstanding the reputed holiness of this celebrated monastery, it was plundered and reduced to ashes by Bratachas O'Boyle and M'Mahon, A.D. 1207. (Annal. Munst.) John was prior in 1353. (Ogygia.)

St. [Patrick's Purgatory, as it is called, was first fixed in this island; but it being near to the shore, and a bridge from the main-land giving the people a free and easy access to it, the cave was closed up, and another was opened in a lesser island, about half a mile from the shore.

Some people have given the invention of this Purgatory to the great St. Patrick ; but others, with more probability, ascribe it to Patrick, who was prior here about the year 850.— (Ware Mon.)

This purgatory continued a long time in repute, both at home and abroad. We find in our records several safe conducts granted by the kings of England to foreigners desirous to visit it, and particularly in the year 1350, to Maletesta Ungarus, knight; another, bearing the same date, to Nicholas de Bucaria, a nobleman of Ferrara (Itymer's F&dera, t. 4. p. 107); and in 1397, one to Raymond Viscount ie Purilleux and Knight of Rhodes; with a train of twenty men and thirty horses. (lb. t. 8, p. 14.) But this purgatory must have fallen afterwards into disrepute; for we find, that by the authority of the Pope Alexander VI. (he having considered the same in the light of imposition), it was demolished on St. Patrick's day, A.D. 1497, by the father guardian of the Franciscans of Donegal, and some other persons of the Deanery of Lough Erne, who were deputed for this purpose by the bishop. A canon of the priory of St. Dabeoc usually resided on the island, for the service of the church and pilgrims. —{Man. lb. p. 103.) ,





The extent of this island is scarcely three quarters of an Irish acre. The cave of the Purgatory is built of free stone, and covered with broad flags, and green turf laid over them. In length, within the walls, it measures sixteen feet and a half, and in breadth about two feet and one inch: when the door is shut, no light can be discovered, save what enters at a small window in a corner {Ware Mon.), and here the males and females do penance together. It was here that Carolan, the famous Irish bard and musician, recollected the touch of a lady's hand he had been in love with twenty years before. In 1630, the government of Ireland thought fit to have it finally suppressed, and it accordingly was dug up, to the no small distress and loss of the R. C. Clergy. (Ware Annal.) But in the memory of the oldest persons I ever heard speak of it, the resort of pilgrims from all parts of Ireland has always been immense : the Purgatory, if ever dug up, is now rebuilt, and in the middle of the summer as devotedly and numerously frequented as ever.—Statistical Survey of Donegal, by J. M' Varlin, M.D.



Did homage to King James I. page 85.—When Hugh O'Donnel, Chief of Tirconnel, fled to Spain, and his brother Roderick possessed himself of his territories, the cousin and dear friend of the exiled chief, Niall O'Donnel, a man of great prowess and military reputation, was summoned to Dublin to appear before the Lord Deputy and Council to receive a patent upon part of the chief tahcy of Tirconnel, "in the hope (says the Chronicle of the Four Masters) to win him over to the English side; but little tempted by an English Earldom, which was offered him, instead of attending this summons, he fled to Kilmaerennan, where the Rock of Inauguration stood, and sent for O'Firgil, the successor of Columb-kill*, by whom he was made the O'Donnel."—Translation of the Irish Chronicle called the Annals of the Four Masters.

* O'Firgil was a sort of bardic priest, and hereditary chief-maker of Tirconnel. The order, descended from the Druidical institutions, differed only by being Christian priests. It is a singular proof of the love of the Irish for the ancient customs of their country, that such a character and profession existed as late as the days of James I. and the preference of Niall (f Donnel for his Irish tanistry (though but a sound), and his rejection of an English Earldom, with a portion of land attached to it, is equally singular. The history of this independent chief is thus sadly concluded in the Chronicle:

"On Niall's refusal, the King's Lord Lieutenant and Council were highly displeased, and Niall O'Donnel, his brother, and son, were taken up shortly after on suspicion of abetting a rebel chief, O'Dogherty; he came off ^ith his life, according to law, but with his son was condemned to perpetual imprisonment."—Annals of the Four Masters.





Corna,'page 139.—The ancient Irish armies had horns, a kind of domestic trumpet, in every battalion, with notes peculiar to the different battalions, for the more precise knowledge of the duty required of each. But the Irish Coma was not devoted alone to martial purposes; meadh was frequently quaffed out of them, as the Danish hunters do their beverage at this day, and the English did their's in the time of Chaucer.—See Walker's Irish Sards.

James sat by the fire-side, with double beard,

And drinketh of his bugle-horn the wine.



Franklin's Tale, vol. 2, p. 809.



Pages 139,144 Hugue O'Donnel un des plus puissans Princes

d'Irelande, apres O'Niel, quoique il fut encor jeun par rapport a son age, ayant a peine vingt ans, il etoit encor mur par rapport a sa prudence, et ses.autres virtus, etant arrive dans le Tirconnel, son pere avance deja en age, lui ceda tout son droit, et il fut reconnud'un voix unanime, et couronne' Prince de Tirconnel par

O'Phrile, qui £toit le ministre ordinaire de cette ceremonie

Histoire d Irlande, par L'Abbi M'Groghan.

Page 152.—The Irish, under all their grievances, appealed, from time to time, to the English sovereigns, against those sent to rule them, "whose conduct," as the Lord Deputy Mountjoy expressed it, "was sufficient to drive the best and quietest states into confusion*," and whose oppressions were merely exercised for the purpose of multiplying forfeitures. The sovereign, though he could not always afford them redress, never denied them sympathy and compassion. Henry the Third personally interested himself in their favour; and Elizabeth, when she read an account of their sufferings, in one of their own pathetic remonstrances, burst into tears, and said to Lord Burleigh: " It may be said of me, as of Tiberius by Bato, It is you who are to blame, who have committed your flocki not to shepherds, but to wolves."

James the First, in most instances, showed favourable dispositions towards Ireland; and Charles the First, in 1628, gave his royal word to the Commons of Ireland, that he would put a stop to the inquiry into defective titles, a sort of rapine committed by his deputies in Ireland, on the property of the natives; but he was daringly opposed in the fulfilment of this promise by the Lord Deputy Wentworth, who carried his point in the House of Commons. During the rebellion of 1641, the puritans were at the head of Irish affairs. It is a singular circumstance that a letter was found in the study of Dr. Borlase (the then law-justice) after his death, written by the king, to inform him of the intended insurrection, and calling upon him to crush it in its infancy. Unfortunately this letter was neither attended to nor revealed: and

* Lord Mountjoy't Letter. Pecat. Hibern. Sub. Linem.

F F





the king himself was afterwards accused of being the instigator of the rebellion; for Sir Fhelim O'Neil was promised his pardon, if he would confess that he held his commission from *' Charles Stewart," as his judges, on his trial, called their king.—See the Duke of Ormond's papers in " Historical Collections, by the Rev. Dr. Neilson," an eminent Protestant divine, and an impartial historian.



Page 156.—The words of the celebrated Charles O'Connor of Ballinagar, and applied to himself. Although he afterwards became so distinguished as the author of many beautiful tracts, and as a man of science, he was of necessity, from the nature of the times, educated by stealth, and, like O'Donnel, by a man who had once lived in courts, been distinguished by princes, and who in his old age found no refuge from misfortune but in the solitudes of rocks, morasses, and mountains. Such was O'Roark, Bishop of Killala, and uncle and preceptor to O'Connor. After having lived in the imperial court as secretary to a prince, love of country brought him back to Ireland when the penal statutes were in full force. Though protected by letters from the English sovereign to the leading nobility in Ireland, nothing could save him from persecution: he wandered for years among the wilds and bogs of the Joyce country: he at last found refuge in the solitudes of Ballinagar, and being a man of great learning and science, devoted himself to the education of his nephew. Carolan, the famous Irish bard, was sometimes present at their studies, and the following anecdote is no bad picture of the times it relates to.

"Nor would the good bishop allow him (his nephew) to neglect the study of the Irish language. One day, when he had succeeded very happily in describing to a friend in Vienna the miseries of the old Irish, a task pointed out to him by the bishop, he told him he would never more write in Irish, since he had succeeded so well in English.

"' No,' said the bishop, ' what you have once learned, you must never forget; and you must not go to rest till you have translated the Miserere into Irish.' He complied, and his translation was superior to Bedel's. Carolan, who was present when it was read by the bishop in a solemn, affecting voice, burst into tears, and seizing his harp, in a lit of rapturous affection for the family of Ballinagar, swept along the strings in a sudden fit of inspiration his ' Donagh-Cahilloig;' singing extempore the fall of the Milesian race, the hospitality of the old O'Connor, and his greatness of soul, who, in the midst of crosses and calamities, harboured that very night in his house a crowd of reduced gentlemen, and had hired a number of harpers to strike up a solemn concert at midnight mass; for it was Christmas-eve."—See the Life of Charles O'Connor, of Ballinagar, Esq. M.R.I. A.



Pages 160, 161, 162.—I felt that these brave men were right. This incident is taken from some biographical anecdotes of the





famous Count O'Rourke, which are here subjoined—extracted from a periodical publication.

COUNT O'ROURKE.

This very remarkable gentleman was born at a village near the ancient castle and extensive forest of Woodford, in the county of Leitrim, and province of Connaught, which was the residence of his royal ancestors. He acquired a knowledge of the language, accent, and manners of his native country, so fixed and rooted, that though he had lived ever since his twenty-fifth year abroad, he yet preserved the broad dialect, and the peculiar style of Ireland. In his twenty-fifth year he came to London, where he remained upwards of five years, experiencing many disappointments. He embarked in several pursuits, but ultimately fixed on the military profession, as the best suited to his genius and disposition. In the first troop of horse-guards he received the rudiments^of arms, but, being a Roman Catholic, he was forced to resign. He then went to France, and presented to the king, at Versailles, a petition, specifying his princely origin, and praying for a regiment. In consequence of which, in the year 1758, he was made a captain of the Royal Scotch in that service. It is well known how difficult a matter it is for a foreigner to get advanced in that jealous and national corps. As few instances of irregular promotions had been known in the brigade, the lieutenants were all, to a man, hurt at the appointment; and being resolved to contest the matter with him, it was decided at the point of the sword ; and the count, in the space of a few days, fought four duels, in which he gained great reputation, not more by his gallantry in the field, than by honourably confessing, that he thought it an injury to the national regiment that a foreigner should be thrust upon them. He therefore gave up his commission, informing the grand monarch, that it was a dear purchase to fight for it every day. At this time he formed an intimate acquaintance with the Polish ambassador and his lady. A soldier of fortune is a soldier for the ladies. It was through life the plan and ambition of the count, to connect gallantry with enterprise, and pay as much regard to the eyes of beauty as to the standard of his commander. The beau monde of Paris declared him to be the cicisbeo of the ambassador's lady, through whose interest he was introduced to king Stanislaus, from whom he received the promise of an honourable appointment; but having too much activity in his nature to wait in idleness for the slow performance of a royal promise, he went to Russia, with strong recommendations from France to the court of Petersburgh, which, being then engaged in a war with Prussia, was the scene for adventure and fame. He was appointed first major of horse cuirassiers, in the regiment of body guards; and, in the course of the war, he distinguished himself greatly, and, in particular, by storming the city of Berlin, which he laid under contribution. At the end of that war, he was invited by the great Frederick to come and see him at his court. He was advised not to go, as the soldiery'





committed several of the outrages, which are but too frequent in the heat of conquest; but the count said, that the man who was a brave enemy, could not be a dangerous friend; and he went to Berlin, where he was most graciously received by the Prussian monarch. In a conversation between them, Frederick asked him how he could entertain the ambitious hope of succeeding in an attempt against Berlin? The count replied, in one of those gasconades which are pardonable in a knight errant, that if he had been ordered by his commanding officer to storm the heights of Heaven, he would have made the attempt. The count now returned to France, with certificates of his gallant conduct, from Peter the Third, Prince General Wolkonskoy, and General de Souvorow. On his return, he was appointed by King Stanislaus one of his chamberlains, which appointment took place in 1764. In the year 1770, he was appointed, by the French king, a colonel of horse, and was enrolled among the nobility of France: and in the year 1774, he was honoured with the order of St. Louis.

At the commencement of the American war, he came over to England, declaring, now that his own country wanted his arm, he would not fight under a foreign banner. He brought with him all his certificates, titles, and recommendations: and, among others, one from the King of France to his Majesty Geo. III. He was introduced by his friend, the late Lord Cunningham, to Lords North and Stormont, and was introduced by Lord Stormont to the King at St. James's. He proposed to Lord North to raise three regiments of Roman Catholics in his native country, to be employed against the Americans, provided they would give him the commission of colonel-commandant; but his offer was rejected. He proposed to them to quell the riots in the year 1780, at the head of the Irish chairmen; but all his offers were treated contemptuously; in consequence of which, he distributed his genealogy, and along with it all the certificates and honours which he received during his residence abroad. He preserved all the dignity of a prince, and, by many anecdotes, showed how much he disdained the upstart families, as he called them, of England.



Page 182.—The Bishop of Derry being at dinner one day, an Irish harper came in, and sung an old ode to the harp, the substance of which was, that in such a place, pointing to the very spot near Ballyshannon, a man of gigantic figure lay buried, and that over his breast and back were plates of pure gold, and on bis fingers rings of the same: the place was so minutely described, that two of the company were tempted to examine into it, and did accordingly find two pieces of pure gold See the Bishop of London's edition of Cambden, p. 1411.

Page 182.—This curious and most ancient family relic is a silver box lined with brass: the top is gilt, and set with large pieces of crystal, and other stones of various shapes. It is divided into three compartments; the centre represents Saint Columb sitting in his Cathedra; that on his right, a Bishop, and that on his left, is a representation of the Crucifixion, attended by the two Marys. The border on the top and bottom consists of lions and griffins, and the sides are oak leaves. On the left is a silver censer, suspended from a chain of the same metal, and it has been evidently used as a portable altar, or pix. At the foot of the saint's figure is a setting, with a piece of glass covering; some small bits of red cloth, supposed to be a relit of the saint's garment. It is by no means of contemptible workmanship: within is contained a wooden box, and in it is a manuscript on vellum, which is supposed-, and with reason, to have been the property of Saint Columb-kill, who was of this family, and the patron saint and apostle of the Highlands of Scotland, and founder of the monastery now bearing his name, Hy Colum-Cille, and which was the usual place of sepulture for the Kings of Scotland.





In the year 1723 this box was in the possession of Daniel O'Donnel, a Colonel in the service of His Most Christian Majesty, who, to preserve it from decay, it being much injured by time, caused a new case to be made round its sides, which has made it very strong, and effectually answered the intended purpose. Round the bottom he placed this inscription: James the Third, King of Great Britain, being in exile, Daniel O'Donnel, a Colonel in the service of His Most Christian Majesty, repaired the silver work, which time had worn away from this hereditary relic of St. Columb, called Caah, in the year of Salvation, 1723.""

Round the bottom of the original was an ancient inscription, apparently in the Irish character, but so much injured and defaced, as to be illegible. Sir Capel Molyneux, Bart., who married Margaret, the daughter of the late, and sister of the present Sir Neil O'Donnel, being in France during the short peace of 1802, heard that the last of the O'Donnels of France, to whom this relic had descended, had, by his will, left it to O'Donnel of Newport, in the County of Mayo, and made inquiry into the matter; having ascertained it to be fact, he applied to the person in whose care it had been deposited, on behalf of the late Sir Neale O'Donnel; and having obtained it, brought it with him to Ireland, and delivered it safely to Sir Neale, in whose custody it remained till his death.



Page 184.—This incident may appear to o'erstep the modesty of probability, but it actually occurred some years back in the family of the late Wogan Brown, Esq., of Castle Brown, Kildare.

Mr. Brown, who was in Germany, wrote to have some fine English horses, which were in his own stables at Castle Brown, sent over to him. The Irish groom who attended them, and who was known in the family by the name of Ned Byrne, proposed

■ Jacobo Tertio M.Br, rege exulante, Daniel O'Donnel Xtianissimo imperatori prefectus rei bellies, hltfusce heretidarii sui, Columbian pignoris, vulgo Caah dicti, argentum vctustate consumptum restauravit. An. Salutis, 1723.





taking them over to his master, though he had never been a dozen miles from Castle Brown in his life: this was at last agreed to, and Mr. Brown's agent in London had orders to provide him when he arrived there with an interpreter and guide to accompany him ; but on hearing the immense sum this person was to receive, he would not hear of his master being put to such an expense, and "engaged he would deliver the bastes safe into his master's own hands." When expostulated with, and the distance represented to him, he replied:

"Why, sure, an't I come to the world's end already? " meaning London: "devil a much further I can go, any how." He set off, therefore, for Vienna, with the "bastes;" reached it perfectly safe, and on his arrival, found his master had gone to Florence. As Italy or Germany were quite equal to Ned Byrne, he set forth again on his travels. As he passed through some garrison town on the frontiers of Germany, Colonel Count Dalton happened to be looking out of a window, and offered to lay a wager with some German officers, that that was an Irish groom riding by. On addressing Ned in English, he found he was servant to his friend Mr. Brown. Much amused with his adventures, he gave him several letters to the post-masters on the route, to facilitate his - Italian journey; every one of which Ned delivered to his master, unopened, when he reached Florence. "What use was there in them, your honour?" he observed: "sure, what better could I do, then I done." Ned returned, extremely delighted with his travels, to Castle Brown, without having understood a word of any language he had heard, from the time he left England. A few years afterwards, Mr. Brown sent over some horses from Ireland to his brother, the present General Brown, Aid-de-Camp to the King of Saxony. General Brown was then at the Court of Dresden, where Ned Byrne had an opportunity of seeing several of his fair countrywomen, who were in attendance on the Electress. His account of his short residence at Dresden, was, on his return, extremely amusing. "And there was the Giniral in his elegint regimintals going to prayers with the Royal Family; and there was Countess O'Kelly, and Countess O'Callagan, mighty glad to see me, and no wise proud: troth, not a bit of pride among them."

For this little anecdote of " Ned Byrne's travels," I am indebted to General Brown himself, who had the goodness to repeat it to me a few hours before the writing of this note.



Page 244.—Leprighaun. It would be extremely difficult to class this supernatural agent, who holds a distinguished place in the Irish " Faerie." His appearance, however, is supposed to be that of a shrivelled little old man, whose presence marks a spot where hidden treasures lie concealed, which were buried there in ",the troubles." He is, therefore, generally seen in lone and dismal places, out of the common haunts of man; and though the night-wanderer may endeavour to mark the place where he beheld the guardian of the treasures perched, yet when he returns in the morning with proper implements to turn up the earth, the thistle, stone, or branch, he had placed as a mark, is so multiplied, that it is no longer a distinction, and the disappointments occasioned by the malignity of the little Leprighaun render him a very unpopular fairy. His name is never applied but as a term of contempt.





Page 250.—Plae Raca na Ruarca, or O'Rourke's noble feast, was composed by Carolan, the first of the Irish bards, and translated most humorously, or rather versified in English, by Dean Swift. The story on which it is founded makes a part of a tradition some time back current in the County of Leitrim, where the ruins of the Castle of the O' Ruarcs, most romantically situated, still moulder, on a precipitous rock, which frowns over a rapid river, near Manor-Hamilton. The substance of the tradition is as follows: O'Rourke, the chief of Brefni, a brave and powerful person, was invited by Queen Elizabeth to London, though under the displeasure of the Lord President Bingham. The Queen made him warm professions of honours and service, intending by this invitation to lead him into a kind of exile, in order to secure bis obedience. O'Rourke confided, and obeyed her summons; but, before his departure, he assembled his vassals and friends in the great hall of his castle, and entertained them with all the splendour of the times. ( Such was the parting feast which gave rise to the song of the bard in after-days.) On the arrival of the Irish chief in Whitehall, the Queen was ready to receive him. The elegant symmetry of his person, and his noble aspect, struck Her Majesty, and he was soon ranked amongst her choicest favourites. One night a person tapped at his door, and was admitted— it was a woman. The visit continued to be repeated, and the visitant to retire before day-light. The Chiefs curiosity became urgent: he pressed the mysterious lady to reveal herself, but she refused: a straggling moon-beam, however, discovered to him a ring that glittered on her finger: he examined it unobserved by the wearer. The next day he saw it upon the Queen's finger at Court, and had the imprudence to hint his suspicion to Her Majesty. His fatal curiosity (adds the tradition) was punished with secret death—he was assassinated that night.—See Walker's Irish Bards.

The catastrophe of this provincial tale is poetical, but happens not to be historical. O'Rourke was publicly executed in London. The crime of which he was accused, was, having received under his roof some shipwrecked Spaniards. His son took up arms to avenge his father's death, and the spoliation of his own property by the Lord President, and joined " O'Donnel the Red," in those contests in which General Clifford was killed.



Page 345.—Among the royal letters here alluded to, I am enabled to present the reader with the following from King James. The original is on the Irish Rolls, and for the copy I stand obliged to the kindness of Sir W. Betham, Ulster Kingat-Arms.





BY THE KING.

James Rex.—Right trusty and well beloved, we greet yon well: we have been credibly informed that Rorie O'Donnel, brother to the arch traitor O'Donnel, lately deceased in Spain, made his humble submission in Ireland to our Lieutenant of that kingdom, and in token of the detestation of his former disloyalties, and firm resolution to continue dutiful and loyal courses hereafter, hath done to us and our Crowne, since our Lieutenant received him unto our mercy, many good and acceptable services; and now lately, for true declaration of his loyal heart, the said Rorie hath dutifully presented himself before our Royal Person, humbly beseeching our princely favour that we would vouchsafe to grant unto him and his heirs our territories and counties of Tyrconnell, in Ulster, the which his late brother (though unworthy), and his father and ancestors, had, for many years past, and have ever in all former rebellion of the O'Neill's, lived as loyal subjects to our Crowne, till his unhappy * brother first stained the reputation of their unspotted name, upon this and many the like suits. We have resolved to manifest to all our subjects of that our realm, that out of our princely disposition, we desire their dutiful loyalty and obedient hearts, than in any degree increase of revenue or profit by their defection, where there appeared evident signes and undoubted expectation of sound loyalty hereafter; and therefore our pleasure is, and do will, and require you, that you cause our letters patent, under the great seal of that our realm, to be made and passed in due form of law, containing our effectual grant to the said Rorie O'Donnel, and the heirs male of his body, with remainders of like estate successively to Cafferey O'Donnel, brother to the said Rorie, and to his cousin, Donnel Oge M'Donnel O'Donnel, of all our territories and countries of Tireconnell, with all the islands, rights, deaneries, advowsons, fishings, duties, and other hereditaments whatsoever, of ancient time justly belonging to the lord thereof (excepting to us, our heirs, and successors, all abbeys, priories, and other spiritual living) reserving also to us, our heirs, and successors, such and the same rent, and beeves, services, rising out, and duties, as the father of Rorie, or any of his ancestors, lords, or possessors of the country, yielded, or ought to have yielded, to our late dear sister the Queen, by tenor of any letters patent, or composition with any of his ancestors in the late Queen's time, and recorded in the council book, or in any of our courts at Dublin; inserting in the said letters

* The unhappy brother, here alluded to, was O'Donnel the Red, kidnapped in his fifteenth year, and persecuted into efforts of self-preservation. The king bears ample testimony to the fidelity of the O'Donnels until the time of O'Donnel the Red, who was " bruised into undutifulness."





patent, such further reservations, exceptions, and covenants, for the benefit of our service as you shall find requisite, and included in any former letters, patent or composition, with the lords or chieftains of O'Donnel's country; in which our grant, we require you to reserve to us and our heirs, the castle, town, and lands of Ballyshannon, and one thousand acres of land thereunto, next about the castle adjoining, with the fishings there, and reserving to us, during our pleasure, liberty to erect forts, which we, or our heirs, shall think expedient for the service of the country, with provisional condition that the castles, lands, services, rents, and duties, which were in the possession of Sir Neal O'Donnel when he lived under Hugh Roe, late O'Donnel, and in amity with him, especially Castlefynen, and all the lands and hereditaments belonging to the same, may be reserved to the free disposition of us and our heirs, to bestow upon Sir Neal O'Donnel, or such other as may deserve the same, and their heirs; and our pleasure is, that Rorie O'Donnel do renounce and relinquish all claims, rights, and duties, which he may challenge upon Sir Cahir O'Dogherty's country, O'Connor Sligoe's country, and upon any other subject residing out of the limits of Tyrconnel; and because Rorie O'Donnel shall, by this our gracious favour, receive, as of our bounty and gift, so large a territory as Tireconnel for his inheritance, which may enable him, as our subject in the highest degree of honour, we have thought meet to grace and countenance him with the stile and name of Earl of Tyrconnel, requiring you to grant unto him by letters patent, the name, stile, and honour, of Earl of Tyrconnel, to have and to hold the same to himself and the heirs males of his body, with remainder of like estate to the said Caffery O'Donnel, brother to the said Rorie; and that the eldest sons and heirs, males apparent, of the said Rorie and Caffery's bodies, be created lords barons of Donegall, during the lives of the earls ; and our further pleasure is, that the said Rorie shall have a custodium of all the abbeys, priories, and other spiritual livings, within the said country of Tyrconnel, till we shall be otherwise minded to dispose them, which our princely intention, our pleasure is, shall be effectually accomplished to the said Rorie, for his encouragement to continue in his dutiful loyalty; and these our letters, notwithstanding any insufficiency of words, or omission, necessary to have been inserted herein for the explanation of our princely favour, shall be as well to you, our lieutenant or deputy, now being, or either of you, and to any other deputy, or head governor or governors of that our realm, for the time being, and to the chancellor or keeper of our Great Seal of that realm, likewise for the time being, or to any other officers whom it may appertain, sufficient warrant and discharge. Given under our signet at Tottenham, the fourth day of September, 1603, in the first year of our reign of England, France, and Ireland; and of Scotland the seven-and-thirtieth. To our right trusty, well-beloved

G G





cousin and counsellor, the' Earl of Devonshire, our Lieutenant of Ireland, and in his absence, to our right, trusty, and wellbeloved Sir George Carie, Knight, our deputy there, 8nd to our chancellor of that our kingdom, now being, and to any other deputy governor or governors, chancellor, or keeper of the Great Seal of our said realm, that hereafter for the time shall be, and to all others our officers and ministers there to whom it may appertain.



M'Swine's gun, p. 370.—Among the rocks near Sheep-Haven Bay, on the coast of Donegal, is to be seen, or rather heard, the awful and curious phenomenon of M'Swine's gun.

By dilapidation, or decomposition of part of the rock, time, and the washing of the waves, have perforated a cave many yards in diameter, which extends about twenty yards into a rock, making part of the mainland, and horizontal with the level of the sea at high and low water-marks, or nearly so. This cavity then ascends, and appears, by an aperture at the surface of the rock, not much wider than a large kitchen chimney.

When the wind blows due north, and the tide is half in, this gun of M'Swine's is seen to spout shots of sea-water, far higher than the eye can reach, into the air, with terrific explosion, to be heard, it is said, from twenty to thirty miles. From its alarming effect on the ears, I should suppose fifty.—Statistical purvey of Donegal.



THE END.
