ZULMA, 

AND 

OTHER TALES, 

VOL. II. 



rj 

0 




ZULMA, 

AND 

OTHER TALES: 

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED 

AN ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

BY 

THE BARONESS DE STAEL 1I0LSTEIN. 



TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH. 



SECOND EDITION* 

IN TWO VOLUME?. 
VOL. II. 



LONDON: 
PRINTED FOft HENRY COL BURN* Co. 

PUBLIC LIBRA a JT, CONDUIT STREET, HANOVER SQCTAHE. 
18*0. 



a Clarke, Printer, Well-Slreet, London. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE, 



TOL. II. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 



The fortune and the education of 
the young orphan Adelaide was con- 
fided to the Baron d'Orville, her father's 
brother, but the obligation of attend- 
ing to her education fatigued him 
so much, that he seized the first oppor- 
tunity to part from his niece. He was 
an amiable man, easily satisfied, but so 
trifling, that it would have been diffi- 
cult to secure his attention for one 
quarter of an hour even to save half 
his fortune. This character rendered 
him very amusing. His carelessness 
B 2 



4 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

amounted to folly in his youth ; in ad- 
vanced life it was called philosophy ; 
but in both the results were the same', 
the name alone had changed : he did no 
evil, he never took pains to do good, 
but through weakness, he was easily 
inclined either to the one or the other. 
He was not a man who indulged 
systems either of morality or immora- 
lity; he disliked, in general, what- 
ever required attention, whatever was 
profound, all that occasioned trouble, 
or demanded exertion. Well aware 
that he was not calculated to educate 
a young female, he left Adelaide in 
the country till nearly the age of 
fourteen with one of bis relations, 
whose name was Madame d'Orfeuil. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 5 

This lady was about thirty: she believ- 
ed that she had loved to distraction, or, 
at least, with the devotion of a saint, a 
husband by whom she had been aban- 
doned : she never permitted herself to 
be detached from this feeling for fear 
of finding that another was necessary. 
Though born with a strong understand- 
ing, she had given it scarcely any cul- 
tivation, thinking of little but love, 
and confining her reading to works of 
devotion. She was totally ignorant of 
the world, because she had always 
lived in the land of chimeras, and, in 
fact, from the contrast between her 
romantic ideas and her religious duties, 
there resulted a character much more 
agreeable to her friends than useful to 
B 3 



6 ADELAIDM AND THEODORE. 

her pupil. Adelaide loved her with 
tenderness, they read romances in 
unison, together they invoked the 
deity, they mutually exalted and 
softened their minds, and the young 
heart of Adelaide was in constant 
emotion. 

In this disposition of mind, at the 
age of fourteen, Adelaide reached the 
house of the Baron d'Orville. He had 
obliged her to come alone without even 
one female attendant, but whatever the 
most inventive luxury can offer await- 
ed her arrival. The female friends of 
the baron eagerly surrounded the 
young Adelaide, and each, to prove her 
attachment, was eager to assist in 



I 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 7 

adorning her person. They gave her 
neither good nor bad advice; they 
left her conduct to chance ; but they 
were much engaged in what gratified 
her vanity, because they attached value 
to her success. When elderly women 
are not jealous of one who is young-, 
they frequently place their vanity upon 
her, and her success in some way or 
other serves to reflect so much credit 
upon themselves, that they regard it 
with pleasure. Adelaide became dizzy 
with what she saw: if she began to 
speak of love, these ladies replied that 
the true method of inspiring it was not 
to wear dark colours when the com- 
plexion is brown, nor light ones when 
it is fair. Did she appear devout, the 
b 4 



8 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

Baron d'Orville overwhelmed her with 
pleasantries. When she desired to 
read, they did not allow her the time. 
In fact, though these ladies were not 
uncivil, they were so frivolous that 
they had the art of making the day 
pass imperceptibly either by its pains 
or its pleasures. 

In the mean time the baron was 
uneasy respecting the attention which 
it was necessary to shew to a young 
female, and was disturbed about the 
mode in which it should be evinced; 
when one morning, Mons. Linieres, a 
worthy man, but as great a tool as 
France could produce, came to declare 
that he possessed an estate worth 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 9 

eighty thousand livres a year; that he 
was sixty years of age, deeply in love 
with his niee«*, and that, if agreeable to 
him, he would marry her in eight 
days. The baron saw no objection to 
the propriety of this proposal, and 
readily gave his assent. Adelaide, when 
informed of the circumstance, was in 
despair: all her romance of happiness 
was destroyed: she, resisted much 
longer than could have been expected 
at the age of fifteen ; but in the midst 
of a ball her consent was at length ob- 
tained. On the morrow of the fatal 
day she wrote a melancholy letter to her 
aunt. " No longer," said sue, " is there 
hope for me; my prospects are finish- 
ed. The hapfi e>s of love is tor ever 

B 5 



10 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

forbidden ; I shall die without having 
tasted of life : nothing more can excite 
interest: all is equal to me," Some 
days after she again wrote : — 11 It is 
necessary for me to dispel thought, to 
suffer myself to be carried along by 
the stream: I have neither misery nor 
happiness: I cannot indulge in the 
reveries of imagination with pleasure, 
but take delight in whatever assists me 
to kill time/' 

Accordingly, Adelaide soon gave 
herself up to all the pleasures of her 
age. As she was handsome, intelli- 
gent, and agreeable, those with whom 
she associated flattered her vanity, and 
excited in her a desire to shine. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 11 

Though she often regretted the man- 
ner in which she spent the day, yet 
the fear of being alone with the most 
tiresome of husbands drove her from 
home ; the constant succession of 
pleasures prevented her return ; and 
while she was incessantly protesting 
against the life which she led, each 
day was invariably a picture of the 
preceding. Thus two years passed 
away: no sentiment engaged her soul, 
but she learned to live without feel- 
ings, to be content with the pleasures 
of vanity; and though her mind and 
heart were far superior to her destiny, 
solitude was necessary for this female, 
who was so liable to be intoxicated 
by the world, and whose fickleness 



12 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

rendered the choice of the objects 
about her a matter of importance. The 
sight of a beautiful country disposed 
her to contemplation : the sound of a 
violin carried her back to the town : 
the sensitive morality which Rousseau 
speaks of was calculated for a soul 
so tender and so flexible. This levity, 
however, affected only the secondary 
qualities: a little vanity and love of 
pleasure ; these were the defects which 
the country corrected, and which the 
town immediately revived : but her 
sensibility, her good-nature, her 
candour were unalterable, and her 
faults, which she readily acknow- 
ledged, were a source of consolation 
to the envious, and afforded her friends 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 13 

a subject of pleasantry that never gave 
offence. Suit and delicate features, 
light hair, an exquisitely fair com- 
plexion, lastly, a romantic and tender 
expression, funned a contrast with her 
extreme vivacity, but diffused over 
her whole person an air of modesty and 
sensibility which powerfully interested 
nil who beheld her. Amidst all the 
gratification which she received from 
entertainments and the distinguished 
attentions that were paid her, Adelaide 
was kind to her husband; she could 
not bear the least ridicule to be cast 
on him. Even fools have vanity. 
Adelaides husband was satisfied with 
a few obliging words, and a request 
that he would accompany her wherever 



14 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

she went, with which his dislike of 
employment always induced him to 
comply. At the expiration of two 
years M. de Linieres fell sick, and 
Adelaide nursed him with unremitting 
care till he died. A feeling of horror 
took possession of her soul: her imagi- 
nation was deeply impressed with the 
gloomy spectacle which she witnessed: 
it was the first time that she had re- 
flected upon death. The loss of what 
is dear to us excites pain so acute as to 
overpower and banish every emotion of 
terror : but in those who are indifferent 
to us we contemplate the termination 
of life, and this idea leads to mournful 
and philosophical reflexions with which 
the heart of a woman is easily alarmed. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 15 

Baron d'Orville and his society were 
so disagreeable to Adelaide, that she 
found it necessary to shun them. She 
therefore resolved to pass the first year 
of her widowhood with Madame d'Or- 
feuil, that aunt whom she adored and 
whom she had never ceased to regret, 
though she censured the dissipation 
in which her niece had lived. It was 
the month of April when Madame 
de Linieres reached the mansion of 
Madame d'Orfeuil. For two years she 
had not beheld the beauties of nature, 
with which her heart was now the 
more delighted. The impressions of 
her childhood were renewed with all 
their charms : she was happy to find 
herself egain in the company of Ma- 



16 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

dame d'Orfeuil, and never had pleasure 
afforded such enjoyment to her heart 
as the soothing melancholy which she 
felt in those delicious scenes. The oc- 
cupations of each day, and the arrange- 
ment of their time, were soon settled. 
Adelaide found that in this way life 
passed more agreeably and more swift- 
ly, that she relished it better, and was 
less liable to ennui : finally, her imagi- 
nation, completely absorbed in the 
charms of the country, never allowed 
her to think of the town but with 
horror. She had scarcely been here a 
fortnight, when Madame d'Orfeuil pro- 
posed to her to pay a visit to the 
Princess de Rostain, whose residence 
was about six miles distant. This 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 17 

lady, who was extremely proud, was 
nevertheless celebrated for her enlarged 
understanding, the strength of her cha- 
racter, and her unbounded affection for 
her son, Count Theodore de Rostain, 
whom *he had at length cured of the 
errors oi youth, that is to say, a pro- 
pensity to run in debt and a passion for 
women. These two faults, which me- 
diocrity considers as crimes of the 
greatest magnitude, and of which rivals 
s o dexterously avail themselves to por- 
mote their own views, are injurious to 
one's self much rather than to other?, 
and hit resting qualities may often be 
both their cause and their excuse. Ma- 
dame de Li Dikes had heard of the 
Count de Rostain. No person had 



18 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

a higher character for understanding 
and agreeable qualities. She knew 
that he had quitted the world about 
four months before, on account of the 
grief occasioned by the infidelity of his 
mistress, Madame d'Etampes, a wo- 
man of intrigue, whose affections he 
had hoped to fix, whom he had sin- 
cerely loved, and from whom he had 
withdrawn himself with equal pride 
and sensibility. She understood that 
he had resided at Paris, that he lived 
in bad company, because he never 
visited any but persons whom he 
loved, and that he was a silly man, 
because he distributed all his fortune 
among his friends: and as opinions are 
lightly formed respecting those who 



ADELAIDE AKD THIODORE. 19 

have no public occasion of making 
themselves known, Madame deLinieres 
believed that Count Theodore resem- 
'bled the portrait which had been drawn 
of him; but her extreme curiosity re- 
specting the intellectual qualifications 
of so celebrated a character overcame 
every other consideration. She had 
been" speaking of him in this manner 
when Madame d'Orfeuil thus replied : 
« You have been deceived in regard to 
Rostain, but the charms of his conver- 
sation, alternately serious and gay, 
have not been exaggerated: he will 
afford you all the pleasures of which 
the mind is susceptible; but his soul 
is the most tender and his character 
the most dignified that you can possi- 



20 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

bly imagine. His ideas on all subjects 
are so perfectly correct, that if he has 
e\ r er deviated from the dictates of 
reason, it was because he was hurried 
away by the feelings of the heart. 
With uncommon gaiety he unites pro- 
found melancholy : I know him 
thoroughly, his mind is not of a 
romantic cast; he exaggerates nothing, 
says little, but feels love a thousand 
times more deeply than we can sup- 
pose. u In the midst of this conver- 
sation Madame de Linieres and Ma- 
dame d'Orfeuil arrived. Adelaide was 
eager to sae a man whom the courtiers 
considered as the most agreeable, and 
her aunt as the most tender: each of 
these advantages was perhaps neces- 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 21 

sary for her mind and heart. Never 
therefore did she feel so strong a desire 
to please. Madame d'Orfeuil and Ma- 
dame de Linieres were ushered into a 
mansion, simply but elegantly furnish- 
ed. As they approached the drawing- 
room they heard two oid ladies, friends 
of the Princess de Rostain, laughing 
heartily ; and on opening the door they 
found her son engaged in conversation 
with them. Adelaide could not pre- 
vail upon herself to speak to the old 
ladies, but sensible that it was a kind- 
ness to pay attention to them, she 
esteemed Count Theodore for it. He 
advanced to meet her : his person was 
Boble and interesting, and his manners 
graceful and dignified: they encoura- 



92 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

ged freedom but rendered familiarity 
impossible. In his look in particular 
there was something tender and 
thoughtful which almost immediately 
succeeded the expression of mirth, and 
seemed to indicate that the latter was 
not the habitual state of his soul. Ma- 
dame de Linieres took great pains to 
please him; his efforts on the other 
hand were not directed by the desire 
of shining but of producing an impres- 
sion : instead of studying his own 
answers, he prepared those of Ade- 
laide ; and had she possessed less un- 
derstanding she would have thought 
that she had more than he. At their 
departure, the count requested permis- 
sion to accompany them : he returned 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 23 

the next and every following day : no 
business whatever kept him away. 
Incessantly at the command of Ade- 
laide, anticipating her wishes without 
mentioning his passion, he expressed 
it sometimes by his devotion, and at 
others by the homage which he paid to 
her charms. 

Can we give the name of flattery to 
the enchantment which he expressed 
w hilst she was speaking to him ? 'Tis 
a very different art from that of prais- 
ing ; 'tis the gift of love: Theodore 
possessed this charm in an irresistible 
degree. He seemed to live in what 
he loved, to study self, while he re- 
signed himself to the emotions of his 



£4 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

heart, to act involuntarily as if from 
the result of reflection ;and, like Emile, 
while bringing his mistress to the 
desired point, he cried victory for her. 
In short, he so embellished the exist- 
ence of her whom he preferred ; plea- 
sure, glory, happiness were all so com- 
pletely his work, that at his departure 
you lost at once both him and yourself; 
you missed both his agreeable qualities 
and those which he had contrived to 
call forth : annihilation succeeded life ; 
the enjoyments which seemed inde- 
pendent of him disappeared during his 
absence. However, the agreeable- 
ness of Theodore diminished, and he 
became thoughtful. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. Si 

Madame de Liniercs, who already felt 
an irresistible attachment for him, who 
had already found herself twenty times 
on the point of betraying her passion, 
could not account for Rostain's silence. 
He was free, so was she also, and no 
obstacle separated them : his actions, 
his words, but above all, his looks invo- 
luntary announced the most profound 
love ; what then could be the cause of 
his silence ? 

Adelaide won! J Iiave communicated 
her sentiments to iter aunt; but Ma- 
dame d'Orfeuil carefully avoided any 
such conversation. At length, one 
evening as they were taking a walk to 
amuse themselves till Rostaia's com* 

VOL. II. C 



26 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

ing, on the bank of a rivulet, in a dark 
alley near the summer-house which 
separated the pleasure-grounds from 
the forest, Adelaide said to Madame 
d'Orfeuil: " What! will you never 
speak to me of the Count de Rostain ?" 

" It is not an hour since we were 

tpeaking of him/' replied Madame 
d'Orfeuil.— " Can you give me any 
explanation of his extraordinary con- 
duct " I must first know," said 
she, " what is the mystery that 1 am to 
reveal. 3 '— " Ah! Boyfriend," exclaim- 
ed Adelaide, bursting into tears, " you 
no longer love me, since you do not 
perceive that I love him/' Madame 
d'Orfeuil was struck with the truth of 
the sentiment;—" Ah!" said she, * if 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 37 

I could believe that your heart was 
worthy of his, I would not oppose his 
passion for you."— " What !" rejoined 
Adelaide, " is it possible that you can 
oppose ray happiness ?" — " If you 
knew what a soul is devoted to you, 
what sensibility, what delicacy; it is 
his life that he places in your hands/' 
— " I am worthy of it by my tender- 
ness : I am worthy of ii by the prin- 
ciples which my aunt has instilled into 
my heart." — u I have a profound esteem 
for you ; nay I am sure that your ardent 
soul is capable of the tenderest attach- 
ment ; but your mind is so fickle, your 
character so unsteadv. that a lover or a 
husband might easily be alarmed for 
your heart. I know Rostain ; he is 
C 3 



2S ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

the most perfect of characters for others, 
and the most unfortunate for himself: 
the world, which contracts the heart, 
has only rendered his more susceptible 
of distrust; and experience, without 
having weaned him from the happiness 
of love, has but too well taught him 
how rarely it is to be obtained/' — 
" My dear aunt/' replied Adelaide, 
" judge not of me by the two years 
which I have passed in the world. I 
did not then love ; I now feel that I 
must die, or possess the heart of Ros- 
tain ; but is it really true that he loves 
me?"— As she finished these words, 
Rostain approached. " Well,*- said 
Madame d Orfeuil to him, " I yield at 
last ; I believe that Adelaide loves you, 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. §9 

anil no longer oppose the avowal which 
you are so anxious to make." — " Ah ! 
my Adelaide/* cried he, -listen to 
me: it is not the first time that I 
speak to you concerning my love ; you 
long since discovered it ; but permit 
me to lay my whole soul oprn to you. 
It is too late to forbear to love you, 
but not to lose the hope of inspiring 
you with some return. Let your heart 
reflect for a moment; it is my life that 
1 commit to your hands; without 
doubt I would consent to lose it, if I 
giight for a single day enjoy such a 
delicious illusion; but the moment 
i hat should undeceive me, the moment 
that would precede my death would be 
Sp cruel, that 1 feel I have not strength 
c 3 



SO ADELAIDE AND THEODOKL. 

sufficient to brave the danger. I have 
sought happiness every where; I was 
captivated for four years by a woman 
who was not virtuous, but by whom I 
fancied myself beloved : when she 
proved faithless, I quitted the world ; 
I would have resigned life also, were it 
possible to love with all the faculties 
of the soul what we cannot es- 
teem. Simple pursuits occupied my 
time. I spent my days without regret 
for the past or anxious expectation for 
the future: the action of my soul was 
suspended. I beheld you, and con- 
ceived the idea of a happiness which 
surpassed all that I had yet imagined ; 
I thought that I could find in you all 
the charms of love and virtue, that 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 31 

I should love you with intoxication, 
and that as you were at liberty, mar- 
riage might sanctify the union which 
love should have formed. None but 
the lover of Adelaide, none but he 
whose whole heart, like mine, is filled 
with passion, can conceive the ec- 
stasy whichth is hope produced within 
my bosom ; but for these two months 
that I have seen and loved you, one 
apprehension deters me; it originates 
in my character alone. The soul of 
Adelaide is tender and pure; her lover, 
her husband, will never have any rea- 
son but to esteem her: that is not suf- 
ficient for my heart ; suspicion is ba. 
rushed from it, but uneasiness is an 
almost constant inmate. I am jealous, 
c4 



32 ADELAIDE AND IHrODoIU . 

and even susceptihlc; there is no hap- 
piness for me, if it is overshadowed 
by the lightest cloud ; and my ima- 
gination is so gloomy, that a pretext 
is sufficient to pftfrige me into des- 
pair. The generality of men are in- 
tent on fortune or celebrity; for my 
part I shall never be unhappy but from 
one single cause : all my energies are 
concentrated in my heart; it is there 
only that I can live or die. If I should 
ever be less beloved by you (forgive 
me for presuming to think that I am 
now beloved) I should not complain : 
love is not to be rekindled by re- 
proaches, and my soul is too delicate 
and too proud to indulge in them ; but 
it would be my death. This expres- 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 33 

sion, which is so much abused, would 
constitute my history, and this specta- 
cle would rend the heart of Adelaide. 
It is for her that I fear; it is for her 
that I question her heart." 

This address was pronounced with 
a kind of solemn sensibility, by which 
Adelaide was deeply affVcted ; but 
nevertheless, giving way to the senti- 
ment which she felt, 4£ Theodore," 
she exclaimed, " my tenderness is 
worthy of your's." " O God !" he 
replied; " this is the most sacred of 
oaths : from the excess of my hap- 
piness I am sensible that it is no 
longer possible to doubt its reality." 
A torrent of tears overflowed his eyes, 
c 6 



34 ADELAIDE AND THEODOKJK. 

Nothing could equal the joy of Ade- 
laide. Madame d'Orfeuil pressed their 
conjoined hands ; they experienced all 
the felicity that the human soul is 
capable of enjoying; and when their 
transports, subsiding by degrees, allow- 
ed them to feel their happiness in its 
full extent, they began to concert the 
means of assuring its duration. Ade- 
laide, naturally thoughtless, had paid 
more attention to Count Theodore, 
than to his mother. That haughty 
female had therefore conceived for her 
an aversion which was but too appa- 
rent to the lovers. Full of confidence, 
Theodore resolved to ask her consent 
the very next day, though Adelaide's 
mourning would necessarily prevent 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 35 

her from again entering for some time 
into the married state. The Princess 
de Rostain, declared to her son that 
she would never consent to such an 
union. He had squandered upon his 
friends all the fortune left him by his 
father, and his only dependence for 
the means of retrieving his losses 
was upon his mother. Theodore was 
highly indignant at this refusal ; for 
the first time this dutiful son gave 
vent to the keenest reproaches, and 
abruptly leaving his mother, he hurried 
to Madame de Linieres, full of anger 
and vexation. As soon as she was in- 
formed of the cause of his agitation, 
she askerl, if at thirty years of age 
he was not his own master. " Yes," 



36 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

replied he, 11 but my fortune depends 
on the will of another/' " Is not mine 
sufficient for us both ?" " True," re- 
joined he : " I shall not thank you for 
that sentiment. ; it is too congenial with 
the feelings of my own heart to asto- 
nish me in your's." 

Perhaps Adelaide ought to have ex. 
horted her lover not to disobey his 
mother; but the only virtues which 
both of them had were those of love. 
Adelaide ceased to visit Madame de 
Rostain ; but the Count passed half 
the day with his mistress, and the in- 
•expressible felicity of being together 
imparted a charm to the most indif- 
ferent employments. 



ADELAIDE AND TUF.ODOUE. 37 

The time which had been fixed for 
their union at length approached. Ma- 
dame d'Orfeuil, who was the only 
person in their confidence, had pro- 
cured the papers necessary for con- 
cluding the marriage. It was intended 
to be kept secret: the mourning of 
Adelaide, the refusal of Madame de 
Rostain, the indiscretion of Baron 
d'Orville, all concurred in rendering 
the precaution necessary. Theodore, 
whose soul was so ready to take alarm, 
felt none on this occasion: in the cer- 
tainty of possessing the heart of his 
fascinating friend, whom he daily found 
fresh reasons to love and to esteem, all 
the moments of his life were epochs 
of happiness. Adelaide was absolutely 



38 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

intoxicated : her heart seemed to be 
still more powerfully agitated than 
Theodore's; her confidence knew no 
bounds ; she concealed none of her 
feelings. On the morning of the for- 
tunate da}', Theodore conducted Ade- 
laide to the pavilion which had wit- 
nessed their first vows. 

" This day, 5 ' said he, M in the name 
of religion and of the laws, you will 
be enjoined to love me ; let another 
ceremony, not less solemn, but more 
tenderi give you to me for ever. Swear 
to that God whose existence we can- 
not but believe, since felicity like our's 
can proceed from him alone*, swear 
to the lover who adores you, that with 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 59 

pleasure you bestow your life upon 
him: for my part, I swear at your 
feet to die, if your love or your hap- 
piness sustain any diminution. Be- 
lieve me, my Adelaide, never was vow 
more sincere."— " And I," said she, 
m I also vow not to exist a single day 
without you. M Never did passion 
breathe more rapturous accents. 

Madame d'Orfouil came and inter- 
rupted them. " The priest is waiting 
for you," said she. " Ah ! What oc- 
casion is there for one ?" cried Theo- 
dore, " I have received her vows." 
An emotion of fear overpowered Ade- 
laide ; her knees trembled; her eyes 
filled with tears; her happiness ex- 



40 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

ceeded her strength: her lover, who 
himself shook in every limb, supported 
her; and, unable to articulate a single 
word, the 1 icill, so fatal or so propi- 
tious, was expressed by their whole 
frame. They returned slowly to the 
mansion, leaning one upon the other, 
plunged into the melancholy of happi- 
ness, and so certain of understaudingone 
another that they needed not to speak. 
Madame d'Orfeuil surveyed them with 
mingled complacency and pain; this 
spectacle renewed the memory of her 
own sorrows ; they perceived it, and 
this idea caused them to break a silence 
which they would have lung main- 
tained; they endeavoured to comfort 
her because they could have wished 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 41 

that there was no misery upon earth. 
To them Madame d'Qrfeuil was cm 
that clay but as any other person ; they 
felt an equal love for every human crea" 
ture. They spent a month in a state 
of felicity so tranquil and so del cious, 
that it would perhaps be impossible to 
find another example of the kind. 
During this interval, Baron d'Orville 
was incessantly writing to his niece, 
to prevail upon her to return to Paris. 
Theodore was obliged to divide his 
time between his mother and his wife. 
Winter approached. Adelaide one day 
proposed to her husband to go and pass 
three months at Paris : he turned pale 
at this request, was silent for a moment, 
and presently replied that it should 



42 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

be as she pleased; that his mother 
had for a month past proposed the jour- 
ney to him ; that he had hitherto re- 
fused, but should now consent to go. — 
" Is the plan disagreeable to you ?" 
said Adelaide. M No," replied Theo- 
dore, " if it pleases you." Adelaide 
perceived not the cloud which over- 
cast the face of Theodore ; she rather 
felt her own emotions than noticed 
those of another. After a sorrowful 
parting from her aunt, she set out, at 
the age of eighteen, passionately at- 
tached to her husband, but overjoyed 
at the idea of revisiting Paris. The 
evening after his arrival, Theodore, who 
was acquainted with Baron d'Orville, 
went to sup with him : when Adelaide 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 43 

entered, the drawing-room rung with 
the applause deservedly bestowed on 
her beauty, heightened as it was by 
a residence in the country. Her hus- 
band, who eclipsed in elegance and wit 
the most accomplished gentlemen that 
Paris could produce, took great pains 
to shew off Adelaide to the best ad- 
vantage. They were both agreeable 
together, and one by means of the 
other. 

The following day Theodore called 
to see Adelaide. " Never/' said she, 
i( was any one so interesting and so 
agreeable as you ; you ought to be fond 
of company, for no one seems so ad- 
mirably calculated for it as yourself/* 



44 ADELAIDE AND TH KODOHE* 

ri My Adelaide/' replied he, " to sl>itl6 
in company has long been a matter of 
indifference to me; since it gives you 
pleasure 1 will agiin strive to excel in 
this way; but it is long since 1 re- 
ceived any gratification from such suc- 
cess." Adelaide, who was looked upon 
as a widow, the rich, the fair Adelaide, 
was the object of universal homage: \ 
her love for Theodore was unabated* 
but with this sentiment she united a 
fondness for society, and love, though 
it ceased not to predominate, did not 
wholly engage her. She would not 
have gfone to an entertainment to which 
Theodore was not invited, but she 
sometimes preferred a ball to solitude 
with him. To him she dedicated her 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 45 

Wumphs, but she was desirous of 
gaining more : if he spoke to her in the 
midst of company, she would leave 
every other person to answer him ; but 
if he left her to dance, or shine in con- 
versation, she would devote the whole 
evening to either: she could not have 
lived without Theodore, but she could 
have amused herself without him. 
Had Adelaide perceived the change in 
herself, that very instant it would have 
ceased to exist; but to her it seemed 
perfectly natural to take delight in 
company, and to be fond of shining in 
it; and under the idea that her husband 
could not but share this sentiment, she 
never entertained a doubt that he felt 
it in an equal degree. The first cloud 



46 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

of vexation which Adelaide remarked 
on the countenance of Theodore gave 
her so much pain, she offered to him 
so cheerfully the absolute sacrifice of 
all the pleasures of society, that he 
himself would not accept it. Per- 
fectly satisfied, as it seemed, with one 
another, Adelaide again began to in- 
dulge her propensities, and Theodore, 
who bad begged her to do so, durst 
not acknowledge that he could have 
wished her not to comply so exactly 
with his desire. Whenever we make 
a point of concealing one single senti- 
ment from the object of our love, the 
impression of that sentiment within 
ourselves becomes incalculable. Ex- 
planations, complaints, reproaches, 



ADELAIDE AND THEODOKE. 47 

cannot leave any trace; but silence 
consumes the heart which imposes it 
upon itself. Theodore, at once proud 
and tender, confined his sorrows within 
his own besom ; his ten per suffered 
from it. Adelaide endeavoured to di- 
vert him ; he fancied that he perceived 
effort where there was nothing but em- 
barrassment, and rejected her atten- 
tions with great indifference. Ade- 
laide was vexed to find her trouble 
thrown away, and hurt at Theodore's 
injustice from the very fe ling of her 
affection for him ; and by a secret sen- 
timent of delicacy or susceptibility on 
both sides, they shunned opportuni- 
ties of being together. Adelaide was 
so sure of loving nothing but Theodore, 



48 ADELAIDE AND THE0D0KE. 

and Theodore of not having given the 
slightest cause of complaint to Ade- 
laide, that neither of them would enter 
into any justification. Time and love 
would have set all to rights again, had 
not jealousy, by an unfortunate cir- 
cumstance, taken possession of Theo- 
dore's heart, which vexation and con- 
straint had prepared for its reception. 
A lady, with whom Adelaide had 
formed a sligi . acquaintance, entrusted 
her with the secret of her passion for 
the young Count d'Elmont, and re- 
quested her to admit him as a frequent 
visitor, because she had no other ay. 
of procuring interviews with him. 
Adelaide, whom love always strongly 
interested, complied with her request ; 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 49 

the consequence was that Theodore 
constantly found Count d'Elmont at 
his wife's. When he spoke to her on 
the subject, she was embarrassed on 
account of the promise which she had 
given not to reveal the secret. Irrita- 
tion, which banishes confidence, soon 
succeeded. Adelaide thought Theo- 
dore too imperious ; Theodore deemed 
her hard-hearted, and resolved to aban- 
don her for ever. 

About this time Adelaide perceived 
that she was pregnant. <; Ah !" cried 
she, " I will regain his affection, I 
will atone for my errors, I will leave 
Paris, our happy days shall be re- 
newed. 33 — Theodore entered her apart- 

VOL. II. D 



30 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

ment; Adelaide advanced to meet 
him, but stopped, chilled by the ex- 
cessive coldness of his manner. One 
of his friends, deceived by appearances, 
had just planted a dagger in Theodore's 
heart, by telling him he believed that 
Madame de Linieres was in love with 
Count d'Elmont. Theodore was far 
from suspecting his wife's virtue ; he 
had remarked that it was her practice 
to receive Count d'Elmont only when 
her friend was present ; he persuaded 
himself that she distrusted her own 
heart, and combining this cutting idea 
with the pain occasioned by the vanity 
and levity of Madame de Linieres, he 
thought it certain that he was no longer 
loved by her, and his resolution was 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 51 

speedily and irrevocably fixed. — " I 
have received orders," said he, " to 
join my regiment; I am just setting 
off, and am come to bid you adieu/* 

A thunderbolt would not have less 
shocked Madame de Linieres. " You 
are going?" said she.— u Yes, I must." 
— " With what indifference you teJl 
me so!" — " I shall see you again 
shortly/ 3 said he ; and soon, with af- 
fected ease and composure, began to 
talk to her concerning indifferent mat- 
ters. Adelaide, who was going to 
inform him of the new tie which united 
them, wounded to the very soul with 
his coldness, kept a profound silence: 
she rose; they advanced towards one 
d 2 



52 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE, 

another ; their secret was on the point 
of escaping from their lips, but an un- 
accountable avidty of misery imposed 
silence on Theodore, who abruptly 
r etired with an exclamation of grief: 
A delaide/* cried he, " Adelaide, 
a dieu!" She remained motionless* 
aghast; then running out to call him 
back, she saw his carriage driving oft 
at a rapid rate, and already at too 
great a distance for him to hear her. 
She hastened to his house, but he had 
not returned thither; she sent out one 
of her servants the way which his 
regiment had gone, but there he had 
not been seen ; she dispatched a mes- 
senger to his country-seat, but could 
obtain no tidings of him. 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 53 

Frantic with anxiety and despair, 
she went in quest of her uncle; she 
acknowledged her marriage, and in- 
treated him to go to the Princess de 
Rostain, and inquire what had become 
of her son. Baron d'Orville could not 
comprehend the reason of the extreme 
affliction of his niece : " He is only 
gone a journey," said he ; " that's all; 
and what harm can that do him ?" 

At length, however, he set out to 
gratify his niece, and in an hour, 
which was an age to Adelaide, her 
uncle returned. " Your mother-in- 
law, " said he, " is the most provoking 
woman in the world ; 1 could get no- 
thing from her but abuse of you, tears 
d 3 



54 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

for her son, and this note." Adelaide 
snatched it with transport.— 4 ' My dear 
mother, I shall be two mouths absent ; 
forgive me for not informing you whi- 
ther I am going; I wish to keep that 
a secret from every body. 1 solemnly 
promise to see you again ; in two 
months I shall return to your country- 
house, near that of Madame d'Orfeuil, 
to live or die at your feet." Adelaide 
fainted on reading this note: her un- 
cle's assiduities recalled her to her 
senses, and lie endeavoured to sooth 
her, but she rejected his consolation. 

Unable to endure that society which 
had been the cause of all her errors 
and all her misfortunes, she resolved 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 55 

to return to Madame tTOrfeuil. How 
many painful reflections crowded upon 
her by the way! what keen remorse 
did she not experience! what severe 
reproaches did she not address to The- 
odore! At length she reached the 
mansion which had witnessed her fe- 
licity. A messenger had been sent 
before, and yet no one came to meet 
her: this mark of indifference on the 
part of Madame d'Orreuil filled her 
with grief. 

As she entered the parlour, Madame 
d'Orfeuil rose, and coldly saluted her. 
" O God!" exclaimed Adelaide, " hast 
thou reserved for me this last misfor- 
tune l"— These words she uttered in 
d 4 



^6 ADELAIDE AND TU£ODOKE, 

such a tone of despair, that Madame 
d'Orfeuil was so much agitated as to 
be unable to refrain from reproaches — 
M Cruel woman, 0 said she, " what 
had the unhappy Theodore done, that 
you should unite your destiny to his, 
that you should sacrifice his tender 
heart to your inconceivable levity? 
Read/' she continued, " read your 
doom in this pathetic letter, which has 
rent my heart, on account of my de- 
served pity for him, and my fata] af- 
fection for you." Adelaide without 
reply read the following letter : 

" All is over for me, my friend; a 
moment's felicity, too great perhaps 
for a mortal, has deprived me for ever 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 5J 

of the strength to endure misery. I 
write not to her who is the cause of it ; 
complaints, reproaches might escape 
me ; she would perhaps attempt to 
justify herself, and I might be induced 
to embrace once more that chimera 
which I cherished and doom myself 
to live. Adelaide, you are aware, 
knows me as well as you do : the sha- 
dow of a change in the heart of her 
whom I love, or the absolute loss of 
her affection, is an equal misfortune 
in my opinion. This change I have 
witnessed. I accuse not Adelaide's 
virtue, her soul is pure; my pain is 
grievous, but not bitter. 1 can still 
adore the object that I have lost f but 
her heart is no longer the same : per- 
D 5 



3S ADELAIDE AND THEODOKL. 

haps another has found means to please 
her; the world at least has weaned 
her from her husband ; she is no longer 
that Adelaide who lived for us alone. 
Ah ! Madam, I have ceased to be ne- 
cessary for her happiness: why, then, 
should 1 live? I will however retire 
alone to the solitary mountain-tops, 
and there, in the presence of heaven 
and earth, reflect on my destiny, and 
on the right which man possesses to 
terminate his existence. If I can live 
without felicity, 1 wiil remove far 
from all that is dear to me; I will 
spend my time and my strength in 
useful occupations ; I will devote my 
life to others as my fellow-creatures, 
but not as my friends. If my fortitude 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 59 

is „ot equal to this effort I will return 
and die near you and my mother : per- 
haps too, perhaps 1 must see her once 
more before I close my eyes for ever. 
Adieu, my friend, adieu !" 

What pen can descrihe the state of 
Adelaide! Why was not Theodore 
h.mself an eye-witness of it? Madame 
d'Orfeuil could hold out no longer, 
and soon strove by all the means in 
her power to comfort her; but her 
grief and anxiety admitted of no alle- 
viation. One moment she would go, 
the next she would stay ; she durst not 
hope, and was afraid to fear. No 
plan was adopted, none was rejected, 
and her distresses, presenting them- 



60 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

selves under every form, exhausted 
every species of courage. It was easy 
to perceive that her soul was torn by 
remorse; but it was from her eagerness 
to justify herself that this might be in- 
ferred. Madame d'Orfeuil durst not 
flatter her with the hope of ever see- 
ing Theodore again, so thorough ly 
was she acquainted with the profun- 
dity of his sentiments: he had never- 
theless promised to return in two 
months. What days were those which 
Adelaide passed in that interval ! How 
truly worthy of her husband did hei 
grief render her ! How easily do feel- 
ings so powerful and so painful efface 
the slight traces of dissipation and va- 
nity! Adelaide yet had need for hope: 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 61 

there are misfortunes, of which i( is 
impossible to form conceptions before- 
hand; such is death, of which nothing 
can give any idea. 

One day, when Adelaide and Ma- 
dame de Orfeuil were walking along 
the road w hich leads to Rostain House, 
thcv saw some peasants coming from 
it with dejected looks. Madame de 
Orfeuil inquired the cause. ci Ah 1" 
said they, " if you did but know how 
our young master is altered !" — " Your 
young master " Yes, Count Theo- 
dore." 

At these words Adelaide swooned : 
she was carried back to the house ; 



62 A D L L A I £•• E AND THEODORE. 

but no sooner had she recovered the 
use of her senses than she threw her- 
self at ttte feet of Madame d'Orfeuii. 
" Ah ! n said she, " go, go and see him ; 
justify me to him; carry him these 
letters, which will prove that it was 
my friend which was attached to Count 
d'Elmont, and that my only fault con- 
sisted in being the depository of such 
a secret; describe to him the affliction 
in which you have seen me for these 
two months past; inform him of every 
thing except the child of which I am 
pregnant: if he repulses the mother, 
both must perish ! Justify me ; obtain 
my pardon.— -Ah ! go, return and think 
what a state I shall be in till I see 
you again V 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 63 

« I m obey you," said Madame 
d'Orfeuil ; " it will be an easy matter to 
obtain his forgiveness; he will believe 
n,e. respecting your heart, now, alas! 
but too worthy of his own: but you 
have heard that he is much altered?" 
" Yes, from peasants whom his dis- 
tracted dress, perhaps.... Ah! my friend, 

lly to him." 

Madame d'Orfeuil immediately set 
out. During the three hours that she 
was absent Adelaide could scarcely 
breathe. The throbbing of her heart 
was perceptible through her dress; 
each minute every sound encreased an 
emotion which already seemed to sur- 
pass human strength. At length Ma- 



04 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

dame d'Orfeuil came back. Adelaide, 
though so impatientfor her return, durst 
not go to meet her. Madame d'Orfeuil 
entered with a gaiety so affected, that 
Adelaide was more alarmed at this ef- 
fort than she would have been at the 
most gloomy looks; but anxiety to 
hear what she had to say detained life, 
which was ready to take its flight. 

" He forgives you," said Madame 
d'Orfeuil; « he loves you, but he is 
very ill,"-." Heaven be praised!" re- 
plied Adelaide, " now I can die. But 
when shall I see him ?"_« He en- 
treats you towaitafew days longer.'*— 
" In what state is be?" This ques- 
tion she ?sked in a tone so mournful 



ADELAIDE AND TilEODOIlE. 65 

lhat Madame d'Orfeuil felt it necessary 
to console her. Adelaide made no 
reply, and continued plunged in a 
profound reverie. At two in the morn- 
ing she requested her aunt to retire, 
saying that she would go to bed. But 
no sooner did the dawn appear, than she 
hastened towardsRostain House,bri bed 
the gardener, and concealed herself in 
a -rove, in which Rostain's mother 
was accustomed to breakfast. She put 
no questions to the gardener ; twenty 
times she opened her mouth to inquire 
after his master, but as often did the 
words die away on her lips. Con- 
cealed in the grove, she could see with- 
out being seen. 



There could not be a finer morning. 



C6 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

At len o'clock she beheld Rostain's 
mother coming with dejected looks, 
and her eyes swollen with weeping. 
A quarter of an hour afterwards, a 
shadow supported by two men, whose 
sensibility seemed to be expressed in 
their faltering steps, slowly approach- 
ed. Adelaide knew not at first who 
it was; or rather striving to deceive 
herself, as a person avoids the stroke of 
a dagger: she was for a moment un- 
certain; but suddenly the sound of 
that well-known voice having reached 
her ear, she gave a shriek and fainted 
away. The noise drew the attention 
of the two men who supported Kos- 
tain; they rushed into the thicket, and 
brought his Adelaide, whom Un- 
placed senseless at his feet.— What a 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 67 

spectacle for him ! What a spectacle 
for his mother ! 

As Adelaide opened her eyes, Ma- 
dame de Rostain indignantly exclaim- 
ed: " Take from my sight the mur- 
derer of my son; take from my sight 
the barbarous woman whom he calls 
his wife/' At these words, Rostain 
mustering all his strength, cried : "Mo- 
ther, insult her not, otherwise you will 
put an cud to my life, together with 
all my respect for you; 1 should be 
unable to controul myself/' — " Go," 
said his mother, " expire at her feet ; 
that is all she wants. Farewell/' 



Adelaide hoard not what passed : 



6S ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

with her eyes fixed on Rostain, she 
strove to discover some signs of life in 
his altered features. Being left alone 
with him, they at first kept silence, 
which was suddenly broken by Ade- 
laide with the most rapid and impas- 
sioned expressions : she justified her- 
self, she embraced his knees, and 
speaking only of her love, she seemed 
persuaded that her fate depended on 
convincing her lover of it. 

" Alas! my Adelaide/' replied Theo- 
dore, " I am convinced of the injustice 
of my heart, and of the purity of your's, 
and accuse nobody but myself of our 
misfortunes."—" Our misfortunes!" 
exclaimed she; " and may not the fu- 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 69 

ture retrieve them? This new tie which 
unites us, your child of which I am 

pregnant " 46 O heavens ! my child! 

And are you likely to be a mother?" — 
u lam/' "O my God!" he exclaim- 
ed, " what have I done that thou 
shouldest renew my attachment to 
life !" As he uttered these words, he 
was so overpowered with anguish that 
his strength forsook him. Adelaide's 
shrieks brought some attendants to the 
spot ; but what a frightful spectacle 
was presented to their view! What 
alarming symptoms of decay and death ! 
Madame de Rostain, brought back by 
the cries of Adelaide, pushed her away 
with horror. " Alas! madam," said 
she, "you will repent of your injustice; 
you shall know whether I love him/ 5 



70 ADELAIDE AND UIEODORE. 

Rostain, on coming to himself, be- 
held terror depicted in every counte- 
nance. " Mother/' said he, " permit 
Adelaide to be with me ; I cannot part 
from her any more: but let me speak 
fora momenralonewith my physician/' 
Rostain was carried into the house, 
followed by Adelaide, who uttered 
not a word; frequent shiverings only 
betrayed the state of her soul ; her 
countenance remained unmoved. The 
physician went in ; he came out asain, 
and still she continued leaning against 
the door: he stopped, and took her 
affectionately by the hand. « Leave 
me," said she to him ; " leave me.~ 
Do you know who has murdered 
him? — I have; leave me." 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 71 

Rostain then asked for his mother: 
she passed furiously by Adelaide, and 
soon afterwards left the room swim- 
ming in tears. " Go/' said she to her, 
44 go, he wants to see you ; go and 
contemplate your work."—" Madam," 
replied Adelaide, 46 1 would fain live 
another hour; allow me that indul- 
gence." She then went into Rostain's 
chamber, without turning her eyes to 
him, and seated herself by his side. 

4 < My Adelaide," said he, " I re- 
quest that soul, so courageous and so 
tender, to listen to me with attention. 
I have done you much wrong; my 
perverse imagination persuaded me 
that I was no longer loved, when your 



72 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

heart yet deigned to be sensible to 
my affection. Sorrow and means still 
more violent have brought my life 
so nearly to a close, that when I came 
hither I was sure I should not Ions: 
survive. I will not conceal from you 
that your presence, your tenderness, 
that pledge of our love, have awaken- 
ed in my heart the keenest regret and 
remorse. But alas! the thread of my 
life once broken cannot be joined to- 
gether again; and as I think that I 
alone can teach you to support my 
loss, I determined myself to announce 
it to you." 



" Well," said Adelaide, « and do 
you suppose that your assassin, do 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 73 

you suppose that she who has plunged 
a dagger into your heart will survive 
you ? Shall I not avenge you ?" — 
" No, my Adelaide ; spare the infant 
to which you are about to give birth, 
preserve that image of a husband who 
was dear to you, and deliver it to my 
mother: let me not die altogether; 
let the remembrance of me be left in 
your heart, and my likeness in your 
child; commit oot such a crime, and 
spare me the pain which it would oc- 
casion." 

At these words Adelaide fell into a 
profound reverie. " Indeed," said she 
to herself, " his child ought to be held 
sacred by me a person may retain life 

VOL. II. E 



74- ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

a little longer; it is possible to postpone 
the hour of death. Very well," she 
exclaimed, rising: " very well, Theo- 
dore, " I promise before God to be 
responsible for your child." — u Ah ! 
my Adelaide, now can I die in peace, 
since you engage to give life to the 
infant, to take care of arid to educate 
it." — 11 No," replied she, with that 
firm and gloomy tone which an inva- 
riable resolution alone can produce, 
"no; I have only promised to give 
life to it ; that is all that it will receive 
from me." — " Adelaide, what is your 
intention? Would you have me carry 
these cruel alarms with me to the 

grave ?" " Barbarous Theodore," cried 

she, " after you have quitted me for 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 75 

ever, after you have cadsed that poi- 
son which kills us to circulate in your 
veins, can your heart have pity on 
me ? You snatch from me him whom I 
love, you make me his murderer, and 
would you persuade me to survive 
him? Forgive me," continued she., 
throwing herself at his feet ; " forgive 
me: you shall hear no more of these 
melancholy complaints: I submit to 
my fate ; but examine your own heart; 
jt will inform you what I suffer, and 
forbid you to command me to live/' 

As she finished these words, Ma- 
dame de Rostain entered. Theodore 
earnestly recommended to her both 
! i r wife and his child. The wretched 
E 2 



4 6 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

mother, overpowered with grief, was 
unable to utter a word : her pride, her 
affection, her failings, and her good 
qualities, were all absorbed by it. Ade- 
laide, who kept her eyes fixed on 
Theodore, lost the power of respira- 
tion when he breathed with difficulty : 
she seemed to be dying with him. 
All at once she observed him turn pale. 
" Theodore/' said she— " Adelaide/' 
he replied, u come and put your hand 
on this heart which throbbed for you 
alone ; think that you are not in fault ; 
think that I leave you my son and my 
mother, and do not forget me. Fare- 
well/' His head sunk upon Adelaide's 
bosom, and in this attitude he expired. 
The shrieks of his mother summoned 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 77 

her attendants, who would have ap- 
proached him. Adelaide with her 
hand kept them all at a distance : they 
again endeavoured to remove her from 
the mournful spectacle. " No," said 
she, " leave me with him ; you see 
that he wished to repose on my 
heart/' 

For twenty-four hours she remained 
in this attitude, asking at times for 
food, which she took with a care which 
formed a striking contrast with her 
grief. Madame d'Orfeuil came and 
entreated her to leave the corpse: 
" Very soon," said she, " you will no 
longer know him."—" True," replied 
her niece ; " let us not expose his dis- 
e 3 



73 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

figured countenance to view. What 
were his last injunctions ?** — " He de- 
sired that his tomb might be placed m 
the grove where you met ; there, he 
said, he could have wished to live, 
and there his remains are to be laid 
to rest." — " Very proper," replied she, 
" and I will myself superintend the 
solemn ceremony." "You?" "Yes." 
" Why strive to inflict fresh wounds 
on your heart ?" — " Ah ! my friend, it 
is with such thoughts only that I can 
employ the time which is yet left me: 
be not uneasy on my account; I will 
live; I must give life to the infant 
within me ; 1 must myself govern my 
heart, which is on the point of flying 
from me.— But go and ask Madame ete 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 79 

Rostain if my presence will not be 



hattful to her 



Madame d'Orfeuil returned and in- 
formed her that Theodore's mother 
would have no objection to her com- 
pany. For the first time Adelaide en- 
tered her apartment without fear. She 
found Madame de Rostain in convul- 
sions of grief, and concealing with dif 
ficulty the horror which she felt at the 
sight of Adelaide, " Do no violence 
to yourself, madam," said she : " you 
cannot aggravate the situation of my 
soul ; your hatred will not be of long 
continuance: promise me to love your 
son's child, though I be its mother; 
this is all that I presume to hope." 
g + 



OU ADELAIDE AND TIIEODOJIL. 

Madame de Rostain was at first 
shocked at Adelaide's composure; but 
on surveying her with attention, she 
perceived in her whole person some- 
thing so sombre and so solemn, that 
she could not help beinq- deeply af- 
fected by it; her looks .md her tone 
became milder, but Adelaide took no 
notice of the change ; she seemed lost 
in thought, rose, and went down stairs 
into the garden. As she approached 
the grove, a shuddering seized her; 
but soon recovering herself, she called 
the man who w as employed to erect 
the melancholy monument. — " You 
will make it as simple as possible," 
said she, " according to his intention ; 
and let two urns be placed upon the 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 81 

tomb." " Two*"*—" Yes, two: he 
would have allowed it; he had for- 
given me/' 

On the day of the awful ceremony, 
Adelaide led the funeral procession 
with inexpressible fortitude. At the 
moment when it stopped she was ob- 
served to shudder, and falling on her 
knees, she prayed for a considerable 
time; then rising, she said to Madame 
d'Orteuil : " Take me away ; it is too 
mitch. 11 On reaching home, she was 
seized with a violent fever. 11 Take 
great care of me,° said she to Madame 
d'Orfeuil ; " though in my present 
state, death, as you may easily think, 
would be a blessing, yet I must live to 
£ 5 



99 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

fulfil my promise; yes, I absolutely 
must" 

The care of Madame d'Orfeuil and 
Adelaide's strength of mind saved her* 
Madame de Rostain also paid much 
attention to her: Adelaide was grateful 
for it, but without any warm expres- 
sions of her feelings. She was gene- 
rally plunged in a profound reverie, 
interrupted only by testimonies of gra- 
titude, complaisant but not cold. Du- 
ring the four months which her preg- 
nancy yet lasted, she wrote a great 
deal, and was often seen alone walk- 
ing near her husband's tomb ! she spoke 
little, and seemed anxious to shun all 
attentions^ and even sentiments. She 



ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. S3 

concerned herself in silence about Ma- 
dame de llosrain ; but it was obvious 
that she wished not to be loved by 
her, and was merely desirous to see 
her happy, and in a better state of 
health. 

At length one night she began to 
feel the commencement of the pangs 
of child-birth : Madame d'Orfeuil was 
with her, and for the first time an in- 
voluntary exclamation betrayed her. 
» O God !" she exclaimed, " 'tis now 
all over 1" Madame d'Orfeuil did not 
understand the meaning of the expres- 
sion. During her labour Adelaide 
exhibited no sign of sufifering. Her 
wind was so wholly absorbed that her 



84- ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

soul was already separated from the 
body: all about her were astonished 
at the contrast between her nerves in 
convulsions and the serenity of her 
looks. 

As soon as she was put to bed she 
desired her infant to be brought to 
her, and holding it up in her trembling 
hands : " Theodore/' she exclaimed, 
" O my beloved Theodore, my pro- 
mise is fulfilled !" Then with so rapid 
a motion that it was impossible to be 
perceived, she took some grains of 
opium which she had kept concealed 
under her pillow. On recovering from 
the stupor in which she had so long 
been plunged, she requested Madame 



A Din>A IL)K AND THEODORE. 85 

de Rostain and Madame d'Orfeuil to 
come to her. " The anguish," said 
she, " which for these four months I 
have endured would have been suffi- 
cient to. put a period to my days ; but 
a still more speedy engine has lent its 
aid to hasten their conclusion. I 

ought to inform you" Here their 

shrieks interrupted her. " Grieve not 
for me," she resumed: " it is long 
since I ceased to live; my soul was 
closed against every sentiment; I had 
no longer a love for any thing ; I had 
become ferocious: if you yet retain 
any recollection of that Adelaide who 
was living before the loss of Theodore, 
if you have forgiven mu the miseries 
occasioned by my guilty levity, O my 



86 ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

mother, take care of your child. The 
experience of errors, the experience of 
misfortune has preyed upon my mind 
and my soul \ and she, who during 
four mouths has cherished the deter- 
mination to die, has surveyed life with- 
out the illusions by which it is em- 
bellished. Let my child read what I 
have written for him ;. speak to him 
often concerning his father; let him 
listen to me, and imitate him; and if 
my faults estranged him from me, let 
my misery and death efface the painful 
remembrance of them." 

She continued to speak for some time 
without weakness and without emotion. 
God, death, a future state, were the sub- 



ADELAIDE AKD THEODORE. 87 

jcets of her profound reflexions; but 
nothing tender dropped from her lips 
till the moment when her head began 
to be confused : the names of Theo- 
dore, his mother, his child, and her 
friend, were then incessantly in her 
mouth, and in a few hours she ex- 
pired, like one to whom death is a 
welcome release. 

Adelaide was laid, as she had de- 
sired, and as she had deserved, by the 
side of her husband. Madame de 
Rostain and Madame d'Orfeuil, united 
by the same regret and the same wish, 
never separated more: they jointly 
educated Adelaide's lovely bey; and 
the firmness of the one, tempered by 



8S ADELAIDE AND THEODORE. 

the mildness of the other, made an 
accomplished object of the unfortunate 
offspring of love and misery. 



HISTORY 

OF 

PAULINE. 



I 



HISTORY 



OF 

PAULINE. 



In those burning climes, where men, 
wholly absorbed in barbarous com- 
merce, and the calculations of sordid 
gain, seem in general to have lost 
those ideas and sentiments which are 
!h capable of inspiring an abhorrence of 
[~ them, a young female, named Pauline 
jf" deGercourt, had been married at the 



92 PAULINE. 

age of twelve years to a very opulent 
trader, whose ruling passion was the 
accumulation of wealth. His planta- 
tions, his business, and travelling, took 
up all his time. He had married, be- 
cause just at that moment he had oc- 
casion for a large sum of money to 
make a considerable purchase of ne- 
groes, and Pauline's fortune furnished 
him with the means. An orphan, and 
badly educated by a guardian who was 
a friend of her husband, and a man of 
the very same stamp, at thirteen she 
married M. de Valville, without know- 
ing the importance of the engagement 
into which she was entering, without 
having reflected either on the present 
or the future. Pauline's disposition 



PAULINE. 93 

was amiable and tender, but of what 
use is this gift at her time of life, unless 
it Las been developed by education ? 
We recover it when the moment ar- 
rives that we know how to profit by 
our own experience ; but the be*t dis- 
position yield* to all the first impres- 
sions received in the world when it is 
not preserved by principles. Pauline 
was beautiful as the day; all that ro- 
mance has told us respecting regularity 
of features and charms of expression 
was realized in her; and though her 
youth yet bordered so closely upon 
childhood, a frequently melancholy 
look already characterised her physiog- 
nomy. Unfortunately for her, M. de 
Meltm often visited M. de Valville : he 



9* PAULINE. 

was about thirty-six years old, agreea- 
ble and witty, but so depraved, that no 
sentiment, not even delicacy itself, 
supplied in his soul the total defici- 
ency of moral principles. He amused 
Pauline, who, forsaken all day by her 
husband, knew not how to employ 
or to divert herself: he was anxious to 
please her, but soon perceived that he 
should not succeed in the attempt; 
and finding that she was not to be se- 
duced, he flattered himself that he 
should be able to corrupt her and 
obtain her compliance with his wishes 
by these horrible means. The youth 
Qf Pauline was no check to his purpose ; 
he devoted her to misery. It is true, 
that as he attached no importance to 



PAULINE. 9*5 

female virtue, he acted only as he 
thought. Meltin introduced to Pau- 
line one of his cousins named Theo- 
dore, a young man of great sensibility, 
at least in appearance, and who thus 
possessed an additional mean of de- 
ceiving. Theodore was extremely at- 
tentive to Pauline: he had read some 
novels, he addressed her in their lan- 
guage ; he moved her, and at length 
won her affection, or at least, her 
young heart attached itself to the first 
impression which it experienced, and 
took it for love, because it felt the ne- 
cessity of loving. Theodore had cer- 
tainly more feeling than his cousin, 
and was moreover incapable of delibe- 
rately forming an immoral plan ; but 



96 PAULINE. 

he suffered himself to be easily led 
away by the schemes of Meltin : he 
would have been ashamed to mention 
his scruples to the latter, and as he 
had little esteem for the females over 
whom he obtained a conquest, he be- 
haved to them with great levity, fie 
excelled in dancing and singing. Pau- 
line possessed all the external accom- 
plishments ; this was the only part of 
her education which had been attended 
to. This similarity of tastes and oc- 
cupations attached them to each other, 
and perhaps the constant pains taken 
by M. d<e Meltin to bring them toge- 
ther contributed still more to produce 
this effect. Right sentiments spring 
up of themselves; but a third person 



PAULINE. 97 

may inflame a young heart for the ob- 
ject of its partiality, more than that ob- 
ject itself; be persuades the more ea- 
sily because he seems to have no inte- 
rest in convincing; we believe him ra~ 
ther than our own eyes, because we 
suspect him not of delusion. 

One evening M. de Meltin gave a 
grand ball, to which all Cape Town 
was invited: Pauline's beauty and 
Theodore's elegance were the theme 
of universal applause; they were re- 
peatedly told that they ought to love 
one another, till they believed so 
themselves. Theodore on this occa- 
sion was absolutely intoxicated. Mel- 
tin still prosecuting his infamous de- 
void iii f 



9? PAULINE. 

signs, emboldened Theodore, who had 
grown timid since his love became sin- 
cere. The excessive heat obliged 
Pauline to go out into the garden; 
Theodore followed her; the hour, the 
darkness and silence of night, the in- 
toxication of pleasure and praise, all 
concurred in causing the fall of Pau- 
line. They parted, she in a state of 
trouble and distress, the violence of 
which surpassed both the strength and 
the reflexions of her age ; he less 
happy than agitated, not loving Pau- 
line with sufficient warmth to take 
upon himself the guidance of her fu- 
ture destiny ; not possessing so much 
insensibility as to behold with indif- 
ference the fate which threatened that 



PAULINE. 99 

young creature. In this state here- 
paired to his cousin, who, instead of 
relieving his uneasiness, endeavoured 
to increase it. Theodore was fond of 
independence : his cousin drew an 
exaggerated picture of the slavery to 
which he was likely to be doomed,, 
and expatiating with enthusiasm on 
the advantages which he would derive 
from accepting a post which was offered 
him in France, he exhorted him in the 
most persuasive manner to depart with- 
out delay. Theodore, who was ambi- 
tious, and with whom his private inte- 
rest always predominated, was stag- 
gered by this advice. He nevertheless 
went to see Pauline ; he scarcely knew 
her again ; that child was transformed 
f 2 



100 PAULINE. 

into a passionate lover ; her language 
was that of the most sublime elo- 
quence. It might perhaps be per- 
ceived that she spoke with some exal- 
tation of her sentiment, that she might 
diminish her fault in her own eyes; 
but whatever love can conceive most 
elevated and most romantic, she poured 
forth before Theodore. Such a scene 
was rather calculated to produce terror 
than attachment in his bosom. Pau- 
line was struck with his coldness, and 
soon resigning herself to the most pro- 
found grief, she protested that she 
would not survive unless he shared 
her sentiments. Theodore was con- 
founded with the vehemence of her ex- 
passions ; but amidst the absuridty 



PAULINE. 101 

which was to be ascribed to her youth 
and situation, he discovered in her 
soul generous and pure emotions, 
which excited his regret. Pauline's 
grief, however, so far from regaining 
him, was an additional importunity 
from which he felt solicitous to deliver 
himself. Against this wish he strug- 
gled a fortnight longer : the sorrowful 
Pauline but too clearly perceived his 
alienation from her ; but unacquainted 
with the art of captivating a man so 
fond of independence, that he was even 
afraid of being loved, she was inces- 
santly writing him long letters, in 
which the feelings of her young and 
tender soul were expressed, in an in- 
correct but extraordinary style, ex- 

F % 



102 PAULINE. 

hibiting the character of childhood in 
conjunction with the sentiments of 
maturer age. Meltin endeavoured, but 
in vain, to console her: the wildest 
schemes successively engaged her 
mind, and her organs, too weak for her 
thoughts, were on the point of sinking 
under them. Theodore, alarmed at 
her condition, determined to leave 
her : he had a soul too tender to en- 
dure the spectacle of her grief; he 
thought it better to raise it at once to 
the highest pitch by his departure, and 
therefore embarked for France, but 
wrote to Pauline that he was going for 
two months to a neighbouring island. 

Theodore had expressly forbidden his 



PAULINE. 103 

cousin to disclose thesecret. Pauline, on 
receiving this intelligence, was so over- 
whelmed with despair, that Meltin was 
apprehensive for her life : he paid her 
unremitting attention, and was himself 
frightened at the situation to which 
his horrid schemes had reduced her. 
No one felt less esteem for the sex than 
himself: he never would believe that 
the man who first sought to seduce the 
affections of a woman had to reproach 
himself with her ruin ; and between 
this first choice and the second, he 
saw only an accidental difference. His 
opinion on this subject, his relaxed, 
his moral principles on other points: 
for morality is a vvliole which cannot 
exist without all its parts. He was 
F 4 



104- PAULINT. 

nevertheless considered as a man of ho- 
nour, because he had been cruel and 
perfidious to women only. The unfor- 
tunate Pauline, absent from her hus- 
band, without relatives who concerned 
themselves about her, without any 
other familiar society than that of Mel- 
tin, passed whole days in expatiating 
on her misery. Her reputation had 
already caused her to be forsaken by 
several of her female acquaintance: 
some, desirous that the errors of their 
youth might be buried in oblivion, 
and setting the example bythem&elves 
forgetting them, shewed an uncon- 
querable antipathy to a girl who began 
So ill. Others, who were nearer her 
own age, hoped by the selectness of 



PAULINE. 105 

their circles lo obtain a consideration 
which their personal merit was not suf- 
ficient to procure them ; while others 
again, merely envious of Pauline's 
beauty, gladly seized a pretext for not 
appearing in company with her: and 
those who wished to be distinguished 
for goodness of soul, said with a tone 
of sympathy which won every heart : 
" What a pity that Pauline should be 
so exceedingly unsteady ! I was so 
fond of her, that nothing, I must con* 
fess, ever gave me more sincere pain 
than the heavy faults which are laid to 
her charge." This interest, apparently 
so tender, was more injurious to Pau- 
line than honest animadversions, how- 
ever severe. She knew what was- said 



:o6 



PAULINE. 



of her, and durst not venture to go into 
company : with a mind uninformed, 
unaccustomed lo employ herself, she 
could not endure solitude, which only 
nourished her sorrows. Meltin strove 
to convince her that she had no other 
way to vanquish her grief than to re- 
sign herself to the influence of another 
sentiment : when she spoke to him 
concerning her repentance, he always 
replied, that this repentance would 
continue to torment her till she adopt- 
ed such principles as would raise her 
above the prejudices of childhood ; and 
concluded with delineating the rest of 
her life, sometimes as a series of sor- 
rows, as days invariably devoted to the 
same idea ; at others as a varied sue- 



PAULINE. 107 

cession of pleasures and triumphs. 
Pauline's heart was not convinced; 
her mind alone, bewildered by despair, 
sometimes persuaded her that she 
ought to try all possible means to deli- 
ver herself from the misery which she 
experienced. She was too young to 
bear affliction, and too weak to over- 
come it. At length after two painful 
months she received a letter, the di- 
rection of which was in Theodore's 
hand- writing, while the post-mark 
shewed that it came from France. At 
this sight her senses forsook her, and 
when she came to herself she was two 
whole hours before she durst open this 
letter, which was pregnant with her 
fate. It was perhaps not love alone 



103 PAULINE. 

that thrilled her with terror, but like- 
wise fear of the destiny which awaited 
her, of the abyss into which Meltin 
was preparing to plunge her. At last 
she read those fatal lines which in- 
formed her that Theodore had arrived 
in France, that he had bidden adieu to 
his native country for- ever, and en- 
treated her to banish all remembrance 
of one whom she had been pleased to 
prefer. This coldness, this contempt 
incensed her to such a degree that she 
now conceived a hatred for Theodore : 
no endearing and tender idea, no pleas- 
ing recollection could sooth the an- 
guish of her soul. For a whole week 
she wandered about in her grounds like 
one distracted: Meltin attempted to 



FAULINE. 109 

speak to her, but she pushed him away, 
and the agitation of her mind seemed to 
border on frenzy. At length one day 
she went up to Meltin, and with a look 
more malevolent than her juvenile fea- 
tures seemed capable of assuming: 
V Hear me," said she, " I am not 
yet fourteen : for a year past 1 have 
been guided by you ; 1 am only a 
child, but I am dying of grief. Ex- 
tricate me from the abyss into which 
you have precipitated me. Tell me 
what I must do to escape death." 
» Love the man who adores you." 
"To love you," replied she, " is 
impossible; I may be unjust, nay 
even ungrateful ; but I feel an aver- 
sion for you."—" Consent to be mine, 



110 PAULIXE. 

and you will no longer be unhappy* 
What is to become of you without 
relatives and without friends? I alone 
can guide you by my advice and my 
attentions, and restore you to the con- 
sideration which you once enjoyed in 
society. I can love you and appre- 
ciate your worth, form a just judg- 
ment of your fault, and forgive it. If 
I forsake you, you will be left to 
struggle with your sorrows and mis- 
fortunes ; I alone can put an end to 
them; I alone can conduct you, and 
supply the place of father, husband, 
and lover." — Iu this manner Meltia 
strove by his seductions to conquer a 
heart which was shocked at vice rather 
from instinct than reflexion. " What!" 



PAULINE. HI 

thought Pauline, » am I no longer to 
feel for myself so much esteem as to 
have a claim upon my own pity? 
Shall I dare to think of Theodore, 
when 1 have hroken all the ties that 
bind me to him? Fickle and incon- 
stant females feci not anguish such as 
mine. Meltio declares that they are 
happy, but what shame is their por- 
tion ! And what, ah! what will be 
my destiny ?•'— Such were the re- 
flexions of the miserable Pauline, and 
under a scorching tropical sun, in so- 
litude and despair, she was nearly 
driven to distraction. Meltin, fearing 
lest he should be disappointed of his 
conquest, threatened to leave her, and 
endeavoured to alarm her on the sub- 



\12 PAULINE. 

ject of the future: he contrived with 
all the art which the study of the sex, 
and of Pauline in particular, coukl sug- 
gest to him, to plunge her into such 
a state of anxiety and horror, that she 
was on the point of losing her reason 
together with her life. 

At this moment she was an easy 
conquest: but what man could not at 
such a time have spared this child 
whom despair alone had thrown into 
his power? Such a man was not Mel- 
tin. " I am then," said Pauline to 
him shuddering, " I am then a ruined 
creature. 1 am then like those vile 
wretches whom all despise: I am cut 
off for ever from that virtue of which 



PAULINE* llJ 

1 know so little, but whose name was 
to dear to me! Well then, take upon 
yourself the direction of my destiny. 
You promised to rescue me from de- 
spair; 'tis all I ask; I can do nothing 
more for myself; you must therefore 
be answerable for the consequences." 
As she concluded these words she 
left him, and he remained almost un- 
easy at his triumph, and not daring to 
reflect on it, lest he should be obliged 
to reproach himself for his conduct. 
Eight days elapsed, during which Pau- 
line repulsed her new lover with hor- 
ror ; remorse was not the cause of this ; 
her heart was not yet sufficiently un- 
folded to experience that sentiment, 
or at least not to be conscious of its 



114 PAULINE. 

existence; neither ought this invo- 
luntary aversion to be ascribed to re- 
sentment of Mel tin's conduct. Pau- 
line had plunged herself into the abyss, 
at least she could not but think so; 
for the insidious hand which had con- 
ducted her was invisible to her eyes : 
but an unconquerable antipathy, ab- 
horrence of a choice dictated by de- 
spair, the obligation to appear to love, 
nay even to love a man who has a 
right to despise his mistress when love 
is not her excuse, produced in Pau- 
line's heart a distress, a sorrow unac- 
companied by any charm, a regret un- 
mingled with soothing recollections, 
of which she knew not yet the agita- 
tion or the void. 



PAULINE. HA 

In this perplexity, in this state 
which allowed her not to form any 
wish, or to conceive any hope, she 
was informed that her husband had 
perished by shipwreck as he was re- 
turning from Jamaica. His will placed 
a considerable fortune at her disposal : 
she shed no tears for a man whom she 
scarcely knew : she was yet a stranger 
to every counterfeit sentiment, to those 
emotions which people feign that they 
may conscientiously make a parade of 
them to others ; but she trembled on 
account of her youth, her faults, and 
her independence. Meltin, on the 
contrary, changing his schemes of se- 
duction into plans of fortune, rejoiced 
at an event which threw into his way 



116 PAULINE* 

the most eligible match in the person 
of the handsomest of mistresses. It 
would be so easy to recall the soul of 
Pauline to virtuous sentiments that he 
could not help fancying himself certain 
he should be able to persuade her to 
marry him, and to convince her that 
her faults themselves rendered her com- 
pliance a duty. Pauline, restless and 
agitated, would actually have accepted 
his hand, but for an unforeseen event 
which saved her from this last mis- 
fortune. Theodore, on his arrival at 
Havre, had been attacked by a very 
severe disorder. An American lady, 
who was related to Pauline, and re- 
sided near the town, paid him every 
possible attention ; but the mortal blow 



PAULINE. 



117 



was struck, and nothing could save 
him. The certainty that he should 
not recover effected a change in his 
soul, or rather every illusion vanished 
on the brink of the grave, and he be- 
held life as it appears to the wise and 
the virtuous. He felt for Pauline's 
situation; he frequently spoke con- 
cerning her with the worthy woman to 
whose pity he was so much indebted: 
he acquainted her with the designs 
and the morals of his cousin ; he shewed 
her Pauline s letters, and deeply in- 
terested his new friend in her behalf. 



Madame de Verseuil, for this was 
her name, was a woman of energetic 
character and a superior mind : she had 



115 PAULINE. 

once cherished a tender attachment for 
Pauline's father, but her parents op- 
posed their union; and though she 
was unhappy in the matrimonial en- 
gagement into which she afterwards 
entered, yet she fulfilled Tier duties 
with rigid virtue. She had been a 
widow four years ; childless, wealthy, 
independent, she had fixed her resi- 
dence in a country-house near the sea- 
coast : she went occasionally to Havre 
with a view to serve such of her com- 
patriots as needed her assistance, and 
never forgot to inquire concerning 
Pauline, as she felt a powerful interest 
for the daughter of the man whom she 
had loved, whom she deeply regretted, 
and who was still the subject of her 



PAULINfi. I 1 " 

fondest reveries. The danger in which 
Theodore represented Pauline moved 
her to the bottom of her soul ; she was 
a woman to whom nothing except 
what was wrong appeared impossible; 
she conceived the design of going over 
to Pauline, and saving her by her 
counsels. Theodore expired, recom- 
mending to her his young and unfor- 
tunate friend; and Madame de Ver- 
seuil, having caught his last sigh, em- 
barked. On her arrival in St. Do- 
mingo, she made inquiries respecting 
Pauline; she learned that she was a 
widow, and immediately flattered her- 
self with the idea of carrying her back 
to France. Pauline was acquainted 
with her name; from the character 



120 PAULINE. 

which she had left behind in the island, 
from the services which she had ren- 
dered in Europe to several of the 
planters, it was impossible to be ig- 
norant of her virtues and her abilities. 
She repaired to Pauline's ^habitation, 
and chose the moment when she knew 
that Meltin was gone to town for her 
first interview. Pauline, moved and 
agitated by her visit, no sooner beheld 
her, than she was impressed with the 
idea that she must know every thing, 
that she could read her conscience. 
Madame de A r erseuil began by ac- 
quainting her with Theodore's death ; 
a chilly tremor and a flood of tears in- 
dicated an emotion somewhat akin to 
remorse and regret in the bosom of 



PAULINE. 12\ 

Pauline. Madame de Verseuil deliver- 
ed to her a letter which he wrote when 
dying, and in which he exhorted her to 
follow the advice of the excellent wo- 
man who took an interest in her situa- 
tion, and conjured her to renounce for 
ever the society of his cousin. 

The remainder 6f the letter contain- 
ed some tender expressions, but con- 
sisted chiefly of reflections dictated 
by morality and repentance. Madame 
de Verseuil spoke for a considerable 
time to Pauline: during this address 
she felt an impression which no tongue 
can describe : her soul expanded itself; 
her sentiments, heretofore unsteady 
and confused, became clear and settled r 
vol. 11. g 



122! PAULINE. 

she listened to the language, which 
though unknown, she had wished to 
hear; she saw the way which she had 
sought open before her; she found in 
Madame deVerseuilthecharacterwhich 

she had represen ted to herself as a ch i me- 
ra, of which she had conceived an idea, 
but never met with an example : she 
was indulging in the first feeling of 
pure felicity when she suddenly be- 
thought herself of the second fault 
which she had committed, and starting 
back with violence from Madame de 
Verseuil, " No, madam," said she, 
" no, I am not worthy of your kind- 
ness; I am a wretch whom Meltin has 
a second time undone: nothing can 
raise me from this degradation, and it 



PAULINE. 12S 

il uuJy by marrying him that I can wipe 
away my disgrace." 66 What a mis- 
taken notion V* exclaimed Madame de 
Verseuil ; " you are not yet fifteen, 
and would you doom yourself to the 
misery of marrying a man whom 
you cannot esteem ?" " I deserve the 
disdain of the whole world: he alone 
has no right to turn his back on the 
unhappy creature whom he has ruin- 
ed." " So young, and so involuntary 
an accomplice in the faults which you 
have been seduced to commit, can you 
suppose that it is not possible to atone 
for them?" " Never, never; their dis- 
grace can never be expiated/' " No, 
Pauli ne ?" said Madame de Verseuil : 
" in my eyes this disgrace no longer 
G 2 



154 PAULINE. 

exists ; in the name of that father, 
whose virtue would have preserved 
thee from the snares laid for thy youth- 
ful heart, in the name of that tender 
sentiment which the remembrance of 
him and thy presence have kindled in 
my bosom ; come, come with me to 
another country; interpose the im- 
mensity of the ocean, and what is still 
more, a virtuous education, between 
thy childhood and thy youth, and I 
will undertake to make thee forget the 
former." Pauline's resolution was 
shaken; at length she yielded, and 
falling on her knees, solemnly pro- 
mised to accompany her. " But hark," 
said Madame de Verseuil, " this busi- 
ness must be kept secret from Meltin. 



PAULINE. I?3 

Behave generously to hiin; let him re- 
tain the management of your affairs 
which he has taken upon himself; 
write to him in a simple manner, but 
so as to leave him no hope of ever 
-seeing you again. To-morrow, during 
his absence, come to me; he knows 
not thai 1 am in St. Domingo ; in two 
Jays we will set out, in two days you 
will bid adieu for ever to misery and 
shame." Pauline promised to comply, 
and passed the whole day in a kind of 
joy. She had not yet reflected suffi- 
ciently to be aware of the pain that 
would accompany the recollection of 
the faults which she had committed, 
and all seemed to her to be repaired. 
She shuddered at the sight of Meltin, 
G 3 



126 PAULINE. 

and pretending that she had a violent* 
head-ache ; she spared herself the ne- 
cessity of disguising her sentiments ; 
a guilty art of which she was ignorant, 
an art to which illicit love condemns 
its votaries, and which perhaps consti- 
tutes its greatest crimes. 

The following day, at the appointed 
hour, she repaired to her virtuous be- 
nefactress. As she entered the room, 
Madame de Verseuil exclaimed : — " O 
my God, I thank thee; she is thine!" 
The next day they embarked. A pro- 
pitious voyage hastened their arrival 
at the charming retreat which Ma- 
dame de Verseuil possessed, about 
three miles from the port of Havre. 



PAULINE. 127 

The sea on one side, and a thick wood 
on the other, gave a melancholy cha- 
racter to its situation. Here Pauline 
met with the portrait of her father; 
here* Madame de Verseuil by degrees 
enlightened her understanding, and at 
the same time exalted her soul: an 
austere morality was not blended with 
all her addresses ; she spared a heart 
which needed not to be tortured by 
remorse. Moreover, she had herself 
loved, she herself possessed sensibility ; 
this recollection and this quality 
mingled with her virtue something 
tender and compassionate, which ef- 
fectually precluded fear: misfortune 
and love were too words to whose 
profound and terrible signification she 
6 4 



1?8 PAULINE. 

never was a stranger. Whoever shed 
tears, whoever could love without 
being- yet worthy of her, was never 
repulsed. Pauline's cheerfulness, so 
far from increasing, diminished daily : 
in adopting that perfect morality which 
Madame de Verseuil so persuasively 
inculcated, she conceived a horror of 
her past life ; and her amiable in- 
structress incessantly had occasion to 
extenuate her faults in her own eyes 
When Pauline was reading in her com- 
pany works containing the purest pre- 
cepts, he frequently left her abruptly, 
and hastened into the recesses of the 
wood, where Madamede Verseuilfound 
her moistening the ground with her 
tears. Even when she indulged herself 



PAULINE. 129 

with the perusal of certain novels, she 
would frequently say to Madame de 
Verseuil :— M They at !en*t <Hhered to 
the laws of delicacy ; they had love for 
an excuse." Never could Madame de 
Verseuil ra : se her soul, dejected by re- 
morse: she was the most virtuous and 
at the same time th^ most criminal of 
her sex : the past, inseparable from the 
present,continually haunted her. When 
she was left alone she, was incessantly 
occupied ; with her recollections and 
hope were alike prohibited ; how then 
could she take any pleasure in reflec- 
tion? When she perlbrmed any ser ice 
for Madame de Verseuil, when she 
distributed her charities, and increased 
them by her own bounty, she seer ed 
g 5 



130 PAULINE. 

happy; but if the most distant hint re- 
minded her of America, she again suitk 
into despair. Madame de Verseuil 
began one day to speak to her of her 
youth, of the happiness of love and 
the want of being loved; but she re- 
pelled the idea with horror. " What! 5 ' 
said she, " would you have me to 
disclose or conceal my shame from the 
man whom I should choose? No, I 
would rather die first." These words 
she uttered with such energy, and 
seemed to be agitated so long after she 
pronounced them, that Madame de 
Verseuil sought rather to divert her 
from her gloomy ideas than to combat 
them. She was far from judging of her 
friend with so much rigour ; she had 



PAULINE. 131 

thoughts of marrying her, and therefore 
wished to bury the last year of her 
childhood in eternal oblivion. 

• 

The removal of Pauline to a new 
world was favourable to this design. 
A strong mind and pure morality had 
guided Madame de Verseuil through 
the whole course of life ; but the ex- 
treme delicacy of Pauline's youns; and 
over-scrupulous soul seemed to her to 
be extravagance rather than virtue. 
Her ascendancy over her pupil, how- 
ever, did not extend so far as this 
point ; she had led her back into the 
path of honour, from which herself had 
never deviated; but Pauline outstrip- 
ped her in it by the excess of her re- 



132 PAl'LINE. 

morse and regret. Four years passed 
in this manner, and nothing had yet 
been able to prevail on her to accom- 
pany Madame d«3 Verseuil in her visits 
to Havre. The sight of men filled her 
with horror: reading and the company 
of Madame de Verseuil could alone 
•^ive her pleasure. She made herself 
mistress of extensive attainments, and 
improved her mind in a thousand 
different ways. Her beauty was 
heightened in the repose of solitude: 
it is impossible to be more accom- 
plished than she w r as at the age of 
nineteen ; something pensive and wild 
imparted a romantic character to her 
countenance ; and the surprise of ad- 
miration was the first homage paid 



PAULINE. 133 

her by every spectator. During one 
of Madame de VerseuiTs vis ts to 
Havre, in which Pauline as usual 
had refused to accompany her, she 
received a letter informing her that 
her friend was attacked with a fever; 
her uneasiness compelled her to set 
off for the town. On her arrival she 
found her better, and would have re- 
turned immediately : in spite of her 
reluctance to stay she was detained by 
her friend ; but no sooner did any person 
come in than Pauline withdrew to her 
own apartment. At night Madame de 
Verseuil gently reproached, her with 
this behaviour, and mentioned the in* 
terest and curiosity which it had ex- 
cited in Count Edward de Cerney. 



134 PAULINE. 

colonel of a regiment of dragoons in 
garrison at Havre. She spoke of this 
young man with extreme enthusiasim 
Pauline paid little attention to what 
she said; but in compliance with the 
desire of her friend, she went the fol- 
lowing day to an entertainment to 
which Count de Cerney had invited 
her. 



A crowd of ladies first repaired to 
the public walk ; they were all in love 
with Count de Cerney; but he shewed 
a preference for none of them. At the 
age of twenty-five, he lived almost al- 
ways alone: study was his favourite 
employment, and that he possessed sen- 
sibility was to be inferred from the ex- 



PAULINE. 13,5 

pression of his face, rather than from 
his conduct: his life was not embel- 
lished by friendship or love, so that 
civility and kindness seemed to be the 
only ties which bound him to the rest 
of mankind. Such was the picture of 
him which Madame de Verseuil gave 
to Pauline while walking with her on 
the parade ; but she did not perceive 
that Pauline was followed by all the 
young men of the town, who ex- 
claimed: 

m What a beauty !' and thronged round 
her with an eagerness that began to 
be extremely troublesome. Pauline 
in great agitation said to her friend: 
m Why have you brought me hither ? 



138 PAULINE. 

This is just what people said in St. 
Domingo, ami what I cannot hear 
without horror/ 1 The concourse en- 
creased, and such was Pauline's dis- 
tress and alarm that she could scarcely 
support hers. If, when Count Edward, 
rushing through the crowd, approach- 
ed her: he perceived her agitation, did 
gave her his hand to conduct h^r to 
a neighbouring house. " Madam/ 1 
said he, M this is the first time that 
such homage produced DC i ther emo- 
tion than terror; since you wish to 
be defended against admiration, let me 
advise you to place yourseJf on these 
steps, surrounded by a few soldiers, 
where you will not be incommoded by 
the crowd." 



PAULINE. 

Pauline replied only by a slight in- 
clination, and yet trembling at thus 
revisiting the world after an absolute 
seclusion of four years, after so many 
painful recollections, she followed Ma- 
dame dc Yerscuil, aud took her station 
with her on the amphitheatre which 
had been erected for the occasion. 
Pauline having somewhat recover- 
ed herself, could not, help admi- 
ring Count Edward: in his manly 
countenance were depicted both sensi- 
bility and boldness ; a slight paleness 
excited interest, and the expression of 
his eyes was animated by courage and 
dignity: the features of his face were 
strongly marked, but his light hair, 
his complexion, his long eye-lashes, 



138 PAULl.NC. 

1 

blended gentleness, and even timidity 
with the intrepidity of the soldier. 
He directed the manoeuvres of his dra- 
goons, for near an hour, with inexpres- 
sible gracefulness ; and every time that 
he passed Pauline, he saluted her with 
an expression of respect which re- 
minded those who witnessed it of the 
days of ancient chivalry. He was going 
to put an end to these military exer- 
cises, when in the last evolution he 
heard the cries of a dragoon over whom 
the regiment had passed. The young 
Count Edward, listening to the dic- 
tates of humanity alone, and regardless 
of the danger to which he exposed 
himself, turned his horse, was himself 
overthrown by the charge of the ca- 



PAULINE. 139 

valry, and disappeared under the 
horses* feet. 



Madame de Verseuil, in the excess 
©f her fright, hastily ran forward Pau- 
line felt the influence of a still more 
powerful sentiment, but misfrus tul of 
herself, slowly followed her fristtd, 
whilst her heart outstripped her. All 
the soldiers, in consternation, had 
alighted from their horses ; and he, for 
whom Edward had e xposed his life, 
and who hail only received a wound, 
would have killed himself out of des- 
pair. 

Edward was taken up senseless; 
his respiration seemed affected by a 



140 PAULINE. 

severe blow on the breast. IJ* 

earned to the house where Mad»** J 

Verseuil lodged, of which he oc 0ll . 

a part: the surgeons arrived, a , wl 

U(J as 

soon as they had examined his 
they went to pacify his moo, 
thronged about the door, Pauli.^ , 
vanced towards them, to inquiry Co ^ 
cerning his situation ; but she h ac} ^ 
the courage to utter a single VVor ^ 
her face, however, so legibly expressed 

what she meant to say, that thev 

J gave 

her an answer before she had op en \ 
her mouth. 44 His wounds are ^ 
gerous," said they; "but with * 
we have hopes of his recovery. 1 ' 



This reply threw Pauline i ato 



TAUL1NE. 141 

profound a reverie that she did not 
for some time perceive that she was 
alone in the midst of twenty oiiictrs; 
but all at once remarking the. circum- 
stance, she hastily retired. On reach- 
ing her apartment, she was alarmed at 
the agitation of her soul ; she was ter- 
rified at the interest which she felt; 
and the recollection of her first faults 
having produced a perpetual distrust 
of herself, she was a thousand times as 
timid as a female of immaculate virtue. 
On this account she forbore to send to 
inquire how Count Edward did, and 
passed five hours in useless torment, 
occasioned by extravagant scrupulo- 
sity. Madame de Verseuil, who had 
.never left Count Edward, sent for 



142 PAULINE. 

Pauline, who accordingly went down 
stairs to her, Madame de Verseuil 
reproached her with her absence, and 
told her that Count Edward had com- 
plained of it as soon as he recovered 
the use of his senses. " You must 
come and see him with me/' added 
Madame de Verseuil ; " all the ladies 
of the place are there, and your ab- 
sence would be censured. M 

Pauline made no reply, and trem- 
bling followed Madame de Verseuil. 
Count Edward was much altered : it 
was impossible to look at him without 
emotion. All the ladies shewed how 
deeply they were affected, and even 
counterfeited greater distress than what 



PAULINE. 145 

they felt, to gain themselves credit- 
and to interest Edward. In the lat, 
ter object, however, they completely 
failed ; for Edward replied only in terms 
merely polite to the testimonies of 
their excessive sensibility: but when 
he saw Pauline enter, he manifested 
uncommon emotion. How superior, 
indeed, were her charms ! How all the 
other females were eclipsed in her pre- 
sence ! He spoke to her with more 
respect, and less coldness, and she an- 
swered him with such extreme re- 
serve that he durst not proceed. She 
was obliged to remain as long as Ma- 
dame de Verseuil, but scarcely opened 
her mouth during the time, so that all 
the women who were there easily per- 



144 PAULINE. 

suaded themselves that this beautiful 
creature had not common sense. This 
opinion they expressed as soon as she 
was ^one: Edward warmly opposed it, 
and insisted on certain principles re- 
lative to female modesty, which they 
thought it vingallant to discuss. 

Notwithstanding Pauline's reluc- 
tance, Madame de Verseuil obliged her 
to spend two hours every day with 
Count Edward : he had a spitting of 
blood, and it was feared that his lungs 
were injured by the blow which he 
had received. 

How natural it is to love one whom 
we are afraid of losing! How natural 



PAULINE, 145 

it is at least to feel all the interest 
which he excites in such a situation, 
rather than in any other! Pauline's 
sentiments, however, were perceptible 
only in the change in her countenance : 
not a word, not a gesture betrayed 
them; and her will kept in strict sub- 
jection all that depended on its power. 
Meanwhile she scrutinized Edward in 
silence, and her observations compelled 
her to admire, to esteem him. His 
soul was kill of energy : he had nothing 
belonging to youth but an exaggerated 
idea of what is good : his conceptions 
were just, but his heart felt perhaps too 
acutely. A detect, or more properly 
speaking, a singular quality for lu> age 
and country characterized him: tttffli wai 

VOL. II. H 



HO PAULINE. 

an extraordinary austerity of manners. 
His father, by whom he had been edu- 
cated, was a man of rigid virtue, whom 
he had lost about two years before ; and 
such was his respect for his opinions 
and precepts, that the opposition which 
he found in the world to his manner of 
viewing things, had fortified him in his 
ideas, and even caused him perhaps to 
go beyond them. He adhered to them 
out of love to his father and also from 
the natural firmness of his character. 
Nothing severe in his opinions, nothing 
pedantic in his conduct, kept others at 
a distance ; but he had a sense of per- 
fection so keen and so sure that he had 
successively disengaged himself from 
all his friends because they could not 



PAULINE. H7 

understand him : he still believed that 
lie loved them when, opportunities oc- 
curred for rendering them any service; 
but these sentiments contributed no- 
thing to his own happiness. He had 
refused the most advantageous matri- 
monial offers, because he had discover- 
ed no female who seemed to resemble 
the model of charms and virtues which 
his imagination had formed and his soul 
longed to meet with. His mind, suc- 
ceptible of the greatest exertion, excit- 
ed astonishment at what it already 
was, as well as at what it was capable 
of becoming; and the warmth of his 
expressions never affected the justice 
of his reasoning. 

h 2 



148 PAULINE. 

Pauline viewed him with astonish- 
ment ; but whenever Edward, secretly 
admiring her modesty and reserve, ex- 
patiated in her presence on female chas- 
tity and virtue, when he strove to give 
her to understand that he never could 
love any woman who was not as per- 
fect as herself, when he repeated with 
pleasure that the female heart, as soon 
as it has known love, is no longer 
worthy of the same homage, or at least 
cannot deserve the same adoration as 
before, Pauline frequently retired to 
hide her tears; but instead of feeling 
less affection for Edward, she approved 
sentiments which were congenial with 
her soul, though they condemned her 
conduct. Every day furnished her with 



PAULINE. 149 

fresh reasons for loving and for leaving 
Edward. Never had she yet experien- 
ced the sentiment which she now felt. 

How is it possible to compare that 
pure and tender affection which blends 
your life with that of another, and which 
allows you to exist for him alone, with 
the delirium of a bewildered imagina- 
tion, which sallying forth in quest of 
happiness, mistakes for it the first ob- 
ject that presents itself, and though 
speedily undeceived, seeks in vain to 
prolong the illusion. 

Pauline read what was passing in 
her own heart ; she was aware of the 
strength of the passion which she had 



1.50 jmitlinje. 

conceived J but so resolutely was she 
bent on subduing it that even Madame 
de Verseuil could not suspect its ex- 
istence. Edward, timid and trembling, 
durst not address a single word on the 
subject of love to the object whom he 
adored : she conversed freely with him 
on indifferent subjects, and he himself, 
led on by his own superior understand* 
ing,and fascinated with that of Pauline, 
took great delight in these conversa- 
tions ; a stronger interest seemed to 
enliven their discourse ; they never 
spoke with one another as they would 
have done with a third person ; but no 
sooner did the count hint, in the most 
distant manner, at the subject on which 
his heart had such need to express its 



PAULINE, 1*51 

feelings, than Pauline's cold and serious 
air obliged him instantly to stop. 

Two] months had now elapsed, and 
Edward's health was not re-establish- 
ed : he was recommended to try the 
effect of the country air, and Madame 
de Verseuil offered him an apartment in 
her house. As it was her warmest 
wish to accomplish an union between 
Edward and Pauline, she encouraged 
his sentiments. Pauline expressed to 
her friend the highest dissatisfaction at 
the proposal which she had made to the 
COUill ; these reproaches, pointed with 
a keenness which was foreign to Pau- 
line's character, urged Madame de Ver- 
seuil to complain of her ingratitude to- 
H 4 



152 PAULIKE, 

wards one whose sole object vvns her 
happiness, and who hoped to ensure it 
by uniting her with the count. Pauline, 
deeply affected, and sorry that she had 
been capable of displeasing her friend, 
embraced her knees, and bursting into 
tears I — " Ah t* cried she, " have you 
then forgotten who I am? What a chi- 
merical plan are you pursuing for me! 
What an unworthy gift you would 
bestow on the man whom you esteem!" 
" Cruel creature/' replied Madame de 
Verseuil; " have I not a right to judge 
concerning you? Have I not formed 
your soul? Do I not know that it is in 
every respect worthy of Edward ?" 
" Erase then," cried Pauline, " erase 
from my heart the remembrance of cir- 



PAULINE. 153 

cumstances which degrade me; enable 
me to endure myself; then perhaps I 
may think myself deserving of the 
good opinion of others. I admit— lor 
why should I conceal it from you?— 
I admit that Edward is the most per- 
fect object that my imagination could 
ever have figured to itself ; but I arn 
too well acquainted with my own 
value to suppose that I am worthy of 
him, and it woul 6 cost me too dear to 
unite my shame with his virtue. I am 
doomed to the everlasting punishment 
of feeling an attachment which I am 
unworthy of inspiring: the past ha9 
plu ged me into a state from which 
nothing is capable ot delivering me ; 
my new sentiments have awakened ift 
h 5 



134 PAULINE. 

my heart regret more bitter than ever, 
but unaccompanied with any new 
hopes." Madame de Verseuil was 
about to reply, when Edward entered: 
he saw that Pauline had been weeping; 
and hastily went up to her. She cover- 
ed her face ; Edward took her by the 
hand and twice pronounced her name 
with inexpressible emotion. " Never, 
never,' said she, in answer to his 
thought, and immediately retired. 
Edward remained motionless; Madame 
de Verseuil endeavoured to encourage 
him, ascribing the extraordinary be- 
haviour which he had witnessed to the 
timidity of her niece and her fear of a 
second union. She revived his hopes, 
and all three set out for the country. 



PAULINE. *-55 

Edward and Paulina, enjoying in- 
cessant opportunities of seeing and 
conversing \ »th each other, felt their 
mutual passion become stronger every 
day ; but Pauline's opposition seemed 
to increase in the same proportion as 
her admiration for her lover. This un- 
accountable mystery threw him into 
despair ; he intreated Madame de Ver- 
seuil to explain it, but was by no means 
satisfied with her vague replies. Ma- 
dame de Verseuil walking one day.with 
him, whilst he was launching cut in 
praise of the purity of Pauline's heart, 
and the reserve of her manners, ven- 
tured to ask if he did not think it pos- 
sible to love and esteem a woman, who, 
though guilty of errors in early youth, 



PAULINE* p 

should have atoned for them by her re- 
pentance. " I think," said he, " that 
in the sight of God and man, her faults 
are wiped away but there is one person 
in whose eyes she never can make re- 
paration for them, that her lover or 
her husband. It is not as a moralist 
that I consider a question, which under 
these general relations indulgence 
ought to resolve but as a man of sen- 
sibility, as one who is capable of loving 
with idolatry, I hesitate not to assert, 
that there can be no happiness with a 
woman whose recollections are not 
pure ; she must necessarily be uneasy 
respecting the opinion which her lover 
may entertain of her; he is himself 
afraid to utter a single word which 



PAULINE. 157 

may hurt her feelings, and this mutual 
distrust makes them feel that they are 
two. The female heart possesses not 
its full perfection except when it is a 
stranger to itself; and the impressions 
which it again feels, the emotions 
which it retraces, never have the same 
energy. If, notwithstanding her faults, 
she loves for the first lime, her heart 
has been stained before it was touch- 
ed: if she has already known what 
love is, she is incessantly comparing 
what she has experienced with what 
she feels, and recollections impart a 
powerful charm to the feelings, and are 
more impressive in the remote distance 
of the past. Moreover, a woman who 
makes a second choice knows by ex- 



Ic8 PAULINE. • 

perience that it is possible to cease to 
love, and when this idea is once con- 
ceived, farcwel to genuine affection." 
" Ho v unjust and severe you are l" 
replied Madame de Verseuil. " Do 
you not believe that the heart may be 
purified by repentance? Are you not 
aware that a female, unhappy through 
her early errors, feels the stronger at- 
tachment for the man who forgives 
them, and uuder the idea that she 
owes to him her whole existence, adds 
to her passion all the ties of gratitude? 
Besides, there are faults so foreign to 
the soul, so nearly excused by the cir- 
cumstances attending them, that they 
bear a much greater resemblance to 
misfortunes." " That may be," re- 



PAULINE. 1^9 

plied Edward, " but let me be united 
to her whom I admire rather than to 
her whom I forgive ; and so deeply is 
this sentiment rooted within me, that 
if I loved a woman who had all the 
perfections of Pauline, without ever 
having possessed her virtues, I might 
die with grief, but I would part from 
her not on ray own account but on her 
own ; not even perhaps for the sake of 
her faults, but because I should be ac- 
quainted with them, and because she 
would be rendered unhappy, almost 
humbled by the generosity which 1 
should exercise towards her." 

These concluding words attracted 
the attention of Madame de Verseuil 



160 PAULINE. 0 

the more powerfully, as they seemed 
to confirm her in her design. Her soul 
was upright; but she was anxious for 
the marriage of Pauline at any rate, and 
this darling wish misled her judgment. 
Edward appeared so tender ; he spoke 
of his love with such energy, of his 
misfortune with such gloomy despair, 
that Pauline, deeply affected, was on 
the point of disclosing her secret : no 
hints were sufficient to give a glimpse 
of it. She would sometimes say to 
hi m : — "An invincible obstacle sepa- 
rates us ; I am not worthy of you." 
Such was his enthusiasm for her, so 
perfect was the character, and so pure 
the conduct of Pauline, that nothing 
could excite the smallest suspicion in 



PAULINE. lt»! 

Edward's heart. He frequently praised 
her with a warmth which tortured her 
heart, and thus repelled the mournful 
secret with which Pauline was on the 
point of entrusting him. At length 
.she one day went to Madame de Yer- 
seuil, and described to her the ardour 
of her passion for Edward. " I am 
compelled," said she, " to chuse be- 
tween the acknowledgment of my 
shame or the absolute sacrifice of my 
love: I cannot continue tosee Edward; 
I cannot encourage in his soul a senti- 
ment which will entail misery upon 
him ! I must separate myself from an 
object so dear to me, or give him the 
resolution to do it, by shewing myself 
to him not as I now am, but in the 



162 PAULINE. 

colours in which I deserve to be con- 
sidered. M Madame de Verseuil, alarm- 
ed at her resolution, related to her, but 
with some alteration, part of her con- 
versation with Edward, and availing 
herself of the ascendency which she 
possessed over her, and perhaps also 
of the value which she attached to 
Edward's love, to that sentiment which 
she was afraid of losing, together with 
his esteem, she irresistibly commanded 
her confidence. Madame de Verseuil 
depicted in strong terms the austerity 
of Edward's character, protested that 
he was wise enough to wish himself to 
remain ignorant of the faults of the 
woman whom he loved., and encourag- 
ing in Pauline the sense of shame and 



PAULINE. 163 

modesty which had so often restrained 
her, she obtained her promise to keep 
the fatal secret. But nothing could 
divert her from her determination to 
order the count to depart, and tore- 
nounce her for ever. Notwithstanding 
the entreaties of one who was more 
than a mother to her, of one to whom 
she owed more than life, she went to 
Edward, and as she had not strength 
long to support the effort which she 
imposed on herself, she told him with- 
out reserve, and with extreme precipi- 
tation, that she requested him to leave 
her, and never see her again. At these 
words he fell senseless at her feet: at 
this sight she had well nigh expired 
herself: she called for assistance, and 



164 PAULINE. 

bestowed on him the tenclerest names : 
the frenzy of passion and despair was 
expressed in the incoherent ejacula- 
tions extorted by the affecting spec- 
tacle of a lover to whom she was so 
strongly attached, dying at her feet. 
Madame de Verseuil hastened to the 
spot: for two days she acted as inter- 
preter to the lovers, and endeavoured, 
but in vain, to shake the resolution ot 
Pauline. Edward at length sent her 
word that he should leave her the fol- 
lowing day: Pauline inquired of Ma- 
dame de Verseuil in what tone he ut- 
tered these terrible words. ct With 
firmness and sorrow,' ' said she ; " that 
was all I remarked. You mike both 
him and me unhappy, Pauline: this 



PAULINE. 165 

is not virtue." After this reproach she 
withdrew and left Pauline to her re- 
flections. 

The most delicious evening that can 
be succeeded the finest day. Pauline 
took her harp upon which she had so 
often played for her lover ; and flatter- 
ing herself that chance would conduct 
him under her window, she sung a song, 
in which she made some pointed allu- 
sions to her former life, and which she 
never durst suffer him to hear before, 
because it was calculated to open his 
eyes. 

Pauline listened some time after she 
bad finished singing: she heard no- 



166 PAULINE. ■ 

thing: opportunities which might have 
led to an explanation between her 
and her lorer seemed to slumber, and 
she wanted courage to seek them. She 
had not gone out for fear of meeting- 
Edward ; but as he was to go that very 
night, and she should never see him 
again, he might believe her to be un- 
grateful and hard-hearted: she accused 
herself of a criminal self-love, which ac- 
cused her from diminishing in the eyes 
of her lover the value of the object 
which he was about to lose. Repent- 
ance took possesion of her soul ; the 
anxiety to hear once more the voice of 
him whom she loved with such intoxi- 
cation produced and strengthened these 
reflections. She first went down stairs 



PAULINE. 167 

into the garden, hoping that chance 
would befriend her. She walked to 
the beach, and lost in thought, con- 
templated the invariable picture of the 
past, and the terrific prospect of the 
future; and her soul, overwhelmed 
wilh melancholy, was raised towards 
heaven, whose indulgence alone can 
erase painful recollections. 

A grove concealed her : she heard a 
noise, and looking at the rock which 
projected into the sea, perceived her 
lover on his knees, his hair disordered, 
and in the attitude of despair. She im- 
mediately guessed his design ; she was 
immediately certain of it; and to save 
the time which it would have taken to 



161 PAUL IN L. 

go up to him, " Edward," she e* 
clamed, M Edward, stop V ' He hea d 
her voice, rose, and saw her ready to 
fly to him. " Approach not," he ex- 
claimed, " or that instant 1 will throw 
myself into the abyss to escape your in- 
fluence for ever." The terrified Pauline 
not daring to advance, fell on her knees, 
and began to implore him :— " For ihe 
sake of the love which I cherished for 

thee, Edward » " Of the love, 

barbarous woman! say rather of the 
hatred." " Come down, come to me." 
" No, no," replied he, indignantly ; 
« go and enjoy yourself." His gesture 
was terrible. « 1 amyour's," she cried ; 
« I am your wife." She could say no 
more; but he had heard her. " Hark.- 



FAULINE. 169 

said he: " do not deceive me ; swear in 
the presence of God, and of this ocean 
which was about to afford me an asylum, 
that you love me, and that your destiny 
shall to-morrow be united for ever with 
miiie." " I swear," said Pauline, and 
swooned as she uttered those words. 
Terror had for a few moments enchained 
her soul, which was ready to depart; 
but when released from its grasp, she 
could no longer restrain her flitting 
spirits. Edward, intoxicated with his 
happiness, moved likewise perhaps 
with the contemplation of death so 
near at hand, carried Pauline to the 
house like one bewildered: he was not 
aware of the danger which he incurred 
from his situation ; he conceived that 



170 VAUL1NE. 

she heard him, and answered what he 

said. 



From this alarming state of mind he 
•was roused by Madame de Verseuil, 
who came to assist Pauline. As soon 
as she had come to herself, Edward, in 
a transport of joy, hastened to Havre to 
give directions for the ceremony of the 
following day. Madame de Verseuil, 
being left alone with Pauline, forcibly 
represented to her that it would be in- 
flicting death a second time on Edward 
to oppose any farther obstacle to their 
union. Pauline, overpowered by the 
dreadful spectacle which she had wit- 
nessed, by the image of her lover ready 
to precipitate himself into the sea, was 



PAULINE. 171 

not entirely mistress of herself. The 
supreme felicity which awaited her, the 
sense of the fault which she was about 
to commit, produced a kind of derange- 
ment, the effects of which could neither 
be foreseen nor calculated. Ed ward 
returned ; Pauline spoke not a single 
word: Edward began to be uneasy at 
his good-fortune ; he was aware that he 
had usurped it, but this he was unwill- 
ing to confess to himself, and merely 
uttered some incoherent and often con- 
tradictory phrases respecting the state 
in which he beheld Pauline. Ma- 
dame de Verseuil never quitted them, 
and kept her niece under restraint by 
her presence. It was as if Edward, in 
concert with Madame ie Verseuil, was 



172 PAULINE. 

desirous of confirming what she had 
said to Pauline, lie repeated, as though 
he was still under some apprehensions 
that his life depended on her not making 
any change in her present situation, 
that he was convinced it was impossi- 
ble for him to survive the loss of any 
portion of his happiness ; that he had 
never felt what he now experienced, 
and that for the first time he was sen- 
sible that there are moments when we 
are deprived of all command over our- 
selves. When Pauline attempted to 
speak he interrupted her, lest he should 
hear a single word that should disturb 
the feeling of happiness which for so 
few moments he had enjoyed. At 
length the priest who was not expect- 



PAULINE. 

ed till the following day, arrived the 
same evening, during which Edward 
and Pauline had not been left a single 
moment alone. Pauline pronounced 
the vows so dear to his heart, like a 
self-devoted victim. If her husband, 
amidst her dejection, had not twenty 
times received the assurance of her 
passion for him, the pain which she 
manifested would have prevented him 
from accepting her hand ; but sure of 
being loved, he ascribed Pauline's ex- 
traordinary state to modesty, and to a 
certain singularity of character. In this 
idea he was strengthened by Madame 
de Verseuil, and his happiness accom- 
plished the rest. As soon as the cere- 
mony was finished, Madame de Ver- 
i 3 



174 j»AiaiN}_. 

seuil took Pauline aside, and said to 
her: " I have no occasion I believe to 
tell you that you would be blameable 
if you M ere now to communicate your 
secret to your husband. You would 
destroy his felicity for ever, and he 
might then justly reproach you with 
a mystery both kept and revealed to 
make him mis?r*b!e." " Ah ! indeed/' 
replied Pauline, " indeed, ahrst fault 
renders a second necessary : it is you 
alone who have urged me to it, you 
alone who are the cause of the crime, 
and the despair of your guilty Pau- 
line." — M Cruel creature/' said Ma- 
dame de Verseuil with tears; " is it 
then so bad an action to bury in 
oblivion a secret from which the ocean 



PAULINE. 



175 



and time for ever separates us; a 
secret with which you alone can ac- 
quaint your husband, and of which he 
himself would detest the fatal know- 
ledge? Are these reproaches the return 
which you owe for my tenderness ?" 
"Oh! forgive me, my mother; my 
friend, forgive me," exclaimed Pau- 
line: "the die is cast; may it prove 
fortunate, and may you never have 
reason to repent of all that you have 
done for me!" — Edward entered; he 
had just received a letter on business 
which obliged him to set off in a few 
days for Paris : he asked Pauline to 
accompany him, but she requested his 
permission to fix her residence for ever 
in the retreat where she was ; and at 
I 4 



176 PAULINE. 

the same time reminding him of ln& 
promises, and his own tastes, she 
obtained his consent. 

The first days of the union of Pau- 
line and Edward were not like the 
commencement of the happiest bond 
on earth, when it is formed by love. 
Pauline evinced an uneasiness and a 
shame, a wish and yet a fear to speak, 
which could not but appear extraordi- 
nary to her husband ; but he attributed 
to bashfulness an agitation which dis- 
played other characters besides ; and 
the grief which Pauline testified at his 
departure, the attachment which she 
shewed for a retreat, where, when they 
again met, they might enjoy each 



PAULINE. 177 

other's society without interruption, 
pacified all his fears. At length he 
departed, and Pauline's tears marked 
the cruel moment. 

During an absence of two months, 
Madame de Verseuil several times 
tore the letters written by Pauline to 
Edward, containing the story of her 
faults; but no sooner cjid Pauline per- 
ceive that she was pregnant, than her 
scruples ceased, her resolution was 
taken : she saw how impossible it now 
was for her husband to forsake her: 
she felt the necessity of attaching him 
still more strongly every day to the 
mother by the child, and to the child 
by the mother; and tranquillized by the 
1 5 



178 PAULINE. 

idea of a duty, she was less tormented 
by her secret. 

Edward returned: he was intoxi- 
cated with the prospect of the hap- 
piness of being a father. When to th is 
tender tie Providence unites all the 
magic of love ; when the infant whom 
you would cherish as your own is like- 
wise the image of the object of your 
fondest affection ; when you find in 
the soul which it is so delightful a 
task to improve a copy of her's whom 
you rejoice to recognize, what bliss 
can surpass that close communion of 
sentiments the most congenial with the 
heart of man ? Unhappy she who has 
never knowu the felicity of being a 



PAULINE. 179 

mother! a thousand times more un- 
happy the unfortunate woman who has 
known this felicity only to be deprived 
of it, and reflects that each passing 
year would have improved the intellec- 
tual qualities, or the charms of her 
child! unhappy she also who has re- 
ceived without enjoying this blessing, 
and whose heart has continued a 
stranger to its endearments! Pauline 
and Edward were capable of relishing 
such felicity, and all the duties, height- 
ened by the sincerest affection, engaged 
their souls. From the moment that 
Pauline gave birth to a son she was 
truly happy ; she banished all painful 
reflexions to devote herself to her hus- 
band, her child, and Madame de Ver- 



150 JPAULINB. 

seuil: she carefully avoided all con- 
versations that might remind her of 
her first marriage : and if the recollec- 
tion of former times yet extorted tears, 
she persuaded herself that by her 
sorrow she paid the full tribute which 
humanity owes to misery. Alas! how 
great was her mistake! what melan- 
choly law of fate reduces the destinies 
of mankind to an equality! So far is 
this idea from affording consolation to 
tender souls, that it is by the contem- 
plation of the happiness of others they 
are enabled the better to endure their 
own misfortunes. 

Edward having one day been to dine 
at Havre, returned much later than he 



PAULINE. 181 

had appointed. Pauline went to meet 
him : excessive agitation was expressed 
in his countenance; he would have 
denied it, but she was only the more 
confirmed in her suspicion, and her 
emotion immediately became so strong 
that Edward could resist uo longer. 
For a year past he had not concealed 
a single thought from her: in such a 
union there can be no secrets. " Well 
then/' said he, ft, since you insist on 
knowing: you will perhaps be dis- 
pleased to see me angry at what I 
ought only to treat with contempt. 
I dined to-day at the house of a mer- 
chant, with whom you are acquainted. 
A man whose name I did not know, 
but whoarriTed yesterday from St. Do- 



182 PAULINE. 

mingo happened to be present: the 
conversation turned on frmale beauty, 
and a young officer said that Madame 
de VerseuiPs niece was the most beau- 
tiful woman he had ever seen. 'Who?' 
cried the stranger ; 1 Pauline de Ger- 
court, the widow of M. de Valville ?' 
— < Yes,' replied the officer. c Ah ! I 
knew her well/ re-joined the stranger; 
f what you say is true enough ; and if 
her disposition has kept pace with her 
personal attractions, she must by this 
time be pretty mettlesome ; for when 
she left us, at the age of fourteen, she 
had only indulged herself in two in- 
trigues. You have since I presume 
undertaken the task of correcting this 
rigid austerity of her principles/ T 



♦ 



PAULINE. 133 

was transported with rage. Some of 
the company would have apprized him 
of the ties which united ns, but I 
insisted on theirsilence. The stranger 
maintained his horrid calumnies: at 
length he perceived the imprudence of 
which he had been guilty, but the 
general contempt with which 1 had 
overwhelmed him prevented his re- 
tracting. His name is Meltin." 

While Edward was finishing this 
account, the paleness of death over- 
spread the face of Pauline; she trem- 
bled in every limb, and such was the 
violence of her agitation that she was 
unable to utter a single wcrd. Ed- 
vard surveyed her with a mixture of 



184 PAULINE. 

astonishment and terror which baffles 
description. Was it indignation and 
some other feeling that paralysed Pau- 
line's tongue ? Could that unaccount- 
able mysterionsness with which she 
had so long avoided an union with 
him, could those oft-repeated expres- 
sions which had then appeared to him 
destitute of a signification be thus 
interpreted ? A dismal light was shed 
over the past, and discoloured the 
future. In this dreadful situation 
they both remained for some time- 
Edward once feared that Pauline 
might suspect him of having too 
feebly resented the deadly insult, and 
that the sentiments which she durst 
not express was the cause of her 



PAULINE. 1S5 

silence. " I shall see that vile slan- 
derer affain to-morrow,'* said he. 
p 

These words, the meaning of which 
Pauline but too well understood, re- 
stored to her the power of speech. 
11 No," cried she, M you shall not see 
him again ; he is not a slanderer; he 
has told nothing but the truth s he was 
himself one of those persons whose 
choice disgraces me; the other died 
very near this place. T have concealed 
my shame from you, that I might pre- 
serve your esteem; it is just that 
I should lose it, and happy shall 1 be 
to die in consequence: but if I have 
deserved your pity by my passion for 
you, renounce the intention of that 
horrible combat of which I am the 



186 PAULINE. 

unworthy cause; spare me this pu- 
nishment: put me to death, but spare 
me torments surpassing all crimes: 
I implore, I expect your pity.*' 

Edward no longer heard what she 
said: he was thunder-struck: the de- 
struction of the universe would have 
less appaled him. At one time 
fancied that Pauline was bewildered 
by her fears of the danger to which he 
was about to expose himself, and 
seizing this ray of hope, " Be not 
uneasy," he cried ; " what senseless 
frenzy disturbs your reason ? ,J As he 
uttered these words he would have 
pressed her to his bosom. " Approach 
me not,'' said she, with sullen dignity ; 
M I am not worthy of you ; you will 



PAULINE. 187 

find me again in the arms of death ; then 
only I shall presume to speak to you 
once more ; now leave me." Edward, on 
his knees before her, was filled with 
emotions of mingled terror and respect. 
At this dreadful moment Madame de 
Verseuil entered ; at the sight of her 
Pauline shuddered: — c< Madam," said 
she to her, " I have followed your ad- 
vice; learn theconsequences.''* In stifled 
accents she then related what had be- 
fallen her husband. " Now," said she, 
M you may judge whether I can live; 
but join me to prevail on Edward to 
renounce the horrid combat, which is 
worse than death to me : this is my 
last wish." 



1S8 PAULINE. 

What a cruel moment for Madam* 
de Verseuit! She repented of her fatal 
advice ; but anxious to excuse Pauline, 
she gave her husband a relation of the 
circumstances which tended to excuse 
her early errors, and of the violence 
which she had done her to prevent 
her from revealing them. Edward 
seemed to listen with particular at- 
tention to the concluding part of this 
justification of Pauline: her distorted 
features suddenly filling his soul with 
terror, he threw himself at her feet, 
« Pauline/' said he, 11 do you imagine 
then, Pauline, that I no longer loVe 
y 0U I*' — m Do you love me/' cried 
she ; " do you indeed yet loye me ? 



PAULINE, 1S9 

O my God, I thank thee: my last 
moments will not be terrible; my 
child will be allowed sometimes to 
pronounce the name of his mother." 
This softer emotion was quickly suc- 
ceeded by another; she fell at Edward's 
feet, and entreated him not to return 
the following day to Havre; but he 
soon gave her to understand that she 
required his dishonour. Convinced 
of this painful truth, she spent 
some moments in prayer, and then 
rising, she turned towards Edward, 
who seeing that the day began to 
dawn already, began to calculate the 
moment of his departure. " That 
sun which is now rising," said she 
to him, " is perhaps the last that 



190 PAULINE. 

either of us shall see. I cannot live 
any longer for my husband; but the 
right to die for hiin is yet left me. Bless 
your child/' added she, " leading him 
towards the cradle ; " I too can bless 
him, for I know that my repentance 
has procured me the forgiveness of 
the Almighty. To you, whom I yet 
dare ad@re, and at your knees I can say 
so, you are. going to risk your life 
for me; my faults, and still more my 
fatal dissimulation, lead you into this 
frightful danger; but you are good, 
you are generous; you still pity me, 
because your heart knows that I 
suffer." — Edward would have spoken. 
" Say nothing," she continued; 
M all is over." 



PAULINE. 

The appointed hcur drew nigh, and 
Edward set out. Pauline, with that 
courage which proceeds from despair, 
accompanied and bade him farewel. 
Madame de Verseuil, uneasy at this 
apparent tranquillity, anxiously fol- 
lowed all her motions, and with alarm 
beheld her walking on the sea-shore. 

Be under no apprehension,"' said 
she: " do you supppose that I have 
any occasion to kill myself; or that 
grief will not effectually do my busi- 
ness?" Thus passed two tedious hours, 
two hours more painful perhaps for - 
Pauline than they would have been 
for a person who yet retained some 
hope of happiness. A messenger at 
length arri ed ; he brought a note from 



195 PAULINE. 

Edward to Pauline. " I have had 
the misfortune/ 1 he wrote, cc to kill my 
antagonist : however reprehensible his 
conduct, I lament his death : this 
cruel business will detain me a few 
hours. Meanwhile, 1 intreat> Pauline, 
who never can cease to be dear to me, 
not to be uneasy." — " You see," said 
she to Madame de Yerseuil, " the 
blood of a fellow-creature falls on my 
head ; 'tis I who am the cause of Mel- 
tin's death. What horrors beset, what 
crimes encompass me ! Ah! save me, 
my mother, save me!" Madame de 
VcrseuU, herselfin the deepest distress, 
strove in vain to sooth the mortal 
anguish of her soul. Edward returned: 
Pauline durst not go to meet him : 



PAULINE. 193 

he approached her, but it was obvious 
that he was already afraid lest he 
should not evince sufficient warmth 
of affection ; he studiously avoided 
all allusion to the aiflicting subjects 
which rent his heart. This circum- 
stance did not escape the penetration 
of Pauline, who well knew that they 
engaged his thoughts much more than 
if lie had spoken of them. " What/ 1 
said he, when he saw the change 
which was daily taking place in her, 
" am I not the same that I have ever 
been to you?" " Better, perhaps," she 
replied, " but not the same: besides, 
don't you see that spectre which haunts 
me, that man whose death 1 have oc 
cas.oned ? Don't you see our happi- 

▼ OL. II. K 



1J4 PAULINE. 

ness for ever interrupted, your confi- 
dence destroyed ? Leave me, Edward, 
leave me to die." 

Edward was the most unhappy of 
men; his character would not allow 
him to forget wrongs which had so 
deeply affected him ; and his love for 
Pauline made him afraid to express the 
pain which they gave him : uneasy and 
agitated in her company, he often 
walked out alone. Pauline durst not 
go in quest of him ; she remained by 
the cradle of her child, where he found 
her again bathed in tears: if he at- 
tempted to speak she would always 
interrupt him ; and he himself, uncer- 
tain what he was going to say, would 



I 



PAULINE. 195 

talk of indifferent matters. Madame 
de Verseuil incessantly accused herself 
on account of the advice which she 
had given Pauline ; for what most 
keenly wounded Edward's feelings 
was the secrecy of Pauline in regard 
to her youthful indiscretions. Time 
would, perhaps, restore happiness in 
this once delightful retreat; but one 
morning Pauline's maid came to in- 
form Edward that her mistress had all 
the preceding night been tormented 
with a violent fever. Edward imme- 
diately sent for a physician, hastened 
to Pauline, and found her delirious, 
incessantly pronouncing his name, 
and adding only these word* ; " He no 
k 2 



196 FAULIKE. 

longer loves me." What a sight for 
him! Whatremorse! How strong was 
then his affection ! How completely 
was every other idea banished from 
his heart ! It was his Pauline, such as 
he had loved her, such as she once 
appeared in his eyes ; it was she whom 
he adored. Madame de Verseuil, 
seated beside Pauline's bed, was more 
alarmed than Edward himself. She 
was well acquainted with the heart 
she had formed, and thoroughly ap- 
preciated the depth of her despair. 
The physician arrived and seemed 
under considerable apprehension. Ed- 
ward encouraged him to deceive him: 
he strove to repel an idea which was 
too painful to his soul. 



PAULINE. 197 

Three days thus passed, during 
which Pauline's delirium continued; 
but all she said was for this reason the 
more affecting. That beloved name, 
which her derangement obliged her to 
repeat as often as it presented itself to 
her imagination, that prevailing idea 
which she expressed in the same words, 
because it always produced the same 
pain, gave every moment fresh pain 
to her unfortunate husband. At length, 
at the end of three days, Pauline re- 
covered her reason ; Edward thought 
her out of danger, and she perceived 
his mistake, which the sorrowful 
Madame de Verseuil was far from 
sharing with him. " My dear friend, 3 ' 
said she toEdwarJ, u dismiss an jllu- 
k 3 



198 PAULINE. 

sion which might embitter the moment 
that is destined to separate us; we 
must bid one another farewel for ever." 
— " Cruel Pauline/' exclaimed Ed- 
ward, " are you determined to leave 
me ? Do you despise me sufficiently to 
suspect my affection? Go, I abjure 
what 1 may have believed before I 
knew you ; I protest at your feet that 
Pauline is as perfect, as sublime in my 
estimation, as in the happy days which 
we have enjoyed. Time and love 
have purified your soul; live to bring 
up your child ; live to be adored by the 
unfortunate man who thinks that he 
alone is guilty.'-" Think not," re- 
plied Pauline, M that a fanatical imagi- 
nation aggravates in my eyes errors 



PAULINE. 199 

which ray remorse has expiated in the 
sight of God ; I am confident that he 
has forgiven them, and am not afraid to 
die. But the happiness of love de- 
pends on more delicate sentiments; 
the indiscretions of my youth, the still 
greater fault of having concealed them 
from you, have for ever destroyed that 
felicity, which from its very perfection 
was not susceptible of diminution. 
On the brink of the grave I think 
myself worthy of you ; the excess of 
my passion for you is proved; it is the 
last memorial I bequeath you ; it is 
all that remains when the object which 
was dear to us no longer exists. Say, 
Edward, am I not happy thus to re- 
move all the barriers which separated 
your soul from mine ? We shall meet 



200 PAULINE. 

again in heaven, and till that moment 
my image shall be impressed upon 
your heart as it once was. And you, 
my dear mother," said she to Madame 
de Verseuil, " you, to whom I owe the 
sentiments, and perhaps the virtues, 
which honour and console me, comfort 
Edward, and assist him to educate my 
child." Her son was brought to her 
bed ; the ejaculations of her husband, 
the caresses of her child, the tears of 
Madame de Verseuil, exhausted her 
strength, and growing gradually weak- 
er, she expired. 

No p^n can describe the affliction of 
her husband and Madame de Verseuil: 
wfeo could interest after her? 1 shall 
only state that grief and remorse, for 

I 



PAULINE. 201 

the advice which she had given Pau- 
line, in a short time put an end to the 
life of Madame de Verseuil, and that 
Edward, a victim to regret, tormented 
with the just fear that he had not 
subdued his character while it was yet 
time, shut himself up in absolute so- 
litude, where he devoted his days 
to the education of the boy, whom his 
love for Pauline rendered doubly dear 
to him. 



THE END. 



B, Clarke, Printer, ^Veil-Street, London. 
