CHAPTER I.


Ut mea sit, servata mea virtute, paciscor.

OVID.

CHARLES DE COURCY, the orphan heir to

a respectable property in the south of Ire-

land, after having received a more than

usually good education, in the house of a

clerical gentleman, who was also one of his

guardians, entered the university of Du^

lin, in November 1813, when he was about

Seventeen years of age.

What he was, or rather what his tutor

thought he was, may be judged from a let-

.

4 WOMEN.

ter written by that gentleman to the other

guardian, a few days after his ward and pu-

pil had quitted him.


After sundry details (which may be spa-

red the reader,) concerning the settlement

of accounts, and arangements for De Cour-

cy's living in college, the letter proceeded

thus:—

" I have now resigned my charge, but

the interest I have always felt for him has

been only increased by our separation. He

has entered on the stage of life, and, quali-

fied to sustain any part, even the first, I

tremble to think that he may fall even to the

lowest—' unstable as water, he may not

excel.'—Nature and fortune seem to have

done every thing for him—but what may

he do with himself ?—or rather, what may

not others do with him ?—almost what they

please. The materials are inestimable, but

they may be moulded either into a god, or

& terminus—incertus scamnum faceretne,

anne—maluit esse Deum—Generous, affec-

1

*. t

WOMEN. 5

tionate, brave, with sensibility that every

thing touches, genius that every thing in-

spires, cheerfulness that every thing can


animate, simplicity that any thing can im-

pose on. Such is the picture, but all pic-

tures must have a reverse ;—credulous, fluc-

tuating, and irresolute, ever led by the last

speaker,—ever obeying the fresh impulse,—

false shame always suffered to act in the

place of true,—the heart always consulted in

disdain of the understanding,—the censure

of the world dreaded less than its laugh,-*-

and the reproaches of the heart coming too

late for any thing but to increase his suffer'

ings;—suchisDeCourcy.—Suetmhe! How

can I tell at this moment what he is ?—who

can analyze to its original tint that which

varies with every light and shade that wan-

ders over its surface ? Among intellectual

men, he is all sparkling intelligence, and ho-

nourable ambition ; among different cha-

racters, loudest of the loud, and lightest of

the light; if seen in his own light, in his

6 WOMEN.

natural character, abstracted from all exter-

nal influence, the most amiable, affection-

ate, and unpretending of human beings.


The mock-bird, you know, though said to

derive his distinction from imitating the

tones of others, is found by later naturalists

to possess some notes of his own exquisite-

ly sweet.

*****

" There are but two things that can Jix

his character. The steady pursuit of lite-

rary eminence, for which he has enough of

ambition, and more than enough of talent

—or—(and far may that period be from

him,) passion, to which I fear he will not

long be a stranger. If he loves, love will

fix his destiny, and perhaps fatally for him-

self; in every thing else, he may be like

the Eolian harp, answering in melody to

every breeze that sweeps it. But in this

the master-chord will be heard, and the

hand that touches it will unite every string

in harmony, or break them. I will say no

WOMEN. 7

more; he has had my efforts, my admoni-

tions, my wishes, even my prayers. They

will still be his ; never did a being emer-


ging into life give greater cause of hope

and of fear. He may be any thing—he

may be nothing—or worse than nothing.

" EvERARD AsGILL."

While Mr Asgill was writing, De Cour

cy was on his way to Dublin. A singu-

lar circumstance attended his journey. The

coach in which he travelled broke down in

passing through the town df Lucan ; none

of the passengers were hurt, but the coach

was so shattered that it was impossible to

proceed in it. This was about four o'clock

of a November evening ; the rest of the pas-

sengers chose to remain at Lucan, but

Charles, learning it was not quite five miles

to Dublin, determined to walk on. The

eveningwas mild, and even beautiful; there

was no moon, but the stars were already

8 WOMEN.

beginning to twinkle brightly. We often

have in Ireland winter nights that rival

the beauty and softness of a summer one.


It was past seven when he reached the out-

skirts of Dublin, and mistaking a direction

given him at the entrance of Barrack-street,

he crossed into the north-circular road, and,

with the murmur and the lights of the city

still before him, and appearing almost round

him, he reached the Canal Bridge. He was

alone ; as he crossed it, he was startled by

the cries of a female voice, piercing, but

suddenly stopped;—he rushed forward,—a

carriage thundering over the bridge pass-

ed him rapidly, and in a few moments the

rolling of the wheels at a distance, as it

pursued the way to the country, was the

only sound to be heard.

There was not a passenger on the road;

he stood for some moments uncertain what

to do ; courage was natural to him, but as

yet he had had no opportunity to exercise

it. Thefe was no other passenger on the

WOMEN. 9

road ; and it was therefore certain, that the

sounds of distress he heard must have pro-

ceeded from the carriage ; he hurried after


it. At the turnpike there was a short de-

lay ; but while it continued, the same cries,

now evidently, though faintly, issuing from

the carriage, struck on his ear. He re.

doubled his speed, hoping to be able to

stop it at the turnpike; but the carriage

went rapidly on, and the people at the gate,

of whom he enquired, could only tell him

that a gentleman within had given them a

handful of silver in great haste ; that there

was a kind of struggle within ; and that he

had ordered the driver to go on at full gal-

lop. De Courcy, hopeless of overtaking

them, still pursued, when one of the horses,

pushed beyond his speed, fell, and remain-

ing entangled in the harness, by his ut-

most efforts he came up with them before

they reached the gate of .the Phcenix Park.

The driver, and an out-rider, who had dis-

mounted, were busy about the hprse that

A3

10 WOMEN.

had fallen, and a man leaning out of the

window was cursing their delay, when a

female voice screamed audibly within, and


De Courcy could distinctly see an arm ex-

tended from the window that was instant-

ly and forcibly withdrawn, and the man in

the carriage drew up the window, urging,

with frightful imprecations, the driver to

proceed. De Courcy attempted to force

open the door, which was strongly held

within ; the driver, turning round, aimed

a blow at him with the end of his whip,

which was meant to stun him; De Courcy

shunned it, closed with him, wrested it

from him, and again attempted the door;

but the man, in the mean time, was on his

box, and the out-rider lashing on the horses

with his own whip, they set off at full

speed, though the plunging, halting gait of

one of them indicated he had been lamed

by his fall.

The carriage entered the Park. Charles

hurried to, the centinel at the gate, and ac-

WOMEN. Ill

quainted him with the facts, and with his

fears, on which he laid much stronger stress.

The centinel could not quit his post, but


offered to alarm the guard. Charles then

alone, entered on the Park road, utterly ig-

norant of its direction, and with nothing

to guide him but the lessening sound of

the carriage- now rolling at a hopeless dis-

tance before him. So ignorant was he of

the environs of Dublin, that he made his

way out of the other Park-gate, and was

on the Chapelizod road before he knew he

had quitted it; then, about half a mile on-

ward, a light, seen distinctly across the dark

road, directed him to a cabin door, where

a woman stood evidently looking, or try-

ing to look, after some object she had late-

ly seen.-

" Did a carriage pass this1 way lately ?"

said De Courcy.

The woman answered there had ; that it

had stopped near her door in consequence

<of some accident that had happened to one

12 WOMEN.

of the horses which appeared to be lame;

that her son had been called vout to assist

in settling the harness; and she added, that


a gentleman in the carriage had rewarded

her so liberally, that " she did not know

what to make of it;" and that he seemed so

agitated, that, after giving her the money,

he still continued to hold her hand with

such force (all the time calling to the driver

to hurry on) that she was dragged for some

steps along with the carriage before he re-

collected himself, and released her.

De Courcy scarce waited to hear her;

and, though now without hope or even ob-

ject, and with strength nearly exhausted,

once more hurried on to pursue he knew

not what.

The darkness of the moonless night, and

the speed with which he had walked (the

utmost speed of a frame eminently active)

had prevented his discovering, or even

thinking, where he was; but at this mo-

ment the loud bell of the Royal Hospital

WOMEN. . 13

striking nine, and its sound instantly re-

peated by those of Stephens and Swift in

solemn accordance, reminded him that he


must have wandered in a circuit, as he was

still so near to Dublin. The sound, aug-

mented by the dead stillness of the night,

seemed to him the most awful he had ever

heard, and at that moment a striking pas-

sage in Clarkson's Account of the Aboli-

tion of the Slave-Trade rushed on his me-

mory ; it was that in which he describes

the effect of the bells of the city of Bristol

ringing out as he approached it—approach-

ed it with a purpose so hostile to its wealth,

its power, and its crime; he describes its

effect like that of an awful challenge to his

spirit, a summons to a conflict, of which

he had never fully felt the magnitude or

weight before.

De Courcy listened till the last sound

died away ; and, pausing to catch its echo,

saw a gleam of light appear and vanish near *

him, and he turned in the direction, and

14 WOMEN.

saw a woman with a light in her hand en-,

ter a house at a short distance—He follow-

ed her—the door was instantly shut—he


knocked at it—no answer—the light with-

in disappeared. His feelings were alive to

every suspicion at this moment; and, un-

able to consult any thing but his feelings,

he obeyed them with a kind of blind con-

fidence. He knocked again; and, recei-

ving no answer, burst the door open in a

moment; a cry> fearfully smothered, and

quick short breathing near him instantly

followed, and he felt that either he or the

inhabitants of the place had something to

fear from each other. Air was dark at first;

but in a few seconds there came a gloomy

indistinct glare from the turf-embers that

burned on the hearth, that still shewed no-r.

thing but the earthen floor and the rafted

roof, leaving the walls in complete obscu-

rity. No human creature was to be seen—>

Charles paused—the deep stifled breathing

increased—at last, a voice near him, tho

WOMEN. 15

speaker still unseen, whispered, " Is that

the mm f

Charles, who knew not what to answer,


advanced ; a woman then started forward

from a dark corner, and stood wildly before

him, as if wishing to oppose him, she knew

not how. She was a frightful and almost

supernatural object; her figure was low,

and she was evidently very old, but her

muscular strength and activity were so

great, that, combined with the fantastic

wildness of her motions, it gave them the

appearance of the gambols of a hideous

fairy. She. was in rags, yet their arrange-

ment had something of a picturesque ef-

fect. Her short tattered petticoats; of all

colours, and of various lengths, depending

in angular shreds, her red cloak hanging

on her back, and displaying her bare bony

arms, with hands whose veins were like

ropes, and fingers like talons; her naked

feet, with which, when she moved, she

stamped, jumped, and beat the earth like*

16 WOMEN.

an Indian squaw in a war-dance ; her face

tattooed with the deepest indentings of

time, want, wretchedness, and evil pas-


sions ; her wrinkles, that looked like chan-

nels of streams long flowed away ; the eager

motion with which she shook back her

long matted hair, that looked like strings

of the grey bark of the ash tree, while eyes

flashed through them whose light seemed

the posthumous offspring of deceased hu-

manity,—her whole appearance, gestures,

voice, and dress, made De Courcy's blood

run cold within him. They gazed on each

other for some time, as if trying to make

out each other's purpose, from faces dimly

seen, till the woman, whose features seem-

ed kindling by the red light into a fiend-

like glare, appeared to discover that he was

not the person whom she expected, and

cried, in a voice at once shrill and hollow,

like a spent blast, " What is it brought

you here?"—and before he could answer,

rushing forward, stood with her back against

WOMEN.

a door, (which but for this motion he would

not have observed,) and waving her lean

nervous arms, exclaimed fiercely,—" Come


no farther, at your peril." ,

This attitude and tone of defiance rou-

sed De Courcy,—" At my peril, then," said

he; but he recollected that he had to con-

tend with a woman, and attempted gently,

but firmly, to remove her from the door.

This he found no easy task ; the beldame

grappled with the strength of a fury, and

it was only by his utmost exertions that he

succeeded in tearing her from it. A faint

murmur within, as if proceeding from some

one disturbed by the noise of the struggle,

reached his ear as at length he flung the door

open. A wretched candle threw its dim

light (too dim to be discovered before) on a

pallet and a figure in white that lay extend-

ed on it. The spotless white of the drapery

made a strange contrast to the darkness,

filth, and misery around it. De Courcy

approached;—it was a female; the face was

18 WOMEN.

averted, and one arm was flung wildly over

the head, but ringlets of luxuriant dishe-

velled hair, that even in the darkness gleam-


ed like gold, were scattered over the shoul-

der, descending almost to the slender waist,

and half the pale cheek, lovely even in

apparent death, was seen beneath it. A

gush of pity, horror, and indignation, swell-

ed in De Courcy's throat;—he could not

speak—he could not approach—he leaned

for support against the Avretched bed on

which she lay unconsciously. She was

young,—how young and how lovely that

lovely hair and slender milky arm told him

as he hung over her. What she must have

suffered to be there—what might she not

have suffered since she came or had been

dragged there ! Her present insensibility

seemed manifestly the stupor of illness or

terror. He spoke to her, though he scarce

knew what he said, but she gave no an-

swer. He attempted, as he thought, to

raise her, but his touch was too feeble to

WOMEN. 19

have raised a far lighter weight, though he

felt that even his touch was something like

profanation. She fell like a corpse from


his arms, but as she fell, a few indistinct

reluctant sounds announced, that though

life was apparently suspended, it was not

extinguished.

At this moment the hag approached the

door, and stood without entering, bending

backwards and forwards, like a tigress col-

lecting force for a spring. De Courcy

looked at her for a moment; there was no-

thing human or hopeful about her; but the

dread that she might have assistants near,

made him risk an appeal even to her. He

caught her arm and attempted to lead her

towards the sufferer ; she struggled to get

loose from him, fearing, like all who in-

tend an injuiy, that some was intended to

her. He released her, and with an appeal-

ing look pointed to the bed. The woman

hesitated, and De Courcy, thinking he

knew the cause of her hesitation, promised

SO WOMEN.

her secresy and an ample reward, if she

assisted him in removing the lady, or even

in not obstructing their escape. Her wild,


but meaning eye, was strongly fixed on

him while he spoke, and she burst into a

laugh of frantic derision, in whose "'mad-

ness, however, there was meaning."

" And you would give money for her

soul, would you ? and for my soul, too ?—-

you would ; but I am no Judas. I won't

sell her for your thirty pieces of silver. I

have watched for her, I have sought her, I

have bought her. I watched in day and

in darkness. I waded through tears and

blood for her;—she is mine. Do not touch

her;—she is bought with the price that

you can never pay. Oh! they were weary

hours till I paid her price. I paid it on

the mountain—I paid it on the bog—I

paid it on the road when I begged—in

their dark holes, where they kept me

screeching, and told me I was mad—in

their prisons, where they kept me starving

WOMEN. SI

and said I was a vagabond. Vagabond and

mad as I was, I won her from them all,

and I'll keep her ;—I was weak, but God


was strong. I had that glory from God

to laugh at them and tread on them; tread

on life and death to save her ;—and I have

saved her through the power of the Cross,

and the power of the Holy Mary, and of

all the blessed holy saints.—Ora pro nobis,

Sancta Maria.—Ora pro nobis, sancte dia-

bole. No, no,—that was the tempter's

doing;—he takes the words out of my

mouth, and the grace out of my heart, and

there he stands grinning and mocking—a-

page satana—ora pro nobis Donrine Jesu—~

that's it, that's it—that's the word. I want-

ed it, but Satan sent it far away. Let me

kiss the Cross—ha, ha, ha! Why do you

offer that great black claw ?—ha, ha, ha !—

that's the tempter."

In an agony of supernatural excitement,

she flung herself on her knees, and inarti-

culately repeated some Latin prayers, mix-

82 WOMEN.

ed with the frequent use of the sign of the

Cross. If the state of De Courcy's feelings

could have allowed him to glance at any


object but that he was trying ineffectually

to raise and support, the figure before him

must have fixed his whole attention. She

was kneeling, indeed; but her expression

and attitude denoted execration, not pray-

er. She seemed to be uttering those " bless-

ings of the evil genii which are curses ;"

her very rags seemed to quiver and rise on

her body from the intensity of her feel-

ings ; her grey matted'hairs actually did,

as in the eagerness of her motions the red

handkerchief that bound them fell off, and

showed them in all their deformity of

streaming hoariness ;—her luminous dila-

ted eyes rolled rapidly and obliquely in

their sockets, as if in search of certain ob-

jects concealed from human sight ^ and the

quick motion of her white shrivelled lips

seemed to mutter a spell, not an address to

Heaven,

WOMEN. 23

De Courcy looked on her for a moment

with horror, and then conceiving that this

paroxysm, in which she seemed unconsci-


ous of her own existence, might be favour-

able to the escape of the prisoner, raised

her Jight weight in his arms in one mo-

ment, and bore her out of the room. The

hag sprung from her knees and caught hold

of the young female ; till that moment the

latter had not shewed the Jeast sensibility,

but at that touch she seemed to revive

with a kind of abhorrent instinct, clung to

De Courcy with all her strength, and hid

her face in his bosom. Her clasp, though

twined round him in unconscious and con-

vulsive horror, seemed to send fire through

all his veins. He broke from the grasp of the

woman, and rushed from the hovel. The

woman followed and seized his hand, which

h? could not release for some minutes; her

preceding strength had been evidently that

of frenzy, and was now gradually relaxing;

yet still she held his hand, and poring over

24 » WOMEN.

• «

it with a witchlike eagerness, exclaimed, as

she examined its lines,—" Ay, ay, it is


white and soft—white enough, yet there is

black in every line of it to the eyes that

can see it, the blackness that is blacker

than death. It is as soft as a woman's,

and yet it can deal a heavy blow—the blow

that kills what it never touched—the blow

that breaks the heart. Others are deadly

to them they hate, but you will be deadly

to them you love!—Take her, take her

from me if you will, but take my curse

with you ; it will be heavier on your heart

than her weight is on your arm. I never

cursed the grass but it withered, or the sky

but it grew dark, or the living creatures

but they pined and wasted away. Now

you bear her away like a corpse in your

arms, and I see you following her corpse to

the church-yard, and the white ribbons ty-

ing her shroud ; her maiden name on her

tomb-stone; no child to cry for her, and

you that sent her to her grave wishing it

was dug for you."

WOMEN. 25

She continued her maledictions with

such frightful loudness and vehemence,

that De Courcy still heard and shuddered


at them, though now he was at a consider-

able distance from the hovel. The road

which he took (scarce knowing where to

go) lay between the Park wall and the ri-

ver. The low fields on the hanks of the

Liffey, with their hedges level to the road,

and their fiat expanse giving no shelter,

left him no hope of escape if they were

pursued. A carriage came on rapidly be-

hind him, and contrasting the appearance

and dress of the young female (whom he

still bore in his arms,) with the wretched

state of the hovel where he had found her,

and of the woman in whose power she was,

he immediately conceived that other hands

must have placed her there, and that he

might have to contend with more than the

frantic witch-like being, whose curses still

rung in his ears, before he could save her.

They were now, however, near Dublin,

VOL. I. B

26 WOMEN.

and he recollected that the lodge at the

Park-gate might afford them shelter be-

fore they reached it. The swift approach


of the carriage, and several voices, as of

men accompanying it, all engaged in en-

quiry, and rapidly exchanging oaths and

reproaches among each other, convinced

him that some danger was near, from which

he had no means of protecting his help-

less burthen. He retreated, and tried to

conceal himself and her among the thick

bushes that cluster below the Park wall;

he sunk on his knees, and withheld his

very breath. The carriage came on, stop-

ped, and the lights of lanterns glanced

across the road. Several voices eagerly en-

quired, " Where she was ?" and among

them that of the old woman was heard; but

she spoke in Irish, and De Courcy could

only collect some imprecations familiar to

the ears of all who have heard the lower

orders in Ireland speak.

All this went on within ten yards of

WOMEX. 27

where De Courcy lay concealed; yet this

moment of terror and danger was the most

delicious of his existence; for the young


female at this moment, revived by the air

or by the motion, clasped her white arms

closer round him, and murmured some in-

articulate sounds. It was the first, proof

of existence she had given, yet De Courcy

trembled lest the sound of her voice, faint

as it was, might reach the ears of those

whom he dreaded to be her pursuers; and,

with hands almost convul-jtd with the ef-

fort, he dared to press her closer to his bo-

som, to hush the whisper that she breathed.

There was a dead silence on the road; the

lights continued there, and their red glare

fell strongly on the very bushes where De

Courcy lay concealed. A short consulta-

tion was held (which seemed to him to last

for ever;)—then the far-off rolling of the

carriage-wheels, and the parting light, as it

sunk in the distance, announced all was

safe. The woman loitered some time af-

28 WOMEN.

ter the rest, and with the inconsistency of

madness, was singing a fragment of an

Irish ballad, evidently of monkish compo-


sition, and of which the air has all the mo-

notonous melancholy of the chaunt of the

cloister:—

"Oh I wish you were along with me,

Said \hefalse knight, as he rode ;

And our Lord in company,

Said the child, and he stood."

" Where's the next ?" she muttered; " ay

—gone far off, like all I remembered once

—far off.

" Oh, I wish you were in yonder well,

Said the false knight, as he rode ;

And you in the pit of hell,

Said the child, and he stood."

And her voice died away in indistinct '

mutterings.

De Courcy did not lose a moment now;

the light burthen in his arms felt like a

WOMEN. 29

feather, and it was scarce possible for hu-

man foot to traverse the ground with the

rapidity of his, till he reached the lodge


at the Park-gate. She neither moved nor

breathed, and at times he doubted fear-

fully whether it was the strong pulsation

of his own heart he mistook for her's, or

whether her's was throbbing with life. It

was some time before he could revise the

people, and when he did, their astonish-

ment at seeing a stranger, supporting in

his arms an insensible female, of whom he

could give no account, and of whose very

name he was ignorant, prevented them at

first from applying the means for her reco-

very ; they stared on him and each other

in stupid amazement.

De Courcy entreated one of them to

hasten to Dublin for any conveyance that

could be procured, and, placing her on a

seat, knelt before her. Her cold extended

hands, closed eyes, white lips, and rigid

frame, filled him, as he gazed, with un-

30 WOMEN.

speakable horror. Water was the only

restorative the people had to offer; but

they made their turf-fire blaze in a mo-


ment, and when by it's light they saw

the beautiful and innocent creature that

lay apparently lifeless before them, a cry

of pity and horror burst from them all,

and they eagerly employed themselves in

every means for her recovery that well-

meaning ignorance could suggest. Simple

as these means were, they proved effectual,

and De Courcy at last beheld the colour of

life tinging her cheeck, with a hue as faint

as that in the bell of a hyacinth. As re-

turning animation slowly pervaded her

frame, De Courcy gazed, and thought that

its like had never before been beheld on

earth. She seemed scarce beyond the age

of childhood, and there appeared about

her an etherial lightness and purity, a visi-

ble sanctity, that even in that helpless state

made her appear as scarce

" Of the earth—earthly."

WOMEX. 31

Her eyes opened slowly, and wandered for

some time without discrimination on the

objects round her; but the kneeling figure


of De Courcy, his locked hands, and his

speaking eyes, soon pointed out her preser-

ver among the group.

Certainly man never appears to woman

under so interesting an aspect as that of her

protector; even the roughest form and man-

ners do not repel the most delicate woman,

when associated with this idea; but when

it is accompanied by a form whose beauty

and tenderness (like De Courcy's) are al-

most feminine, the contrast of such quali-

ties augments their value, and one feels for

such an object almost all that could be in-

spired by both sexes in each other. With

a feeling, that even the novelty of her situ-

ation could not repel, she spread out her

white hands to him, and exclaimed, " Oh!

how much, how much do I owe you!"

De Courcy heard with that silent de-

light that cannot answer; he bowed to the

32 WOMEN.

earth before her, and pressing his lips to

the edge of her white garment, felt a relief

in sinking from her sight, and shutting out


the intoxicating sound of her voice. Ex-

hausted by the effort, the young female fell

back, and closing her eyes and reclining her

head, seemed to sink into a state between

repose and insensibility.

Suddenly the sound of a carriage was

heard ; the party held their breath in ter-

ror ; the woman dexterously extinguished

the light; there was a dead silence for some

moments; at last the welcome voice of the

messenger from Dublin was heard. The

door was opened immediately, and an el-

derly man, of no very prepossessing ap-

pearance, entered, and addressed the lady

as his niece. She was for some time un-

able to answer him, and he turned to the

people of the lodge for explanation; but

they could give him none. There was

something very singular in his manner,

which struck De Courcy, agitated as he

WOMEN. S3

was; he neither expressed terror, pity,

wonder, or affection, but he was profuse in

his acknowledgments to the Deity, and


these were delivered in a measured and

technical phrase, which seemed ,to be ready

prepared in his memory, and to cost him

little effort to repeat. Of De Courcy he

took no notice, and De Courcy felt no wish

to obtrude himself on it. It was only

when he was supporting his niece to the

carriage, that she turned round, and point-

ing to De Cpurcy, with a gesture whose

emphasis could not be mistaken, forced the

attention of her uncle towards him. ">

There was an eloquent reproach in her

appealing look, that roused him reluctant-

ly. He turned to De Courcy, and mut-

tered some ungracious sounds of obliga-

tion, concluding by offering him a seat in

the carriage to Dublin. De Courcy bow-

ed proudly, and felt disposed to decline his

offer; but acute and increasing pain in his

head and back, which he then ascribed to

B2

34 WOMEX.

fatigue, compelled him to accept the repul-

sive invitation. When they were in the

carriage, the uncle (whose name he had


neither heard or enquired,) informed him

he had been in search of his niece, whose

disappearance at evening prayers had alarm-

ed the family, when he had providentially

met in the street the young man who had

been sent to Dublin for the carriage. From

a conversation he overheard between him

and the couchman, he suspected the truth,

and, accompanying him down, discovered

his niece. To this explanation De Courcy.

listened with little interest; his pains were

becoming excruciating, accompanied with a

violent pulsation in his temples ; the niece

never spoke, though frequently called on

by her uncle to " lift up Tier voice and praise

the Lord for her deliverance."

The carriage stopt in a street, of which

De Courcy did not know the name or di-

rection ; the sullen, half-muttered expres-

sion of a wish to see him at their abode, to.

WOMEN. 35

"join in thanksgiving for the mercy of which

he had been the instrument" he hardly heard,

and hurried to the hotel where he was to


pass the night in a state of feverish suffer-

ing, which his mental agitation was mo-

mently exasperating.

In the morning he was delirious: the

seeds of a fever had been lurking in his

constitution, and now burst forth with vio-

lence. Of many young men whom he had

known in the country, and who had pro-

fessed to look forward with such delight

to the renewal of their intercourse in Dub-

lin, not one approached his sick bed ; and,

in spite of medical skill, he might have

perished from the want of those number-

less nameless attentions, more needful to

sickness than medicine itself, had it not

been for the care of a young man, who,

till then, had never professed any particu-

lar friendship for De Courcy.

His name was Montgomery ; a serious

young man, whom his acquaintance ridi-

86 WOMEN.

culed as a Methodist: he took his patient

steady station beside De Courcy's infected

bed, and never quitted it till the sufferer


was restored to every thing but strength. It

was a singular circumstance, that, on his re-

covery, he found that the delirium of his fe-

ver had obliterated every trace of that event-

ful night, except the image of the young

female. Of the place where he found her,

her name, her residence, he could not recal

a single idea ; while of her form, her face,

her motion, and the few words she had

murmured, he retained an impression so

vivid and distinct, that it tormented him

with its contrasted clearness. His confused

and clouded memory seemed to darken the

back-ground of the painting, to make every

line and tint of its beautiful subject shine

out with the brightness of reality. For

hours he thought upon that night, vainly

trying to grasp one accompanying idea.

Sometimes in despair he gave up the whole

as a vision, and often he felt as if she was

WOMEN. 37

still in his arms. He had never mention-

ed the circumstance to any one; and his

involuntary doubts of its reality were


strengthened by the silence of the other

party. Neither uncle, or niece, (if such

persons existed,) had ever made an enquiry

about him.

" Singular neglect, if it was not all a

dream!" said De Courcy to himself.


still in has am*. H» nt i

ed the orcBissaary v it*

involuntary dxJB * s

strengthened ry :te aac


party. Xekkr asck a- :

persons eiBtei i^e«sr»

about him.

" Sinsabr ggpi f t

dream** HJcXfeCanir -„

39

nder

n ne-

wcnt

pres-

ourcy

con-

haust-

lose of

,bya

enter;

in the

xc saw

otti his

weak-

it, she

th, gi-

He

ied to

icher,

lady.

, and

38 WOMEN.

CHAPTER II.

Te captam somniis teneo.

THIS constant uneasy contemplation re-


tarded his recovery. In the evenings he

was particularly lonely and depressed ; and

one evening in particular saw Montgomery

going to leave him, with a reluctance which

he was ashamed to avow.

" Where are you going, Montgomery ?"

" To Bethesda Chapel, to the evening

lecture."

" They say you are a Methodist," said

De Courcy, laughing.

" If I minded what fools said of me, I

should have a fine time of it," said Mont-

gomery, bluntly.

" Take me with you, provided always

you do not convert me," said De Courcy,

WOMEN. 39

hiding liis unwillingness to be alone under

a forced laugh.

" If God does not convert you, man ne-


ver can," said Montgomery. So they went

both of them together.

Bethesda Chapel was crowded; the pres-

sure in the aisle soon separated De Courcy

and Montgomery; and the former con-

tinued standing till he was almost exhaust-

ed. An elderly lady, towards the close of

the sermon, opened a pew-door, and, by a

courteous motion, invited him to 'enter;

his figure and appearance, unlike any in the

place, had struck her; and when she saw

him often remove the thick hair from his

pale forehead, on which the drops of weak-

ness were every moment bursting1 out, she

felt affected by this contrast of youth, gi-

gantic height, and apparent debility. -He

accepted her offer; but still continued to

stand in fixed attention to the preacher,

and this circumstance pleased the old lady.

She turned her eyes often towards him, and

40 WOMEN.

wished him well. The sermon ended; and

the hymn, in which many of the congrega-

tion joined, began.


Close to De Courcy, the tones of a voice

more soft, more rich, more plaintive, and

more pure, than it seemed possible for hu-

man organs to utter, " rose like a stream of

rich distilled perfumes." Ignorant of mu-

sic as a science, but " tremblingly alive"

to its influence, he listened;—the voice,

strengthening with the joining voices of

the congregation, and aided by the swell of

the organ, sounded so distinctly, that De

Courcy, starting, for the first time per-

ceived a young female standing beside him,

whose simple dress, low stature, and slight

figure, had hitherto escaped his observation.

Her face was completely concealed by her

large bonnet, and her figure lost in a dark

pelisse, and her whole appearance was so

petite and obscure, that De Courcy bent to

listen whether those delicious sounds were

indeed uttered by her.

WOMEN. 41

As he leaned near her, the young female,

with that liberty which seems to inspire

confidence, but not to express it, offered


him her hymn-book, and pointing with her

white finger to the page, pursued her sa-

cred song with as little emotion as if her

sister held the other leaf. De Courcy bent

over the book, which was so small that

their hands almost touched each other; his

eyes, fixed on the white fairy fingers so

near, wandered over the lines without dis-

tinguishing them ;—that thrilling voice so

close to him, those tones that seemed to

turn the very air into music, gave him sen-,

sations of delight, such as Milton felt when

he said, " Intremuit Iteto fiorea terra sono.n

He did not wish for some moments to

catch a glimpse of her face-—he felt as if the

present moment were to last for ever—as

if the sounds which he then heard were

never to cease. It was only at the conclu-

sion of the hymn (when the lady attempt,

ing to withdraw the book, which he still

42 WOMEN.

held unconsciously, looked up with a slight

expression of surprise) that he beheld a

countenance which gleamed on hiin like a


vision of the past. The ringlets of pale

gold, curling like the untortured locks of

childhood, falling over her cheek, like the

shade of brilliant foliage over a bed of blos-

soms ; the eyes of Heaven's own blue, in

which every feeling of the pure heart was

written, and not a feeling that might not

be avowed to men and angels ; the lips,

over whose young roses no breath but of

devotion had ever sighed; her whole aspect

reflecting the mild glory of that holy har-

mony, whose last notes trembled on her

half-open lips, and her glance so suddenly

raised, so suddenly withdrawn,—he recog-

nised all—it was herself—the very female

he had saved !—She evidently did not know

him,—he was much altered by his illness,

and this was the first time he thought or

felt he was. He still continued to gaze

on her, as we watch the sleep of a beautiful

WOMEN. 43

infant, delighted with its calm unconscious

beauty, and feeling that when it awakes it

will turn to us with looks of love.


The congregation were dispersing; the

elderly lady and her young companion

made several unassisted attempts to open

the pew-door ; at length De Courcy recol-

lected himself, and attempted to assist them,

but his trembling hands only increased the

difficulty, and Montgomery, who was in

the aisle, was obliged to release the party.

As they went out, the young lady, with a

motion that seemed rather the result of re-

ligious benignity than of worldly courtesy,

turned and slightly bowed to De Courcy.

He saw once more those eyes that breathed

of heaven; and the unuttered sound that

trembled on her lip had more of sweetness

than any that courtly politeness ever breath-

ed or dictated ; and the grace of her fairy

form, as it glided down the aisle, left him

without power to follow her but with his

eyes.

44 WOMEN.

" I am much altered," said he to himself,

" yet she might have known me;" and a

feeling like pride mingled in his determi-


nation not to claim her notice. He watch-

ed her;—she turned and looked steadily

at him ;—a smile of bright and timid plea-

sure trembled over ker beautiful features

for a moment, the next she appeared to

grow very weak, and caught the arm of the

elderly lady for support, while she feebly

extended one hand towards De Courcy.

He rushed forward and caught it; the el-

.derly lady appeared alarmed, and Montgo-

mery looked on in silent amazement; for

some moments he thought that De Cour-

cy's delirium had returned, and a consider-

able time elapsed before a short and hur-

ried explanation introduced them to each

other. There was much embarrassment in

the manner of the elderly lady as she in-

distinctly alluded to the eventful night of

Eva's, danger, and pressed De Courcy to al-

WOMEN. 45

low her family an opportunity of express-

ing their gratitude to him under their own

roof. Charles bowed in silent delight, and


they then separated.

De Courcy wandered away alone; he

wished to be far from the city, from its in-

habitants, from all mankind if possible. At

length he felt himself in the country ; the

cold clear splendour of a winter night was

around him ; he was at last alone with his

own heart, and its new-born inmate, pas-

sion in its first purity and brightness. He

communed with himself and was still. Oh,

what gleams of heaven burst on the soul in

such a moment, when creation seems re-

newed, and we awake to an existence so

new, so bright, so delicious, that the very

elements seem to harmonize with our feel-

ings ; and the stars, and heaven itself, appear

to hold a silent alliance with the thoughts

that are burning within us! He looked

round him, and the earth, though in dark-

10

46 WOMEN.

ness, appeared lovelier to him than in the

brightest noon of a summer's day. He

looked upward, and wondered that the


stars had never appeared so resplendent to

him before. He sighed, and felt respira-

tion itself a delight . He tried a thousand

times to utter some name that seemed at

the bottom of his heart, but knew riot what

name to call on ;—his whole mind seemed

but one idea—his whole existence but one

feeling ;—a glow like that of summer per-

vaded his whole frame, and he trembled

with a grateful consciousness of life he had

never known before. It was so late when

he awoke from his delirium, that he found

on his arrival at the College the gates were

shut. One might have supposed his situa-

tion comfortless enough as he leaned against

the iron railing till the gates were opened ;

but those moments were perhaps the most

delicious of his existence. What dreams

were his ?—The dreams that passion sheds

pointment or infelicity.'


WOMEX.

47

but once on the heart before its purity has

received a tinge from the senses, or its ar-

dour can anticipate the possibility of disap-

WOMEN.

CHAPTER III.

EURIPIDES.

THE next day, at an early hour, De


Courcy was in Dominick Street; he easily

discovered the house—it was a handsome,

but a very grave-looking one. The name

of " Wentworth" was on the door. There

are some houses that seem to bespeak their

inhabitants, and De Courcy had a kind of

feeling that this was one of them, at the mo-

ment he touched the knocker. He was

shewn into a room furnished plainly, but

in a manner that shewed if luxuries were

wanting, wealth certainly was not, and in a

few minutes Mrs Wentworth entered the

room. He had now leisure to observe her,

and the bare circumstance of her being an

inmate in the same house with that object,

WOMEN. 49

gave an indescribable interest to the obser-

vation. She appeared about fifty years of

age; her person was plain; but her clear


commanding eye, the severe simplicity of

her manners, and a consciousness of perfect

sincerity accompanying every word she ut-

tered, and communicating itself irresistibly

to her hearers, made one respect her the

moment they beheld her, and love her a

very few moments afterwards. Withdrawn

and recollected from the embarrassment of

the preceding night, her manner appeared

comparatively cold, but it was rather the

coldness of habit than of character; there

was more, too, of the measured and limited

phraseology of the evangelical ^people in

her conversation ; but when she continued

to speak for any time, one easily saw that

the range of her mind was far more exten-

sive than that of the objects to which it

was confined. She herself appeared to feel

this self-imposed constraint, and to escape

from it from time to time, but soon return-

VOL,. I. c

50 WOMEN.

ed again; and the final impression which

she left was that of strong sense, rigid rec-

titude of principle and conduct, and a tem-


per and heart naturally warm, but subdued

by the power of religion.

She expressed herself with earnest grati-

tude to De Courcy for the preservation of

her niece, and then made the most minute

and searching enquiries into the events of

that strange night. During the detail which

De Courcy gave, she was so much agitated,

that he would have paused had she not ur-

ged him to go on, with an earnestness very

remote from curiosity. *

" And can you possibly, madam," said

De Courcy, " guess at the authors or the

motives of this outrage ?" Mrs Wentworth

was silent.—" It is a most mysterious pro-

ceeding," said De Courcy, anxious to re-

lieve himself from this embarrassing. -si-

lence.

" There is a mystery," said Mrs Went-

worth, speaking almost involuntarily, and

WOMEN. 51

while she spoke she shewed so much agi-

tation, that the subject was dropped as if

by mutual and tacit consent.


The silence that followed was broke by

the entrance of Mr Wentworth, in whom

De Courcy recognized the uncle. The ap-

pearance of this man almost dissolved the

spell which appears to us to hang over

every object dwelling under the roof of

those we love, and attracts the heart irre-

sistibly, even to inanimate things, which

they have consecrated by a touch or a look.

His manners were repulsive, his under-

standing narrow, and his principles inflexi-

bly rigid; his mind was rather tenacious

than strong; what little he knew, he knew

thoroughly, and what he once acquired he

retained for ever. Early in life he had

made a large fortune with a spotless cha-

racter, and having retired from business,

found his mind utterly vacant; by the

persuasion of his wife, he was induced to

listen to the evangelical preachers, and (as J

52 WOMEN.

(*

is often the case with converts either in

early youth or in advanced life,) in a short


time he far outwent his preceptors. Calvin-

ism, Calvinism was every thing with him ;

his expertness in the five points would have

foiled even their redoubtable refuter, Dr

Whitby himself; but his theology having

obtained full possession of his head, seemed

so satisfied with its conquest, that it never

ventured to invade his heart. His mind

was completely filled with a system of doc-

trines, and his conversation with a con-

.nexion of phrases, which he often uttered

mechanically, but sometimes with a force

that imposed not only on others, but on him-

self. In this state he was perhaps as happy

as he could be, for he had a gratifying sense

of his own importance, and his conscience

was kept tranquil by listening to or repeat-

ing sounds, which to him had all the effect

of things. Never was Mirabeau's acute

remark, that " words are things," more

WOMEN. . 53

strongly verified than in the case of Mf •

Wentworth's religion.

. Mrs Wentworth introduced them to


each other, and, hoping to warm her hus-

band's coldness, was loud in her praises of

De Courcy's courage and humanity. Mr

Wentworth listened with the impatient air

of a man who is waiting to speak himself;

and then turning to De Courcy, exhorted

him to consider himself under every dis-

pensation, whether of providence or grace,

as the humble and worthless instrument of

Divine Power.

" I trust, young man, that you consider

yourself (though the preserver of my niece,)

as not a jot higher in the divine eye than >

those who were probably leagued against

her life. They may yet be as brands snatch-

ed from the burning, and so, through .Di-

vine Power, may you."

De Courcy, unused to this language,

could only answer by silent blushes and

bows ; but these bows and blushes became

54 WOMEN.

him much, and Wentworth at once set him

down as a convert. Mrs Wentworth, who

felt as much for her husband as for him,


was beginning to express her regret that

her niece could not thank him in person,

and her surprise that so long an interval

had elapsed previous to his introduction,

when Montgomery entered the room, and

enquired after Eva with all the familiarity

of I"ami dufamille.

De Courcy felt thunderstruck. By a

tenacity as strong as it was unaccountable,

he had never mentioned to Montgomery

the events of that extraordinary night. It

floated in his imagination like a vision; and

^Montgomery, occupied by his attention to

his patient, had never believed that any

intercourse existed between him and the

Wentworth family, till their brief and sin-

gular introduction at the Bethesda Chapel,

the preceding evening. Mrs Wentworth

answered his enquiries after Eva, and then,

apparently forcing herself ta give some ac-

WOMEN. 55

count of De Courcy being present, said, in

a low voice and hesitating manner, that the

family owed him unspeakable obligations


for the services he had rendered Eva.

Montgomery instantly extended his hand

in frank and cordial gratitude, though he

was totally unconscious of the nature of

the services alluded to. De Courcy gave

his in return, but it was with a coldness he

could not account for; the ardour of Mont-

gomery's enquiries had infused a dullness

into him, which, while he disdained him-

self for, he could not resist. At this mo-

ment they would have been delighted to

have exchanged situations; Montgomery

would have wished to be her preserver,

and De Courcy to be her friend. He soon

after retired, not without a warm invita-

tion from Mrs Wentworth to dine with

them on the following day ; it was as sin-

cerely, though not as warmly repeated by

Mr Wentworth, and De Courcy accepted

it with a delight he dared not express.

56 WOMEN.

" We do not live in the world," said

Mrs Wentworth, in a qualifying manner ;

" there are only grave quiet people to be


with us; but at your age I trust you are

rather 'governed by your feelings than by

the world in your choice of society."

" I trust," said Wentworth, " he is go-

verned by neither, but by grace." And so

they parted.

The next day he dined at Dominick-

Street, and found that Mrs Wentworth's

qualifying manner was not without a mean-

ing, for he was introduced to a class of so-

ciety whom he had never before met with.

A large evangelical party dined at the

house, (for the evangelical people remune-

rate themselves for renouncing the mixed

assemblies of the world by frequent meet-

ings among themselves,) and the men and

women were unlike any men and women

De Courcy had ever encountered before.

The women all dressed with the utmost

simplicity, with absolute plainness, arms

WOMEN. ' 57

covered to the wrists, and necks to the

ears; no distinction of appearance between

maid and matron, except that the former


wore their hair very simply arranged ; and

the latter, however young, had their heads

invariable .covered. The men—they nei-

ther paid the general attention to women

that is usual in mixed companies, nor se-

parated in groups to talk of politics •, they

sat apart " on their chairs sublime, in

thought more elevate, and reasoned high."

De Courcy heard terms used by them,

some of which he did not understand, and

others which he did, he thought quite unfit

for loose and general discussion. He felt

himself quite disconsolate; and approach-

ing a gentleman who stood leaning against

one of the windows, he ventured a few

observations on the position of the allied

armies, then sufficiently interesting and cri-

tical, for it was in the close of the eventful

year 1813.

" Very true, sir," said the gentleman,

c3

58 'WOMEN.

with a contraction of countenance that ap-

peared to De Courcy quite pantomimic,

" very true ; you are speaking of the down-


fal of the power of Buonaparte, but have

you ever thought of the means of over-

throwing the power of Satan, and extend-

ing the kingdom of Christ ?"

Dinner was announced at the end of this

triumphant sentence,—the party mixed,—

the dinner was excellent, but without pa-

rade ; the first course contained the sub-

stance of two or three more splendid but

less substantial. De Courcy remarked par-

ticularly the man who had rebutted him

just as they went down to dinner. He was

tall, but very ungraceful; a strange consci-

ousness of importance mingled itself most

uncouthly with his coarse figure and awk-

ward manners ; his hair was red ; his eye

small, but keen and piercing; his voice

powerful, but not melodious ; most repul-

sively softened when he addressed females,

to whom, however, he paid obvious atten-

WOMEN. 59

tion. He never spoke but on one subject,

and on that his eloquence was overpower-

ing, and his information profound, but it


was only on one side ; he was a sturdy or-

thodox Calvinist, skilful in argument, vehe-

ment in declamation, and amply equipped

with weapons from the old armoury of

Geneva, well furbished by modern artists,

"which he wielded with equal force and

dexterity. But his manners, his habits of

disputation, and even his pulpit oratory,

powerful as it was, were strongly tinged

with the original vulgarity of his origin and

nature.

He was the son of a poor labourer, the

tenant of a wealthy gentleman in Cork,

whose wife was evangelical; she instruct-

ed the children of her husband's tenants in

her own system ; her husband gave her no

disturbance; he followed his fox-hounds

all day, and damned his wife's Methodism

over his claret all night. The good lady

went her own way, and discovering in this

60 WOMEN.

lad, maugre his fierce red hair and bare

broad feet, evident marks of his being " a

growing and gracious character ;" and asto-


nished at the fluency and eloquence with

which he repeated his acquired creed, and

gave the word of exhortation to his ragged

family, wondering round the mud-walls of

his native cabin, and exhorted the old wo-

men (who, gossipping, squabbling, and even

drinking forty yards distant from the cha-

pel door, fell on their knees in the mire at

the tinkling of the bell which announced

the elevation of the Host) to turn from the

error of their ways, and seek the Lord.—

She proposed a subscription among her

friends to enable him to enter the universi-

ty, and be qualified " to minister at the

altar."

The subscription went on zealously, and

young Macowen entered College; but when

once there, his views, as they were called,

expanded so rapidly, that no Church Epis-

copalian, Presbyterian, or Independent, had

WOMEN. 61

the good fortune precisely to suit his senti-

ments in orthodoxy of system, or purity of

discipline. Thus he moved a splendid and


erratick meteor, shedding his light on the

churches as he passed, but defying them all

to calculate his orbit, or ascertain his direc-

tion. In the mean time, it had been sug-

gested to him that many evangelical fe-

males, of large fortune, would not be un-

willing to share his fate. This hint, often

repeated and readily believed, threw a most

odious suavity into his manner; his over-

blown vulgar courtesy was like the flowers

of the poppy, all glare and stench. Under

these circumstances, he had become the in-

timate of the Wentworth family ; and from

the moment hebeheldEva, his feelings were

what he could not describe, and would not

account for even to himself, but what he

was determined implicitly to follow. His

system took part with his inclinations, and

in a short time he believed it a duty to im

press her with the conviction that her sal-

"

62 WOMEX.

vation must depend on her being united

with him. When a perverted conscience is

in league with the passions, their joint in-


fluence is irresistible.

There is, among the evangelical people,

an establishment something like the Court

of Wards, abolished under James the First;

a determination to dispose of wealthy un-

married females to distinguished profess-

ors or preachers, who are not equally fa-

voured by fortune ; and the families of the

former conceive themselves not only ho-

noured, but benefited by the exchange.

Thus the evangelical system is rapidly as-

suming the aspect of the papal, and, by the

union of intellectual influence with actual

wealth, bids fair to rival it in power as well

as in pretensions. On this Macowen relied

much, and, strange to say, on his personal

advantages still more. He had been strong-

ly recommended to the Wentworths, and

held in the family something like the of-

fice of director in a Catholic continental fa-

mily ; but from the moment he beheld De

WOMEN. 63

Courcy, he felt his influence shaken. His

beauty ,his youth, his distinguished services,

—the enthusiasm of feeling that trembled


in his light and graceful form,—the broken

music of his firm mellow voice, as he ad-

dressed even the relatives of Eva,—the

deep but vanishing crimson of his cheek,

as for a moment, at the end of his hurried

enquiry after her, his eye fell on herself,—

and the sudden dropping of his white eye-

lids, with their rich, dark, humid fringe,

through which the eye spoke more than

words could utter—all this Macowen saw,

and looked at him askance, " with jealous

leer malign." The dinner went on ; the

men and women, seated alternately, spoke

of their popiilar preachers, and of popular

works of evangelical divinity, and of elo-

quent speeches made at the meetings of

the Bible Society, and of the diffusion of

the gospel throughout Ireland; and they

uttered sundry strictures on the parochial

clergy who opposed the circulation of evan-

64 WOMEN.

gelical tracts, with many a by-blow at the

contrast between the Calvinistic articles of

the Church of England, and the Arminian


creed of her modern sons.

Such was the conversation; and when

the women retired, it was not a whit more

enlarged. One man talked incessantly of

the " election of grace," his mind literally

seemed not to have room for another idea;

every sentence, if it did not begin, ended

with the same phrase, and every subject"

only furnished matter for its introduction.

Dr Thorpe's last sermon at Bethesda was

spoken of in terms of high and merited

panegyric.

" Very true," said he ; " but—a—a—

Did yon think there was enough of election

in it?"

A late work of the same author (his cle-

ver pamphlet on the Catholic petition) was

mentioned.

" But does he say any thing of election

in it?" (i-

WOMEN. 65

" There was no opportunity," said Mr

Wentworth. t

" Then he should have made one—All,


I would give very little for a book that did

not assert the election of grace !"

Once seated in his election-saddle, he

posted on with alarming speed, and ended

with declaring, that Elisha Coles, on God's

Sovereignty, was worth all the divinity that

ever was written. " I have a large collec-

tion of the works of godly writers," said

he, turning to De Courcy, " but not one

work that ever was, would I resign for that

of Elisha Coles."

" Won't you except the Bible ?" said

De Courcy, smiling.

" Oh, yes—the Bible—ay, to be sure,

the Bible," said the discomfited champion

of election ; " but still, you know"—and

he continued to mutter something about

Elisha Coles, on God's Sovereignty.

Another, who never stopped talking, ap-

peared to De Courcy a complete evangeli-

66 WOMKX;

cal time-keeper;—the same ceaseless tick-

ing sound;—the sam6 vacillating motion of

the head and body; and his whole conver-


sation turning on the various lengths of the

sermons he had heard, of which, it appear-

ed, he was in the habit of listening to four

every Sunday.

" Mr Matthias preached exactly forty-

eight minutes. I was at Mr Cooper's ex-

hortation at Plunket-street in the evening,

and it was precisely fifty-three minutes."

" And how many seconds ?" said Mrs

Wentworth, smiling, for she felt the ridi-

cule of this.

Close to De Courcy were two very young

men, who were comparing the respective

progress they had made in the conversion

of some of their relations. They spoke on

this subject with a familiarity that certain-

ly made De Courcy start.

" My aunt is almost entirely converted,"

said one. " She never goes to church now,

though she never missed early prayers at

WOMEN. 67

St Thomas's for forty years before. Now,"

with a strange tone of triumph, " now, is

your sister converted as much as that ?"


" Yes—yes—she is," answered the other

eagerly ; " for*she burned her Week's Pre-

paration yesterday, and my mother's too

along with it."

The other was dumb at this incontrover-

tible mark of conversion. De Courcy felt

shocked; for he thought, however opposite

to their sentiments might be the contents

of the book in question, this auto da fe of

its pages might have been spared ; and he

recollected the decent superstition of the

Turks, who collect and preserve with the

greatest care every scrap of paper on which

the name of God has been accidentally writ-

ten. At last De Courcy tried to ingratiate

himself with the party, by attempting to

speak on the only subject discussed among

them ; and, in answer to some observation

• • *

* Fact; me ipso teste.

68 WOMEN.

of Macowen's, he tasked his memory to

cite some passages from Fletcher's eloquent

" Appeal." Macowen at once silenced him,


by telling him, with a chilling look, that

Fletcher was an Arminian; and as little as

he understood of the phrase, it was enough

to signify that he was hors de combat in the

present engagement. IJe made one more

faint attempt to rally by quoting a passage,

which he imagined to possess resplendent

beauty and truth, from " Ccelebs in search

of a Wife." It was that fine speech of Lu-

cilla's father, where he speaks of the internal

evidence a believer has of his own conver-

sion ; and concludes with the utmost feli-

city of allusion, " One thing the Christian

knows, that whereas he was blind he now

seeth."

De Courcy spoke with eloquent anima-

tion ; but the dubious shake of the head,

the sigh of stifled reprehension, the " damn-

ing of faint praise," made him feel that he-

terodoxy was not confined to Arminianism

WOMEN. 69

f

alone in the opinion of the party ; and that

Hannah More herself, in spite of her ample


strides to the evangelical side of the ques-

tion, was still regarded by rigid Calvinis s

as " little better than she should be." All

he had now to do, was to cover his retreat

by " joining' the ladies;" and never was

retreat effected with less glory and more

satisfaction. But when he arrived in the

drawing-room, the same monotonous and

repulsive stillness ; the same dry circle (in

whose verge no spirit could be raised) re-

duced him to the same petrifying medium

with all around. The females were collect-

ed round the tea-table; the conversation

was carried on in pensive whispers; a large

table near them was spread with evangeli-

cal tracts, &c. The room was hung with

dark-brown paper ; and the four unsnuffed

candles burning dimly (the light of two of

them almost absorbed in the dark bays that

covered the table on which they stood,)

gave just the light that Young might have

70 WOMEN.

written by, when the Duke of Grafton

sent him a human skull, with a taper in it,

as an appropriate candelabrum for his tra-


gedy writing-desk. The ladies sometimes

took up these tracts, shook a head of deep

conviction over their contents, laid them

down, and the same stillness recurred. The

very hissing of the tea-urn, and the crack-

ling of the coals, was a relief to De Courcy's

ears.

The fact was, his presence was a con-

straint on them ; for religious people never

feel themselves quite at ease, except in the

presence of those whose opinions are simi-

lar to their own, or so opposite as to justify

a challenge to open a controversy. De

Courcy felt this, and also felt that the con-

straint he imposed was doubled on him-

self; still he lingered, for he had a hope to

support him—the hope that brought him

there; and, though not yet realized, it

seemed to grow stronger every moment its

indulgence was suspended. He might yet

WOMEN. 71

obtain one glance from Eva, one conscious

look, any thing that intimated they had

met before, met even in terror and distress;


for any thing allied to strong emotion,

seems to us allied to love, and we can hard-

ly see those who have participated with us

in strong emergencies, without feeling a tie

of the heart to them. A stranger, with whom

we have suffered shipwreck, appears ever

after to us as a friend. For a look he had

come, and for a look he still waited. When

he appeared before dinner, she had recog-

nized him only by a slight bow, and af-

terwards appeared engaged among the fe-

males of the party; and now, though near-

er to her than before, her down-cast eyes

were fixed on some netting, and though si-

lent, she appeared deeply attentive to the

few words that were uttered near her. It

was only at a moment when all eyes hap-

pened to be withdrawn from her, (except

De Courcy's,) that she raised hers, and their

smile, for hers were eyes that could smile,

72 WOMEN.

made him feel more than all the eloquence

that gratitude or passion ever poured forth.

Oh ! how a smile can repay love, even for


the sacrifice of life; how hearts can under-

stand each other, when the eyes alone are

the interpreters between them; and lan-

guage, in all its infinite variety, affords no-

thing so expressive as a look ! Yet, in the

look of Eva, there was nothing for presump-

tion, or even for hope to dream of; in her

beautiful eyes nothing could be read but

the timid thanks of a helpless terrified girl

for protection from danger,—thanks which

she had not the courage to convey in words,

and which she felt it almost a crime to ex-

press by a look. For months after he fed

on that look ; it came to him like a beam

of light, and he forgot whether it was day

or night when it glanced before his eyes.

The whispers of the party were now

faintly rising into articulate murmurs, and

De Courcy caught some singular sentences.

Mrs Wentworth asked a droopingc onsump-

• 6

WOMEN. 7S

tive girl next to De Courcy, how far she

had got in the Pilgrim's Progress.

" I have got no further than the Slough


of Despond, ma'am," said the poor girl, with

a phthysicky querulousness of accent al-

most ludicrous.

On his other hand sat a lady, whose life

was divided between the kitchen and the

conventicle; and a singular tinge, from her

divided pursuits, pervaded her conversation.

She was giving a history of her converting

her cook, but made perpetual digressions to

a fillet of veal that had been overdone the

day before. " And, Mary, after my read-

ing to yovi, says I, three sermons of Ro-

mance's this very day, and leaving Burder*s

-Village Sermons on your dresser, I did

not expect, Mary, you would have spoiled

that veal—you should think of your duty,

Mary, at your spit, and not have spoiled

that veal,—but indeed," in a lowered, con-

fidential voice, " the jack is not so good as

it ought to be."

VOL. i. D

74 * WOMEN.

In a few moments the rest of the party

came up, and then Charles witnessed a new

scene. The evenings of religious people


are necessarily monotonous; they do not

dance, they do not play cards, and music

(except sacred music) is rarely admitted.

When tea was over, and it was a long ope-

ration, (for men who drink little wine are

much attached to the milder excitement of

the tea-table) a table was placed in the cen-

tre of the room, with a Bible and a Hymn-

Book ; a layman of distinguished gifts was

requested to " give a word of exhortation,"

and some clerical members of the party

were urgent in the request. He complied,

and opening the Bible, selected a verse

from the Epistle to the Romans, and ad-

dressed the audience in an extempore dis-

course. The language was excellent, and

the matter equally so, to those who relish

Calvinistic divinity. At the conclusion,

another of the party gave a long extempore

prayer, in which he petitioned the Deity

WOMEN. 75

that the eyes of one, who was yet in dark-

ness, might be enlightened to behold the

glory of the truth ; and Charles, who felt


that he was the only one to whom the peti-

tion was applicable, blushed, even on his

knees, at the application.

The service concluded with a hymn, in

which most of the company joined, some

with science, but all with devotion. The

harmony was good, for there were many

voices ; yet Charles could hear but one.—

Her angel figure, as it bent over the harp,

—her white slender arms,—her clustering

locks, thrown back by a motion of the head,

so graceful, yet so infantine,—and her up-

cast eyes, as their pale-blue lustre broke

from beneath the shade of her ringlets,

might have made a poet or a painter think

of a young Cecilia in her first moments of

inspiration, but could make a lover only

think of herself.

The party separated early ; and Charles,

though surprised, was pleased to find that

76 WOMEN,

no allusion was made to the adventure of

the preceding evening, nor did it even ap-

pear to be known to the rest of the party,


He could not bear the thought of standing

like a mark for congratulation to be dis-

charged at by strangers ; but even the fear

of it was spared him. In fact, Mr and Mrs

Wentworth wished the subject to be never

known, or soon forgot; the latter from

strong and just reasons, and the former be-

cause he had the sense, in all important

*natters, to be governed by his wife.

WOMKN. 77

CHAPTER IV.

Ti nf » 3

,n-


that day Charles became an ad-

mitted member of the family ; he was invi-

ted almost every day, for the Wentworths

appeared to feel their obligations in propor-

tion as they concealed the expression of

them. Every day in that family was ex-

actly like another ; a succession of evange-

lical guests, or evangelical topics, filled up

every hour. Sometimes the strong and

cultivated mind of Mrs Wentworth threw

a gleam of light across the narrow horizon

to which she had bounded herself, but it

was soon darkened. Yet this cheerless mo-

notonous existence, this life of phrases, (for

he had not acquired the feelings of the

78 WOMEN.

.party,) was to Charles the most exquisite

delight. He saw her every day, every day

he heard her voice, though not addressed


to him ;—a single movement of her figure,

unconscious as she was of its graces, plun-

ged him in a delicious reverie for hours;—

a single word, addressed to him accident-

ally, left him without power to reply to it,

and then he retired to repeat it to himself

like a spell, till his senses became giddy

with delight.

When we first feel passion, the presence

of the ©bject beloved is all we seek on earth;

we imagine that if we are but admitted to

its sight, every wish of the heart is fulfilled;

and, like the Persians before their God, we

only ask to see, and kneel, and worship.

But in a short time the sight of that object

whom we love, beheld under circumstan-

ces of constant constraint,—the sight of an

object whom we can see as we wish, but

cannot speak to as we feel, the struggle of

the " bursting heart and reined tongue" be-

come insupportable, Every day he saw her

WOMEN. 79

he drank deeper and deeper the intoxica-

ting draught which he had not the cou-

rage to keep from his lips, though he felt it


maddened him. But the constraints under

which he saw her became every day more

insupportable ;—to see her, and to see her

constantly among strangers, to whom her

sole attention was devoted;—to see her,

yet to feel that her eyes were never turned

towards him ; to hear her, and to watch

for a monosyllable addressed to himself) on

which he might feed for a day;—to con-

trive a thousand devices that her dress

might touch him as she passed,—that he

might, in turning over the leaves of her

music as she sat at the harp, touch her fin-

gers, or feel her odorous breath pass near

his cheek ;—to waste the day in expedients

to be near her, and feel that to be near her

was to be every day nearer madness ;—yet

to suffer all this in the presence of stran-

gers,—beings among whom he felt as if

they did not understand his language,—as

«0 WOMEN.

if they formed no part of his creation,—as

if they could see him die, and never ask

the cause, or understand it if it was told;


—to do this long was impossible.

The presence of a beloved object, sur-

rounded by- strangers, is worse than ab-

sence to those who love; for it forbids

those ijlusions of the imagination which ab-

sence indulges. Solitude becomes a relief,

compared to the necessity of suppressed

emotion, increasing in proportion to the in-

creasing force of that emotion; that pre-

sence then becomes a torment we cannot

bear ; we wish to be as far as possible from

constraint, from witnesses, even from the

object we love ; we wish to be able to ex-

claim aloud, to vent inarticulate cries, and

to seek in the silence of nature that relief

which society seems sworn to deny us. In

these fatal indulgences of passion, stealing

glances and sounds to feed its feverish appe-

tite in solitude,—of days wasted in watch-

ing for a look, and nights in recalling them;

WOMEN. 81

in this existence of dreams, four months

were passed away, and with them Charles's

health and spirits, and vital resources, were


passing away swiftly also. All on a sud-

den he discontinued his visits at Went-

worth's, for he felt he could no longer sup-

port the sight of that face whose every

glance seemed to be drinking up his blood.

Her coldness appeared increasing too,

though, in fact, her manners had not un-

dergone the least alteration; but in propor-

tion as his own feelings became more fer-

vid, her's must, by contrast, have necessari-

ly appeared colder. In climates where the

ardour and brilliancy of the sun are beyond

the conception of a European imagination,

the coup de soleil is often fetal; so it was

faring with Charles,—he sickened under

the brightness of the object by whose light

he lived. Perhaps a little more knowledge

of the female character would have enabled

him to draw a conclusion more favourable

to the wishes he did not dare to utter; but

D2

82 WOMEN.

the penetration of Charles, wholly unaided

by vanity, could never discover that timid

silence is the most expressive language in


which a young female can intimate the ab-

sence of indifference. When he had torn

himself from Wentworth's, he gave up all

society; not even Montgomery was admit-

ted : He gave up all study, all literary pur-

suits ; but read still those few works in

which passion is represented in a state of

wild intoxication, or hopeless despondency.

All day he spent in his rooms, and in the

evening his wasting figure was sometimes

seen in the College Park, shunning and

shunned; for even those who did not know

the cause of his dejection, were repelled by

its effects, and the gay De Courcy was de-

serted by all.

It was now spring, but the weather was

cold and ungenial, and the trees were bare;

nothing could be more suitable to the

gloomy complexion of the season and the

scene, than that figure, once eminent above


84 WOMEN.

and her voice, when the evangelical party,

usually assembled there, joined in hymns.

That voice, in his present exhausted state,


would have been more than he could bear,

had he been in her presence; but its notes,

" by distance made more sweet," combined

all the luxury of melancholy with the in-

toxication of passion. He listened, and

imagined that such sounds might perhaps

be uttered over his grave, and he would

have resigned his spirit that moment to

have had its parting soothed by such a re-

quiem. He did not know that the voice

which filled him with such delicious an-

guish was observed, by those who heard it,

to grow every day fainter, and that the

cheek of Eva was growing paler every day,

while those who watched it never guessed

what worm was preying on its rose; nor,

had he known it, would he have divined

the cause more than they. The impres-

sion that he had received of her was that

of a being so devoted to God, that man

WOMEN. 83

could have no share in her thoughts or

her heart; he regarded her as something

enshrined and sanctified, to whom the men-


tion of earthly things would have been an

insult, and of earthly passion, almost im-

piety.

Even to himself, his love almost appear-

ed a crime, and it seemed to cost him less

to die of its concealment, than to disclose it.

The change in his health now grew alarm-

ing. Montgomery, whose feeling but proud

mind could notstoop tosolicit forconfidence,

grew every day more wretched about him ;

and, at length, accidentally learning his

guardian's direction, wrote to him, guarded-

ly but explicitly—stating the desperate si-

tuation of Charles, as well as his obstinacy

in refusing all medical advice, or friendly

communication on the subject.

Mr Asgill, on the receipt of this letter,

came instantly to town. He first waited

on Montgomery, to whom he expressed his

thanks in a voice choked by his emotions,

9

8<> WOMEN.

and then made some enquiries about the

state of Charles, which perhaps he had as-

scribed to other causes. But Montgomery


had told all he knew, and could now only

express his hope that Mr Asgill had not

come too late. Mr Asgill then went to

Charles—he was alone as usual, and when

he saw this respectable man, for whom he

had always felt veneration, and still as much

affection as bis heart had 'yet to spare, he

rushed forward to meet him, with a mix-

ture of cordiality and secret shame, that

burned on his cheek, and trembled in every

limb. Mr Asgill was prepared from Mont-

gomery's letter for this interview; but he

was not prepared for the object he encoun-

tered. It was not in the damp emaciated

fingers he wrung in his ; nor in the hollow

cheek, where one feverish spot burnt deep«-

ly; nor in the sunk eyes, whose wandering

fires burnt fiercely one moment, and the

next seemed extinguished in their sockets;

nor in that wasted frame, where the slight-

WOMEN. 87

ness of youth seemed rapidly yielding to

the attenuation of death, that he could dis-

cover a trace of the beautiful, graceful,


healthful form, that he had parted with a

few months before in all the pride of youth

and strength. The old man's voice was

lost; his hand remained helpless in Charles's;

he tottered from strong emotion.

" Won't you sit down, sir ?" said Charles;

and his voice, retaining all its former sweet-

ness, restored Mr Asgill's recollection.

" I will—I will," said he; accepting the

offer not from courtesy, but necessity—and

he sunk into a chair, covering his face with

his hands. The next moment he looked

up ; the glow of meeting had faded from

Charles's face, it was the hue of clay—and

the old man could only repeat—" I thought

—I hoped -and this is the state in which

I find you ?—Oh! Charles—if'

The crimson spot burned stronger than

ever on the cheek of the sufferer, as he re-

plied,—" And can you, sir, for a moment,".

88 WOMEN.

His own voice was suppressed by shame

and grief, as he added faintly—" I may be

wretched, but I never was vicious."


" And what, what then can be the cause

of the state in which I find you ?" A dead

silence followed the question. Mr Asgill

repeated the question.

" I am not ill," said Charles, faintly ; " I

am not indeed," he repeated more earnest-

ly as he observed that his assertion was

only answered by a melancholy shake of the

head. He extended his hand with strong

emotion to his old friend, as a kind of assu-

rance ; Mr Asgill took it, he held it in his

for a moment, looked at the skeleton fingers

with agony ; the tears burst from his aged

eyes. Charles sunk into his chair again ;

the old man, wiping away his tears, hastily

retired, without adding a word.

The next day he returned, accompanied

fcy a gentleman, and Charles could not re-

fuse to see his former tutor's friend, though

all human society was a burthen to him.

WOMEN. 89

The stranger was a man of extensive infor-

mation and agreeable manners; and it was

only by his at length leading the conversa-


tion to medical subjects, that Charles disco-

vered he was a physician. He had been

brought for the purpose, and Charles did

not oppose it; he answered his questions,

and the doctor and Mr Asgill soon retired.

Montgomery happened to be in the room,

and he heard Charles after they were gone,

murmuring to himself, " Canst thou mini-

ster to a mind diseased ?"

The next day, various prescriptions ap-

peared ; and Charles, too gentle to oppose,

and too indifferent to reject, or willing to

pacify Mr Asgill by a compliance that he

thought would be his last; or, perhaps, in-

dulging a secret hope that those medicines

might expedite an effect contrary to their

intended purpose, submitted to take them

—but his disease was beyond their reach—

he grew every day visibly worse ; and Dr

H , whose candour was equal to his

90 WOMEN.

skill, told Mr Asgill that he feared the pa-

tient's distemper was in his mind; then

Asgill's influence, and Montgomery's en-


treaties, were exerted in vain to discover

the cause. Determined on preserving his

desperate secret, Charles's constancy was

proof to all importunity, but his health suf-

fered by the struggle. He was now con-

fined to his bed—the proud Montgomery

had humbled himself even to kneel before

him, but Charles, believing that no human

influence could avail for him, cherished his

secret with that melancholy pride which

jseeks from disappointment what it has been

denied by hope, and declined all solicita-

tion with a quietness that leaves repetition

no hope and no excuse.

His fever increased ; Montgomery now

remained with him day and night, and

availed himself of the helpless situation of

Charles to pay him those attentions which

he feared would have been rejected if he

had had the power* One night, after ra-

WOMEN. 91

ving much, Charles fell into a feverish doze;

Montgomery alone was in the room, for

Mr AsgiH, yielding to his infirmities, had


quitted him after midnight. His sleep was

broken by stortings and mutterings. Mont-

gomery drew nearer to the bed—"Her heart

is fixed on God alone," he murmured ; " she

disdains man—she disdains man—she dis-

dains me." He then talked incoherently

about Mr Asgill having come to town to

marry him, but only arriving in time, to in-

ter him. He laughed frightfully—then he

grew calmer, and spoke of his own burial—

" Lay me somewhere that her foot may tread

on me—perhaps she may shrink—no,—she

has already trod on my heart, what matters

its dust?" He then seemed to be speaking

to some friends who were trying to inter-

cede for him—" No, no, don't speak to her

—she is a soul so pure—one burning sigh

of mine would blast her—when she appears

before God, to be the object of earthly pas-

sion would be a spot on her robe of glory—

92 WOMEN.

let me die—but do not tell her of it. Yes—

yes—(appearing to address Mr Asgill)—I

would pray, but my prayers are sins—and


her's are pure incense—do not pollute them

with my dying groan." Montgomery listen-

ed in that vague terror (at first) with which

we hear the raving dreams of a feverish man

—but when he heard her name pronounced

with a sigh that convulsed the frame of the

sufferer, he could enjoy the "bliss of igno-

rance" no longer—Montgomery loved her

himself.,

In a few moments Charles awoke—he

started up,-—"Montgomery, are you there ?

—Oh ! yes, you never leave me—Montgo-

mery, have I been raving ?—my head is"—

Montgomery bid him compose himself—

" But did I mention any name ?—the name

that- "

Montgomery, who, to the living or the

dying, never spoke but the truth, pressed

him to take some composing medicine that

had been ordered for him, that het might

WOMEN. 93

evade the answer; Charles took it, and sunk

back in a state of stupefaction. Montgo-

mery trembled while he held it to his


lips, and then retired ; the air of the room,

which he hod never felt oppressive be-

fore, had become intolerable in a mo-

ment. Charles's windows had been left

open by the orders of the physician ; he hur-

ried to one of them, and leaned far out of it,

, gasping for breath. He felt in a moment

the cause of Charles's sufferings, and in bit-

ter, but generous anguish, felt that the sa-

crifice he was about to make might be at-

tended with similar sufferings to himself.

In a moment, he saw, as he imagined, the

issue of the whole affair. Montgomery could

reason coolly, though he could feel warmly,

and he said to himself, " I have no chance,

or if I had" The thoughts of Charles's

ample fortune, the resistless attractions of

his person, the sincerity of his attachment,

(almost fatally testified) rushed on his mind

like overbearing witnesses against him.

<)4 WOMEN.

Montgomery had the rare faculty of feeling

in cases where he was a party as if he were

only a judge, and he determined the case


instantly; he did not quit Charles till day-

light ; he had resolved to wait on Mr As-

gill directly, and disclose the truth ; but as

he quitted the room, and stole one glance

at the sufferer, a selfish thought (a rare in-

mate) visited him for one moment. " He is

dying," said he to himself; " yes—he is per-

haps dying," he added, " and I may save

his life." In the morning he went to Mr

Asgill.

WOMEN. 93

CHAPTER V.

*.

Mil ASGILL, received him with eager en-


quiries about Charles; for the morning re-

vives alike the hopes of the sick, and of

those who watch them, though they have

no other hope. Montgomery immediately

spoke to the point; he told Mr Asgill that

he had (involuntarily) learned from Charles's

ravings in a dream, the real cause of his suf-

ferings,—that he was dying of a complaint

that few suspected, and still fewer suffered

from. Mr Asgill listened to him at first

with surprise, for the old cannot easily be-

lieve that life depends on feelings they have

long ceased to feel; but in a few moments

his solicitude for Charles overcame the in-

credulity of age, and though he would have

96 WOMEN.

heard with ridicule the tale of a young man

dying for love,—when that young man was

Charles, every thing vanished before the


wish to save him—" he believed all things,

endured all things"—and eagerly pressed

Montgomery for the name of the lady, and

for the means of introduction to the fa-

mily*

It was then Montgomery's heart was

wrung; he saw from Mr Asgill's eager-

ness that nothing would be left undone to

facilitate the match, and he hesitated so

long before he could answer his enquiries,

that had Mr Asgill had eyes, ears, or per-

ception for any object but one, the truth

could hardly have escaped him. . -

" Her name is Wentworth," said Mont-

gomery, speaking with some difficulty; and

he added, that she resided with her uncle.

" And is she so beautiful ?" said Mr As-

gill,—" is she so excellent ?—is she indeed

worthy of Charles ?"

To dwell on her image at the moment

WOMEN. 97

he was resigning her, was too much even

for Montgomery; after a vain effort to

speak, he pressed his hand to his d?tnp


forehead, and, complaining of fatigue, at-

tempted to retire.

" You must be very much fatigued,"

said Mr Asgill; " and I was too selfish, too

fond of Charles I mean, to press you to

speak ; but you will have a harder task to

fulfil to announce to him his happiness—

(for I have scarce a doubt of it)—yet I

would not undertake it, it would be too

much for me ; you must be the messenger,

and, considering his precarious state, it will

be a difficult task."

" It will be a difficult task to me,"- said

Montgomery; and collecting all his reso-

lution, he went away to watch by the bed

of Charles. Mr Asgill hastened to Went-

worth's, and it was not till he was at the

door that the strangeness of his commission

struck him, and the chance of failure came

over him like a sudden chill. He was

VOL. i. E

98 WOMEN.

going, a stranger, to solicit strangers, of

whose manners, habits, feelings, and inte-

rests he was totally ignorant, in behalf of


one who might be as indifferent to them as

he was dear to him. They might have dis-

posed of her otherwise, or she might be

averse to him, or a thousand circumstances

might arise that would render the interview

ineffectual, and even ridiculous. All this

passed through his mind, but along with it

came the image of Charles as he saw him

last, pale, wasted, and raving; and the hand

which he had raised to the door was sus-

pended no longer. If we have ardour in

youth, in age we have tenacity, and Mr

Asgill felt a confidence, from interest being

on his side, which never enters into the cal-

culations of the young. He announced his

name, and in a few moments Mrs Went-

worth waited on him.

" I am a stranger, madam," said Mr As-

gill ; " but the occasion on which I wait on

you will not admit of forms." Mrs Went-

99

worth "bowed, and sate in an attitude of at-

tention. " I have a friend,—a young friend,

most dear to me, who has the honour, I un-


derstand, to be your acquaintance. He is,

I fear, dying; but his recovery,—his life,—

may depend on you,—on your family."

Mrs Wentworth appeared touch shocked,

and more so when he added the name of

De Courcy. She spoke warmly of his me-

rits, and of the sense which all her family en-

tertained of them ; and when Asgill again

•mentioned his dangerous state, she rose

from her seat with emotion, and eagerly

asked, What it was possible she could do to

serve or to save him ? Mr Asgill acquaint-

ed her with his attachment to her niece;

and with scarce less zeal than if he had been

pleading for himself, implored her influ-

ence as the only means of preserving his

existence. Mrs Wentworth's countenance

changed, and she resumed her seat.

" You must be sensible, sir," said she,

" that it is impossible to give a direct an-

I-

100 t. s WOMEN. .''.

swer to such an application, even under the

urgent circumstances which you state;—


the extreme youth of the parties,—Mr

Went worth's absence at this moment,—

my utter ignorance of the state of my

niece's affections,—my confidence, indeed,

that her affections have never yet been ex-

cited,—and a circumstance stronger than

all, a circumstance that I trust will weigh

with you, as it must with her uncle and

me,—the marked difference of religious sen-

timent, the unalterable basis of conjugal un-

happhiess,—all these, sir, must at once pre-

clude the possibility of my giving the an-

swer you could wish, or that I," she added,

yielding to the natural warmth of her feel-

ings, "feeling as I do at this moment, could

wish myself."

Mr Asgill took a good omen from her

last words, and entering into an explana-

tion of his religious sentiments, which were

as Calvinistic as her own, endeavoured to

persuade her that Charles only required an

WOMEN*.

union with such a family to adopt its senti-

ments ; and he urged a topic from their mu-

tual opinions, of the danger to which not


only his life, but his spiritual state might

be exposed, from an ill-timed obstinacy in

rejecting a convert, whom Providence, as

well as grace, appeared to have placed with-

in their very reach. Mrs Wentworth saw

the fallacy of this, reasoning, though, in

compassion to the feelings of the speaker,

which she saw had more share in what he

said than either his reason or his theolog)*,

she but slightly exposed it.

" If you, sir," said she, mildly, " entertain

thoseviews of the gospel, whichl am willing,

from your language, to believe you do, you

must be conscious that the power by which

any one ' believes unto salvation,' is a pow-

er from above, and that the most promising

natural means are ineffectual, unless direct-

ed by Him who causes ' all things to work

together for good to them that love him,

and are called according to his purpose.'

102 WOMEN.

Believing this, as I trust you do, you sure-

ly cannot imagine that any human influ-

ence, however powerful, would be finally


effectual in such a case. Nay, sir, may I

not ask,—and forgive the question,—Is not

so strong an attachment, as you represent

your friend to be affected by towards an

earthly object, almost a proof that God can

have little share in the heart, when the ima-

gination and the senses are so pre-occupied

by a creature ? Is not the altar, devoted to

such a sacrifice, the very last (humanly

speaking) which we could hope to be lit

with the fire of the sanctuary, and,blown

with the breath of the seraphim ?"

" Madam," said Asgill* " it is for us to

use the means, not decide on the end."

Mrs Wentworth allowed this, and pro-

mised to mention the subject of their con-

versation in the most favourable manner to

Mr Wentworth and her niece; and she

even added, that of all the unenlightened

young men she had seen, Charles appeared

WOMEN. 103

to her the least likely to endanger the tem-

poral happiness of his earthly partner. Mr

Asgill, who felt that no more could be


gained without risking all, was going away,

when he paused for a moment to speak of

Charles's ample fortune, and of the splen-

dour in which his future wife might be

maintained. He did not speak from his

heart, for he despised wealth with all the

uprightness of a conscientiously religious

man, but he would not omit any topic that

he thought might prove a plea in" the cause

of his client. As he looked up in Mrs

Wentworth's face, he saw this plea availed

nothing in the Court of Conscience. She

calmly observed, that her niece was inde-

pendent, and were she not, she trusted she

could answer for her, that worlds would

not bribe her to the alienation of her heart,

or the prostitution of her conscience.

Mr Asgill then took his leave, and though

nothing could be less hopeful than this in-

terview, yet he persuaded himself, as soon as

104 WOMEN.

\

he was out of the house, that Mrs Went-

worth's expressions were much more fa-


vourable than they seemed to be ; and be-

fore he saw Charles again, he resolved to

represent his visit as almost successful. Mr

Wentworth came home shortly after, and

his wife mentioned the subject of Mr Asgill's

visit in terms the most qualifying she could

think of, (for she felt an interest for Charles

which her religious sentiments contended

with, but could not overcome,) and she now

felt herself reduced to act almost the same

part with her husband that Asgill had lately

acted with her. Wentworth instantly arm-

ed himself in " complete mail" of scriptural

phraseology ; and he quoted sundry texts

from the Epistle to the Corinthians, to prove

that " to be unequally yoked together with

unbelievers," was so diametrically opposite

to the precepts of the gospel, that even to

propose it was scarce less criminal than be-

ing guilty of the fact itself. His wife was

prepared for this, and she was also prepared

WOMEN. 105

with the arguments usually urged against

it, which he had often heard; for the sub-

ject is much discussed among evangelical


people, when the object of their inclina-

tions, as sometimes happens, is not a con-

vert to their creeds.

Mr Wentworth stood his grdund impene-

trable. Then she condescended even to call

in the secular arm, and (incidentally) men-

tioned Charles's splendid prospects, and the

temporal advantages that would accrue from

the union ; but before she could finish the

sentence, her conscience checked her, and

she suddenly stopped. But this argument,

though urged with no strength, (for Mrs

Wentworth was truly conscientious,) had

more effect than she wished to be aware of

on the hearer. Mr Wentworth instantly be-

came silent; his worldly feelings recurred;

but a moment after (like a man who mistakes

the reverse of wrong for right) he assumed

the look and tone of authority which weak

E2

106 WOMEN.

minds substitute for argument, and insist-

ed upon hearing the subject mentioned no

more. Mrs Wentworth had too much know-


ledge of her husband's character to oppose

him on the spot; she led him from it, but

then dexterously led him back again, by re-

presenting (almost in the language of Mr

Asgill) the strong human probability there

was of Charles adopting the sentiments of

the family of which he became a member ;

and she tried to interest Mr Wentworth's

religious views by the hope of a convert,

and even to flatter his vanity by the pro-

spect of his controversial powers being dis-

tinguished by facilitating that conversion.

In all this there was nothing of female

art, and but Kttle of earthly feeling; Mrs

Wentworth (whose heart was naturally

warm) was strongly, though almost uncon-

sciously, attached to Charles; all her hu-

man feelings were on his side of the ques-

tion ; and though she had maintained be-

WOMEN. 107

I

fore Asgill the inviolate state of her niece's

affections, her penetration had scarcely


wanted the aid of his disclosure to disco*-

ver that if Charles was really attached to

Eva, any opposition he might meet with

would not be aggravated at least by her in-

sensibility. -All her human feelings were

engaged in the question; and it was so

long since she had felt them, that their ex-

ercise now appeared an indulgence. Mr

Wentworth, in answer, repeated his in-

junctions that the subject should never be

mentioned again, white in the same breath

he expressed hi& wish that the young man

should visit at the house as formerly. His

real motive for this concession was, his fore-

seeing a subject of endless controversy in

the conversion of Charles, (and controversy

he delighted in,) but this motive he took

care to conceal from his wife, and they

parted mutually satisfied ; she with having

gained his permission that Charles should

108 WOMEN.

be admitted as a converted, and he with

the prospect of exercising his talents, and

displaying his importance.


Mrs Wentworth then went to Eva, and

Asgill himself never felt more agitation as

he stood in doubt at her door a few hours

past, than she felt when about to speak of

a lover to her whose heart she had hitherto

tried to fill with God alone. She paused

at the door for many minutes, and then re-

solved to defer the disclosure till evening.

Evening came, and Eva and she were

alone; and she felt as all do who trust to

delay for diminishing the difficulty of a

task,—that it only increases it. At length

she forced herself to speak ; and such was

her emotion, that she continued to speak,

her eyes intently fixed on her work, and

her shaking hands making no progress in

it, without regarding the effect of her dis-

closure on her niece, till at its conclusion

Eva threw herself at her feet in an agony of

tears. Mrs Wentworth was shocked and

WOMEN. 109

alarmed; she forgot her feelings for Charles

in her feelings for one far dearer ; she fear-

ed that she had been pleading for one who


•vvas indifferent to her ; and, in the tender-

est language of confidence and conciliation,

she implored her to believe that no influ-

ence would be exercised over her affec-

tions, and that she had with reluctance

undertaken the office of pleading for one

whom she now would never mention more,

Eva wept still, and still did not venture to

raise her head.

" Why do you weep ?" said Mrs Went-

worth ; " you shall be disturbed no more

on this subject—let us forget it for ever."

Eva raised her head for a moment, but her

thick locks had fallen over her eyes, and

though their expression seemed to struggle

through their shade, in the next moment

her locked hands tried to conceal it. " I

see," said her aunt, hastening to end the

scene—" I see he is indifferent to you—

his name shall be heard no more."


110 WOMEN.

As she rose to go, Eva, still on her knees,

detained her — Mrs Wentworth paused:

" These tears," said Eva, scarce audibly,

" are not shed for indifference."

WOMEN. 'HI

CHAPTER V.

In religion I duly observe every form;

With a heart to my country devoted and warm,


I give to the poor, and I lend to the rich.

Fakeer. But how many nails do you stick in your —— ?

IT was in November when Charles and

Eva first met, under circumstances so re-

pulsive ; and it was in the beginning of

spring that Charles was received as the ac-

knowledged friend of the family, and the

permitted lover of Eva. Guardians and

friends (for neither of them had parents)

had given consent to their union. The ex-

treme youth of both parties had made them

defer the period of that union for three

years; but, during that interval, they had

youth, love, health, affluence, and beauty—

112 WOMEN.

every flower that can brighten the desert

of life glowed in their path, nor was there a

single weed to darken their beauty, or to


dull their fragrance.

To common eyes, Charles and Eva might

have seemed to live like the first pair in

Paradise,—the same beauty of form, the

same sanctity of life, the same unison of

heart. " They took sweet counsel toge-

ther, and walked in the house of God as

friends." Was there any thing to disturb

hearts that seemed above the vicissitudes

of life, both from passion and fortune, that

were linked by a tie " not of this world ?"

They had much yet to encounter; for

every day Mr Went worth's eagerness to

make Charles a convert increased with its

difficulty, and every day Mrs Wentworth's

fears increased, that the spiritual interest of

both was sacrificed to the impulse under

which she had espoused Charles's cause, {and

still remained his advocate, rather from ha-

bit and feeling, than from conscience;) and

Asgill, as the temporal interest of his pupil

recurred to him, felt that, in his terror for

Charles's life, he had perhaps compromised

all that could render life valuable, by con-


senting to his union with a family who re-

garded him- as little better than an infidel,

and where the very object of his attach-

ment seemed to tremble between the alter-

nate claims of nature and grace, while she

felt that the chosen of her heart was not

the partaker of her faith, was not " the

Elect of God." Even Cliarles himself, whose

devotedness of heart made him regard

the whole world as a shrine, where there

was but one Deity, and but one worshipper,

whose recovered health and reason seemed

to be given him only to exhaust in gazing

on her for whom they were nearly lost,

even he felt the persecution to which he

was exposed from the principles and ha-

bits of the family, and its intimates, at

times almost beyond the patience of a lo-

ver. Every morning, though a constant

114 WOMEN.

visitor, he felt like a stranger to himself

and those around him; the house was filled

with religious persons of various denomi-


nations; all met for the purpose of con-

troversy or devotion, or both ; and, after

the protracted and luxurious breakfast, the

signal for battle was generally given by

some spiritual leader. Predestination or

Perseverance sounded their tocsin in the

ear of some jealous and startled Arminian,

the conflict commenced, and they would

talk,—" Good gods, how they would talk!"

—till their minds, inflamed with the fiercest

passion, and their tongues on fire with the

most terrible anathemas, and scarce hiding

their abhorrence of persons under a denun-

ciation of principles almost dooming each

other to eternal torment, while they affect-

ed to supplicate the Divine Mercy on the

professors of imputed error, on another sig-

nal given, they would sink on their knees

together, but still continue the warfare un-

der the shelter of an address to the Deity,

WOMEN. 11(5

by appealing to him for the defence of his

own truth, and imploring him, with that

kind of charitable malignity peculiar to re-


ligious people, to turn their erring brethren

from darkness to light, to give them the

" heart of flesh for the heart of stone," &c.

&ic. &c. Such was the morning, and such

was the evening too ; and the evening and

the morning that made the first day, made

every other also.

Eva, though she never joined in contro-

versy, listened to it with profound habitual

attention, and joined in the prayers with

earnest devotion. Charles was sometimes

amazed, and sometimes provoked, by the

attentive patience with which she hung on

lips that seemed to him to utter incompre-

hensible jargon, or daringprofanation, white

his own eager vigilance of looks was scarce-

ly rewarded by a glance, for which Eva

seemed to reproach herself, as if it was sto-

len from heaven; yet, like the patriarch,

he felt (when that glance was directed to

116 WOMEN.

him,) that the time " he served for her

was but as a moment." The constant war-

fare carried on in his hearing, would have


been more supportable if he were not almost

constantly the object of it himself, for, from

the moment of his becoming an intimate

in the family, the whole evangelical party

had set themselves for life and death to con-

vert him.

Though these people decry worldly pow-

er and influence in their operation to facili-

tate the diffusion of the gospel, and repeat

often, that " not many wise, not many

mighty," &c. &c., yet still they grasp at

the aid and authority that worldly influ-

ence can give; and when they have obtain-

ed it, they triumphantly quote from Isaiah,

" That kings shall be their nursing fathers,

and queens their nursing mothers," &c. &c.

Charles's large fortune, his talents, his avow-

ed devotion to an evangelical female, and

the suavity of Ids manners, which they mis-

took for docile ignorance, promised a fair

WOMEN. 117

subject for conversion, or at least for con.

troversy. Cbarles at first yielded from ti-

midity, or answered from complaisance, but


at length found himself, by the pertinacity

of the disputants, inextricably involved in

the mazes of controversy. Every hour he

was called on to discuss or to decide on

points above human comprehension ; he

was pressed with importunities about his

spiritual state, which was represented to

depend on his adopting the separate creed

of every individual speaker, with all its di-

visions and subdivisions, and shades of dif-

ference, that seemed to him to give to airy

nothing " a local habitation and a name."

And he was warned, in language that dis-

gusted him more by its grossness, than it

terrified him by its violence, not to dare to

unite himself on earth with one, with whom

he never could be united in eternity, unless

he seduced her into that path of perdition

in which he was advancing himself, without

hope of retreat or return. From this per-

118 WOMEN.

secution he was sometimes freed by the ih>

fluence of Mrs Wentworth, whose influ-

ence never failed, even amid the rage of


controversy, and sometimes by the fears of

Wentworth, that he might lose his convert

by the violence of the means employed to

secure him; but in these moments of re-

spite, when he turned to Eva for relief, he

found not the relief he expected, .. r :

Her feelings were as deeply, though not

as vehemently, engaged in the cause as those

of the controversialists; and the silence

which her youth, her sex, and her timidity

imposed on her, and the deeper interest she

felt in the conversion of Charles, made her

listen with that anxious attention to the

debate, which Charles contantly mistook

for indifference to him ; and even when re-

leased from this, the purity of Eva's man-

ners, the primitiveness of her mind, and her

equal inexperience of life and of passion,

forbid those furtive but exquisite indul-

gences, by which love can alone subsist in

WOMEN. 119

the midst of constraint, disturbance, and

opposition. They had never loved like

lovers; for months he had now been the


inmate of the family, yet never had he da-

Fed to avow his feelings, nor ever had Eva

ventured, by glance or word, to tempt of

reward the avowal; if he raised his eyes to

hers, they were withdrawn ; if he touched

her hand, the shrinking of her diffidence

seemed like the shudder of reluctance to

him ; nor could he see the look with which

she dared only to follow his parting steps;

nor could he hear the sigh which she ne-

ver breathed, till the ear for which it was

meant could hear it no longer. Sometimes,

very rarely, they were accidentally left

alone ; and those moments Charles felt the

most painful of all. The subject that trem-

bled on the lips of both, was the last those

lips could be brought to utter ; the timidi-

ty of a young and delicate female may give

confidence to men accustomed to the fe-

male world, but it communicates itself to

120 WOMEN.

a youth scarce older than herself, and who

knows in the female world but one object;

and they had no common subject to unite


them, or to lead to another.

The only subject on which Eva could

speak, was that exhausted already by every

other speaker ; she had read no books, but

those of Calvhlistic theology, and though

her remarks on the occasional passages of

brilliant eloquence in those, or of poetical

enthusiasm, in the hymns, shewed gleams

of mind that he Avould have caught and

pursued like the pillar of fire in his wilder-

ness, yet in a moment that light was again

extinguished, and the cloud resumed its

place. She could speak but of the books she

had read; those were few, and the habits

of her life reared an impenetrable barrier

against her acquaintance with others. To

her, one book, her Bible, seemed to contain

the substance of all others ; all other prose

was futile, all other poetry falsehood. Some-

times, to escape from what is actually the

WOMEN. 121

most exquisite torture to those who love,

(the presence of the object, when we feel or

fear we have no power of interesting it) he


solicited her to sing for him; she complied,

(for she too felt his presence a burthen in-

supportable from feelings that appeared to

her almost guilty, and wholly inexpressible)

—but she knew nothing but hymns ; and

the solemnity of her manner, only anima-

ted by a warmth that was borrowed from

the subject, not from the hearer, chilled

into reverential silence eveiy feeling those

lovely lips, "(and the sound that thrilled

through them, like the breeze opening the

cup of a rose-bud,) would have excited.

How could he ask from lips that had but

just uttered the name of their God, and ex-

pressed an exclusive devotion to his glory,

an avowal of love to a creature ? how could

he expect that eyes exalted to heaven in

the rapture of devotion, would turn to

glance on a being, whose trembling adora-

VOL. I. F

122 WOMEN.

tion must at that moment have appeared

almost impiety ? If he spoke, would he be

listened to ?—If he knelt, would it not be


termed profanation ?—There was but one

pursuit in which their tastes united, and in

which Eva seemed to feel it not a crime to

solicit sometimes his aid, and sometimes

even his approbation.

She drew exquisitely, and her talents

had been highly cultivated; for Mr Went-

worth knew that this was the only talent

that could not be paraded in society, and

no expence had been spared to render her

execution equal to her taste. But even

this pursuit received a strong tinge from

the peculiarity of her habits and manners.

Undraped figures, or figures in wet (or no)

drapery, and the anatomy of the human

figure, andthose subjects which some young

ladies delight to study, under the pretence

of proficiency in the art, Eva would not

have looked at. Her landscapes were

\

WOMEN. 188

beautiful, and she delighted in drawing

flowers.

Charles had one evening procured some


beautiful exotics, and he hastened to Domi-

nick-street with them. Mrs Wentworth

and Eva were at the house of a friend about

a mile from Dublin, where he had the privi-

lege of following them. The drawing-room

was empty when he arrived; but in a green-

houseoffthe stair-case Eva was seated draw-

ing ; he spread the flowers before her, and

their hues and their fragrance seemed pale

and faint to the glow of delighted surprise

that tinged her beautiful cheek, and the

odorous breath that for a moment mingled

with his as they bent over the flowers toge-

ther. She selected some Provence roses

from them, and began to copy them in a

wreath she was painting. As she leant over

them, a long lock of her lovely hair fell

over the paper—Charles removed it unre-

pelled; his trembling fingers lingered for

a moment on her white neck; Eva felt it

124 WOMEN.

but did not dare to shew she felt it. Charles

bent over the drawing; she felt his burning

breath on her cheek, till the heat seemed


communicated to it; she heard his shorten-

ed respiration, and the tremor of his hand,

as it touched her chair, made her own faul-

ter. She knew not why she was disturb-

ed, yet dreaded to know more. She rose,

and saying something indistinctly of the

warmth of the evening, walked to an open

gkss-door near her. Charles followed si-

lently ; it was a lovely evening; the glow

of a brilliant horizon, and the rich expand-

ed scenery of the Bay of Dublin, burst on,

their view as they stood together.

The heart of Eva seemed softening, and

the humid radiance of her eyes had all the

softness and all the azure of the heaven to

which they were raised. Charles ventured

to touch the hand that lay half concealed

among the roses that clustered round the

window; it was not withdrawn; he ventu-

red to press it.—it trembled., but remained

WOMEN. 125

in his ; almost doubtful of his happiness, he

Taised his eyes, swimming in delicious dews,

to hers; they were cast down, but not


averted. Intoxicated with delight, he ven-

tured to touch her fingers with his burn-

ing lips; Eva withdrew them, and the

look of tender reproach, that seemed to

complain of a broken, though tacit confi-

dence, made him feel a danger that till that

moment had never entered the imagination

of either.

" What a lovely evening," said Charles,

his faultering respiration scarce making the

sentence audible.

" It is most lovely," said Eva; " and

oh ! what a richness it gives to this lovely

scenery to think, ' my Father made all

this!1"

" And may not a thought of the creature

be mingled without impiety amid the feel

126 WOMEN.

ings such a scene inspires ?" said Charles.

" May not one human sigh be heaved, and

be forgiven ? Oh ! Eva," he uttered wildly,


" be less lovely, less pure, less cherub-inno-

cent, or bid me not think of heaven while

I can behold you!"

Eva shrunk from him, no less alarmed by

his wildness, than revolted by his language;

and though she could not speak, the calm

rebuke of her look, " severe in youthful

beauty," dispelled the delirium of the in-

toxicated boy, and drove him in a moment

to the wildest extreme of penitent humili-

ation.

" Oh! pardon me—but you will not

pardon me, Eva—I have offended your

feelings—I have offended your God. In

vain I solicit you for pardon, which you

cannot grant, because you cannot feel—-you

cannot love—love, as I do, with a heart

broken, a brain distracted, an existence

trembling on the verge of the grave before

I dared to speak. Such love is profanation

WOMEN. 127

in your ears—yet such I have felt to the

risk of my very life—such I feel—such I

avow at this moment at a greater risk—-


your displeasure. Eva, pity me, if you

can, for you can never love as I do."

As he spoke, his burning tears fell fast

vipon the hand he held, but which, though

it trembled, no longer struggled in his

grasp. The sublimity of religious feeling

made Eva at that moment feel a strength

far above the frantic energy that supported

Charles ; her youthful timidity, her habi-

tual reserve, her maiden sanctity of feeling,

all yielded to the spirit that upbore her, as,

still holding his damp and trembling hand,

she pointed to heaven, and exclaimed, " /

cannot love!—look there, and see how I can

love—as one who hopes to meet the belo-

ved of her soul there."

She bent towards him as she spoke, and

the first pledge of love was received by

Charles with a feeling far different from


128 WOMEN.

that with which it was communicated; by

him with the maddening enthusiasm of

earthly passion; by her with the feeling of

a seal to an eternal union.

WOMEN. 129

CHAPTER VII.

" Susan was piously given,

And the worst of it was, we could never agree


'Bout the road that was shortest to heaven."

MOOBE.

CHARLES, at the commencement of the

conversation, felt as if he had irreversibly

offended, yet, at its conclusion, he felt re-

lieved from a burthen insupportable. It is

certain that an explanation is necessary be-

tween those who have a sentiment of any

description for each other, and that should

it develope even very opposite feelings be-

tween them, it is a relief to have avowed

them. Convinced that Eva felt for him

all she could feel for mortal, the ardour of

his own feelings suggested to him the hope

ISO WQ.MEX.

that he might communicate it to hers, and

it spire her with that passion which he felt

himself, but which, wanting in enthusiasm


in her, seemed tjo him to be wanting in re-

turn. A sigh, a look, a touch, that thrills

to the heart, is enough in the infancy of

love; but the passion soon becomes impor-

tunate, and the heart that feels defrauded

of its expected return, could exclaim with

Lear—" I gave you all!"

After this interview he ventured to op-

pose Eva's opinions and habits, and to in-

fuse some portion of his own feelings into

hers. They never could agree about the

term " passion." With Charles it was some-

thing which, though he could speak of with

inspiration, he could never define, and

though he could feel to madness, he could

never express; with Eva it was the hope

of life being brightened by a partner who

would aid her steps, and fix her eye in

her progress to eternity. Both of them

were perhaps disappointed in the object

WOMEN. 131

they had selected for their respective feel-

ings, but both were only inspired with

greater solicitude for their mutual conver-


sion. Like all disputants, too, each of them

lost ground by maintaining their own side

of the argument; and, like most disputants,

each of them was glad to retreat to any

auxiliary subject as a resource. Charles,

passionately fond of music, and to whom

all music was comprised in her voice, often

implored her for a mortal song; and he was

amazed how any one who decried human

poetry as the idle sport of an intoxicated

imagination, could apply, without hesita-

tion, the warmest language of human pas-

sion, (which so often occurs in the evange-

lical hymns,) to the expression of human

passion, and address the Deity in such lines

as these:—

" How tedious and tasteless the hours,

When Jesus no longer I see;

Sweet prospects, sweet birds, and sweet flower*,

No longer have charms for me."

132 WOMEN.

And he had heard her speak with pleasure

of " Watts' poetry," with which she was too

well acquainted not to know that such is


the style in which he describes the death of

Moses:—

" Gently his fainting head he laid • •

Upon his Maker's breast;

His Maker kist his soul away," &c.

And such are the lines in which he mingles

his aspirations after divine love, with a

kind of amorous pastoral feeling almost un-

intelligible, and wholly unsuitable—

" I'll carve thy name on every bark,

And every wounded tree

Shall drop and bear some mystic mark

That Jesus died for me."

Such was the poetry to which ears and

lips were accustomed that closed with hor-

ror against the efforts of imagination, or the

aspirations of passion, or even the voice of

music, unless combined with the language

WOMEN. 133

of an evangelical hymn. He urged this in-

consistency on Eva, and ventured to ask

her, by what unction of impunity the lips


of evangelical females were armed, that en-

abled them to apply such expressions to ob-

jects wholly unsuitable, while they would

shudder to address them to those to whom

nature and passion seemed to appropriate

them ? Eva could only answer him in the

language of habit, and of habit the language

has no power, except to those who are un-

der its influence; yet the purity of her sen

timents was a silent pleader for her, and

though Charles was wearied with the mo-

notony to which her exquisite voice was

confined, he would have shrunk with hor-

ror from hearing her sing one of the airs

that modern females are accustomed to

sing.

They differed on almost every other sub-

ject, but to Charles even this opposition

had a charm; for what would have been

mere obstinacy in any other female, had in

134 WOMEN.

her the attraction of a virtue. It was not

for opinion, but for principle, she contended,

and she made this so plain, yet with such


modesty, she bore her faculties in contro-

versy so meekly, that Charles experienced

more than the pleasure of victory in de-

feat ; yet he felt that this perpetual conflict

of opinions and habits was no happy pre-

lude to domestic union.

One evening he brought her someflowers

to copy, and shewed her at the same time

a beautiful sketch of the ruins of Athens,

which he had himself taken that day from

a volume in the College Library. Eva

looked at the architecture slightly, though

she well understood its principles, and felt

the beauty of its modulation, but immedi-

ately began to copy the flowers. Charles

looked on with surprise and disappoint-

ment ; Eva observed it, and after a long

silence, (for, unused to speak, and fearful to

offend, her simplest observations were pre-

ceded by silence,) at last she said,—"These

2

135

are the work of God, this is the work of

man. There is but one image that I would

wish to be ever present to my thoughts,


and even the humblest of His works re-

vives it."

" And is there but one image, Eva," said

Charles, mournfully, yet daring, though

unconsciously, to be jealous of the Deity,

" that you would wish to he present to

your thoughts ?"

" I need not wish," said Eva, scarce arti-

culately, and bending over the flowers,

" for the other;" and then feeling she had

said too much, she hurried to add,—" These

pillars remind me of nothing but man's ef-

forts to immortalize a temporal existence;

to tell the living, in the voice of vanity,

that man has been;—but these flowers will

be renewed as long as existence can conti-

nue, and are scattered on the grave as a me-

morial of a life sometimes beautiful, but al-

ways transitory, as them."

" And does nature, then," said Charles,

136 WOMEN.

" only speak to remind us of the infelicity

and short duration of life ? Why should we

not then turn to those brilliant monuments


that dignify existence, and give immor-

tality on this side of the tomb ? Flowers

may fade, but the memory of genius sur-

vives many flowers, even the laurel that is

strewed on its grave."

" I love these flowers," said Eva, an-

swering her own thoughts, not those of

Charles ; " God made the country, but man

made the town."

Charles thought he had got very far

when he had led Eva to quote poetry, and

" on that hint he spake." It was in vain.

Beyond Cowper, the evangelical poet, she

knew nothing, and would know nothing ;

and such was the tranquil purity of her

WOMEN. 137

mind, such was " the sober certainty of wa-

king bliss," with which she seemed to fill

the narrow sphere of her enjoyment, that


Charles felt it almost a crime to try to fa-

miliarise her with works of imagination

and passion, to communicate to her " the

sweet madness" with which she had inspi-

red him. At times he felt it was like the

attempt of Milton's Satan to introduce into

the pure region of heaven " strange fire,

his own invented torment." Still he urged

her to read poetry, for he felt as if it might

plead for him,—as if its impassioned lan-

guage could convey to her what he could

no.t utter.

One evening he had succeeded in pre-

vailing on her to listen to " The Lay of the

Last Minstrel;" she was struck by the in-

troduction, and Charles was proceeding'with

that increasing confidence which the increa-

sing interest of a listener gives a reader,

when the clock struck, and she reminded

him it was time to go to the evening lee-

138 WOMEN.

ture at Bethesda Chapel. Charles, with a

sigh, threw aside the poem, and accompa-

nied her. The sermon was eloquent and


long, the congregation profoundly atten-

tive; Charles sate abstracted and listless.

As they returned, the lovely calmness of a

vernal night revived the feelings of Charles ;

and as Eva leaned on his arm, and some-

times raised her looks (but with other feel-

ings than his) to the bright blue spangled

sky, that exquisite passage broke involun-

tarily from his lips, that ends with, " for

lovers love the western star."

Eva started, started with actual terror;

she felt the name or language of love like

a profanation of the moment, and told him

that she was trying to recollect the sub-

stance of the sermon she had just heard,

and impress it on her memory. Charles

was silent; and silently accompanied her

home, where nothing but the sermon wfcs

spoken of, and every division and sub-

division of theological subtlety was run on

WOMEN. 139

it to exhaust the hour that must inter-

vene till the bell was rung for the servants

to attend the family devotions, and a long


extempore prayer from Mr Wentworth

concluded the night.

The following evening, Charles had suc-

ceeded, almost beyond his hopes, in enga-

ging both Mrs Wentworth and Eva in

Burns' " Cotter's Saturday Uight," when an

evangelical female friend hurried in with

the intelligence of a distinguished preacher

of the gospel, who was " to give the word of

exhortation" in the meeting-house at York-

street that evening. Pelisses and bonnets

were instantly in requisition, and Charles,

spell-bound, followed. The discourse was

every thing that could be expected from a

man well versed in Calvinistic theology,

expert from habit in extempore speaking,

confident of his audience, and still more

confident of himself. Eva listened with

deep and unaffected attention; and her

eye, fixed on the preacher during a dis-

140 WOMEN.

course of an hour and forty minutes, could

not spare one glance to him whose eye was

fixed only on her, till, at the conclusion,


she turned to him with a look that spoke

triumph in the eloquence of the preacher.

His eyes, fixed on her with a far different

expression, struck and almost terrified her.

Those burning glances she had encounter-

ed before, and felt distressed and perplexed

when they were turned on her; but here

their expression was so different from that

of the feelings with which she was trying

to fill her heart, and hoping to communi-

cate to his, that it was in vain she at-

tempted to shrink from a painful consci-

ousness of their meaning. The place ap-

peared to become a silent interpreter be-

tween her and him ; she felt it as forbid-

ding her not only to meet those looks, but

even to scrutinize the state of her feelings.

Every object around her murmured to the

mind's ear, " Let God be all in all." She

knelt to join in the silent prayer in which

WOMEN. 141

the congregation were united at the close

of the sermon, but those looks followed her

still. Her heart was at war with itself, and


some tears struggled through her fingers as

she pressed them on her closed eyes, but

felt she could not shut his image out.

" I think too much of him," she said to

herself, and she shuddered at finding those

words had mingled themselves among her

prayers. Memory, with a busy, backward

glance, ledher to Bethesda Chapel, where his

sight had first caused her to wander in her

prayers. She compared the present agita-

tion of her heart with the tideless calm she

had felt before she knew him; and to

those who have experienced a calm that is

the result of religion, any disturbance of it

appears like a crime. The novelty of the

agency makes them suspect the agent. " I

love him too much," she murmured to her-

self. And when they were retiring, she

felt some reluctance at the arrangement

made bj Mrs Wentworth, who took her

142 WOMEN.

friend's arm, and consigned Eva to the care

of De Courcy. Their intelligence was now

becoming so intuitive, that De Courcy felt


he had offended her, though he knew not

how; he recollected, however, that she was

in the habit, on quitting a place of devotion,

to endeavour to impress on her memory

the substance of the sermon she had been

listening to. He paused, till he could

pause no longer.

" Why are you so silent, Eva ?"

" I was thinking of that fine text."

" What was it ?"

" What was it ?" said Eva, almost relin-

quishing his arm, from a feeling stronger

and more unpleasant than surprise, for she

had no idea of any one forgetting the text

so soon.

" I have a bad memory—or a bad head-

ache," said De Courcy, trying to smile away

her amazement—" or, perhaps, I would ra-

ther hear it from your lips than those of

that dark-browed sallow man."

WOMEN. 143

" It is little matter," said Eva, " from

what lips we hear the truth. The text

was, * God is Love.' "


" Oh, Eva.'" said De Courcy, under an

impulse he could not resist, " do we re-

quire any thing more than this dark-blue

sky, this balmy air, those lovely stars that

glitter like islands of light in an immea-

surable ocean, and point out our destina-

tion amid its bright and boundless infinity,

to tell us that ' God is Love ?' Why must

we learn it in the close and heated air of a.

conventicle, with all its repulsive accompa-

niments of gloomy looks, sombre habits,

dim lights, nasal hymns ? Are these the in-

terpreters the Deity employs as the inti-

mations of his love ?"

" They are," said Eva, awakened to an

answer, but never thus awakened for more

than a moment—" they are. For to the

poor the gospel is preached, and they sel-

dom feel any thing of the atmosphere but

its inclemency,—to the sick, and they can-

144 WOMEN.

not encounter it,—to the unhappy, and

they cannot enjoy it."

De Courcy was silent; for what can be


replied to truth ? But at the moment he

felt, as the guests at the ancient Egyptian

banquets may be supposed to have felt,

when the death's head was served up at the

table to remind them of mortality, just

when they wished to forget it—he felt, if

the truth must be told, that he wished her

less religious at that moment. They arri-

ved in Dominick Street; Mrs Wentworth

stood for some time at the door talking to

her friend, Eva and De Courcy were at a

little distance. The hand that hung on his

arm had gradually sunk. Eva was uncon-

scious of this motion, which was merely an

intimation that they were parting. De

Courcy was not, for the hand came gradual-

ly in contact with his. He touched it as a

signal of reconciliation; and small as his

was, even to feminine delicacy, hers was

soon contained even in his. Eva disen-

WOMEN. 145

gaged and attempted to raise it, to point

to a brilliant star on which she believed

De Courcy's eyes were fastened as much


as her own. De Courcy's eyes were fixed

indeed, not On the star, but on her hand,

and as she raised it, his lips were fastened

on it too. She straggled to withdraw it;

the difference between their feelings seem*

ed to be striking her every moment more

and more. As she extricated it, she look-

ed on_ him with as much reproach as her

eyes had the power of expressing; but that

was very little. His flushed cheek, and ar-

dent eyes, met her glance ; their beauty

had something terrific to her. She knew

not what he felt, but she knew he did not

feel like her.

Mrs Wentworth descended the steps to

press him to join their family supper. The

head-ache, of which he had complained on

quitting the meeting-house, was becoming

intolerably painful, he pressed his hand on

VOL. I: G

146 WOMEN.

his burning forehead, and declined her in-

vitation.

" Wanderer," said Mrs Wentworth," and


where did you earn that head-ache ?"

" At a billiard-table, last night after I

left you," said De Courcy; repentance, sin-

cerity, and something like anger, producing

the confession. Mrs Wentworth hastily

retreated up the steps.

" What is a billiard-table ?" said Eva,

following her.

" It is something better than a conven-

ticle," said De Courcy, as he turned from

the door.

WOMEN. 147

CHAPTER VIII.

Wretch that than art; an elder cried, and gone

For everlasting. Go thyself, said John;—


Depart this instant, let me hear no more.

CRABBE.

THE Wentworths had long known that

De Courcy was not one of them, or, in their

own language, that he was " of the world;"

but they tried to conceal what they knew

both from each other and from themselves,

if possible, though from very different mo-

tives ; Wentworth, because not even his at-

tachment to Calvinism exceeded his due ap-

preciation of De Courcy's L.3,000 a-year,

and Mrs Wentworth from compassion for

Eva, and from a hope, which was, however,

growing fainter every day, of his finally

adopting the religious sentiments of the fa-

148 WOMEX.

mily. It is certain, from the facility of De

Courcy's temper, and his enthusiastic pas-

sion for Eva, he would have become a


ready and docile catechumen; but the ri-

gour of Wentworth's family-discipline, and

the repulsiveness of the instrument on

whose operations they chiefly relied for his

conversion, were the principal means of ob-

structing it. This instrument was Mac-

owen, whom De Courcy, who had disco-

vered his worldliness, sensuality, pride, and

virulence of temper, hated with an hatred

passing that of swadlers. The increasing,

difference between his habits and those of

the family was growing thus more obvious

every day, and he was even at less pains

to conceal it; he opposed Mr Wentworth's

dogmatising, and even ventured to ques-

tion some of his opinions, to which he had

formerly listened with respectful silence.

When Wentworth was announcing with

triumph the happy evening he was to spend

in company with a Socinian, a Catholic, an

WOMEN. 149

Arian, and an Arminian Methodist, who

were assembled for the purpose of being

exposed for the whole night to the batteiy


of a dozen resolute Calvinists, De Courcy

could not help asking. If he looked forward

with pleasure to such an evening ? Avhile

his own look and tone announced that he

would have awaited it in horror.

" Unquestionably," said Air Wentworth

^—" Oh it will be a precious time—a time

of refreshing for the soul.—The enemies of

the Lord shall then be found liars!"

" And is it possible, sir, you can find

pleasure in such a clash of creeds, tenets,

and tempers ?—Why, the Synod of Dor-

drecht itself wiH be j» Quakers' meeting to

such a Babel."

" Without controversy" sajd Mr Went-

worth, " great is tlie mystery of godliness."*

* This glaring misconstruction <of a wefl-fenown text

I have met in print in the work of an American contro-

versialist. I have introduced it as a bint to tfcos* wh»

150 WOMEN.

And, satisfied with this apposite and con-

clusive quotation, he was retiring, when an

exclamation from De Courcy struck on his


quick ear, as an invitation to prolong the

dispute, and he turned instantly.

De Courcy's exclamation ^was extorted

by a different cause; he had taken up a

newspaper that lay on the table, and read

aloud, with vivid and heedless delight, the

announcement of the arrival of the celebra-

ted Madame Dalmatian}, first singer at all

the continental operas, and first tragic act-

ress in Europe, who, by the unprecedented

liberality of the manager, (relying on a ger

nerous public,) had been engaged on enor-

mous te.rms to perform a few nights at the

Dublin theatre, the last she was ever to ap-

pear on. Little did the generous public,

are ignorant of the original language, to be careful how

they lay their hands on the text. The writer above al-

luded to quotes it as a testimony in favour of the neces-

sity of controversy.

WOMEN. 151

or the manager either, know of Madame

Dalmatiani's motive for visiting Ireland.

De Courcy had heard of this extraordinary


woman from men who had been abroad;

according to their various descriptions, she

was a Siddons, a Catalan!, a Gabrielli, a La

Tiranna, with a}l the terrible Medea-graces

of Cumberland's description. She was all

the muses, and all the graces embodied, in

the beautiful slender form of a female about

20 ; but the talent that excited most won-

der was her perfect knowledge of the Eng-

lish language and literature, and her mark-

ed preference of the characters of English

tragedy, which she played alternately with

those of the Italian opera. De Courcy

poured out all he knew or heard of her as

a kind of comment on the paragraph which

he had read; and in his new-kindled enthu-

siasm forgot every thing but her of whom

he was speaking.

Mr Wentworth had kept silence even

from good words, though it was pain and

152 WOMEN.

grief to him; but when he heard De Cour-

cy, by way of climax, announce his inten-

tion of visiting the theatre every evening


during her stay, the smothered flame burst

forth with the fury of a volcano. He had.

been provoked by De Courcy's strictures

on the controversial party, and this was a

fine opportunity for venting it;—on he

went triumphantly, and every histrio-mas-

$rix, from Tertullian down to Prynne and

Collier, might have been raised from the

dead with joy. He cursed stages, stager

plays, stage-players, frequenters and abet-

tors, from Thespis down to Mr Harris and

the committee of Drury-Lane, lamp-light-

ers, scene-shifters, and candle-snuffers in-

clusive, not forgetting a by-blow at De

Courcy for visiting those tents of Kedar.

*' What is a theatre ?" said he j "a place

where the name of the Deity is never heard

but in execration or blasphemy; where,

contrary to the commandment of the Lord,

(see Deuteronomy, chap. xxii. ver. 5.) the

W&MEH.

women wear mens' garments, and the men

the women s'; and where Satan gains so

many souls for five pieces of silver a-night,


that I suppose he now repents of his prodi-

gality in giving thirty for that of Judas."

De Courcy bowed before the storm while

it raged, and replied, by a simple repetition

of his intention to visit the theatre every

night Madame Dalmatian! performed; he

then retired. Mr Wentworth knew not

where to vent his highly-raised wrath, so

he turned on Eva.

" And this is the chosen partner of your

life!—these be thy gods, oh Israel!—A clog

upon the wheels of your soul, to drag them

back into perdition. I should not be sur^

prised if one day he had the confidence to

propose your visiting that temple of Satan

along with himself; but first I would see

you visit your grave."

" And are all plays, then, so wicked ?"

said Eva.

" I know nothing at all about them,"

e2,


154 WOMEN.

said Mr Wentworth. " I thank Heaven I

never read one of them, and trust in M»

grace I never shall"

WOMEN. 155

CHAPTER IX.

Quails in Eurota: ripis, aut per juga Cynthi

Exercet Diana chores


• Deas supereminet omnes.

VIRGIL.

i

ALL the next day, Eva said to herself,

** He will not go to the theatre;" but it was

observed that every moment that day she

was taking up the newspapers, and exami-

ning the column in which the play for that

night was announced, and Madame IJalina-

tiani's name, in broad and attractive capi-

tals, blazed in the van. She read and sigh-

ed, then laid it down, and read it again.

Charles did not go to Dominick-Street all

that day.

Sir Richard Longwood was nominated

one of Charles's guardians, but he was mere-

156 WOMEN.

ly a nominal guardian. He had asked his

ward once or twice to dinner since his arT

rival, and the invitation had been complir


ed with, just as it was given, in form. But

the very night before, Sir Richard had said

to Lady Longwood, as the servants were

putting out the candles after a supper

party, " Why was not De Courcy here to-

night ?"

" I don't know," said Lady Longwood ;

" I believe he had a card—he Jiever comes

here now,—you know he is going to marry

a methodist ?"

"Amethodist! Lady Longwood; a young

man of his property married to a methor

dist! Lady Longwood, I tell you, you do

not look into these things—it would be no

bad look-out for Honoria or Caroline."

On that hint Lady Longwood did not

speak ; but she wrote a polite note, with

the best crow-quill in her writing-desk,

which was left next day at Charles's rooms.

WOMEN. 157

requesting the pleasure of his company to

a family dinner, and offering him a seat in

her box to see the celebrated Dalmatiani,


who had been particularly recommended to

her during her residence in Dublin.

Charles, who had determined to go, ac-

cepted the invitation. A singular circum-

stance occurred that day; as Charles was

going to Merrion-Square, where the Long-

woods lived, he met a Mr Cole, a neigh-

bour of his guardian, Mr Asgill's. They

shook hands—" Well, my young friend,"

said Mr Cole, " I hear you are going to be

married.—and that you are to commence

bridegroom before you commence bachelor,

academically speaking."

Charles blushed and hesitated.

" Pray, may I ask the goddess's name, if

a goddess can he supposed to have a Chris-

tian name ?" said Cole.

" Her name is Eva Wentworth," said

Charles.

158 WOMEN.

" Any relation of Wentworth's of Ab-

bey-Street, who was in business with my

uncle till he turned evangelical ?"


" A niece," said Charles.

" Niece !" repeated Cole; " niece .'—Im-

possible. Wentworth had only a sister,

who died unmarried, and Mrs Wentworth

never had brother or sister—You must be

mistaken, Charles ?"

Charles could only repeat that she was

said to be Mr Wentworth's niece; but

when, after Cole's repeated assurances that

it was not possible she could stand in that

relation to him, he felt it impossible to

refute it, they parted with an impression

of uneasiness on Charles's mind that he

could not account for, and would not ex-

amine.

The bustle at Merrion-Square soon left

him little leisure to think further; a large

party was assembled at dinner, and no

tongue could utter any sound but Dalma-

WOMEN. 150

tiani's name. Those who knew nothing at

all about music, spoke of nothing but her

compass, science, and volubility; and those


who knew just as little of literature, were

still louder about an Italian actress being

able to understand Shakspeare, though there

was not a character in Shakspeare she had

undertaken to act; and Honoria and Ca-

roline, judiciously placed on each side of

Charles, bored him with questions about

Italian music and the English drama, and

finally (instructed by their governess) ask-

ed him which he liked best, Metastasio or

Shakspeare ? Charles tried to evade the

question by pointing out the difference be-

tween a writer of musical dramas, and the

creator of the English stage,

" Oh !" said Miss Longwood, " but does

not Ophelia sing in Shakspeare; and did

not Shakspeare set the songs for her ?"

" Oh yes," said Miss Caroline, proud of

superior literature; " but then Ophelia was

mad, you know, and Shakspeare, or any

160 WOMEN.

gentleman, would do as much for any giri

* crazed in care, or crossed in hopeless love.'"

These words were scarcely uttered, when


the coflfee was brought in, and the'Carriages

announced, and the whole party set off Sat

the theatre, mad with the rage of patroni?

ling, and giving thek vanky all the credit

of liberality and taste.

The performance on this night was a suc-

cession of scenas from the most distinguish,

ed Italian operas. The house was crowded

and the overture just over as they entered.

A brilliant audience, lights, music, and the

murmur of delighted expectation, prepared

Charles for a far different object from Evar

What a constrast in the very introduction,

between the dark habits, pale lights, s0r,

lemn music, and awful language of a conT

venticle, and the gaiety and splendour of a

theatre ! He felt already disposed to look

with delight on one who was so brightly

harbingered, though it was amid a scene so

different his first impressions of passion had

WOMEN. 161

been received and felt. The curtain rose,

and a few moments after Madame Dalma-

tian! entered : She rushed so rapidly on the


stage, and burst with such an overwhelm-

ing cataract of sound on the ear, in a bra-

vura that seemed composed apparently not

to task, but to defy the human voice, that

all eyes were dazzled, and all ears -stunned;

and several minutes elapsed before a thun-

der of applause testified the astonishment

from which the audience appeared scarcely

then to respire. She was in the character

of a princess, alternately reproaching and

supplicating a tyrant for the fate of her

lover ; and such was her perfect self-posses-

sion, or rather the force with which she en-

tered into the character, that she no more

noticed the applauses that thundered round

her, than if she had been the individual she

represented; and such was the illusion of

her figure, her costume, her voice, and her

attitudes, that in a fiew moments the in-

spiration with which she was agitated was

162 WOMEN.

communicated to every spectator. The

sublime and sculpture-like perfection of her

form,—the classical, yet unstudied undula-


tion of her attitudes, almost conveying the

idea of a sybil or a prophetess under the

force of ancient inspiration,—the resplen-

dent and almost overpowering lustre of her

beauty, her sun-like eyes, her snowy arms,

her drapery blazing with diamonds, yet

falling round her figure in folds as light as

if the zephyrs had flung it there, and de-

lighted to sport among its wavings; her

imperial loveliness, at once attractive and

commanding, and her voice developing all

that nature could give, or art could teach,

maddening the ignorant with the discovery

of a new sense, and daring the scientific be-

yond the bounds of expectation or of expe-

rience, mocking their amazement, and lea-

ving the ear breathless—All these burst at

once on Charles, whose heart, and senses,

and mind, reeled in intoxication, and felt

pleasure annihilated by its own excess.

WOMEN. 163

The performance went on; applauses were

doubled and redoubled at every re-appear-

ance of the enchantress. Charles ga^ed on


without speech or plaudits, like one " blast-

ed with excess of light." The house seem-

ed coming down at the end of every song.

Charles heard nothing but the song. He

looked round, and wondered that the ap-

plause was louder than his own silent sigh.

Excess of any feeling deprives us of all

power of expressing it. To a spectator,

Charles must have appeared the only indif-

ferent person there ; of all there, an obser-

ver would have seen he was the least so.

It was for the last scene she had reserved

her powers,—those astonishing powers that

could blend the most exquisite tones of

melody with the fiercest agitations of pas-

sion, that could delight the ear, while they

shook the soul. She came forward, after ha-

ving stabbed the tyrant to avenge the fate

of her lover. Her dress was deranged,—

her long black hair floated on her shoul-

164 WOMEN.

ders,—the flowers and diamonds that bound

it were flung back, and her bare arms, her

dark fixed eyes, the unconscious look with


which she grasped the dagger, and the un-

felt motion with which from time to time

she raised her hand to wipe off the trace of

blood from her pale forehead, made the

spectators almost tremble for the next vic-

tim of one who seemed armed with the

beauty, the passions, and the terrors of un

avenging goddess. Applauses that shook

the house had marked every scene bat the

last. When the curtain dropt, a dead si-

lence pervaded the wheJe theatre, and a

deep sigh proclaimed relief from .oppression

no longer supportable.

The Miss Longwoods were the first to

recover the use of speech for Charles's tor-

ment, and they eagerly began to express

their fears of her intention to commit real

murder, and to congratulate each other

en their safety in being so far from the

stage. " They would not for thje world

WOMEN. 165

have been in the stage-box—Would he?"—

Two or three ladies fainting in the stage-

boxes luckily gave their curiosity and their


alarm another direction, and they were in

eager debate in one moment whether one

of the fainting ladies was in a pink or a

white satin spenser, and wishing for " God

save the King," that they might have an

opportunity of standing up and displaying

their long French shawls in drapery, when

the box-door was opened, and a gentleman

of Lady Longwood's acquaintance entered,

and announced that Madame Dalmatian!

wished to pay her respects to Lady Long-

wood before she retired to a party where

she was engaged to sup.

" Oh, delighted," said Lady Longwood.

" I shall be delighted to see Madame Dal-

matiani!—Pray tell her I shall esteem it a

particular favour.—Honoria, Caroline, make

room.—Mr De Courcy, she can sit between

you and me:—Honoria, you can speak Ita-

lian to her; at all events speak French, not

166 WOMEN.

a word of English, or she will think you a

bete. Take the copies of the opera out of

your ridicules, and be reading as she comes


in ; it will shew you understand it."

All this exhortation was lost on the Miss

Longwoods. With staring eyes, and no

small degree of terror in their faces, they

continued gazing at the open door, through

which they every moment expected 'to see

Madame Dalmatian! enter, dagger, or, per-

chance, sword in hand, in all the terrors of

her dying scene.

" Do you think she will come in with

the real dagger in her hand ? Do you think

she will have that blood on her forehead ?

Was it real bloed, or only paint ?"

" Oh, no, it was only paint; they could

not afford real blood every night, and mam-

ma says she is to act every night this week:"

Charles stood with his eyes fixed on the

door. Madame Dalmatian! entered, hand-

ed in by a musical nobleman, well? known

in Dublin; and all her omnipotence of ta-

8

WOMEN. 16?

lent never could have produced such an ef-

fect on the minds of Lady Longwood and

her daughters, as her being escorted by an


earL She advanced, and paid her respects

to Lady Longwood in English; her lan-

guage was at once elegant and polite; and

not the slightest trace of a foreign accent

perceptible, though her manner and atti-

tude had all the foreign onction. Lady

Longwood in vain tried to collect her ha-

bitual politeness to meet a woman whose

claims in society appeared as high as her

own, united with such extraordinary tas.

lents. She wished to, parade as a patron-

ess, and found herself no more than an

equal; and as for the Miss Longwoods,

not only Italian and French, but all Eng*

lish failed them;—they bowed and sat in

timid awkwardness, consoling themselves

by registering every item of her costume in

their heart's core, yea, in theirheartof hearts.

Madame Dalmatian! was instantly recog-

nized by the house, and applauses loud and

168 WOMEN.

*

long greeted her on the moment of her ap-

pearance in Lady Longwood's box. She


rose, and, with the most attractive humility,

bowed to every side ; her bending attitude

—her hands pressed on her heart, seemed

to bespeak her a suppliant for the forbear-

ance of applause that oppressed her; but

the eye that flashed beneath the white

downcast lid, and the long dark lashes that

fringed it, spoke a suppressed consciousness'

of powers that could justify and enjoy the

applauses of assembled worlds. It was wherv

she sat down and turned herself to address

Lady Longwood, that Charles could first

behold her with undazzled eye; she still

wore her splendid dramatic costume, but

to avoid notoriety, she had wrapt herself

in a large French shawl, whose folds, if

possible, augmented the grace of that figure

no drapery could conceal. She had fasten-

ed up her long hair, and taken off the dia-

monds she wore on the stage, but the

flowers were still twined through her darfe

WOMEN. 169

ringlets. Her bare arms were studiously

kept within the thick folds of her shawl,

and the simplicity and privacy of her fi-


gure made a delightful contrast to the ter*

rible energy of attitude and passion that it

had developed a moment before. She ex-

erted herself to speak to Lady Longwood,

though evidently fatigued with her late

efforts ; and the sweetness, the gentleness,

and even the timidity of her manner, were

so powerfully contrasted with the tremen-

dous and soul-searching powers she had

lately displayed, that awe and admiration

were rapidly exchanged for far different

feelings. Her age appeared hardly twen-

ty ; her beauty, though marked with the

strong features of the continent, united all

the charms of innocence with all the magic

of intellect. As she turned to bow to some

vapid praise of Lady Longwood's, Madame

Dalmatiani's carriage was announced by a

long train of servants at the door, and Lord

"• rose to offer her his hand ; she drew

VOL. r. H

170 WOMEN.

her shawl round her, and bowed low to

Lady Longwood. As she gavesher hand

to Lord ——, she perceived she had dropt


her diamond bracelet; Charles at the same

moment took it up, and offered it. With

the freedom of continental women, but

consecrated by the simplicity of her man-

ner, she bowed her silent thanks, and held

out her white and beautiful arm while he

fastened it on, though all the time she con-

tinued speaking to Lord . Charles fas-

tened it with a trembling hand ; from that

moment, Lady Longwood and her daugh-

ters talked incessantly, almost frantic with

the vanity of having had Madame Dalma-

tiani in their box ; they took care to make

their triumph known by such extravagance

of praise, so loudly uttered, that the atten-

tion of the whole house was fixed on their

box, as they wished it to be.

How happy Lady Longwood would

have been, had she heard the jealous hints

of matrons and daughters less fortunate

WOMEN. 171

than herself, on the glaring notoriety of her

introducing an actress into her box just

after her public performance, and known


how those remarks were aggravated by the

rich and handsome De Courcy being dis-

played by her daughters' side, as if to in-

crease their triumph ! But Lady Long-

wood wanted nothing but her own positive

feelings to set her almost mad with grati-

fied vanity-—the first performer in Europe

visiting1 her box—the finest youth in Dub-

lin seated between her daughters ;—how

she talked, and how she triumphed!—for-

tunately for Charles, her volubility exclu-

ded the necessity of an answer, and pre-

vented her observing that she had not the

slightest share of his attention. Of all that

she said he only retained the last words—

" You won't forget us to-morrow evening—

Madame Dalmatiani has promised us her

delightful society—We intend quite to do-

mesticate her with us during her engage-

172 WOMEN.

ment—A few literary friends—Just what

she likes—She hates large parties—So do

Honoria and Caroline-r-indeed, quite do-


mestic—Caroline, why don't you take Mr

De Courcy's arm ?—But were not you de-

lighted ?—Oh, what an actress !"—•

" Oh, what a woman !" sighed Charles.

All this time they were in" the crowd-

ed lobby, and Lady Longwood purposely

" won her way" sic ,vly through the throng,

loud and louder in her anticipated delights

of the next evening, Honoria and Caroline

echoing every word*—" Lady Longwood's

carriage stops the way."'—What welcome

sounds to Charles! With an eagerness, alike

mistaken by the party and the spectators,

he escorted them to the carriage ; the ser-

vant held down the step—" We have a

place for you," said Lady Longwood, bend-

ing forward, in the softest tones of insinua-

tion. " You'll sup in Merr ion-Square ?"—

Charles did not hear her; he scarce knew

WOMEN. 173

where he was; the impatient footman dash-

ed his flambeau against the wheels of the

carriage, and called to the coachman to


drive on; Charles bowed his silent nega

tive, and the carriage drove away.

L..

174 ATOMEN.

CHAPTER X.

Musa refert, dedimus summaui certaminis uni.

OVID,


THE day passed Charles scarce knew

how; he had hardly a conscious moment

till he found himself at Lady Longwood's.

A mixt sensation of danger and delight

was over him, but he attended only to the

latter.

Quite contrary to Lady Longwood's pro-

mise, her rooms were crowded ; her vanity

was too great to suffer Madame Dalma-

tiani's presence at her parties to be un-

known ; and when she had circulated it as

a secret that she was to pass her even-

WOMEN. 13

ing enfamille in Merrion-Square, she made

it the greatest of all possible compliments

to admit her " dear five hundred friends"


to see her, each on the individual assurance,

that they were favourites so distinguished,

flattering herself that she had secured po-

pularity and fashion for her daughters, by

the ecl&t of her first assembly.

Lady Longwood had been accustomed

only to the usual routine of parties—youth

in folly in one room, and old age at cards

in another; but this night she tried to dif-

fuse a more continental air over her party;

—not a card-table to be seen, groupes in

attitudes of conversation at least, chess-ta-

bles, volumes of engravings, hired for the

night, and harps and pianos, occasionally

touched by professors, to bring on their

timid pupils, who sat down, and then, like

Lady Heron, " could not, would not, durst

not play." Every thing was arranged ac-

cording to Lady Longwood's ideas of a fo-

reign conversazione ; there was only want-

176 WOMEN.

ed mind and talent to give the meagre ske-

leton " life, and breath, and all things."

When Charles entered, Lady Longwood


was gliding round the room, proud of a se-

cret, and ten times more proud that that

secret related to Madame Dalmatian!; and

by this time the circle required some excite-

ment ; card-playing matrons were yawning,

and exclaiming to each other, " How charm-

ing, oh how superior to the usual routine of

Dublin parties!" Then whispering to every

one near them, " Oh, what a bore! not a

card-table—Will that woman sing to-night ?

—I'm so sorry I ordered the carriage away ;"

and the misses, three deep, leaning on their

intended partners, and straining their white

necks, " But will there be no dancing ?—

And it is all to depend on Madame Dal-

matiani ?•—Sure one could hear her at the

theatre—I was there last night, but I would

not for the world miss seeing her at a pri-

vate party—Oh, it is so ^delightful to see a

public performer at a private party—Don't

WOMEN. 177

you think she will look quite different ? or

will she come dressed as she was last night ?"

All this time Lady Longwood was bu-


sily circulating her important whisper,—

"How fortunate—think how fortunate I

am in acquiring such an intimate !—a wo-

man of rank and fortune in Italy—im-

mensely rich, quite independent—the sale

of her jewels alone would enable her to

live in opulence any where—to have a

house in Merrion-Square, if she pleased—

just remains on the stage from habit, and

is come to Ireland in quest of a lover of

hers, or something of that kind—quite a

romantic incident—-how interesting-r-quite

the air of a foreign princess!" . ..

" How interesting-^—quite^quite the air

of a foreign princess,"—^and all the fair au-

ditors stretched their necks to the utmost

extent of elongation, and those whom ill

fate or a late arrival placed in the back

ground, sprung with unbidden and unwel-

come feet on the velvet sophas to catch a

H2

178 WOMEN.

glimpse of Madame Dalmatian!, or display

their aerial figures in all the graces of tiptoe

expectation,


But who of all the groupe were blessed

like the Miss Longwoods that night! They

followed in the wake of mamma, not SQ

loud as her, for they took care to breathe

their little nothings sotto voee, but they too

had then? secrets to, tell, and their intelli-

gence to whisper,

" Oh, yes, she is immensely rich, and

she has diamond ornaments, presents from

all the princes of Europe; and she has sung

for Buonaparte and the Pope; and she is

dressed just like us, only the arms quite

bare, and the shoulders ; and I am determi-

ned to have all my dresses made without

shoulder-straps ; and she has real Parisian

lace round her neck, and real French flow-,

ers in her hair. I'll never wear an English

flower again as long as I live; and she has

spoken two Italian sentences, and one in

Latin, since she came in. I knew the Ita-

WOMEtf. 179

4

lian, because it sounded just like the Ita-

lian in Veneroni's Grammar, and the other


I am sure was Latin, because I did not un-

derstand it, but all the gentlemen looked as

if they did. And what is most delightful of

all, she will only be called by her Christian

irrame ; it is quite the custom in Italy, and

she says she does not know herself by any

other name but Zaira. O4i, I wish I had

been born in Italy ; I'wish I had been call-

ed Zaira" said both fair speakers, in unison

duet, forgetting that if both had been call-

ed Zaira, one of them must have adopted

another, for distinction-sake at least.

" But won't she sing, won't she do some-

thing in a foreign way ?" said or looked the

fair listeners, who were too far to be heard

but by gestures; ** and won't we see the

lace, and the French flowers, and how she

does her hair ?"

" Oh, no," said the Miss Longwoods,

well taught to disguise their own rage for

180 WOMEN.

exhibition under pretended politeness, "that

would be committing her as a public per?

former. Caroline and I will first sing our


Italian duets, and then we are to have

waltzing, and then a figure-dance by the

Miss Dennets and us, that they composed

for us; and then, perhaps, Madame —-

Zaira will accompany one of us on the

harp. I have got a charming harp-song,

and I'll try it ju.st tp bring her on, you

know." ,

At this arrangement all the hearers were

as externally delighted, and internally dis-

appointed, as polite hearers are and seem

to be; but there was no time for farther

speeches, the folding-doors of the music-

room were thrown open, and the superb

harp and piano, placed just beneath their

ample arch, to increase their sound, were

discovered amid a blaze of lights. Zaira,

who was seated at the other end of the

room amid a small circle of literary men

and well-informed women, all unconscious

WOMEN.

of the eclat of her French flowers and clas->

sical shoulders, was enjoying the rarest of

all feasts, the feast of reason, and wonder^


ing at her rarer good fortune in being per-,

mitted to enjoy it undisturbed, when the

sound of music, of the Miss Longwoods

singing, broke on their ears. Zaira bowed

in silent answer to a gentleman who had

just spoken to her, and made a motion that

signified she wished to listen to the music.

There was obviously a mixt effort of good

nature and politeness in this, that almost

reconciled them to the loss of her conversa-

tion; they could no longer listen with'ad-

miration, but they beheld her with delight.

At every passage tolerably sung she turned

her brilliant eyes on the circle with an ex-

pression of pleasure so generous and unaf-

fected, that she almost communicated the

pleasure she tried to feel, and made the

spectators sympathise in the candour of her

own heart. Dancing followed, and Zaira,

after a few remarks on the foreign dances,

184 WOMEN.

wood, with affected humility, and real pre-

sumption. ;

Zaira complied, though she could hardly


suppress a smile ; but the timid, trembling

Honoria, when consulted, stoutly declared

she could only sing the first; there was no

retreating, and the first singer in Europe

had the honour to accompany Miss Long-

wood as a second in a duet. Charles sa\v

and felt all this; and the simplicity and

goodness of heart that Zaira developed

in this short scene, made a stronger im-

pression on him than the dazzling talents

that she had displayed till that moment.

No exertion of powers, no grace of acconir

paniment was wanting to the performance.

Zaira did all 3 instead of contrasting and

exposing the presumption and inferiority of

her first, sustained her with all her powers,

those matchless and exquisite powers that

made all other singers forgot where she

sung; and, at the conclusion, bowed with

that flattering humility that confers

WOMEN. 185

•«

distinction it seems pretending to decline.

But after this effort, she declined every im-


portunity to sing, and retreated to the circle

from which she had been called; and the

Miss Longwoods sung and waltzed amid

cojd bravos and languid gazes for the re-

mainder of the evening.

Lady Longwood went about canvassing

for applauses for Honoria's duet, and Caro-

line's attitudes, in vain, and nothing but

the hope of her usual excellent supper de-

tained her disappointed company. At last

it appeared; but Lady Longwood, determi-

ned for life or death on a classical evening,

was resolved to have nothing more substan-

tial than the slight refreshments of a conti-

nental party; and mammas and misses, who

had been talking themselves hungry and

thirsty in praise and wonder for four long

hours, saw with horror the trays parading in,

scantily furnished with lemonade, ices, cake,

and jellies; not a dropof vulgar wine, or sub-

stantial eatables, to pollute the elegance of

185 WOMEN.

the entertainment, that equally consulted

economy and taste. " Spare fast, that oft

with gods doth diet," need not have turn*


ed away from such a banquet.

All the party were now dispersed through

the rooms in quest of refreshments, and

some matrons did not scruple actually to

examine and cross-examine the servants on

the subject of the entertainment. The circle

that had gathered round Zaira at first had

now dispersed ; but now that the room wai

almost emptied, Charles succeeded in sta-

tioning himself near her chair. He retneca-'

bered Lady Longwood's whisper—she htrt

come to Ireland in quest of a former lover;

He watched her countenance, and though

he involuntarily asked himself, why he felt

such an interest in the examination, he did

not dare to answer the question. At times

he could observe a shade pass over her

features, but whether from melancholy or

thought, it was not easy to discover : and

sometimes she appeared to listen with an

1ST

air of abstraction, which her brilliant eyes,

*»d her eager attitude of attention turn-

ed to the speaker, seemed intended to


contradict; and once, amid the loud ap-

plauses that followed her song, she sighed

audibly, but this might be frpm fatigue;

and Charles felt that the fatigue and con-

stant excitement of one who was always

palled on for exertion, on or off the stage,

might cause many moments of involuntary

depression. At all events, he watched,

though he dared not ask himself why.

Zaire was now conversing with a few

who had collected round her, and who

seemed to feel no less delight in the exer-

tion of her intellectual powers than the

circle had lately testified at her vocal ones;

and the applauses that she now received

seemed far more delightful to her than the

noisy bravoes that had drowned the pass-

sages of her song they were intended to ap-

plaud. She did not say much, but enough

to prove, that, had she said more, none else

188 WOMEN.

would have had occasion to speak. She ap-

peared to listen with more satisfaction than

even she could be heard with; and there was


a sweet and generous pleasure with which

she listened to every observation that show^

ed the slightest indication of talent,—the

attention by which she tried to,solicit, and

the smile with which she delighted to re-

ward it, that communicated all she felt,

and made all around her feel the enthu-.-

siasm of genius, without its envy or its me-

lancholy. Any one who had seen her glances

of eager intelligence.—her involuntary atti-

tudes of admiration—her bend of profound

attention, would have imagined her the se-

condary of some brilliant orb, instead of the

centre of a system that borrowed all its

brightness from her. The circle gradually

deepened round her ; the conversation had

turned on dramatic subjects, and some of

her auditors loudly expressed their admira-

tion of her entree the preceding evening.

Zairti bowed, but said, with inimitable and

\

WOMEN. 189

unaffected naivete, that carries its meaning

not to the ears but to the heart,—" How

flattered I feel! long as I have beeri on the


stage, I have felt a terror you can hardly

believe at my first appearance. Last night,

though I have appeared on almost every

stage in Europe, I could have sunk into

the earth with pleasure to avoid the ' burst'

in which I was forced to enter."

" How is that possible ?" said one of the

hearers. " You who speak English with such

purity ^ what could you have to apprehend ?

It is impossible but you must have been a

native, or a resident at least, in these islands

before."

At these words Zaira appeared visibly eril-

barrassed, and the changeof her countenance

was visible through all her rouge. The

speaker pursued the subject, and some one

else said casually, " But you have the ' ars

celaf e artem;' we would never have known

your acquaintance with the classics, but from

your comparison between the Orestes in

190 WOMEN.

the Eumenides of Eschyius, and Shake-

speare's Hamlet."

" Indolence, indolence," said Zaira, try-


ing to laugh ; " like the Laplanders, who,

when a silver mine is discovered, bribe the?

discoverer to conceal it, for fear the Sweden

should compel them to work it;" and she*

then attempted to follow the parallel she

had been tracing between the characters

of Orestes and Hamlet, but her powers

of expression seemed suddenly to fail her,

and she paused in obvious embarrassment;

the current of her ideas had been evidently

suspended.

Charles, who had stood near her chair,

silent and unnoticed, ventured then to re-

peat a passage from Schlegel on the drama,

and he added to it the remark of an Eng-

lish critic, that the characters of Electra and

Hamlet bore a closer resemblance to each

other than any that the ancient and modern

drama furnished. He spoke in French,

and his pure and elegant language derived

WOME*. 191

an interesting contrast irom the timid tone

in which it was uttered. Zaira, who till

then had scarcely observed him, turned to-


wards him with eager delight; and as he

continued to speak, she expressed, in rapid

but polite French, her surprise at such cri-

tical knowledge in so young a speaker.

Charles blushed ; '• I am not the rose," said

be, " but I have been near the rose."

«.Zaira continued to converse with him

almost exclusively ; she urged him to speak

on the ancient and English drama, and she

even condescended to say, that his know-

ledge of the German authors had given her

new ideas ; but she renewed her enquiries

after the English drama, of which he ap-

peared such a master.

" You must have read much," said she;

" but when did the slaves of the lamp ga-

ther so rich a treasure in,the subterranean

palace of antiquity ?"

At this moment (perhaps the happiest,

certainly the most brilliant, of Charles's ex-

192 WOMEN.

istence,) refreshments were placed on the

table near which Zaira was seated, and bust-

ling Lady Longwood scattered the circle to


right and left hi a moment, with hopes and

fears about her fatigue, and extravagant

unscientific praises of her performance, and

importunities that she would taste the con-

fectionary, the French names of which she

ran over with a volubility that might have

made Zaira believe she was at a restaura-

teur's in Paris; the cremes of every kind,

and the marangles, and the limonade, the

very same as that which had acquired im-

mortal honour for " la belle limonadiere at

the mille colonnes."

Zaira, taking some ice, assured her, that

the pleasure of the evening had repaid

her exertions ; and added, rather speaking

to herself than Lady Longwood, " never

did I meet with such talents in one so

young."

" Oh, my dear, dear Madame Dalma-

tian! !" said Lady Longwood, catching both

WOMEN. 193

her hands with eager delight, " how you

do enchant me! Could I have imagined

my poor timid Honoria would have ob-


tained Such flattering applause—and from

you ?"

Zaira looked at her for a moment with

silent amazement, and then recollected her-

self enough to praise Honoria as much as

her conscience would let her. But her

own thoughts were quite enough for Lady

Longwood; and she glided away to re-

peat to her "wondering, weary, incredulous

audience Zaire's raptures about her poor

Honoria.

" 'Dear creature," said she, throwing her

arm on Honoria's bare broad shoulders in

a fine Sevigne style, " how timid she is !—

these praises quite overpower hep—I feel

her little heart beating so this moment."

" Oh, mamma!" cried the timid Honoria,

twisting herself in no graceful attitude

from under the fostering arm,, " that ,odi-

VOL. I. .

WOMEN.

ous bracelet of yours ; it has torn my neck,

and now you have got it entangled in my

hair."


And, lo ! as Honoria spoke, her mother's

arm was too hastily withdrawn, and sus-

pended to it hung an exquisitely turned

ringlet, that had been carelessly, too care-

lessly it seems, twisted among the artifi-

cial flowers, and was—as artificial as they.

Lady Longwood, " no whit dismayed,"

joined another circle; and hiding her in-

voluntary " rape of the lock" in her ridi-

cule, Canvassed so successfully, that she was

deputed to wait on Zaira with the en-

treaties for one more delightful air, which

was to conclude the happiest evening they

had ever passed. Zaira complied in a mo-

ment ; but, generously anxious for others,

she concealed it under a slight apology for

fatigue, and declared herself willing to join

any performers in harmony. The profes-

sional singers immediately crowded round

her, and the splendidly bound volumes of

J

WOMEN. 193

Italian trios unfolded their broad leaves on

the table in a moment; Zaira, with polite

humility, left the choice to any singer who


would have the goodness to accompany

her. At that moment, she saw Charles's

eye fixed, with a look of intelligent de-

light, on the beautiful trio of " Padre

amato," in Zaira. She sung what had been

fixed on ; but immediately after, called on

Sir John S and Miss C e to join

her in the trio. Charles's heart beat au-

dibly—the applauses were loud and long

—Zaira looked around for him, and was

disappointed-—the sweetness, the richness,

and the deep and mellow tones of her voice

had overcome him, and he had turned

aside to hide the effect which they had

produced. Struggling with his emotions,

he came forward at the close of the trio,

but the fire of his dark brilliant eye was

quenched. Zaira heard the bravos of the

crowd, but she felt his tear. She rose a

moment after, and Lady Longtoood, hap-

196 WOMEN.

py in officious trifling, called out, ""Ob,

those beautiful flowers!—that beautiful Pa-

risian wreath!—Do you know it is just


falling oif—Will you allow me"——and

she pressed forward to adjust the flowers in

Zaira's hair.

" Oh!" said Zaira smiling, " I am not

worthy of such an assistant;" and, taking

the wreath from her head, she placed it

.playfully on a bust of Shakespeare that

stood on a beautiful marble pedestal near

Jier.

Charles, the most silent, but the most

constant of her attendants, was close to her.

" But," said he, pointing to the wreath,

" the laurel is destined for poets—these

•roses are the flowers of beauty and love."

" Then on whom shall they be bestow-

ed ?" said Zaira.

" On their representative," said Charles,

snatching them from the bust, and offering

them to her.

Zaira took the flowers, and declining

WQM-EN. 197

the reference to herself, said, " Then you

must have the honour of being the high-

Driest at the offering—I have a charming


cast of the Venus de Medici—Do me the

honour to visit her tomorrow evening, and

crown her"

Charles bowed with- speechless delight;

but while she replaced' the flowers in her

dark hair, he could not help comparing its

glossy braids, and luxuriant curls, bound

-with pearl, and entwined with flowers, with

the flaxen ringlets of Eva, so unadorned

except by their own lustre.

198 WOMEN.

CHAPTER XL

• * i •

Proxima Circsece radubtur litora terra ;


Dives ubi Solis filia lucos • . . ,

Assiduo resonat cantu ————

VlEfilt.

CHARLES was hurrying to Madame Dal-

matiani's the next evening ; she had apart-

ments in Sackville-Street; but so strong

was the force of habit, and so unconscious

was he of its force, that he found himself at

Mr Wentworth's, in Dominick-Street, be-

fore he discovered his mistake. It is im-

possible to tell the mixture of feelings

which governed him in his determination

to enter, though his intention had been far

from visiting Eva that evening. He knock-

ed at the door, but his hand seemed to him

WOMEN. 199

to tremble, and the knock had a hollow

sound in his ear. Mrs Wentworth was at

home; he entered the well-known room;


Eva and her aunt were at work; the room

was large; the dark-brown paper, two can-

dles dimly burning on the work-table, the

silent quiet figures that sat beside it, the

shelves loaded with volumes of divinity,

the still sombrous air of every thing; no

musical instrument, no flowers, no paint-

ings ; what a contrast to the scene he had

last witnessed, and to the scene he was

hastening to!

Mrs Wentworth expressed her pleasure

at seeing him, without any remark on his

absence; Eva trembled with surprise and

pleasure, but she never raised her eyes

from her work. Charles felt something like

constraint, and something like shame and

fear in her presence,—that shame that arises

from the consciousness of a broken confi-

dence,—his engagement felt to him like

200 WOMEN.

an injury to her; and as he gazed on her

lovely cheek, in which the pure and elo-

quent blood had mantled so richly since his


entrance, he said to himself, " She has no

secrets—no thoughts that she might not

disclose." Eager to escape from his own

thoughts, he offered to read to them while

they worked. " With pleasure," said Mrs

Wentworth ; and, pointing to the shelves,

she offered him his choice of Sandeman's

Letters to Hervey, or Boston's Fourfold

State, or, if he wished for scriptural expo-

sition, Gill on Isaiah, or Owen on the He-

brews.

Charles viewed them all with the blank

eye of despair. " Is there not one human

author here ?" said he ; and then recover-

ing himself at the involuntary gloom on

Mrs Wentworth's countenance, and the si-

lent dejection of Eva's, he caught up a vo-

lume of Milton, and placing it before Mrs

Wentworth, appealed to it playfully to

plead for him.

WOMEN.

" Let Milton plead for himself," said" Mrs

Wentworth, good-humouredly.

Thus encouraged, Charles ventured to


read; and his eyes, required but little aid

from his imagination to transfer all that

the first of poets has said of the purity,

beauty, and the unearthliness of his female,

to- her who might have been her represent-

ative in all but fickleness. But as he con-

tinued to read, he was perpetually inter-

rupted and obstructed by Eva's enquiries

into the classical allusions with which it

abounds, and by Mrs Wentworth's strong

remarks on Milton's obvious tendency to

Saxterianism—(now what Baxterianism

was Charles did not know, and he chose

to leave Mrs Wentworth in full possession,

unexamined, of what it might or might

not mean);—and at length he was com-

pletely chilled by the increasing horror and

reluctance which they expressed at the free

and frequent mention of the most sacred

i2

202 "WOMEN.

names, and the familiar dialogue in which

they are employed. Charles laid down the

book; a long silence followed. Mr Went-


worth's rap was heard; he came in hot

from controversy at a religious party with

whom he had dined. He drew from one

pocket the well-known Letters of a Barris-

ter, with Dr H 's able answer; from

another a scarce copy of Toplady's Contro-

versy with Fletcher on Predestination;

and thus, doubly armed, was proceeding

to give his wife an account of a debate on

"imputed righteousness," at the same time

giving a hint of a bye-battle with Charles,

by desiring him to glance over the Checks

to Anti-nomianism, and give his opinion

of them, when the clock struck ten, the

signal for the servants to assemble to pray-

ers. They came; and Wentworth, whe-

ther elated by recent victory, or from some

fvesh impulse of the spirit, gave an extem-

pore prayer so long, that the conclusion of

WOMEN. SOS

it found all the family asleep except Mrs

Wentworth, Eva, and Charles. "Went-

worth went round rousing them from their


slumbers with no gentle voice or action,

earnestly assuring them, that in the world

of flames and torture, to which their carnal

sloth was hurrying them iast, there was no

slumbering or sleeping, and exhorting them

not to close their eyes till they had prayed

that they might no more be sleepy dogs,

lying down, loving to slumber ;—to excite

them to which, he distributed a large hand-

ful of evangelical pamphlets among them,

which they received with drowsy bows,

half-closed eyes, and hoarse, inarticulate

thanks.

Then Wentworth had leisure to turn to

Charles. " A nd is this a new invention of

Satan's to cover the heads of fools from

hearing the word of God ?" said he, taking

up Charles's tasselled hat that lay'on wa'

chair. " You are going, I presume, to a

204

party, as they call it—that is, to a place

where sinners assemble to shut their souls

and ears against all that could save the one


or pierce the other. And at what an hour

do they meet! at the very hour when the

people of God are supplicating for mercy

in vain on the unthinking wretches! Well

may such meetings be called deeds of dark-

ness in the literal sense ; and well docs the

Apostle couple murders, drunkenness, re-

veilings, and such like,"

Charles calmly took up bis hat, and,

bowing to Mrs Wentworth, he was going

to retire. The dazzling attractions of his

figure, embellished by dress, and perhaps

animated by some slight suppressed feel-

ing of passion, never were more resistless

or commanding. Mrs Wentworth felt

more for Eva than ever she had felt till

that moment. There was a strong con-

trast between the brilliant figure before

her, and the gloomy existence to which he

WOMEK. 205

had devoted himself, and of which the

gloom appeared to herself at that moment.

" Stay with us," said she, " and we will


try to make the evening pleasant to you—

we have some other books."

" And is he going to a party ?" said Mr

Wentworth, who, like many angry people,

had talked himself into a passion about

Charles's engagement, while he did not

think him engaged.

" I am engaged," said Charles.

" To the actress, I suppose," said Went-

worth, intending only a virulent sneer, but

unconsciously discovering the truth.

" I am engaged to Madame Dalmatiani,"

said Charles, in a still more hesitating voice.

Mrs Wentworth, retreating, seated her-

self in silence; Eva, folding up her work,

rose to retire.

" Where are you going, child ?" said Mr

Wentworth; " the door is at the other

end of the room; do you mean to go out

through the wall ?"

5


206 WOMEN.

Eva, with the utmost exertion of her

spirits, smiled, and went out through the

door which she did not see. Wentworth

and his wife looked at each other in silence.

WOMEN. 207

CHAPTER XII.

1 Hail, foreign wonder !

Whom certain these rude shades did never breed.


Milton.

What a contrast in Zaira's apartment-

lights, music, flowers, beauty, and genius !

No effort to drag on the hours, and mea-

sure out time by stated employments ; time

seemed only measured by enjoyment, and

life itself a kind of prescriptive title to hap-

piness, (the best kind of happiness, intellec-

tual enjoyment, combined with the most

refined gratifications of the sense;) groups

were conversing without effort, listeners

attending without ennui or affected inte-

rest ; music without any silence of weari-

208 WOMEW.

some attention, or burst of disciplined ap-

plause ; literature, and no pedantry; per-

fect ease, and no relaxation : the best poe-


try in all the languages of Europe was pro-

fusely, but not obtrusively, scattered round

the room, intermixed with biography, criti-

cism, and works still more profound : vases

filled with flowers, and lamps of classical

structure, diffused their fragrance and their

light among volumes and busts; and Ho-

race, Anacreon, and Moore, might have

been here said to live amid roses once more.

Every thing breathed pleasure, without la-

borious excitement; and there was all the

spirit of society r without the mechanism of

its forms.

At De Courcy's first entrance, it was

easy to observe the truth of Lady Long-

wood's observation, that Zaira was not

only independent, but wealthy; the num-

ber of attendants, and the splendour of her

whole establishment, proved this sufficient-

ly. And again the motive of her continu-

WOMEN.

ing on the stage, and of her coming to Ire-

land, tortured him wkh irresistible solici-

tude. When he experienced this feeling;


he said to himself; it is curiosity; but he

already began to feel it was something

more. Thus, in the first movements of the

heart, we always try to deceive ourselves ;

we dread the approach of a power, whose

influence we anticipate as ungovernable, as

the warrior in the Old Testament said to

him who warned him of the approach of an

enemy, " Thou seest but the shadows of the

mountains as if they were men," and tried

to believe himself till he became the cap-

tive of those whom he derided as phantoms.

As he passed through the rooms, the ob-

jects of delight and hixury around only

struck him as assimilated to her taste, or

indicative of her character. The books, the

flowers, the instruments seemed to him like

the embellishments of a temple, that an-

nounce the character of the deity to which

it is dedicated ; and in inhaling this luxuri-

210 "WOMEN.

ous atmosphere by which she was surround-

ed, he seemed to enjoy her presence in the

objects over which its influence was effu-


sed, as seamen are said to know the coasts

of Arabia before they are visible, by the fra-

grant emanations of the gales that are waft-

ed from their shores.

She came in very late; she had acted at

the theatre; but this had never occurred to

De Courcy, who thought only of his invi-

tation for the evening, and she did not

wish him to be reminded of it; it was sin,

gular, that even already she did not wish to

be considered by him as an actress. She

passed through the rooms, conversing suc-

cessively with the literary groups that filled

them; she was evidently much fatigued, but

her fatigue did not extend to her talents,

and only gave a delicious languor to her

voice and expression ; it was still the sound-

ing of Apollo's bow, though the string was

relaxed. Her conversation, addressed to va-

rious professors of the arts, of poetry, and

WOMEN. 211

©f general literature, was varied to the sub-

jects and styles of each. Like Cleopatra,

she could give audience to the various am-


bassadors of her court in the native lan-

guage of each.

At last she passed into a small room,

where there was but a single groupe; this

room was almost filled with flowers, and

the light shaded by veils of muslin,—a

light, that, like the mistress of the house,

was most seductive, because less dazzling,

made the company seem as if they were

reposing in bowers by moonlight, Her

harp was there ; the party were conversing

together, but there was an instant and deep

silence, when throwing her white arm over

the strings, she produced a few chords of

irregular, but exquisite modulation. They

all crowded round her, pressing her to sing,

and Charles joined them; till, recollecting

her fatigue, he condemned his own selfish-

ness, and entreated her not to sing, in a tone

212- WOMEN.

that seemed to contradict its own petition^

The indifference with which she had listen-

ed to the other petitioners, was exchanged


in- a moment for an expression of interest,

and a smile of the brightest, softest plea-

sure, wandered over her beautiful features.

It is Crater us then who loves the king, said

she to herself; but Hephestion loves Alex-

ander, and she immediately prepared to

sing. The air she selected was that re-

markable one which Farinelli was em-

ployed to sing to awake the king of

Spain from a state of gloomy and des-

ponding abstraction, that threatened the

loss of his intellects, and which is said to

have been successful. It was simple and

tender in the highest degree, and the mur>

mured admiration of all the circle, and the

tear of one in it, bore testimony to its rich

and thrilling sweetness. At the close, she

suddenly changed the measure, and stri-

king the symphony of a gay Venetian air,

WOMEN.

accompanied it with such rapid articula-

tion and festivity of expression, :that every

foot trembled to join in the dance, to its


light and lively measure.

" I appear like a trifler," said Zaira to

De Courcy, when her song had ended. " I

would not wish to appear so to you—but

of the two sources of mental or physical ex-

citement, contrast and association, the form-

er is certainly the strongest, and I often

have recourse to it to produce that excite-

ment that is expected from me."

" And do you indeed think contrast the

strongest ?" said De Courcy ; to whom this

speech seemed to develope :the light feeling

of the continental women, who are always

looking for a coup-de^theatre in whatever

they do.

" No," said Zaira, thoughtfully ; " Con-

trast appears to affect the arts, and asso-

ciation the feelings. In contrast there

must always be surprise, and surprise .pro-

duces a momentary vivacity of impres-

214 WOMEN.

sion, unfavourable perhaps to deep feeling.

But association forces reflection on us, by

giving us leisure to collect and compare the


minute and resembling features of which it

is composed. Contrast excites emotion, but

association leads to reverie ;" and, as she

spoke, her features assumed a shade that

seemed suggested not by the reflections of

the moment. DeCourcy, to whom her pause

was eloquence, did not interrupt it by a

whisper ; it seemed as if, in her last words,

she had begun to speak of herself, and he

felt as if her very silence was like reposing-

a kind of tacit confidence in him. " With

the thoughts of our country," said Zaira,

speaking in a still more suppressed voice,

" how many associations are combined !—

even in its recollections, though we can

trace nothing but misfortune, that misfor-

tune gives us a thrill like pleasure; and

though when we return to it, we only ex-

pect their revival, we expose our wounds

to its native air, with a hope that flatters,

WOMEN. 215

though it does not heal. Does not one of

the first of poets sooth even death with the

recollection of our country ?


91

' Moriens dulces reminiscitur Argos.'"

VIIJOIL.

" What would I give," said De Courcy,

who thought her imagination was now

wandering to the shores of Italy; " what

would I give to be a native of that coun-

try which has a share in your recollection?—

In joy we sympathize with strangers, but

we lament only what we love. The green

leaves, with which the ancients decorated

the door in their houses of pleasure have

long withered away, but to this day we

find their phial of tears near the urns of

their friends."

" What would you give to be my coun-

tryman ?" said Zaira, rapidly; " and how

can you tell you are not ?" And with these

mysterious words she quitted him, and

urne d to a group near her.

216 WOMEN.

A gush of delight thrilled through the

frame of De Courcy.—Her countryman!—

and then Lady Longwood's hint,—" She


came to Ireland to look for a lover," re-

curred to him like the nights in the de-

sert, when frost succeeds heat almost in-

tolerable. And at this moment Lady

Longwood's testimony, though he knew

the futility of her character, appeared lo

him irresistible ; for he felt that such weak

worldly people somehow contrive to ascer-

tain the motives of conduct much sooner

than those who are guessing or groping

their way through the maze of sentiment;

to facts they go, by facts they decide, and

they seldom are wrong, because they have

nothing to lead them astray. "Can she then

have come to Ireland to seek a lover?—

Can Zaira's lover be to be sought ?<—Or, it'

such a wretch be, is he worth seeking ?—

Or, may she not find a lover ?—Oh, what

a madman am I!"

This mental Soliloquy was over in a mo-

W®MEN. 217

Bient; he turned, and was surprised to find

himself not alone, so completely was he ab-

stracted ; but when he turned, Zaira was


conversing calmly with one of the com-

pany, who was pointing out that passage in

Metastasio-s works, where" «e deprecates the

impraoisatori talent of his country, as de-

structive of genuine poetical power, while

he laments that he had himself been sedu-

ced in his youth to practise it.

" But you do not condemn this charm-

ing talent, which you certainly possess ?"

said the speaker.

" I believe, sir," said Zaira, rather coldly,

" it is a talent that belongs only to native

Italians," and she turned away.

Charles caught the words,—only to na-

tive Italians. Twice in one night, then,

she had appeared to disclaim her being a

native of Italy. Yet still, what could be

her motive for visiting Ireland ? At this

moment young Longwood, the most un-

VOL. I. K

218 WOMEN.

welcome of all intruders, lounged up to

Courcy, complaining of the damned bore

of such an evening, and regretting that he


had not accompanied his mother and sis-

ters (for so he was instructed to hint) to

the Castle that night.

" Nothing here but talking and singing.

By heavens, she is going to sing again !"

and he pointed to Zaira, who, yielding to

the importunity of the company, was once

more seated at the harp.

As she sat down, the beautiful wreath of

flowers that was twined in her dark hair,

became loose, and one of the roses fell on

her neck, making a bright contrast with its

whiteness. She attempted to arrange it,

but did not succeed ; and the graceful mo-

tion of her arms in this simple attitude,

seemed to develope a new charm in this

most attractive being, who could, in a mo-

ment, combine the extremes of simplicity

and genius. She placed the wreath beside

her.

WOMEN. 219

" The season of the rose is departed with

me," said she, glancing her dark eye at De

Courcy; " but that of the nightingale still


remains ;" and she began to sing an Irish

air. It was that beautiful one to which

Moore's words have given new beauty—

" Hath sorrow thy young days shaded ?"

" She is all art and affectation," said

Longwood, almost audibly, whispering De

Courcy.

De Courcy was silent.

" Look at the attitude in which she

bends over her harp—look at the attitude

in which she turns to take that note from

the servant. I suppose an order from the

manager."

" But is that affectation ?" said Charles,

watching her changing countenance as she

read.—" See how white her lips are grow-

ing.—See." It was not affectation, for

before Zaira could finish the note, she

fainted.

220 WOMEN.

CHAPTER XIII.

How hapless ip th' applauded virgin's lot,

Her God forgetting, by her God forgot!


Pleasure its gale, and flattery lends its breath,

To waft her smoothly to eternal death.

Wesley.

Zaika's female attendants were sum-

moned ; and the company, after some en-

quiries which none could answer, dispersed.

De Courcy was at her door at an early

hour the next day ; he was told her indis-

position was accidental, and that she was

well; but he did not obtain admission for

some following days, nor did she appear

at the theatre for that week. During this

period, it was his only employment to has-

ten to her door, where the same excuse

was repeated; and to call every day at

WOMEM.

Wentworth's. During the firstjjart of his

acquaintance with Eva, his steps almost

unconsciously bore him to her uncle's every


day, where he lingered tiil preparations for

their early dinner made longer delay im-

possible. Now, on quitting Zaira's door,,

he was obliged to remind himself that he

ought to go, and latterly to frame excuses

to himself for not going just that day. It

need not be observed, that very slight ones

soon began to be sufficient. Thus a senti-

ment was rapidly assuming the form of a

duty. Had his intermitted visits, or his

abstraction been observed, he would have

been happier; he would have had an op-

portunity of justifying himself, and this we

always wish for when we begin to feel we

want it. An accused person, too, always

feels like an injured one, and we take plea-

sure in being accused by others in certain

states of feeling, because such accusation as-

sists us in escaping from our own. A scene

of explanation would have shewn Eva, too,

222 WOMEN.

in a new light, but it was one she would not

appear in—it would have given Eva a new

interest, but it was an interest she disdained


to borrow. We love to have false motives

imputed to us, that we may be willingly ig-

norant of the true; and the reproach of her

pensive unaltered smile was the last he could

submit to bear. He said to himself, " I love

to gaze on the glowing colours of this won-

derful being, but it is only that I may feel

more refreshment from the pure green of

another character;" but while he said this,

he was aware that those who argue in me-

taphor seldom argue for truth; for every

day he would have hung over those bril-

liant colours, had they been unveiled to

him, and every day he forgot to refresh

himself with the green. During this time,

Zaira wrote to the most intimate friend she

had on earth, a Madame St Maur, who lived

near Paris, but to whom she never could

prevail on herself to disclose the circum-

stances of her life, till she was at a distance

from her.

WOMEN. 223

She wrote to her, assigned the cause of

her visiting Ireland, the hope that had sus-

tained her there, till the night she had faint-


ed on receiving a letter that crushed all

hope for ever; and she concludes with

these words, " What have I now to live

for ?"

9

Madame St Maur's Answer to Zaira.

1814.

" What have you to live for, ma belle

Zaire ?—Why, live to love ; and unless

you live to that, and for that, you live to

no purpose, in my opinion, that is, in the

opinion of any rational woman, any French-

woman, I mean. And so you would waste

your brilliant existence in running after

the shadow of—what!—a brat, that if it

had had the good fortune to be born in

Paris, would have found its way to les en-

fans trouvees, and never disturbed you by

its cries from that to this.—Oh, my dear

e, at a thousand, or five hundred, (or I

324 WOMEN.

don't know how many leagues—I am a

wretched geographer, but I suppose it is at

least a thousand leagues from Paris to Dub-


lin,) I cannot stand the fire of your eyes—

veil them, in mercy to me and all mankind.

I cannot encounter the sublime and beau-

tiful anger of their flashes even at this dis*

tance, though I see and feel yon are arm-

ing them with all their lightnings to blast

me for my last daring sentence. Turn them

on your lovers, and spare me;—the fact

is, (but I don't tell facts well) I cannot bear

a child of that Fiorettfs, and I can scarcely

bear you for being fond of it. Now, don't

you forgive me ? a beautiful woman feels

little difficulty in forgiving any abuse of

her husband, that implies a homage to

herself. But, seriously, my dear, I cannot

comprehend this frightful story of yours,

with such a father and such a husband.

What a frightful father,—what an odious

husband!—But they are dead, and so we

need think no more about them.

" Oh, my dear, what a becoming thing

WOMEN. 225

death is when the living remember it pro-

perly, that is, when the recollection gives a

pensive grace (for a moment, no more) to


the features, or a striking period to a sen-

tence which no one finishes half so well as

you, and therefore I will leave it in your

hands; only remember, that the tear which

your own Sterne so beautifully describes as-

giving a new lustre to the sword of Mon-

sieur le Marquis de N , would only

have rusted what it embellished, if it had

been suffered to remain on it too long.

Take the hint, my beautiful Zaire, intelli-

gent as you are beautiful, and remember

that eyes bright as yours were never crea-

ted only to weep.

" And so you are in Ireland—ab, take

care—recollect that Telemachus, who set

out in pious quest of a father, found him-

self wrecked on the island of Calypso,

the island of Love! May this never be

your fate, at least the wrecking part of

jt!—There was a vessel lately lost near

K2

226 WOMEN.

Dieppe, and every soul perished!—How

dreadful—and how your genius might em-

bellish the description ; but I still trem-


ble to think of a wreck even in metaphor.

Ah, these Irishmen ! they are dangerous

beings. No wonder—they have, I am told,

something of that ardour, that devotedness

to the sex, that sentiment for women which

formerly distinguished Frenchmen, and ob-

tained for them the highest glory man need

pretend to, that of being agreeable to wo-

men. But the terrible revolution has de-

nationalized us, and our modern beaux do

nothing but oil their Titus's, turn in their

toes, and talk of horses—apropos of heads,

or of wigs rather, which is just the same

thing—I have seen one or two lately in the

style of Henry IV.—awful phoenomena

these! In other countries revolutions are

intimated by signs more alarming ;—in

France by a change of the fashions. What

will this come to ? For my part, (no

Frenchman or woman could ever speak of

any thing without adding, for my part) I

WOMEN.

am reconciled to any dynasty that will ex-

empt us from conscriptions and taxes; quite

of the sentiments of the Fauxbourg -


who, when the Emperor rode among them

the other day, shouted, ' Live a thousand

years, but give us peace P

" Nothing but politics in Paris, that is,

we never speak of them, but we pay it off

with thinking. I saw.the Empress in her

carriage yesterday, she looked very melan-

choly ; but such is the system of espionage

here, that it would be dangerous to remark

it. Why will princes lay snares by their

looks ? Amid all this we have one conso-

lation, — justice, ample justice, is about to

be done to the beauty of Parisian ancles ;

the petticoats are growing shorter every

day, and, provided they do, no matter how

long the political faces are. Do you know

they say milord Wellington has actually

crossed the Pyrenees ? — the Pyrenees ! —

my God, but that is impossible. I would

as soon believe Livy's foolish story about

228. WOMEN.

Hannibal's having melted a rock with vine-

gar, after first heating it with an immense

wood fire, while M. de Viosmenil shewed


me the other day, that a few lines before,

Livy says there was not a twig for fuel to

be found in the whole region : And they

say too, that the allies are making a de-

monstration toward Paris, and that in a few

weeks we shall have Cossacks bivouack-

ing in the Boulevards; but some people

will say any thing. Can you believe them,

then ?

" Ah ! should that event ever take place,

what glory for France !—Doubtless, these

conquerors, intoxicated, enchanted with

the refinements, the elegancies, the unima-

ginable superiorities of the metropolis of

Europe, would instantly confess themselves

slaves, and Paris, covered with the glory of

a sublime defeat, would behold her conquer-

ors only to conquer them. Already I see

the formidable Alexander flinging off his

Russian furs, and thawing his polar ice in

the glowing meridian of Parisian luxury,

WOMEN. 229

and even the uxorious Frederick clasping

to his bosom the souvenir of a Parisian beau-

ty, instead of the urn of his broken-hearted


queen I long to see them waltz ; doubt-

less they will waltz if they come here. I

am told the Emperor of Russia waltzes like

an angel. Ah, can it be possible, and he

has never yet seen Paris!—it is inconcei-^-'^

vable—but then a few lessons. Yes, it is

only in Paris that the dieu de la dcaise was

ever worshipped as he deserves to be. I

am told my style of beauty is exactly to

the taste of Marshal Prince Blucher. Ah,

my God! what associations, what anticipa-

tions ! I am devoured by these chimeras of

the soul; perhaps it was not only Roxalana's

petit ne& retrousse that was destined to new-

model a dynasty. But before the Marshal

is at my feet, I must give orders for alter-

ing my sandals; they no longer wear rib-

bons round the ancles.

" But to return to the Cossacks. I have

been told they eat tallow, and drink train-

230 WOMEN.

oil; tallow and train-oil, but this is incon-

ceivable ! Can you imagine it ? But what

an interesting exhibition ! I am distracted


between my fears of their visiting Paris,

and my wish to see them eat tallow. My

patriotism and my curiosity are producing

within me the most frightful struggles; but

a woman's curiosity is so much stronger

than any other of her sensations. Adieu

then, ill-fated love of my country ; you

must yield to that which overcomes every

thing with me. I must see the Cossacks

eat tallow, though I die of horror at the

sight.

" Ah, Avhat a calamity!—it is not the

Empress alone has cause tolook melancholy;

bur poor friend, Madame D'Orsange, pre-

cisely the day-week that she had buried her

husband and only child, had her Angola

goat stolen from her, and lost her incom-

parable Lury and two Java sparrows, by

the perfidy of a friend who envied her su-

perb aviary. What a dreadful event! but,

W01IEN. 231

Heavens, what magnanimity, what great-

ness of soul!—she never shed a tear for hus-

band, child, goat, Lury, or sparrow ! She


only ordered her coffee to be made a little

stronger. But Heaven delights to try the

virtuous with misfortunes ; so I tell her,

and she believes me.

" As to M. de Viosmenil and me, we go

on just as usual. I never will many him

while my mother lives, and while my con-

stant attentions are necessary to prolong-

that life, whose value increases every mo-

ment with its precariousness.

" You know I have been in the habits

of putting her to bed for some years past.

I was prevailed on the other night to go to

a ball; quadrilles were danced as merrily

as ever they were at St Cloud, by the

Duchess of Abrantes and her party, while

her husband was flying for his life from

Portugal; suddenly a sentiment, an in-

stinct (like Cinderilla's) told me I had out-

staid the hour. I precipitated myself from

232 WOMEN.

the seat—I flew down stairs—I rushed from

the house. M. de Viosmenil followed me ;

every one thought we were mad. I reach-


ed home—I winged my way to my mo-

ther's apartment—I threw open the cur-

tains,—' And are you in bed then, my mo-

ther ?'

' I am, my daughter; but I could not

sleep till I saw those beautiful eyes, which,

close or open, I have blessed before I went

to sleep these six and thirty years.'

" I wept—my mother wept. M. de

Viosmenil was affected.

' Ah, my friend,' said I, extending my

hand to him, ' can you promise me a plea-

sure like that you deprive me of, in tearing

me from this beloved mother!'

" What a scene—what an effect result-

ing from the simplest elements of feeling!

" We wear a profusion of the most bril-

liant flowers in our hats ; bonnets, the Eng-

lish would call them. Among them, I saw

lately one or two white lilies; it was well

WOMEN. 233

for the pretty heads that bore them that

they were not seen, otherwise they might

not long have remained on their shoulders.


Adieu, beautiful Zaire; I embrace you,

though at an immeasurable distance.

" DELPHINE ST MAUK.

" P. S.—After all, though the scene at

mamma's bedside was very good, she need

not have mentioned I was six and thirty

before M. de Viosmenil"

234 WOMEN.

•

CHAPTER XIV.

Baptisant son chagrin du nom de piete.


BOILEAU.

WHERE was Montgomery all this time,

from the moment that Eva had avowed or

admitted her preference of De Courcy ?—

He had hid himself in the country, not in

a romantic Beltenebros' spirit of exile, but

with a determination to contend with and

subdue a passion, which could no longer

be soothed by hope, or sanctioned by prin-

ciple.

But reports had reached him there, and

he had now come to town, resolved to see

with his own eyes, hear with his own ears,

and judge with his own understanding,

WOMEN. 235

and few were better qualified for the task.

He met De Courcy accidentally in West-

moreland-street; they walked on together


—" How are the Wentworths ?"

" They were very well when .'

" When" said Montgomery, laughing—

" when—why, how long is it since you saw

them ?" .

" Two or three days, I believe."

" Two or three days, and you believe ?"—

. " What needs this iteration ?" said De

Courcy, trying to laugh in his turn.

The forced sound of his laugh was lost in

the thunder of a splendid carriage that was

passing over Carlisle bridge. The young

men looked up; a lady was in it; she

leaned forward, smiled and bowed—" Her

bow might, from the bidding of the gods,

command." It was Zaira. De Courcy,

gazing on her, forgot to bow ; but the ver-

milion that suffused his cheek ; the quick-

ened lustre of his humid eyes; his short-

ened respiration, faltering step, and lin-

236* WOMEN.

gering, long-reverted gaze, struck on MonO-

goi nery's very heart. They walked up Sack-

vilie-street in silence. " Are you going to


Wentworth's ?" said Montgomery.

" If you please."

" If/please?"

" My dear Montgomery," said De Cour-

cy, more and more anxious for the tempo-

rary shelter of a jest; " my dear Montgo-

mery, this stormy day, you are a strict ob-

server of the Pythagorean maxim, when

the wind rises, worship the echo; but,

however, I am going to Wentworth's, whe-

ther you please or not; or even if you dont

please—will that please you ?"

Through this forced mirth Montgomery

saw restrained pique, and his thoughts in-

stantly found a new channel, De Courcy

might have known his attachment to Eva,

and this might be the language, not of in-

difference, but of jealousy. Whatever it

was, he was resolved to hear it out, to trace

it, if possible, through all its ambiguities of

W.OMEN. 23?

darkness, and confront it in light.—"Ev cf>a,n

tfo^sc-o-o*," said Montgomery to himself, re-

ferring to his own situation.


- They arrived at Went worth's: Now it

seemed to be Eva's fate, that, just at this

period, her uncle's house, society, every

light under which she eould be beheld,

every association connected with-her image,

should be particularly and pre-eminently

repulsive. Macowen was there every day,

and all day long, defining, disputing, dog-

matizing, hair-splitting, and excommuni-

cating,—the absolute Pope of the parlour-

conclave. His hearers, dazzled by his ora-

tory, stunned by his volubility, proud of

his reputation, afraid of his virulence,

would hardly have denied that a crust

was a shoulder of mutton, if it had so

pleased Lord Peter to call it. It was lu-

dicrous to hear these people, the moment

they were allowed to speak (and that was

not often,) break out into exclamations

4

238 WOMEN.

against those who suffered themselves te

be led by worldly teachers; or, as Mac-

owen expressed it, suffered themselves to


be harnessed to the old lumbering state-

coach of the Hierarchy, that they might

drag it over rough and smooth, under

the lash of tithes-men and proctors, be-

dizened with the faded trappings of life-

less ordinances and beggarly elements.

This day, however, he was resolved that

more than admirers should witness his tri-

umph ; he announced that he had lately

been engaged in the conversion of one who

had nearly been brought to see the error of

Jds way, and whom he had invited to meet

him at Mr Wentworth's, that he might

"produce his strong reasons" before the god-

ly friends who were assembled there. Mr

Wentworth was just expressing his satis-

faction, that his house was chosen for the

assembling of the saints, and with twink-

ling eyes, erect figure, fluttered handker-

chief, prelusive hems, and oscillating mo-

WOMEN. 239

tion in his chair, was speaking, as plain as

attitudes could speak, his agitation of de-

light at the expected controversy, when a


loud rap was heard at the door. The par-

ty sat hushed in grim repose.—" He is but

a babe in grace," said Macowen, with a

preparatory leer of conciliation at the com-

pany, " he is but a babe, and must be fed

with milk."

The door was thrown open—enter the

babe—a man turned of fifty, six feet two

inches high, broad and bulky in propor-

tion, with an atrabilious complexion, a

voice of thlinder, and a tread that shook

the room. The contrast was unspeakably

ridiculous. " Babe!" murmured De Cour-

cy; "Babe!" echoed.Montgomery, and both

had some difficulty in subduing their re-

bellious muscles to the placid stagnation

that overspread the faces around them.—

But the calm was of short continuance —

This Quinbus Flestrin, this man-mountain

of a catechu men, came not to sit with low-

240 WOMEN.

ly docility at the feet of his teachers, but

to prove that he was able to teach them.

If he was a babe, as De Courcy said,


" tetchy and wayward was his infancy;"

no ill-nursed, ill-tempered, captious, squal-

ling brat, was ever a greater terror and tor-

ment in the nursery. He resisted, he re-

torted, he evaded, he parried, he contra-

dicted, carped, and cavilled on the ninth

part of a hair.

Macowen lost his ground ; then he lost

his breath ; then he lost his temper;—scin-

tillating eyes, quivering lips, and streaks

of stormy red marking their brown cheeks,

gave signal of fierce debate. All the wea-

pons of fleshly warfare were soon drawn in

the combat^ and certain words that would

have led to a different termination of the

dispute among men of this world, passed

quick and high between them. Struck

with shame, they paused—a dreary pause

of sullen arger and reluctant shame.—

" Now, shan't we have a word of prayer/

WOMEN. 241

said Mr Wentworth, who had been watch-

ing them with as much deliberate enjoy-

ment as an ancient Roman would a spec-


tacle of gladiators.

" For Heaven's sake, ma'am, where is

Eva!" said De Courcy in a low voice to

Mrs Wentworth.

" Attending her school always at this

hour."

" Her school ?"

" Yes; a school of little orphans, whom

she maintains out of her allowance princi-

pally ; clothes by her own work, and teaches

with her own lips."

" But I never knew this before," said

De Courcy.

" Nor ever would from her," said Mrs

Wentworth calmly—" her left hand does

not know what her right hand doth ; and

she always contrived to make her absence

appear accidental."

This was all she could manage to say—

VOL. I. L

WOMEN.

for at the mention of the school Macowen

• was off like a rocket; all hissing, blazing^

and mounting, but not spent so soon. This


same school had been a matter of argu-

mentation, long, loud, and vehement, be-

tween him and the Went worths. He had

insisted that it should not be opened, and

that the orphans should neither be admit-

ted, clothed, or fed; till he, Judge in the

Last Resort, had digested, compiled, and

arranged the materials for their religious

instruction, in ordine ad spirituatta. Now

this was no easy matter ; for his creed was

shifting ever hour, not only in points of

discipline, but even in matters of doctrine.

His views, as he called them, were every

day enlarging; and every day he had the

same task to go over, from house to house,

with his well-disciplined, patient audience,

to convince them that his views were be-

coming more scriptural, and that in a

short time he would form a system on

the purest models of primitive orthodoxy.

WOMEN. 243

They heard and believed, on the consoling

conviction that they should all in a few

days be apostles in their own right, by vir-


tue of the patents issued from Macowen's

genuine office. Now, this office of uni-

versal censor, Mr Macowen found it very

convenient and desirable to be active in

a particular department of, that of orga-

nizing a new charitable institution of what-

ever description ; there his talents were

displayed—his importance magnified; there

he lived, and moved, and had his being.

Endless were the debates, and countless

the breakfasts and dinners eat for the

good of the famishing objects, before Mr

Macowen's eloquence, appetite, and sense

of importance, were sufficiently gratified.

Against Eva's little institution he had

infinite objections, as he knew no system

of catechetical instruction pure enough to

harmonize with his creed, and fit to be

put into the hands of children who were to

be brought up in the way of life. Thus

half of the poor orphans must have star-

244 WOMEN.

ved, and the other half been mendicants,

the worst of mendicants, naked, lying,

thievish wretches; rank in premature de-


pravity, and earning the gallows with an-

ticipated industry ; lashed to vice by blows

and curses, and robbed of its profits by

callous veterans, that hunger might make

them 'cute (acute,) while Mr Macowen was

committing to flames much milder than

those he condemned their authors to) the

catechisms of Watts, Mann, Lewis, Stop-

ford, &c. &c. &c.; and declaring, that no

evil the children might suffer from the de-

lay could be equal to the evils attendant

on their receiving their religious impres-

sions from any teacher whose tenets were

unsanctioned by the word of God ; which,

(being interpreted) signified any teacher but

himself.

Eva went on her own quiet way, not

without frequent prayer to Him, who

could alone further every good word and

work, that He would consecrate her in-

capacity, and bless her feeble efforts for his

WOMEN. 245

service; and in a few weeks saw round

her ten little orphans, healthy, docile, and

diligent, to whom she ventured to read


the most elementary parts of Scripture, and

invite children to " come unto Him who

forbid them not;" while Mr Macowen was

still, morning, noon, and night, searching

up, down, and across all the boot-stands

in Anglesea Street, Ormond Quay, and the

Coombe, for an old Lutheran catechism

that the Queen brought to England in the

year 1761, and of which his researches, after

all, could not trace a copy extant.

Lo, therefore, at the inauspicious men-

tion of this school, his ire burst forth, and

blazed with terrific resplendency.—He was

really eloquent—a natural orator; and he

was now speaking for life and death—for

the double interest of his eloquence and

his importance, the credit of which had

been much diminished in the late con-

flict.

Mr Wentworth joined him totis mribus;

246 AVOMEN.

for he had all a trader's natural invincible

terror of money being laid out without

value received; and, all-evangelical as he


was, he would rather have seen his niece's

contribution blaze in the front of a po-

pular subscription, (Miss Wentworth 30,

40, 50 guineas,) or heard the thick well-

rolled paper drop fatt in his hearing into

the velvet-lined box of a collector at a

popular charity sermon, where Mr Went-

worth and Jbmity's well-filled -seat drew

every eye with expectation of ample do-

nations to be recorded in public papers,

than known how much money was going

in her foolish whim about orphans; for,

as he said, what good can be expected of

orphans, who—who—do not go to Bethes-

da Chapel ? A shrinking, nameless fear of

the objects* of the institution being known

to her little pupils, had prevented her

They are Magdalens.

WOMEN. 247

bringing them to Bethesda Chapel.—This

fear she did not, could not, avow even to

her uncle.


The Babe also joined, for he was ashamed

of the late altercation, and glad to make

peace with Macowen even on his own

terms. The motion for 'a " word of prayer"

passed unanimously ; and Macowen, proud

of his acknowledged gift of supplication,

and still prouder of his recovered conse-

quence, was preparing, when De Courcy

whispered 'Montgomery—" Shall we visit

the school ?"

" Yes, certainly," said Montgomery ea-

gerly ; " yes, certainly ;—let us go to the

school."

"Now," said Montgomery triumphant-

ly to himself—"Now, we shall see whe

ther his heart developes itself, or whether

he has a heart at all to be developed—Cer-

tainly, Mr Wentworth's house is not the

place for the discovery."

To the school they went, but that was

248 WOMEN,

not the place to develope De Courcy's

heart. Eva was indeed there, with dishe-

velled hair, flushed cheek, and busy finger,


pointing out lessons, and cutting out work

for her little scholars, whose eyes, and fin-

gers, and tongues, moving all in concert

with hers, and all directed to her, mingled

the singular appearance of eager intelli-

gence with that of automatal mechanism.

To Montgomery she appeared like our

first mother, binding up the straggling

and decaying groupes of flowers, and teach-

ing them to bloom (Montgomery added

mentally) unto life eternal,—To De Cour-

cy she appeared—very unlike Zaira.

The business of clothing, teaching to

work, and instructing to read, sounds beau-

tiful and sublime in reading and theory,

particularly when a beautiful girl, not fif-

teen, is the maitresse, and ten little or-

phans are half of them on her lap, and half

of them at her feet; but the detail—the

detail—no one but Eva herself could have

WOMEN, 249

patience with them—De Courcy certainly

could not.—Their dullness, their blunders,

their stitches, taken horizontally, perpen-


dicularly, diagonally, when they should

have been taken in any and every other

direction—their horrible confusion of the

most sacred names in their religious les-

sons,—appalling to Eva's ears, revolting to

Montgomery's, and ludicrous to De Cour-

cy's—their dirty hair, nails, stockings, and

skirts of stuff-frocks, for which they were

gently and vainly rebuked by Eva, while

they gazed at her with stupid eyes, fixed

immoveably on the spotless white of her

drapery—their looks speaking the concen-

trated spirit of childish envy, without a

wish or thought of imitation—their Babel

of brogues, where the drawling Munster

accent was holding vain and perpetual war

with the angular and exalted cadence of

the North—All this, and more, and worse

than all this—worse than " fables yet have

850 vr OTAH.fi.

feigned, or fear conceivecT'-^worse than

could be imagined except by Eva, or some

one in her situation, burst all at once on


De Courcy's eyes, ears, and other senses.

" Can a woman be more delightfully em-

ployed?" said Montgomery, as they rev

tired.

De Courcy said, " Certainly not."—But

he thought she might, more delightfully

for himself at least,—a kind of refined self-

ishness had been stealing over him since his

first acquaintance with Zaira.

Montgomery still continued to speak of

Eva—of her worth—her virtues—her gra-

ces ; and though Montgomery seldom quo-

ted, he now quoted, and repeated with

emphasis, more than with good discretion,

Milton's " Ode to a virtuous young lady,"

" Lady, who in the prime of earliest youth

Wisely hast shunn'd the broad way and the green;

And with those few art eminently seen,

Who labour up the hill of heavenly truth—

WOMEN. 251

The better part, with Mary and with Ruth, f

Chosen thou haat; and they that overween,

And at thy growing virtue fret their spleen,


No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth.—

Thy care is fix'd, and zealously attends

To fill thy odorous lamp with deeds of light, •

And hope that reaps not shame; therefore be sure—''

H Be sure^-be sure-f-help me out, De

Courcy; you know poetry better than I

do."

De Courcy went on-*-!-

f Thou, when the Bridegroom with his feastful friends,

Passes to bliss at the mid-hour of night,

Hast gained thy entrance, virgin, wise and pure."—

And, as he finished, De Courcy burst into

an eulogium on Eva, so warm, so.loud, so

elaborate, that anyone would have thought,

instead of expressing his own feelings as a

lover, he was trying to inspire those feel-

ings into Montgomery. . 9 >

Montgomery became silent; and du-

£52 WOMEN.

ring this pause, De Courcy, silent also,

was at full, unwilling leisure to compare

his feelings on his habitual, voluntary re-


collection of Zaira, and the necessity of re-

calling the image of Eva by an effort of

duty, not of imagination. The thought of

Zaira came over his mind, like the floating

notes of some delicious music, whose re-

membrance we cannot exclude ; but when

he wished to think of Eva, he was com-

pelled to praise her-~to remind himself of

her—and to talk of her to others, whose

sympathy might assist his own. " Thank

Heaven," said he to himself, as he ascend-

ed the steps of Zaira's splendid house—

" Thank Heaven, we shall have no A B,

ab, or E b, eb, lessons here—How can Eva"

—His heart struck him, and he paused.

Eva, instructing, clothing, and fostering

her orphans, was indeed less brilliant than

the beautiful, talented Zaira, the Aspasia,

the Melpomene, the Calliope, the Terpsi-

WOMEN. 253

chore, the enchantress of all eyes and all

hearts ; the bright fall moon, whose glory

filled and illuminated the whole sphere of


his mind, while, " twinkling faint, and dis-

tant far," the image of Eva scarce glimmer-

ed on the verge—the utmost boundary of

the intellectual horizon.

The first object he saw on entering the

rooms, was—the last he would wish to have

seen there—Montgomery—yes, Montgo-

mery, propria persona, as quiet, thoughtful,

and observant, in this fairy palace, as in

Mr Wentworth's brown-papered parlour.

Montgomery, by dint of strong interest

powerfully exerted, had got himself intro-

duced to Zaira's parties ; and he had a mo-

tive which brought and kept him there,

averse as he was, both from principle and

habit, to such scenes and their inmates.

To De Courcy, his appearance there,

everywhere, seemed the result of a delibe-

rate system of espionage; and he saw, with

854 WOMEN,

a feeling of resentment, aggravated by «

consciousness, which was the more irritable,

because it was guilty. He was determined


to brave it out, and met Montgomery with

dauntless eye, and cheerful, elevated tone—

" Is not this a bower of enchantment,

Montgomery?" J

« Yes—and are you come here to play

Rinaldo in this bower of enchantment ?"

Zaira was standing with some friends at

a small table, covered with illustrations in

the most expensive style of modern deco-

ration, and showing a beautiful edition of

Horace (Wakefield's,) whose frontispiece

represented the Bard with his lyre, sur-

rounded by Nymphs and Muses,*-™

?* Here happy Horace tuned the Ausonian lyre 1"

said Zaira, as she pointed to his happy

.figure, that was displayed in an attitude

announcing, with felicitous retrospective

WOMEN. <955

intuition, the mixture of voluptuousness,

indolence, and genius, that characterized

the writer, who, at one time, is accused by


his friends for not writing more than four

times a-year; at another, humorously sa-

tyrizes his book for its ambition of popu-

larity ; is always a lover of the country

(ruris amatorem), yet always involved in

-the bustle and clamour of Rome, plunges

into every depravity of luxury, and is,

even in his adored villa, for ever singing

and drinking—sub fircta vite bibentem; yet

wishes himself born at that heroic period,

when (if he had been born) his first and last

sighs would have been exhaled at the Tern-

plum Vagitale, and " the world had wanted

many an idle song."

" This," said Zaira, pointing to Banier's

Ovid, with its splendid sculptures, " this

is one of my favourite writers."-—(" How

does she like his Ars Amatoria" thought

Montgomery to himself, parenthetically.)

256 WOMEN.

" His landscapes are always graphic; when

I read him I feel,

' Sunt rustics numina, Fauni,


Et Nymphae Satyrique, et monticolae Sylvani.*

His imagination fills all the landscapes of

Greece and Italy with its brilliant popula-

tion, and inspired our great Milton with

the magic that enabled him to raise a Comus

and a Sabrina amid the woods of Ludlow

Castle."

One of the company " spake on that

hint," and talked of " gigantesca sublimifa

Miltoniana" as sonorously as Algarotti

himself.

" It is singular," said Montgomery, " that

the classical satyr and the Christian demon

should have exactly the same appearance."

All turned and stared at the odd, but

just remark; and Zaira was pointing to

Scott's description of the " Coir-nan-Uris-

kin," to justify the observation, when she

WOMEN. 257

was led back again by De Courcy to classi-

cal subjects. With light and graceful, but

steady steps, she traversed the fairy ground


of classic mythology, and touched on the

close affinity of its elementary topics to the

Mosaic theology. DeCourcy lifted his proud

appealing eye to Montgomery. Montgo-

mery listened, while she traced the differ-

ence between the simple sublimity of the

description of the Deluge in the Mosaic

history, and the puerilities, the affectation,

the concetti of the classic authors on the

same subject, from Horace's

". Omne cum Proteus pecus egit altos

Visere montes;

Piscium et summa genus liuesit ulmo,

Nqta quie sedes fuerat Columbia,"

to Ovid's—

" Mirantur sub aqua lucos, urbesque domosque

Nereides, silvasque tenent delphines, et altis incursant

Ramis, agitataque robora pulsant"—.

258

down to the flat iteration of

•s

" Fulvos vehit unda lepores, unda vehit tigrcs."


" But," said Montgomery, " don't you

think there is strong and just description

in the line following—

i

' In mare lassatis volcuris vaga decidit alis.'"

•

• « '

" By Heaven !" said De Courcy to him-

self, gnawing his under-lip, "he delights

in contradicting her." .. *

" I feel in those descriptions nothing so

strong," said Zaira,—" nothing of that cir-

cumstantial evidence that the mind de-

mands to reconcile itself to events that ter-

rify incredulity. When Lord Byron tells

us,* that, on the extinction of the sun, the

noxious animals wandered among the dark-

* A gross anachronism—transeat cum cceteris.

AVOMEV. 259

ened habitations of men,' hissing, but sting-

less,' I no longer float in uncertainties ; the

mind fixes its anchor in one terrible fact,


and I almost believe myself present at such

a period."

(" No matter if you were," thought

Montgomery to himself.)

Montgomery's last ([notation of " Idsm-

tis decidit aKs" hiad, in the mean time, given

the hint to some talkers of the party, and

&ey were dffat a tangent on the albatross.

That broughton Wordsworth's Ancient Ma-

riner, where the crew of a goddly vessel all

perish because one of them with

" His crocs-bow did shoot ap Albatross;"

That brought on the Green Bird of Para-

dise, in Thalaba, who had a human mean-

ing in its eye; go on to the Simorg who

dwelt at Kaf; to the birds who are linked

by a hook and eye ; to the footless fowl of

heaven; Wilkins' feathered women, and

Southey's Glendoveer, &c. &c. till they

260 WOMEN.

fairly found themselves lodged with a Phce-

nix on the top of a pillar in " Egyptian

Thebes."


In the mean time, Zaira, De Courcy, and

Montgomery continued together; the lat-

ter watching, almost maliciously, for some

developement of sentiment or character

that would force open De Courcy's eyes.

He expected, and almost wished, every

moment, that she would commit herself by

some sneer at revelation; some sceptical

remark; some deference to French atheis-

tical writers; or, at least, that she would

go out of her depth in the stream of senti-

ment, and after vainly dabbling about in

metaphysics to save herself, fairly go to the

bottom.

No such thing. She passed on in un-

blenched majesty, and she did not utter a

sentence which might not have been quot-

ed as a proof that her principles of morality

were as pure as those of her critical taste.—

Continuing the subject of their late conver-

sation, she spoke of the voluptuousness.

WOMEN. 261

selfishness, and worldliness of the character

of Horace, with obvious dislike, as if the

character resembled some she had encoun-


tered in life.

" The great defect/' she observed, " in

the ancient writers* was their want of sen-

sibility."—(" Now for it," said Montgomery

to himself—He was disappointed.) " Their

pleasures," said Zaira, " are all physical;

they never speak of the enjoyments of me-

mory, or of music; their unfortunate my-

thology shut out that view of a future state,

which alone can give dignity to our recol-

lection of the departed; and their melan

choly seems the depression of a libertine in

the intervals of his indulgence, not that

sublime feeling inseparable from genius*

which is at once its reward and its punish-

ment."

" They had, at least," said Montgomery,

" an enthusiastic sensibility of rural plea-

sures? and where such sensibility exists, the

taste is seldom wholly depraved."

Zaira smiled. " Even in that enthusi-

262 WOMEN.

asm I trace rather the love of enjoyment

than the taste for nature; enjoyment al-

most wholly corporeal. The natives of a


glowing climate, they speak with fondness

of shades, because they shelter, and of wa-

ters, because they refresh them. Horace's

preference of the country is defended by a

reason that suits a valetudinarian better

than a poet; and the bare absence of the

mention of moonlight (that light of the

heart) in their writings, forbids me to think

that their sensibility of nature was pro-

found."

"Horace mentions it," said Montgomery,

(who was in a bad humour because he had

nothing to find fault with,) " in his beauti-

ful vernal ode, ' DifFugere Nives.' "

" Yes," said Zaira; " but he sees only

nymphs dancing by it, images of gaiety

and pleasure."

And as she continued to speak, blending

enthusiasm with critical taste, and enrich-

ing ancient literature with the diversified

images and multiplied materials of modem

WOMEN. 263

poetry, De Courcy rapturously applauded,

and Montgomery reluctantly approved;

and the former compared her, in his imagi-


nation, to those waters sprinkled on the an-

cient paintings of Herculaneum, whose af-

fusion restores to their colouring, for a few

moments, all its primeval beauty. " Which

of the ancients is your favourite ?" said she,

to De Courcy.

" Virgil," was the answer; one lay on the

table, and Zaira proposed their trying the

Sortes VirgiliaiuB. Montgomery declined it.

He thought it superstitious, and even pro-

fane, though he was ashamed to say so.

Zaira opened at the ominous passage

" Vixi, et quern dederat cursum fortuna peregi

Felix, heu nimium felix si—.—"

De Courcy opened on the lines-*-

" Eja age1, rumpe moras,

Varium et mutabile semper femina."

8

£~A WOMEN.

Montgomery, on pretextof looking close-

ly at the lines, held his pointing finger

strongly on them, and fixed a searching


gaze on De Courcy. Zaira was silent. De

Courcy, ashamed of the effect this trifle

had produced on him, began to relate the

story of Charles the First and Lord Falk-

land, having tried the Sortes VirgUiarue.

" Yes, and T remember the event corre-

sponded with the prediction in the cases of

both," said Zaira ; and this remark did not

seem to dissipate the effect of the experi-

ment.

Their attention was called away, fortu-

nately for De Courcy, who could not bear

the inquisition of Montgomery's looks, by

a beautiful alabaster vase being brought in,

which had been sent from Florence to Zai-

ra. Many and eager were the debates on

the subject of a groupe of figures in alto re-

lievo that embellished it. Zaira, after some

examination, proved that it was the adven-

ture of Psyche after being deserted by her

WOMEN. 26S

lover; and while the antiquarians went off

in Platonics about divine love and immor-

tality, and souls and butterflies, and such


** branches of learning," Zaira fixed De

Courcy's attention on the beautiful melan-

choly figure of the abandoned Psyche. De

Courcy gazed on it in silence; the emotion

that he felt at a resemblance it suggested

deprived him of all feeling of admiration,

all power of praise. Zaira observed his

altered expression.

" Can you trace a resemblance between

that and any figure you have seen ?"

" He can" said Montgomery, almost tri-

umphantly.

*' She must be very lovely and graceful,"

said Zaira, looking herself with unenvying

loveliness on the figure.

" She is," said Montgomery, pursuing

his triumph, " as lovely, as graceful, and as

pure as that alabaster figure;" and as he

spoke, Milton's image rushed on his mind:

" A rock of alabaster piled up to the clouds,''

VOL. I. M

266 WOMEN.

" Vous parlez avec beaucoup d'onction,"

said Zaira, smiling. " What says Mr De

Courcy ?"


De Courcy said nothing. . '

"I myself," said Zaira, " am struck with

the resemblance between this figure and

that of Ariadne, in a painting you have not,

I believe, yet seen. Allow me to show it

you."

She passed on before them, taking a

branch from the table to shew the paint-

ing. De Courcy, pausing, fondly pointed

out to Montgomery the exquisite grace of

.her parting figure and uplifted arm, as she

glided with attractive majesty before them.

Montgomery, with his head turned over

his shoulder, and his last looks fixed on the

vase, only repeated, " Psyche abandonnee","

and followed.

" What a perpetual fountain of domestic

sweets," whispered De Courcy, pressing af-

ter her, " is found under your roof—in your

presence—from literature to its most exqui-

WOMEN. 267

site illustrations by the arts. I am igno-

rant, I know not how to express myself;

but I feel I am in Paradise."


" I would wish," said Zaira, with one of

those brilliant smiles that reflects the sun-

shine of a happy heart, " when you, I mean

when my friends are here, that every hour

should be marked by a new enjoyment, as

some have contrived to measure their time

by flower-clocks, whose bloom and frag-

rance succeeding each other, are their only

marks of time." As she spoke, she stood

opposite the fine painting of Ariadne desert-

ed in Naxos ;—" It is a French painting,"

said Zaira, " of the modern school; and in

spite of all that Stewart has said, perhaps

too justly, of' marble flesh, drapery of satin

spar, and the moonlight streams of milk,' I

must think it a fine one."

And, her imagination led from the arts

to literature, she repeated, with thrilling

pathos, the beautiful lines of Aspasia, in

Beaumont and Fletcher's Maid's Tragedy;

268

——This false smile was

Well express d ; just such another caught

These colours are not dull and pale enough


To shew a soul so full of misery

As this sad lady's was. Do it by me,

And yon shall find all true but the wild island.

Suppose I stand upon the sea-beach now,

Mine arms thus, and my hair blown with the -wind,

Wild as that desart; and let all about me

Tell that I am forsaken. .

Strive to make me look

Like sorrow's monument! And the trees about me,

Let them be dry and leafless; let the rocks

Groan with continual surges; and, behind me,

Make all a desolation.

Zaira acted these lines as she spoke them,

and one would have imagined there was

something like a prophetic feeling in the

bottom of her heart. The light fell full on

the painting as she spoke; every one was

gazing on her. Montgomery kept his eyes

fixed on the figure of Ariadne. There was

no theatrical exaggerated French expres-

sion in the painting. Ariadne, a striking

WOMEN*. 269

likeness of the Psyche, appeared broken-

hearted, submitted, forsaken. Not even

the exquisite lines of Beaumont, aided by


Zaira's magical recitation, could give a

stronger representation of all that a woman

feels on the desertion of her lover, and all

that feeling she sinks under, than this soli-

tary figure.

" It is a striking likeness," said Montgo-

mery, in a tone that could not be mista-

ken.

" Of whom ?" said Zaira.

" Of the lady," said Montgomery, appa-

rently whispering Zaira, while his eyes

were strongly fixed on De Courcy—" of

the lady Mr De Courcy is engaged to."

" Allow me," said one of the company,

advancing to Zaira, " to take the branch

from you; you must be quite fatigued hold-

ing it."

" Not at all," said Zaira, mechanically,

and she retreated.

M2

J70 WOMEN.

Through her rouge no unpractised eye

could trace emotion; but the revulsion of

her features, the instantaneous whiteness


of her unpainted lips, the subsiding of her

-whole figure, a moment before elated, buoy-

ant with dramatic emotion, and conscious

of applauded talent, were clearly seen, and

strongly marked by Montgomery.

De Courcy, who had not heard Montgo-

mery's words, approached her with a glass

of water;—she gently waved him off. He

spoke some words to her in a low voice.

She only bowed her head in answer ,, and

a few minutes after, while the company,

after a debate on Murphy's Phcedra, the

only modern play that has attempted to re-

cord the misfortunes of Ariadne, all gather-

ed round a young man of great humorous

talent, (as it is called) who was singing

the mock bravura of Ariadne, in Lewis's

Adelmom, she glided away. The conver-

WOMEN. 271

sation soon languished, and the party sepa-

rated in groups.

De Courcy, oppressed, agitated, and mi-


serable, wandered from them without know-

ing where he went. He rested his burn-

ing temples for a moment against the pi-

lasters of a small door that opened into a

room filled with flowers, and wholly with-

out light. He believed himself alone, till

lie heard an audible sigh near him. He

advanced, and Zaira's white drapery gleam-

ed among the flowers by which she was

surrounded. He was at her feet before he

felt the impulse that brought him there.

The time, the place, the feelings that tore

his heart, and made it feel alternately a de-

sert and a paradise, gave him now a bold-

ness like frenzy. He cared not what was

thought, if lie was but allowed to tell all he

thought; in a paroxysm of feeling, half self-

ish, half-desperate, he wished to be heard,

and to die. He seized her unresisting hand;

272 WOMEN.

—unchecked, he pressed it to his burning

forehead and lips ;—unrebuked, he covered

it with his kisses and his tears. Zaira,


shocked, attempted to withdraw her hand;

he held it more firmly; and at this mo-

ment, her repulsive motion, his own in-

vincible timidity, left him without power

to utter a word, but what belied his feel-

ings and his situation. His language was

only that of an inexperienced boy apolo-

gizing for intrusion, not pleading for and

from the heart. " Zaira, are you offend-

ed with me ? Do not be offended. Thf

happy hours—the only happy hours hi my

life—the elysiaU moments that I have pass-

ed under your roof—in your sight—the

intellectual existence—Oh, Zaira, it is only

you have made me feel myself a thinking

being! and if you are offended with me, if

you drive me from you, I am annihilated,

lost—nothing.—No answer ? Zaira, speak

to me. Only tell me you are not angry

WOMEN. 278

-with me. I was a wild thoughtless be-

ings—I never knew happiness till I knew

you."


" Stop—stop," cried Zaira, vainly strug-

gling to extricate her hand.

" No—never—never, by Heaven!—I

was a neglected, overlooked being. You,

you alone—you have awoke me to happi-

ness—to life. Will you cast me off now ?

Oh, Zaira—angel—friend—more than all

—woman—regenerate me by your genius

—make me worthy of being your pupil—

of sitting at your feet—of kissing them as

I do now, with my heart prostrate before

them. Zaira, will you not raise me ? You

weep—Good God, are these your tears

dropping on my hands ? and have I—have

I—Oh, Zaira, drops of life!—Blood drawn

from my heart would not give me such

anguish."

Zaira collected herself. She calmly re-

pelled him ; and fixing on him eyes, which

burned in the darkness around them, said,

274 WOMEN.

with apparent calmness, and smothered

feeling, " Why did you not tell me this

before ?"


" This—what V

" May I not see your beautiful bride ?"

said Zaira, pride lending her voice a forced

unnatural calmness; then her feelings over-

powering her, she added, " Why may I

not see her ? I will bless her—love her*—

love her for your sake, dear—dear De

Courcy!" • - - •

" Dear—dear De Courcy," repeated the

intoxicated boy. " Was it you—you, that

spoke these words, Zaira ? Speak them

again, if you would save me from"-

The voice, the warning voice of Mont-

gomery, was heard from room to room,

calling De Courcy, and exclaiming that

every one was gone. Zaira rose, and was

retiring; suddenly she returned, and pla-

cing within his hand a flower, whose name,

it is said, in all modern languages, signifies

" forget me not," whispered " Ne m'oubliez

WOMEN. 275

i

pas" and quitted the apartment; the scene

of a disclosure which both dreaded, perhaps


as much as they wished.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
