OLAN-ALBIN. 



vol. in. 



CLAN-ALBIN 



A NATIONAL TALE. 



A nation fam'd for sons; and beauty's charms ; 
Zealous, yet modest , innocent, though free; 
Patient of toil ; serene amidst alarms; 
Inflexible in faith ; invincible in amis. 

Beattie. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. III. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, & BROWN, LONDON J 

MACREDIE, SKELLY, AND MUCKERSY, EDINBURGH ; 

AND JOHN CUMMING, DUBLIN. 

1815. 



John Muir, Printer. 



1.3 



CLAN-ALBIN, 

A NATIONAL TALE. 



CHAR XXX. 



Wise without learning, kind and good, 
And come of Scotland's gentler blood. 

Scott. 

Having left our hero under the care of 
friends so intelligent and devoted, we now re- 
turn to Eleenalin. It was six months since 
Lady Augusta had received any letters from 
Monimia, and a long time since she had even 
heard of her ; for Montague, in obedience to 
the high authority of his wife, the ci-devant 
Miss Sinclair, was now in Edinburgh. 

A little week had converted this lady from 
a fawning slave into an imperious tyrant; 
breathing hatred and revenge against her for- 
mer patroness, and the whole family of Castle- 
bane ; and embittering the existence of poor 
Montague, by the uncontrolled workings of 
a temper depraved by mortifications, cruelly 

vol. ill. u 



2 CLAN-ALBIJST, 

inflicted and tamely endured, — by wanton in- 
juries, exciting deep, though long smothered 
resentments. 

The grief of Lady Augusta, at the appa- 
rent neglect of her young friend, was increas- 
ed by the situation of Flora. For her Mrs 
Montague had ever expressed a very warm 
regard, and now that she was a destitute or- 
phan, thrown on the cold bounty of distant 
relatives, the kindness of Monimia was be- 
come peculiarly valuable. 

Lady Augusta was too well acquainted with 
the character of fine ladies to wish to see Flora 
in that amphibious situation known by the 
name of a companion. In this situation had 
Miss Sinclair lived, without any decided rank or 
duties : neither an equal nor a servant — toil- 
ing to fulfil the offices of both, reaping the 
rewards of neither. The tool, the butt, the 
spy, the confident, the double, the flatterer, 
the slave, of a family divided against itself, 
but united against the world. Was a dun to 
be civilly dismissed, — a new credit solicited 
before an old bill was discharged, — an oppor- 
tune hint to be given, — a necessary lie to be 
told, — a fine story invented and circulated, 
whether to save the reputation, traduce the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3 

rivals, or magnify the greatness, wealthy 
beauty, or virtue of the family, — all in the 
executive department was left to the industry 
of the companion. 

To lose good days that might be better spent ; 
To waste long nights in pensive discontent; 
To speed to day, to be put back to-morrow ; 
To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow; 
To fret thy soul with crosses and with cares j 
To eat thy heart through comfortless despairs ; 
To fawn, to crouch, to wait, to ride, to run ; 
To spend, to give, to want, to be undone. 

Such is a dependant's life : and this mi* 
serable degraded life had Miss Sinclair en- 
dured, for the mere privilege of following 
the Castlebane family from London to Brigh- 
ton, and from Brighton to the Highlands, and 
of being permitted to say, " My worthy friend, 
Lady Gordon, and the dear amiable young 
ladies." — Where religion, patriotism, and all 
the higher virtues, can boast a single martyr, 
it must be confessed that ambitious vanity 
numbers its thousands. 

That lady having now formed the charitable 
design of presenting Flora Buchanan to Ladv 
Gordon, as the wife of her darling nephew, 



4 CLAN-ALBI3T, 

which she justly concluded would go a great 
way towards discharging ancient obligations, 
anxiously wished to obtain this beautiful or- 
phan for her companion, and accordingly 
made the most liberal offers both to herself 
and Lady Augusta. 

" No, my dear girl," said the Lady, " I 
cannot consent to this. Educated as you 
have been, gentle and obliging as you are, 
many a sensible mother, who is the guardian 
of her childrens education, will be happy to 
obtain your society. To a situation of this 
kind, the friendship of Monimia will intro- 
duce you ; let us then have patience.'' 

But Monimia was still silent; and Flora, 
soft and timid even to weakness, prone to 
imagine fanciful ills, and to exaggerate the 
real evils of a world, she knew only by the 
painting of her fears, saw the time approach 
when Hugh was to conduct her to the tempo- 
rary protection of a female relation ; a coarse- 
minded and violent woman, whose temper 
and manners she recollected with mingled 
terror and disgust. 

Unable to disguise her feelings, she often 
retired to a shaded seat in the garden to mourn 
over her cheerless prospects ; and here the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 5 

Lady would find her weeping, and gently 
chide the indulgence of unavailing sorrow. 
" Ah, Lady, how can I chuse but weep, to 
think how often I have seen you sit here and 
knit; Norman's woodbine arching over and 
clustering so richly around you, — the delicate 
tendrils of Monimia's passion-flower wreath- 
ing round that, and my own brier-rose load- 
ing the air with sweets, and Moome spinning 
and singing at your feet, and old Hector 
stretched at her's, and basking in the sun. 
Ah* Lady, how can I chuse but weep." — The 
Lady smiled, and soothed this soft-hearted 
girl, cheered her with better hope, and spoke 
also of her future condition, " Why, my 
dear Flora," said she, " will you afflict your- 
self, and increase the grief I feel at being 
compelled to lose you. You must, my dear 
girl, conquer this unfounded dislike of com- 
mon-place characters, — learn to bear with 
occasional perversity, and to overlook occa- 
sional rudeness. The struggle may be easier 
than your fears represent, but nothing can 
exempt us from the attempt." — Flora promis- 
ed to overcome her fears ; but she wept to 
think she had any fears to subdue ; and in the 
present state of her feelings, she felt more 
B 2 



6 CLAN-ALBIN, 

comfort from the sympathy of Moome than 
in the consolations of the Lady. " Well may 
you weep, my darling," would Moome say, 
" leaving our own Lady, and even the coun- 
try itself : — Well may you weep, — great rea- 
son you had, and all of us. Hugh Macalhin, 
too, away the way of Craig-gillian, and let- 
ting my own flax rot in the hole. Maepher- 
son indeed, my dearest ! to even himself to 
your mother's dochter, — and your father was 
a decent man, too. An evil meeting to that 
slounge ! ah, if they were alive it is the grief 
of my heart to think upon, soon would he 
go trooping from Macalbin's lands. Aye, 
you had reason to weep, my poor girl, for 
the Low Country is bad enough, I warrant 
you. Alas, it can chill the warmest heart, 
that herself should be the one to forget us. 
But dry up your tears, my sweetest Flora, and 
let your poor heart be comforted ; for there 
is a merciful Father above, and a dear lad on 
earth, who love you, and will never forsake 
you." — And thus did Moome allay the tempest 
of grief which she had raised. 

In the afternoon of this day, Hugh came 
home, accompanied by Craig-gillian, — " the 
good Craig-gillian j" for by this epithet he 



A NATIONAL TALE. J 

was known in the country. Craig-gillian had 
been left by civil convulsions a destitute and 
uneducated orphan ; but ancient prejudices 
taught him to reverence in himself the de- 
scendant of men of family and of honour. — 
His Highland neighbours never forgot this 
claim i and a pretty correct idea of the attri- 
butes of a gentleman, together with an entire 
conviction that himself was such, went a very 
great way in training his individual character 
to the model of his fancy. None of the abo- 
minable arrogance of upstart pride attended 
his elevation, for he felt that he had only re- 
gained his place. 

" There he comes," said Moome, her old 
eyes shooting a gleam of joy and welcome, 
" the best of fathers, of masters, and of coun- 
trymen. Poor though he was, as times now 
go, alas! did he not contrive to give his boy 
the best of edication. Though he gets home 
few Low-country commissions indeed, is not 
his house the abode of comfort and roug-h 
country- plenty ? There you will always meet 
with hospitality and gentility, ould cheese and 
new butter. Day and night, late and early, 
clansmen or tenants, strangers or gentlemen, 
all are welcome to Craig-gillian. — The te- 



8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

nants send their childer to serve there as to a 
school; — and, as he was loved while he lived, 
did he die to-night, there would not be a dry 
eye in these countries." 

The object of this flourishing eulogy now 
approached; and Moome, with mingled smiles, 
curtsies, inquiries, and kindly welcomes, in- 
troduced him into the lady's parlour, and 
withdrew. When he had paid his compli- 
ments to the lady, he turned to Flora with a 
smile of fatherly goodness, " So, Flora, the 
piper tells me you are to leave the country; 
but I won't suffer that ; for surely, if Lady 
Augusta permits you to quit her, we have the 
next best right to you." — Flora's heart beat 
with increased pulsation, while she raised her 
sweet blue eyes in mute gratitude. — " Aunt 
Margaret, (a maiden-sister who had managed 
Craig-gillian's house since he had lost his 
wife) Aunt Margaret grows very frail, and we 
have great need of you at Craig-gillian. You 
will have enough to do among us, I can tell 
you ; but, for all that, we must have you. So 
go, my dear, and tell Unah that the shep- 
herd's wife wants the charm for her child ; 
and I promised the foolish woman to bring it. 
Go, while I beg a loan of you from the 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q 

Lady." — Flora pressed the old man's hand to 
her quivering lip, ran to Moome's hut, and 
threw herself, sobbing, on the neck of this 
indulgent friend, telling, in short incoherent 
sentences, her good fortune and her happi- 
ness, — and Moome mingled her tears with 
Flora's. " Good right he had to you, indeed," 
cried Unah, " God bless him with it. Was 
not the great grandmother of your late mo- 
ther and the late Craig-gillian's grandmother 
both sister's dochters of the Ardmore family ? 
Namely beauties they were in their own day : 
Flora the fair, whose yellow hair went round 
her waist twice, — few such heads of hair now ; 
and Mar) 7 , the dark-eyed, on whom a son of 
the Morar family, when in the German wars, 
made the song you love so much ; and sure 
there is not finer, deeper Gaelic, in any song 
of Ossian's;" — and here Moome, as is very 
customary in Highland conversation, repeat- 
ed, with great sensibility, some verses, breath- 
ing the very spirit of wild tenderness and in- 
spired nationality. 

In about half an hour Craig-gillian and the 
Lady entered the hut, and Moome, so grati- 
fied, and so proud, insisted that he should 
" break bread beneath her roof," to which he 



10 CLAN -ALB IN, 

consented; and while she hastened, with hos- 
pitable alacrity, to prepare her barley cakes 
and her cream, he begged that Flora would 
get ready to go home with him. " Aunt 
Margaret has sent her own horse," said he, 
" and what is more, her own saddle ! I 
would not have hurried you so much, how- 
ever, if it were not that my people begin 
the hay-harvest to-morrow, so I could not get 
away for a week or two ; aud if I had trusted 
you alone with Hugh, what if Macpherson 
had run away with you as you crossed Ben- 
vulla ?" — Craig-gillian, whose weakness it was 
to find more difficulty in suppressing one bad 
joke than in performing twenty good actions, 
pinched the chin of the blushing, smiling girl, 
who ran away in high spirits to prepare for 
her journey. 

Yet she sobbed bitterly when she bade a- 
dieu to the Lady ; she wept as she kissed 
Moome, and again when she embraced the 
piper, who, according to custom, had trotted 
three miles by the side of her horse. The 
piper also coughed and hemmed, and, at 
parting, said, " he would make a start over 
(ten miles) to-morrow, to see how she was 
liking #." — " Go where you will, darling, ad- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 11 

ded the cunning piper, with a side glance at 
Craig-gillian, " a blessing must follow you. 
It's the likes of yourself should be in a great 
house ; for a warmer-hearted, freer-hand- 
ed cratur than your father's dochter never 
entered Glen-gillian, and that's a wide word." 
" Go, you flattering piper," replied Flora, 
smiling, " don't frighten Craig-gillian ; I am 
not to be his almoner/' — " No, but his house- 
keeper. I understand you. — But you are go- 
ing to no churl's house. It would be no son 
of his worthy father's, could he churl the 
poor." And with this they parted ; and for 
the next six miles Flora was amused by the 
remarks of the jocular old gentleman. But 
when they turned abruptly from the broad 
strath into the rugged defile, over which hung 
that tremendous crag, from which Craig- 
gillian's paternal valley took its name, her 
spirits fluttered with momentary anxiety, and 
she looked eagerly and almost fearfully 
round. 

Highland scenery owes half its charms to 
the bold, fantastic lights, and the deep and 
flitting shadows of sun-rise or sun-set — to the 
sunny glimpses of a lowering noon, or the 
light, white mists of a bright morning. It 



] 2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

was almost sun -set when Flora entered the 
narrow, unploughed valley, which enclosed 
her future home. She paused, and looked 
every way around. Steep hills, with craggy 
summits, enclosed her on three sides, and on 
the fourth the huge Cnr^-gillian shut out the 
adjoining strath, and hid the rock-hewn path 
by which she had entered. A low, white - 
walled mansion, with a neat porch, stood on a 
gentle slope, fronting the south, surrouncjed 
by crags and low-spreading copses, and more 
nearly by a few tall birch trees ; a quick, 
sparkling rivulet swept round this slope, its 
wavy course marked by thin tufts of aller, 
white thorn, and grey willow, and skirted by 
a stripe of rushy meadow, still gay with sum- 
mer flowers. The offices* and the huts inha- 
bited by the weaver and married servants at- 
tached to the family, were scattered round in 
pleasing irregularity; the deep green of their 
potatoe-gardens, and the delicate shades of 
the little patches of flax, (the housewife's 
crop,) as it twinkled to the softest breeze, af- 
fording a fine contrast to the solemn hue of 
this russet valley. A little farther up the glen, 
the stream, half seen through thickets of ha- 
zel, white-thorn, and mountain-ash, dashed 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1$ 

down some craggy steeps in a number of 
beautiful cascades, turning a little mill, and 
laving the walls of a ruinous castled building, 
— the ancient home of the family. Flora sent 
round another glance, but more in admiration 
than anxiety. Every object in the bottom of 
the glen was now nearly involved in soft ob- 
scurity ; but a bright flush of parting day, 
shooting past Craig-gillian, still glowed oa 
the shrubby cliffs, and tinted the light mists, 
which, in slow and graceful convolutions, 
played around them. Groups of cattle were 
reposing under these rocks ; some goats were, 
still browsing on their summits ; the cotters' chil- 
dren, who had ventured to wade across the shal- 
low summer stream, were gathering blaeberries 
and wild rasps in their recesses, and all their 
echoes were alive and joyous with the bleat- 
ing of kids, the imitative cries of children, 
the shouts of the shepherd boy, and the pic- 
turesque notes of cro-challin, lilted by the 
milk-maids as they wound down the glen from 
the evening fold. 

" How lovely ! how sweet is evening on the 

braes of Glen-gillian !" exclaimed Flora, while 

tears of rapture swelled in her eyes ; and 

Craig-gillian smiled in sympathy with, her 

vol. in. c 



14 CLAN-ALBIN, 

young enthusiasm. " How delightful a pic- 
ture of tranquillity and retreat, of rural plenty, 
of the pastoral life in all its joys and ele- 
gance." — But Flora, who if not very wise, was 
at least very modest, only thought this.—" And 
you are not afraid that these wild hills will 
hide you from the world,'* said Craig- gillian. 
" So sweetly romantic is the scene they bo- 
som, that if here were the dear loved few, oh ! 
how happy should I be to forget all beyond 
these hills," thought Flora, — but she said, 
" Oh ! no, I am not afraid," and smiled. 

It is very certain that, even in this commer- 
cial nation, kindness, and love, and gratitude 
cannot be purchased. So small is the wages 
of female servants in distant places of the 
Highlands, that their parents furnish the great- 
er part of their clothing. In fact, the houses 
of country gentlemen may rather be called 
schools of manners and duties, than situations 
of profitable service, in the common accepta- 
tion of the word. So cheaply are they main- 
tained, that every family swarms with female 
domestics ; and to a. gentle stranger, nothing 
can be more pleasing than the air of animat- 
ed interest and respectful attachment with 
which these kind-hearted beings approach 



A NATIONAL TALE. 15 

the guests of their masters, because nothing 
surely can be more afflicting than the hireling 
sullenness, — the mien of conscious inferiorit}*, 
—the alacrity of sordid expectation, which, 
in other situations, excite our disgust, and 
which would justify our contempt, did we not 
look deeper for the true causes of consequen- 
ces so humiliating, and find pity taking place 
of scorn. 

In the patriarchal dwelling of Craig-gillian, 
there were certainly much loftier notions of 
family greatness than in most lowland houses ; 
yet the heart of Flora, who doted on the very ap- 
pearance of kindness and attachment, was re- 
freshed by the view of his affectionate peo- 
ple pressing familiarly round the horses, 
with smiles and welcomes, and extended 
hands, aifd offers of service. In the porch, 
the young stranger was met by " aunt Mar- 
garet," — a stately perpendicular maiden, verg- 
ing on sixty years, who, in memory of a hero 
fallen at Bergen-op-zoom, had made a cruel 
vow of living on in single blessedness. This 
high- blooded maiden dropped a very formal 
curtsy, and seemed to expect that Flora's 
knees were equally flexible ; — but she also 
kissed the damsel, and the warmth of the em- 



10 CLAN-ALBTN, 

brace took off the chill which the more formal 
salutation had thrown over the heart of Flora. 

The inside of the dwelling corresponded to 
its outward appearance. A profusion of ma- 
hogany furniture, substantial even to heavi- 
ness ; large home-made carpets; stoves in 
which half the neighbouring moss seemed 
glazing ; home-made candles lighting a board 
groaning beneath the mutton and game of 
the surrounding hills ; trout from the next 
stream, fowl from the barn-door ;— in short, 
every department of an extensive farm, whose 
produce was all consumed on the spot, con- 
tributed to that rough, unambitious, unlabo- 
rious plenty, which distinguished the days of 
chieftainship and clannish hospitality. 

When she retired for the night, she was 
attended by aunt Margaret to a neclt and airy 
attic chamber, which she was told to look on 
as her own ; and next morning, before break- 
fast, the same notable maiden led her through 
overflowing stores of wool, flax, yarn, house- 
hold linen, cheese, butter, hams, &c. and very 
formally invested her with the keys of office. 

Among a very numerous family of servants, 
and in the complicated business of a large 
farm, and many home manufactures, Flora 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1? 

kad no time for ennui. But she rose with 
the first ray the sun darted over Benbrisgean, 
and, when her household business was accom^ 
plished, found no small delight in listening 
to the family history, with which aunt Marga- 
ret would graciously entertain her as they sat 
together knitting, or spinning, or winding ; 
till evening brought her reading or her music, 
or the weekly epistle to Eleenalin, — and twi- 
light, her enchanted reveries by the bum-side, 
where she would saunter till summoned to 
supper by the halloo of Craig-gillian ringing 
among the cliffs. And often, in the lovely 
nights of the northern midsummer, which, 
seem but a softer day, would she again steal 
out and wander by that haunted stream, till, 
the morning star trembled on its bosom, and 
the sweet notes of the wood-lark, the night- 
ingale of Scotland, had admonished her of 
the long-fled hour of midnight. 

Flora every day gained on the good-will of 
her protectors and their numerous attendants. . 
The bonhommie of Craig-gillian found some- 
thing to admire in all she did, and even Mar- 
garet sometimes smiled stiffly in approba- 
tion. Craig-gillian had the national taste 
for music and poetry, and though, he fancied, 
C 2 



18 CLAN-ALMN, 

that Flora often sung too slowly, he was very 
fond of her Gaelic songs, as she walked up the 
glen with him at sun-rise, when he went to 
look at his young cattle. Though neither 
himself nor his sister cared much for reading, 
they respected Flora's taste, for it was also 
his, who, in their eyes, was all goodness and 
perfection, — the son, the benefactor, the pre- 
server of the family of Craig-gillian. — " He 
is more my father than my child," would the 
grey-haired man say, while his eyes glisten- 
ed with tenderness and triumph ; and Flora 
would strive to recollect the tall, grave lad, 
who used to call her his little wife, and con- 
tribute to all her childish pleasures from his 
own scanty means. 

A stranger, in the situation of Flora, would 
have found much to remark, and to wonder 
at ; but to her, every thing appeared natu- 
ral and proper. To hear, that the dairy had 
last night composed a satirical song on the 
shepherd awkwardly losing his brogues in 
the moss, when crossing the hill to visit his 
sweetheart, — that a young woman in the glen 
had made a dirge on her brother lately drown- 
ed in crossing a swollen ford in the pine-fo- 
rest, — or that old Donald, who travelled the 



A NATIONAL TAtE. J$ 

countries, had composed both the words and 

music of an exquisite lament on Major , 

who had lately fallen in battle, — filled her with 
neither contempt nor astonishment. The 
song was probably lively and poignant ; the 
dirge tender and beautiful ; the lament wild 
and plaintive, abounding in fine images, 
happy local allusions, and heart-rending bursts 
of impassioned grief, or overcoming tender- 
ness. — These effusions swiftly spread from 
glen to glen, and were sung by Flora and all 
her compatriots, till something newer came 
out, to which they gave place ; unless supe- 
rior excellence made them be treasured up 
among the celebrated lyric productions of 
this original people. 

A stranger might probably have been equal- 
ly surprised to find the secondary kitchen of 
that H white house" continually crowded with 
an influx of wandering guests; — persons, who, 
to use the gentle phrase of Highlanders, H tra- 
velled the countries.'' These wandering men* 
dicants are generally decayed tenants, or seal- 
lags no longer fit for labour, whom a ruthless 
factm % y or modern tacksman, has turned out of 
doors in their old age. After disposing of their 
small remaining property, they literally " take 



20 CLAN-ALBIN, 

up their beds and walk." — With a blanket oc 
two, packed in a bag of sheep- skin, or interwo- 
ven bents, they roam from farm to farm, and from 
glen to glen, remaining a week in one place r 
and a fortnight in another, as is found con- 
venient. As they are mighty f etchers and 
carriers of news, songs and tales, they are. 
everywhere welcome. They arrive with bless- 
ings and embraces in the kitchens of gentle- 
men, and depart with solid marks of ancient 
bountifulness. In the cottage of the tenant 
they are equally welcome* They eat with 
their hosts, — make their beds in the warmest 
corner of the hut, — amuse the elder part of 
the family with their legendary lore, — -and in- 
struct the little children in the tales and 
rhymes of the country, — and in the Lord's 
Prayer and the Creed. As their kindred are 
well known, their name and their blood al- 
most sacred, they are treated with great re- 
spect, and addressed by the usual high- 
sounding appellation of beanusale, or duine- 
usale, (lady or gent le?na?i,) which the poorest 
Highlanders employ when they meet each 
other. These travellers, who naturally strive 
to acquire such accomplishments as may ren- 
der them more acceptable to their hosts, are 



A NATIONAL TALE. 21 

no contemptible substitutes for the ancient 
bards- and senachies. There is a higher de- 
scription of travellers, who possess nearly 
the same accomplishments, — decayed gentle- 
folks, or their descendants, who are parlour- 
guests in great houses. These are general- 
ly females of very lofty pretensions, who, af- 
ter remaining a long time in one house, are 
sent to the next on horseback, with proper 
attendants. The habits and poverty of the 
country, which send every gentleman to the 
army, leave very many of these high-blood- 
ed single-sisters in the Highlands ; and it is 
not wonderful that these unfortunate ladies 
have very tenacious recollections of the for- 
mer splendour of their families, and a per- 
fect acquaintance with every tale, and song, 
and anecdote, in which its grandeur is re- 
corded. Let it be understood, that these la- 
dies do not " travel the countries," — theyon-" 
ly visit their friends. Nor do they ever deign 
to enter the door of a tenant unless he be of 
their family, and evince, by presents of wool, 
or cheese, or cloth, or a sheep, that he has a 
due sense of the " honour her father's doch- 
ter did him and his, by standing beneath his 
roof." — Persons unacquainted with the habits 



22 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of monarchical society, might feel a little 
mortified to see such presents sometimes 
looked for with mean avidity, did they not 
perceive that these exalted personages con- 
trive to indemnify their pride by the dignified 
scorn with which these humble offerings are 
accepted. 

Flora Buchanan had been about two months 
in the family of Craig-gillian, when, on a fine 
day in July, all the people of the glen went 
to the neighbouring moss, with the exception 
of the ladies and the caillach nan ceark (the 
henwife, a most important personage in High- 
land nursery tales,) who was left to take care 
of the young children. After a very busy 
morning, Flora was congratulating herself on 
a quiet afternoon, spent in listening to the 
traditionary history of Dame Margaret, when, 
happening to approach a window, which 
commanded a view of the hills that bounded 
the head of the glen, she perceived men, wo- 
men, and children, horses and dogs, all re- 
turning from the moss, shouting and halloo- 
ing with tumultuous joy, and a young lad 
running on before, who soon rushed into the 
house, exclaiming, " Hector! Hector! Ma- 
jor Hector is come home 1" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23 

Flora reddened and trembled, — sat down, 
and rose up, — ran to the window, and again 
sat down ; — while Aunt Margaret applied her 
handkerchief to her eyes with great deco- 
rum. 

Young Craig- gillian entered with his fa- 
ther ; and, when released from the arms of 
his aunt, he bowed to the beautiful girl, 
whose light and finely -rounded figure form- 
ed a striking contrast to the flat, perpendicu- 
lar maiden, behind whom she screened her- 
self. 

"An ill meeting to the fellow!" said Craig- 
gillian, in Gaelic, while he gave his son a 
good-humoured push towards Flora, — " Is it 
you are to bring Low-Country fashions to 
your father's house ?" 

Thus reproached, young Craig-gillian 
touched with his lip the glowing cheek of the 
stranger. " Is it possible that you don't know 
her?" cried Craig-gillian, laughing; and 
Hector looked and looked again at the love- 
ly girl, whose soft blue eyes, — their liquid 
brightness subdued by the rich curls of silky 
brown hair through which they glanced, — 
were, with bashful archness, turned on him- 
self. He was trying to recollect every young 



24 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lady he had left in the country, without re~ 
membering that it was twelve years since be 
had visited the country, when a sly wink from 
Craig-gillian called forth all the laughing 
dimples which lurked round the little mouth 
of Flora, 

"Is it possible!" cried Hector, " my old 
little wife!" — and he pressed his lips to the 
dimpling mouth which so sweetly revealed 
that his favourite plaything had grown up 
into this lovely young woman. 

" It is just your wife, it seems, but not so 
very old, I think," said Craig-gillian, laugh- 
ing; while, covered with blushes, Flora flew 
to her chamber, and Hector began to express 
his astonishment at the marvellous change 
which twelve years had produced, scarcely 
able to persuade himself that it was not some- 
thing altogether out of the ordinary course of 
nature which made the heart of a man palpi- 
tate at the touch of his " little wife." — " A 
mere child !" said he. — " But surely you did 
not expect she was always to continue a 
child r" answered Craig-gillian. — " Flora, my 
darling, come down stairs, and convince this 
unbeliever that you are not changed by the 
fairies." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25 

Flora stood in the middle of her room, 
pressing her hand against her bosom, and ac- 
cusing herself of something like coquetry in 
the airy reception she had given to this stran- 
ger. This, then, was that wonderful " Hec- 
tor," that " good son," to whom every thing 
she had seen, or heard, or performed for the 
last two months had the closest relation, — 
whose image was blended with all her duties 
and pleasures, interwoven with the whole tis- 
sue of her life. — " He is certainly very plain- 
looking," thought Flora, " swarthy, and lean, 
and sun-burnt; and I am sure I am not 
much better with this ugly stuff gown. I am 
always sure to be ill- dressed when any stran- 
ger comes to the house." 

Though sorely tempted, Flora did not im- 
prove her dress. She hastened to obey the 
summons of Craig-gillian, and dealt out good 
things for a rustic festival in honour of the 
welcome stranger. Him she found on the 
green plat before the door, which the High- 
landers choose to call a rampar, surrounded 
by the scallags and sub-tenants of his father, 
and their wives and children. Every one of 
these contrived to be closely related to him. 
One was his cho-alt; another the cho-alt of 
VOL. in. D 



20 CLAN-ALBTN, 

of his father, or grandfather, or aunt ; a third 
claimed him as his gosti;* a fourth was of 
the family ; a fifth, a name-sake; a sixth, 
his name-son ; — and at worst, he was their 
" young master," or " Hector Craig-gillian." 
" Miss Buchanan," said Hector, again se- 
cretly admiring the wonder-working hand of 
time, " did you ever know a man so happy in 
a. rich collection of relations ? Hear how these 
ragged men, and old smoke-dried women, 
with worsted petticoats hung round their 
shoulders, cho-alt me and gosti me. Kind 
old souls ! Yet how much better do they look 
than the miserable creatures I have seen 
to-day. — Thanks to my good father!" 

* Gosti, a gossip. This tie, similar to that which is known 
in Ireland by the terra gossipred, is most zealously adhered to 
in the Highlands, Besides the connexion formed between the 
parents of the child and the god-father, there is also a relation 
formed between the god-father and god-mother, 



A NATIONAL TALE, 2? 



CHAR XXXI, 



Yet, always wishing fer retre at, 
Oh, could I lee roy country-seat ! 
♦ • • 

O charming noons, and nights divine' 
Or when I sup, or when I dine, 
My friends above, my folks below, 
Laughing and tattling all a-row. 
The beans and bacon set before 'em, 
The grace-cup serv'd with all decorum. 
Each willing to be pleased and please, 
And e'en the very dogs at ease ! 
Here no man talks of idle things, 
How this or that Italian sings. 

Swift. 

The younger Craig- gillian was at this pe- 
riod upwards of thirty years of age. The 
time he had been in the service was spent in 
India; and his attainments in Oriental lan- 
guages had rapidly and honourably advanced 
his fortune. After passing a few weeks at 
his paternal home, he intended to rejoin his 



28 CLAN-ALBIN, 

regiment; though his father, who was growing 
old, earnestly wished him to settle in the 
country. " We are still too poor to be hap- 
py," would Hector reply, shaking his thought- 
ful head, and pointing to the ruined home of 
his ancestors, and to the mean-looking huts 
of his people. " It is long since I thought my- 
self rich enough/' said Craig-gillian, — " and 
if your son be like mine, you will think so 
too. So I'll just tell aunt Margaret to look 
out for a wife for you, and have done with 
that India." — Hector replied only with a 
smile. 

High-spirited, polite, and generous, pos- 
sessed of much latent though subdued enthu- 
siasm, and above all gifted with the first of 
Highland qualities, a warm heart, young 
Craig-gillian was not more the delight of 
his family than the pride of his dependants, 
to whom the rumour of his arival had been a 
jubilee-trumpet. Crowds of poor people, 
from many distant places, hastened to con- 
gratulate the representative of an ancient and 
beloved family ; and for every one Hector 
had a kindly welcome, and an overflowing 
shell. There is something peculiarly pleasing 
in the air of interest which surrounds an ami- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q 

able young man, born to fortune, when in the 
midst of those who have every thing to hope 
from his future goodness. The complacency 
of a being, whom riches have not yet render- 
ed cold, selfish, and calculating, — who feels 
that he shall yet be powerful, and resolves to 
make that power the instrument of his bene- 
volence, — awakens a kindred feeling in every 
bosom ; and Flora felt that no period of her 
life had been so happy as the three weeks 
Hector had spent at Craig-gillian. 

In the first week he attended her in a visit 
to Eleenalin, and the rest of the time had 
been devoted to receiving visits from families 
in distant places of the country, and to re- 
turning them. But now he remained mostly 
at home, spending his mornings on the hills, 
and his evenings in the bosom of that patri- 
archal family, to whom his society gave new 
life, and a new sense of enjoyment. Though 
habitually taciturn and reserved, he had now 
so much to tell, and to hear, and each party 
listened with an air cf interest so animated, 
that Fiora was continually saying to herself, 
" Can this be the cold, grave Hector, — that 
the stiff aunt Margaret ?" 

" Surely, Hector, you will not think of 
D 2 



30 CLAN-ALBIN, 

leaving us," was the usual observation of 
Craig-gillian, at the end of every happy do- 
mestic evening ; and Flora's eyes so sweetly 
repeated, " Surely, Hector, you will not think 
of leaving us," that Hector gave up the grave 
shake of his ambitious head, and began to 
sigh most profoundly, and to calculate the a- 
mount of his rents and half-pay, and the pro- 
bability of increasing his resources even in 
the country.. 

Regularly every morning, as soon as Flora 
had left the breakfast- table, did Hector receive 
a grave exhortation from his aunt, on marriage, 
and settling in the country; and, above all, 
on remembering the state of the Craig-gillian 
family. At first, Hector, with equal gravity, 
promised to send her home half a dozen yel- 
low children from India ; but at length he be- 
gan to listen with more seriousness, and one 
day laughingly inquired, " who she thought 
would have him ?" Margaret's eyes sparkled 
with joyful alacrit}', while she began thus : — 
" Any lady in the countries might be proud 
to become the lady of Craig-gillian. But our 
family have so often got wives from the Altla- 
rish family, and the Altlarish family have so 
often got wives from the family of Craig- gil- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 31 

lian'' — but here Hector snatched up his hat, 
recollecting an engagement. 

In the evening Margaret communicated 
this piece of success to her brother, and 
ordered her horse to be got ready next morn- 
ing to carry the news to Altlarish. — " Softly, 
sister," — said the sagacious Craig-giliian, — 
" Hector has never said he will stay at home ; 
yet the children have certainly got through 
the vaccine, — that keeps him no longer. What 
think ye if he has catched some disease himself, 
poor fellow ? Look here, Margaret," — and he 
pointed to the bum-side, whither Hector had 
followed Flora. 

Margaret received this hint with great dis- 
satisfaction, and indignantly replied, " Don't 
tell me, brother, that the only son of the 
Craig- gillian family would so demean him- 
self, — and the girl is a good enough girl." 
Craig-gillian shrugged up his shoulders. Flo- 
ra was at best of mixed blood ; besides, 
though lovely and elegantly formed, her fi- 
gure had been thrown in a smaller and softer 
mould than suited Craig- gillian' s ideas of 
beauty. Now, the family of Craig -gillian had 
long been remarkable for tall, stout, fine- 
looking sons and Amazonian daughters ; and, 



32 CLAN-ALBIN, 

in common with many Highland families, 
they were not a little vain of the distinction, 
and consequently anxious enough to keep up 
this distinguished breed. " Yet blood is 
thicker than water, Margaret/' said the 
thoughtful Craig- gillian, — " and ail the wa- 
ter in the sea could not wash our blood from 
her's. But I grant what you say is right too, 
though I shall be thankful to my God for 
whatsoever means he may employ to keep 
my good son near me in my old days. Flora 
is a good girl, and the child of an honest man, 
and that is a good ancestry, sister Marga- 
ret." 

Margaret allowed this. She wiped her eyes, 
and gravely said, " Craig-gillian's wife will 
always be my niece ;" — yet she sighed to think 
of Miss Sibella Altlarish, the daughter of a 
real old catholic family, five feet ten inches 
in height, with the largest bone and the long- 
est, yellow-reddish hair in the countries. The 
pride of old Craig-gillian was also in Miss 
Sibella ; but his affections were placed on 
Flora ; and in a heart so good, pride could 
not long resist the stirrings of better feelings. 
Unconscious of this important conversa- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 

»tion, Hector had joined Flora in her custom- 
ary twilight walk. 

" Miss Buchanan," said he, " shall I tell you 
the history of these three solitary elms on that 
little peninsula?" — " If you please/' replied 
Flora. — " 'Tis an old story," said Hector, 
" and, like other old stones, takes a strong 
hold of the memory. About fourteen years 
ago, when I was a rough bey at Ballyruag 
school, Norman and Flora were little solitary 
things, almost as wild r.s the twin fawns of 
the roe, and loving each other as dearly. 
Both were my pley-things, but Flora was my 
pet. Many a kiss she gave me then for nuts 
and blaeberries, and necklaces of roxvans, and 
more from pure affection ; for Fiora loved me 
once." — " I don't like digressions," said Flo- 
ra, laughing, and blushing. — " Sut digres- 
sions — such digressions are the charm of old 
stories," replied Hector, with a look so em- 
phatic, that Flora began to pull the golden 
cinque-foil from the crevices of the rocks, 
which impended over the path ; and he re- 
sumed. — " One fine autumnal day — I shall 
never forget it, — succeeding life has no days 
like that ! — I was permitted to carry these 
babes of the wood to gather nuts in Glen- 



34 CLAN-ALBIN, 

gillian. How proud and how careful was I, 
leading forward the borrowed horse, (on which 
they were slung, like gipsey children, in op- 
posite panniers,) while Hugh Piper brought 
up the rear-guard. Flora clapped her little 
dimpled hands, exclaiming, * Happy day ! 
happy day ! going with Hector to Glen-gil- 
lian V " 

Flora again coloured, and smiled, and pull- 
ed another tuft of wild flowers. 

" Glen- gillian was not then Hector's fa- 
ther's ; but the old shepherd and the calliach- 
?ian-ceark kindly entertained Hector's guests. 
She took a little barley-meal from a bag of 
sheep-skin, and made us cakes, and toasted 
them against a stone, and roasted eggs and 
potatoes in the ashes, and gave us the milk 
of her two ewes. Flora, I have since been at 
princely banquets ! — but you don't like di- 
gressions. I shewed you all my lost treasures, 
and the ruined home of my fathers, — doubt- 
less you neither cared, nor understood, but 
I was silly enough to be pleased, — I am so 
still! — The person who possessed Glen -gil- 
lian was planting that hill. I got some plants 
from the servants, and we planted these three 
elms. This in the middle is Flora's ; for her 
manly little brother said, as they grew up 



A NATIONAL TALE. 35 

Hector's and Norman's would shelter her's. — 
Flora! I have been in the farthest land the sun 
shines on ; and I have visited many a lovely 
scene,— but these wild rocks, — that wander- 
ing stream, — those stunted trees, — !" He 
paused, — and then abruptly added , " Durst 
I prefer a selfish prayer to heaven, it would 
be, — that when my remaining years have 
been sweetened by the affection of a being 
gentle as Flora, they might wave over my 
grave 1" 

He pressed the hand he had taken, and 
walked away ; while Flora's eyes, glistening 
through tears of unmingled tenderness, fol- 
lowed his unequal steps. 

These three elms had acquired new interest 
with Flora. Another, and another evening, 
she returned to visit them, and Hector was 
still by her side ; sometimes he recalled little 
traits of school-day friendship, and some- 
times his confidence won on hers, and she 
talked of all those she loved, and felt that at 
such moments she loved them the more. 

These twilight conversations, gay, tender, 
poetical, and sometimes verging on love, be- 
came at last so interesting, that Flora, in 
great alarm, resolved to give up her even- 



36 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ing rambles, — " till Hector should leave the 
country," — till Hector has left the country !" 
Flora sighed deeply to the anticipated blank- 
ness of that period. Craig-gillian and aunt 
Margaret had many of his virtues, but they 
wanted his spirit, his youth, and his accom- 
plished mind ; Flora might have added, the 
captivations of that dawning passion which 
threw a charm around his manners which her 
heart was unable to resist. — She now indulg- 
ed long reveries on those happy days, when 
Hector, at eighteen, had been all protecting 
love, and herself, at five, all innocent fond- 
ness. — « Succeeding life has no days like 
these I" sighed Flora. 

The jokes Craig-gillian was continually 
passing on his son and the formidable Miss 
Sibella Altlarish, were now become intolera- 
ble ; and the hopeless attempt to smile, was 
often followed by showers of secret tears, the 
source of which Flora did not dare to trace. 

As soon as Flora gave up her twilight walks, 
Hector became an early riser, diligently at- 
tending her and his Father in their usual mor- 
ning rambles over the farm, and professing 
to feel great benefit and delight from these 
early excursions. ** I see you farmers have 



A NATIONAL TALE. 37 

many pleasures we lazy folks know nothing 
about," said Hector, gently drawing the 
hand of Flora within his arm, and following 
his father through a beautiful glade, while the 
morning star still trembled in the purpling 
sky, and the hoarse call of the corn-craik, is- 
suing from the dew-drenched grass, awoke 
the songs of the lark and the blackbird. 

" But you will find them all out bye and 
bye," — replied Craig-gillian, (who had found 
a new subject for his jests, as embarrassing as 
Miss Sibella, though by no means so pain- 
ful), — ei if you will only stay at home and 
take Flora for your teacher." 

On this morning, Flora happened to find a 
little helpless leveret, which she accused her 
bloody-minded companion of having ren- 
dered an orphan. He denied the charge ; but 
between them it was conveyed home to be 
nursed by Flora. When Craig-gillian enter- 
ed the breakfast-parlour, he saw the leveret 
nestling on Flora's arm, close to her bosom, 
and his grave son on his knees caressing it, 
as if to atone for the injury he had caused it. 
Both rose in manifest confusion, while Flora 
exclaimed, — " I can't think where I have laid 
my keys." — Craig-gillian broke out into a 

VOL. III. E 



38 CLAN-ALBIN, 

long, deliberate, and, as Flora thought, a very 
provoking and ill-timed fit of of laughter, and 
then said, — " Girls when they first fall in love, 
are always losing the keys." — tl In love !" 
cried Flora faintly, while she eagerly looked 
for the keys, affected to smile, and held away 
her head to conceal the throbbing bosom, and 
the deep and varying colour. — " Aye, as you 
with our friend Hector for instance." " Oh ! 
Craig-gillian," cried Flora, involuntarily clasp- 
ing her hands, with a look at once supplicat- 
ing and indignant, — " or else you are a very 
ungrateful girl, for even blind Finlay can 
see he is dying in love with you." * Father ! n 
cried Hector, smiling and colouring. — " Well 
son ? I suppose you won't deny it. So Flora, 
my darling, get in love with him as fast as 
ever you can — and out again ; for though 
courtship, as I am told, is very pleasant to 
lovers, it is not so comfortable to other people, 
particularly when the keys are lost, and they 
hungry for breakfast. I'll leave Hector to 
help you to find them ; and see if you can be 
clever enough to earn the smart gown I am 
to bring from the fair, by persuading him to 
stay at home and nurse leverets." — Craig- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 39 

gillian walked out and mounted his horse, re- 
solving to breakfast elsewhere. 

" Flora, my dearest Floral" said Hector, 
" you must forgive my father ; you know he 
is a mighty joker." 

" Oh yes I" replied Flora trembling and 
weeping, and attempting to withdraw. " And 
you will follow his injunction also, — the first 
part at least, — will you not dear lovely crea- 
ture, and make me the happiest and most 
grateful of men ?" 

" Oh yes V sighed the bewildered Flora, 
while a tender smile played upon her agitat- 
ed features. — Hector, in rapture, folded her to 
his bosom. His wild thanks, and expressions 
of endearment, betrayed the extent of the 
promise she had made, — but she felt no wish 
to take it back. She burst into another flood 
of tears, but they fell on the bosom of Hec- 
tor. " Craig-gillan has been strangely cruel 
to me," whispered she, " but kind also ; very, 
very kind !" 

In the course of the day, Flora recover- 
ed at least the semblance of composure, and 
made a point of finding her keys ; and when 
the good old father returned in the evening, 
they were ostentatiously, though silently dis- 



40 CLAN-ALBIN, 

played. But Craig-gillian perceived them not, 
— he saw only the sweet bashful glance of Flo- 
ra, shrinking beneath the affectionate gaze of 
his son. His servant followed him into the 
parlour with the new gown. When the 
man had withdrawn, he folded it down, gaily 
inquiring if Flora had earned it. — " If she 
has not, I have for her," said Hector, " I have 
prevailed with her to let me remain." — 
Craig-gillian threw the cloth around them, 
and drew them towards him. They fell at 
his feet. He leaned his silvered head on their 
shoulders ; then clasping their united hands 
within his own, pressed them to his bosom. — 
" Be to her such a husband as you have been 
a son/' said he; "and, O Flora! remember 
that if ever man deserved the blessing of a 
good wife, it is my Hector." — " And he has 
obtained that first of blessings," exclaimed 
the enraptured lover, pressing his lips to the 
pale cheek of his bride. Aunt Margaret 
next paid her compliments, applied a hand- 
kerchief to her own eyes, and conducted 
Flora to her chamber with great decorum. 
How relieved would the feminine heart of 
Flora have been, could she have thrown her- 
self on the maternal bosom of the Lady or 



A NATIONAL TALE. 41 

old Moome, there to have sobbed away the 
overwhelming fears and tumultuous joys 
which alternately swayed her mind; though 
not even to them could she have revealed the 
first enchantments of that blissful tenderness 
which glowed on her cheek, panted in her bo- 
som, and thrilled with rapturous sensation 
through every nerve of her frame. 

11 That he should think of me," she sobbed 
out, " that Hector, so admired, so beloved, to 
think of poor orphan me ! My heart is too 
narrow for its happiness." 

Love, even the first love of a female bosom, 
is a feeble sentiment compared with the pas- 
sion which Flora now cherished, combined as 
it was with respect, esteem, pride in the ta- 
lents and in the virtues of her lover, an ad- 
miration which regarded him as the first of 
human beings, and a gratitude which felt him 
to be the best of men. 

The necessary arrangements for remaining 
at home were now gladly made. Hector wil- 
lingly agreed to give up his commission; and 
Flora gave him all she had to bestow, and all 
he now coveted, — herself. 

Flora was married at Eieenalin ; and when 
Hugh had attended her home, in spite of 

E 2 



42 CLAN-ALBIN, 

every entreaty and remonstrance, he instantly 
returned to his lady. — " Thank God," said 
he, looking back from Craig-gillian on the 
sweet retreat it enclosed, " thank God, there 
is one care off my mind. Were the other one 
as well settled, this world has no griefs for 
me/* 

When he came home, he entered the par- 
lour, where Moome sat with her Lady. — 
« Unah Macalbin," said he. " Well, dear/' 
was the reply. 

" Did not I, here where I stand, make the 
hay, reap the barley, cut the peats, mend the 
thatch, cut sticks for a new roof to the cow- 
house, caulk the boats, mend the nets, make 
new hooks, build up the garden- wall, tan 
Maclolhan's hide and make yourself brogues, 
make a new ladder to the hen-roost, and help 
yourself to make potato-starch and candles ?" 
u That you did, dear, I'll swear for you." 

" Did I not dig rue and lily-roots for your 
dyeing, and gather as much lichens and hea- 
ther as would dye all the cloth in the coun- 
tries and make you plenty of fern-ashes - T and 
when the Lady herself would be saying, " My 
poor Hugh, you will kill yourself, work less 
hard, I command you>" did I not say, never 



A NATIONAL TALE. 43 

mind, I'll have a good play for this before 
Christmas ?" 

" Son of my brother, that you did," said 
Moome in Gaelic, and lost in astonishment. 
Hugh twirled round his bonnet, and betrayed 
many symptoms of confusion and anxiety. 
<c Well, seeing all is done my poor hands can 
do, and that black Archy is to come twice 
every week see what is needed, if the Lady 
would have no objections that I should make 
a start out few days see how the boy is liking 
it, as these stockings you knit for his boots 
must be sent at any rate, and your own spec- 
tacle wanting a new eye." 

" Och, God himself bless you for a true- 
hearted cratur, and a kind," cried Moome, 
" refuse you she cannot. Yes, go, dear, go 
in God's own name." — The Lady could not, 
indeed, refuse this hard-earned indulgence, 
earned by exertions impossible to every thing 
but attachment like that of the piper's. But 
she mentioned the great distance and conse- 
quent fatigue. — " I will easily get a cast in 
some boat going from the isles for salt or Inis- 
hone" said Hugh, who, in obtaining her con- 
sent, had obviated every difficulty; — M after 
that it will only be a walk to me." 



44 CLAN-ALBIN, 

u i\nd a namely walker you was, in your 
own day," added Moome ; " and many is the 
wild dream I had of him, of late, and of her, 
who has, I fear, forgotten us and ours. But 
Hugh, dear, since you are going, you will 
take her the pearls." — " That I will ! God for- 
give us for blaming her ; for no doubt a lady 
like her has many things to mind, more nor 
the likes of us." 

In a considerable stream, which flowed 
round the height on which stood the castle, 
pearls were found ; and many of these Hugh 
had fished and treasured up in an old stock- 
ing, that Moome might one day present them 
to Monimia, — that Monimia who never came, — 
never wrote, — -and perhaps never thought of 
any thing in Eleenalin. The Lady repre* 
sented the great improbability of his meeting 
with Mrs Montague; but Moome's ideas of 
geography were not quite so accurate as those 
of Lady Augusta; and Hugh secretly thought, 
" What if I should follow on few miles when 
I am out ; give her the Lady's, and Moome' s, 
and Mrs Hector Monro's compliments ; I 
I will see her servant at any rate, and little 
Mary." — So both gently insisted, that, * with 



A NATIONAL TALE. 45 

the Lady's leave," the pearls should be ta- 
ken. 

" But sure you would not affront a lady 
like her with your ould stocking," said the 
notable Moome. 

" God help me, what sense have I about 
what a lady would require," replied Hugh, 
who almost idolized the sagacity and polite- 
ness he despaired of ever being able to at- 
tain. " To be sure you never lived in the 
family," said Moome, smiling with harmless 
vanity. " Little right I had to be proud, 
considering my advantages ; few of my day 
had the like. But Hugh, dear, now you are 
going among strangers, have done with your 
awkwardness ; behave proper, and be a cre- 
dit to your name, — for I know you are a good 
cratur" — Both were good, were affection- 
ate creatures. All night long did they sit up 
preparing for the journey ; in the morning 
Hugh got a packet from the Lady ; he next 
went to Craig- gillian, and then set out for the 
island of Tiree, from whence he found a boat 
going to Ireland. After being a day and a 
night at sea, he landed in Loch-Foyle, and 
began to cross the island on foot. 



46 CLAX-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XXXII. 



I pine for her. 
In crowded halls ray spirit is with her. 
Through the long sleepless night I think on her, 
And happiness is gone and health is lost, 
And fled the flush of youth, and I am pale 
As the pale ocean on a sunless morn. 
I pine away for her, yet pity her 
That she should spurn a love so true as mine. 

SooIbey. 

While the Piper is plodding his solitary 
way towards the south of Ireland, we shall 
return to the sick couch of Norman. The in- 
formation Captain Drummond had so thought- 
lessly given, struck on his heart like a thun- 
derbolt, drying up the springs of existence, 
and in a single moment blasting every hope. 
He had hitherto lived but in his hopes. The 
illusions of a glowing and active imagination, 
So far exceeded tame, cold, joyless reality, 
that he too often abandoned the sober cer- 
tainty of moderate happiness, to pursue for a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 47 

season those phantoms of enchantment, which, 
like the gay pictures in a summer's cloud, va- 
nish with the gleam of sunshine by which 
they are created. 

The loss of Monimia was an evil which he 
often contemplated, and which indeed he 
sometimes fancied arrived. But, in dreadful 
paroxysms of the deepest despair, he now felt 
the immeasurable distance which lies be- 
tween the fear of abandonment and the over- 
powering conviction that hope is for ever 
shut out. 

The attachment of Norman originating in en- 
thusiastic admiration and the purest feelings 
of youthful love, had gradually grown up in 
solitude, harmonising with every soft affec- 
tion of his happy nature, and cemented by 
entire sympathy in tastes, in talents, and in 
virtues, with her by whom it was inspired. 
This strong and tender regard, unlike the 
transient sentiment of preference inspired by 
the possession of some fashionable accom- 
plishment, or by the beautiful idol of passing 
admiration, was formed to resist time, ab- 
sence, and the decay of beauty, and was only 
to be subdued by unworthiness in its object. 
The sacrifice of this attachment could be 



48 CLAN-ALBIN, 

yielded to duty and to reason ; but reasoa- 
nor duty could never fill up the gloomy 
aching void left in the heart it had occupied 
and blessed. To him it had hitherto been 
happiness to love, even without as[ l.ing to 
the rapture of being beloved ; but the great- 
ness of his misfortune, by discovering the ex- 
tent of his hopes, displayed also the fallacy 
of this sentiment. Instead of resting satisfied 
in the silent adoration of unrivalled charms 
and virtues, even during the first glow of 
passionate admiration, his quiet, contempla- 
tive, and domestic mind, stretching beyond 
the fleeting period of a brilliant youth, per- 
ceived in Monimia a creature formed to dig- 
nify and sweeten every stage of life, — to en- 
liven solitude, — and to embellish society, — 
to share his counsels, as well as to refine his 
pleasures, — to be the companion of his un- 
derstanding as well as the object of his ad- 
miration and tenderness. In her he had 
fondly imagined the perfection of female ex- 
cellence, — a character soft, yet firm, — just, 
though indulgent; — which exhibited the rare 
union of amiable affections and, an enlightened 
understanding, and the still rarer combina- 
tion of graceful accomplishments, perpetual- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 4Q 

]y relieving those serious duties, whose place 
they were never permitted to usurp. 

His acquaintance with Monimia was besides 
the most brilliant event of his obscure life. 
During that short year, he had thought, and 
felt, and enjoyed more than in all those 
which had preceded it : it was the era of a 
new existence, the date of all his hopes and 
projects; and that existence was now anni- 
hilated ; an insuperable barrier was placed 
between him and the accomplishment of those 
hopes. 

With the feelings of misery, despair, and 
forlorn ness, in which the first weeks of his ill- 
ness were passed, (and which indeed consti- 
tuted that illness,) a gentler sensation of soft 
regret was often mingled, and a modest con- 
sciousness of worth made him sometimes 
sigh, " O may she never feel how happy we 
might have been !" 

About this time letters from Eleenalin, an- 
nouncing the happy establishment of Flora, 
proved more exhilirating to his dejected spi- 
rits than all the cordials prescribed by the 
skill of his physicians, and administered by 
the affection of Pat Leary. On the evening 

VOL. III. F 



50 CLAX-ALBIN, 

of that day on which he received these let- 
ters, he went, for the first time, to breathe 
the fresh air at the door of his tent. — How re- 
viving, after sickness, is the first sight of the 
blue heavens, the green earth, and the first 
breath of that mild breeze, which seems the 
spirit of returning health ! — For a moment 
Norman forgot his sorrows ; and when Drum- 
mond came hastily forward, exclaiming, 
" Moore ! Moore is come to review us !" he 
felt that something still had power to impel 
the languid pulses of his drooping heart. Af- 
ter congratulating Norman on his amended 
looks, Captain Drummond more leisurely in- 
formed him, that, before the army assembled 
there went into quarters, a grand military 
spectacle was to be exhibited, at which the 
illustrious soldier he had mentioned was to 
be present. — " You must make haste to be 
well," added he, " I would break my heart if 
you were not to see him. For my own part I 
could fall down and worship him : — a Scotch- 
man too j — we are all citizens of the world, 
you know, but we are men of Scotland. I 
would not love you, if you did not feel that 
distinction." — " Then continue to love me, 
for I do feel it ; and your admiration of our 



A NATION AL TALE. 5 1 

illustrious countrymen can never outstrip 
mine." 

Drummond contrived to send Leary away ; 
and then proceeded. — " I have a better rea- 
son for loving you ; I have the comfort of 
pouring out upon you all my own vexations. 
People have hitherto talked of the obstinacy 
of a mule, — but the obstinacy of a man who 
was so long a subaltern that he is unfit for a 
field-officer, and yet was made one, — so long 
a bachelor that he is unfit for a husband, yet 
became one, — so long a father, that he knows 
not how to part with his rights to a son-in- 
law,— beat it all to nothing. The unreason- 
able old man talks of sending Mary home to 
the Highlands. Do advise me to run away 
with her. Gordon has set us a good example." 
Norman complained of sudden faintness, and 
his frank friend apologizing for occupying 
his attention so much, assisted him to his 
couch, and withdrew. For a moment this 
information seemed a new wretchedness; and 
Norman, surprised at his own sensations, 
with a degree of self- contempt, felt that he 
had still been the dupe of a wild unaccount- 
able hope. This consummation of fate, was, 
on the whole, salutary ; and, after a few hours 



LIBRARY 

UNtvE&srnr of wmn 



52 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of exquisite suffering, he brought his mind to 
the contemplation of Monimia, the wife of 
Sir Archibald Gordon. — " One other night 
to misery," sighed he, " then back to the du- 
ties of man, — to cares and sufferings l" 

He rose with the sun of the next morning ; 
and, while Leary prepared his coffee, trem- 
blingly approached the little desk, which con- 
tained what had once been more precious 
than a prince's ransom. The first thing he 
met was a drawing of the cottage in Eleenalin, 
and old Mnome spinning with her distaff in 
its porch. It had been sketched by Moni- 
mia, while she sat in her skiff in the bay of 
Lochuan. He recollected how earnestly he 
had hung over her while executing this draw- 
ing, — how carefully he had cut her pen- 
cil, — and how happy the possession of the 
picture had made him. — " I must keep this 
for her dear old sake it represents," thought 
he, glad of this excuse to comply with a se- 
cret inclination. Among some manuscript 
music, he had found a song in the handwrit- 
ing of Monimia, which was adapted to a fine, 
Highland air. — These circumstances, and an 
idea which, though often checked, still re- 
curred, gave it infinite value with Norman, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 53 

and he indulged himself with perusing it for 
the last time. 

Though Norman durst no longer think that 
the verses he read were of private interpreta- 
tion, he continued to gaze on the characters 
in which they were traced, lost to the con- 
sciousness of every surrounding object. 

'• If you would suffer me to put the least 
drop in it" said Leary, stirring up the coffee, 
he had scalded his fingers in preparing it; 
" It would take off the rawness this could 
morning. But sure the candle, you were in 
such haste for, is burnt to the socket." This 
remark recalled Norman to recollection. He 
held the papers he had collected to the flame, 
snatched them back by an involuntary im- 
pulse, and sighed as they lay a heap of ashes» 
Leary, who was a very shrewd fellow, watch- 
ed this scene with much interest, while he 
pretended to be busy with his own affairs. 
" If I might make bould, I would advise you 
not to sigh so deeply," said he : " My mo- 
ther, poor soul 1 used to say, every sigh makes 
a drop of blood fall from the heart. — Now it 
stands to rason, that a heart always bleeding 
should never be whole." — Norman tried to 
reward the kindness of Pat with a cheerful 
f 2 



54 CLAN-ALBIN, 

smile, yet that smile seemed in mockery of 
gaiety. 

But his small success in recovering tran- 
quillity did not relax his efforts. — He busied 
himself all the morning in writing to Eleen- 
alin and Glen-gillian, and afterwards encou- 
raged the jokes of Leary, who knew very well 
when it was proper to speak, though he some- 
times forgot when it was proper to have done 
speaking. From the familiar histories of Lea- 
ry, as well as from personal observation, Nor- 
man gathered many particulars respecting 
the fine country he now inhabited, which 
were very interesting to his feelings, though 
most afflicting to his heart. And in Ireland 
he continued to find many subjects of amaze- 
ment and regret, and of silent unavailing 
pity. 

Meanwhile, time and resolution gradually 
advanced his recovery. — He had a strong de- 
5ire to see the hero of his imagination, and 
this wish almost accomplished itself. Every 
soldier looked forward with impatience for 
that day which was to invest him with a kind 
of reflected importance. At length it arriv- 
ed ; and the officers, zealous for the honour of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 55 

their respective corps, led their soldiers to the 
field with mingled pride and trembling. 

The troops for thirty miles around had as- 
sembled in one spot, and an immense crowd 
of spectators were collected to witness this 
magnificent " rehearsal of murder." On 
every side a gay throng wooed the eye of 
Norman, who sighed at the recollection of the 
enthusiasm this splendid array would have 
inspired before 

M Thought had destroyed his paradise." 

The general officers had not yet entered 
the field, and his eye carelessly wandered 
from one group to another. Dismissing the 
cares with the business of life, the holiday- 
face of every light-hearted Irishman was 
brightened with animation and smiles, and 
the bosom of Norman caught the kindly in- 
fluence ; for the social principle still flou- 
rished there, and a gleam of sunshine was 
sufficient to revive its drooping blossoms. 
The scene he beheld was one in which all 
ranks had a common interest, — for who so 
debased as not to share in the glory of his 
country, and who so exalted as not not to feel 



56 CLAN-ALBIN, 

that his highest boast is to be called her son. 
The eye of Norman following the dissipation 
of his mind, wandered from the dignified mi- 
litary chief to the humble patriot, — from the 
fantastic votary of fashion to the pale mecha- 
nic, — or the sprightly maiden who, having 
obtained an hour's respite from toil, singled 
out from the close ranks the favoured milita- 
ry hero. 

In a few minutes General Moore and his 
staff galloped into the field. It was not the 
portrait which fancy had drawn that the anx- 
ious eye of Norman now contemplated, and 
for a moment this difference deranged his 
ideas. But it was the first soldier of his 
country who stood before him, with that vi- 
sible, though subdued greatness, which so 
truly shadowed forth the character of that il- 
lustrious individual, who to a Roman spirit 
added an English heart. 

The mind of Norman was again kindled by 
the sparkles of his original enthusiasm, and 
agreeably absorbed in the complicated busi- 
ness of the day, when a splendid open car- 
riage was seen advancing beyond the oppo- 
site line. Sir Archibald Gordon galloped up 
to meet it. The line broke, — the party alight- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 57 

ed, — and Monimia was inclosed in the cen- 
tre. Ah, it was no illusion ! It was the Mo- 
nimia Norman had loved and lost, who now 
unconsciously passed him so closely, that her 
robe brushed his clothes ; while his palpitat- 
ing heart still confessed her undiminished 
power. 

Monimia was accompanied by a numerous 
party of ladies ; che leaned on the arm of an 
officer, and in her hand led Mary Fitzconnal. 
The party halted a few paces from the spot 
on which Norman was standing, resting on 
his arms. In compliment to the day, or ra- 
ther to the officers,, the ladies wore a sort of 
military ccstnme ; Monimia alone preserved 
the habit and the delicacy of her sex. She 
appeared like the gallant Henry JV. sur- 
rounded by his decorated courtiers, conspi- 
cuous only by superior beauty and majesty. 
Yet, as a tribute to national valour, she wore 
the bonnet of Scotland, — a golden button fast- 
ened a plume of snowy feathers among its 
velvet folds, — a golden broach fastened the 
mantilla of plaid silk above her white dress, — 
and that silk was the chequer of Clan-Albin. 

Monimia appeared mc^e gay, more bril- 
liantly beautiful than Norman had ever beheld 



58 CLAN-ALBIN, 

her. The soft invidious bashfulness which 
used to steal over her features in the soli- 
tudes of Glen-Albin, was exchanged for that 
decided air of high fashion, which enabled 
her to converse and to smile with her compa- 
nions with blushing dignity, a3 if her proper 
sphere were here where every eye was fixed 
upon her. 

It is scarcely possible to imagine situations 
more opposite than those of Norman and 
Monimia on this eventful day* When he 
first beheld her, a joyous welcoming smile 
for &ijj?4Kent played over his emfteiated fea- 
tures; but with the recollection of the suc- 
ceeding minute he shruak behind his compa- 
nions, pale, spiritless, and broken-hearted, 
and more in sorrow than in anger. Yet not 
for a moment could his eye wander from the 
lovely object, which fascinated to destroy. If 
sue moved as if to approach towards the spot 
where he stood, the increased pulsation of his 
heart announced his proximity to the object 
which impelled all its movements. Once the 
soft melody of her voice fell on his ear, and 
recalled those sensations of rapturous delight, 
which can only h& distinctly recollected when 
they are renewed. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 5Q 

Norman had remained a considerable time 
in this tantalizing situation, when Luath, his 
wolf-dog, which he had lost more than a year 
before, suddenly sprung upon him, loading 
him with caresses, and howling with extrava- 
gant joy. A chain, which the animal dragged 
after him, showed that he had broken loose 
from confinement. This meeting powerfully 
affected the heart of Norman, and tears filled 
his eyes as he cordially returned the kindness 
of his faithful friend. — " Poor Luath, you 
have not forgotten me," said he, in a voice of 
soft reproach, — reproach that was unheeded. 
A servant, in the livery of Sir Archibald 
Gordon, advanced to reclaim the fugitive; 
and so powerful is the habit of obedience, 
that the dog at first obeyed the call. 

But this was to Luath a day of adventures; 
for at the next step he met Mary Fitzconnal, 
who for a moment had lost her party. Luath 
speedily recollected his play-mate, and their 
joy at meeting was mutual and fervent. Again 
Luath forgot his keeper: he ran back towards 
his master; Mary bounded after him, and, 
with a scream of surprise and transport, clasp- 
ed the knees of Norman. He hung over this 
warm-hearted child in an agony of tender- 



60 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ness, unable to answer all her fond and hur- 
ried questions. Pat Leary at length remind- 
ed him how much such behaviour was at va- 
riance with the etiquette of the moment, and 
he gently tried to dismiss her. — " Surely you 
will come with me. My mother will be so 
happy to see you; — though you never an- 
swered my letters, she will love me so for 
finding you out; and Luath, and Hugh,— 
where is Hugh ? Oh we love you all in our 
hearts! You must come to the ball. Sir Ar- 
chibald will be there, — but we don't love him, 
with his ugly eyes; — you used always to dance 
with my mother." — While Norman listened 
to the prattle of the child, Leary exclaimed, 
" I'll be hanged if there be not the lady you 
burnt the other morning; her picture it was 
I mane" — Monimia was seeking her little 
charge, somewhat astonished to see her con- 
versing so intimately with a soldier. Some- 
thing in the figure, and in the air of the head 
which bended over Mary, attracted her atten- 
tion. She advanced as rapidly as her trem- 
bling limbs could bear her; she stood oppo- 
site to Norman, — Luath was fawning at her 
feet. — " Can it be possible?" — He looked up, 
and saw the hands, involuntarily stretched to- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 6l 

wards him in eager transport, and the lovely 
blushing countenance beaming with its wont- 
ed sweetness, sensibility, and open-hearted 
kindness. It was the Monimia of Glen Al- 
bin, — the Monimia he loved ! — " Can it be pos- 
sible!" she again exclaimed, "IsLady Augusta 
well ? Ah, why do I see you thus ?" — With the 
succeeding moment the colour faded from her 
cheeks ; she felt all the delicacies of her situ- 
ation, and, taking the hand of Mary, attempt- 
ed to go away, before one of her questions 
had been answered. — " The Lady is ?iow quite 
well," said Norman at length, " and I am 
— but this is no place" — u - Oh, no, this is 
no place," added Monimia, — and they both 
looked hastily round on every hand; and 
when their eyes met, she regarded him with 
a look of tenderness so anxious, of pity so 
soft! and moved forward slowly and reluc- 
tantly. — " If I might make so bould, my lady, 
as to ax if this young Miss's name is not Fitz- 
connel?'' said Leary; and Monimia, turning 
round, replied in the affirmative, and eagerly 
inquired if he knew any thing of her relati- 
ons? — " Perhaps I do, and perhaps I do not," 
answered Leary ; — " but there comes a gentle- 
man that should, for he was at the burning of 
VOL. ill, G 



62 cLAisr-ALBiisr, 

her father's house." — This was Sir Archibald 
Gordon, who advanced, pale with anger, while 
his aunt followed, as fast as excessive embon- 
point, and a military riding-habit would per- 
mit. A single glance of her experienced eye 
sufficed to comprehend the whole scene.— 
" Oh fie, fie Mary, to trouble Mrs Montague. 
But come, my dear," — and she took the arm 
of Monimia, — " the carriage is drawn up." 

" I have some hopes, Madam," faujtered 
Monimia, " of discovering the relations of my 
little Mary." Indeed !" exclaimed Lady Gor- 
don, secretly admiring what she fancied a 
a trick of the moment. — " Ladies, ladies," 
cried Sir Archibald, " I shall be forced to re- 
mind you that the men are under arms. 
Discoveries, of whatever kind, must be defer- 
red for the present." 

" O tyrant!" smiled out Lady Gordon. — 
" Well, my dear, we must just yield to mili- 
tary despotism." 

" A minute will tell all I have to tell," said 
Leary: — " Phelim Bourke, of his Honour's 
own regiment that was, was her cousin-ger- 
man, which need be no disparagement to her, 
nor to any lady in all the whole kingdom, for 
better blood is not in it, though he lies under 



A NATIONAL TALE. 03 

the sea the day ."—The countenance of Gor- 
don became livid with mingled rage and hor- 
ror; his teeth almost chattered in his head; 
yet at the very moment in which he felt the 
agonies of remorse for the fate of Bourke, it 
seemed as if he would willingly have consign- 
ed Leary to the same suffering. A numerous 
party were now attracted to this spot, and 
Lady Gordon found it impossible to get away ; 
though Monimia, who fancied every eye ri- 
vetted on herself, was equally anxious to be 
gone. 

The man, to whose charge the wolf-dog 
had been committed, now tremblingly ap- 
proached; and when about to lead it away, be- 
gan to apologise to his master, while the gen- 
tlemen around joined in admiration of the far- 
famed Suwaroff. — " 'Tis Luath he is call- 
ed," said the child, who caressed her old 
friend, " Mr Macalbin's Luath." 

The presence of Monimia bridled the fierce 
anger of Sir Archibald, and subdued the re- 
sentment of Norman; but when the dog was 
again to be led away, the latter snatched the 
chain from the servant, and calling to a lad 
who stood at a small distance, placed it in his 
hand with an air of haughty resolution, and 



04 CLAN-ALBIN, 

said aloud, u David, you will keep this dog 
till I claim him from you." 

The pale cheek, quivering lip, and restless 
eye of Monimia now evinced, that the self- 
possession which she enjoyed in the midst of 
thousands, to whom she felt indifferent, could 
be put to flight by the sudden view of a single 
object interesting to her affections. She saw 
the looks which the angry rivals darted on 
each other, with dreadful apprehension $ and 
as the only means of withdrawing Sir Archi- 
bald, prevailed with herself to request that he 
would attend her to the carriage* He led 
her away in triumph ; the party followed, 
some speaking of the dog, some of the lady, 
and some of the young soldier, who was again 
left alone and hopeless. 

It was some hours before the mind of Nor- 
man emerged from the tumultuous and bewil- 
dered state into which it had been thrown by 
the late abrupt interview. He had then 
seen Monimia! She was probably in his 
neighbourhood; he might again see her; she 
was still unmarried, and looked as if— Nor- 
man durst not define that look. This, how- 
ever, was but the bright side of the picture. 
He had been rescued from the torpor of set- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 65 

tied despair, only to be agitated by the fluc- 
tuations of hope, and the still worse tortures 
of suspense, or that bitter feeling which fol- 
lowed the comparison of their relative situa- 
tions: — She, great, powerful, distinguished, — 
himself, poor, insulated, unknown, without a 
place in society, or a name he could claim as 
his own. This last humiliating consideration 
perpetually banished the wild schemes he was 
ever forming of seeing her but once, and of 
confessing his presumptuous love and merit- 
ed unhappiness. 

When the review was ended, he sought 
Pat Leary, and heard the disastrous story of 
Fitzconnal. It was a tale, to which Irish an- 
nals afford but too many parallels, of a people 
treated as slaves, and punished because they 
then ceased to act like men. Several indivi- 
duals of this misled and unfortunate family 
had terminated a tumultuous life by a violent 
death; but the father of Mary had been exil- 
ed to Germany, and was now supposed to be 
living somewhere in France. 

Next day Leary was summoned to attend 
Lady Gordon, who deemed it necessary to 
hear the amount of his information as the best 
G 2 



06 CLAN-ALBIN, 

mode of preventing it from being more dif- 
fuse than she wished. 

This message was no sooner received, than 
Leary, proud to have something to communi- 
cate, hastened to his former patient. " Did 
you hear she sent for me, the ould one it was ? 
They are all entire living at the Lodge; see 
ye, yonder down the shore, and across the 
bay." — Norman perceived a gentleman's seat 
about six miles off, which at sun-set he often 
looked to as a beautiful feature in the land- 
scape. Leary hung on a few minutes, and 
added, " If you had any word of any kind at 
all, I would be proud of bearing it." — " I 
have nothing to say," replied Norman, colour- 
ing, " but if your little countrywoman re- 
member me, give her my love." 

In the evening, Norman wandered along 
the shore, agitated by restless impatience for 
the return of Leary : he was accompanied by 
his dog. Grey twilight came softly on ; the 
wind rose with the increasing tide, and heavy 
though short showers of rain swept across the 
sky. Heedless of the rain he still walked on, 
starting at every sound, and fancying every 
rock the advancing figure of Pat Leary. He 



A NATIONAL TALE. 67 

was about two miles distant from the camp, 
when he was suddenly alarmed by shrieks of 
a female. No sound could convey so quick 
an impulse to the heart of Norman. He 
darted across a ledge of rocks which divided 
him from the spot whence the voice proceed- 
ed; and, by the remaining light, perceived 
Sir Archibald Gordon grasping a young wo- 
man in his arms, while she wildly screamed 
and struggled to disengage herself. 

" Call on your Bourke now, you devil," 
said the intoxicated ruffian, more bent on 
gratifying his diabolical revenge than the fu- 
ry he was pleased to call love. If any thing 
could have increased the just indignation of 
Norman, it was this brutal sarcasm; and it re- 
quired but a slight effort from a manly arm, 
nerved by a good cause, to extricate the 
trembling girl from her furious insulter. 
She fled precipitately, in the strong sense of 
personal danger, forgetting even him who 
came to her rescue; and the baffled hero di- 
rected his rage, and the sword he disgraced, 
to the bosom of the unarmed but daring in- 
truder. With alertness peculiar to himself, 
Norman warded off the thrust, till a second 
and a third attempt, at which the point of the 



6S CLAN-ALBIN, 

sword entered his arm, compelled him to 
close with this hero, and to wrest a dangerous 
weapon from an arm so unworthy of an ho- 
nourable trust. While they struggled together, 
the wolf-dog sprungatthe throat of the baronet; 
and, but for the active generosity of Norman, 
another minute would forever have terminated 
his atchievments in war and gallantry. While 
Norman quieted the infuriated dog, Sir Ar- 
chibald recovered his sword ; and in the phrert- 
zy of revenge, losing even the sense of perso- 
nal danger, again attempted to lodge it in the 
body of his enemy. Again Norman caught 
the naked weapon, and dexterously wrench- 
ed it from the baronet, who fell on his knees 
as he struggled to retain it, and, in the fury 
of unmanly rage, applied his teeth to the pre- 
sumptuous hand that resisted him. A deep 
blush stained the cheek of Norman, at an act so 
humiliating to the dignity of man. — " Despi- 
cable coward !" cried he, " since nature has 
furnished you with fangs to defend your con- 
temptible existence, why should you disgrace 
the weapon of a man of honour," — and he 
harled the sword along the shore, where it 
shivered to pieces among the shingle. 



A NATIONAL TALE. OQ 

He then called his dog, bound a handker- 
chief round his bleeding arm, and departed. 
Advancing a little way, he overtook DoraTra- 
cey, whose anxiety for her deliverer increas- 
ed, as her personal fears abated. At one pe- 
riod, this girl had shewed abundance of rus- 
tic coquetry in her behaviour to her great ad. 
mirer Sir Archibald, and her gallant lover 
Phelim Bourke ; but from the death of the 
latter, the generosity of a female nature, made 
her regard his destroyer with warm and un- 
changeable aversion. "Norman kindly drew 
her arm within his own, and offered to convey 
her to the protection of her father. By the 
way, she informed him that she had been 
picking up shells on the beach for Miss Grant ; 
darkness had come on before she was aware, 
and as she was hastening homeward, Sir Ar- 
chibald had overtaken her as he returned 
from the lodge. 

The guards were pacing their nightly 
rounds before Norman and his companion 
reached the camp, at the skirts of which they 
were met by captain Drummond. Had the 
figure of Norman been easily mistaken, the 
deep shade which invested every object might 
have prevented recognition, which he anxi- 



70 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ously wished. But this was impossible, for 
his gay friend was, at least, as desirous of 
making a discovery, as he was of passing 
unknown. After a long whistle, he sung out, 
" Oh ho, is it so ?" — and then pompously re, 
peated in French, from the celebrated letter 
of the corporal : " Sentiment is nothing with- 
out love, and love is nothing without senti- 
ment y 

(i I was gathering shells for Miss Grant," 
said Dora. " And Mr Macalbin was helping 
you no doubt," added Drummond ^arcastu 
cally ; " but, as I presume you have done for 
the night, suppose you go away, and leave 
me to convey him home. And look ye, there is 
old Tracey, who knows if he approves of 
shell. gathering." — Drummond laid his hand 
on the arm of Norman, as if to draw him away, 
but feeling it wet, and seeing the handker- 
chief, he started back, exclaiming, " Good 
God, what is the matter }"■ — This question 
was answered by Dora, who throwing herself 
into the arms of her father, burst into tears, 
and in a few incoherent words, though of 
powerful interest to the heart of a parent, and 
a soldier, explained her adventure, or rather 
the part which Norman had taken in it. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 71 

" And you have fought that brute ? You 
are wounded }'* cried Drummond ; " here is 
a tent, for God's sake come hither." — « I have 
not fought, I am not wounded, compose your- 
self my dear friend,'' replied Norman, smil- 
ing at his warmth. — With the vehement re- 
sentment of an honest, though untamed spi- 
rit, old Tracey poured forth curses, both 
loud and deep, on the brutal wretch who had 
insulted his child ; but prone to kindness, his 
feelings soon flowed in a more humanised 
channel, and he silently wrung the hand of 
her preserver ; for though language could 
strongly express his hate, it sunk beneath the 
more powerful feeling of his gratitude. 

Notwithstanding the remonstrances and 
entreaties of Norman, Drummond went in 
search of a surgeon. — " I am truly ashamed 
of troubling you, Sir, every time I bleed my 
fVnger," said Norman, while the surgeon, in obe- 
dience to Drummond, uncovered the arm. 
" A sword wound I" cried the other in sur- 
prise.— " Aye, dont fail to mark that, I pray 
you," said Captain Drummond; " and all a- 
bout it 5 how many inches below the elbow, 
how wide, and how deep, and all the rest of 
it. It wont end here, I promise you." 



72 CLAN-ALBLff, 

While lie still spoke, several gentlemeu 
ran into the tent, eagerly inquiring what had 
happened. — " Sir Archibald has come to the 
guard without hat or sword ," cried they, 
" denouncing Macalbin and his dog — Here 
is the guard !" 

The surgeon was permitted to finish his 
business before the party seized their pri- 
soner, who betrayed neither uneasiness nor 
embarrassment. To the numerous inquiries 
of his acquaintance, he calmly, but steadily 
replied, " I will leave Sir Archibald to tell 
his own story ." — " Poh ! never mind !" said 
one, piqued at the dissappointment of his cu- 
riosity, " let us go and finish our game. 
There's Dora Tracey weeping without; it 
is only the second edition of Phelim Bourke." 
The officers withdrew to interrogate Dora. 

When Tracey, his daughter, and Captain 
Drummond had seen Norman lodged in the a- 
partment which had lately been occupied by 
Bourke, they went together to the house of 
Colonel Grant. The Colonel was certainly 
very much grieved at the intelligence he re- 
ceived ; but it was his temper never to feel 
sorrow unaccompanied by anger, and he now 
cursed his daughter for wanting shells, Dora 



A NATIONAL TALE. JS 

for gathering them, Sir Archibald for a brute, 
Norman for a hot-headed fool, and, finally, 
himself for the mast unfortunate man that 
ever existed. The girls wept together ; and 
Drummond and old Tracey patiently wait- 
ed till the first whirlwind of his wrath had 
blown over. 

In the midnight silence of his prison, Nor- 
man had abundant leisure to review his situ- 
ation, and he did so without either fear or 
anxiety. In his late conduct, he felt nothing 
to regret, — he trusted in his innocence, and in 
that innate sense of justice, which neither in- 
terest nor habit can banish from the bosom of 
man. 

The rapid flow of ideas in the mind of the 
solitary prisoner, accorded ill with the lazy 
pace of time. When he had walked through 
his vast and dreary prison for about an hour, 
he fancied the night very far advanced, and 
laid himself on the humid straw, (last used 
by the unfortunate Bourke,) to obtain a short 
repose. He at length fell into a broken un- 
easy slumber, haunted by indistinct visions of 
Lady Augusta and Monimia ; and of Hugh, 
whom he fancied he heard moaning in an- 
guish, without the power of aiding. 

vol. in. H 



74 CLAN-ALBIN, 

It was the real voice of the piper which fell 
on his sleeping ear, and mingled with images 
of fancy. Poor Hugh had taken advantage 
of the harvest-moon, to perform on this day 
a double march, in order to gratify himself, 
and agreeably surprise his young friend. 
Hugh had walked nearly eighty miles, and 
when he reached the camp, the midnight 
guard had been relieved. Forgetting previ- 
ous fatigue, his spirits became uncommonly 
high, as the strengthening moonlight disco- 
vered the white tents in the distance, and with 
all the spring and alacrity of his cheery tem- 
per, he hastened on, concerting fond and jo- 
cular things which he intended to say to 
" him." 

The dissappointment and anguish of this 
faithful creature when he learned that Nor- 
man was in confinement, admits of no descrip- 
tion ; and his doleful wailings as he sat on the 
broad stone steps of the prison, were so true 
to the genuine feelings of nature, that the ob- 
durate guards melted at their touching ex- 
pression, and began to find the dormant sym- 
pathies of humanity stirring in their bosoms ; 
and as they paced the little allotted space be- 



A NATIONAL TALE. ?5 

fore the prison- door, they still returned to 
comfort him. 

Next morning, when Norman approached 
his narrow grated casement, he started at see- 
ing Hugh and Luath seated together, and the 
eyes of both, mournfully fixed on the bars of 
his prison ; he stretched out his arms with an 
exclamation of delight, prevailed with the 
guards to admit them, and, in the next minute, 
hugged the piper to his bosom. 



76 CLAN-ALB1N, 



CHAP. XXXIII. 



A stream of many tides against the foes of thy people ; but 
like the gale that moves the grass to those that ask thine 
aid. So Trenmor lired, and Trathal wai ; and such has 
Fingal been. 

OSSIAN. 

It was to the address of Miss Sinclair, that 
Monimia owed her present residence in the 
family of her paternal uncle, Lord Glanville. 
In sending Monimia from the Highlands, that 
lady had the double motive of forwarding her 
own design on Montague, and of thwarting 
the favourite scheme of her former patroness. 
She contrived to apprise the Glanville family 
of the suspected fortune, and the affair was 
concluded. Lord Glanville felt it his duty to 
protect, and iC properly bring forward" his 
brother's child ; — his Lady made no material 
objection, and very polite letters summoned 
Monimia to England. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 77 

The New Inns, as the house of Macpher- 
eon was called, was the post-office of Glen* 
albin, and of the surrounding country. No 
one was quicker at apprehending an obscure 
hint than its owner; and when Lady Gordon 
suggested the expedience of enclosing every 
letter addressed to Mrs Montague under co- 
ver to Sir Archibald, (by way of saving ex- 
pense, as he represented a borough,) Mac- 
pherson bowed very low. " I suppose poor 
Lady Augusta finds difficulty enough in liv- 
ing on her narrow income. So you may send 
any letters for her, or her family, in the same 
way, and I shall make Sir Archibald return 
them with a frank. But this must on no ac- 
count be mentioned: I would not for the 
world hurt her feelings." — Macpherson bow- 
ed lower than before, and would have com- 
plimented her Ladyship on her delicate and 
considerate goodness; but, though she some- 
times submitted to temporize with her own 
conscience herself, she resented similar 
freedom in others, and her rising frown 
produced a silent acquiescence. — " If your 
Ladyship before going would just have the 
goodness to mention the lease of Loanbane to 
his Honour, as I paid the grassum, and in the 
H 2 



78 CLAN-ALBIN, 

hurry" — " I shall not forget," interrupted 
Lady Gordon; — "so, good b'ye, Duncan, 
look to your master's interests till we return." 
— Macpherson began a fawning speech ; but 
her Ladyship seemed in haste. He bowed, 
as he slid backwards to the door* — " Sordid 
wretch!" exclaimed her Ladyship; — " and 
Gordon is taking grassums, and letting his 
land for half its value. — Well ! — patience." 

Lady Gordon was too good a politician at 
once to prevent all correspondence between 
friends so devoted as Monimia and the 
lonely islanders. The correspondence be- 
gan with much animation ;, it became more 
irregular, and at last suddenly died away. 
Lady Augusta at length began to suspect 
that her highly-gifted young friend was not 
superior to the usual caprice of her age; arid 
Monimia, her woman's heart torn with con- 
tending feelings, feared that her friend was 
but too wise, too firm, too exempt from hu- 
man frailties herself to pardon them in others. 
Jealous pride, and alarmed delicacy, were 
quickly roused to combat her lurking weak- 
nesses. — "Cruel Lady Augusta!" thought 
she, " I will take the lesson you set me. I 
will convince even you, that it was not neces* 



A NATIONAL TALE. 7Q 

sary first to sooth me in my folly, and then to 
wean me from its indulgence. Since you 
think it proper that the hope you once en- 
couraged should now be renounced, shall I 
be mean enough to feel any difficulty in tear- 
ing it from my heart ?" 

Monimia tried to combat her luckless par- 
tiality, but, unhappily, more in the irritability 
of pride than the strength of wisdom ; and, in 
the meantime, she resolved, at least, to act as 
if she no longer remembered that spot, and 
those beings that engrossed all her affections. 

Lord Glanville was a fourth-rate politician, 
of first-rate pretensions and activity, — a sort 
of constitutional activity, become morbid 
from the continual stimulus of hope, and the 
pain of disappointment ; for his Lordship was 
at this time in opposition. His party possess- 
ed an overflow of talent, with a plentiful lack 
of numbers; and to them the measure of his 
value was exactly his borough, his personal 
vote, and the name of his family: — he was 
formidable to the minister in the very same 
degree. Wonderful oratorical talents, and the 
usual attendant on great judgment — a bad me- 
mory, — made his lordship dislike that business- 
like thing called debating ; but, with the po- 



80 CLAN-'ALBIN, 

lishing aid of his son's tutor, he made one os 
two set speeches every session, and, at the 
solicitation of his friends, published the same 
on the very best of paper. What with being 
in the House as regularly as any fixture there ; 
inditing letters and pamphlets on all kinds of 
subjects ; canvassing towns, counties, and bo- 
roughs ; watching the gates of house, 

from the garret-windows of his own ; carry- 
ing on a most extensive foreign and domes- 
tic correspondence ; and, moreover, educat- 
ing his only son into the first statesman and 
the finest gentleman of the next generation, 
his lordship found sufficient employment to 
make him the most busy, bustling, through- 
going, and troublesome person that ever dis- 
turbed the quiet of a family, or tried the pa- 
tience of those who had the misfortune to be 
reckoned among his friends. The most piti- 
able object of his talents, however, was his 
own son, who, from the hour of his birth, had 
been the unfortunate subject of all sorts of 
moral and physical experiments, till the poor 
boy was become puny, peevish, and stupid. 
He had lived chiefly under the immediate 
eye of his father ; but he had also, for a time, 
been sent to box and see the world at West- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 81 

minster- school, — to row and make Latin 
verses at Eton, — to live on vegetables with a 
learned curate at the foot of Snowdon, — to 
overcome all national prejudices at Geneva, — 
and to learn the philosophy of politics under 
the care of a Scotch professor. In any of 
these situations he might probably have done 
very well ; but, unfortunately, his father would 
have had nothing more to do, and the chief 
delight of Lord Glanville was in doing at no- 
thing. 

Monimia justly thought that she had never 
seen any person so active in displaying his 
own imbecility. 

Lady Glanville was a mere common-place 
woman of fashion, who went about the ordi- 
nary business of fashionable life in the usual 
manner. She sometimes made a feeble op- 
position to the suffering of the only creauire 
she cared for, but forgot her regret when she 
no longer beheld the tears of her son ; or, if 
she remembered them, thought it a pity that 
a boy could not be trained into the first states- 
man and the finest gentleman of the next ge- 
neration, without so many tears and com- 
plainings. She herself had been educated, 
or rather reared in solitude, under the care 



82 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of a maiden aunt, without any tincture of that 
literature common to her rank, and with a 
very slender knowledge of those accomplish- 
ments so sedulously cultivated by young wo- 
men of the same condition. Yet she dressed 
elegantly, looked elegantly, saw the best 
company, gave opposition routs, nearly as 
celebrated as the opposition dinners of her 
lord, and lived on, from season to season, 
with a kind of indolent good-nature that pro- 
moted her own quiet, and permitted the quiet 
of her neighbours. 

On her first entrance into life, Monimia 
had been patronised by the family of her 
mother ; — a family detested by Lord Glanville 
from the period of a contested election. That 
he had wrested from them the disposal of his 
beautiful niece, and her large fortune, was 
the subject of great self-congratulation ; and 
the kindness of her reception corresponded 
with his triumph. It was a kindness compound- 
ed of vanity, duty, civility, and selfishness ; 
yet languid and feeble in its nature, and cold 
and heartless in its demonstration, which 
knew no degrees either of increase or abate- 
ment. 

Lady Gordon found little difficulty in ob- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 83 

taining an intimacy in this family, or in rais- 
ing doubts about the fortune, and insinuating 
the engagement of Monimia with her nephew 
as a fixed thing, which, however, she rather 
permitted than approved. In short, whispers, 
paragraphs, and reports, made Monimia soon 
be regarded as the future Lady Gordon, by 
the prescription of society ; for Lord Glan- 
ville was always too busy to have time for 
any thing useful ; and his lady was too indo- 
lent to trouble herself about the matter. 

The first winter glided away in the usual 
occupations of fashionable life. Lady Glan- 
ville made her protegee wear every thing, and 
know every body, and accepted no invitation 
in which she was not included. Lord Glan- 
ville sometimes met her in society, and often 
darted in upon her and his lady in a morning 
when he could escape from the daily levee 
with which he chose to fetter himself. Some- 
times he felt a momentary concern for the 
deep dejection, which, towards the end of the 
season, was but too evident in her appearance, 
and, in his own way, tried to give her comfort. 
— " How d'ye do, Monimia ? pray be happy, 
my love. Lady Glanville, make my little 
Monimia quite happy. I'm so hurried, and 



84 CLAN-ALBIN, 

worried with affairs." — " Dear me I" would 
the lady reply, with a look of vacant astonish- 
ment, " I am sure Mrs Montague is quite 
happy. I have procured tickets for Lady 

's breakfast ; and ordered your dress 

the very same as the Ladies P . I think 

a Maria Louisa blue will be charmingly be- 
coming to you my dear." — " Aye, said Lord 
Glanville, " do make Monimia quite happy ; 
get the Maria Lou — " and suddenly recol- 
lecting himself, he exclaimed, " Oh ! you 
simple woman ! there would be a theme for 
the higher powers. The terrible Glanville 
dressing his niece in Maria Louisa blue ! No, 

no, no ; that will not do. And Lady " 

(the lady of a minister J " bowed to you at 
the opera last night. I marked her. She has 
her cue. But it won't all do my little lady. 
Nobody shall say the wiles of a fair woman, 
or the charms of a fine place, could tempt 
Glanville to desert his friends, worthless as he 
is to them." 

" Dear ! I am sure Lady could not 

do less than return my bow. She is a very 
well-bred woman." — " Poh ! leave all that to 
me my little woman. — And nobody will have 
any thing to say to the niece of a poor whig- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 85 

nobleman ? Sir Archibald Gordon has not pro- 
duced his credentials yet.— Oh ! this is a sad 
thing, — a terrible thing indeed, that )'our poor 
uncle's name, in the black-book, should terri- 
fy all lovers. Never mind, my little Moni- 
mia, — every dog has his day. — If next cam- 
paign were over, we must think of pairing 
you off,— leave all that to me. But public 
business you know, of course — The house will 
be met, — good morning ladies." — His Lord- 
ship shuffled off. 

The political sagacity of Lord Glanville, 
led him often to speculate in the funds ; and 
in his anxiety to render Monimia quite happy, 
he had already sold out more than the half of 
her little fortune ; but, unluckily, he never 
found a fit opportunity to buy in again. Not 
that he intended to do her any injury, but so 
closely was he employed in watching the na- 
tional purse, that the money imperceptibly 
slid out of his own. But even from shameful, 
self-created, pecuniary distresses, could the 
alchymy of vanity extract gratification. — "So 
your poor uncle has half-ruined you too, my 
little Monimia ? — Seek money from me, Lady 
Glanville ? why, you simple woman, where 
should I find money ? Why did you marry a 

vol. III. I 



80 CLAN-ALBIJtf, 

needy place-hunter ? No loaves and fishes 
among us. Connect yourself with the thriv- 
ing folks, my little Monimia." — " Dear me, 
I am sure your private fortune is good enough : 
And, they fell me, you will get no place, 
whatever change happens ; I am tired of 
whiggism." 

" Family persecution combining with the 
allurements of place and power, — Glanville 
whistles them off like dew-drops from the 
lion's mane." 

Monimia sometimes smiled, and sometimes 
sighed, in reply to all this. Lord Glanville, 
indeed, seldom troubled her with his theories 
of politics or education, for he rightly con- 
cluded, that they were beyond her compre- 
hension ; but before he went out, he often 
drove his tortured pupil into the drawing- 
room, exclaiming, — u Go along, you young re- 
bel, to the feet of your cousin. Monimia my 
love, you know what I mean for Charles James, 
— a grace, a manner, a decorum." — Monimia 
sometimes procured for the poor victim of ve- 
getable regimen, the more substantial advan- 
tage of a plate of cold meat ; and when his 
father returned, and found his sullen fits gone, 
he was perfectly convinced, that he was tak- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 87 

ing the best of possible means to train him 
into the first statesman, and finest gentleman, 
of the next generation. 

Yet the recollection of this winter was for 
ever endeared to Monimia ; for in it she gain- 
ed a friend, — and such a friend as a lifetime 
were well spent in acquiring. 

This was General the colonel of 

the regiment into which Norman had chosen 
to enter, and the gentleman to whom Lady 
Augusta had applied in his behalf. General 
represented one of the most distin- 
guished families in Scotland; a family, whose 
real grandeur had happily never been ob- 
scured b}' the vulgar decoration of bestowed 
title. In early life, this gentleman had lost 
a beloved wife, and he possessed the heart 
which feels that loss irreparable. Yet his 
was that enduring, quiet, and unobtrusive 
sorrow which shrinks from the eye of the 
world, and is fearful of its pity, and seeks 
and finds no consolation, save in brooding in 
solitude over its own treasured sadness. 

The good genius of his country found this 
gentleman a melancholy wanderer on the 
continent of Europe; and amidst scenes of 
death and danger his widowed heart sought 



88 CLAN-ALBIJST, 

to forget the fair perspective of that happier 
life which stretched before him, ere misfor- 
tune had wedded him to glory. Virtue would 
indeed have gone without her earthly reward, 
could such a mind have been the continual 
prey of corroding sorrow. His lasting grief, 
and endless regret, at length assumed a 
gentler tone. The soft remembrance of her 
lie had lost, was indeed ever present ; her 
image was everywhere around ; her idea 
blended with the whole scheme of his life, — 
and happy was its influence. It cherished 
his natural benevolence for all his kind ; it 
tamed the brilliance of success; it blunted 
the sting of disappointment; it mingled 
with the consolations of his faith ; it carried 
forward his affections into that futurity, where 
alone is perfect peace and perfect joy, — in 
the visions of slumber it blessed him ! 

This lofty character, — without fear and 
without reproach, — united the extremes of 
every thing captivating. It was romantically 
tender, amiably good, chivalrously great ; and 
the young fancy of Monimia flamed forth in 
ardent admiration. 

Monimia sometimes saw this gentleman at 
Lord Glanville's political board, — for many 



A NATIONAL TALE. Sg 

distinguished characters were occasional- 
ly seen there, and often* met him in so- 
ciety. That love of Scotland, and of the 
Highlands of Scotland, which glowed unseen 
in the hearts of both, formed a natural at- 
traction, and an agreeable theme for conver- 
sation ; and they soon discovered in each 
other the same taste for nature, and the same 
love of the peasantry as well as the land- 
scape of Scotland. Monimia had not the 
merit of being singular in her admiration of 
this distinguished character ; — for whatever 
indiscriminate censure may affirm, modest 
greatness, and real and manly goodness, are 
admired and loved even in this bad world, 
and that in no stinted degree. But others 
had many different occupations, pleasures, 
and pursuits ; and she had no pursuit, no 
pleasure so valued, as contemplating the vir- 
tues of the friend she anxiously wished to 
obtain. However mortifying it may seem, it 
must be confessed, that in the first stages of 
this intimacy 7 , Monimia was compelled to 
make all the advances, though even then Ge- 
neral thought her a very charming young 

creature, with far more heart, and talent, and 
good taste than falls to the lot of most of the 
12 



QO CLAN-ALBIN, 

trained young ladies, who form the market- 
able commodity at the watering-places and 
in the metropolis ; and sometimes imagined, 
that a woman, much inferior, would be a more 
suitable companion for Sir Archibald Gor- 
don. 

During the early months of summer, chance 
again threw them into the same circle, and 
they often met in morning rides and also in 
evening parties. General was too ex- 
perienced in all the varying symptoms of 
heart-rending sorrow, not to perceive that 
Monimia was the secret victim of consuming 
grief, and that she loved himself for what he 
had suffered, as much as for what he was. She 
was now, therefore, the object of his tender- 
est pity ; for he feared, that while she endur- 
ed like miseries with his own, she knew no- 
thing of his consolations. It was with a cer- 
tain mournful pleasure, therefore, that he saw 
this gentle and uncomplaining girl single out 
himself with innocent freedom ; and though 
neither ever breathed the most distant hint of 
any personal cause of grief or regret, they 
perceived that they often felt together, and 
that social suffering relieved pent-up and so- 
litary anguish. Yet an uninterested observer 
could scarcely have perceived the melancho- 



A NATIONAL TALE. Ql 

ly tone of feeling which generally pervaded 
the minds of these two persons ; for General 

always appeared mildly cheerful, and 

Monimia was often gay and lively. But hers 
was that soft and seducing gaiety which, re- 
sembling the sprightly melodies of Scotland, 
required only a slower movement, and a more 
emphatic expression, to breathe forth the 
most subduing tenderness or delicious melan- 
choly. 

In the late session, Lord Glanville had ap- 
plied so closely to some foolish scheme of fi- 
nance, that his private affairs were greatly 
deranged ; some impertinent persons, indif- 
ferent to his labours for the public weal, even 
talked of executions, and he found it abso- 
lutely necessary to visit Ireland. Monimia 
was delighted with an opportunity of revisit- 
ing her native land, especially as General 

was going thither to join his regiment ; 

Lady Gordon also contrived to be included in 
the party, under the pretext of going to her 
nephew. 

This brilliant party accordingly crossed the 
channel together ; and in Dublin they were 
met by Sir Archibald Gordon. During the 
fortnight they remained in that city, they 



Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lived together in the same hotel ; and Sir 
Archibald seemed to claim all the little pri- 
vileges of an accepted lover, while Monimia 
behaved with the most mortifying coldness, 
and often as if she was unconscious of his 
presence, or even of his existence. Her 
conduct was a perfect enigma to General 

, who was compelled to conclude that her 

heart revolted in secret from an alliance 
formed either in obedience to the wishes of 
her family, or from the too common imagin- 
ary necessity of accepting the richest and 
grandest man that offered her his hand. Her 
behaviour, indeed, often threw him into a 
kind of delicate embarrassment, for, avoiding, 
or more properly overlooking the gallantry of 
Sir Archibald, it was from himself she seem- 
ed to expect, and to love the little habitual 
attentions due to her sex ; — it was his hand she 
sought on leaving her carriage, — his arm on 
which she leaned, in walking through the 
city ; and those symbols of deference and 
protection, which it had once been so pleas- 
ing to bestow, were become almost painful 
when the sullen brow of Sir Archibald Gor- 
don told that they infringed the rights of an- 
other. 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q3 

One evening the whole party were invited 
to a very public private concert. The Gene- 
ral was late in going, where politeness alone 
forced him to attend ; and when he arrived the 
rooms were much crowded. After paying his 
compliments to the ladies of the house, he 
went to take his station by Monimia and 
Lady Glanville. — " I knew you were to be 
here," said Monimia, rising at his approach, 
" I have saved a place for you ;" and she 
made room on the sofa on which she was 
seated. The General sat down, but perceiv- 
ing Sir Archibald, — who had hovered round 
her all night, — he felt somewhat uneasy, and, 
rising, said, " Sir Archibald, pray accept of 
this seat, and be very sensible of the distinc- 
tion I make in your favour ; for I do assure 
you there is no man in existence to whom I 
would yield it but yourself." Sir Archibald 
made his bows and acknowledgments, and sat 
down ; on which Monimia instantly rose, and, 
with a look of haughty displeasure, walked to 

a different part of the room. General 

had that morning been informed, by Lady 
Gordon, of the nature of her nephew's en- 
gagements with Monimia; and he could not 
help thinking the behaviour of his young 



Q4 CLAN-ALBIN, 

friend childish and degrading, though still he 
greatly pitied her. 

Monimia's anger soon vanished ; and, in 
the course of the evening, she again advanced 
to her friend. His manner appeared cold 
and constrained, and she feared that she had 
offended him; and,' with sweet and earnest 
insinuation, sought to regain his favour; — but 
Sir Archibald approached, the General men- 
tioned an engagement, and went away, leav- 
ing Monimia overwhelmed with chagrin. 

Next morning, on entering the breakfast 
parlour, she perceived the seat next her own, 

which was usually occupied by General , 

empty, and himself seated at another part of 
the table. She sat down, however; and Sir 
Archibald, taking the only remaining place, 
seated himself beside her. — " You are not 
reading the fashionable paragraphs to me this 

morning," said she; for General was 

accustomed to read the newspaper to her du- 
ring breakfast. The General handed the 
newspaper to Sir Archibald, saying, " Lord 
Glanville and myself are absorbed in war and 
politics this morning. We must leave the 
fashionable paragraphs to younger beaux. 1 ' 

After breakfast he rose to go out, and Mo- 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q5 

nimia followed him to the door of the apart- 
ment. — " Might I crave one little minute of 
your time," said she, in a faultering voice ; 
and the General bowed, and led the way to 
the drawing-room. — " Dear Sir, tell me, how 
have I offended you?" said she, while tears 
trembled in her eyes — " Valuing your friend- 
ship as I do, not for the whole world would I 
willingly offend you. Tell me, then, I en- 
treat you, what I have done amiss. I will 
make any atonement, only restore me to your 
kindness." — There was an expression of o- 
penness, innocence, and candour in the tear- 
ful, anxious eyes that were fixed on General 

, which admitted of no misconstruction. — 

" Never for a moment have you offended me, 
my lovely young friend," replied he earnestly. 
" On the contrary, nothing has been so re- 
freshing to this desolate heart as the kindness 
with which you have honoured me." — His 
voice quavered for a moment ; and Monimia 
could have gathered with her lip the half- 
starting tear which spoke all the fond recol- 
lections of that desolate and all-enduring 
heart. — " But I wish," added he, smiling on 
her, " that you had some sage old female 
friend, to whom I might put one fatherly 



Q6 clan-albin, 

question." — He again smiled in her face, as 
if to explain the nature of that delicate ques- 
tion. But Monimia was very slow of appre- 
hension, for her mind reverted at that mo- 
ment to Lady Augusta Macalbin, and in bit- 
ter sorrow she replied : " I have no female 
friend. All I love is snatched from me, and 
my heart clings the more fondly to whatever 
is left to me;" — and she involuntarily pressed 
his hand to her side, as if to preserve that. He 
printed on her cheek an elder brother's kiss, 
and for a moment held her to his heart. It was 
the silent covenant of their mutual amity. Mo- 
nimia raised her head in sweet emotion, and 
her bashful eyes thanked him for kindness so 
precious to her. In their situation there was 
nothing equivocal. His widowed heart was 
sealed up, and consecrated to the remem- 
brance of supreme felicity; and the unde- 
caying recollection of something still more 
tender, more rapturous, more blessed than 
all she now felt, preserved the heart of Mo- 
nimia, — that heart so exquisitely alive to 
every impulse of refined delight, — from 
feelings which might have proved as agoniz- 
ing to herself as distressing to her friend. 
When she raised her head, he smiled more 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q7 

softly on her, and again resumed the former 
subject. — " 'Tis so long since I have scanned 
meanings in ladies' eyes," said he, " that I 
am in truth quite out of practice. Must I 
have recourse to Sir Archibald to tell me all 
I would divine in yours?" — Her dark eyes 
flashed with mingled surprise and indigna- 
tion. — " Is it possible, General , that 3/024 

also think Sir Archibald Gordon has any pre- 
tension to influence my conduct?" — "Not your 
conduct; I cannot be so ungallant as to sup- 
pose that. I know of course that young la- 
dies must not only govern themselves, but 
their admirers. But I did think Sir Archi- 
bald had some pretension to influence your 
heart ; and I know that those who influence 
Monimia's heart will greatly influence her 
conduct." 

" Ah, I thought you loved me better than 
to think such a man" — Monimia checked her- 
self abruptly. The secret of her heart was 
blushing on her lovely averted countenance. 
She struggled with the weakness she regard- 
ed as degrading to herself and her sex, — and 
banished the idea of Eleenalin. She looked 
up with modest confidence; and, with some 
attempt at gaiety, added, " Do not mistake 
YOL. III. K 



98 CLAN-ALBIN, 

me. Sir Archibald Gordon certainly did once 
offer me his hand and his fortune; but you 
know I am a free-born Irishwoman, nobody 
can claim the little hand you hold without 
my own consent first " had and obtained." I 
did myself and him the justice to decline his 
addresses, with sufficient firmness, I believe — 
for it is said I am very positive — and remained 
very sensible of the honour, and so on. I 
fancy I should have been very grateful too, 
but, as I conclude, you gentlemen fall in love 
with us, as 'tis called, as much to please your- 
selves as to oblige us, I am pretty easy on 
that score. At any rate, I feel that it costs 
me an effort of benevolence to appear even 
indifferent to Sir Archibald Gordon, since 
his strange conduct has drawn upon me the 
persecution of society, — so, on the whole, we 
are quits." 

General was rejoiced at this explana- 
tion. — " Am I then authorised by yourself to 
say that no engagement exists between you 
and Sir Archibald, and that the idea has 
arisen merely from his ungentlemanlike per- 
tinacity ?" — " Nor did the shadow of an en- 
gagement ever exist ; nor could it," — replied 
Monimia.— " And you are not only authoris- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 99 

ed, but solicited, — at least, to believe it. Were 
Lord Glanville not so busy just now writing 
out receipts to the poor Irish peasants for 
cooking their potatoes, and shewing them 
how, with a little economy, they might live 
so comfortably — (don't think me a very un- 
dutiful niece, if I say he has taken a happy 
time for doing so.) — I hope he would not al- 
low Sir Archibald Gordon to blink the ques- 
tion in this manner — for I do indeed feel the 
conduct of that gentleman to be very unge- 
nerous. 

Monimia was afraid of involving her friend 
in any dispute with Gordon ; and, repenting 
of what she had said, she hurriedly added, 
u My uncle will, however, soon be at leisure : 
In the meantime it is all very amusing to me ; 
and, should the homage of Sir Archibald be- 
come very troublesome, I can easily go over 
to Scotland, and swear a law-burrows against 
himself and his aunt." 

General was laughing at the oddi- 
ty of this idea, when Lady Gordon entered 
the drawing-room. — ei Bless me, General ! I 
thought you were gone out." — " But you are 
bappy to find me more agreeably engaged," 
replied he, still laughing, in spite of himself, 
at the idea of Monimia taking a law- burrows 



100 CLAN-ALBIN, 

against Lady Gordon. — " Your spirits are 
quite enviable this morning," said Lady Gor- 
don, lost in astonishment. — " I do confess my 
spirits are much better than they were at the 
same hour yesterday," replied he. Lady Gor- 
don coloured as she looked eagerly round. She 
remembered that at the same hour yesterday, 
she had, with great dexterity, insinuated the 
engagement of Monimia with her nephew. 
The General immediately went out, and Mo- 
nimia took her work. 

From the day of this explanation Monimia 
again found her arm resting in security with- 
in the arm of her friend ; her glad smile wel- 
comed his approach ; her affectionate glance 
was lifted to him in trustful fondness, and 
sought in his eyes an answering regard, while 
warm admiration of his noble qualities gave 
zest to that pure attachment which so largely 
contributed to her happiness. It was love 
without passion and without illusion, — which 
gave time for sober enjoyment, and preclud- 
ed all the tortures of imaginary suffering — 
that Monimia cherished ;— and for her Gene- 
ral felt an elder brother's love, animat- 
ed by that natural desire of pleasing, which 
ever attends the social intimacy of polished 
persons of different sexes. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 1 

In a few days after this the party proceed- 
ed to Glanville-Lodge, a seat in the county 
of Cork belonging to Lord Glanville. The 
weather was charming ; and Monimia full of 
delight to find that the land of her fathers 
justified her patriotic fondness. The party 
arrived at the Lodge on the day before the 
grand review ; and on that day Lady Glan- 
ville determined to give a ball, by way of 
welcoming her friends to the country. A 
very short notice was sufficient for the ladies 
in the neighbourhood, and wherever there are 
soldiers it is not difficult to make up a party 
of pleasure. 

General was too delicate to rob Co- 
lonel Grant of any of those honours which 
had cost him so much swearing and perspira- 
tion ; so he declined taking command on the 
day of the review ; and, after he had ushered 
Lady Glanville's party into the field, he 
mounted his horse, and joined General Moore 
and the inspecting officers of the district. It 
was leaning on his arm that Norman had first 
seen Monimia. 

The general officers dined together ; but, 

late in the evening, General - looked in 

at Lady Glanville's ball. He expected to find 
K 2 



1 02 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Monimia dancing and gay ; for he thought 
her spirits had improved much in the journey 
through Ireland : But he found her pale and 
melancholy, seated alone, and seemingly ab- 
sorbed in her own thoughts. When he remark- 
ed her looks, she pleaded indisposition, and 
in a few minutes retired ; leaving those who 
had come together to see the destined bride 
of the dashing Sir Archibald Gordon, — the 
far-famed and beautiful Mrs Montague, — in 
amazement at her want of animation and 
beauty ; for the men said she wanted the one, 
and the ladies denied that she had ever pos- 
sessed the other. 

Next day Monimia found herself unable to 
leave her chamber, though a distressing con- 
sciousness of the suspicions of Lady Gordon 
made her very solicitous to appear with the 
family. On the following day, Lady Glan- 
ville carried her out on an airing, in compli- 
ance with the advice of Lady Gordon, who 
chose that time to converse with Pat Leary ; 
for her Ladyship had now the strongest mo- 
tive to vigilance, — her own honour as well as 
the interest of her nephew, depended on pre- 
venting all intercourse between Norman and 
Monimia. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 103 



CHAP. XXXIV. 



Stone walls do not a prison make, 

Nor iron bars a cage ; 
Minds innocent and quiet, take 

That for an hermitage. 
While I have freedom in my love, 

And in my soul am free, 
Angels alone, that soar above, 

Enjoy such liberty. 

Lovelace. 

IN orman had neither satisfied his own anxi- 
ous curiosity, nor answered half of the eager 
questions of the piper, when he was summon- 
ed to his grated casement by the whoop of 
Pat Leary. All his humble friends and for- 
mer comrades were assembled round the pri- 
son ; and a heart, which depended for half its 
happiness on the affectionate regards of those 
around, was inexpressibly soothed by this 
mark of kindness. When they had satisfied 
themselves that neither his health nor spirits 



104 CLAN-ALBUST, 

were affected by the alarming situation in 
which he was placed, and looked their good 
wishes, they all departed, except Leary, to 
whom Norman was indeed very desirous of 
giving audience. Him, however, the centi- 
nels would not admit; and he walked about, 
in the hope of Captain Drummond taking 
him in with himself when he arrived. 

Captain Drummond soon came with his 
uncle. He had been attempting to obtain 
the liberation of Norman on parole, or at least 
the indulgence of having him made a priso- 
ner in his own tent; but he had not succeeded 
in either of these attempts, so he forbore 
mentioning that they had been made. 

" Well, Macalbin, you have succeeded in 
getting yourself into a pretty scrape at last," 
said the comforting Colonel. — " What the 
devil business had you to interfere? You must 
have a wonderful fondness of running your 
head against a post." 

" I rather suppose, plase your Honour, it 
was the post ran again him." — " None of your 
wit, Leary. But let us hear your way of the 
story now, Macalbin. It was a mighty affair, 
no doubt, that Sir Archibald presumed to sa- 
lute Miss Dora in passing. If I live another 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 05 

day, Til have that gipsy drummed out of the 
regiment." — "Ah, poor old Tracey!" said 
Captain Drummond, laughing, " what a mer- 
cy it is, that your little girl is not a soldier !" 
" Aye, poor old Tracey !" said Colonel Grant, 
" I vow to heaven it is hardly to be borne, 
that forty years good service should not en - 
title his little girl to the respect — ." Colonel 
Grant had been too gracious^ he abruptly 
cried, " 'tis a damnable shame. It was too 
much, however, to attempt the life of Gordon 
because he ventured to salute Miss Dora, for- 
sooth, in a civil way." — " Colonel Grant does 
not believe that I attempted his life," replied 
Norman. — " But you wrested the sword from 
him, — you and your dog together; you don't 
deny that? 5 ' — " I did take the sword," replied 
Norman. 

" Took the soord, but left him the teeth/' 
exclaimed the indignant piper, starting for- 
ward, unable to keep silence when he heard 
his innocent friend accused. The gentlemen 
looked round, and saw the piper like a High- 
land Urisk, his small eyes sparkling through 
his hairy cheeks, while he exposed the double 
set of his own fixed teeth. 

" Ah, Hugh, is this well done?" said Nor- 



106 CLAN-ALBIN, 

man. " Norman Macalbin," replied the now 
reckless piper, " don't look at myself as if 
you would eat me. I am a man who, witli 
your leave, might be your grandfather, and 
should know something of the world. Though 
not a drop's blood to you, you know yourself 
I love you as much as if I had born you every 
day since you came to the world, and that 
day too ; and am I going to hear my own 
flesh and blood put in the wrong, to conceal 
the doings of a Gordon ? I am ashamed of 
his doings as much as yourself, but my own is 
always my own." — u Aye, that it is," said 
Captain Drummond, — " there's a good man ; 
tell us the truth ; Gordon bit him, did he 
not ?" — Norman turned away, shocked at a 
disclosure so degrading to the dignity of 
man ; but happily the ideas of Hugh were not 
so much generalised, the honour of Clan-Albin 
was safe, and he had few scruples respecting 
the Gordons. — " He knows himself he did 
not tell me, did I not find it out by the mark, 
and face him about it; and God knows but he 
put venom in it, — and none of Moome's 
salve of the wavering leaf have I at this pre- 
sent." 

As Hugh's warmth abated, he made many 



A NATIONAL TALE. 107 

apologies to the gentlemen for the freedom 
he had taken ; and, turning to Norman, said, 
" You know, darling, you should not make 
myself angry with you, nor go over the cords 
with me, seeing it is all for your good, as 
Moome says, when she scolds myself when I 
would be staying too late/' 

Colonel Grant pulled Norman's hand from 
his vest, where he concealed it. — " This is a 
new mode of fighting," said the disgusted old 
soldier, dropping the mangled hand. Still 
you ought to have remembered his place in 
the army," added he, trying to fortify him- 
self in his professional opinions ; " his sword 
was sacred, — and of that you robbed him." 
" The sword he disgraced, by drawing it on 
an unarmed man," replied Captain Drum- 
mond with warmth, and his gracious uncle 
told him he wanted none of his remarks. 
" To set your savage dog on him too," said 
Colonel Grant, wishing to provoke the young 
soldier to minute explanation. Norman turn- 
ed round, reddening with indignation, " Had 
this been the fact," said he, " Sir Archibald 
Gordon would scarcely have been able to day 
to relate such a tale." — Cplonel Grant looked 
at the powerful animal, which crouched at 



108 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the feet of Norman, " Hey !" cried lie " as 
I hope to live, this is the wonderful Suwaroff." 
" It is our Luath, the Gordon stole last year 
at the New Inns, when, to my shame be it 
toidd, I was little overtook, which has not hap- 
pened since, however." — Colonel Grant and 
his nephew exchanged a very meaning look, 
and Norman preserved entire silence. 

" Well, Macalbin, we shall see how all this 
will turn out," said Colonel Grant, moving 
to go out. " Dont let your spirits be depres- 
sed, — though I can't even yet conceive what 
tempted you to interfere, — but — " " Tempt- 
ed me to interfere," repeated Norman, " my 
whole soul impelled me to an act sanctified 
by all that is sacred in humanity ; the voice, 
the suffering of a woman tempted me, — but 
forgive my warmth ; you know not, — no man 
can feel, what I owe to woman." 

Woman was indeed the tutelary genius of 
Norman's wayward fate. Her kindness had 
preserved his feeble existence, fostered his 
infancy, and tended his childhood ; she had 
been his earliest and almost his only friend, 
and from her lip of love he had imbibed 
those lessons, which would have told him to 
" drain his dearest veins," in protecting the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 OQ 

meanest of a sex so sacred. In every felici- 
tous occurrence of his life, Norman could 
trace the agency of woma?i 9 — and through so 
endeared a medium every blessing was to him 
twice blessed. 

With the natural embarassment which a 
delicate mind always experiences when its 
strongest feelings are betrayed to those who 
can neither comprehend their nature, nor 
sympathize with their display, Norman walk- 
ed to his window, and stood there for a few 
seconds. Pat Leary, who had been working 
about the desolate apartment, as an excuse 
for remaining with the gentlemen, approach- 
ed, and with many winks and grimaces, held 
out a small twisted billet. Leary had a natu- 
ral genius for mystery and intrigue, as well 
as a talent for insinuating himself into the 
confidence of his superiors, though it must 
be owned that he never abused that confi- 
dence. At any other time, Norman would 
have been greatly amused, and also some- 
what displeased, at so much apparent artifice, 
but now, with an eager trembling hand, he 
took the billet and hastily put it into his bo- 
som. 

Colonel Grant shook the hand of the pri- 

VOL. III. L 



1 1 CLAN-ALBIN, 

soner, exhorted him to keep up his spirits, 
and went away, ordering Leary before him. 

" Colonel Caustic is not in the best of his 
humours to-day," said Drummond ; " but I 
am ; — for the General supersedes him, and I 
hope that will be useful to you. A court- 
martial it will be, no doubt, and it is peculi- 
arly unlucky that there was no witness of 
your rencontre. I own, I would be happy 
that it were dropped even yet, and I do think 
Gordon, if he has any remaining sense of ho- 
nour or shame, ought to be so also ; for your 
condemnation will by no means prove his ac- 
quittal." Drummond appeared sunkin thought 
for some minutes, and then added, " Do you 
know any thing of female influence ; your 
warrp friend, Miss Grant, is very well ac- 
quainted with the lady who, of all others, 
may be expected to sway Sir xlrchibald. You 
have heard me talking very foolishly about 
her; but I seriously assure you, she is even 
more amiable than charming. If, by her me- 
diation — ." — I have no favour to accept from 
Sir Archibald Gordon," said Norman, " and 
I beg that on this subject, you will now, and 
for ever spare me." — " No favour/' replied 
Drummond, " but justice, which, my young 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 1 L 

man, we must sometimes receive as a favour." 
" The affair will be settled by men of ho- 
nour," answered Norman, " and I do not de- 
spair of justice. But though life, or more, 
depended on Sir Archibald Gordon, I could 
accept no boon from him." — There was a 
proud resolution, indicated more by the man- 
ner of Norman than his words, which put an 
end to the conference. — " Then, we must do 
the best, and hope the best," said Drum- 
mond, taking leave. " I'll see you again in 
the evening. In the meantime, I shall send 
Leary with your books and things." 

u And now, nothing but Hugh was be- 
tween Norman and the gratification of his 
vehement curiosity, yet, in the presence of 
Hugh, he could not read the billet ; he there- 
fore entreated the toil-worn piper to lie down 
on the straw couch; and, to oblige him, Hugh 
consented.— " Now sleep Hugh," said he, bu- 
rying him under the straw. " God bless that 
kind hand," said the half- sobbing piper. 
"Yes, darling, I'll try since you bid me; 
though, God knows, sleep is far from me. , 
But I'll say my prayers, and that is always a 
great help to me when I fall off my sleep-" 

In such a situation, the shrewd Learj^ would 



112 CLAN-ALBIN, 

have been asleep in a moment, but poor 
Hugh had none of his cleverness. Norman 
drew the billet from that fluttering prison on 
which he had placed his hand twienty times, 
during the last ten minutes, as if fearful that 
some magical influence might snatch away 
his treasure. 

With fear and trembling, did he unfold 
the twisted note. It was written by Mary 
Fit zconnal ! — and this discovery, in displaying 
how unwarrantable was the hope by which he 
had been agitated, produced a feeling of mor- 
tification, as painful as the disappointment he 
had sustained. 

He laid this juvenile epistle on his knee, 
unable to examine its contents, till a faint 
revival of his former hope gave him courage 
to proceed. 

" I saw the soldier that knew my poor 
" mamma, who died, as he came up the ave- 
" nue," said the little writer, " and I ran to 
" meet him, and he told me you loved me 
" very much, and I am sure I love you very 
" much indeed, and so does my mother. But 
" you don't come to see us as you used to do 
" at the Druid's Isle, and Dunalbin, to dance 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 13 

" with me and my beautiful mother. She 
" was not well at the ball though ; and she 
" did not dance with any body, but cried 
" very much when she came to bed, with a 
" headache ; and my cheek was wet with her 
"tears, for I was not asleep, because I want- 
" ed to ask when we would go to see you. 
" She does not know herself ; but she kissed 
" me, and bade me go to sleep, but my heart 
"would not let me just then, it was so sorry ; 
" and I am sure you would be sorry too, to 
" see my beautiful mother crying, for I know 
"you are very good-natured. 

" Now you must excuse this bad letter, for 
" when I wrote you before, my mother always 
" gave me a beginning ; but to-day, she is 
" gone out with Lady Glanville. And you 
" must excuse me too, that I have no wafer, 
" for Lady Gordon's cro.:-s maid won't let me 
"have any, because, when I went to ask it 
"just now, I picked up a letter addressed to 
" my mother, on the floor of her Lady's dres- 
" sing-room, and it is your writing 1 know, for 
" we read the songs you translated for my 
" mother, very often indeed. I am sure, the 
" soldier will tell you, how the cross creature 
" bawled after me in the stairs, for he was 
L 2 



1 14 CLAN-ALBIN, 

* with Lady Gordon just then. But I held 
" it firm, let her beat or scratch me ever so 

u much, and ran to General , who came 

u up stairs, and he said I acted quite right, 
" and sealed up the letter with my own seal, 
" before Morrison's ugly eyes : and he will 
" keep it himself till my mother comes home, 
" for Morrison dares not scratch him. I have 
"no more to say now, but that I love you 
" very much indeed, and more than when I 
** began to write, and that you must come in 
u the afternoon to see us, and bring poor 
" Luath with you. 

" Your dear 

" Mary Fitzconnal." 

u The soldier has not come down yet, and 
" Morrison wants to see my letter, and to be 
" friends with me, but I won't though she call 
" me ever so -many '■ charming creatures,' and 
" ' cunning monkeys.' — I think you very 

* handsome indeed in your Highland sol- 
" dier's dress." 

The epistle of a lady of eight years seldom 
excited a sensation so powerful, or invited so 
many thick coming fancies, as did Mary Fitz- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 115 

connal's. But it would be superfluous to relate 
the variety of conjectures which Norman ra- 
pidly formed and dismissed, while he revolv- 
ed the perplexing and inexplicable circum- 
stances to which the little girl alluded. The 
only point on which his mind could rest with 
certainty was Monimia still feeling a feeble 
and ineffectual remorse, while, in the strength 
of ambition, she had resolved to conquer her 
own tenderness, and 

u To break the honest heart 
That wore her in its core*" 

The problem so difficult to Norman was 
nevertheless of very easy solution. Lady 
Gordon, on the day succeeding the review, 
had taken from her repositories the only let- 
ter which Norman had ever ventured to ad- 
dress to Monimia, that she might give it a se- 
cond perusal, and gain some insight into the 
character of the writer. When Leary was an- 
nounced, in her haste to conceal these inter- 
cepted letters, she had dropped this one, and 
Mary had found it. 

When Monimia returned from her long 
ride, General met her at the park-gate ; 



3 10 CLAN-ALBIJtf, 

and she alighted to walk home with him while 
Lady Glanville drove on. After congratulat- 
ing her on her recovery, he presented the 
sealed packet, and she turned it curiously 
round. — " What can this be ?" said she, smil- 
ing. " Were you a poet, I should for a mo- 
ment be happy in the idea that it was some 
tribute to my peerless eye. But it comes 
from you, and bears the impression of my be- 
loved country's charming emblem. Have I 
your permission r" He bowed, and she burst 
the seal. He sat down. at the foot of a tree, 
at a small distance from the bank where she 
seated herself; and for the next half-hour 
amused himself with sending a favourite dog 
on errands ; he at last threw the peeble the 
dog carried towards Monimia, by way of re- 
minding her that it was time to begone. She 
gave a faint scream ; and fancying himself 
called, he waiked up, and found her weeping 
in unrestrained agony over the letter he had 
given to her. Greatly shocked and grieved 
at a sight so unexpected, he was at a loss 
whether to walk on in affected ignorance of 
what he saw, or to follow the impulse of his 
heart, by taking her to his bosom, and sooth- 
ing her sorrows. Monimia determined for 



A NATIONAL TALE. 11? 

him. Hastily drying her eyes, she sighed, 
convulsively, as if to gather voice, and said, 
* { General ,will you oblige me by saying 

how you obtained this letter ?" — " Have I not 
mentioned that ?" said he, telling the parti- 
culars of Mary's battle with the waiting- 
maid. Monimia leaned heavily on his arm, 
and tears still trickled silently down her face. 
He gently pressed her trembling hand to his 
side, and while he hung over her in tender- 
ness, whispered, " My young friend will do 
me the justice to believe, that no one could 
be more reluctant to wound her delicacy, had 
I no hope of being useful to her. But I think 
I can be of some use. Do I guess aright in 
imagining that a criminal curiosity, or an un- 
fortunate accident, has betrayed to that pry- 
ing woman, Lady Gordon, and of course to 
the world, some tender secret which Monimia 
would conceal from even her most valued fe- 
male friend, — will you give me leave to speak 

to her ladyship?" The burning blushes 

which dried up the tear-drops on Monimia's 
cheeks, and the fluttering of her truant heart, 
confessed that the spirit, if not the letter of 
her secret, was discovered. 

" I have no secrets," cried she, with wo- 



118 CLANT-ALBIN, 

manish eagerness, placing the letter of Nor- 
man in the hand of the General. — " I blame 
nobody ; but the cruel detention of this let- 
ter, and perhaps of many others, made me 
believe my best and dearest friends guilty of 
an injustice that has caused me dreadful suf- 
fering. — It is from Gien-Albin ; that spot 
where the happiest days of my life were 
spent, — where I feared that I was for ever 
forgotten. Oh, how cruel and unjust they 
must have believed me, when I could treat 
such a letter with silent unconcern 1" 

Lady Gordon was at this moment seen in 
the same walk with Monimia. The General 
drew down her veil, and then said, " Had you 
not best go through the shrubbery into the 
house, while I meet Lady Gordon." — " You 
are ever kind and considerate," replied she, 
gliding away through an embowering alley. 

How happy was Monimia when the tumult 
of her feelings subsided, and left her time to 
reflect and to feel all her happiness. — " They 
love me still," thought she, weeping in ten- 
der joy to the thought, "and we shall still be 
happy ;" — and she regretted that, for a mo- 
ment, she had parted with the mournful let- 
ter which assured her that she was not for- 
gotten." 



A NATIONAL TALE, 11Q 

16 Selfish that I am," thought she, upbraid- 
ing her joy. — " But he, said jLady Augusta, 
was nozv quite well. And could he think that 
I had known her otherwise, regardless of her 
suffering, and of his young and noble spirit, 
struggling in her defence, and bending be- 
neath the crush of evils too terrible to be 
combated ?" 

Monimia rose from the bed on which she 
had thrown herself, and began to write to 
Norman. She knew not what to say j yet it 
seemed impossible to exist another hour un- 
der his displeasure : Yet did he seem dis- 
pleased with her ? Ah, no ! Monimia remem- 
bered his sorrowful glance of unutterable, 
unconquerable love. She pressed her hand 
against the throbbing heart, which seemed 
ready to burst from its prison. " He loves me 
still !" was the cherished idea of subdued ap- 
prehensive thought ; " and we shall all be 
happy I" 

Mary Fitzconnal had acuteness enough to 
perceive that oa this day she had performed 
a very meritorious deed t — when Monimia 
fondly kissed her, — praised her firm conduct, 
— and, dismissing her maid, permitted Mary 
the much-desired honour of assisting her to 



126 CLAN-ALBIN, 

dress for a great dinner, to which she had 
been already twice warned. 

In flying down stairs, fastening her brace- 
lets, she met General , who was about to 

enter the drawing-room. — " Oh, mamma, you 
are beautiful to-day," cried little Mary, look- 
ing down after her from the balustrade of the 
bed-chamber floor, " your eyes are like Nor- 
man's." 

The General held the letter of that Nor- 
man in his hand ; and Monimia, colouring in 
beautiful confusion, took that loved letter, 
while she called to Mary, " Ah, you little 
flatterer, I am beautiful, because you dressed 
me !" — " Aye, mamma, but I could not dress 

your eyes." General thought he had 

indeed never seen her so beautiful ; and, 
smiling on the lovely mistress, and the ad- 
miring maid, he was about to compliment the 
latter on her talents for embellishing beauty, 
when a footman threw open the door of the 
drawing-room. 

General was not skilled enough in the 

economy of a lady's dress to know that it 
contained no depository for letters ; and Mo- 
nimia foreseeing the ceremony of being hand- 
ed to the dining-parlour on this day of state, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 121 

approached a distant window, and insinuated 
her letter into the bosom of her dress. 

It required all the good-breeding of Moni* 
mia to behave with common politeness to the 
woman who had occasioned her so many 
hours of mistrust and misery, and her friends 
equal suffering ; and when the ladies with- 
drew, as the only method of controlling her 
feelings, she, unsolicited, seated herself at 
the pianoforte, and continued to play till the 
gentlemen came up stairs. 

At the request of Lady Gordon, Mary Fitz- 
connal was permitted to drink tea in the 
drawing-room ; for her Ladyship affected a 
violent fondness for Monimia's favourite, and 
had thus early volunteered her services in 
procuring her an establishment. The little girl 

found General seated by her whom she 

called mother, in a bow-window, in the end of 
the room, which had been struck out for the 
sake of a beautiful view. She playfully let 
down the curtain, saying, " You have a nice 
little drawing-room of your own; pray drink 
your tea here together. I will place my mo- 
ther's work-table, and be your attendant; 
O do!"—" Ask Lady Gianville's permis- 

VOL- III. M 



122 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sion," replied Monimia, smiling at this con- 
ceit; and permission was asked and obtained. 

A very lively dialogue immediately com- 
menced between those within and those with- 
out the curtain, but General ■ found 

time to whisper, " I have perused your letter, 
and can well understand the suffering you 
must have felt at the unaccountable delay of 
such a letter. I have a claim of my own on 
your correspondent; to-morrow morning, if 
you give me permission, I shall tell you 
more/' — Monimia bowed in silence. 

The Ladies Glanville and Gordon, on the 
motion of the latter, now seated themselves 
immediately without the window-curtain. 
The mind of Lady Gordon gave her no inti- 
mation of any attachment of the nature of 
that subsisting between Monimia and Gene- 
ral , and she began to feel some vague 

uneasiness at its progress. She, indeed, be- 
lieved, that the heart of Monimia was still in 
the possession of the } T oung soldier; but en- 
thusiastic admiration, combining with the 
sense of propriety, and the ambition of dis- 
tinction, might produce very wonderful things; 
and her Ladyship knew human nature too 
well to marvel at even greater changes 



A NATIONAL TALE. 123 

than those she anticipated being accomplish- 
ed by time, and female ambition, and wiles, 
and beauty. She had often seen (and who 
has not ?) the soft, weeping consoler, trans- 
formed into the smiling antidote of widowed 
grief; and what has been, may be. These 
apprehensions were greatly increased since 
the day of the review; for Monimia, indepen- 
dent in fortune and in action, had made no at- 
tempt to see or to hear from her lover. True, 
she had been greatly agitated and indisposed, 
but to-day she appeared brilliant in beauty 
and spirits; and, moreover, she had made a 
very eloquent eulogy on the generosity of a 
certain Highland laird to his swarming te- 
nantry. Now, this was exactly that kind of 
delicate and implied deference, the force of 
which Lady Gordon could well estimate; and 
she pondered all these things. Lady Gordon 
had seen young women of the highest rank, 
when an adequate motive was held out, de- 
scend from the eminence on which nature 
and society had placed them, not merely to 
admire, but to imitate the most disgusting 
peculiarities. She had seen them smoke to- 
bacco, and drink grog, and train puppies. In 
short, her Ladyship knew, that very young, 



124 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and what are esteemed very frivolous wo- 
men, often possess a flexibility or sagacity of 
mind, which can avail itself of the weaknes- 
ses and prejudices of others to accomplish a 
desired purpose, with a suppleness and dex- 
terity faintly understood by their lordly supe- 
riors; and she was quite sure that erery one, 
— and even the hgh-minded Monimia, — 
would readily employ these talents, whenever 
a motive powerful enough roused her facul- 
ties to action. 

Lady Gordon was also aware, that a nature 
so delicate in its tenderness as that of Moni- 
mia's friend would, till the last moment, re- 
volt at the mere imagination of any woman 
aspiring to a place in that sealed heart which 
was hallowed to the recollection of departed 
joys ; and on this belief she rested her plan of 
attack. 

" Now, Lady Glanville, what if I should 
treat you with a mighty discoveiy, as that 
convenient curtain spares Mrs Montague's 
blushes so nicely ? Nothing less than the Ge- 
neral kissing hands this morning in the her- 
ceau walk." 

" Your Ladyship may add, on the conclu- 
sion of nothing else than a treaty defensive" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 125 

replied Monimia from her sanctuary ; — " or, 
perhaps, offensive, should offensive measures 
be deemed the best means of self-defence. 
Are my tactics good, General ?" " Quite so." 
— There was something womanish in the 
tone of Monimia' s voice that alarmed Lady 
Gordon. — " Ah, General," cried she, " are you 
there? I move, that all parties come from behind 
their curtains, and answer for themselves." 

" Your Ladyship shall be obeyed," said 
Monimia, pulling up the curtain, "let the 
guilty tremble." 

The swell and fail of Monimia's bosom had 
by this time pushed Norman's epistle into 
view. This was a circumstance which the 
General durst not see; but the lynx-eye of 
Lady Gordon immediately darted upon the 
letter, and she as quickly recognised the 
hand-writing, though she had not the least 
suspicion that it could be the paper she fan- 
cied safe in her private repositories. Actu- 
ated by a variety of motives, she snatched 
the letter in affected sport, exclaiming, " Ah, 
here is a prize, Lady Glanville ; — the whole 
negociation, copied by some most confiden- 
tial secretary too, I see." " Lady Gordon, 
I entreat you," cried Monimia in great dis- 
M 2 



126 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tress ; but her Ladyship playfully, peremptorily 
held away the paper. — " Lady Glanville, shall 
we order it to be laid on the table, or refer it 
to a secret committee above, in case some- 
thing occur which, for the safety of the state, 
requires concealment. You know the safety 
of the state always requires, that the faux pas 
of the ministers should be concealed." 

" Oh, never mind, you know we are whigs; 
let us have it," replied Lady Glanville. 

" Lady Gordon, you will find nothing ori- 
ginal in that paper, I believe. For more 
sakes than mine, give it back," said Monimia 
with some severity. — Lady Gordon gave the 
letter a second glance, the paleness of guilt 
overspread her features. — " You could not 
believe me so ill-bred as to pry into your se- 
crets, Mrs Montague. Here, my dear, is your 
letter." 

" I am sorry to see your laudable curiosity 

so baulked, my good lady," said General . 

" I was in hopes of a wonderful discovery." 
" There is a point at which curiosity becomes 
quite unwarrantable," replied Lady Gordon, 
. — and Monimia gravely added, " There sure- 
ly is." 

In a few minutes Lady Gordon left the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 127 

company, and examined the desk which con- 
tained the Eleenalin correspondence under 
seven seals; but, when opened, the letter in 
question was indeed missing. Having inter- 
rogated her maid, who denied all knowledge 
of the fact, she paced the chamber in all the 
agonies of detected meanness, till joined by 
her nephew. It is the peculiar misfortune 
of the intriguing, that the unforeseen accident 
of a single minute may disconcert plans 
which years have been spent in inventing, 
forwarding, and maturing; and it was now the 
misfortune of Lady Gordon. Her nephew 
had taken too liberal an allowance of wine to 
be capable of either consoling or counselling; 
and her temper, though generally under the 
most well-bred discipline, was at this moment 
not proof against such a cause of irritation. 
She vented bitter and unqualified reproaches; 
and Sir Archibald made insolent, and even 
brutal replies. They parted in anger; and 
on this night, and in this mood, he met Dora 
Tracey and Norman. 

While Lady Gordon was actually shedding 
tears over her baffled plans, and the stinging 
ingratitude of that selfish being, for whom she 
had practised so much baseness, and endured 



128 CLAN-ALBIN, 

so much shame, Monimia was eloquently pour- 
ing forth her surcharged heart to Lady Au- 
gusta Macalbin.— *- u Ten days more," thought 
she, " and she who is all delicate kindness 
will make my vindication;" — and she com- 
mitted the incoherent note she had written to 
Norman to the flames — " I will not take my 
cause out of her hands," said she, " she will 
say more for me than I dare to say for my- 
self;" — and having again requested that Lady 
Augusta would not lose a moment in inform- 
ing all her friends of the true cause of her 
apparent neglect, she closed her voluminous 
epistle. Sweet on this night were the slum- 
bers of Monimia; for her dreams were of those 
she loved and trusted, and looked to for end- 
less happiness. 

At an early hour on the next day, Sir Archi- 
bald Gordon visited his aunt ; and, after a 
hurried apology for his late behaviour, with 
an air of savage triumph, announced the cap- 
tivity of the " Glen-Albin adventurer." — 
" This is beyond my hopes !" exclaimed Lady 
Gordon : But when she heard the story, even 
as told by Sir Archibald, it appeared in a 
very different light ; and, throwing aside all 
disguise, she conjured her nephew, as he va- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 12Q 

lued his last hope of Monimia, and all her 
desirable accompaniments, immediately to 
hush up the affair. 

" Mrs Montague will feel so grateful for 
3'our kindness to the young favourite of Lady 
Augusta," said she, indicating the turn dex- 
terity might give to this affair. — " 'Tis so 
sweet to oblige those we love. Let this be 
the moment then to bring every thing to a 
happy conclusion." 

It was the temper of Sir Archibald Gordon 
never to be in the wrong ; but he became 
fiercely and obstinately so, if any one pre- 
sumed to oppose his will ; and at this moment 
he would not have given up his desire of re- 
venge, though the hand and dowry of a prin- 
cess had been the reward of forbearance. 
Vain, therefore, were the pleadings, tears, 
and threats of Lady Gordon j and he was 
flinging off as much exasperated with her 
as with his captive, when Mary Fitzconnal 
tapped on the door, and delivered a note, 
written with a pencil. It ran as follows : — 
" Mrs Montague will thank Lady Gordon, to 
" order her maid to look out the other letters 
" from the same quarter as that which Miss 
" Fitzconnal picked up yesterday ; as they 



130 CLAN-ALBIN, 

u can now be of no use but to the person for 
" whom they were intended." 

In the momentary agony of complete dis- 
grace, the habitual address of Lady Gordon 
for a moment forsook her ; and she placed 
this note in the hand of Sir Archibald. They 
had never, in direct terms, spoken to each 
other of the letters which passed through Sir 
Archibald's hands; but it was perfectly un- 
derstood on all sides; though now scowling 
his eyes over the writing, he sullenly said, 
" What am I to understand from this note ? 
But I have no wish to participate in ladies' 
secrets." — He abruptly left her, mounted his 
horse, and returned to the camp. 

On this morning Lady Gordon might well 
have said, " Oh, misfortune, if thou comest 
alone, thou art welcome !" for her English 
letters announced a terrible domestic feud 
between her favourite niece, Belle, and the 
good-humoured coxcomb Mansel, to whom 
she had been a few months married. The 
aggrieved young lady complained loudly of 
silliness, impertinence, and stinginess ; and 
the father of the gentleman, (for he had fled 
himself,) of extravagance and caprice, and a 
temper, so provoking in its insolence, that no 



A NATIONAL TALE. 131 

ordinary mortal could endure its gusts and 
squalls. He ended, by entreating Lady Gor- 
don to return and cement the union she had 
formed. 

" Then for England," sighed Lady Gor- 
don," crushing the epistle of her dutiful niece 
in her hand. — " Ungrateful wretches ! And it 
is for beings so heartless I have suffered and 
still suffer." Her Ladyship forgot that her 
own honour and glory were her strongest mo- 
tives of action ; and while she wept the disap- 
pointment of her ambitious projects, she 
pleased herself with thinking that she be- 
wailed the ingratitude of her family. 

There was, however, no time to lose in 
fruitless lamentations. She gave her orders 
with precision and dispatch ; dried up a few 
womanish tears, — repaired her smiles, — and, 
blessing Mary Fitzconnal at leisure times, in 
a couple of hours was ready for her journey. 

" Equipped for travel ! Bless me !" cried 
Lady Glanville, when her guest entered the 
parlour, where she sat with Monimia and Ge- 
neral . 

" Yes ! I have just half a minute to thank 
your Ladyship for all your hospitality, and to 
beg the honour of your commands for Eng- 



132 CLAN-ALBIN, 

land, — and your's for Scotland, Mrs Monta- 
gue ;" — and she turned to Monimia, who, in 
delicate confusion, had turned away, — " and 
then off. I have an old relation at the point 
of death, who, for family reasons, requires 
my immediate presence. — A-propos, of old 
relations and great legacies : I have letters 
from my friend, Mrs Miles Montague, this 
morning. It seems past doubt now, that her 
queer lord is the lucky man, — heir to the 
whole Indian fortune. I do not condole with 
you, my dear ; for you know we always 
thought it was so." 

"Dear! and has Mrs Montague no claim 
to that fine fortune, after all ?" said Lady 
Glanville. 

" So it appears. Money is certainly the one 
thing very needful in this wicked and luxuri- 
ous age. Yet youth, beauty, talent, and op- 
portunity, are admirable substitutes. A kind 
of metallic tractors, that draw the gold of the 
old and loving into the pockets of the young 
and lovely." Lady Gordon glanced her sharp 
eye towards General ; but it sunk be- 
neath his penetrating and half-contemptuous 
look ; and she hastily added, " such charms 
and talents are unbounded fortune."—" Espe- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 133 

cially when graced by truth, candour, and 
innocence," added the General. — " O, if 
your well-known gallantry choose to throw 
those little items into the scale, who can ob- 
ject ? A-propos of gallantry" — Your Lady- 
ship is a-propos to every thing this morning," 
said the General, smiling. — " O ! but this 
is so very a-propos" replied her Ladyship, 
playing off his remark — " Your rural beau, 
Mac — Mac— Mac — Mac — , what is it, my 
dear ?" said she, turning quickly to Monimia. 
" Mac — any thing you please," said the Ge- 
neral, in pity to the confusion of Monimia — 
" You would not insinuate that Mrs Monta- 
gue is so very unfashionable as to remember 
the names of rustic beaux." 

" Well, your Glen-Albin Strephon, — that 
is a nom dn guerre for all pastoral swains, like 
Philopatria to newspaper writers, or Carril, or 
Ullin, or Anna Matilda, to magazine bards 
and bardesses, — has got himself into prison 
last night, according to the most approved 
practice of modern chivalry. I own poor Sir 
Archibald's share of the affair is somewhat 
mortifying. You know 'tis impossible for a 
new man to admire two cherry -cheeks, with- 
out fancying all the world as mad as himself. 

VOL. III. N 



134 CLAN-ALBIN, 

I understand it was a battle-royal ; a man 
fights like a lion, under the inspiring eye of 
his lady. Now, this furious Orlando, his 
dog, and damsel, — you know she might scream 
most animatingly, — were fearful odds against 
poor Sir Archibald solus. 'Tis a whimsical 
affair for grave discussion in a court-martial : 
I wish I were behind a curtain." 

No, never till this moment had Monimia 
felt any thing so dreadful as the pang of 
mingled jealousy, alarm, and humiliation, 
which now seized on her heart. Overcome 
with sudden faintness, she sat down, though 
all the party were standing, and Lady Gor- 
don, turning to her, exclaimed, " Bless me, 
Mrs Montague, I entreat a thousand par- 
dons! Could I have imagined — Lady Glan- 

ville — General ." In that short minute 

a thousand recollections darted through the 
mind of Monimia, restoring it to confidence, 
and composure, and dignity. She rose with 
sudden energy, and gently pushed back Lady 
Gordon, while the blended glow of indigna- 
tion and generosity suffused her cheek with 
a richer bloom than that which had forsaken 
it. — " Lady Gordon, I cannot, I will not af- 
fect to misunderstand you. I am not so des- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 135 

picable as to disclaim the acquaintance of 
Mr Macalbin, young man though he is, 
because you tell me he is plunged into mis- 
■ fortune ; for on his innocence I could pledge 
my life, my honour. I well believe, madam, 
that your nephew has gained some momen- 
tary triumph over the unfriended experience 
of Lady Augusta Macalbin's adopted son," 
(and her eyes were filled with tears,) — " But 
I am equally certain, that when this affair is 
impartially investigated, his share in it will 
confirm the opinion I have ever entertained 
of him and of Sir Archibald Gordon." 

" Bless me, my dear, you take it gravely ; 
and certainly give the most flattering of all 
proofs of admiration by imitating the con- 
duct of your — your friend, Mr Macalbin ; — 
I mean in attacking those who never medi- 
tated attack on you. Nor do I fancy your — 
your friend so very guilty as you seem to 
suppose I do. A person of my standing in 
this wicked world must just shrug her shoul- 
ders, — pray stop your ears. General, — at 
such every- day infidelities, — I mean slips, 
however heinous they may appear to a young 
lady in — her -friend I; and fancy them very ve- 
nial transgressions. For a young man, — a sol- 



130 GLEN-ALBIN, 

dier too, — being the slave of two black eyes, 
though stuck into the head of a Serjeant's 
daughter, — pour passer le terns, you know, — 
this unsanctified generation will find many 
excuses. I am not disposed to be severe on 
your friend ; though I own it was abundantly 
foolish and dangerous to insult and attack a 
man of Sir Archibald Gordon's rank in the 
army in consequence of this innocent pen- 
chant. 

" Lady Gordon reserves her severity for 
her own sex," said Monimia, with a look of 
unqualified disdain. 

* But is this gentleman attached to the en- 
campment, ladies?" inquired the General. — 
" Dear me, aye. — " What is he ? Is he a man 
of family?" said Lady Glanville. — " He can 
number Adam, and Cain, and, for aught I 
know, Melchisedec, among his grandfathers," 
replied Lady Gordon. — " I rather think this 
last is head of the family, and it is not a small 
one, nor of yesterday. It has lasted since 
frail damsels were first led astray by their 
wicked stars on the plains of Chaldee." 
" Lady Gordon, you must permit me to put 
my question a second time," interrupted Ge- 
neral , disgusted at this malicious ban- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 137 

ter. — " Then he is a volunteer in your regi- 
ment, one of those gentlemen cadets who 
live in splendour, God knows how." 

" Thank God, he is no mercenary soldier," 
thought Monimia, while the General hastily 
said, " And is my volunteer and Mr Macal- 
bin the same person ? I rejoice to hear it." 
" Then do rejoice, with exceeding great joy; 
for the Glenalbin Strephon, Mrs Montague's 
friend, and your volunteer, is one and the 
same multipotent person. This Mr Jones is 
exactly that Mr Jones; — the love-lorn Miss 
Sophy's Jones, is good Squire Allworthy's 
Jones, — the foundling, named after St. 
John."* 

General deigned not to notice this 

spiteful remark ; but the woman's soul of Mo- 
nimia, more easily moved to resentment, spoke 
its feelings by a downcast glance of wither- 
ing scorn. 

" I was honoured with a letter from Lady 
Augusta Macalbin on the subject of a young 
friend of her's some months back," said the 
General. — " I wrote to her immediately; but 

* In the Highlands, illegitimate male children are often 
named after St. John, and females after the Virgin Mary. 

N 2 



138 CLAN-ALBIN, 

I am afraid, like Lady Gordon's damsels of 
Chaldee, Highland letters are apt to go a- 
stray." — Lady Gordon did not blush; but she 
flushed through a triple coating of rouge, and 
advanced to the window. 

" The chaise is in waiting, and my false spi- 
rits are fled," said she. — " Why do I delay the 
fatal moment? Yet, how cruel is the parting 
of friends!" She embraced Lady Glanville ; 
she approached to embrace Monimia, who 
involuntarily drew back. — " I find," whisper- 
ed she, " that your suspicions of that vile 
creature Morrison are but too well founded. 
She is altogether the tool of Ursy. I have 
used my authority to make her give up your 
letters; — you will find them on your toilet. 
I am shocked to think I have had so base a 
creature about me. Now, since it must be 
so. farewell, my love. Were it possible to 
do without that sordid gold, it has ever been 
the first wish of my heart to call you by the 
dearest of names." — Monimia dropped a very 
formal curtsey, gravely replying, " My gra- 
titude shall ever keep pace with your Lady- 
ship's kindness." — " Charming girl !" cried 
Lady Gordon, saluting the cheek of Moni- 
mia. — " I shall give your love to that uxori- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 13§ 

ous Mansel. Belle's good father-in-law is 
quite eloquent by to-day's post on the old 
story of being about to be blessed with an 
heir to his fine estate. How admirably is it 
said, that we live a second time in those we 
love !" 

Her Ladyship took the arm of the General, 
and Lady Glanville attended her to the car- 
riage; and with bows, salutations of her own 
hand, and a well-managed white handker- 
chief, she wheeled off with tolerable eclat. — 
" Thank God I" said Monimia; and going to 
the window to be sure that Lady Gordon was 
indeed gone, she saw Captain Drummond 
ride up, and drew up the sash. He touched 
his hat, but refused the invitation Lady Glan- 
ville gave him to walk in, pleading business 
with the General as the reason of his visit to 
the Lodge. When he had conversed a few 
minutes with General , the latter order- 

ed his horse, and entered the house to bid the 
ladies good- morning. — " This is the intimate 
friend of my unknown volunteer, I find," 
said he, " which is another presumption in 
his favour; for Drummond, besides being my 
neighbour's son, is a good honest fellow. I 
am impatient to hear the whole story; for a 



140 CLAN-ALBIN, 

certain fair advocate has already raised a 
powerful interest in my breast." — " That inte- 
rest will be more powerful when you do hear 
the story," replied Monimia. " Lady Gordon 
made a serious charge, and you may think 
that I made a rash defence ; yet I place a 
whole life and an unblemished character 
against that charge; and if I am deceived, I 
shall be most painfully so." 

They parted; and after Lady Glanville had 
yawned, and declared Lady Gordon a very 
pleasant, well-bred woman, and wondered if 
she would be two miles off yet, and thought 
she would be stifled to death in that great 
stuffy cloth habit ; and fancied the Lodge 
would be intolerable without her,— Monimia 
escaped to her letters. 

They were few in number, but Monimia 
could not read them through. Her mind 
still wandered to Norman, and busied itself 
in imagining the cause of his imprisonment, 
and the distressing consequences which might 
result from the displeasure of a man high in 
power, and unrestrained by any feeling of 
justice. As indignation abated, her fears re- 
turned. She thought of the words of Lady 
Gordon, and her confidence was staggered,—* 



A NATIONAL TALE. 141 

and she dreaded, as an evil of the greatest 
magnitude, that, while Norman still retained 
the world's esteem, he might, to her more re- 
fined sense, have lost that bright bloom of 
youthful virtue, which, once effaced, can 
never be restored ; that he might have im- 
bibed the maxims of the world, and exchang- 
ed the pure morals of his solitude for the at- 
tributes of a soldier. 

The day passed away, and General 

did not return to the Lodge. He had not, 
indeed, promised to return j butMonimia had 
promised it to herself, and the disappoint- 
ment of a self-made promise is the heaviest 
of any. Twilight found her straining her 
eyes from the window of her dressing-room, 
now elated with hope, and now weeping like 
a true woman. 

" Mamma, mamma, here is Hugh Piper," 
cried Mary, dragging Hugh forward on the 
landing-place; " and he won't come in." — 
" Ah, I am so glad to see you," said Moni- 
mia, hastily opening her door; " Is Lady 
Augusta well?" — " Very well, considering, 
my lady," replied Hugh, taking off his bon- 
net, and scraping and looking round this fine 
apartment with a strange mixture of fear, an- 



142 CLAN-ALBIN, 

xiety, and gladness. — " You must excuse my 
own brogues, Madam, and the nails; for I 
would not be so ill-mannered, did not Miss 
Fitzconnal drag me on. Though far enough 
from them who could teach me better, I 
know what becomes a lady like yourself." 
" A lady like myself would have you to sit 
down, and tell me how you do," said Moni- 
mia, placing one chair, while Mary placed 
another. — " Och God himself bless you," re- 
plied Hugh, melted by unlooked-for kindness. 
— " Then, with your leave," and, taking off 
his brogues, he advanced a step.—" Though 
the poorest of my name, I know better tlfan 
sit down before a lady; but having this small 
parcel, commended to your Ladyship, with 
kindest love from ould Unah Macalbin of 
Bruachrua," — and he bowed, and delivered the 
pearls, — " I made bould, hearing from Mr 

Leary of *s regiment," (the Highland 

appellation of the General,) " that you was in 
the country, to follow on, give them to you 
with my own hand, though, perhaps, it was 
taking too much upon myself." — And, again 
bowing, Hugh would have withdrawn, but 
Mary hung round him; and, Monimia, in a 
voice that touched his affectionate heart, said, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 14S 

" Does Moome, then, still remember me with 
kindness." — " Is it herself? Ochand that she 
does, madam/' replied Hugh. " When I 
would be coming home from the New Inns 
every day in the winter, with no word at all, 
your Ladyship then in London, not having 
time to write, and poor Mr Buchanan in his 
grave, and Macpherson very hard on us, and 
the boy to part his country, which was worse 
nor all," — (Hugh brushed off an intrusive 
tear,) — " She would say, « A great lady like 
her, with your leave, will have much to think 
on and take up her hand with, in the throng 
companies, more nor the likes of us, God 
help us ;' or give herself a rock backwards and 
forwards this way, and sigh a deep sigh, and 
ay, ' But I have seen Macalbin's dochter have 
another day ;' for, poor ould cratur, you see, 
madam, she will always be thinking of the 
ould stile, and the like of that, which you 
know, madam, is nothing at all to any body 
but just to ourselfs." 

" And it is thus you madam and lady me, 
you unkind piper," said Monimia, in a tone 
of affectionate reproach ; " me who used to be 
your dear and your darling at every word." 

" Och that you was, that you was," sobbed 



144 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Hugh, now fairly dropping his brogues; — 
" My dear, and my darling, and my own la- 
dy's darling, and Norman's heart's darling, 
I'll swear for him, — when you would be at 
home in the countries, like a child of the fa- 
mily, with Mrs Major Hector Monro Craig- 
gillian, {Hugh loved to give his friends all 
their titles) and the young Macalbin, walking 
like the angel you was in the woods of Glen- 
Albin. These are the days it is my happiness 
to remember; but the Highlands and the 
Lowlands makes a great differ." — And Hugh 
sighed while he looked round on the finely 
decorated apartment, and at the richly attired 
young beauty who stood before him ; and that 
vision so light, so lovely, that it looked like 
some gay creature of the element, softly 
echoed the piper's sigh, and whispered, " a 
great difference indeed 1" 

At length Hugh was persuaded to sit down, 
and he soon recovered his usual cheerful fa- 
miliarity ; and entered into copious and, as 
some might have thought, very tedious ex- 
planations : and when he artlessly told the 
story of Phelim Bourke and Dora Tracey, 
and revealed the unspotted innocence and 
honour of him he now chose to call " the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 145 

young Macalbin," Monimia rose involun- 
tarily from her seat, her eyes sparkling with 
triumph and joy : " I could have sworn 
it," she exclaimed. — " Could you dear ? och, 
God bless you, and have you in his keeping ! 
So could Mr Leary, who, with your leave, is 
one of the best fellows ever God made. Says 
he, this very day it was when he came with 
the books, c Mr Macalbin, you shall never 
want a witness to do you sarvice while this 
tong-gue is in my hade.' 1 I was coming from the 
Lodge about that hour, it could not be much 
in or over,' says he, ' and I perfectly re- 
member like a drame, seeing you have a tussle 
with Gordon, and him swearing he would 
stick you, and Dora screaming, c Murder, 
murder, sorrow be on the villain, he has kilt 
Mr Macalbin with his sword.' He gave the 
sweetest of his smiles, — our own Norman did, 
darling, — for though pale enough, and in low 
order, with the long and the sore sickness, his 
own sweet smile is left him yet." — " And Mr 
Macalbin has been ill ?" said Monimia in her 
softest voice. — " Aye that he was, and never 
let us know of it, or we would have come to 
him on our hands and our knees, if we had 
begged the way. But says he, ' Friend 

VOL. III. o 



146 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Leary, let us hear no more of your drames, — 
that second-sight evidence won't do here. It 
does not become a manly fellow to drame ;" 
and with that, in comes Captain Allan Drum- 
mond Logievar, — there is another of the 
prime, — and who should be with him, but 

General 's ownsetf, — there, again, is the 

chief of chiefs S God bless him, above and 
beneath, and round about, and the very 
ground he stands on. And thinking it man- 
ners to come away, the gentleman convers- 
ing very throng, with your leave, I made Ser- 
jeant Macdonald drop few lines to Craig- 
gillian, (as true a heart, the Serjeant too, as 
ever warmed with * clan's blood,) and made 
off with myself with all speed, see your Lady- 
ship ; Mr Leary telling me it was here you was." 
" I am much obliged by your visit," said 
Monimia, " and when you go home, ,, ' — " Is 
it to the prison, darling r" said Hugh. — " Yes ! 
but I hope that a prison will not long be your 
home ; — tell Mr Macalbin, I was so unfortu- 
nate as never to receive the letter with which 
he favoured me, till yesterday, — that I have 

* Clanranai.d, chief of one tribe of Macdcnaldf, is called 
Clan in his own country. 



A NATIONAL TALE, 147 

written to our clear Lady Augusta, and that 
in a few days I hope to congratulate him on 
his freedom." 

" Och that I will, lady dear, and a joyful 
heart his will be to hear it ! So, with your leave, 
I will go to him, who is not so happy as me 
in seeing you, but does not deserve it the less. 
No, darling ! do not let the Gordons, man or 
woman of them, be setting you up against 
him, for every one else likes him, and loves 
him, and well they may, for a braver or a 
warmer heart was never shrouded in tartan, 
and that is a proud word. So don't let the 
black whigs be setting you up against him, — 
bad luck to them I" 

" Who talks of black whigs ?" cried Lord 
Glanville, suddenly opening the door. " Mo- 
nimia, are you too plotting against us ?" 

" This is a good friend of mine, who has 
brought me a message from Scotland," re- 
plied Monimia. " His ideas of whiggism dif- 
fer from yours, my Lord. 'Tis Sir Archibald 
Gordon he calls a whig." — Lord Glanville 
would have taken the trouble to inform Hugh 
of his mistake ; but bowing very low, he with- 
drew, attended by Mary, who enjoined him to 
come again to-morrow. 



148 CLAN-ALBIN 



a 



So I find Gordon lias blinked the ques- 
tion" said Lord Glanville, abruptly — for he 
never had time for delicate circumlocution 
in introducing an unpleasant subject, — " Just 
as I supposed. That wonderfully clever wo- 
man, his aunt, is off too, I'm told. Lady 
Glanville believes a long cock and bull story 
of dying relations, — I can see farther. But, 
courage my little Monimia ! though we are 
thrown out to-da} 7 , we may be in by to-mor- 
row's post. I rather think we shall. Don't 
despair, the royal countenance will shine on 
us yet, and lovers, like other good things, 
come over by dozens, — besides, that Gordon 
has very little to say in his own county, — 
and of talent nothing, — absolutely nothing." 
" Indeed I am not so vain, as to believe 
myself of so great political consequence," re- 
plied Monimia, laughing, " even although I 
have the honour of standing in so near a re- 
lation to your Lordship." — " Aye, no doubt 
it is for your own bright eyes to bring admir- 
ers to your feet, — not the influence of that 
insignificant nobody, Lord Glanville, — what 
man so desperate as to court an alliance with 
him ? And that person you lived with is your 
late husband's heir too, I'm told ;-— very extra- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 14Q 

ordinary that, — when I get my new hill thrown 
out, that must be looked into ; — Lady Glan- 
ville has been telling me, too, of a quarrel, 
and a volunteer, and I don't know all what ;— 
never fret about it, — I don't believe one word 
of it, — spite, — party-spite. I'm used to these 
things, — a side blow glancing on you, but, in 
reality, aimed at your alarming uncle. Thank 
heaven, he can bear all that with abundant 
philosophy. V 

Monimia again smiled at this absorbing 
vanity, and followed Lord Glanville to the 
drawing-room, where his lady was waiting their 
appearance to drink tea. 

Hugh's present was now exhibited, and 
Lady Glanville expressed an almost childish 
admiration at the size and lustre of some of 
the pearls. — " I would be happy to hear of a 
purchaser for them," said Monimia sighing, 
that she could not afford to keep them her- 
self; for, to her, they had a much higher 
value than mere ornaments. " The poor 
pearl-fisher cannot afford to lose his time, 
nor ought I to accept such presents from 
those kind-hearted beings, who consult their 
munificent disposition, and forget their stint- 
ed means." — Monimia would not have ven- 
O 2 



150 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tured to insult the national, and the hereditary- 
pride of Moome, or the piper, by repaying 
with money the heart-made offering of de- 
voted kindness ; — but she hoped to remunerate 
them, without offending their delicacy, and 
her eloquent eye reminded Lord Glanville of 
the money he had appropriated and thought- 
lessly squandered, — or, more properly, suf- 
fered to slip through his fingers he knew not 
how. 

" I take the hint, Monimia," said Lord 
Glanville. " But not a sous have I to bless 
myself with, — steeped in poverty to the very 
lips. — But, what is your friend fit for ? What 
can I do for him ? — An exciseman, — a tide- 
waiter, — put me in mind of him when the 
time comes. " — " There is no place in your 
Lordship's gift that will suit him, I'm afraid," 
replied Monimia. " No, — that's odd enough, 
— nothing but money will do, then, — Lady 
Glanville, are you en fonds ?" " Me ! dear 
me, no. I borrowed Mrs Montague's last five 
guineas, only last night, to make a shew of a 
card purse, — pray, speak to that man your 
steward, — him with the odious Irish name ; — 
he has plenty of our money, I dare say." 
Lord Glanville knew too well, that it was 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 5 1 

vain to seek what could not be obtained. — 
" This depreciated currency is utter ruin," said 
he. " It comes home to all of us, at length. 
— Well, well, ladies, we must see what our 
good friends the booksellers can do for you ; 
— no disgrace in a man living by his labour, 
especially intellectual labour. — Peter the 
Great earned his own shoes, — there is impe- 
rial example, — so I must go fag by the mid- 
night oil." — With a smile of complacence, 
Lord Glanville retired to finish his warning 
pamphlet on the wilful wretchedness in which 
the lower orders were involved, by their want 
of economy and foresight. 

" How ridiculous I" said Lady Glanville, 
" to speak of persons of our rank touching 
such money," — " I believe your Ladyship is 
in no great danger of being subjected to so 
great an indignity," said Monimia. — " I trust 
not. However, Til take all the pearls these 
persons have ; — it is always depreciated cur- 
rency with my Lord, but I always get money 
some way or other, when it comes to the push, 
so I never mind him." — Somewhat provoked 
at the vanity of the one, and the silliness of 
the other, Monimia retired without accom- 
plishing her design. 



152 CLAN-ALBIJN T , 

It was late before Hugh reached the prison 
and Norman, unacquainted with the visit he 
was making, became restless and alarmed at 
his protracted absence. — " Did you guess 
where I was," cried he, entering all flushed 
with joy and haste. "Drinking with Leary, 
I presume," replied Norman, gravely. — A 
tear of insulted affection started to the eye 
of the piper, as he indignantly threw down 
his bonnet. " Drinking I was, to be sure, 
one glass of good wine, and another, but there 
was persons nearer my own heart to-night 
than Mr Leary, kind as he has been to me 
and mine." — " What mean you, dear Hugh ?" 
said Norman, looking earnestly in his face. 
" Ah ! I know now where you have been. — 
and you have seen her." — " Och, is it dear 
Hugh, now," said Hugh, half tenderly, and 
half humourously. " I thought you knowed 
me better, than believe I would go a drinking 
with strangers, and yourself in this, though I 
have been a little merry, and well to live, 
few times too often, at a wedding or the like 
of that in the countries." — Norman interrupt- 
ed him with apologies, and to all, but the 
Gordons, Hugh was the most placable of 
human beings. — " Did I see her ? say you, — 



A NATIONAL TALE. 153 

yes, see her I did, sure enough, and out came 
the lovely hand, white and soft as the *can- 
nach-down ; no doubt, out of respect to those 
I come off. — My good piper, says she, — she 
called me her good piper, God bless her ! 
so you must wait of her the moment, — but, 
jewel, what said B to you, — the Gene- 
ral ?" — " Every thing kind and encouraging. 
He is the best, as he is the first of men, — 
but hasten dear Hugh, to tell me all." — " Long- 
life to him ! — well, I shall tell you, darling, 
beginning at the very first. When I left this 
with Mr Leary, who should we meet but Ser- 
jeant Macdonald, whom 1 knew at Loch-Broom, 
at the herring- fishing, and who should be with 
him, but a Macfarlane man, a misfortunate 
cratur, who saw all our clan on the Mohawks. 
So, poor as I was, I could not do less than 
treat him, get the good news, and after one 
pint another, you see'; — Inishone it was, which 
never will equal Fainitosh, in my own mind, 
while the world is a world, — the landlord 
laughing and joking all the while with Mr 

* Cotton-grass, whose silky, pendant tofts, afford many a 
beautiful simile to the Highland bard, and enliven many a 
dreary mile of moor. 



154 CLAN-ALBIN,^ 

Leary, and, as countrymen all speaking to- 
gether, and observing, bow much better our 
own country was nor the Lowlands, and" — 
" Well, hasten, — I can conceive all that," 
cried Norman. — " Can you, darling ? och, 
God bless you ! and it is yourself he has bles- 
sed with the true heart to your country, and 
the kind" — " But my Mon — Mrs Montague I" 
said the impatient Norman. — " Aye, she is 
the head of the chapter, as she well deserves. 
So you see, Finlay tould me how poor ould Hec- 
tor died, and how his dochter Mary is married 
the second time on Malcolm Roy. You remem- 
ber red Malcolm, dear, who gave you crow-ber- 
ries and cream, and made much of you at 
Portsnalung, when I took you see the sea ?" 
tc Yes ! yes !"— " Well, as I was telling you, 
Malcolm married Mary — as pretty a girl she 
was, in her own day, as very few, — and as 
clever : two slips off every day she sat on a 
wheel ; and one of the stoutest of her name. 
I have seen her lift the stirks pot off alone, 
full of potatoes, with these eyes, — and that is 
what no woman in the countries could do but 
herself and Miss Sibella Altlarish."— The 
patience of Norman was quite exhausted with 
the beauty and accomplishments of this lady, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 155 

and he again urged Hugh to go on. — " Yes,dear. 
So you see, Farquhar, — you remember Far- 
quhar the famous putter of the stone ; the only 
one ever came up with you, save Moome's Dalt, 
and he was of the ould style, — Farquhar said, 
he had oaths of Mary since she was a young 
girl, and he took it to heart and died, and di- 
vil the blow of a bag-pipe touid a Macalbin 
was gone to heaven, as Finlay tells me. And 
ould Ronald's wife went next.'* — " Poor Ron- 
ald ! has he lost his wife ?" said Norman, for 
a minute forgetting even Monimia. — " He 
has, dearest, — and though a little cross when 
he would come home from the fairs, well to 
live, she had not a bad heart. She was of our 
clan, by father's side and mother's side, for 
ten generations, and the best maker of blue 
cheeses in Glen-Albin, not excepting Moome 
herself, who alwa}*s made cheese for the fa- 
mily." 

After some farther conversation, Hugh once 
more resumed the thread of his narrative. — 
" Well, what would you of it, — I set off with 
Unah's message, wondering in my own heart 
what she would say, and thinking to face her, 
in a joking way, about the Gordons. But my 
heart fell when I came in sight of so fine a 



156 CLAN-ALBIN, 

white house; and I tried to make myself 
proud, remembering who I was come off, and 
the blood was in my veins, and saying, Nor- 
man will have his own luck ; I'm not afraid for 
Norman : As good fish in the loch as ever 
came out of it ; we have had dochters of Mac- 
donald of the Isles in our family. But when 
I did see her, lovely as the spirit of the hill, 
and kind and good as ever, Och not a word 
could I find ! but took off my bonnet, and 
gave Moome's respectful compliments, and 
bowed as Unah told me. Och, no fish in the 
loch like her then ! when I found she had 
still the same warm heart, as if bred and born 
among us, and her fine taste for the pipe-mu- 
sic, and remembered her dancing strathspeys 
with yourself in Eleenalin ; — to be sure, nei- 
ther Mrs Major Hector nor myself, though I 
was thought a namely dancer in my own day, 
could ever compare with her. Long life to 
her ! How my own eyes would be reeling in 
my head, only to be looking at her, when I 
would give a loud shout, like ould Njel 

Gow, to make you lively — " " Well, but, 

Hugh," said Norman, gently^" be brief j tell 
me what she did say." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 157 

" Yes, dear," replied the Piper, nodding 
his head, but still going on with the history 
of his own feelings. 

" And when I saw the tears in her beautiful 
eyes, as I tould of you parting your country, — 
shining like the star of night through the soft 
mists of Lena, (as our songs say, but as I 
can't in the English,) — my own heart could not 
stand that, and I looked down respectful ; 
for a lady like her is not like Mrs Major Hec- 
tor, or yourself, whom I was always used to 
since you were childer." 

After much circumlocution, Norman heard 
the bliss-giving message of his Monimia. 
In the course of the day he had learned from 
the conversation of Captain Drummond, that 
the report of her marriage was entirely de- 
void of truth ; and now that thought was rap- 
ture ; — his musings may be better conceived 
than depicted. 

The two friends stretched themselves to- 
gether, undressed as they were, on the straw- 
couch of Phelim Bourke. Norman breathed 
a prayer, too spiritual for language ; and 
Hugh, mingling the tribute of devoted thank- 
fulness with the customary night-spell of 

VOL. III. p 



158 CLAN-ALBiN> 

harmless superstition, sunk into the light re- 
pose of innocence. But even his laudable 
precaution could not deliver his spell-bound 
companion from the ( tempters of the night ;' 
yet bright and fair were the visions that 
haunted his fancy, and entranced his soul in 
the joys of a fairy paradise.' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 159 



CHAP. $£XV. 



Irft your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial ; 
wherein if I be foil'd, there is but one shamed that was 
never gracious ; if kill'd, but one dead that is willing to be 
so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none to la- 
ment me ; the world no injury, for in it I have nothing ; 
only in the world I rill up a place, which may be better 
supplied when I have made it empty.— Shakespeare. 

* A MAN may subdue his resentments to his 
interest; — it is, on many occasions, too mucb 
for female virtue," thought Lady Gordon, 
flinging herself back in the carriage as she 
wheeled through the gate of Glanville-Lodge. 
" It had been better for me to employ these 
last moments for that madman, if it be still 
possible to save him from disgrace, though 
not from poverty. Curse of my life as he is, 
what else have I left worth caring for,-— with- 
out affection, principle, or gratitude, he still 
is all I have, — the head of the family of Gor- 



ICO CLAN-ALB IN, 

don." — To repair an error into which she was 
seldom betrayed, Lady Gordon wrote to Ge- 
neral , from Kilkenny, requesting him, as 

a peculiar favour, t& use alt his influence in 
hushing the affair between Sir Archibald and 
the relation of Lady Augusta Macalbin. — " I 
believe," said she, " Sir Archibald was some- 
what flushed with wine ; and, for the sake of 
my venerable neighbour, (and entre nous of 
a younger and lovelier lady,) I should be sor- 
ry ihat this young man marked his entrance 
on public life by the disgraceful eclat of a 
brawl with his superior." 

General was perfectly aware of the 

motive of this disinterested kindness, and he 
treated it with the indulgence family attach- 
ments always deserve ; though a mind like 
his could not easily pardon such means, 
though employed to effect a very pardonable 
purpose. 

He had now seen this young soldier ; he 
had also heard him spoken of with approba- 
tion and kindness by the most stern of all 
disciplinarians, Colonel Grant, — with all the 
warmth of youthful friendship and national 
partiality by Captain Drummond, — and by 
Monimia with the fearless confidence of kin- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 6 1 

dred excellence. But General — — was slow 
in forming important opinions : — he visited the 
prison a second time ; he found the soldiers 
assembled round the door in earnest respect- 
ful attachment; yet the calm, reserved, but 
affectionate manners of Norman evinced none 
of the mean arts of vulgar popularity : — from 
Drummond he learned what the young sol- 
dier had done with and for his comrades ; 
from himself the history of the late dispute 
with Gordon ; and in the clear, manly, and 
dignified statement of his wrongs, just to 
himself and scrupulously honourable to his 

enemy, General perceived the most 

unequivocal indication of that elevated and 
generous mind, that temperate and gentle- 
man-like spirit, which touched his own soul 
with the sympathy of brotherhood. And when 
he surveyed the fine and graceful figure, and 
animated countenance of his volunteer, and, 
on the slightest mention of Monimia's name, 
heard his low sigh, and perceived the bright- 
ness of valour subdued in his intelligent eyes 
by the softness of love, he felt how very na- 
tural it might be for these young persons, 
when thrown together for weeks and months 
in the bosom of romantic solitude, to imbibe 
£ 2 



162 CLAN-ALBIN, 

an affection too powerful for the controul of 
that chilling prudence which seemed to de- 
mand its relinquishment. Many motives con- 
curred to make him desirous of promoting 
the professional interests of Macalbin ; but 
chiefly, he was friendless, and he appeared de- 
serving of friends. 

After mentioning the circumstance of the 
miscarried letter, which he did without any 
comment whatever, and the happiness he 
would feel in seconding the wishes of Lady 
Augusta Macalbin, the General expressed a 
very brief but flattering assurance of per- 
sonal regard. — " But we must have you out of 
confinement in the first place," added he^ 
" and that right speedily and honourably. It 
is now too late for compromise ; since you 
were publicly sent to prison, you must be li- 
berated as publicly." — Words had he found 
them, would have been inadequate to the ex- 
pression of Norman's gratitude. He bowed 
in silence. 

An early day was accordingly appointed 
for the trial ; of which Monimia was apprised 
by the Piper, and indirectly by the General, 
who cheered her hopes with hints of honour- 
able acquittal. 



A NATIONAL TALE. l03 

In the mean time, the other friends of Mac- 
albin were incessantly employed in his be- 
half. In those blissful days, when the simpli- 
city of innocence unites all ranks in the cor- 
dial enjoyment of the harmless pleasures 
which are the spontaneous gift of nature to 
her common family, Dora Tracey was the 
favourite playmate of her foster-sister Miss 
Grant ; and Captain Drummond fondly re- 
collected the happy parties he had formed 
with these little girls, when he was still a boy- 
officer, and when they, following the vicissi- 
tudes of a soldier's fortune, sported away the 
last years of childhood at a remote station on 
the Lakes of Canada. Dora was an important 
link in the chain of association, which first 
drew, and now bound his roving heart to his 
fair cousin ; and the lovers were the friends 
of Dora as well as the zealous friends of Mac- 
albin. Nor did Colonel Grant shrink from 
hailing old Tracey, "Friend and fellow-sol- 
dier." — Often side by side had they poured 
the "resistless roar" of Caledonia's clans on the 
embattled hosts of her foes. They returned to 
Europe, two among ten individuals, the vete- 
ran wreck of a gallant corps, — the leaven, 
that leavened the whole recruited strength of 
the regiment. 



1 64 CIAN-ALBIN, 

When the day dawned which was in some 
measure to stamp the fate of Macalbin, the 
anxiety of Monimia became so intense, that, 
under the pretext of returning a visit she had 
received from Miss Grant, she drove to the 
neighbouring town. — " I shall know the re- 
sult^ at least two hours sooner," thought she ; 
and the idea afforded momentary relief. On 
entering Miss Grant's drawing-room, she 
found the Colonel and his nephew, and two 
other persons, whomrshe understood to be 
Tracey and his daughter. The latter imme- 
diately withdrew in tears, but the veteran sol- 
dier stood firm at his post. 

" You must pardon this formidable array," 
said Miss Grant. — " I have been trying a very 
interesting case^ which comes before my fa- 
ther to-day, and my foster-sister and Tracey 
have been assisting me." 

" I hope you have settled it to your own sa- 
tisfaction," replied Monimia, with as much 
calmness of manner as she could assume. — 
" And to the satisfaction of justice, and the 
triumph of innocence," replied Miss Grant. 
" For I honourably acquitted the prisoner, 
and in open court returned him thanks for 
his manly conduct ; and let me see who will 



A NATIONAL TALE. l65 

be daring enough to reverse my solemn deci- 
sion." — With a playful affectation of judge- 
like sternness, she fixed her eye on her pro- 
voking father, who, in spite of all solicitations, 
had kept his own opinions in the most per- 
plexing obscurity. 

The Colonel paid no attention to the silent 
tears of Dora, and very little to the entreaties 
of his daughter; but when old Tracey march- 
ed statelily to the door, in a kind of slow time, 
sternly saying, " The decision of this day 
will show whether or not my blood has been 
well shed," he replied abruptly, " Tracey, 
you might know me better. I will do justice. 
Would you have me sally out at the head of 
Dora, Pat Leary, and the redoubtable piper, 
to burst the fetters of your hero? This is 
what my heroine would have." 

Tracey bowed with a look of triumph, and 
marched away. — " Nobody thinks of hcroin- 
ism" said Miss Grant ; " but I did believe that 
the defender of a brave old soldier's daugh- 
ter would never have wanted a champion a- 
mong soldiers." — " Nor will he, I tell you," 
cried the Colonel, teased out of a definite re- 
ply. — " There spoke my own dear papa/ 1 
cried Mary, kissing her father's hand, " and 



166 CLAN-ALBIN, 

I thank you not only for myself but for Do- 
ra, Drummond, Macalbin, and my whole 
sex." — " Truly I never saw you more like 
your sex," replied the Colonel drily. 

" Because you never saw her so generous, 
so kind, so noble," said Drummond, kissing 
Mary's hand in his turn, and thinking her plain 
but expressive countenance, while thus em- 
bellished by the smile and the blush of affec- 
tion gratified by his praise, and the pleading 
tear of humanity, much more delightful as a 
woman's gentle, domestic face, than that of 
any mere beauty he had ever seen. He 
looked as if he longed to tell her so. 

"Damned nonsense!" muttered Colonel 
Grant, secretly pleased with his daughter's 
triumph; for he often suspected Druoimond's 
casual deviations at least from the fidelity of 
admiration. — " Will you come away to 
court ?" 

Captain Drummond offered some apology 
to Mrs Montague, before he followed his tes- 
ty relative; and, in a fluttering tone, she en- 
quired, if he was also to be on the trial? 

" No, madam," replied he, " I have only 
the honour to be Miss Grant's most faithful 
reporter ; — that is, if she hire me well." 



A NATIONAL TALE. I67 

" And will the honour and glory not be re- 
ward enough?" returned Monimia, smiling; 
" particularly as you will oblige me at the 
same time; for, if this trial is soon concluded, 
that is, if it be not very long, I should like 
to hear Miss Grant's judgment affirmed; for 
I am convinced it must be a correct one." 

" No more, I beg, fair ladies, lest I change 
my sword for a penknife, and hang an ink- 
horn to my button for life." — He flew after 
his uncle. 

The young ladies were now left alone, and^ 
for the next three hours, Monimia listened 
with what composure she could to the details 
of Miss Grant. It is so sweet to hear the 
praises of those we dearly and secretly love 
from the lips of the discerning and candid; 
it conveys a sanction of our own judgment so 
flattering and so welcome : but how much 
more delightful to reflect, that this one so ad- 
mired and so admirable is mine! — and mine 
alone by the delicate and tender appropria- 
tion of exclusive love. This was, however, an 
embarrassing topic. Monimia at last took 
shelter behind the books which lay scattered 
about, and then entrenched herself beside 
the piano-forte, glad to exchange an axnious 



168 CLAN-ALBIN, 

fluttering pleasure for apparent quiet and 
freedom. 

As the day wore on, even this quiet desert- 
ed her. She fancied the harsh discordant 
music she now made, might somewhat resem- 
ble that of Madame Roland on the night 
which preceded her murder. At last a loud, 
an electrifying shout, was heard from the 
camp; and Miss Grant, springing to the win- 
dow, exclaimed, " Hark ! Macalbin is acquit- 
ted; that is the joyful shout of the soldiers. 
You must pardon my anxiety. This young 
soldier is a countryman, and a great favour- 
ite in our family." — Monimia made a graci- 
ous signal with her hand; she smiled, but 
voice was denied her. It seemed as if her 
heart died away, to leap on the instant into 
more ardent life. She rose to hide in the 
carriage that unnerving agitation which she 
could no longer controul. 

Fortunately Miss Grant was too much en- 
gaged to perceive her confusion; but she op- 
posed her sudden departure. — " You must 
not be so cruel as to rob poor Drummond of 
his reward, said she. — " Here he comes run- 
ning, splashed to the very top of the feather." 

" Stewed in haste," and half-covered with 



A NATIONAL TALE. l6Q 

mud, Drummond rushed in, caught his cousin 
in his arms, and exclaimed, " Acquitted! 
most honourably acquitted !" 

"I rejoice to hear it! But, heavens and 
earth ! keep off with those boots, — my unfor- 
tunate gown." She shook her hand in good- 
humoured pity over her stained robe. — 
" Beautiful are the feet of him who bringeth 
glad tidings, Mary. 1 thought you knew 
your Bible better. Never mind gowns, but 
my reward ; for the prisoner and the whole 
court are adjourning hither, and I should be 
sorry if the publicity of my good fortune 
made them hang themselves after so good a 
day's work." — A playful argument now arose 
between the cousins, Miss Grant asserting 
they were informed of the issue of the trial 
by the shouts of the soldiers; and in its pro- 
gress Monimia rallied her spirits. She gave 
Drummond her hand, and Miss Grant also 
extended the tip of her little finger; and ha- 
ving gallantly kissed both hands of both la- 
dies, he placed Monimia in the carriage. As 
she drove out by one end of the principal 
street, a blaze of scarlet and gold, and a 
grove of white plumes, were seen to advance 
from the other. 

VOL. III. a 



170 CLAN-ALBItf, 

Ah, he is happy to-day," thought she, " ad- 
mired, triumphant ; and I can share his tri- 
umph, and feel his happiness, though he does 
not even think of me." — She now gave an al- 
most unrestrained indulgence to her agitated 
feelings; and the violent re-action of her spi- 
rits soon subsided into the placid flow of gen- 
tler hope. 

General had made Hugh the bearer 

of a card to Monimia, in which he indirectly 
intimated the acquittal of Macalbin ; and the 
harbinger of good tidings, outstripping the 
speed of the carriage, was already waiting her 
arrival at the Lodge. He was to take back a 
book; and Monimia ordered him to follow 
her up stairs till she wrote a note to accom- 
pany the volume, 

Hugh, too joyful to be so reverential in his 
respect as he had been on his late visit, began 
unasked, but not unwelcomed, to recount the 
particulars of the trial. 

" And, perhaps, lady dear, you did not 

hear yet what B said. These ears heard 

him : to him of Castlebane it was he spoke 
at the tent- door. — ' You demand justice,' 
says he, * and you shall obtain it. But, re- 
member, that even-handed justice knows of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 ? 1 

no concealments, no predilections. Her pur- 
est administration is as much the right of the 
private soldier as of the distinguished qffishcr. 
I will confess that I never was more inclined 
to support its claims with all my heart, and 
strength, and mind, in defiance of infamous 
privilege, or shameless prerogative.' 

" * Och,' says the black mongrel, — the Gor- 
don,-—' I did not expect to hear General — — 
avow sentiments which would tend to the 
utter subversion of all those excellent max- 
ims of expediency, which custom and ne- 
cessity have long sanctioned and embodied, 
as a practical supplement to military regu- 
lation. 

" ' You be cursed !' says the General, — No, 
he did not say that either, but he looked it, 
to my own heart's feeling, his eye flashing 
this way? — (Monimia laughed in spite of 
herself at the theatrical attitude of the ani- 
mated speaker.) — 'You may think as you 
see fit,' said he. * The subordination esta- 
blished in my regiment rests on no capricious 
violation of personal rights; but I have yet to 
learn, that it has been found inefficient for 
its important purposes. You will also recol- 
lect,' says he again (long life to him for 



1 12 CLAN-ALBIN, 

that!) that this young man is no mercenary 
who has bartered away his life with a recruit- 
ing serjeant, — and I have every respect for the 
character of the meanest soldier, — but a man 
who, in enrolling himself in our ranks, follows 
the ennobling impulse of the most heroic 
nature ; — a freeman, devoting his life, and 
strength, and faculties, to the preservation of 
the freedom he values. By heaven !' says 
he,— that was his oath ; and och, darling, you 
never saw him look more like his father's son 
than at that blessed minute ; high, and proud, 
and chieftain-like ; this way, — ' By heaven, 
I feel more invincible in the possession of 
one soldier of this stamp, than if I numbered 

a thousand 's armed in proof.' — There 

was a word after thousand I did not know, 
but I suppose it meant the Gordons ; and with 
that he waiked into the court quite lofty ; the 
Gordon slounging after him, conjured like a 
beaten dog, as he is." 

" You are absolutely dramatic to- day," said 
Monimia, pleased and greatly amused by the 
Piper's singular exhibition. 

" No, Lady," said Hugh, reddening, and 
speaking in a quite different tone ; " I tasted 
nothing this day stronger than the pure joy. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 173 

Whatever I may be myself, I could not dis- 
grace my clan, and those I come off, among 
strangers. I may have taken too much upon 
myself with a lady like you, but I am not in- 
toxicated."— He bowed, and moved away. 

Monimia, much affected at the pain she 
caused to the pride and the kindness of the 
Piper, eagerly explained the meaning of the 
word she had used. It was a word Hugh had 
never heard in Eleenalin. He courteously 
accepted her explanation, apologising for his 
own ignorance of the Saxon tongue, and 
again assuring her, that whatever he might be 
as an individual, the recollection of those " he 
came off" would forever prove the safe-guard 
of conduct. 

" Your recollectiors are most admirable^ 
most elevating," replied Monimia j " they 
have power to render the humblest man a 
very noble creature : High-minded, self-de- 
nied, unbending, and honourable. Cherish 
these recollections, — they foster the loftiest 
virtues, or almost supply their place, — never 
forget " those you are come off." 

"That is all we have to be proud of now-a- 
days, Lady, and, to be sure, we may some- 
Q 2 



1 74 CLAN-ALBIN, 

times take a little too much upon ourselves 
thinking of that." 

" Well, tell me the end of your story now, 
or I shall fancy you are offended with me." 

" Offended with you, darling ! how could 
that be ?— but I shall tell you. The General 
came out of the court, when it was over, sur- 
rounded by all the qffishers, and payed the 
young Macalbin the kindest of compliments 
in the hearing of all, and him looking down, 
with his own sweet look, as you have seen him 
often and often ; and pressing my own hand 
quickly in passing, and saying, in the Gaelic, 
" Dear uncle Hugh" in a low voice ; for the 
gentlemen present made him alter his man- 
ner, you know, Lady, but not his heart. No, 
that would be the same were he King George 
on his throne, or, what is more, Macalbin in 
his castle. — But sure, Lady, my ill-manners 
keeps you from dinner." 

This certainly was true. Monimia drew 
forth one of her last guineas. — " You are 
friends with me, now, Piper," said she. 

" Och, darling, you shame me ; how can 
you doubt it ?"— " Then, < by the same token? 
you will accept of this bit of gold, and in this 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1?5 

jubilee night pledge Mary's friend, Leary, to 
the health of your Lady." 

Hugh knew not how to refuse. He bowed, 
and took the guinea ; he bowed still lower, 
and retired ; while Monimia graciously waved 
her white hand, and kindly smiled on him. 



1 76 CLAX-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XXXVI. 



If heaven one draught of heavenly pleasure spare, 
One cordial in this melancholy vale, 
'Tis when a youthful, loving, modest pair, 
In other's arms breathe out the tender tale, 
Beneath the milk-white thorn that scents the evening gale. 

Burns. 

IVlONiMlA hastily performed the duties of 
her toilet ; and, after a tedious dinner, found 
means to escape to the luxury of undis- 
turbed reflection in a ramble over the park. 
Glanville- Lodge stood at the head of a small 
bay, on a gently swelling lawn of close, short, 
elastic turf, green as the sweetest pastures 
of green Ireland, and broken and feathered 
here and there by a single magnificent plane 
tree, or an irregular remaining clump of 
the ancient woods, which still rose in amphi- 
theatre behind the mansion, and stretched 
out around it, following the graceful curve 
of the bay. The horns of this sweeping 



A NATIONAL TALE. 177 

crescent were composed of steep, shrubby 
cliffs of red granite, and on one of them stood 
a ruined pleasure-house, which was the fa- 
vourite resort of Monimia. This neglected 
building, resembling in structure an ancient 
alarm-tower, was now muffled by a fantastic 
embroidery of ivy and briony, tall nightshade 
and clematis clinging to the shattered walls, 
and darkening the long, narrow casements. 
An old domestic informed Monimia that this 
deserted spot had been her father's favourite 
haunt; and that many of its sylvan decora- 
tions were the delightful employment of his 
boyhood. From some letters in her posses- 
sion, she knew that here he had received the 
vows of her hard-fated mother, at that time a 
visitor in the family of Glanville. Monimia 
loved the steep unfrequented path which led 
to the tower, winding among the woods, 
shaded and soothing. It washer chosen walk 
at contemplative twilight hour. When she 
had reached the summit she could see the 

spires of , and the snowy tents of the 

peninsulated camp, tinted by the long level 
beams of sun-set, and enzoned by the gleam- 
ing ocean ; and in the distance the soft out- 
line of the hills of Shehy, fading into vapoury 



178 CLAN-ALBIN, 

blue. But on this evening she loved bet- 
ter to sit in the dim religious light of the 
watch-tower, than to gaze on the extended 
landscape. She loved to listen to the mono- 
tonous murmur of the waters dashing on the 
cliffs, soothing or melancholy, according to 
the prevailing mood of fancy ; or to the cawing 
of the rooks, which sailed by in long trains, 
seeking their airy hammocks in the woods 
below ; and, with listless effort, to watch the 
flitting sail of the homeward skiff, catching 
the sun's last beam as it shot across the bay, 
and the white £ocl:s of ocean, now wheel- 
ing overhead in graceful involution, and now 
plunging downward, and, in all the luxury of 
undulating motion, vising and falling, as they 
floated on the swell of the coming wave. 

After the brilliant dies of the western clouds 
were fading into sober grey, Llonimia still 
sat, wrapped in tender and indulged reverie, 
when a quick, elastic step, which the fallen 
leaves had deafened till it was by her side, 
made her start into recollection and alarm. 

" Am I at last so happy I" cried Norman, 
bis expressive features animated by every 
varying emotion of wild joy and thrilling ten- 
derness. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 7Q 

" Mr Macalbin ! is it indeed you ? — I am 
very glad, — " voice failed, but Norman, trem- 
blingly, clasped the trembling hand held out 
in welcome ; and silence, more eloquent than 
the glowing language of the highest poetry, 
finished the sentence. 

Monimia first recovered self-possession ; 
and having also recovered her hand, she re- 
peated the usual formal inquiries and hopes. 
Struggling to subject his surprised and tu- 
multuous feelings to decorous reserve, Mac- 
albin answered with equal formality j and 
these two young persons, — agitated by those 
powerful emotions, which unlock the richest 
stores of the heart, the understanding, and 
the fancy, — which can exalt ignorance to elo- 
quence, and genius to sublimity, — continued 
an awkward and desultory conversation, in- 
terrupted by frequent silence and involunta- 
ry absence of mind. Monimia at length en- 
quired how he had come hither, glad of so 
good a topic for a conversation she could nei- 
ther find courage to improve nor terminate. 

" I was admiring a fine effect of sun-set on 
this tower from the other side of the bay," 
said he, " without knowing * whom that even- 
ing sun was setting on ,-' and finding a small 



180 CLAN-ALBIN, 

skiff by yon cabin, I sbot over to gratify my 
curiosity by a nearer inspection of what ap- 
peared so picturesque from a distance." 

" Then I must not indulge the vanity of 
attributing any part of this visit to myself," 
said Monimia sportively, " this is mortifying 
enough." 

" If I durst indulge the happiness of be- 
lieving this visit in any degree welcome to 
you ?" replied Norman, while his breath came 
quick, and he hung on her looks for the con- 
firmation of happiness. — " The sight of any 
friend of Lady Augusta Macalbin's must al- 
ways be acceptable to me," said Monimia, 
resuming her former common-place serious- 
ness. Norman bowed and sighed. The na- 
tural diffidence of genuine affection, ever 
ready to exalt its object and humble its pos- 
sessor, kept him silent. — L* Have you heard 
from her of late r" enquired Monimia. — " Not 
very recently," was the reply ; and another 
dangerous silence followed. Norman made 
some observations on the beauty and softness 
of the evening, which had succeeded a grey 
cloudy day. — " 'Tis like an Eleenalin even- 
ing," cried Monimia, catching with vivacity 
at this new theme of a discourse to which she 



A NATIONAL TALE. 181 

seemed spell-bound.—" I could fancy that 
gleaming bay with its little wooded promon- 
tories your Lochuan, with its fairy islets, 
sleeping in the glowing twilight of Scotland." — 
" My Lochuan / — Ah, do you then still re- 
member those happy evenings," said Norman, 
— a tender hope contending on his face with 
the glow of recollection. — ic Would you wish 
me to forget them r" said Monimia, raising 
her soft eyes for a moment to his face, then 
dropping them in tender confusion, and the 
next instant blushing at her own folly. — 
" God forbid that you should forget them," 
said Norman, with deep earnestness, — and 
involuntarily adopting the idiom of his coun. 
try, he added, " It is my happiness to think 
that you have not quite forgotten Eleenalin ; 
for ab, you cannot guess how exquisitely mi- 
serable another belief has made me. But 
why obtrude my recollected anguish on your" 

Monimia, with feminine quickness, affect- 
ed to give another turn to his meaning ; 
shrinking with woman's instinctive alarm from 
the dreaded avowal of that affection it was 
her happiness to have inspired. 

" If you believed me so unjust, cruel, and 
ungrateful, as to hear with unconcern of the 

VOL. III. R 



182 CLAN-ALBIN, 

severe distresses of Lady Augusta, you al- 
most deserve to think so still," said she. 

" No, I never did believe you indifferent to 
the subject of the only letter I ever presumed 
to address to you, but I greatly feared " 

" I am glad to learn that I never entirely 
forfeited your good opinion," said Monimia, 
gaily interrupting him. " This is truly gal- 
lant. Much anxiety and distress have arisen 
to me from the strange interruption of my 
correspondence with Lady Augusta; but that 
is past. I am restored to her esteem and con- 
fidence, and to happiness as their conse- 
quence." 

" Long, very long, may it abide with you," 
sighed Macalbin, resolutely imposing on his 
impetuous feelings the controul which her 
momentary softness had nearly betrayed. A 
low, inbreathed sigh, expired on the lip of 
Monimia ; and she wished, while she saw his 
desponding look, that she had not so abrupt- 
ly checked the flow of confidence. 

They had now conversed for nearly a half 
hour ; but still Monimia lingered. At last she 
found courage to congratulate her companion 
on the event of the day, a day, which she 
pronounced " so honourable to him." He 



A NATIONAL TALE. 183 

received her compliment with a glowing 
cheek and a throbbing bosom. How rich, 
how enchanting, was the incense of praise 
from the lip of beauty and tenderness! His 
feelings were those of beatified beings, re- 
ceiving the reward of painful virtues in the 
fruition of heavenly hopes, — so far as morta- 
lity can imagine their perfect blessedness. 

The conversation naturally turned to Ge- 
neral , and they no longer wanted a 

theme of delightful discourse. Monimia 
caught the kindly glow of Norman's affec- 
tions, and his fancy kindled amid the brilliant 
sparkles of her exalted imagination. Each 
knew, as if by intuition, how to touch the 
key-note of the other's mind. In the past 
hours of unrestrained conversation, Monimia 
had frequently experienced somewhat resem- 
bling a sudden access of intellectual power 
from the collision of Macalbin's mind ; and in 
the early, unanxious days of their first ac- 
quaintance, he seemed to acquire greater 
fertility of ideas, and quicker and more 
graceful invention from the society of Moni- 
mia. 

They experienced a slight revival of their 
former fruitfulness of fancy, succeeding to 



1 84 CLAN-ALBIN 

inconceivable stupidity, while they echoed 

each other's praises of General . " He 

is the very patron I coveted for you," said 
Monimia; and she precipitately added, " Be- 
cause I know that the Lady has a proud jea- 
lousy of patrons, a feeling in which I can well 
sympathize.'* 

This topic finished, they talked of Flora, 
w\&felt her happiness. 

" I know no condition of life which pro- 
mises so much pure and permanent felicity, 17 
said Monimia. — " To persons of humble 
views," replied Norman. 

* Of reasonable views," said Monimia; and 
he looked up, his cheek mantling with richer 
colouring, — " It includes all the delights 
which my theories of happiness embrace; 
— quiet, contentment, domestic affections, 
friendly neighbourhood, unostentatious use- 
fulness, with as much of cultivated taste, and 
polite literature, as may diversify and embel- 
lish a life of retirement, without interrupting 
its business ; and as much solid wealth as to 
scare the gaunt spectre, Poverty, far, far be- 
yond the boundary crag. I think, I feel, that 
tmr friend will be very happy." — Monimia 



A NATIONAL TALE. 185 

sighed softly, and mentally added, " For her 
lover is her husband." 

" Your theories of happiness are most se- 
ducing," replied Norman, in a fluttering 
voice; — "especially when one reflects, that 
fortitude and wisdom might realize them." 

His look and tone formed an animated 
commentary on these few words. — " Nay, 
will, I hope," replied Monimia, in a firm 
voice. " It would be unwise and miserable 
to form any theory of human happiness, 
which human virtue could not realize." — She 
met his glance, their eyes softened to ten- 
derness, and she hastily rose to depart. 

The grey tints of evening had now crept 
over all the sky ; and the lawn and the mansion 
were veiled in shade, though the sea still 
gleamed faintly in the deepening twilight. — 
" It becomes dusky," said Monimia, and 
Macalbin durst not solicit her stay for ano- 
ther minute, though he could have bribed it 
with worlds, had he owned them. 

When they had advanced a few steps into> 
the wood, a soft shower began to patter among 
the foliage, now tinted with the hues of au- 
tumn, and thinned by the rustling winds of 
that season. Macalbin looked at the thin* 
K 2 



186 CLAN-ALBIS", 

dress of his delicate companion, and entreat- 
ed her to return to the shelter they had quit- 
ted, till the shower blew over. " No, this 
tree will be a temporary umbrella," said Mo- 
nimia, placing herself on a rustic bench, 
formed of the fantastic trunk of an old oat, 
and fixed between two trees at a fine point of 
view. Macalbin held his bonnet over her, to 
save her from the heavy drops which collect- 
ed on the leaves. 

" I am afraid that both your arm and your 
plumes are suffering from that gallant posi- 
tion," said Monimia, smiling; " so, if you 
please, we will have recourse to the friendly 
tower, till the shower is over. It is a sweet, 
genial shower too; I am unwilling to quarrel 
with it, if it would only keep terms with my 
thin sandals." — They returned ; and she sat 
down on a broken stone bench by the entrance 
of the tower. The silence of the next five 
minutes was broken only by the monotonous 
pattering of the rain, and the cooing of the 
wood-pigeon in the dell below. — " Hark !" 
said Monimia, " that is the plaintive note of 
the cushat." — " The sweetest emblem of con- 
stancy," replied Norman. 

" I never heard the note of the cushat till I 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 87 

went to Glenalbin," said Monimia. " There 
is no woodland song in India. I still remem- 
ber how I longed to hear the birds of my 
country, and to see the modest daisy, the 
humble violet, and the pale primrose, " just 
sprouted by a bank," the sweet feminine 
iiowers of my country. " — " And / well re- 
member how you loved the long, -soft, shadowy 
twilight of Glen-Albin, that enchanting twi- 
light, which, like a transparent veil cast 
over the features of brilliant beauty, mellows 
it to the expression of more bewitching love- 
liness. " — He gently touched the drapery of 
Monimia's veil, and it fell around her. She 
coloured and smiled; and after suffering it 
to remain for a moment, threw it back. — " I 
don't intend to personate Twilight yet," said 
she. ** The mavis has not yet ended her 
song." — u You remember all our Scotish 
names," replied Norman smiling fondly, and 
leaning towards her. " That is, indeed, the 
charming note of the mavis. 

" At once His music^ and His love. 

His voice quivered in repeating this line, — be 
sat down by Monimia 



188 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The chilly air of the ruin, and still more 
the increasing agitation of her spirits, made 
Monimia experience a sensation of shivering, 
which, however, was not attended by much 
cold. Norman, alarmed for her health, and 
deeply interested in the origin of the emo- 
tion, in which he strongly sympathized, took 
her trembling hands within his own, saying, 
" My plaid has screened you from a shower 
before now in our weeping climate; if you 
will permit it that honour again, till you ap- 
proach your home." 

Monimia could not at that moment trust her 
shaking voice with the words of refusal. 

M This is Moome's most delicate and charmed, 
manufacture," said he, stripping offhis uniform 
plaid. " If you are spell-bound in it, the 
guilt be on the head of the sorceress.*' — This 
affected gaiety was of brief duration. He 
wrapped the plaid closely around her, his 
trembling arm, gliding beneath its cumbrous 
folds, entwined her waist. In the rapturous 
delirium of that moment he fell at her feet, he 
drew her towards him with a constraint, strong, 
gentle, irresistible. Her head sunk power- 
less on his bosom, and a moment of raptu- 
rous silence followed ere Macalbin, in a voice 
perceptible only to the ear of love, could 



A NATIONAL TALE. 8Q1 

whisper, " Monimia^ I have dared, to love!"— 
Monimia replied only by a deep quivering 
sigh. She made a feeble effort to disengage 
herself from his embrace. She slowly raised 
her face, beautiful in the paleness of over- 
powering emotion. A smile, tender, languid, 
enthusiastic, played over it, — the smile of a 
soul in bliss. Her sigh fanned the cheek of 
Norman. He wildly printed on her lip the 
first kiss of unutterable, unextinguishable 
love. 

While he hung on that yielded lip, his soul 
seemed fled to Monimia. Her head again 
dropped on his shoulder; the sigh which di- 
lated his breast heaved the bosom of Moni- 
mia. " Monimia loves" thought Norman, 
holding his breath, lest it should dissolve the 
spell that bound him in enchantment. The 
first raptures of bliss, too exquisite for utter- 
ance, wore away in that mysterious silence 
which is the soft nurse of those delicious e- 
motions that the human bosom feels but once, 
and remembers for ever ! 

A bright ray of moon-light streaming 
through a high casement roused Monimia 
from her reverie. She drew herself from 
the embrace of Norman, who, still kneel- 



]Q0 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ing before her, now avowed his love, and en- 
treated, that by one single word of hope, she 
would confirm his felicity. Monimia felt 
that her preference had already been suffici- 
ently manifest. But love banished a feeling 
verging on humiliation ; she extended her 
hand, a look of ineffable tenderness blending 
with maidenly decorum and recovered digni- 
ty. He pressed the snowy pledge a thousand 
times to his lips and his bosom, as if it con- 
tained all the being of Monimia. Her timid, 
momentary glance fell quickly beneath the 
ardent, impassioned gaze of Macalbin, on 
whom the strong light of the moon now fell, 
as with wild rapture he caressed her hand, ut- 
tering exclamations of joy, and vows of love. 
" Am I then so blest ?" cried he. " Oh, my 
Monimia, my own, my long idolized Moni- 
mia, seek not to withdraw this hand. When 
I last hung over this loved hand in hidden 
agony, could I have foreseen that this moment 
awaited me— this moment which might richly 
overpay a life of misery ? Is not this some 
wild dream of enchantment ? Oh, my blest 
Monimia, give me again and again this pre- 
cious hand." 
. <* My day of power is past," said Monimia, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1QI 

with a grave smile. " Why should I deny 
that it will be my happiness to bestow this 
hand on him whose worth and tenderness 
have gained all that makes it valuable, when- 
ever he can demand it with prudence, and I 
grant it with propriety." 

Norman did not wait for the words, pru- 
dence and propriety. He poured forth his 
transports of joy and gratitude, and again 
pressed his glowing lips to the yielded ines- 
timable prize. At that moment all seemed 
gained. — " And shall we, then, my own, my 
blessed Monimia, — shall we realise all your 
theories, — your enchanting theories? Shall 
they be ours? Shall we live in happiness 
with, — for each other? Oh, teach me to bear 
up against this overpowering influx of felici- 
ty. I could have endured misery, but this, in- 
deed, unmans me." 

" Calm yourself, my dear friend," said Mo- 
nimia. " Sit down by me, while I have yet a 
moment to spare. We have much to think 
of, — this is to us a very solemn hour, — wisdom 
would have avoided it, — but it is arrived." — 
" Monimia, do you then so soon repent of 
your goodness ? Oh ! do not say that you re* 
gret this moment." — " God forbid, that I should 



1Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ever have reason to regret it!" replied Moni- 
inia, in a tone of deep solemnity. She melt- 
ed into those tears of timid, undefined appre- 
hension, which ever tame the highest joys of 
the female heart. 

" God forbid that yon ever should !" said 
Norman, with equal solemnity* — " That were 
misery indeed." — He folded her gently in his 
arms. He kissed off the slow falling tears, 
not now, with the wild fondness of enraptur- 
ed love, but the calm seriousness of manly 
affection, already watching with anxious ten- 
derness over the most precious of all trusts, 
— that fragile happiness, — that delicate ho- 
nour, which woman's fearless, generous love 
committed to his keeping. — " My belov- 
ed Monimia, words are but feeble things; — 
if you have honoured me with your affection, 
I know that you have not withheld your con- 
fidence, — that sweet smile tells me that the 
most blessed moment of my life, — the mo- 
ment which binds me to endless gratitude 
and devotion, will never, never, be recalled 
with regret. " Monimias tears now flowed 
freely, in trustful tenderness. They fell on 
the bosom of her lover, like the soft dews of 
heaven, cooling the impassioned fever of his 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1§3 

soul. This was the balmy and genial clime 
of quiet affections, — the sober twilight of 
chastened happiness, on which the mind of 
Macalbin loved to expatiate. Though capable 
of the deepest tenderness, and the highest 
enthusiasm, his peaceful domestic heart had 
small delight in those lofty and stormy re- 
gions to which the impetuous spirit loves to 
soar on the whirlwind of the stronger passions. 
From these " given delights," he was hastily 
torn, by voices in the woods below, echoing 
the name of Monimia. — " Ah ! I am missed/' 
cried she. " 'Tis late, — suffer me to go." 
" And when shall I see you again, — I have a 
thousand things to tell you, to hear from you, 
— we cannot part thus." — " We must part," 
said Monimia, going away. — " Promise, first, 
to see me again, if but for one moment, — on 
this spot, for ever dear to me, — to-morrow, 
— my darling Monimia, — shall it be to-mor- 
row ? Oh 1 do not refuse the first request I 
ever presumed to urge." These words brought 
to the recollection of Monimia, the clandes- 
tine and luckless vows which her mother had 
received on this spot. A kind of superstitious 
horror seized her mind ; she trembled in every 
limb ; the voices appeared to advance. " Hark ! 
vol,. III. s 



ig4 CLAN-ALBIN, 

they approach !" cried she, starting away. 
" I promise, but do not now detain me." 

They glided down into the woods, Nor- 
man's circling arm supporting her feeble 
hasty steps, in spite of her entreaties, that he 
would leave her. The servants came in sight. 
Norman recollected the voice of Williams, 
and of Monimia's voluble maid. He remind- 
ed her of her promise, stripped off the plaid, 
which she had forgotten, and stole into the 
thick woods. In the next minute, he heard 
her address her maid with a severity, which 
was meant to conceal her own confusion. 

" Why Sarah, do you raise such an alarm, 
— you know I am not afraid to walk in our 
own grounds in clear moonlight." 

" La', my Lady," replied the other, " no 
more am I, if a friend was with me, or the like 
of that ; but since we came among them wild 
Irish, 1 am always of a tremble after sun-set. 
So, as I was sitting with my lady's woman 
after dinner, in the butler's parlour, taking a 
hand at cards, and a glass of Constantia, — ■ 
for always living among the highest of quali- 
ty, she can't endure your heavy austere winess 
6 Ladies,' says Mr Joseph, " make yourselves 
comfortable if you can, among them bog-trot- 
ters, — I saw a dozen of 'em landing below the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 195 

lower cliffs a little ago, come a poaching in 
my Lord's woods." — Monimia blushed, and 
the unseen Norman smiled, as he still glided 
on in the direction of the path which Moni- 
mia trod. — " O Lord ! cries I, as sure as six- 
pence, they will murder my Lady in the 
woods, and take her gold watch, and her 
pearl ear-rings. Mr Joseph would not come 
with me, but I got Williams, and we ran 
out." 

" Well, 1 am obliged by the motive of your 
walk, at least," said Monimia. " But in fu- 
ture, you need not interrupt your card and 
Constantia parties for me. If my Lord's cel- 
lars are as safe from the poaching of the ci- 
vilized English, as his woods are from the 
wild Irish, he will lose little game in Ireland." 
This was said with a feeling of national 
asperity, for which, in the following moment, 
Monimia blushed. " I don't mean the civi- 
vilized, but the polite English, Williams," said 
she, addressing her respectable servant. 

" I know what you mean, my Lady," said 
the man, bowing respectfully to Monimia, 
and looking sulkily at her maid. 

" Ther/ walk on Williams, and leave me 
with Sarah." The man obeyed.-—" Sarah, I 
am seriously displeased with you for presum- 



1Q0 clan-albin, 

ing to trifle with the affections of that excel- 
lent and sensible man, by your foolish flirting 
with that coxcomb Joseph." — " La' my Lady," 
said the other, with a kind of hysterical gig- 
gle, for she was indeed beginning to fear 
that her flirtation was losing Williams, with- 
out gaining Mr Joseph, " Williams holds him- 
self quite above me, now a-days, but let him 
take his mind of it, — only let him be either 
off or on; — (and she raised her voice,) — for I 
am tired of this shilly shally ; — I have had 
very handsome hoffers. — -Good lack ! what 
noise is that, — some of them wild Irish couch- 
ed in the woods. Oh ! Mr Williams, Mr 
Williams, do you feel how I tremble, I shall 
go off into hysterics, as sure as sixpence." — 
" Then, if you do, we shall certainly leave 
you to get out of them," said Monimia look- 
ing anxiously round. A tall figure emerged 
from the woods, darted across the lawn, and 
was instantly paddling in the little skiff which 
had brought the dozen of poachers. — " There, 
lady, will you believe me afterwards," whis- 
pered Sarah, as they distinctly heard the dash 
of the oar. " I shall tell the game-keeper to 
look out." — " You shall not dare," cried Mo- 
nimia. " How do you know but it is some 
gentleman, — some stranger come to see the 



A NATIONAL TALE. YQJ 

grounds ; you must do no such thing Sarah." 
" To be sure not, my Lady, if you forbid 
me," said the girl, in a tone Monimia dislik- 
ed ; and she replied, " You know Sarah, this 
is my country, and I don't like to hear my 
country folks accused." — Sarah curtsied, and 
begged pardon, half-affronted, and half-amaz- 
ed, to be told her lady was one of the wild 
Irish, which she had somehow forgotten. 

Norman had been somewhat astonished, to 
hear Monimia, on such a night, interest her- 
self in the loves of the staid and respectable 
Williams and the smart fiirtish Sarah ; for he 
knew not, that the soft picture of a distant, 
but delightful establishment, far too humble 
for these expensive domestics, was already 
stealing on her fancy. 

■ 
►I 



198 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XXXVII. 



Friendship, peculiar boon of heaven, 

The noble mind's delight and pride, 
To men and angels only given, 
To all the lower world denied. 

Johnson, 

J HE alarming epistle of the Piper's friend 
had by this time reached Glen-gillian. This 
was the first event that had damped the bri- 
dal joys of Flora, and reminded her, that her 
lot was still but human. A prison was to her 
an object of dreadful and undefined horror. 
She thought of it like a Highlander; and he 
whom she loved with the purest and tender- 
est regard of sisterhood, was a friendless pri- 
soner in the stranger's land. She threw her- 
self weeping on the bosom of Hector, who 
alternately soothed her alarm, and knit his 
brows in conjecture over the tantalizing epis- 
tle of Hugh's secretary. 

The ever-indulgent Craig-gillian had but 
one mode of solving the difficulty. — " What 
is the good of plaguing ourselves more about 



A NATIONAL TALE. IQg 

it?" said he. "I will give Hugh a hearty 
scold when I see him. In the meantime, go 
you over to Ireland, and take Flora with you. 
Every body makes a tour on their marriage 
now; and though yours will be somewhat late, 
it is to the land of bulls you are going." — Flo- 
ra loved all her father-in-law's bad jokes, 
but none of them had ever been so welcome 
as this. — " I bless and thank you for this," 
cried she, pressing the old man's hand. — 
u Then we shall go immediately." — She look- 
ed at her husband. — " If you are able, my dear 
love, for so sudden a journey." — " Am not I a 
soldier's wife r" said Flora, gaily. " I am 
perfectly able, and infinitely willing. We 
shall stop at Eleenalin to-night, cross the 
country on horseback, hire a vessel some- 
where, and be in Ireland in a minute. I shall 
prepare." — " You must wait till we send to- 
Inverness for a chaise, at all events," said 
Hector. " Aye, Flora, you must do that," 
added his father; and Dame Margaret said, 
" Certainly." — " And lose three days," re- 
plied Flora, her eyes filling with tears, — - 
" days so important, when you might be so 
useful to Macaibin. My dear father, if I am 
to go, suffer me to ride my grey poney, your 
kind present to me. Plead for me with that 



200 CLAN-ALBIN, 

stern soldier." — " Yes, Hector," said the in- 
dulgent father, " I think Flora may ride. You 
know she is used to it; and, as she says, it 
may be useful to Macalbin." — " Impossible!" 
replied Hector, " I cannot risk the health of 
my wife, even for so desirable a purpose. 
You, Flora, who never travelled farther than 
between Glen-Albin and Craig-gillian, nor 
ever crossed a broader sea than Lochuan, 
know nothing of the hardships of long jour- 
neys performed on horseback, and voyages in 
vile little vessels. Thank Heaven, my Flora, ' 
you are not, as you say, a soldier's wife ; for I 
could neither live without you, nor make you 
the sharer of a soldier's pilgrimages." 

Margaret had now beckoned away her bro- 
ther to a private consultation; and Flora twin- 
ed her white arms round the neck of her hus- 
band, overcome by the probability, that some 
unforeseen circumstance might yet tear him 
from her bosom. — " Promise that you will 
never leave me behind you/' said she; " that 
I shall share all your fortunes, in peace or 
war, in life or death?"—" Surely, my love, 
provided I can take you in a handsome car- 
riage, or a good large frigate. My sweet Flo- 
ra, you little know what you ask in begging to 
share the hard fare and rough couch of a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 201 

wandering soldier." — He shook his head over 
her in soft compassion, as if his heart already 
foreboded poor Flora's destiny. 

" You surely think me very dainty and de- 
licate" said she, with truly Highland con- 
tempt of luxury. — " Promise me, that wher- 
ever you go, I shall be witli you. My Hector, 
could any couch be hard with a pillow like 
this?" — She gently laid her head on his bo- 
som, and closed her eyes as if in sleep. — 
" Sweetest, sweetest creature," cried the lo- 
ver-husband, fondly caressing her, " It shall 
all be as_y_fin will; for, surely, care nor sor- 
row can never reach the bosom that pillows 
this cherub head. " 

" You have promised," said Flora, pressing 
her lips for the first time to his cheek.— "Hi- 
therto she had only received his caresses. 
Once, indeed, while Hector slept on the sofa, 
and Flora sat by him with her work, she per- 
ceived what she had often perceived, — name- 
ly, how dazzlingly white was that small part 
of his forehead, which a foreign climate and 
a military life had not embrowned. Flora 
stole one soft,slowkiss from that forehead, and 
blushed with pleasure at the theft ; but look- 
ing up, she perceived Craig-gillian peeping 
through the window, — the jest-loving Craig? 



202 CLAN-ALBIN, 

gillian,— and blushed still deeper with the 
agony of detected guilt. This had been a 
standing jest with Craig-gillian for the last 
fortnight, by the name of the " secret." — A 
secret which he, however, most delicately pre- 
served, in spite of the entreaties and ingeni- 
ous guesses of Hector. 

Craig-gillian again entered. — " Well, Flo- 
ra, I'm going to send Peter for the chaise ;— 
it may be here by to-morrow night, and you 
will set off next day." 

" But Hector has already consented, my 
dear father. We go on horseback." 

" If you are so positive, I shall tell the S€- 
cret, Flora." 

" I don't care," said Flora, smiling, 

" O you shameless girl 1" — Craig-gilliaiv 
again withdrew to consult his sister and Hec- 
tor's Moome, whom he had left together. To 
resist the wishes of Flora was to him impos- 
sible ; but Margaret had been filling his 
simple mind with her own favourite visions of 
the heir of the family ; for the old women of 
the glen had already been looking out for 
him in the grounds of the tea with which Mar- 
garet treated them, and of course he had of- 
ten been seen ; very tall and handsome, — a 
soldier too, — and surrounded by numerous 



A NATIONAL TALE. 203 

followers and herds of black cattle. The heir 
of Craig-gillian was, in Craig-gillian's subject 
glen, an object of far greater interest than 
the heir of the throne. 

Meanwhile Flora was unfolding the secret, 
for she had half forgotten Macalbin ; because 
she knew that while losing minutes she was 
gaining days to devote to his service. And 
she judged correctly. It would have been a 
very improper request indeed that Hector 
could have refused at this moment. 

" Since it must be so, I will order the 
horses," sighed he. — " Flora, you are a sadly 
spoiled girl. My foolish father has entirely 
spoiled you." 

" And his wise son will entirely mend me," 
replied Flora, — her eyes beaming with consci- 
ous power, while she shook her little head in 
his grave face. 

Hector sighed as deeply as a man in love 
usually does when he feels pleasure in sub- 
jecting the sober wisdom of thirty to the wild 
vivacity of nineteen. 

Flora bounded up stairs like the deer of her 
native wilds, and in a single half-hour made 
all the necessary preparations for her journey. 
The load of anguish was already off her heart, 
for Hector was going to Macalbin, and she 



204 CLAN-ALBIN, 

had that faith in Hector which can remove 
mountains. Flora flew down again, kissed 
Margaret in passing, and sprung on horse- 
back. 

" Mrs Major Hector, will you take care of 
your feet," said the decorous maiden, who, 
both in word and practice, gave the young 
wife a distinguished example of matronly 
carriage, — " you never see me skipping in 
that way." 

" True, child, you never see Margaret 
skipping that way," said Craig- gillian, " but 
she has a few years more experience you 
think,"— for Flora's cheek was dimpling. 

" Flora," said Hector, " you look so airy 
and delicate on your little palfrey, your fair 
and heightened complexion, and glittering 
brown ringlets, (as wild as your steps, I think,) 
so finely contrasted with your green riding- 
habit, that you might pass for the Queen of 
Fairyland. I am quite in love with you to- 
day. — Is this little foot firm in its place ?" — 
" Quite so," replied Flora, looking as if she 
felt and thanked him for all his tenderness. — 
" And no^v, I think, you look like my favourite 
'■ Fairly Fair J in the beautiful old ballad," 
said he, still hanging about the horse-woman. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 205 



4 ; j sa ji anc i d ear ^ 

A girdle shaw'd her middle jimp, 
And gowden glist her hair." 

" These lines portray you." 

" I rather fancy myself some errant-dam- 
sel held by a dark enchanter" replied Flora ; 
and touching her little steed, she flew like 
the wind far beyond the boundary^ crag, 
dreading the contagious sorrow of the ser- 
vants, and their wives and children, who 
were as usual gathered round the door with 
blessings and fond farewels. 

She was soon joined by Hector and Craig- 
gillian ; and it was agreed that the travellers 
should for that night stop at Eieenalin to 
take leave of the Lady, and account in the 
best way possible for this sudden journey ; 
for they could not venture to mention the 
true reason. It was a grey evening, late in 
September, and before they reached Glen- 
albin, it became chilly and foggy. Hector 
began to anticipate discomforts on the jour- 
ney, and almost to regret that he had yielded 
to Flora's wishes, since another day would 
have obviated every difficulty, and the kind 
Craig-gillian became pensive at the thought 
of losing his children. 

VOL. III. T 



206 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" Macalbin's come home !" cried Moome, 
starting at hearing the now-seldom sounded 
horn. --"That is Major Hector's blow. Fie,Catri- 
na! run to the boat." The girl flew, and Moome 
heaped the fire with fresh turf, and swept up 
the hearth, and exchanged her chequered 
apron for a white one. — " Lady dear, this is 
one of our lucky days," said she; u I dare 
say Mrs Major Hector has also got news of 
her. And did we have the second-sight, we 
might see this a lucky day in Erin too. I 
dreamed myself — but here are the strangers." 
She curtsied her welcomes to the gentle- 
men, and embraced Flora. Hector, when he 
had paid his compliments, drew from his poc- 
ket a cap Flora had given him to carry, and 
tied it, though awkwardly, over her old hap- 
py face. " Here," said he, turning to the 
lady, " is 



■ u a piece 



Of needle-work so rare, 
Wove by nae hand, as ye may guess, 
Save that of Fairly Fair." 

" I may well be proud," said Moome, again 
curtsying, for she was quite of the old court ; 
" I had none so fine since she left Dunalbin. 
Lady dear tell of her.' 9 



A NATIONAL TALE. 20? 

Flora exclaimed, and almost wept with joy, 
to hear that she might in Ireland see and em- 
brace the unchanged Monimia ; and Hector 
also congratulated himself on meeting her, 
as a beautiful and accomplished woman, whom 
he had often entertained in India with de- 
lightful stories of the pale primrose, and the 
little social Robin, and all the other enchant- 
ments of that native world beyond those deep 
waters which she had crossed in infancy. 
The lady explained in very general terms 
the reason of Monimia's long silence ; but 
Moome took Flora aside, and entered into all 
the particulars she knew. " I always was 
sure the blame was between the Gordons and 
the Macphersons," said she ; — " for my own 
heart told me it could not be her's." 

" lam much pleased with this journey," 
said Lady Augusta, when after tea they all 
drew round the fire. " I love to see friend- 
ship comprehended in plans of pleasure, or 
rather to see its enjoyment constitute plea- 
sure. But if you are so rapid in your move- 
ments, I must retire to make up my de- 
spatches."—" Never trouble yourself, lady," 
said the good-humoured old Craig-giliian. 
" I wonder, for my own part, how people can 
trouble themselves so much with writing, 



208 CLaN-ALBIjST, 

when they might as well come and see each 
other. Do you, Hector, bring them both 
over to the Christmas, — that is the easiest 
way. If it be between them, as I have heard, 
though no great gossiper, what is the good of 
the one running one way and the other ano- 
ther, when they can only be happy by run- 
ning into each other's arms." — Flora smiled 
with pleasure, and nodded to her father to 
go on. Within the last few months she had 
become wonderfully quick-sighted in love 
affairs. She could now comprehend how Nor- 
man and Monimia might love — dearly love, — 
and yet never breathe the name of each 
other — never trust their lips with those praises 
that flowed so naturally from even the most 
indifferent stranger. 

" I am told," continued Craig-gillian, 
" that she has lost her fortune, — that wonder- 
ful fortune we heard of when she went to 
England, either by the cleverness of Ursula 
Sinclair, or because it never was intended 
for her. But they have enough between them 
for happiness. I know she loves this coun- 
try, for which reason I love her. Let her 
then, in God's good name, come home to 
us, marry her loyer, and live in peace in the 
bosom of her own family — instead of sending 



A NATIONAL TALE. 20Q 

him away to fight, and sigh, and get him- 
self made a tawny-moor in one corner of the 
world, like Hector there, seeking the for- 
tune a brave and honest fellow has the 
worst chance of gaining, and which he may 
not live to enjoy when it is won ; while, in 
another, she is dressing, and dancing, and 
pining, and sighing, becoming green and 
yellow, and all manner of ugly .colours," — 
" Nay stop now, father," cried Hector ; 
ei give us a chance of being heard." Craig- 
gillian nodded, and went on — '■' Wearing out 
her best years of life, I say, in the sickness 
of hope deferred. You young fellows bust- 
ling through the world, though you may have, 
your own anxieties, know nothing about the 
quiet, uncomplaining, smothered anguish to 
which you leave the ladies you are in love 
with, forsooth ! My heart has often ached to 
look at the poor girls around us, becoming 
old and faded, and spirit-bruised ; waiting till 
some Highland soldier made a fortune, who, 
perhaps, poor fellow, may never return to 
them either in wealth or poverty. I assure 
you, Major Hector, that if you had left my 
Flora for the sake of gaining a few more pal- 
try pounds, you should have found her, on 

T 2 



210 CLAN-ALBIN, 

your return, instead of a ghost-looking pale 
girl, the happy wife of some wiser man." 

" I am obliged to you, at least," said Hec- 
tor, laughing ; and Flora felt, that a whole 
life worn out in the hope of one clay being 
Hector's, would still be a life of happiness in 
the comparison of any other lot.- — " I hope, 
however," continued he, " that my Flora 
would not have been quite so wise as my fa- 
ther, if any necessity had made us part ; and 
that Macalbin's Monimia — if she is his Mo- 
nimia, — will also have somewhat more love, 
and somewhat less prudence." 

" But there is no such necessity in this case, 
either," said Craig-gillian, determined to set- 
tle the whole affair, at least to his own satis- 
faction. " Lady, tell me, in the first place, 
if they love each other ?" — Lady Augusta had 
been a silent, anxious, melancholy listener. 
i: Craig-gillian," said she, " you know how 
inexpressibly dear both of these young per- 
sons are to me. I believe that, in favour- 
able circumstances, Macalbin might raise his 
thcughtsto the beautiful and high-born crea- 
ture of whom we are speaking — but now — " 
she sighed, and shook her head. 

" Well, they love, — that is clear," said 
Craig-gillian, " and the rest is easy." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 211 

" As how, my dearest father r" said Flora, 
pressing to his side, and looking in his face. 

" I'll tell you that.— There is our large farm 
of Brora, with all its mosses, and fishings, and 
tine grazings, and woods of oak, — a place 
Mrs Montague admired so much when with 
us, — -they might have a lease of it from your 
Lord there, while w r oods grow and waters run, 
— or till " Macalbin enjoy his own again," and 
I hope that day will come. — Would she not 
be better there, as its mistress, and the wife 
of as handsome and good a fellow as ever left 
his country r" — " And that he is/' sighed 
Moome. — " His veins filled too, with the ge- 
nerous blood of Macalbin y — for who can doubt 
of that who looks on him ? — than languishing, 
in perhaps endless separation, — or, more 
wretched still, the miserable wife of some 
mongrel Lowlander. — What say you, ladies r" 

" I say with you my dearest father \" cried 
Flora. " God bless you ! — And so do I," said 
Moome. But Lady Augusta only shook her head 
and sighed. Hector also shook his head ; but 
he smiled at the sanguine simplicity of his 
Father and Flora. — " It is really pleasant to 
hear my father detailing his Arcadian scheme 
of love in a cottage," said he. " I could 
just forgive Macalbin for entertaining so ro- 



212 CLAX-ALBIN, 

mantic a project." — " The project is not so 
romantic as you imagine, my wise son," re- 
plied Craig-gillian. " Surely the cottage 
will be nothing the worse of love, and a cot- 
tage in our country, with an income of three 
or four hundred a year, and the profits of a 
large farm, may have many good things about 
it besides love." — "I give you up as incorri- 
gible/' said Hector, now laughing outright. 
u Those who would transform the high-born; 
and high-bred Monimia, accustomed from in- 
fancy to Asiatic splendour and English lux- 
ury, into the domestic wife of an obscure 
Highland gentleman, dying yarn, and send- 
ing clues to the weaver, are beyond my con- 
trol.^ 

" Pooh !" said Craig-gillian, " Unah there, 
would do all that for her." 

" By Mary yes, and that I would," said 
and swore Moome, — who had never been 
more in earnest in her life. " God forbid 
that a lady like her shoukl do but what she 
pleased herself: — though the queen on her 
throne needs not be above what MacalbinV 
lady and Macalbin's dochters did, in their 
own day, — a day which it is the wound of my 
heart to feel I shall never see again." 

" Lady, we must just give these good folks 



A NATIONAL TALE. 213 

over to their own fancies" said Hector, again 
laughing at their tenacity. " Those who 
would condemn the elegant Monimia to the 
employments of making clothes for little 
brats, the luxuries of venison hams, blue 
cheeses, and bilberries and cream, and the 
society of Highland half-gentry, are far be- 
yond my skill." 

" Provided the little brats called her mo- 
ther, — Hector !" cried Flora, eagerly ; " char- 
ming rosy brats, wearing the features of Mac - 
albin and Monimia, — those enchanting fea- 
tures ! — provided the venison was ' the quar- 
ry of his bow,' CraigilHan ; — and the bilberries 
pulled on a lovely summer's night, by those 
little brats, on the tomshee of Brora;— ^and that 
she shared them, with all the objects of her 
love, by the cottage door which my father 
has been describing.' , 

" Provided all that could happen, I would 
allow that Flora can draw charming pictures," 
said Hector, smiling. 

*' Ah, Hector, my sage son, you are yield- 
ing," said Craig- gillian ; and he added 
proudly, " and without any derogation from 
the birth or the breeding of the lady, she 
might yield too. I know little about Lowland 
society, but I should imagine that the society 
of Eleenalin would throw no stain either on 



214 CLAN ALBIN, 

the dignity or refinement of any society the 
Lowlands can boast. But it is you who im- 
peach the young lady ; for I know she has 
more sense and feeling than to prefer dancing, 
and singing, and visiting among a set of peo- 
ple she does not care a rush about, to her do- 
mestic duties, when on them, after all, her 
happiness must ultimately depend." 

" T despair of making you understand how, 
(with all due submission,) your scheme is not 
only premature, but abundantly indiscreet," 
said Hector. 

" The devil take the discretion which sets 
people above their happiness," replied Craig- 
gillian, with characteristic naivete; — "Flora, 
my darling, don't you be so wise." 

" Nor is Mrs Montague," cried Flora; 
" I am certain she would decide with us." 

" Aye, that she would," said Moome. 

" There now, Hector ! Well, I shall ap- 
peal to herself. I can't bear to see young 
people throwing away their happiness, and 
finding ambition. Flora, my dear, you shall 
write out for me, 6 a case for the opinion of 
Mrs Montague/ 

Flora laughed at this new idea, and hastily 
collected writing materials, and Craig-gillian 
dictated his original scheme, though with 
more humour and delicacy, and without men- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 215 

tioning any name except A and B, and the 
farm of Brora." 

" I shall certainly submit this case," said 
Flora, inquiringly. " To be sure you will," 
replied Craig-gillian ; " and we who are on 
the right side of the question will sign our 
names to our own opinions. Here, Unah, 
give us your mark." 

" And my prayers too, for this good end," 
said Moome, complying ; " and I dont de- 
spair yet : Who better deserves her than him- 
self?" 

a Were it to go by desert, my poor 
Moome," sighed the lady, who was greatly 
affected by so close a scrutiny of the forlorn 
prospects of her beloved protege. 

Hector had previously been revolving In- 
dian schemes for the brother of Flora, and his 
own old school fellow; and he now mentioned 
this idea to Lady Augusta. " I have little of 
what may be called interest" said he, " but 
I have some friends. Macalbin will find 
other friends — he will find them, or make 
them — and in a few years he may return to 
us, if not a rich man, at least a man deserv- 
ing of fortune, and Brora will still be waiting 
him." 

This scheme appeared much more rational, 
and the lady warmly acknowledged the kind- 



216 CLAN*ALBIN, 

ness of young Craig-gillian ; — she acknow- 
ledged it like one who, in the same circum- 
stances, would have acted a similar part. 

" I was for that too, while I thought there 
was no love in the case," said Craig-gillian. 
" But now, why send the poor fellow away 
in search of a great fortune, while they may 
be happy with a small one — Hold up hands 
that are still for Brora." Moome and Flora 
held up their hands, laughingly. " We have 
the majority, lady." 

" My dear kind neighbour," said Lady 
Augusta, smiling, " you do not consider the 
education, habits, and probable prospects of 
the lovely young creature to whom Macalbin 
aspires, since we have settled that it is so : 
— far beyond his fortune, but not beyond his 
merit, — I am sanguine enough to believe that, 
did prudence sanction affection, and his good 
conduct in life dignify her choice, Monimia 
would not be insensible to his worth ; — but, 
at present, young, nameless, poor. — My dear 
Craig-gillian, I am happy that Macalbin can- 
not hear your seducing plans." 

" Then I wish he could, and she too," 
whispered Moome in the ear of Flora, and 
the lady smiled. 

" Unwilling as I am to part with him for- 
ever," continued Lady Augusta, — " the last 



A NATIONAL TALE. 217 

hope — almost the last comfort of my age — all 
of my blood that fate, even my fate, has 
spared, — for I feel that Macalbin belongs to 
me, — I think I could have the courage to per- 
suade him to make one firm effort to gain 
that fortune which would be the means of 
happiness. Craig- gillian, he must either se- 
cure for her he loves that place in society 
which becomes her birth and excellence, and 
his own manly and persevering spirit, or re- 
nounce a hope which, perhaps, it was folly 
and presumption ever to form or indulge." 
The lady spoke in a tone at once firm and 
heart-struck; and Craig-gillian gravely re- 
plied, " Lady, I have done — I can only wish 
them all manner of happiness, without judging 
of the means which are to make them happy." 

Flora thought there was more pride than 
tenderness in the opinion which the lady had 
avowed. It was the first time she ever thought 
of the lady as less than infallible; and she 
was glad to find that Moome's judgment sanc- 
tioned her own. 

" But, Lady dear, with your leave," said 
Moome, very courteously, " if the young lady 
herself were of Craig-gillian's opinion, what 
would you say then ? — not separate him from 
kin and country, surely?" 

VOL. III. v 



218 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" I would say, Unah, that it was a young 
lady's opinion, and that time would try it; 
and if the young lady persisted in her opinion 
after that time had elapsed, I would not, per- 
haps, think her a young lady very wise in her 
generation ; but I would feel her to be a very 
amiable young lady, and so send you to 
Brora to wind her clues. " 

" My dearest Lady," cried Flora, kissing 
the hand of the Lady,— " Always think me 
amiable, and never think me wise in my ge- 
neration." 

The party smiled at Flora's injunction ; and 
Moome, her old eyes sparkling with joy, now 
said, " Och, and it would be my happiness to 
go to them and theirs, wherever they would 
be, though I little thought ever to leave Glen- 
albin." 

After some farther conversation on the 
same subject, Lady Augusta retired, to write 
to Monimia and to Macalbin ; and the rest of 
the party to their chambers, as they intended 
to set off at a very early hour next morning, 
Craig-gillian for his home, and Hector and 
Flora for Ireland. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 21 9 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 



I and my sword shall earn ourselves a chronicle.— 
There's hope in't yet. 

Shakespeare. 

When Macalbin returned to his tent on the 
night he had seen Monimia, he found a card 

on his table from General , requesting 

his company at breakfast on the following 
morning. At the appointed hour, which was 
an early one, he repaired to the General's 
tent, and they continued tete-a-tete till late 
in the forenoon. Books in several modern 
languages, maps and military plans furnished 
abundant topics of a conversation, which the 
General designed as a sort of trial of his in- 
genuous guest. 

" I hope," said he at length, " you are not 
too proud to oblige me." — u I am afraid that 
I might indeed be too proud if I were capa- 
ble of obliging General ," replied Nor- 



220 CLAN-ALBIN, 

man. The General bowed, and proceeded. 
" My friend, the Earl of intends his se- 
cond son and a favourite nephew for the mili- 
tary profession. They are youths of about 
sixteen. He has done me the honour to con- 
sult me in their professional education; and I 
thought this field the best school for a young 
soldier. Like yourself, they are to be volun- 
teers in my regiment. Their studies, duties, 
and pursuits ought to be similar to yours. 
May I hope that you will undertake to super- 
intend their studies and their conduct, to live 
with them as their elder brother and friend ? 
The Earl is, in the best sense of the word, a li- 
beral man. To him we may safely confide all 
after considerations; for he is very capable of 
estimating the value of those in whom he 
places so important a confidence. In the 
meantime, I will arrange all pecuniary mat- 
ters. He leaves all to me, for he knows I 
can make a good bargain. I trust you will 
have equal complaisance. I purpose, then, 
if you agree, that your appointment shall 
yield you two hundred a-year, I am very un- 
willing to anticipate a refusal. May I venture 
to beg your acceptance of this part of that 
sum as an earnest of my success."— He held 
out a bill for fifty pounds; and Norman, in 



A NATIONAL TALE. 221 

some confusion, replied, " This is kindness so 
unexpected, a mark of confidence so gratify- 
ing to me — In truth, I know not what I say, 
but I deeply feel your goodness. It will, how- 
ever, be time enough for this," — and he gen- 
tly put aside the bill. — " Besides, it is far 
more than I ought to accept, as I can never 
hope to earn it." 

" I must say you are far wrong there, Mac- 
albin. A man who sets so just a value on his 
time, and employs it so diligently, ought to 
have it highly valued by others. On this 
point I am absolute. As you wish to oblige 
me, yield to my request." 

Norman no Longer sought to resist or reject 
kindness so considerate. He put up the bill,, 
and departed with an overflowing heart, say- 
ing, " Do with me as you will; for I can in 
no shape, not even in words, acknowledge 
your goodness." 

The Piper was busily employed in brush- 
ing at something when Norman entered the 
tent. He beckoned him to the table, and 
spread his treasure before this true, though 
humble friend. To Norman, who, in his fears 
for her he revered beyond all human beings, 
had already suffered in anticipation all the 
horrors of extreme poverty, this money ap- 
U 2 



222 CLAN-ALBIN, 

peared a very precious treasure. The afflict- 
ing image of Lady Augusta, aged, deserted, 
and poverty-struck,had often overwhelmed him 
with a misery beyond all other misery — in his 
most rapturous moments it had intruded to 
blast his hopes and joys ; and his dawning 
prospects now gave him happiness as intense 
as his former anxiety. The patronage of the 
General was to advance his fortunes ; his in- 
dustry was to give comfort to the last years 
of the Lady ; and the love of Monimia was to 
crown his joys and reward his toils. 

On the same day, the expected pupils of 
Norman arrived ; and he was immediately in- 
troduced to his new duties. Till the encamp- 
ment broke up, the whole party were to be 
accommodated with tents ; and in arranging 
their future establishment, the General con- 
fided all to his discretion* On this day, also, 
he found means to write to the Lady, and to 
transmit his treasure, though he felt some re- 
luctance at using money he had not yet earn- 
ed ; and when all this was accomplished, he 
hastened to the bay, which he again crossed 
in the little fishing skiff. But, on this occa- 
sion, Monimia was nowhere to be found. The 
ni bt became dark and stormy ; and after 
approaching the mansion, and wandering for 



A NATIONAL TALE. 223 

hours round the spot, which seemed blessed 
by her habitation, he returned wet and dis- 
pirited to his tent. 

Macalbin was now restored to his former 
habits ; and being placed at the head of a li- 
beral, if not an expensive establishment, many 
sources of pleasure were put into his posses- 
sion, which a narrow fortune had hitherto de- 
nied. His tent was now strewed with new 
books, pamphlets, maps, plans, and newspa- 
pers ; he was again afloat in the current of af- 
fairs, occupied with business, and full of ideas 
and projects. In his new system of life, there 
was Jess of languid, fastidious, exhausting en- 
joyment, and more of the manly satisfaction 
which a sound mind must ever experience in 
steadily pursuing an animating purpose, than 
he had ever yet known. 

His young pupils likewise contributed to 
his happiness. He found them full of inge- 
nuousness, good-humour, and vivacity ; and 
when they saw, that, instead of a stiff, exact- 
ing pedant, their tutor was a handsome and 
spirited young man, as willing to become 
their play-mate as their instructor, the in- 
structor became more dear, and the compa- 
nion more respectable. 

Every evening Norman continued to haunt 



224 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the woods of Glanville-Lodge ; but when a 
week had elapsed he had still caught no 
glimpse of Monimia. When he recollected 
the wetness of the evening on which he had 
last seen her, he began to entertain very se- 
rious apprehensions for her health, and resolv- 
ed to hazard sending the Piper with a mes- 
sage of enquiry. 

The General, however, saved him the dan- 
ger of this expedient, by appointing next 
morning to ride over to Glanville-Lodge, and 
introduce his young friends and their tutor to 
his Lordship, — a ceremony which had been 
too long delayed, as their families were dis- 
tantly related. 

This desired, yet alarming visit, was ac- 
cordingly made. His Lordship gave his guest* 
a very cordial reception, and quickly conceiv- 
ing a high opinion of the talents and accom- 
plishments of the young tutor, he as sudden- 
ly formed an entire new plan of education 
for his son. The most distinguished legisla- 
tors of Greece and Rome had also been the 
most illustrious captains. In modern times> 
Marlborough, Frederick of Prussia, Washing- 
ton, and Bonaparte, had discovered talents 
alike great in the field and in the cabinet ; 
England was become a military nation j and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 225 

for these and several other cogent reasons, 
Lord Glanville, who was, in fact, tired of the 
office of tutor, resolved to place his son un- 
der the care of Macalbin. And Charles, be- 
sides being the finest gentleman and greatest 
politician, was also to be the most eminent 
soldier of the next age. 

Here, then, was something to do to boast 
of, and to make paragraphs and long disser- 
tations about in the many letters his Lordship 
dispatched every day. There was, moreover, 
an obscure young man of genius to patronise 
and bring forward, and enlist in the service 
of his party. His Lordship was therefore in 
delightful spirits ; and Norman, remembering 
that he was Monimia's uncle, was equally de- 
lighted that he had so quickly gained the fa- 
vour of his host. 

After partaking of some refreshment, and 
receiving an urgent general invitation to the 
table of Lord Glanville, the young gentle- 
men were about to return home, when his 
Lordship, with his usual promptitude, request- 
ed a private conference with the General, ou 
the subject of his son's education ; and as 
the boys were in the gardens, he begged 
Norman to amuse himself for a few minutes 
in his library. With this request, he gladly 



220 CLAN-ALBIN, 

complied ; but more occupied with the mor- 
tal living than the immortal dead, while he 
ranged through the melange litter aire scatter- 
ed around, and carelessly turned over the 
leaves of a Greek tragedy, which his Lord- 
ship had folded down as the apparent subject 
of his studies, he thought only of Monimia. 
Unable to gain any intelligence, he resolved 
to interrogate a servant concerning the health 
of the ladies of the family, and accordingly 
rung for a glass of water. But when the ser- 
vant appeared, this task, so easy to the indif- 
ferent, was too much for the conscious Nor- 
man. Mr Joseph disappeared. Norman un- 
der the pretext of asking for a newspaper, 
again summoned him, and assuming an air of 
indifference, looked on a book, while he en- 
quired for Lady Glanville and the other ladies 
of the family. — " O Lord sir, — I beg your 
pardon, — all our ladies except Mrs Monta- 
gue, are all overpowered with vapours, and 
miserably nervous ever since we came to this 
country. There's my Lady and Mrs Sarah, 
Sir, you would not know which has the most- 
delicate nerves of the two ; such flutterings 
and palpitations." — " Very well," said Nor- 
man, that is enough." The man bowed, and 
retired \ and, in the next moment, he saw a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 227 

chaise drawn up to to the door, and heard a 
servant announce Craig-gillian. He fan- 
cied he had mistaken the name, till he saw 
Monimia bound down the door-steps, and in 
the next minute perceived two beings so 
dear to him, entwined, like sister graces, in 
the arms of each other, and Major Hector 
Craig-gillian hanging over them, claiming his 
share in this joyful recognition. Involunta- 
rily he flew to join this loved groupe, which 
he encountered in the hall. Monimia start- 
ed back, and coloured, and Flora, screaming 
with delighted surprise, caught his hand, 
which she placed in Hector's, — the well re- 
membered manly lad of long-fled years, who 
bad been the first object of Norman's child- 
ish emulation, 

" Ah, so happily met !" cried Flora, — half 
wild with affectionate gladness. " Would it 
were in Eleenalin, but still this is happiness;" 
and she alternately pressed the hand of Nor- 
man and Monimia, both of which she held, 
assailing them with endless questions, and 
half answering their impatient interrogatories. 

When the flush of joy and surprise had fad- 
ed from the cheek of Monimia, her pallid 
complexion and languid air too well explain- 
ed the cause of Norman's repeated disap- 



228 CLAN-ALBIN, 

pointments. : She accounted for the paleness 
and thinness, so alarming to Flora, by men- 
tioning a cold which she had caught on the 
preceding week, which had confined her to 
her apartment for some days. 

Their mutual felicitations were not half 
ended, when they were joined by Lord Glan- 

ville and General . In Craig-gillian the 

latter recognised an esteemed countryman 
and fellow-soldier. The recommendation of 
the General was more than sufficient to win 
the friendship of Lord Glanville. He receiv- 
ed the guests of Monimia with much kind- 
ness; and, summoning his languid lady, re- 
peated the necessary ceremony of introduc- 
tion. 

After some farther desultory conversation, 
tedious and irksome to those whose hearts 
were overflowing, the visitors departed, ac- 
companied by Monimia, who yielded to the 
importunity of her new found friends, and a- 
greed to spend with them the remainder of 
the day. 

On their arrival in the town, Craig-gillian 
and Norman set out in quest of lodgings for 
the former; and Flora, left alone with her 
friend, wept while she told the tale of the 
gloomy by-past winter; and smiled through 



A NATIONAL TALE. 22$ 

her undried tears, while, with the happy ego- 
tism so excusable in those we love, and feel 
to have a kindred interest in all our joys and 
projects, she expatiated on her new-born fe- 
licity. 

It was now that Flora playfully produc- 
ed the important document, honoured by 
Moome's mark, and old Craig-gillian's signa- 
ture. Monimia, half offended and half pleas- 
ed, returned it with a grave smile, saying, " I 
find it impossible to be displeased with the 
good Craig-giliian ; — his very errors proceed 
from the kindly desire of giving happiness." 
" But I hope you think that our opinion in the 
Macalbin case is as correct as it is well-mean- 
ing. If our judgment is not sanctioned by the 
Lady and Major Hector, it is because they, 
in their wisdom, argue from their superior 
knowledge of the world, — and we from know- 
ing the worth of Macalbin, and the tender- 
ness of a young female heart." 

She laid her hand genti}' on the bosom of 
Monimia, whose blush and smile half betray- 
ed her feelings. — " Ah, we are the people, 
and wisdom shall die with us," said Flora, 
peeping slily into Monimia's face. \ 

" With all clue respect I must defer to the 
vol.. in. X 



230 CLAN-ALBIN, 

opinion of more learned judges," said Moni- 
nimia, smiling at this affectionate folly. 

" And I, confident of success, give way to 
more eloquent advocates," replied Flora, as 
Norman entered the room to inform her that 
lodgings had been procured in the immediate 
vicinity of Colonel Grant's. He attended 
the ladies thither. 

In the course of that day, he found an op- 
portunity of acquainting Monimia with the 
happy alteration in his affairs. Nor did she 
conceal the satisfaction she felt at his gaining 
an opportunity of unfolding his talents and 
character, and acquiring that confidence in 
his own powers, and that respect from his fel- 
low-men, which might sanction her opinion, 
and justify her choice. 

The carriage of Lord Glanville was sent to 
town at a pretty early hour for Monimia ; but 
Norman remained with his friends as long as 
the etiquette of the camp permitted. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 231 



CHAP. XXXIX. 



But I will delve One yard beldw their mines. 

ShakespiarK- 

IS QBMAN was sinking into sleep when he was 
roused by the voice of Brummond, who de- 
manded admittance. He sat down by the 
bed-side, flushed and breathless, and, as Nor- 
man fancied, under the influence of too much 
wine. — When Hugh had struck a light, and 
retired, Norman demanded the reason of this 
late visit. — " O I am dying in love again," said 
Drummond, " and I found it impossible to sleep 
till I revealed my passion to you ; for I am so in- 
nocent and bashful, forsooth, that I dare not," 
--" This is so common an occurrence with you," 
interrupted Norman, smiling. — " O, but I am 
so seriously smitten to-day : She is such a love- 
ly, timid, little soul ; so clinging, and tender, 
and trembling, and blushing, and so exqui- 



232 CLAN-ALBIff, 

sitely fair and tiny; — I wonder she was not 
afraid of that great black monster." — " Of 
whom?" said Norman.— l< Why, of Craig- 
gillian, to be sure." — (l Is it Flora you are in 
love wiih now ? She is very charming, indeed; 
particularly since she has been married. The 
passion you speak about so much is a mighty 
embellisher, I think. But, seriously, my dear 
Drummond, what presses on your mind ?" — 
" Presses on my mind ! — is this not pressure 
enough in all conscience ?" — "When you re- 
flect that you kept me from sleep only last 
night with another of your diurnal flames, I 
hope that you will now unfold your real er- 
rand." 

u O aye, that was Mrs Montague. She 
locked so interestingly beautiful the other 
day.— Besides she gave me £ her bluest vein 
to kiss,' when, like the welcome messenger 
of Anthony, 1 returned to Mary,— poor Mary ! 
with the news of your acquittal." — Norman's 
heart was throbbing. — " But her beauty is ra- 
ther too dignified for my taste ; too much in- 
debted to native intelligence. I love the wo- 
man who hangs on my looks, and catches her 
Joveliness from the gracious smile of Captain 
Drummond. However, I am in love with her 
too, < and could adore as many more.' She 



A NATIONAL TALE. 233 

shall have a distinguished place in my sera- 
glio, — a man may speculate on that, you 
know, — so truce with that virtuous frown. But 
my favourite sultana shall be Craig- gillian's 
fairy love, — looking like a little lamb, half 
pleased and half afraid. * O, she does hang 
upon her sable chief, like a rich jewel in an 
Ethiop's ear.' — You may guess how bad I am, 
when you see I have called up all my poetry. 
I think I see her now, with her little dimpled 
face, and sunny eyes, gleaming through gold- 
en hair, so laughingly. But when she tosses 
her little head with innocent freedom, to shake 
back the ringlets which hang between her 
and Craig-gillian's smile, I am half wild and 
wholly bewitched. O Macalbin, you are a 
happy man to know nothing of the pangs of 
hopeless love !" 

"Love!" cried Norman, " Craig-gillian 
loves ! you rave to conceal some latent un- 
easiness. But let us talk of Hector. There 
is a pattern, man, for you and me. A man 
who, I believe, never thought of self in his 
life," — Drummond began to pull up his 
boots, — " his very boyish pleasures were dis- 
interested and considerate. You know how 
prosperous his career has been ; but perhaps 
you have to learn, that his zeal, industry, and 
X2 



234 CLAN-ALBIN, 

integrity, compelled fortune to be propiti- 
ous. You think him cold and reserved, and, 
for a Highlander, he is wonderfully so ; but 
when I tell you that he was for eight years in 
a remote station of India, surrounded by pe- 
rils in every shape, and with no society save 
native soldiers, listening to the shriek of the 
jackall, instead of the roar of his native Mo- 
niezvar, and all this for the sake of his rela- 
tives and dependents, and above all his ve- 
nerable father, I am sure yon will love and 
admire him. His solitary habits have tinc- 
tured his manners, but they could not reach 
his heart, — that is still glowing, and open, 
and clannish. Hector loves the last drop of 
his own blood, and is a friend to the mean- 
nest native of his country." 

" I do think him admirable indeed," said 
Drummond, somewhat displeased at this his- 
tory — " and pray, did he marry to oblige his 
father,— -eh ? Well, let my father require such 
a piece of obedience, and I will not yield in 
duty to the pious Eneas himself,— or even the 
grave Hector Craig- gillian. — Pray, does he 
ever laugh at all ?" 

" I am sure he would to see you beating 
round the bush in this manner, when some- 
thing, which my true regard for you makes 



A NATIONAL TALE. 235 

me anxious to know, has for three succes- 
sive nights brought you to my bed-side r" 

" Why, did I not tell you it was love, man. 
i O Cupid, prince of gods and men !' " 

" Love !" cried Norman, half angrily -, 
" and what says Miss Grant to all this lover" 

" Miss Grant," said Drummond, his face 
colouring, and its expression suddenly chan- 
ging, — " Why, she says she will be obliged 
to marry me off-hand, as it is impossible to 
keep me else : Now, to speak elegantly, the 
cat is out of the bag. O ho ! you are on 
your elbow now ; but don't speak yet. I half 
prevailed with her last night, and hied hither 
to tell you ; — but this morning I drove her from 
every female strong-hold, and my dear girl 
gave a tearful consent to take me to-morrow 
morning, for better for worse — that is for Cap- 
tain — for Major, — in despite of old Caustic ; — 
and the pleasure of vexing him gives a high 
gout to the delight of pleasing myself, let me 
tell you. — Pray, don't look so droll now; for 
you were the means of throwing us into what 
dramatic folks call the situation. Mary look- 
ed so prettily the other day, when I ran home 
from your trial--that is, for one's cousin Mary ; 
and my uncle dined out so opportunely, and 
I pleaded so eloquently, and Mary smiled so 



230 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sweetly, and time glided on so swiftly — and 
her father finding me there at two o'clock in 
the morning, scolded so crossly — and I, too 
proud to be scolded, replied so warmly — and 
poor Mary cried so bitterly — and I flung 
away in such wrath, and ran to you feeling 
so queerly — and indeed so indignantly." — 
" Well now, pray be serious, my dear friend," 
interrupted Norman. " You don't mean to 
marry without the consent, or, rather, with- 
out the knowledge, of Colonel Grant." — 
* Then, very seriously, I do. — I went to Mary 
this morning with a special licence in my 
pocket, and like an honest soldier told her 
very plainly, that unless I obtained a right 
to stay with her, not only till two o'clock, 
but the whole night over, I would never again 
enter her father's door ; — for the truth is, I 
am worn out with my uncle's amiable temper, 
I always wonder at other people heeding his 
ill-nature, but I can't help feeling it myself. 
My poor Mary cried sadly again — you see 
she had no good argument to oppose to my 
solicitations ; — but having a point to carry — 
for her own good — I hardened my heart — 
told her all her regard for me was pretended, 
or she never would subject me to such in- 
sults :— so, when she poor little soul protested* 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23/ 

her strong affection, I kissed her hand, took 
silence for consent, and invited his jolly re- 
verence to dine with me. I sounded him at 
a distance on doing us the good turn — but he 
shied at first. However, as my uncle's wishes 
are known, — as it must happen some time or 
other, — as what is done cannot be undone — 
and moreover, as I managed to let him win 
above twenty games at back- gammon, he has 
agreed to tie the knot — and to-morrow is the 
day big with the fate of Mary and of Allan. 
— You are to be there ; — and if ever you need 
a friend on a similar occasion, here is your 
man — to hush the watch-dog, burst the gates, 
scale the two pair of stairs window, tie the 
maid to the bed-posts, and gag her with her 
own handkerchief — release your charmer 
from durance vile, and, carrying off herself 
and her band-box, give her to your arms all 
trembling, and weeping, and blushing : — Oil 
the delicious creature, how can I part with 
her!" 

" But whither will all this lead?" inquir- 
ed Norman, greatly perplexed what course 
to pursue ; for he perceived, in spite of Drum- 
mond's flippancy, that his pride was greatly 
inflamed by the behaviour of Colonel Grant ; 
and he feared that the feelings of the dauglx- 



238 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ter and the mistress had been little regarded, 
while the father obeyed his angry, jealous ho- 
nour, and the lover his petulant revenge. — 
" Whither, dear Drummond, will all this 
lead ?"— he again repeated. 

Drummond durst not at this moment speak 
seriously, much less reflect with deliberation, 
for he knew that he was doing any thing but 
what was proper. " Lead!" he exclaimed, 
" Where should it lead but to Mary's arms — 
there's a lead for you — but you are so dull 
of comprehension. — But, in the first place, 
it will lead his reverence to my uncle's to- 
morrow, — which will lead me to produce this 
licence, — which will lead to the benediction, 
and so forth, — which will lead me to introduce 
Mrs Drummond to Colonel Grant's bad 
graces, — which will lead him to storm, — which 
will lead me to laugh, and Mary to weep. 
And when we have all done storming and 
laughing, and weeping, like dutiful chil- 
dren, as we are, we will clown on our marrow 
bones, graciously to crave his ungracious 
blessing, — which will lead to a good dinner, 
and a laugh, even from Craig- gillian, at our 
frolic, — which will lead on the gay hours 
which lead to twelve o'clock, — which will 
lead me gravely to observe, that I have been 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23g 

ordered never to be seen in my uncle's house 
after twelve, on pain of being turned out of 
doors, — which will lead him to grin in his a- 
greeable way, — which will lead Allan to fly 
up stairs, — which will lead Miss Dora to sim- 
per and leave her mistress, — which will lead 
me to vow that, as my God shall help me, my 
dear, generous girl shall never repent the 
confidence she has placed in Allan Drum- 
mond." 

Drummond's eye glistened for a moment, 
and his voice quivered. — He abruptly rose, 
and gaily added, — " On my honour, I shall 
lead you no farther ; had you not been the 
fellow I love best on earth, I should have left 
you below stairs, — so adieu, till to-morrow,—-* 
remember your department." 

" Still, dear Drummond, I am quite amaz- 
ed. — I doubt," — Drummond hated the word, 

and he hastily exclaimed, " O so am I, 

quite amazed that my uncle could behave so 
brutally, — yes, Macalbin, — your eye reproves 
the term, but I cannot find another; — more- 
over, I am quite stupified with thick port 
and dull back-gammon ; — so I will go sleep, 
nor think seriously of any thing till three 
mornings hence, when Mrs Drummond will 
come up stairs to awake me, saying, — ' My 



240 CLAN>A£BIN; 

dear Allan, papa waits breakfast.' So I'll 
yawn, languidly turn myself round, and re- 
ply, ' My dear, let him wait. 5 O, these odi- 
ous matrimonial clears, how many ugly sen- 
tences do they preface. — ' My dear, give me 
leave to tell you, you know nothing about the 
matter.' — \ My dear will you not teaze me.' 
c Damn it, my dear, will you for one moment 
hold your tongue.' — I shall not call Mary, 
my dear, for these twenty years." 

Norman now saw, that Drummond was de- 
termined to speak down every attempt at ex- 
postulation ; so he permitted him for this 
night to run on, hoping that the cool morn- 
ing hour would prove more propitious to re- 
flection and advice. 

This conversation took from Norman all 
inclination for sleep. The path of propriety 
was easy and clear, but he was still young e- 
nough to shrink from the imputation of pu- 
sillanimity in friendship, and of an unworthy 
desire to recommend himself to the favour of 
Colonel Grant by refusing to share in the 
imprudence of Drummond. The mind of 
Norman was too enlightened and too upright 
to have recourse to that convenient logic by 
which persons of weak understanding seek to 
pervert what is right in principle, into a pal- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 241 

liative for what is wrong in conduct. He 
deemed it both more safe and more honour- 
able to act against a firm conviction of duty, 
and thus incur the pains of self-reproach, ra- 
ther than blunt or warp his moral perception, 
and venture to justify that error which a 
known false sense of honour led him wilfully 
to commit. 

Love, on this night, seemed to have con- 
spired against the repose of Norman. He 
had hardly dropt asleep, when he was again 
disturbed by Leary at his tent-door, bawling, 
" I'm loth to disturb you, if you are not awake 
at any rate, as it's only eight o'clock." 

" That is very considerate; but what is the 
matter ? Come in. Have you seen the Cap- 
tain r" 

" Troth, no, it was the Colonel himself," 
replied Leary, who now appeared very finely- 
dressed and powdered, a kind of awkward and 
bashful drollery visible in his countenance 
and deportment, while he hung by the foot of 
Norman's bed, twirling his cap, scratching 
his head, and balancing himself, first on one 
leg, and then on the other. 

"And what said he?" inquired Norman, 
who fancied all this finery and these airs in 
honour of Drummond's nuptials, and the se- 

VOL. III. Y 



242 CLAN-ALBIN, 

cret confided to Leary, who was understood 
to centinel the door while the ceremony was 
performing. 

" O, he is done of his grumbling now: Miss 
Grant, you see, Sir, gained him over. So, if 
you plase, it will happen this morning, and I 
come to tell you, and ax your advice." — 
" And has Colonel Grant consented, then ? n 
cried Norman, in amazement. — " In troth 
has he. — O don't look at me! — I'm not tell- 
ing a word of a lie at present. But, though 
he had refused, there was no help; only I 
thought it decent to give the family my coun- 
tenance, as they have always been kindly to 
Dora, you see, Sir." 

" Dora!" exclaimed Macalbin; but, quick- 
ly recollecting himself, he added, smiling, 
" You were, certainly, very condescending in 
your attention to the Colonel's family. But 
this is a sudden determination." 

" Och, all the regiment knows I have been 
her bachelor these three weeks. She loved 
me for my grief for poor Bourke; for, before 
that, sorrow bit of her would look to Paddy. 
Soyousee,Sir,astheould woman, my grandmo- 
ther, who always prophesied I would be a credit 
to the family, since she saw, by my big nose, 
that I was a rale Leary, and not a bit of me 



A NATIONAL TALE. 243 

an O'Shaughnasey, which is the mother's 
side. As she was always sending me down 
messages, on her blessing to have done with 
my wildness, and take myself up, as I was the 
first-born, I took a serous thought of it. And 
Dora being a clever, tidy girl, a favourite in 
the Colonel's family, and a mighty good 
washer and smoother of fine linen,"—" I see 
it all," interrupted Norman, who knew that 
Leary was never at a loss for good reasons to 
justify any thing he wished to accomplish.— 
" And since it is so, Paddy, I trust this will 
be a new motive to steadiness and good con- 
duct." 

" I knowed you would be telling me of 
steadiness," replied Leary, laughing, — " but I 
resolved to tell you, and ax you for all that." 

" Well, since you were so good-natured," 
said Norman, smiling at his shrewdness, " I 
think I shall say no more about steadiness to- 
day. But when we go into quarters, I shall 
use my influence to get you permission to 
work at your trade ; for you know a married 
man must be diligent to earn money to keep 
his wife comfortably j and I trust you will do 
so." 

This was not the precise sort of kindness 
which Leary relished. But he was grateful 



244 GLAN-ALBIN, 

even for this, and bowed very low, saying, 
? Sure I intend to act by her like njantleman, 
and to do what is right and honourable. They 
say she was too fond of handsome Bourke. 
That was a fault of my own, too, and all our 
women admired him, so I can't blame Dora." 

" Nor can any one else," said Norman.— 
" You intend, it seems, to be very honour- 
able ; I hope she will be very discreet. God 
bless you both." — " And you, Sir ; and for- 
give myself for trying to deceive you; for it 
was all over this morning after six o'clock 
mass ; but thinking you might take it amiss 
not to have your advice axed — M 

" O Leary," said Norman, laughing, " I 
never take the truth amiss. You know I am 
only rich in good-will. Take this bit of gold 
to treat our old comrades in the " philoso- 
pher's tent" on this happy day ; and if ever I 
am a richer man, I shall not forget how our 
acquaintance commenced, and that Paddy 
Leary axed my consent to marry a wife when 
he had been three hours a married man.'' 

Leary coloured while he laughed; and, 
with his usual address, added : — " And thin 
told you the truth, though it put shame on 
himself; and never find his mind asy in 
cheating ycu did Pat Leary, who is prouder 



A NATIONAL TALE. 245 

of being one of the philosophers, than was 
he on the throne of Tara the day." — This 
was not exactly true, perhaps ; but at that mo- 
ment Leary felt it true, and Norman was con- 
tented to believe him. 

When Leary withdrew, Norman dressed 
himself to visit Drummond. Norman was 
hopeless of dissuading him from the purpose 
to which he was urged by affection, and goad- 
ed by exasperated pride ; but friendship and 
duty demanded a strenuous effort. If it fail- 
ed, Norman retained an honest resolution of 
acting wrong. The sight of his young pupils 
at breakfast, by reminding him of the trust 
reposed in his prudence and integrity, ren- 
dered this resolution more painful. To for- 
feit his own esteem, the confidence of the 
General, and perhaps blast the prospects of 
Ids future life, was too much even to preserve 
the friendship of Drummond; and, after some 
farther honourable debate with himself, he 
took the wiser part of coming to an open ex- 
planation with his friend. Drummond, at all 
times prone to take offence, was now ex- 
tremely displeased. He was conscious that 
he was acting wrong, — but impatient of being 
convinced, nay convicted of error. 
, After a very unpleasant conversation, he 

Y 2 



240 CLAN-ALBIN, 

flung off with an ironical compliment to the 
wonderful prudence and circumspection of so 
young a man, — qualities so necessary to a 
rising man, — a man who would thrive in this 
good world. Norman knew that tins was the 
language of resentment ; the slang of that 
careless friendship and affected generosity, 
which he despised, and yet it cruelly wound- 
ed his feelings. When Drummond went off, 
he was unable to make any effort to detain 
him, and for a little time he suffered the bit- 
terest pangs of poverty ; for he perceived 
that it laid him open to the humiliating sus- 
picion of meanness and baseness ; of a wish, 
— a dishonest wish, — to recommend himself to 
patronage at the expense of his friend. Drum- 
mond was exceedingly irritated at the pa- 
tience and composure with which Norman 
had borne his reproaches ; and when he had 
been about a minute gone, he flew back for 
the special purpose of affronting him still 
more, by requesting him at least not to be- 
tray his secret. He saw the convulsive throbs 
of Norman's bosom, who leaned against the 
side of the tent with his face shrouded by his 
clasped hands, — and but for his " manhood" 
and his " soldiership/' — the former quality 
always prompting him to vindicate the errors 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2-4 7 

into which the latter betrayed him, — he could 
have fallen on the neck of his friend and be- 
sought his forgiveness. As it was, he slipt 
away in silence, wishing he could yet retrace 
his steps, but now soothing himself with the 
belief, " that to go back was tedious as go 
o'er." 

He went straight to his cousin, to acquaint 
her that Norman could not be present at their 
private marriage, — and to her he did justice 
to the character of his friend. Miss Grant 
had always wavered ; but the part which Nor- 
man had taken, and the struggle which she 
heard it cost him, confirmed her opinion. — 
" Allan, ought we — can we, — in honour com- 
mit an action which Mr Macalbin cannot ho- 
nourably witness }" said she. — " Bless me, 
no — yes ; there is a great difference between 
the principals, and those who are only art 
and part, as I shall shew you afterwards ; but 
just now I must be as busy as Caleb Quotem, 
for I have as many functions this morning. 
Now be a brave girl for a few hours longer ; 
and when it is over you will rind it is nothing." 
But Mary felt that it was a very serious some- 
thing : She thought of the moral courage of 
Norman, not as a thing to admire, but to 
imitate ; and going to her father, declared the 



243 CLAN-ALBIN, 

truth, and the whole truth, and threw herself 
on his paternal mercy. The Colonel was first 
amazed, then provoked, and at last melted* 
That a plot of this kind should have been 
hatched in the family of so rigid a discipli- 
narian, — one who made it his boast that the 
motion of his eye was obe3*ed, — was some- 
what extraordinary. But he was conscious 
of having used his nephew very ill, and was 
even meditating some atonement,, and the 
honourable dealing cf Mary and of Macalbin 
deserved reward. Like the Sultan of the In- 
dies y however, though resolved that the story- 
teller should live, " he went out as usual, 
without acquainting Scheherazade with his 
resolution." 

Mary fancied she saw relenting kindness 
in his face. She heard him go up to the 
apartment of a lady, the widow of a subaltern 
officer, who, since the death of his wife, had 
acted as his housekeeper, and a sort of cha- 
per 'one to his daughter. But this was merely 
to order a fine dinner in all haste. She found 
means to learn, that a number of notes, which 
she had seen him send off, were respectively 
addressed to the members of the Glanville 
family, Craig-gillian, the General, Macalbin, 
and the Bishop of . " What can he 



A NATIONAL TALE. 24Q 

want with the Bishop ?" thought Mary. She 
knew that he hated the company of clergy- 
men ; he abhorred those who tolerated his 
habitual swearing ; he was too well bred to 
swear before the respectable part of the cler- 
gy ; and he could not bear, that is, easily bear, 
any sort of restraint which was not strictly 
professional. Before he went out to the pa- 
rade, he sternly told Mary, to proceed in 
every particular as had been previously re- 
solved, and leave all else to him. Mary, 
trembling, promised obedience. 

About twelve o'clock Norman received the 
following note from the Colonel :— 

" D* Macalbin, 

" I have heard of your soldier-like conduct. 
It is not lost on me. Do in all things as 
Drummond directs. Keep my secret, and 
rest assured of my approbation. If he has 
his mine ready to spring, I have my counter- 
mine. " J. G." 

Norman was comforted by this note; for he 
had justly concluded that the anger of the 
Colonel would be much more violent, and 
perhaps more persevering than Drummond 
seemed to anticipate. Yet he disliked all 



250 CLAN-ALBIN, 

this plotting and contrivance ; this " palter- 
ing in a double sense," this dull denouement 
of a stale farce, — and foresaw that the agree- 
able surprise might still more deeply insult 
the jealous honour of Drummond, while it 
compromised the dignity of Miss Grant. 

He now went to Drummond. — " Captain 
Drummond, I wish to attend you this morn- 
ing, if you will now permit me."—" If I will 
permit you I — you kindest of kind friends, — 
to be sure I will permit you, — thank you, — 
bless you ; — but do you, — have you changed 
your mind r" — " My mind is the same ; I still 
think you ought to make a candid acknow- 
ledgment to Colonel Grant." — " Better and 
better," said Drummond, " you know and 
esteem virtue ; but you love Drummond bet- 
ter. Now this is the friendship that pleases 
me. I am like that reasonable lad, the Ve- 
netian bravo, with Rosabell, I must be loved 
with all my crimes on my head. Well, once 
I am married I shall repent, and live virtuous- 
ly as a wedded man, — iui pere cle Jamille,-— 
God help me, and it ought to do. And now, 
Macalbin, unless you swear that you will ne- 
ver tell the share you had in this matter, you 
cannot witness my secret nuptials. I will not 
have your sins on my conscience. 1 ' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 251 

Norman nodded his head, and evasively 
said, " Let Paddy give me intimation." 

The parade at last had an end, though 
Drummond believed it never would. He saw 
the Colonel mount his horse for his usual 
ride, and ran to the lodgings of the chaplain, 
whom he sent off, and then flew to Norman. 

" Ha! so fine — and all in honour of me — 
or Mary perhaps : — Well, come, come — for I 
have dreadful misgivings — would it were all 
over — priest, and blessing, and reconcilia- 
tion." 

They went out together, as if to pay a 
morning visit to Miss Grant. On the stairs 
of the Colonel's house they met Mr and Mrs 
Leary. The former, with many winks and 
twitches of the sleeve, acquainted his Ho- 
nour, that " his ould Worship had returned 
from his ride, and that his Reverence was hid 
in the pantry." 

" O Lord!" cried Drummond. " But I'll 
take him off, if the life be in me," said Leary, 
in one of his hoarse whispers ; and Drum- 
mond, still ascending, began to sing, 

" Did ye ever hear what roaring cheer 
" Was had at Paddy's wedding, O ; 

" And how so gay they pass'd the day, 

M From the churching to the bedding, O ?" — 



252 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and to salute Dora, or rather to smack Ins- 
own lips, till the stairs rang again, for the 
amiable purpose of provoking his uncle. 

" Has Leary waited on you, Sir ? — Hymen's 
altars are flaming in our regiment this morn- 
ing. Shall I order him up? for he only waits 
to receive Miss Grant's congratulations." 
The new-married pair were ordered into the 
room ; and the Colonel, from regard to old 
Tracey, condescended to drink the health of 
the bride. 

" The health of the bride, and God bless 
her," said Drummond, half in spirit, and 
half in tenderness, glancing his eye on his 
cousin.- — " You are very gay this morning, 
Drummond ; almost as gay as if, like Pad- 
dy there, you were a bridegroom." 

" Aye, 77io?i oncle, in the hope that my turn 
mav come next." He smiled, and nodded to 
Norman. The Colonel also grinned to him ; 
while Miss Grant blushed to the eyes, and felt 
extremely distressed at this game at cross- 
purposes. 

" Charming weather," said Drummond, 
with affected carelessness. " Do you ride 
this morning, Sir?" 

" His Honour does not always ride when 
he puts on his spurs,** said Leary, loud 



A NATIONAL TALE. 253 

enough to be heard ; and louder still, " The 
jantlemcn are trying them rockets to day at 
Glanville Park, I lam ; so feared we might 
miss your Honour, as the General is gone, 
and all of them — just as we came too ; so 
sure your Honour is not too late yet." — The 
Colonel paid no attention to Leary's empha- 
tic yet; and Drummond added, u Aye, is it 
to-day ? I thought they would embrace the 
first good day ; and this, amid these equi- 
noctial storms, is delightful. — Are you quite 
sure, Paddy ?" 

" Och, as sure as death itself," cried Leaiy, 
who never scrupled to tell a few lies, ' less or 
more,' to serve a friend, — " The day it is, and 
sure didn't I see the General on Sir Lancelot, 
and his new leopard-skin saddle-cloth, and — " 

° Not to-day, but to-morrow," said the 
Colonel, drily. — Leary bowed, " The mor- 
row is it ? O, very like, your Honour ; it may 
he the morrow — though this is the better day 
for a fair trial ; that is, if your Honour plases, 
I'll run to tell you want to try them." 

Leary received no encouragement, and he 
was forced to retire, whispering to Drummond, 
" Be asy." 

Another tedious quarter of an hour passed 
away. The Colonel sat, and s^t, and Drum- 
VOL. III. 7. 



254 CLAX-ALBIN, 

mond whistled and fretted, and fretted and 
whistled ; — Norman traced the whole course 
of the Ganges, and Miss Grant doubly po- 
lished every key of her piano -forte. The Co- 
lonel next examined a barometer, prophesied 
more rain, and began a long dissertation on 
the moist climate of Ireland. " This is the 
first we have ever heard of his philosophy ," 
whispered Drummond : " You will soon see 
the last of mine — this is beyond endurance.*' 
The Colonel entered on the velocity of can- 
non-balls, and { talked about it and about 
it,' till he forgot the purpose of his ever- 
lasting harangues, and spoke on in real for- 
getfulness. Leary had watched for his exit, 
till patience was more than exhausted. He 
returned, and in a few minutes was knocking 
at the door of the drawing-rObm, which he 
suddenly threw open, and appeared puffing, 
and blowing, and perspiring, with a great 
black cat under his arm. 

" I ax a thousand pardons, your Honours— 
but my father, ouldTracey, being just looked 
on every minute, and wishing above all things 
to see your Honour/ I run, for the life" — 

" Tracey dying!" — see me — does he wish 
that — poor Tracey— but what is the matter ?" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 255 

" The St Anthony's fire, your Honour — 
with a face as red — as red as your Honour 
ever — seen a boiled lobster. We are going to 
try the three drops of the black cat's blood." 
Leary pinched the cat, which squalled as a cor* 
roborating evidence; and the Colonel snatched 
up his hat, to pay a farewel visit to old Tracey, 
utterly unsuspicious of trick or falsehood. 

Norman steadily examined the face of 
Leary, to whom his presence was at all times 
a second conscience— much more quick, in- 
deed, than that which long habits of false- 
hood had deadened to the love and the prac- 
tice of truth. 

" It might be the gin he took," said Leary, 
who comprehended that scrutinizing glance, 
" though my father never gets drunk but on 
Patrick's day, and the Abram day ; but an 
ould woman said it was the St Anthony's* 
fire/' 

" O fie, fie, Paddy," cried Drummond, 
laughing. " But now, fly — run — get his Re- 
verence from the pantry ; 1*11 secure the 
door." The Colonel returned. Leary again 
pinched the cat, and withdrew, with a look of 
despair, to contrive some new expedient. 

" Before I go, Gentlemen, you must pro- 
mise to dine with me," — Drummond's face 



256 CLAN-ALBIJST, 

brightened. " I promise with pleasure for 
both, Sir/' 

" Have a good dinner for your friends, 
Miss Grant." 

" I second the motion for a good dinner," 
cried Drummond, willing to spare his cousin 
the pain of reply. " A good dinner, is at all 
times a good thing ; — and what if we should 
have a little ball in honour of the wedding, — 
Macalbin, could you, think ye, dance a Strath- 
spey with the bride ?" 

The poor bride could hardly command her 
tears. — The Colonel again withdrew, — Drum- 
mond listened till the hall-door was shut after 
him,— -darted down stairs, — sent some of the 
servants on errands, locked others into the 
kitchen, — and returned with a large key, a 
large chaplain, and little Dora Leary. The 
key, he solemnly deposited on a table, grave- 
ly swearing, that no soul should enter or 
quit the house till he was Benedict, 

The party stood up, Drummond whisper- 
ed courage and comfort to Mary, and taking 
her arm within his own, gently drew her for- 
ward. — She burst into tears. iC Dear Allan, 
my father knows all ; he, I fear, is within." 

This was the moment which Norman dread- 
ed. The face of Drummond underwent a ra- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 257 4 

pid and dreadful change ; — he tossed away the 
hand which he held, exclaiming — " Is it possi- 
ble, Madam, that you have plotted, not only to 
betray, but to insult me ? — And you, Sir ?" 
turning fiercely to Norman. " But 1 shall 
find a time to'speak with you." — He was flying 
off, when Norman caught him in his arms. — 
" Drummond, my dear friend, are you mad, 
— has Miss Grant not endured enough alrea- 
dy? — be a man, and all will end well.'V- Drum- 
mond ceased to struggle, and curiosity took 
place of anger. The folding doors which 
connected the drawing-rooms flew open, as if 
by enchantment, and Drummond saw a long 
and laughing perspective of white robes and 

scarlet coats, and, farther off still, Bishop 

in full canonicals. General advancing, 

led in Monimia ; and, behind him,- came the 
old Colonel, gallantly squiring Mrs Monro, 
while over his shoulder peeped Craig-gillian, , 
his own serious smile displaced by his fa- 
ther's good-humoured laugh. 

" Here we come, unbidden guests," said 
the General. — " But not unwelcome, certain- 
ly," replied Drummond, bowing, with a face 
of scarlet. 

Paddy, who stood without, as centinel, on 
hearing this noise, ventured to peep in, to see 
z 2 



258 CLAN-ALBItf, 

how matters were proceeding, and turning 
up his great eyes, exclaimed, tc O Christ ! 
— the kay, the hay." — Drummond had adroit- 
ly slipt it to Dora, who stole away, followed 
by the waddling chaplain, whose beneficed 
hue had been succeeded by the paleness of 
terror. 

" His Honour does not always ride when he 
puts on his spurs,— and his Honour does not al- 
ways ride when he takes up his whip," thun- 
dered the Colonel. Norman closed the door 
on the objects of his just resentment. 

" Captain Drummond, I hope that your 
character will not be less respectable, nor 
your life less happy, for receiving my daugh- 
ter Mary from the hand — the heart of her 
father." The Colonel spoke these words 
proudly and feelingly. Drummond bowed 
very low. — " I have been somewhat harsh, 
perhaps, and you have not been over dutiful: 
Mary has been wiser than both ; — she has 
often made us friends, — be this hand our 
bond of union." He gave her hand to his 
nephew with more tenderness than might 
have been expected from stuff so stern ; and 
Drummond completely melted, spoke and 
looked his part very becomingly. " t flatter 
myself that your mutual vows will not be the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25Q 

less impressive for being pronounced in the 
presence of these ladies and gentlemen," said 
the Colonel. " Nor less fortunate, certain- 
ly," replied Drummond, bowing round. 

Every one seemed to feel that he had now 
been sufficiently lectured, and the General 
kindly beckoned the Bishop, who, stepping 
forward, arrested a fresh expostulatory speech. 
Drummond now appeared to enjoy perfect 
ease and self-possession, and passing Nor- 
man, archly whispered, — 

1 So Vm to have no elopement after alV 

No persons of common sensibility, in the 
situation of Norman and Monimia, could have 
witnessed such a ceremony unmoved. But 
though their emotion had been visible, it 
would have been unperceived. Every one 
was absorbed in his own feelings. % 

When the Highland custom of drinking; 
healths, and the usual congratulations were 
ended, the ladies retired with the bride; and 
Drummond was summoned to a conference 
with his uncle. He returned, and drawing 
Norman's arm within his own, with a face 
pregnant of matter, took the way to his tent. 
Arrived there, he began to exclaim, " Paddy 
Leary, Paddy Leary, get me a clean shirt; 
pull off my boots, — a boot-jack, a boot-jack, 



260 CLAN-ALBIN, 

a guinea for a boot-jack !"— Leary attended. 
" Here is money for you ; make a bale-fire as 
high as Croagh-Patrick, and get all royally 
drunk to-night." 

" Long life to you ! It would ill become us 
to stand in the way of your honour's orders," 
said Leary, taking the money, and resolving 
on prompt obedience. 

" I am very much inclined to dispute the 
propriety of your Honour's orders," said Nor- 
man, laughing, as Leary withdrew. 

"O !of thatto-morrow,whichistobe the com- 
mencement of a new era ; — the reign of pru- 
dence and sobriety, and — and — and all the 
married virtues. But, pray put yourself into 
the attitude of listening. This has been a cri- 
tical day ; but I forgive you, and you forgive 
me and my uncle. After all, if it was not for 
■ Ms bow-wow way? he has not a bad heart. 
He was quite right about my late visits; — 
since I have been a married man, — that is, 
within the last half-hour, — my notions of fe- 
male conduct have risen considerably. Well, 
I am to get leave of absence for six weeks, 
that we may bury our bridal blushes in a post- 
chaise, and bowl away for Scotland, — not 
that we need to run from our friends to save 
our credit at this time. I am no fool, — and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 20 1 

Mary, — but now that we are one flesh I must 
not praise her. How my gorge does rise at 
the fulsome fondness with which some young 
wives bedaub their lords. Pray did you ne- 
ver feel inclined to box their ears ?" 

" Truly I never was exposed to any temp-* 
tation," said Norman, laughing. 

" Happy you, — fogh ! — Well, now that I 
have got the better of it, see here a carte 
blanche to provide for my increased expendi- 
ture. By this, no doubt, I am to be bound 
over to my good behaviour, and economy, 
and all that. We shall see. — God knows he 
has been a hard-hearted uncle to me. When 
I came to his regiment, a there boy, so great 
was his heroic terror that I would disgrace 
him by cowardice, or draw upon him the im- 
putation of partiality, that every piece of ser- 
vice, harder or more mortifying than another, 
was reserved for poor Allan. But for fight- 
ing, — to do him justice — he always gave me 
my stomachful of that, and as little credit as 
possible for the doing of it. When I disco- 
vered spirit, I was called quarrelsome ; and 
when prudence, pusillanimous. I had a shock- 
ing life ; but I compelled him to respect me, 
and at length he did respect me. Now, Mac- 



262 CLAN-ALBIN, 

albin, tell me, as your friend, do you wish to 
follow your present profession l v 

" Do you think I ought ?" 

" I cannot say ; but I will tell you my sto- 
ry ; — it has been that of thousands indeed ; 
but it may be yours, and you shall j udge." x 



A NATIONAL TALE. 263 



CHAP. XL. 



Behold a man of war assailed me, 



He told me of his battles o'er and o'er ; 
Shew'd me good store of scars, but none of cash 
No, not a doit : but still he vapour'd much 
Of what a certain prince would do, and talk'd 
Of this and that commission— in the clouds. 



" At the age of fifteen," said Drummond, 
" my buckram uncle got me a commission. 
I joined him a child, — a spoiled, petulant, 
grandame's imp. What a world opened to 
me! — The pressure of a thousand evils, re- 
buffs, and mortifications, made me in a few 
months start up into a man, — a real man in 
the ranks and at the mess ; but with little 
Mary and Dora Tracey, I still enjoyed a game 
at bowls amazingly, when no one was by. 

" I was to live with my uncle ; but we quar- 
relled in three days, and I was thrown upon 
my own resources. I am not ashamed to tell 
you, though I would be hanged, or damned, 



264 CLAN-ALBIN, 

before I told it to another, that, after the ex- 
pense of my education and outfit, I could 
neither in justice nor honour make any de- 
mand on the home establishment. I was too 
sulky to accept of pecuniary assistance from 
my uncle, — nor did he urge me much, — that 
might have been rude, you know. How I 
got on amazes me ; my pride could never 
brook suiting my appearance to my circum- 
stances. I think, nay, I am sure, that I don't 
value a man a pin's head more or less for his 
dress, unless I were going to buy the man, 
clothes, and all ; but I never could be recon- 
ciled to a shabby equipage for my own pre- 
cious person. So, for long, long years, I* did 
penance in fine dressed company, with more 
gold on my doublet than in my pockets. 
When I could not afford a ball ticket, I hated 
tumult and dancing ; and when too poor for 
the opera, I loathed music. I had — I ought 
to say I acquired — a constitutional aversion to 
wine." 

" Which you have since lost," said Nor- 
man, laughing. 

" O, in seven years a man's constitution 
changes! The ennui of country-quarters is 
dreadful to an un-idead officer. He games 
and drinks. I loved study > — that is, I read 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2f)5 

novels. When very poor, and proud, and sul- 
len, I tried my hand at being a philosopher 
too; but that would never do, — as the old 
man said cheerfulness would still break in." 

" And is sullenness philosophy ?" 

" So the world says : but I give you lessons 
fresh from life ; none of the mustiness of phi- 
losophy ; lessons of i thrift, thrift, Horatio/ *' 

" And I have need of them." 

Drummond, without noticing this remark, 
proceeded. — " I had an utter contempt of 
all bijouterie and gimcrackerie, and that pet- 
ty traffic which prevails in ship -cabins and 
mess-rooms, — as, * I'll exchange my opera- 
glass for your topaz seal ; and you'll give me 
your gold watch for my pistols and Belcher 
handkerchief ; — and done— and done/ I 
scorned to be a dealer in small wares, and 
resolutely stuck by this heir-loom — (he pulled 
out an old-fashioned massive gold watch) — ► 
and these " seal-rings of my grandfather's." 
This saved me, and may save you a world of 
money, and, as I think, of respectability. 

" So, with a little dash, and quackery, and 
a bold face, I still got on — a fine, dashing, 
thoughtless dog." 

" People may talk as they will of monastic 
mortifications;— what are they, after all, to the 

vol. in. a a 



266 CLAN-ALBINO 

self-denial of a man with a subaltern's pay, 
and a gentleman's spirit. Had my self-denial 
proceeded from a good motive, I would have 
deserved to be canonized. My stiff-backed 
patron, who alone could guess the truth, had 
no pity for me ; — he had got on in the same 
way himself, thousands of brave Scotch offi- 
cers have, and without the revenue of my good 
spirits, or the comfort of my friendly novels. 
Peace to the generous souls who labour in 
this useful vocation ! and for a few shillings 
a month keep a poor man's fancy rolling in 
gold ; — the more noble too, as one may fairly 
suppose that, like their devoted reader, they 
are not overstocked themselves. " 

" Well, Drummond, you have merit, I be- 
lieve — but you might have had more — you 
needed not all this stuffing and seeming" 

" You are wrong, Macalbin. Had I in- 
deed — " and he smiled, and glanced his eye 
over the fine form of Norman — " had I indeed 
been such a column of true majesty, I could 
have afforded to be an honest man, though a 
poor one. But, on the whole, 1 bless my po- 
verty. Had I been richer, I would have been 
more dissipated, and perhaps more of a cox- 
comb, though probably less saucy, and sud- 
den, and quick in quarrel. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26 7 

" Now have I run through, e'en from my 
boyish days, my strange eventless history — 
for which I suppose you wont give me a world 
of thanks. But I am going to tell it at my fa- 
ther's fireside, whore I sliall be thanked — and 
where I shall be neither saucy nor well-dress- 
ed ; for I shall be sure of admiring auditors. 
A man is so great in his own father's chimney- 
corner, after an absence of seven years — of 
course so happy, so complacent — unless the 
man be a brute. O Norman, of all the friends 
merit can gain, or success command— com- 
mend me to the dear old souls who love me, 
because I am their own Allan." — 

M Of whom they have reason to be so 
proud," said Norman, " hypocrite though 
he be." 

" Of whom a very small matter would make 
them proud. Happy for me that one's own 
dog is better than one's neighbour's lion. 
— Well, is it soldier or not soldier, — that is 
the question ?" 

" There is nothing inviting yet — you must 
tell me farther." 

" O, I shall tell you all. I was three years 
an ensign — and my promotion was equally 
creditable to myself, and to him who recom- 
mended me. — It was not my uncle. — I one 



268 CLAN-ALBIN, 

day dined in a military circle, in which was 
a person of the most elevated rank. I was 
still a boy — perhaps I looked a simple boy ; 
and this great personage, playing with his 
glass, fillipped some of his wine into my 
Face. My blood was boiling. There were 
but two ways to wash out this stain. I pre- 
served my temper, fixed my eye steadily up- 
on him, and, smilingly, threw a whole glass 

full into his face, saying, " Your , we 

do it this way in Scotland *.*' In a few days 
I was made lieutenant — and lieutenant I con- 
tinued for six long years. Everybody said 
that I was an excellent officer, and I was in- 
clined to believe them ; for, though no hero, 
I had, and have, I trust, a clear, and full, 
and honourable perception of what every sol- 
dier ought to understand by the word duty. 
I had several times been offered the payment 
of a company — ' O dem it, 1 I swaggered at 
that; my poverty could never seduce my 
pride. But so excellent an officer could not 
refuse the adjutantcy, especially as my ac- 
ceptance must be useful to the regiment— 
this pattern regiment. It was very useful to 
me. I had hard work ; but I was lavishly 

* Some of my readers are no doubt acquainted with this 
altered anecdote \ but it can scarcely be told too often. 



A NATIONAL TALE* 2&Q' 

praised, and excessively vain of my doings. 
I was now comparatively rich too ', and, lest 
love should prey on my suu-burnt cheek, I 
spoke of matrimony. I was told, s It was 
damned nonsense to think of that yet;' and 
you know who told me so. However, I was 
not forbidden to hope ; and after hoping on 
for other four years, I am senior captain, and 
married — perhaps too soon. Poor dear Mary I" 
Drummond paused and sighed, and Nor- 
man echoed his sigh more deepljr — " A sol- 
dier thirteen years/' thought he, " a good, 
gallant soldier, and too soon married. Ah 
Monimia! — to wear out life in that cold lan- 
guishing hope ' which maketh the heart sick.' 
Selfish that I am, could I condemn your youth 
to this cheerless waste of its finest capacities 
of enjoyment." — While lie shrunk under the 
self-inflicted tortures of a generous remorse, 
Drummond also was pursuing visions of that 
poverty which affection embitters ; but he 
soon recovered* — " Courage! my dear lad— 
this is the dismal side ; now for the bright 
and captivating. The hardships which seem 
so dreadful, when compressed into a conver- 
sation of five minutes, are light as a feather 
when expanded over the surface of twelve 
years of youthful life. I have much good to 
A a 2 



270 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tell you. I have been in America, the East 
and West-Indies, Egypt, and Gibraltar ; and 
in every climate I have luckily, or wisely, 
preserved, if not good health, the capacity 
of recovery." 

" And what is mere health," said Norman, 
who had never known sickness, and could not 
be reconciled to such tame notions of pros- 
perity. 

" A mighty good to an officer. — Besides, I 
have never been made prisoner ; aifd, though 
twice wounded, am still sound in every limb. 
Once too, hear it, O Norman ! I had the 
pleasure, in a long gazette, to see honour- 
able mention made of Lieutenant Drummond. 
Never did so brilliant a paragraph appear in 
print, always excepting another, with which I 
ran over my father's heathy domain for a 
whole day, reading to man$ woman, and child, 
u Allan Drummond, Gent, to be Ensign" 

Drummond burst into a violent peal of 
laughter, which was by no means pleasing to 
Norman. It was stripping life of all illusion, 
and of all interest. 

" But I have quite another stile of adven- 
tures to tell you now," said Drummond, when 
he had composed himself. — " This is but half 
a soldier's story. Think of the ladies I have 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2? 1 

loved, and the ladies who have loved me. As 
for the battles, and duels, and wounds, and 
valour, these are mere trite common -place e- 
vents; but the squaws, and baladiers, and Cir- 
cassians, and Jewesses, that * upwards and 
downwards, thwarting and convolved,' chase 
each other through my story, are wonderfully 
interesting.''* 

" If you please, we will defer this pleasure 
till another opportunity," said Norman, laugh- 
ing. " But you have, I think, said nothing 
of your king and country, and glory, and 
ambition," — he averted his glowing face, and 
spoke hesitatingly, conscious of the ridicule 
to which he exposed himself, — " and the 
thanks of a grateful nation." — He looked up 
and smiled, for this was a standing paragraph 
in the sermon with which the chaplain regal- 
ed their ears on Sundays, and become a cant 
phrase in the regiment, where it was felt with 
pride, and talked of with ridicule. — Such is 
mankind, 

" My king and country! God bless them 
both," replied Drummond fervently; and 
Norman felt reassured, and was even grateful 
for his seriousness. — " I have served them, I 
trust faithfully ; but thousands who longed 
for my place would have filled it with equal 



272 CLAN-ALBtN, 

credit; — tens of thousands would have moved 
like chess-men through this war game, at the 
will of the directing mind, with regularity, 
courage, and intrepidity, superior to mine* 
No, no, Norman, no man now-a-days needs 
enter the army for conscience sake, though 
both honour and conscience often bind him 
to his post when he would gladly retire. We 
have an overflow of good officers, a glut of 
the stuff of which good officers are made, and 
sad experience has made us proficients in the 
art of moulding it to our purposes ; so that 
every man who chooses may, with great pro- 
priety, remain under his domestic fig-tree* 
To be sure a man may think a little of his 
country in the second place. c Pray, my dear, 
what are we to do with these boys?' says 
mamma. * They are grown amazingly, and 
they eat, — how they do eat!' c Why, my 
dear, we must try the law for John, as the 
estate is small; send Peter to India to his 
uncle; and get Allan a commission. In 
God's name, what more can we do?' — So 
Allan is consecrated to the service of his 
country, though you won't deny that it is pro- 
bable any other mamma's Tom, or Dick, or 
Will, might have served it equally well.'' 
Norman was again disposed to quarrel with 



A NATIONAL TALE. 273 

Drummond. He had an art, and it appeared 
a pleasure, in stripping human motives of 
all that is pure, and inspiring, — at least so 
thought Macalbin, — and his grave features 
betrayed his belief. — " Let me, however," 
exclaimed Drummond, " make an illustrious 
exception for such men as Moore, and Gra. 
ham, and Fergusson, — those leading minds, 
inspired by the divine ambition which makes 
war the glorious thing you fancy; and for 
those "young and princely novices," — and he 
nodded to Norman, — " who, exalted by the 
enthusiasm of this animating trade, grow up 
into such heroic men," 

" Very well turned; but I don't quite for- 
give you. You have a sad lack of romance, 
that's the truth, for all your novel-reading.— 
You a hero !" 

" You may well say it, sitting here on my 
wedding.day. But meet me in half an hour; 
and, when dinner is over, and my uncle in good 
humour, pray second me with all your might 
in getting a bill of indemnity passed to screen 
poor Leary. You know that with me he is as 
bull- horned as the devil." 

" I am sure I know one reason for the de- 
cay of invention in our days," said Norman 
gravely. 



274 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" And what is that, pray ?" 

" Our attachment to set forms of speech, 
which spares us the trouble of inventing any 
thing original or apposite. Every thing is as 
hard, or as soft, or as cold, or as hot, or as 
sweet, or as sour, or as ugly, or as handsome, 
or as tall, or as short, or as thick, or as thin, 
or as tight, or as wide, — as the devil. He 
walked away, and Diummond, who was busy 
with a razor and strap, cried, " Here, now, is 
a razor as blunt as — " 

" Pray, now, save your credit ; don't be the 
man with but one comparison, and that a vile 
one." * 

" As blunt — as blunt as a man's wit who 
has no comparison but — ." From that day 
Drummond gave up this and several other fa- 
vourite modes of speech. 

The wedding-party met at dinner; and, in 
compliance with the entreaty of Mrs Drum- 
mond, her father requested that the marriage 
should not be disclosed till the young couple 
had set off for Scotland, which they were to 
do in a few days. The Colonel was, at the 
same time, to make a journey to England; 
and it was also arranged, that Craig-gillian, 
for the few weeks he remained, should occu- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 275 

py Colonel Grant's house with Monimia as 
the guest of his wife. 

Next day the General entertained a large 
party at dinner, for the understood purpose 
of introducing the pupils of Norman and their 
tutor to the officers of the regiment, and seve- 
ral other gentlemen, whose acquaintance he 
wished them to cultivate. So well-timed, and 
judicious, and delicate were his attentions to 
Norman, that, without drawing upon him the 
overwhelming attention of this numerous 
company, he afforded the most favourable 
opportunities for the modest display of his 
acquirements. Sometimes he drew forth his 
powers, and sometimes opened occasions for 
their natural developement; and managed, 
with so much amiable address, that those who 
had wished to consider Norman the protege of 

General , were compelled to see that he 

stood upon his own ground, resolved to main- 
tain every inch of it, and disdaining to make 
his way, either by crawling or climbing, to 
those heights to which he aspired, but had 
not yet attained. 

This was also a conciliating dinner ; and 
the Major, who hated Norman, because said 
Major had taken him for a great personage, 
while he was in reality an obscure one, be- 



270 CLAN-ALBIN, 

fore the conclusion of the repast, begged the 
honour of taking wine with him, though in 
truth very sensible of the honour which he 
fancied he conferred. 

On the following day, the General conde- 
scended to dine at the regimental mess, as this 
was the first appearance of his young friends 
there 5 and he wished them in future to dine 
with the officers twice a week. And here 
again, Norman was treated with great polite- 
ness by the Major, who deigned to add an 
« indeed," or " pon my word/* expressive of 
satisfaction, at the conclusion of his observa- 
tions, though not directed to himself. 

" Mary, Mary," said Drummond, when Nor- 
man and he joined the female party at Craig- 
gillian's lodgings, " Hear what a favourite 
Macalbin is become; — the Major has not 
only told him, ' During my late father's 
mayoralty,' — but also, c You must know Sir, 
that when I was recruiting at Lichfield, the 
ladies used to call me the audacious captain.' 
— Is he not a favourite? — The Major's two 
best stories! — and certainly those by which he 
is best known." 

" Mr Macalbin is every body's favourite," 
said Mrs Drummond. *' And now, Allan, 
news for news. — Our Mrs Montague, is, as 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2J7 

you know, an intimate friend of the Craig- 
gillians, — but as you do'nt know, — and as I 
won't tell you/' — " O ho !" cried Drummond. 

" Ah, Norman, you are sly, — d d sly." — 

Norman's tell-tale eyes were now, at least 
sufficiently communicative. At this moment, 
Flora and Monimia entered the room, and 
Drummond drawing the arm of his wife with- 
in his own, carried her off, to undergo a cross- 
examination. The party were to sup with 
Craig- gillian, and Flora, occupied with real 
or pretended business, found an opportunity 
to leave her friends tete-a-tete. To relieve 
the embarassing silence which ensued, Mo- 
nimia began to play, and had the compla- 
cence to chuse an air which was one of Nor- 
man's first-rate favourites. — It was the beau- 
tiful song from Park's travels, versified by the 
late Duchess of Devonshire, 

* The thunder roar'd, the rain fell fast, 
6 The white man yielded to the blast.' 

Almost unconsciously, she accompanied her 
playing in those low-breathed, pathetic tones, 
which ever cast a spell over the heart and 
senses of Norman. While he hung over her, 
Drummond and the ladies suddenly return- 
VOL III. b b 



27 S CLAN-ALBIN, 

ed, and Monimia, sympathising in his feel- 
ings, quickly changed the air. Norman had 
a natural and a national dread of ridicule, 
and a strong power of repressing his keenest 
emotions, partly on this account, and also 
from a fastidious impatience of the feehle 
sympathy of strangers. 

" Now, this is the style of songs Norman 
loves," said Flora, who had caught some notes 
of the tune. " He has more tenderness than 
musical taste ; and far more fondness for the 
fair sex than any gentleman I ever knew." — 
Drummond smiled at the naivete of this ob- 
servation, and Flora hastily added, " 1 mean 
the kind sex, the nursing sex, — who, as the 
good St Pierre says, — but you'll think me 
vain to repeat it ; — in short, Norman loves 

* Gentle woman ever kind,' 

but, to counterbalance that, he is excessively 
jealous. " 

• £ I'll not believe it," said Mrs Drummond. 
" Then I tell you he is, of every thing he 
loves. Most men are vain of shewing off all their 
fine things; — but Norman loves to treasure up 
his riches of favourite books, or poetry, or mu. 
sic, or scenery, for the secret delicate enjoy- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 279 

merit of himself and is few favourites. I 
assure you, the crowd will not need to lift 
their profane eyes to Mrs Norman Macalbin ; 
far less to say or sing her praises. I think 
he is more impatient of * a foolish face of 
praise/ than of downright censure. How he 
used to lookj when a party of fashionable 
tourists found out Glenalbin. Civility com- 
pelled him to be their guide, and truth to 
point out what was best worth notice ; but 
when they burst into turgid raptures, and be- 
gan to expatiate on the sublime and beautiful, 
he looked for all the world as you may sup- 
pose Mr Bureheil in the Vicar of Wakefield, 
when the fine ladies entered on * Shakespeare, 
taste, and the musical glasses/ — and he cried 
'fudge: 

" But you recollect something about pearls 
cast before swine," replied Drummond. — " I 
am not sure if this is jealousy ; but it well ac- 
counts for Mr Macalbin never, never breath- 
ing an admiring syllable of what he most ad- 
mires." — Drummond tried to carry Norman's 
eye to Monimia.— " You may be sure of that: 
If Norman has any pretensions, or affectation, 
it is the affectation of hardness of feeling and 
indifference to what other people pretend to 
admire. But there is altogether a provoking. 



280 CLAX-ALB1N, 

quietness about him ; a piquant indifference 
to all that pleases or teases ordinary mortals, 
which is not easily reconciled with his ex- 
treme indulgence and patient good-nature. 
I never could perceive Norman weary of a 
story that was merely tedious, or a person who 
was merely insipid. Any degree of good- 
humoured egotism he bears with the most edi- 
fying patience ; but when affectation assumes 
the high tone of taste and sentiment, Norman 
is certainly well-bred, but I think net well- 
pleased. And yet how inconsistent we are: 
One summer our good piper picked up a land- 
scape painter from Edinburgh, who had been 
cast away on our moors, and brought him to 
the hospitality of Eleenalin. He was so plea- 
sant and gentlemanlike, that I quaked lest he 
should enter loudly on the picturesque, and 
Norman look l fudge.' But fortunately the 
sublime and beautiful dwelt more in his ima- 
gination than on his tongue, and the enrap- 
tured Norman followed him through bog and 
through brake for a whole fortnight, while at 
every fine point of view, their eyes held such 
intelligent tete-a-tetes. When Norman halt- 
ed, the painter looked round, sure of some- 
thing worthy his observation ; and when the 
painter stopt, Norman looked sharp to behold 



A NATIONAI/ TALE. 28 1 

something an artist's eye alone could disco- 
ver, and gave his companion a smile of grate- 
ful recognition, as if to say, c thank you ; I 
see it for the first time now.' But, O, there 
was such a provoking lack of ' fine frenzy' in 
their general looks and language, as nothing 
could atone for ; till a sudden swell of enthu- 
siasm would sweep down the icy flood-gates of 
their fancy, and it was seen that Norman and 
his frigid friend felt more than all of us ." 

Flora wished that the whole world should 
know and love the companion of her youth as 
he deserved to be known and loved. In Eleen- 
alin his praise was a darling topic ; and in so- 
ciety she expected that it might be heard with 
nearly equal pleasure. 

" Well, the painter, before his visit was 
concluded, became such a favourite, that, on 
the last day of his stay, he was introduced in- 
to the corrie of Brora, the loveliest recess I 
' Fairies and genii hover around it !' — it is the 
very sanctuary of lovers ! Norman never form- 
ed a pastoral wish but there he laid the scene." 

The evident embarrassment of Monimia in- 
duced Norman to interrupt the loquacity of 
Flora. 

" To prove that I am not that churl of my 
treasures which you represent, you shall sinp 



282 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Captain Drummond my Highland lays, in 
Highland tongue, still more precious and sa- 
cred than even my favourite scenery." — Flora 
complied, and sung Gaelic airs, till the party 
were joined by Craig-gillian and Colonel 
Grant. 

While the General continued with his re* 
giment, it was his practice to have a num- 
ber of the younger officers at breakfast 
twice a-week. Norman and his pupils were 
always invited to these breakfasts ; and the 
hour was improved to all present, by a rigid 
examination of their studies and progress. 
By these means, the General delicately indi- 
cated the course of study he wished all his 
young officers to pursue; and few were so in- 
sensible as to feel no ambitious stirring, no 
wish to excel, when his alluring example, and 
powerful influence, made the excellence to 
which he pointed an object of pride, as well 
as of interest. In this regiment professional 
struggles took a noble direction ; for every 
private and every officer perceived that he 
was valued for personal qualities, and these 
not merely military, but social also; — not the 
mere blazonry of valour, but the persevering 
discharge of a soldier's duty, when there is no 
eye to behold, and no voice to cheer, no hope 



A NATIONAL TALE. 283 

to excite, and no applause to reward. As the 
practice of goodness held the first place in his 
esteem, whom all were ambitious to please, 
the acquirement of that knowledge, and those 
talents which best fit mankind for its intelli- 
gent and really useful exertion^ obtained his 
secondary praise. 

While this intercourse lasted, Norman ob- 
tained that degree of confidence and esteem 
to which his character gave him the fairest 
title, and to which he never forfeited his claim. 
His companions were indeed rather captivat- 
ed by the blended spirit and obligingness of 
his disposition, than by the more splendid and 
commanding qualities of his mind : they loved 
him on the terms which his social and kindly 
nature approved ; and revered him for a pu- 
rity in principle and conduct, which would 
have seemed either hypocritical or ridiculous 
in another, but which appeared sacred in 
Norman Macalbin. 

" Norman," said Craig - gillian, " your 
friends have paid you the highest compliment 
men can pay to their fellow. For your single 
sake, they have adopted new maxims in judg- 
ing conduct, and from all sweeping denuncia- 
tions against the rigidly righteous, they except 
the evangelical purity of Macalbin.. A man has. 



284 CLAN-ALBIN, 

small merit in daring to avow that he posses- 
ses those principles which are opposed to 
gross iniquity ; but it requires much mental 
courage in a young soldier, to wear, without 
a mask, those old-fashioned virtues which are 
at variance with custom, lightly prized by 
modern morality, and punished and persecut- 
ed by a pernicious ridicule. This is one of the 
many cases in which it is easier to be than to 
seem ; and you have much merit in both." 

While they were conversing, Hugh ap- 
peared with an important something in his 
face : " Out with it, piper," cried Craig- gil- 
lian, smiling at his meaning looks, where joy 
struggled with a decent desire to controul the 
expression of unbecoming exultation. — " O I 
am far from taking pride to myself, God for- 
bid? — it is for no sake of mine I got this; 
but for those I come off ; and for that I have 
good right to be proud, — and proud I am." 

tt I am sure if it is any thing good, you de- 
serve it all, for your own sake, Hugh, — What 
is it?" 

" And did you not hear, and did you not 
ask him to make me piper to the grenadier 
company ; but still your servant dear, to serve 
you night and day, and stand by you with 



A NATIONAL TALE. 285 

hand and soord, while the life itself is in my 
body." 

u Still my * Uncle Hugh," replied Nor- 
man. " But I am glad of this. The General 
has done you much honour, and you may 
honestly take pride in it ; for no man ever re- 
ceived a favour of this kind at his hand who 
did not deserve it, or ever pined for a favour 
of any kind, which he did deserve, and Gene- 
ral had the power to bestow." 

" God bless him ! Well, dear, 1*11 now take 
ease in my conscience to be with you ; for it 
went to my own heart to see Ellis brushing 
your clothes and polishing your boots, and 
myself for no use at all, — never being used to 
it, and not liking the trouble of do — doing at 
things that must all be done over again to- 
morrow morning, — more shame for me." 

Norman sought to appease the remorse of 
Hugh, though he was sincerely happy at an 
appointment which removed him from his pre- 

* This epithet would perhaps be better translated kinsman. 
Highlanders have a kindlier and more appropriating term than 
uncle or aunt ; and that poverty of language is not much to be 
regretted which obliges them to say " brother of my mother," 
" sister of my father," " son of my mother's brother." This 
looks like making the most of the ties of blood, binding them 
to our hearts as closely as possible. 



280 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sent vocation to one every way more suitable. 
The piper had no skill in the arts of a gentle- 
man's gentleman, and little veneration for their 
mysteries. Yet he was jealous of the superi- 
ority of Ellis, and dissatisfied with his own 
failures and want of desire to improve, and 
altogether more unhappy than he had till now 
confessed even to himself. But now Hugh 
had reached the summit of his professional 
ambition ; he was the first piper of what he 
esteemed the first Highland regiment. There 
was but another step ; — Hugh thought of it 
more in sorrow than ambition. " We have 
now no chief, — God forgive my repining. I 

am at any rate B 's piper." 

" Ah Hugh, how naturally does high sta- 
tion beget high thoughts," said Craig-gillian, 
smiling at him. " No sooner the General's 
piper than you have visions of Clan-Albin. 
But go up stairs and tell Mrs Monro your 
good news, you know it will be kindly wel- 
come to her ; and I see Norman wishes to 
write it all to Moome." — " Aye do dear, for 
you know she loves me in her heart.— Is she 
not my own father's sister? — though she nev- 
er tould me to my face for fear of spoiling 
me." He went to find Flora, and Norman 
sat down in Craig- gillian's parlour to write to 



A NATIONAL TALE. 287 

Moome. Unah could indeed neither read his 
letters nor reply to them ; but yet he wrote 
to her. The lady read these epistles, but 
Moome, tenacious of her rights, still placed 
them in her needle-case, saying, " By your 
leave lady." And they were exhibited to all 
her visitors, few of whom were more learned 
than herself, though, with the courtesy of a 
court, they could inquire for her wandering 
friend ; and, with the kindness of a cottage, 
sympathize in his misfortunes, or rejoice in 
his welfare. Norman loved to gratify the 
pride of her innocent affection, and to enable 
her to tell her admiring guests, " / had this 
from the young Macalbin last week,— -the 
Lady herself had none since." 

u My worthy friend," said Norman, folding 
his letter, " every day extends the circle of 
my friends and yours, and every day convinces 
us that no new friends can supply the place 
of those who recall our earliest delights,— 
those who filled all our hearts when we first 
began to feel that we had hearts to be filled." 

Hugh had now communicated to Flora his 
unexpected promotion. Since the arrival of 
Craig- gillian he had had several long confer- 
ences with her; he had told her all his adven- 
tures in Ireland and on his journey, what 



288 CLAN-ALBIN, 

people bad said to him, and what he had re- 
plied and intended to reply. Yet so temper- 
ed and restrained were Hugh's narratives that 
though they might have tired some persons, 
they could have offended no one. Nor did 
Hugh's friends need to shrink from the for- 
wardness of his regard. Deference to rank 
was the first principle, — or, more properly, the 
first instinct of his nature. He was bred in a 
land where devotion to high station permits 
men to descend from the stateliness of rank 
without endangering dignity. Hugh had ever 
thought of his young friends in a way more 
consonant to his own feudal notions than the 
place they filled in society. Now that they 
were entitled to his deference it was proudly 
and lavishly rendered, — not certainly the ter- 
ror-blent respect which the vassal pays to his 
lord, but rather the graceful homage the lover 
yields to his mistress, who flatters because he 
is himself deceived by the enchantments of 
love, and youth, and beauty ,-^-who is exalted 
by the very delusion which holds him in 
thraldom, and is submiss without being de- 
based. 

Hugh had also many questions to put to 
Flora, concerning the state of the countries, 
and the domestic management of Eleenaliru 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2 89 

Like persons not often from home, he was 
amazed that no mighty revolutions should 
have taken place within the month he had 
been absent. Yet so seemingly inconsistent 
are we, that when Hugh, after an absence of 
years, did revisit his country, and found many 
changes in cattle, and children, and dogs, 
and dress, and buildings, and that some per- 
sons had been born and others buried, he ex- 
perienced an indefinable astonishment at the 
affairs of life going on without his presence 
or interference. This feeling is not altogether 
peculiar to Hugh. 

" So the brood -goose would not hatch," 
cried Hugh, returning to his questions ; 
" Och, bad luck to her for an ould, unnatural 
rogue ! if I were at home I would give her 
one chase for it. And Moome made her com- 
plement of potatoe- starch, dear ! Aye, this 
was always her time ; and it served her caps 
the whole year round when I was in the coun- 
tries. She gave myself a job at it too, when 
I washed my hands, — though I was awkward. 
And next came the pulling of the brambles 
for her jelly, when she would give me the 
scum to keep for the small childer. — God 
bless her 1 But I am taking up your hand, 
Mrs Major Hector, with my nonsense. How- 
voL. in . c c 



2Q0 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ever, I'll not forget it to Archy mending^ottr 
hen-roost ladder : — he was always a gentle 
boy. So, good morning, darling." — Hugh 
retired with more than one bow ; and when 
Norman had read the letter to him, and taken 
his directions about the brood-goose and com- 
pliments to the lad who had mended the hen- 
roost ladder, it was sealed and given to Hugh 
to convey to the post-office. 

Flora had small merit in patiently listening 
to Hugh's details, and in answering his inqui- 
ries. By her the most trifling trait which 
brought the quiet picture of domestic life vi- 
vidly to recollection was far more prized than 
all the second-hand prattlement of fashion 
and high life, with which the provincial fine 
ladies at the Lodge, and the military loungers 
at Colonel Grant's, first stunned and then 
fatigued her vulgar ears and understanding. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 291 



CHAP. XLL 



A sudden thrill, a startling thought, 

A feeling many a year forgot ; 
As if again, in every vein, 

H's mother's milk was stirring. 

SOUTHEY. 

jVIonimia had made every arrangement for 
her visit to the Craig-gillians, and the car- 
riage was at the door, when Lady Glanville's 
maid entered her chamber, with a long com- 
plaint against the delighted companion of 
her journey, little Mary Fitzconnal. The 
little girl, full of frolic and spirits, and pos- 
sessing a quick perception of the ridiculous, 
had, on several occasions, very happily exhi- 
bited to Lady Gianville that affected imita- 
tion of her personal airs and graces which 
her waiting-gentlewoman retailed to the coun- 
try gentry and inferior domestics. Her Lady- 
ship liked to lie at ease on her sofa, and to 



2Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

be amused without effort. Her indolence 
made her dependent on her maid, — she felt 
her thraldom, without being able to shake it 
off, and loved the sort of revenge afforded by 
Mary's rouge, and false curls, and fine airs, 
and bad language. There was also that spe- 
cies of rivalship between the lady and her 
damsel, which is unhappily more common 
than quite consistent with dignity. Lady 
Glanville wore a costly shawl, and the maid 
exhibited on the following Sunday so exact 
an imitation, that the beautiful shawl was 
thrown a^ide in disgust. The damsel wore 
paste ear-rings, which had so brilliant a can- 
dle-light effect, that Lady Glanville actually 
waxed wroth, notwithstanding her constitu- 
tional good-humour, — quarrelled with her 
diamonds and her maid, — and might have 
slipt her neck from the domestic yoke, had 
not the latter prudently dropt her fine ear- 
rings, and kept her good place. 

Mary had penetration enough to know that 
these entertainments would not gain the same 
admiration from Monimia which they extort- 
ed from Lady Glanville, and her absence was 
generally the season chosen for exhibitions. 
What wasMonimia's surprise one day to find 
the little girl flaming with rouge and glitter- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q3 

idg with pearl powder, sailing in affected 
state through the drawing-room, in the imi- 
tation-shawl drapery ; while Lady Glanville, 
holding her sides with laughter, stimulated 
her efforts. 

This was the last of Mary's scenes, and, as 
her severest punishment, she was forced to 
beg pardon of the offended Abigail ; but the 
pardon pronounced came only from the lips* 
It was this damsel who now vehemently ac- 
cused Mary of having endangered setting the 
house on fire, by carrying flaming paper up 
and down the nursery while at play with the 
young Donovans, the children of a neigh- 
bouring gentleman, who had paid her an 
early visit. Mary denied one part of the 
charge. She said she had not carried the pa- 
per up and down. — " See, then, Ma'am. See 
Mrs Montague, Ma'am," cried the damsel, 
snatching up a piece of twisted paper, which 
had evidently been burning, though it afford- 
ed no proof of having been carried to and 
fro, which Mary shrewdly remarked. — " Miss 
Alicia Donovan wished me to teach her to 
play at Le petit bon homme vit encore" said 
Mary. " I could not refuse ; but, indeed, in- 
deed, I did not endanger the house. O Mam- 
ma, I am bad enough without that !" — She 
c c 2 



2Q4 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sighed, with the consciousness of some un- 
acknowledged fault, — but sighed unheeded ; 
for Monimia, who had carelessly untwisted 
the paper, and listlessly glanced over a few 
lines of what was saved from burning, hastily 
started up, exclaiming, "Where got you this 
paper ? Mary, my dear child, tell me, — oh 
tell me instantly/' — Mary glanced at the 
remnant of what had been part of a newspa- 
per. Her eyes were bowed down with the 
weight of guilt,— her face and bosom were 
dyed with the deepest blushes, — and, sinking 
on her knees, she clasped her hands together, 
exclaiming, " Punish me, Mamma ;— oh, pu- 
nish me as I deserve, but forgive old Ju- 
dith, — she is not good, but she loves me, — 
she loved my poor mother V She took from 
her bosom a beautiful and highly-finished 
miniature picture of a young lady, and laid it 
on Monimia' s knee. 

A suspicion of the most painful nature 
darted across the mind of Monimia. Had the 
child stolen this picture ? — She caught the eye 
of the maid-servant, who bent eagerly forward 
with a fixed look of malignant triumph, 
awaiting the unfolding of the scene which 
was to stamp present disgrace and future sus- 
picion on the character of her little enemy. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q5 

Monimia had sufficient presence of mind 
to lead the young culprit to her own cham- 
ber ; and having carefully shut the door, she 
again began the examination. The little girl 
now melted into tears, knelt down, prepared to 
confess the whole truth, but still imploring 
pardon for old Judith, " who was not good, 
but who loved her." 

**■ I will pardon every thing, if you will on- 
ly recollect yourself, and tell me how you ob- 
tained this paper, — that in the first place." 

" It was wrapped round the picture, Mam- 
ma." — " And you took it from Lady Glan- 
ville's cabinet, — tell me the whole truth, my 
dear child ?" 

" Mamma !" cried the little girl, starting 
up, her small figure seeming to enlarge, while 
her cheeks burned with a deeper red, and 
her eye indignantly repelled the cruel suspi- 
cion she understood. Her eye dwelt for a 
moment on Monimia ; her lip quivered, but 
pride held back the starting tear. Monimia 
could not look to her, so anxiously did she 
examine the half-consumed fragment ; the 
language of her gestures was therefore un- 
heeded, and Monimia again urged a confes- 
sion. 

" My own mother would not have thought 



2Q6 CLAISr-ALBISr, 

me a ." Mary could not pronounce the 

infamous word. She burst into bitter tears, 
and turned away. Monimia, struck with an 
expression of misery and forlornness, as in- 
compatible with her tender years, as natural 
to her present condition, folded her to her 
bosom, and besought her forgiveness, and 
kissed away her tears. — " O Mamma, my ever 
kind Mamma, forgive me and old Judith, — 
we want forgiveness." 

Monimia at last learned, that old Judith 
was the grandmother of Leary ; and of the 
wife of that Connor, whose hospitable cabin 
had so often proved a refuge to the crazed 
Fitzconnal and his orphan grandchild, when 
as mendicants they had wandered over that 
country, a great portion of which their ances- 
tors had once called theirs. It appeared 
that this old woman, when informed of the 
fate of Mar)-, by the letters of her grandson, 
had adopted the resolution of stealing the 
child from the protest ant family by which she 
had been adopted. Her plan had been abet- 
ted by a priest, a devoted follower of the 
Fitzconnal family, who contrived to maintain 
a correspondence with the banished father of 
Mary, and who hoped to convey her abroad. 
The endangerment of her catholic faith was 



A NATIONAL TALE. 297 

their principal motive for conduct so extra- 
ordinary. Judith, who had nursed the grand- 
mother of Mary, and who would have given 
her life to save or serve any of her race, 
though aged and infirm, had travelled up- 
wards of a hundred miles on foot to accom- 
plish this, to her, so desirable purpose. 

With Father Ullic, for so was the priest 
named, she had contrived to see the child at 
a cabin in the neighbourhood of the Lodge. 
Mary instantly recognised the nurse and the 
priest, and embraced them with the impas- 
sioned joy of her warm and lively disposi- 
tion. She would immediately have led them to 
Monimia, but this, for obvious reasons, was 
declined ; and, after repeated entreaties, she 
promised to conceal the interview, and meet 
them again on the following day, with the 
catholic maid-servant, who had been induced 
to lead Mary to the cabin where they now 
met. 

She went a second time ; it was on the 
evening of a great ball at Glanville Lodge. 
She remained long with her friends; and Fa- 
ther Ullic became satisfied that her present 
situation was highly eligible. While Moni- 
mia resided in England, Mary had lived at a 
Catholic boarding-school. Now she attended 



2Q8 CLAN-ALBINT, 

prayers every Sunday morning by the orders 
of Monimia, and also received the religious 
instructions suited to her age from a priest 
who was tutor to the young Donovans. 

Fattier Ullic, therefore, contented himself 
with giving her pious counsel ; but Judith 
still tempted her to leave her present protec- 
tors. This was a point on which Mary never 
wavered ; though she owned that she would 
be most happy to see Connor's children, and 
the wood of Connal. It appeared that the 
priest had at last forbidden such discourse, 
and had written a long letter to Monimia, 
which he gave in charge to Mary. Monimia 
heard, with unavailing regret, that this paper 
had been sacrificed by some of the little Do- 
novans to i le petit bon homme,' while Mary 
had for a moment left the nursery to see if 
Mrs Montague was yet risen, that she might 
deliver the letter. So alarmed was she at the 
loss of the letter, and her own culpable con- 
cealments, that up to the moment of detec- 
tion she had been unable to reveal the truth* 

Such was the outline of Mary's adventure. 
It was filled up with the devoted kindness of 
the priest, and the nurse ; — glowing with the 
rich colouring of affection, which misfortune 
quickened ; of gratitude, which misery ren- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q§ 

deredmore zealous and respectful. — " These 
Fitz-connals must have deserved attachment," 
thought Monimia ; but small was the portion 
of thought she could spare from the half- 
burned paper. 

" And this paper, my love?" said she, for 
the third time. 

" Indeed, mamma, it was round the pic- 
ture." 

" And the picture, my love ?" said Moni- 
mia, earnestly examining the features of a 
face even more remarkable for sweetness than 
beauty ; though, " here is beauty," was the 
half-suppressed exclamation of Monimia as 
she gazed on it. 

" Is it of your mother, my love ?" 

" Oh no, indeed, mamma — 'tis my papa's 
sister — my aunt Geraldine ; — Judith told me 
yesterday — and often before I had been told, 
but I forgot, mamma : — my poor aunt Geral- 
dine!" Mary press'd her lip to the glass. 
" She was drowned, and never heard of more, 
among the Hebrides, mamma. Judith has 
an Irish name for the Isles. It was long, long 
before I was born. My poor aunt was com- 
ing to Ireland from Portingale, Judith calls 
it — Portugal it is, mamma." So volatile are 
youthful affections, that Mary laughed heart- 



300 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ily at the mistake of Judith, till her mirth 
was suddenly checked by observing the blood- 
less cheek and pale quivering lip of Monimia. 

" Oh mamma, you are ill! What shall I 
do?" — She sprung to the bell. 

" Stay, my love ; get me a little water 
yourself." Mary flew, — " Oh if my surmise 
be just!" exclaimed Monimia, while the blood 
crowded back to her cheek : " If this blest 
paper unfold the mystery — if Norman-^-if this 
unhappy Geraldine — " 

" O here, mamma — Oh you are better," 
cried Mary, returning." 

Lady Glanville and two maid-servants, 
whom Mary had alarmed, entered the room. 
There is something in the sudden accidents 
to which human nature is liable, which all 
human beings must feel. Lady Glanville 
advanced with alacrity. Her anxious gaze 
preceded her steps — the selfish, languid Lady 
Glanville. 

" That abominable ball! It has torn even 
your iron nerves — Drops for Mrs Montague — 
my own drops, Sarah." 

Monimia revived without the aid of her 
ladyship's own drops. 

" Mary has alarmed your ladyship need- 
lessly." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 30 1 

* Oh not needlessly— but I am glad you 
are better. — Your illness has done me good. 
I have been dying all the morning ; dear, 
what possible good can gentlemen obtain 
from being in Parliament, to compensate for 
those vile popularity Irish balls. I would not 
undertake another ball-night to have Charles 
prime minister. " The maid arrived with the 
drops. Monimia detested all such remedies ; 
but her ladyship insisted, her skilful maid 
remonstrated, and, as the easiest mode of 
getting rid of importunity, she swallowed 
them. But not so did she yield to the en- 
treaties of Lady Glanville, to delay her visit 
to the Craig-gillians. 

On her way she met Norman and his pupils 
on horseback, going to Glanville Lodge. 
She waved her hand as the carriage passed 
him; and Mary, his fervent friend and ad- 
mirer, exclaimed, " We are going to the 
Craig-gillians." 

Happily for the impatience which Mary's 
information excited, Norman found that Lord 
Glanville had rode out, and turning his steed, 
he reached town almost as soon as Monimia, 

Colonel Grant on this morning gave a pub- 
lic breakfast to the officers of his regiment, 
and a number of ladies and gentlemen, pre- 

vol. III. D d 



302 CLAN-ALBIN, 

vious to the departure of the new-married 
pair for Scotland ; and on this occasion, the 
secret which, like many other secrets, was 
very well known, was to he revealed, and 
his daughter introduced as Mrs Drummond. 
When Norman, an invited guest, entered the 
house which Craig-gillian now inhabited, he 
found a large party assembled, and the Colo- 
nel fretting at the absence of his family. 

" Take the trouble to tell them how foolish 
we look here," said he to Norman. " You 
will find them in divan somewhere above 
stairs." 

Craig-gillian and Flora, Monimia, Drum- 
mond and his bride, were accordingly found 
in secret conference, some of them dressed, 
others in dishabille, but each exactly in the 
state he had been found when Monimia en- 
tered the house. 

" I hope I don't intrude," said Norman, 
delivering his message. 

" How insufferable to "be tormented with 
people when one's whole soul is absent and 
cccupied," said Drummond, running out. — 
" I'll be back in a minute with Leary, if he is 
above ground." 

" As this is the most interested man, ladies, 
we had best tell him the whole truth at once," 



A NATIONAL TALE. 303 

said Craig-gillian.— " Sit down, Macalbin, 
and read this. We, your friends, imagine it 

may providentially " But the faculties 

of Norman were already rivetted on the torn 
fragment. Craig-gillian saw that he was un- 
heeded, and the ladies retired unperceived. 
Norman raised his meaning eyes for an in- 
stant to the face of Monro, who bent over him; 
and again in breathless haste, and with in- 
creasing agitation, fell to perusing the paper. 
This finished, he drew his breath with a long, 
deep sigh, laid it on his knee, snatched it up, 
and again looked inquiringly in the face of 
Craig-gillian. 

" My dear friend," said Craig-gillian, " we 
have every reason to believe that this paper 
must refer to your unfortunate mother. We 
know, or at least guess, who that lady was. — 
Hear me patiently. Mrs Montague, with 
quickness and sagacity which seems more like 
inspiration than human sagacity, has supplied, 
to my satisfaction, most of what is burned." — 
Craig-gillian then read the paper, with the 
additions of Monimia. Its import was as fol- 
lows : — A lady, near the period of her con- 
finement, had sailed in a vessel bound from 
Lisbon to Waterford, which, by the violence 
of the equinoctial gales, had been driven from 



304 CLAN-ALBIN, 

its course, and wrecked on a small cluster of 
uninhabited islands, or rather rocks, of the 
Hebrides. All the crew perished, with the 
exception of one man, whom his companions 
had abandoned, as he was sunk in intoxica- 
tion when they attempted to make their escape 
in the boat. They had also left the lady to 
the fate from which it appeared that she had 
been almost miraculously preserved. The 
boat, in which the crew took refuge, was 
swallowed up by the impetuous surge; and 
the storm suddenly abating, the wreck, some 
hours afterwards, had drifted gently to a 
smooth sandy beach, carrying forward this 
helpless woman and her unconscious compa- 
nion. 

It appeared farther, that this brutal ruffian, 
on recovering his senses, after rifling ber of 
some money and trinkets that were about her 
person, had left the island in a small boat at- 
tached to the wreck; and that she, whom the 
waves had spared, had again been given up 
to a more horrible death. Some years had 
elapsed before this man, in the remorseful a- 
gonies which preceded a shameful death, re- 
vealed the truth, which, by the humanity of 
the clergyman who attended him, was commu- 
nicated to the friends of the lady. A diligent 
search had immediately been instituted, but 



A NATIONAL TALE. 305 

no farther intelligence had been gained. The 
inhabitants of the island next to that on 
which she had been left could find no trace of 
any female, dead or alive, in the place de- 
scribed. The paper concluded with the pa- 
thetic appeal of a husband, imploring, for the 
love of God and of man, any intelligence of 
his wife or her child, if she had lived to bear 
a child ; and promising to reward such infor- 
mation with the half of his fortune. It was 
impossible to ascertain the date of the news-* 
paper, the place of its publication, or indeed 
the date of any circumstance, except the 
time of the shipwreck, and that nearly cor- 
responded with the birth of Norman. It was 
equally difficult to make out the names of the 
cities, and the individuals to whom reference 
was given. Norman fancied he could read 
what had been Paris; and Monimia positively 
affirmed, that she had read in the burnt frag- 
ment, now, spite of her, mouldered into ashes, 
" Don Ignacio du Rocha, Lisbon." 

Such was the information gained by the 
paper. — " And now, my dear friend, I must 
tell you the reason we have to believe that 
your mother, for this was your mother, was of 
the family of Fitzconnal." — Craig-gillian re- 
lated what Mary had told of her aunt Geral- 
D d2 



306 CLAN-ALBIN, 

dine, and he produced the picture. Norman 
gazed on it with feelings, thrilling, powerful, 
indescribable. In the confused yet delight- 
ful emotions of the moment, it seemed to him 
as if in some former pure, and happy, and 
faintly remembered state of being, he had 
known and loved his mother. — " My mother ! 
my mother!" was all he uttered, and laid his 
head on Craig-gillian's shoulder. This sup- 
pressed gush of natural tenderness was soon 
complicated with other feelings. He half- 
raised his head; and, while a glow of pride 
and delicacy brightened his face, whispered to 
Craig- gillian, " I am a child of misfortune, 
but not — no, thank God ! — not of shame." 

Another half hour was spent in conversa- 
tion. Craig-gillian wished immediately to 

beg General to write to Lisbon to the 

English ambassador, concerning Don Ignacio 
du Rocha. That capital was in some confu- 
sion; but if information could be obtained, 
this was the best channel. Meanwhile Drum- 
rnond had gone in search of Leary, who, it 
was thought, must know who had been the 
husband of Geraldine Fitzconnal; and, lastly, 
Monimia was already writing to Lady Augus- 
ta, while Flora re-examined the piper on 
the circumstances attending the death of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 307 

Norman's mother, as if she expected to hear 
something new. 

Drummond now returned without finding 
Leary; and, after a race of half an hour, re- 
collected that he had himself given Paddy 
permission to go with his wife to a * patron 
the evening before, which was held in an ad- 
jacent village. Having dispatched a soldier 
for Leary, he at length listened to the angry 
messages of Colonel Grant, and joined the 
breakfast party with his bride. As the Gene- 
ral was there, Craig-gillian also went, and 
Monimia followed. Flora, whose feelings 
had never learned to bend to ceremony, shut 
herself up with Norman, the piper, and Mary 
Fitzconnal, whom Norman now folded in his 
arms, whispering to himself in Gaelic, " Daugh- 
ter of my mother's brother." 

Hugh hardly knew whether or not to rejoice 
at the late discovery, for there was no hint, no 
mention of Clan-albin. — " Should he not be a 
Macalbin after all t" thought Hugh. This 
was a supposition which disturbed all his as- 
sociations, and visionary hopes; and Hugh, 
who loved to set his feelings at ease, dismiss- 
ed it as often as it recurred. 

* A dance or a saint's day. 



308 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Drummond had obtained his uncle's per- 
mission to delay his journey till next morn- 
ing. As soon, therefore, as civility sanction- 
ed his departure, he left his party; and, find- 
ing that Leary was not yet arrived, proposed 
to Norman to go again in search of him. 
They went out together. — " Leary and J have 
lately had a small difference," said Norman. 
" Yet he is so good-hearted a creature, that 
if we give him any hint of our wish to ascer- 
tain or establish a particular fact, I know he 
will, in spite of himself, stretch the point any 
way that may suit our theory. Don't you 
think, therefore, that it will be better to set 
him a-talking, and hear what he says ?" 

" Sift him in any way you please ; yet in 
so plain and simple a thing as a name, one 
might trust Paddy — -but hark!" v They stood 
behind a ruinous wall, and heard the voice of 
the man they wanted pronouncing at inter- 
vals, i Hades for a naggin of potsheen — Harps 
for a mass for Bourke. Hades has it, and I 
am plased any way," 

" Aye, the potsheen against a mass at any 
time," said Drummond, advancing. 

" Och, is it your honours!" said Leary, 
picking up the tenpenny he had been tossing 
up. Drummond inquired why he was not 



A NATIONAL TALE. 30Q 

at the patron; and Leary said, " he had fallen 
in with some Connaught people, who had 
been taking the harvest in England, and an 
ould grandmother of his own." — " And where 
is she ?" said Norman, " Where shall we find 
bet?" 

Leary's face flushed. — " Sure the ould Je- 
zebel did not stale the child, after all? — By 
the bridle — and if she did, I'll disown her this 
moment, my grandmother as she is." 

Norman informed him that there was no 
child stolen. They merely wanted to learn 
as much as possible of the history of Miss 
Fitzconnal's family and relations, and wished 
to apply to his grandmother as the person 
best informed in these particulars. As she 
had returned home, they now applied to him. 
Leary assured him he should have the whole 
truth he knew, " not the less for turning him 
off from the young gentlemen, and hiring 
Ellis." 

" How is this?" said Drummond. 

" Did your Honour not hear? how he gave 
Dora half a guinea every week I was wid 'em, 
for taaching the young lords the exercise, — 
and forgave me all the confounded lies I tould 
at your honour's marriage, after fair warning. 
Kapp as I am, I'll do him justice, now the heat 



310 CLAN-ALBrN, 

is off me. Lean-, says he, I cannot permit 3 
liar to come near these young gentlemen — a 
gentleman must wash out with his own blood, 
or the blood of another, the bare suspicion of 
so odious a' vice. — But, auer all that, I must, 
in the devil's name, be talking and joking to 
make 'em laugh, and acting Brian Barue and 
the like, as I seen in the treater; so I was 
packed off for my cleverness, and Ellis the 
Englishman taken, who tells no lies, nor much 
truth neither, as he seldom says any thing 
good or bad." 

Drummond would willingly have listened 
to any excuse Leary could have offered for his 
improper practices ; and he even endeavour- 
ed to save him from the darkest part of the 
charge. 

" Och no, I am a big liar !" said Leary, 
earnestly. " More shame for me. ' It is un- 
worthy of a brave man,' said his honour to 
me. ' It is the vice of a coward and a slave : 
conquer this disgraceful habit, which com- 
pels me to part with you.' All nixt day Dora 
had poor life wid me ; but p las e God to keep 
me in the right mind, I come under vows to 
give my own tong-gue a great bite every 
time the devil tries to get the better of me ; 
and"-^ 



A NATIONAL TALE. 311 

" Don't lay your faults at the devil's door, 
however," interrupted Drummond, laughing. 
" And, hig liar as you are, give us a true ac- 
count of Miss FitzconnaFs family, or I'll 
save you the trouble of giving your tongue a 
great bite, by cutting a nice slice from the tip 
of it." 

Norman, impatient for information, again 
led to the subject so interesting. He was 
aware that Leary, who talked with so much 
ease of his own degrading failings, was ex- 
tremely nervous on one topic, namely, the 
Irish rebellion. The Bourkes and Fitzcon- 
nals had been deeply implicated in this affair 
in all its disastrous periods ; and Leary, when 
talking of them, which he now did with free- 
dom and pleasure, employed the most inge- 
nious circumlocution to avoid the words rebel 
and rebellion ; they stuck in his throat, and he 
spoke " of the troubles in this kingdom, in 
which the Bourkes and Fitzconnals were up, 
with other misfortunate jantlemen." 

u You mean they were rebels ?" said Drum- 
mond. Leary cleared his throat. '• Aye, that 
is the word wid your honours — you not being 
rale Irish born, though well desarving, — But 
had we, that is they, got the upper hand of 
the Orangemen, they would have been rubbles 



3 1 2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

then. I see your honours is sinsible. They 
were misfortunate craturs." Leary sighed very 
heavily. 

" And Bourke's mother was a Fitzconnal 
you say ?" said Drummond. " Aye, your ho- 
nour, the eldest of the ladies ; the younger, 
Miss Geraldine, married in foreign parts/' 

" And what was her husband ?" 

" An officer and jantleman of great fortin, 
as well became her."* — " His name?" — " Then 
I can't say, though sure I did hear from my 
grandmother; — and was not I a slip of a boy 
about Bourke's, when she was expictcd home 
to ly-in in the kingdom ; so her son or daugh- 
ter would have been an Irishman any way, 
though his honour the father was French." 

" French — are you sure he was of France — 
the husband of that lady?" — " I could take 
the sacrament on that; he was either French, 
or Spanish, and sawed the French king at 
any rate, in America, and there got acquaint 
wid the then Fitzconnal, and saved his life. 
I reynimber like a drame the young lady Ge- 
raldine setting off all speed to foreign parts 
to nurse her father. — God bless him, many 
sad day did he see after that ; so the nixt we 
heard was this great jantleman fallen in love 
wid her at first look, and marrying her — and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 313 

then, as God would have it, troubles came on 
them kingdoms abroad ; and returning home to 
lie in, she was drowned, with a whole cargo of 
wine, coming to Bourke. More's the pity he 
missed it — for devil a padlock was ever on his 
cellar-door. I was about him always then, 
for we were all the whole generation his fol- 
lowers — rubbing a knife, or looking after a 
horse, or the like, to pass the time — a half- 
long boy, and so was Phelim, as we call him. 
But that was another day with him, — great and 
small at his nod ; and he, plase God, heir to 
all. Well, the government did not get much 
after all. — Ould Bourke had the spirit of a 
prince — God bless him — rale ould family 
blood, both sides. He left myserf and all 
of us handsome legacies. — Bad luck to his 
enemies from cabin to castle." 

"And where the deuce is your legacy ?" 
said Drummond, laughing. 

" Sure your honour does not think I got 
it," said Leary. " Devil a fipptnny had he 
to bless him wid ; — but it shewed his good 
will — God rest him." 

" This was a real Irish legacy,'* said Drum- 
mond, laughing again, though Leary could 
not see the spirit of the jest, — " And you ca»- 
vol. III. £ e 



314 CLAN-ALBIN, 

not remember the name of Miss Geraldine 
Fitzconnal's husband ?" 

" No, I fear, — it is so long since I heard it; 
- — had your honour spoke the other day when 
Father Ullic was here, sure he knows." 

" Where, — who is Father Ullic ?" cried 
Norman. — " The priest sure, that edlcate Phe- 
lira ; for clever as he was, it did not come 
all the natral way. The priest was a follow- 
er of the Fitzconnal family, who had borne 
his charges abroad, before Maynooth was in 
the kingdom, and he would have gone through 
fire and water to sarve them. But Phelim 
would not be controlled, — fell in love wid a 
shister of my own, — bad luck to her black 
eyes, — and instade of going abroad to sarve the 
Jmperor like a jantleman as he is, was, — God 
rest him ! — listed at seventeen, not to quit 
her and the kingdom ; and so I took on after 
hi m for company, but by good luck mistuck 
the corps. Well, — your honours knows that 
Phelim Bourke was a gay fellow*" Leary 
sighedagain. And Norman thought of Bourke, 
the son of his mother's sister, with new feel- 
ings, — he could not think of him with warmer 

* Brave and generous :— qualities which, with the lower 
orders of the Irish, cover a multitude of sins. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 315 

interest than that which his high spirit and 
luckless fortune had already inspired. 

" I have given my tongue a holiday, any 
way," said Leary, moving to go away. 

" Aye, that you have, — and never a bite, — 
eh r" — " Sorrow one," said Leary, laughing. 
" 1 was upon honour now." 
" u But Father Ullic ?" said Norman. — "Och 
aye, — sure he sails from Cork as yesterday 
fell, for abroad ; where he will see Fitzcon- 
nal, — and so meant to stale the little Miss, 
as my grandmother tould me in a secret, — 
but finding her in the good hands of a rale 
Irish- born lady, — " 

<; How unlucky !" interrupted Norman. — 
" Would it not be possible to overtake him ?" 
Leary perceived that this was earnestly wish- 
ed, and accordingly asserted that it might 
easily be accomplished. Commanding him 
to be in the' way when wanted, the gentlemen 
returned to their friends, and held another 
consultation. 

And here, it was unanimously resolved, 
that Norman, accompanied by Leary, should 
immediately set out tor Cork, in search of the 
priest. — If he was already gone, they were 
next to visit FitzconnaPs-town, and examine 
the persons best acquainted with the connexions 



315 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of the luckless family of the more luckless 
Geraldine. 

The mail coach was to pass through the 
town in a couple of hours. Notice was sent 
to Leary, who having obtained his Colonel's 
permission, in ten minutes came to Norman's 
lodgings, to see " if he could not be of sa?- 
vice ?" But Ellis had already packed Nor- 
man's portmanteau ; while poor Hugh, with a 
feeling of jealousy and alarm, looked on in 
silence, sighing from time to time, displeased 
with himself, because he could not sympathize 
in the alacrity of Norman's humble friends, 
nor in the joy of Norman. — " He never was 
happy, and I did not feel it," thought Hugh. 
w Shame on me !" 

Norman was engaged in writing a card at 
this time ; but he could still perceive the 
course of Hugh's feelings. He therefore cal- 
led him aside, and began to talk to him, in 
Gaelic, on the late occurences, in his usual 
confidential tone, — for he wished that Hugh 
should share his joy, — calling him by the fa- 
miliar appellation of " Uncle Hugh," and 
taking his hand in kindness, as he bade him 
farewell. — " Yes, dear, that did very well be- 
fore," said Hugh, in a quivering and suppres- 
ed voice, — averting his moist eyes, and shyly 



A NATIONAL TALE. 317 

and with gentle violence, drawing back his 
hand. — " My Uncle Hugh !" said Norman, 
grasping the reluctant hand. " My best, 
my oldest friend !" — He looked earnesly in 
his face, and Hugh in a convulsed voice blurt- 
ed out, " But if you are no Macalbin after 
all, dear." 

" If not born, I am at least bred a Macal- 
bin. If not in blood, in heart." — " Yes ! 
yes ! you are, darling. God forgive me, 
for I know there is something bad in my own 
heart, or I would be happy too." — For a little 
while, Hugh was comforted by Norman's as- 
surances; but when he saw him seated in the 
mail-coach, and heard Leary, when placed 
on the top of the same vehicle,, give a loud 
cheer as it drove off, all his unhappiness re- 
turned, and he earnestly wished to be in 
Eleenalin, that Moome, who alone could share, 
might sooth his moody griefs. 

Meanwhile Norman reached Cork, only to 
find that Father Ullic had sailed some hours 
before for Gijon in Spain. For this there was 
no remedy save patience. He ordered a post- 
chaise, and after a few hours of rest, taken 
more for the sake of Leary than himself, set 
out for the melancholy and nearly desert- 
£ . E 2 



318 CLAN-ALBIST, 

ed village which bore the name of Fitzcon- 
nal. 

With all the speed he could urge, it was 
the afternoon of the second day before he ar- 
rived at the brow of a gentle slope which 
sheltered the village. — " That's it, your ho- 
nour V* said Leary, looking back on Norman, 
from a place where he had perched himself 
beside the postillion, for the sake of conversa- 
tion. " Is it not an elegint bit of a place ; 
and yonder forenent us the oukl castle and 
Sii'gorm ; and just at the open a peep of the 
sea ; and yonder, — sure you see, — over again 
the mass-house, my grandmother's cabin ; 
and there, just by the heap of turf, my uncle 
Macguire's ; and — sure your honour ob- 
sarve&a. bundle of clouts in the broken win- 
dow, just where the pig is chasing the tur- 
keys'—Norman saw at his feet a picturesque 
village, sheltered by the declivity which the 
carriage descended. A rich bottom of toler- 
ably well-wooded land stretched out from 
right to left, through which flowed a small 
river ; the sea shot up in a narrow bay to met 
its course. The hill of Sli'gorm, crowned by 
naked precipitous cliffs of blue granite, from 
which it derived its name, and the ancient 
residence of the family, gave a finish to the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 319 

scene. Norman would willingly have con- 
templated, at his leisure, the abode of his ma- 
ternal ancestors, — the estranged property of 
the unhappy old man, who, beside the ashes 
of his more unhappy child, had, in Eleenalin, 
found the repose of the wretched, — the rest of 
the weary. This purpose was, however, quite 
incompatible with the pride of Leary, who, 
ambitious of making a figure in the eyes of 
his townsmen, seized the reins and the whip, 
and set off with so furious a career, that Nor- 
man was compelled to arrest his progress, and 
remonstrate against the impropriety of driv- 
ing so impetuously down a steep and rugged 
path. Leary's mode of driving was a stand 
and a gallop. He now halted,, and looked 
back, saying, " Sure if we don't make. a bit 
of a dash down on 'em, they'll never take us 
for quality." — Taking it for granted that 
Norman could offer nothing against so co- 
gent a reason, he tightened the reins, — plied 
the whip, — and exclaiming, " Whoop, jolly 
horses ! — wag, Potsheen, you little rogue 1" — 
again set off, neck or nothing. And so it 
proved. On crossing a small,- flat bridge, 
laid over a mill-course r one wheel flew off, and 
the boastful driver was thrown into the wa- 
ter. Norman and tlie postillion escaped un- 



320 CLAN-ALBIN, 

hurt; and Leary himself, though well duck- 
ed, received no material injury in pride or 
person. He soon extricated himself; and 
giving the broken wheel a revengeful kick, 
said, " Sorrow be on you, thief ; if you had 
not given way, we would have come down in 
elegant style \" 

Among the other grandeur of FitzconnaFs 
town, Norman had often heard Leary men r 
tion the inn. He requested to be shewn to it 
in the first place ; and the mob of men, wo- 
men, beggars, children, and dogs, which the 
sight of the carriage had attracted, moved 
forward, as if by general consent, or what 
Drummond would have called the social com- 
pact, to a dismantled house, where Norman 
saw the characteristic sign of a tea-cup and 
saucer, surmounted by a knife and fork, cross- 
ed over each other, and read below, " Good 
dry lodgings, with a half bed to let" — He 
looked round to Leary. — " Poh, that is all in 
my eye !" said Leary, glancing his eye on 
the sign, " you need not want a drop of wine 
itself, even." 

Norman seated himself in a wretched par- 
lour, which certainly had no " nicely sanded 
floor," nor " varnished clock," nor indeed 
any thing, either for ornament or use, except 



A NATIONAL TALE. 321 

a long settle on each side of a table, daubed 
with the relics of many a stale debauch. He 
exhorted Leary to dry his clothes, and remind- 
ed him of the purpose of their journey, which 
the latter seemed to have forgotten in the 
bustle of the universal felicitation which as- 
sailed him from all quarters. 

Screened behind the broken and dirty win- 
dow, Norman was for sometime considerably 
amused at the mystery affected by Paddy 
Leary, for the purpose of magnifying his own 
consequence and that of the gentleman he 
attended, and the occasional sauciness and 
pretended forgetfulness with which he, dealt 
out his notices, or enhanced their value, to 
those who pressed forward for recognition, as 
he stood by the door of the inn, ever and anon 
turning round to the landlady, and calling 
out, " Arrah, will you stir yourself, — do you 
know the guest you have, good woman ?" 

w O curse your good woman," replied the 
offended landlady. " Sure as if you did not 
know my name ? — many is the good cut of 
bread I give you, saucy gentleman." 

" By St Patrick ! sure it's not possible," 
cried Leary, affecting slow returning recol- 
lection. — " Mrs Farrell ! Then didn't I expict 
to find you an oald woman." 



322 CLAX-ALBIN, 

The appeased landlady took the proffered 
hand of Leary. (i A good high red in a lady's 
face for my money, for it is always improv- 
ing," said he, winking to the by-standers. 
" Pray now, how much might the painting it 
cost your jantleman ?" — In Ireland as every 
man's wife is his " lady/' every woman's 
husband is her " gentleman ;" unless indeed 
the former happen to be u my jade," and the 
latter " my vagabond/' 

Leary's kindred, a formidable train, were 
now crowding round him, claiming " the best 
right to him;" equally eager to give him wel- 
come, and to learn the business of the stran- 
ger at Fitzconnal's town. 

" Is it soldiers he wants r" — " Sorrow one 
but my own grandmother/' said Leary. 

" Then sure he has a message to St Peter," 
said one, " for that's the road she is taking, 
poor soul." — Leary looked aghast. 

" And did nobody tell you, cousin dear?" 
said one of his female relatives. " Sure the 
journey she made up kilt her, but we got the 
poticary." 

Norman now stept to the door, and found 
that disappointment again awaited him. Fa- 
tigue, and privation of every kind, on a jour- 
ney so unsuitable to her age, had thrown poor 



A NATIONAL TALE. 223 

Judy Leary into a pleuritic fever. She was 
not dead though reported kill ; but the apothe- 
cary, whom Norman sent for, gave very slen- 
der hopes of recovery. " She had got first a 
could, and then a heat, and then a could" 
her female friends said, — " and was now deli* 
rous." 

To be brief, Norman waited the crisis of 
her disorder. It proved fatal, — and, with her, 
expired his hopes of hearing at this time the 
name or country of a parent, who might pro- 
bably be still alive to claim his duty, and re- 
ward his tenderness ; — for the numerous des- 
cendants of Judy, though each knew every 
thing connected with the Fitzconnal family, 
when cross-examined were found to know 
nothing he wished to ascertain. 

Leaving Paddy Leary to empty naggins \\\ 
honour of Judy Leary — and to join in the dis- 
mal howl raised by 134 children, grandchild- 
ren, and great-grandchildren, who followed 
her to the grave, — Norman returned to head- 
quarters as wise as when he set out. 

The first person he met was Hugh, who 
had been watching every carriage that enter- 
ed the town for three days past. 

" Well, darling ? 17 — " I have heard nothing." 
Hugh's heart beat lighter. " God's will be 



324 CLAN-ALBIN, 

done," said he, perfectly resigned to hear no 
more of an ancestry for Norman unconnected 
with Clan-Albin. 

Having first visited his pupils, Norman 
went to the house of Colonel Grant, which 
was now entirely occupied by Craig-gillian ; 
the Colonel having gone to London, and his 
son-in-law and daughter to the Highlands of 
Scotland. 

On the same evening General wrote 

to the English ambassador at Lisbon, and also 
to a friend he had in that city. He likewise 
offered to make every possible inquiry, the 
moment he went to London to attend the 
meeting of parliament, among those French 
emigrant noblemen who must have been in 
the service at the time alluded to by Leary 
and all his friends, when the husband of Ge- 
raldine had saved the life of her father. In 
concert with his friends, Norman likewise 
adopted the obvious expedient of putting ad- 
vertisements into several English newspapers, 
and into as many of the foreign ones as the long 
arms of gold could reach. For this purpose 
he gladly accepted the pecuniary aid of 
Craig-gillian. 

Having now done all that was possible, 
Macalbin waited the event with placid resig- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 325 

nation, — a virtue which for the next ten days 
he found by no means difficult ; for Monimia, 
seated at the chimney-corner of Craig-gil- 
lian's parlour, at each returning evening re- 
warded with her softest smile the sedentary 
toil, or active employments, of a busy, and 
therefore cheerful day. Though Monimia was 
to him at all times an object of supreme de- 
light, when seen in wider circles, a sense of 
their contrasted fortunes, of what he was, 
and what, but for his love, she might be, crea- 
ted a vague feeling of regret for the very suc- 
cess which formed his felicity. This feeling 
might not be quite reasonable, but it was 
neither unnatural nor ungenerous. In Craig- 
gillian's temporary home, however, there was 
no place for factitious distinctions, — no lei- 
sure for annoying recollections. In the mixed 
parties in which Norman had lately seen her, 
she seemed cold, — estranged, — indifferent, 
though gay, — and animated more by the force 
of her own active mind, than the interest she 
felt, or could feel, in the persons and scenes 
around her : discharging the duties and 
courtesies of life with strict and graceful ob- 
servance of time, place, and person, but sel- 
dom stepping beyond them. But to the little 
domestic parties of those fleeting and long- 

VOL. III. F f 



326 CLAN-ALBIN, 

remembered evenings, she brought all her 
heart and high-toned affections; — an enthusi- 
asm perpetually felt, but seldom seen, often 
betrayed, but never exhibited ; — so strong a 
wish to animate the bliss she shared ; — so 
much of that touching and evanescent charm 
with which the desire of pleasing, where she 
loves unconsciously, inspires the ductile ima- 
gination of a cultivated woman. — that Macal- 
bin again, and in rapture, saw, felt, the lovely 
naive, bewitching Monimia of Eleenalin, priz- 
ed so far beyond the elegant and apparently 
indifferent Mrs Montague, who formed the at- 
traction and grace of Lord Glanville's circle. 

" Moniraia," said Flora, one evening, be- 
fore the gentlemen had joined them, " if you 
were not the most magnanimously honest of 
all young ladies, I would think you a little bit 
of a hypocrite." 

" A hypocrite ! — I a hypocrite ? — and why 
so ? — you astonish me." 

" I'm sure I would give any body nine 
guesses, who sees you in the frigid zone of 
these long, large, and lofty rooms you are 
forced to frequent in town, before they found 
out what a warm, quick-beating, little heart 
lurks here." 



A NATIONAL TAL£. 327 

" Is that my hypocrisy ?— No, no, Finagalla, 
those who have hearts, — and many fashion- 
ables have hearts, or at least fragments of 
them, — will easily find out mine, provided 
they are interested in the discovery. I for- 
give them and myself for having no heart for 
heartless occasions : — Alter all, few people 
want hearts; but there is indeed a miserable 
deficiency in the world and out of it, of that 
principled goodness which stamps on the 
glowing impulse of the heart stability and 
value/' 

Flora seemed occupied with her own reflec- 
tions. On the discovery of Norman's family, 
she had indulged the most extravagant hopes 
and the wildestjoy. Ci Fortune, — great fortune 
no doubt, — a father so proud, and so happy to 
acknowledge such a son, — perhaps a Macal- 
hin ; — but at all events amiable, — Norman's 
father cannot be otherwise." — " Why Flora?" 
said Hector, smiling at the unresisted enthu- 
siasm of a mind still fresh and artless, and uu- 
reproved of chiiiing experience. 

" Is he not Norman's father ? The simple 
question ! — Lord Glanville could tlien, I pre- 
sume, urge no objection ; — that soft tie was 
formed when no relation thought of her : 
Not quite ratified, I grant you. When this 



328 CLAN-ALBIN, 

rich, good father is found, they will marry 
in the first place, — bribe Gordon with any 
money to sell Glen-Albin ; — at any rate, they 
can fix in Eleenalin. This in summer, Edin- 
burgh in winter, and a good new road opened 
to Glen-gillian. We shall all be so happy." 

" Softly, my Finagalla," said Hector, " we 
must really have a little check-string fixed to 
your fancy. It is but too probable that the 
father of our friend no longer survives. The 
fortunes he might possess will of course have 
passed to relatives from whom it may neither 
be very easy, nor very gracious to reclaim 
them." 

" You could remedy all that," said Flora. 
In her eyes Craig- gillian was all-powerful, — 
by far the greatest, as well as the best and 
most beloved of men. In the country where 
all her notions of power had been formed, Sir 
Archibald Gordon was a great proprietor, but 
a man of small influence — according to the 
calculations of Flora; — he had few tenants, and 
no friends : — Craig-gillian reigned in every 
heart ; no wish was formed that he could not 
gratify; no project that he could not accom- 
plish, — he was the law and the prophet : and 
this Craig-gillian, so loved, and therefore so 
powerful, was hers. " You can easily remedy 



A NATIONAL TALE, 32Q 

all that for us," said she, with implicit and 
happy confidence, and regarding her fanciful 
arrangement as a fixed thing. 

" I have no interest in destroying your be- 
lief of my infallibility," replied Craig-gillian, 
smiling at that perfect dependence on his 
powers and talents that so singularly con- 
trasted with her acuteness of observation on 
other matters. — " At least you may believe, 
that no effort shall ever be wanting on my 
part for our Macalbin and his Monimia." 

" Ah ! well now, I knew that," said Flora, 
in her voice of caressing intreaty. — " Then 
should this fail, or not ripen as we wish, join 
forces with ours, and, — " 

" O, you are going back to the chapter of 
Brora.— Then Tm off; deeming it safer- to fly 
than resist." 

It was this chapter that engaged the atten- 
tion of Flora, while Monimia repelled the 
charge of hypocrisy. In a few days she must 
leave Ireland ; Monimia would probably soon 
follow; and in the meantime the intercourse of 
the lovers must be suspended. 

Macalbin knew that his presentjoyous even- 
ings could not endure forever, — knew and 
felt it, — so did Monimia ; but Flora spoke as 
well as felt. Starting from her reverie, she 
F f 2 



330 CLAN-ALBIN, 

exclaimed : " Monimia, place your feet on the 
fender, as we do in a friend's house I" She 
was answered by smiling obedience; and giv- 
ing the fire arousing stir, snuffing the candles 
thatburnton the chimney-piece, sweeping up 
the hearth, and drawing forward the empty 
chairs of Norman and Craig- gillian, and mak- 
ing round the cheerful hearth a circle as nar- 
row and warm as possible, she sat down with 
an air of satisfaction and a face of business. 

" Now, Monimia, for plans and projects : 
You know we have still a few minutes, and but 
a very few days. Speak, for I am content to 
listen, though I have much to say of men and 
measures ; you shall not want the aid of ma- 
tronly counsel." 

" And what shall I say, Flora ?" 

" Say, — why say, — ' No, the lady shall not 
wear out the few lingering years heaven may 
spare her to us, in cold withering solitude : 
Nor shall Macalbin fight his way through the 
world and the French, with the chance of some 
ugly scars, if not worse, and the certainty of 
nothing more useful or embellishing than a 
shabby single epaulet.' " 

" And count you as nothing the tried merit, 
the honour, the courage that won that epau- 
let, and deserved more," — would Flora re- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 1 

ply," said Monimia, smiling, — " never to be 
discovered in the solitudes of Brora." 

" Though existing there," cried Flora ea- 
gerly : " Ah, there, my dear, I have you !" 

" Latent, perhaps," replied Monimia, smil- 
ing — " like the good qualities you discover in 
persons who have no visible excellence. Un- 
fortunately we cannot find out latent fine qua- 
lities, nor spell-bound talents. Act, that I 
may know you." 

Flora looked very grave. " Then you wish 
Norman to prosecute this perilous profes- 
sion r" 

" That he must decide, — I cannot, will not 
say, that I shall be indifferent to his decision. 
Oh, my dear friend, you who ought to 
strengthen, do not enfeeble my mind, already 
seduced by its own tenderness !" 

" This is my own Monimia !" said Flora, 
embracing her. — " I think I know how he will 
decide ; how, if he loves, could he do other, 
wise ! and that, Monimia, is no question. You 
must respect the opinion of Craig-gillian ; not 
the son, but the father, — the junior, I am a- 
fraid, has a little lurking ambition. I can par- 
don it in a man, but never, never in you, Moni- 
mia! On this point myopinion is that of my fa- 
ther-in-law ) — you may smile, Monimia, — but, 



332 CLAN-ALBI^, 

ah ! could you now drive poor Norman from 
hope and home, without mercy ?" 

" In wisdom, and in mercy, not / hut 
duty would send him, not from hope, hea- 
ven forbid, but from home, my dear Flora. I 
have heard the lady say, — now this is autho- 
rity against authority, — ' The time ap- 
proaches when he must join his fellow men, 
measure himself with them, and learn the 
ground he occupies, — struggle for distinction, 
honourable pre-eminence ; — and, in this in- 
vigorating exercise, establish his title to the 
superiority we claim for him, or sink to his 
natural level.' " 

" That is, prove himself the full head above 
every body else," said Flora, in a pouting 
tone,—" which none that sees him can doubt. 
Now, Monimia, is there not a little, a very 
little pride here ? — who that knows Norman, 
can doubt of his natural superiority." 

" I hope that on such a subject we shall ne- 
ver be without pride,-^great pride, — f affec- 
tion's triumph,' — you, and the lady, and — " 

" And yourself," said Flora, slily finishing 
the broken sentence. — " I could be so proud 
of him at home, though ; and so happy too." 
She folded her arms on her bosom, and ad- 
justed herself with an air of quiet satisfaction. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 333 

" Can you wish that Macalbin should feel, 
that your friend should inspire, that boyish, 
fantastic, puling passion, which grasps at 
fleeting enjoyment, mocking the good which 
wisdom bosoms ever," cried Monimia, warm- 
ly ; — " the far-stretching, sober, certain hap- 
piness which time must bring us-, if we deserve 
it, and which hope already bestows. If it were 
permitted me to live with the lady, I have 
no present wish unaccomplished, but this, 
which I must ever earnestly desire, for her 
sake and my own/' 

" Is it then possible, Monimia ! — but why 
should I ask ? You would not then fear that 
dull round the fine people describe with such 
horror, — to-morrow — and every morrow like 
its sullen brother, yesterday."—" Surely not, 
Flora ; for that sullen yesterday would to me 
be most happy, spent in the home whither 
my heart, and, I trust, my duty, will one day 
lead me ; where all I loved is beloved, all I 
value is prized, in a succession of cherished 
duties and tranquil pleasures; and all enli- 
vened with the hope often repeated, the pro- 
mise often renewed, of a yet brighter day to 
me and mine, and those we love. Flora, I have 
unwisely revealed my wish on this point, al- 
though I know it to be idle. 1 ' 



334 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" And why, why Monimia ? — wherefore not 
return with us to Eleenalin, to Craig-gillian, 
to your poor Highlanders, where a hundred 
hearts would leap with joy at your approach; 
each of more real worth than the entire sweep 
of any rout you will witness this season r" 

" My uncle, 1 ' said Monimia, — " propriety. 
—In short, it is impossible. Can I, ought I, 
foicibly to withdraw myself from the protec- 
tion of my nearest relations, while they almost 
command my stay ?" 

" O then, my dearest Monimia 1" replied 
Flora, her eyes sparkling with earnestness, 
" Courage at once, — tell Lord Glanville, ' You 
are the Lord of duty ; but there's my hus- 
band.' " 

The eloquent blood mounted into Monimia's 
cheek She spoke not ; and Flora, thinking 
she had gained some vantage-ground, again 
returned to Brora. 

" Flora, my dear Flora, you give me pain ! 
Why speak of what must not at this time be 
even thought on r Teil me at once, on your 
honour — Could you have felt for Craig-gil- 
lian what you now feel, had he, through life, 
been a mere good patriarchial grazier? well- 
born, and essentially well-bred, and worthy, 
and respectable, as in all circumstances ' his 



A NATIONAL TALE. 335 

father's son* must have been ? Could you have 
felt that dignifying esteem, that proud affec- 
tion for the younger Craig-gillian, which now 
ennobles the wife of Major Hector Monro }" 

Flora's countenance was already illuminat- 
ed with that irrepressible pride which proved, if 
not the fallacy of her theory, at least the in- 
consistency of her reasoning. If other proof 
had been wanting, that also was at hand. 
Craig-gillian entered, and, with a very grave, 
though affectionate manner, drew his chair 
between the fair friends, and producing a large 
packet, said, " This from the war-office : — 
Don't be too proud, Flora, if, instead of a 
quiet farmer's wife, you are suddenly trans- 
formed into the Lady of a Colonel. " 

" Promoted ! without solicitation ! Ah, then, 
Craig-gillian, how can I help being proud — . 
happy ! But my dear father and aunt Mar- 
garet! — must we then leave them — leave Glen- 
gillian I" She leaned her head on his shoul- 
der, and hid the ready tear, which claimed 
its source as much in joy as regret — looking 
like the beautiful personification of an April 
day gleaming in brightness through a soft 
short shower. 

A few weeks after his marriage, Monro had 
written for liberty to resign. His request had 



330 CLAN-ALBIN, 

neither been refused nor granted : — a clerk 
had merely acknowledged, in the customary 
form, that his letter had been received ; and, 
as he claimed no favourable terms of resig- 
nation, he concluded that the affair was as 
good as finished. In the meanwhile, a ge- 
neral officer, of very high rank and interest, 
and still higher merit, under whom he had 
served in the Maratta war, had been most 
earnestly recommending him for promotion — 
representing his former services, and that skill 
in languages which had rendered him so pe- 
culiarly useful in India. The application was 
successful ; and Craig-gillian, though many 
discordant feelings tamed his exultation, could 
not remain insensible to so honourable a tes- 
timony of esteem in his officer, and confi- 
dence in his sovereign. 

Like his daughter-in-law, the first impulse 
of old Craig gillian was an almost overween- 
ing pride in the success which declared the 
merit of his son ; but his feelings of rapture 
faded more quickly. He still spoke with na- 
tural triumph of " Colonel Hector," to his 
neighbours, and tenants, and people ; — but a 
concluding sigh bespoke another state of feel- 
ing, smothered and painful. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 337 

There could be no doubt that the regiment 
to which Monro was appointed was destined 
for India; and he long struggled between a 
desire for the society of his wife, and his 
fears for her health and comfort amid all the 
chances of war and climate. But on this 
point the resolution of Flora was invariable. 
Old Craig-gillian's warmest sanction approv- 
ed her fixed purpose; and Hector acqui- 
esced. 

The time now approached when it was ne- 
cessary that he should go to London, and 
when Monimia must of course return to the 
Lodge. Flora had rapidly formed and dis- 
missed many schemes of Norman joining the 
regiment of Hector, and Monimia as his wife 
accompanying them abroad. Her plan also 
included Hugh and Luath — Mary Fitzconnal 
being left as a legacy between Glen-gillian 
and Eleenalin. It was not necessary that 
Craig-gillian should represent the wildness 
of her fancies on this occasion. She felt the 
impossibility of Norman leaving Europe in 
the very crisis of his fortune, at a time when 
Lady Augusta had suggested the impropriety 
of imposing the slightest fetter on his condi- 
tion, and recommended that he should re- 
main as he was, a volunteer soldier ; though 

VOL. Ill G or 



338 CLAN-ALBIN, 

General offered to solicit for him the 

first vacant commission that occurred in his 
own regiment; and Colonel Grant spontane- 
ously offered to use all his influence for the 
same purpose — a generosity he seldom shew- 
ed to any young man. This was in effect a 
promise ; hut Macalbin, to whom her wishes 
had the force of commands, requested to re- 
main attached to this regiment at home, or 
to follow it abroad, a devoted and faithful 
volunteer. 

His improved circumstances now enabled 
him to follow this plan without fear of conse- 
quences ; for his salary was equal to his per- 
sonal expenses, and the narrow establishment 
of Eleenalin. Lady Augusta had indeed re- 
turned twenty- five of the fifty pounds he had 
already sent home^ but, with that noble con- 
fidence it was the pride of Norman to jus- 
tify, she had assured him that she would feel 
no scruple in receiving the £ew indulgences 
necessary to her age, and to her venerable 
friend, from his industry. — " Yes, my beloved 
Macalbin," said she, in one of her letters, 
" I eat the bread which honourable industry 
has earned, and filial piety bestowed, not with 
thankfulness merely — -but with pride and joy. 
Meanwhile, I do not neglect our affairs. — 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33Q 

Craig- gillian has great hopes from poor Mac- 
donald's activity and enterprizing temper, 
and I have all confidence in his probity : 
though we may never be rich, we will not be 
destitute, when time in its golden round brings 
us all together." 

Till now he had often denied himself even 
the slenderest indulgence, that he might have 
something to bestow on * those that needed ;' 
but when this rigorous system of self-denial 
was no longer necessary, he gradually relax- 
ed, and often afforded himself the coveted 
volume ; and this generally bounded his de- 
sires. 

At length the day of separation arrived. 
Lord Glanville, wearied of Ireland, announced 
his intention of returning to England, as Par- 
liament was immediately to meet, and the 
business of the nation could not proceed 
without his intervention. Craig-gillian's re- 
giment imposed on him an equally imperious 
necessity. In the same hour, therefore, Mo- 
nimia set off for Glanville Lodge, which she 
was to quit next day, and Hector and Flora 
for Dublin ; each friend suppressing his own 
feelings, and bestowing that consolation on 
others he wanted for himself, and all ex- 
changing the promises of faithful correspond- 



340 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ence, which Floret rigorously exacted, and 
agreeing, wherever fortune might throw them, 
to consider Lady Augusta as a rallying point, 
and Eleenalin as head-quarters. 

Macalbin and his constant Hugh involun- 
tarily drew closer together, as the chaises they 
pursued with their eyes gradually disappear- 
ed. — " God bless them, go where they will ; 
and send us all to meet again in his own good 
time. Amen/' Such was the prayer of the 
piper, and Norman's heart repeated the 

amen. 

He was now alone, — thrown upon his own 
resources, — quartered through a long and se- 
vere winter in an Irish market-town, convuls- 
ed with the most unhappy spirit of party, — 
where the regiment was regarded by the nu- 
merous caste with mingled jealousy and ha- 
tred ; by the loyal caste, as a sort of body- 
guard, which gave security to former aggres- 
sions, and impunity to all the insolence of of- 
fice. He indeed escaped many of the pains 
and penalties annexed to such a residence, 
by observing that strict neutrality, which was 
not more in his case the dictate of prudence 
than the indulgence of inclination. A Sco- 
tish Highlander cannot, however, live < with- 
out the pale' in Ireland, without feeling that 



A NATIONAL TALE. 341 

he is among a kindred people, — the same as 
his native race, — in heart, and soul, and ima- 
gination. Modified by slight differences in 
some points, and warped and changed by un- 
fortunate circumstances, as the Irish have 
been, they are still felt to be essentially one 
with the Gael. --During along residence, Nor- 
man found no time to investigate, whether St. 
Patrick had stepped from Carrickfergus to 
the port which bears his name, and peopled 
all Scotland in one morning with his own hands, 
— or whether, according to the equally ration- 
al theory of zealous Caledonians, the emerald 
isle was peopled from the bleak north. He was 
wisely contented to feel himself at home in 
Ireland. 

The winter wore on. — Norman, indulging 
that hope of better times, which is common 
to all men, and, in the meantime, making 
the most of the present moment, which un- 
happily is not so common. Though repeat- 
ed advertisements brought no intelligence, he 
was cheered with frequent letters from Eng- 
land and Scotland; and the month of January 
brought another comfort, for Drummond re- 
turned with his wife and Colonel Grant. 

Drummond, indeed, returned with the bit- 
ter temper he usually brought from London ; 

Gg2 



342 CLAN-ALBIN, 

for he had again been disappointed in the 
long-expected, and, as he thought, hard-earn- 
ed majority. He affected to treat the matter 
with careless lightness, and with strangers he 
succeeded; but a half word from Norman was 
sufficient to betray the genuine tone of his 
spirit, and draw forth a tirade of invective a- 
gainst his real or imaginary rivals. — " I did 
hope to see you Major at this time," said 
Macalbin, sympathizing warmly in his disap- 
pointment. 

" Did you ?" replied Drummond, with a 
bitter smile. — " Fie, simpleton — What compa- 
rison between me and that second son of a 
tailor! I must stand by a little. Has not ouf 
hero's father made such a fortune, and built 
such an immense castle of clouts with his 
hush-money and crush -money . I dislike all 
the nouveaux riches, head, tail, and midriff; 
but my feeling amounts to absolute abhorrence 
of that despicable, non-descript, political fry, 
which over-run our royal and loyal boroughs, 
— a class of reptiles, that, without the honour 
of gentlemen, the probity of tradesmen, or 
the honesty and courage of cjownright high- 
way knaves, fatten to bloatedness on the 
grossest corruptions that shame this great 
empire. Vile slaves! the meanest tools of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 343 

the basest purposes ; touched with loathing, 
and turning away, even by those who are for- 
ced to employ them, — dabbling in that fecu- 
lent political sink, which offends those who 
escape its contaminating touch, by the noi- 
some effluvia of that " cream and mantle," 
where the spawn of corruption is quickened 
into loathsome life by the vivifying beams of 
ministerial favour." 

" Softly, dear Drummond 1" said Norman, 
" is not your philippic rather too general ?" 

" General let it be. include a large class. 
For politicians of the higher orders I make 
every allowance; — those whom principle, 
however mistaken, exalts, and passion and 
ambition excuses: But words cannot express 
the energy of my disgust at those cold-blood- 
ed prostitutes to existing power, to whom all 
are alike welcome who come with the same 
price; — who c are yours and mine, and have 
been slaves to thousands.'" 

" I protest you speak as feelingly as if some 
of those worshipful tailor-mayors had oppos- 
ed your being made one of his majesty's 
faithful Commons." 

" I speak feelingly, because I have seen 
and studied this sort of animal; because I 
have lived in scenes that inspired me with an 



344 CLAN-ALBIN, 

intolerable sentiment, — disgust of baseness 
too low for contempt, too despicable for ha- 
tred." 

" And because, because," — said Norman, 
archly. 

" Aye, because, because," replied Drum- 
mond, half-laughing, — " And why not? Was 
it not enough that they had the militia and 
the marines for these gentry, — that they must 
thrust them on us, — over us, forsooth ?" 

" O bo, Mr Leveller! — like all your breth- 
ren, you would level downwards, lower e- 
very thing, but raise nothing." 

" Neither one nor other. — I am of the old 
court, — give me power enough to com- 
pass my purposes, — for I dread and hate cor- 
rupt and corrupting influence. You know no- 
thing of these people. In this country, we 
have, to be sure, the excluding loyal, — and, at 
every turn, the existence of an odious com- 
pact glares upon us. But here the political 
scavengers are open, bold-faced scoundrels ; 
—now in Great- Britain, we have them ' yea 
forsooth knaves' who go to church, and pre- 
tend to conscience, — who try to identify them- 
selves with the men to whom their abjectness 
ministers, and think the whole strength of 
government bound to resent the petty quar- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 345 

rel they have with those who see their base- 
ness without pretending to have their eyes 
shut. Like the priests of former times, who 
called on heaven to avenge them on those 
whose temerity exposed their pious frauds, 
and held them up to detection and ridicule." 
" In short, now, you are not major." 
" Briefly, I am not major ; — it seems th« 
thing was impossible ; — my father could not 
6 strengthen the hands of government,' so go- 
vernment could not at this time, I presume, 
afford to adorn my shoulders. The fact is, 
they are, I believe, half worried with those 
sharks. — So, patience. 

Very few days passed, however, before 
Drummond forgot his mortification and its 
source, and thought more of the quarrels of 
the rival roses and shamrocks, — the English 
and Irish ladies in the town, — than of all the 
majors, and aldermen, and agents between 
Land's End and John O'Groats, Cape Clear 
and Giant's Causeway. But, besides the ri- 
valry of these ladies, he had another favou- 
rite amusement in the matrimonial squabbles 
of Pat and Mrs Leary, — the latter appealing 
in all disputed cases to Mrs Drummond, and 
the former to Macalbin or himself : — Judg- 
ment never failed to gcr against poop 



346 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Paddy, though Norman had sometimes a 
shrewd suspicion that the lady was as much 
in the wrong. These contests were rather 
on points of honour than of right, and each 
party seemed to claim the privilege of com- 
plaint, and, at the same time, of joining with 
the offender in a warm defence, if the judge 
appeared at all disposed to severity. — " Sure 
there was not an honester man than Pat 
Leary in his Honour's company, or a better 
husband, — though forgetting himself be- 
times." — " And och, don't say one word, your 
Honour, of little Dora ; I never deserved the 
likes of her, and that's the truth." 

" Blockhead," would Drummond cry, " did 
you not come here to complain of her ?" 

" Troth, and I did, — but a prettier cratur, 
barring her warm word, — Did you but see her 
yesterday, dressed out to the life, as fine as my 
lady lieutenant, in an ould cast gown of the 
lady's, as good as new, — faith, its a shame to 
see her any other than a Serjeant's lady, at 
laste, the night before the morrow." 

" Is it so ? — well, march off, and let me 
hear no more complaints," said Drummond, 
laughing at his shrewdness. " What think 
ye of such a candidate for the dignity of the 
halberd Mr Macalbin r" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 347 

Norman loved Leary better than many a 
better man ; but he could not, on the present 
occasion, say much in his favour, — he only 
shook his head, — and Leary's conscience 
sent the blood to his face. 

" I hope, Leary/' said Captain Drummond, 
" you have not forgot your vow, to make the 
teeth check the tongue. After all, Macalbin, 
according toPaley's definition, Learyisno liar; 
for nobody expects to hear the truth from him." 
Leary was become more sensitive on this 
point within the last four months ; he again 
reddened, and cast a stealing glance at Nor- 
man. 

" I must do Leary the justice to say, that 
I cannot impute to him even the shadow of 
any impropriety of this degrading sort." 

" Indeed I" cried Drummond. 

" Then, God bless you, and surely he will, 
— for that is the true jantleman's spirit spoke 
there, — now, say of me what you will, I desarve 
it all ; — on the other score, though — but I'll 
not say it, — the piper misled me as much as 1 
did him, — or his pipe at lasted 

Leary withdrew, again exclaiming, " The 
pipe it was, and no other soul sure." 

Macalbin thought Mrs Leary was disposed 
to overlook faults of great magnitude, while 



348 CLAN-ALBIN, 

she took fire at very trifling matters : For in- 
stance, the almost daily visits which Leary 
paid to a neighbouring alehouse, thouglr-they 
made terrible havoc among the tenpennies 
Dora earned by her talent for c smoothing fine 
linen/ were never resented — though repeat- 
ed complaints were lodged for the crime of 
speaking to a man from Fitzconnal's town, 
whose wife had somehow affronted her. Nor- 
man had not minded these deviations much, 
till Hugh's festive and social disposition be- 
trayed him into a connexion with Leary, more 
remarkable for warmth than prudence or tem- 
perance. The piper was generally grave and 
shy with strangers ; but Leary had contrived 
to gain his good- will. Hugh had always lived 
in the bosom of society, and his imagination 
was much more couleur de rose than that of 
the solitary mountain shepherd, whose life is 
spent in the contemplation of awful and wild 
scenes of extended loneliness — while his mind, 
from boyhood to old age, is wrapped in pen- 
sive musings on the various fantastic combina- 
tions of the l mythology of mist/ The piper's 
tone of mind was gayer than that of the most 
of his countrymen ; and as he could not ob- 
tain the company of Moome, or those skilled 
in the visions and visionary genealogies of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 349 

Clan- Albin, he naturally indulged himsel f with 
the best substitute circumstances threw into 
his way, namely, Pat Leary. 

In a suburb of the town, there was a little 
snack-house, kept by an old soldier, the sign- 
board of which exhibited a lusty, ruddy St. 
Patrick, in one hand grasping a bunch of 
shamrock, while the other was extended with 
an air of courteous welcome, which Hugh and 
Leary could not resist; or, had opposition 
been thought of, the distich, over which stood 
the jolly looking saint, rendered it impos- 
sible : 

' Ye sons of Erin step in here, 

i And cheer your hearts with Paddy's beerf 

was invitation irresistible. 

" And sure we will — Long life to you," was 
the oft-repeated exclamation of Pat; while 
Hugh tuned his pipe, and regaled his Irish 
friends with ' Carolan's receipt for drinking 
whiskey,' which he had learned in the High- 
lands from a wandering harper. 

Very animated discussions took place at 
these meetings. — Scotch potatoes against 
those of ' the land of potatoes/ — Highland 
mountains against Irish mountains, to which 
Hugh refused the name, asserting there was 

VOL. III. Hh 



350 CLAN-ALBIN, 

not a real Bein in the whole island ; — the great 
bag-pipe against the Irish pipe ; — and, lastly, 
Fairntosh against Inishone : — Pat Leary rais- 
ing his eye-lids when he heard that the High- 
landers fancied themselves peculiarly ill off 
if obliged to have recourse to smuggled Inish- 
one. 

These cordial meetings, through the natu- 
ral turbulence of some of the company, and 
a real desire for a splendid finale, sometimes 
ended in what Leary termed " a friendly 
row." He often assured Norman, " it was for 
the mere fun of the thing." But, fun or 
otherwise, Norman felt himself obliged to in- 
terfere, and remind the piper " of those he 
was come off:" — and this simple hint effectu- 
ally put an end to the ardent devotion paid at 
the shrine of St. Patrick, at least on his part. 
Not so on Lear}' s, who, during Captain Drum- 
mond's absence, had been twice lodged in the 
black-hole, or, as he quaintly termed it, " St. 
Patrick's purgatory," on a fair night, in con- 
sequence of a pitched battle betwixt the Bal- 
lyporeen boys and the boys of O'Shee's town ; 
Leary regularly joining with the former* 

It was the recollection of those exploits 
that made the blood now mount into a cheek 
which it seldom hastily visited, when Drum- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 351 

tnond spake of Leary as a candidate for a 
serjeantcy. 

In the midst of ail these important events, 
Norman, with desponding feelings, saw his 
oft-repeated advertisements productive of no- 
thing but disappointment. General had 

been four months in London, and his indefa- 
tigable inquiries among the French noblesse 
were not more successful. So many years 
had elapsed — so many changes had taken 
place : — that dreadful explosion which scatter- 
ed the glittering relics of all that had been 
gallant and honourable in France over the 
face of Europe, effaced the recollection of 
every inferior event. It was like searching 
for a friend in the ruins of a city swallowed 
up by an earthquake. 

But there was still hope. — Father Ullic yet 
lived, and the exile Fitzconnal, and probab- 
ly the gentleman in Lisbon to whom the mu- 
tilated fragment referred. 

The priest, and the father of Mary Fitz- 
connal, were, however, far beyond the reach 
of Norman ; and in the month of April he 
heard from his patron, or friend, the General, 
that Don Ignacio du Rocha had gone to South 
America with the Portuguese court, whither 
the letters had followed him. 



352 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Summer arrived. — Craig-giliian was still in 
England ; Monimia was in Devonshire with 
Lady Glanville; and Norman and his pupils 
in the neighbourhood of their Irish town, 
longing to bid it adieu. 

No air is so grateful to the ears of a true- 
bred soldier, as that which, in a fine morning 
in the latter end of June 1S08, cheered the 
mind of Macalbin, and transported Drum- 
mond and Pat Leary, as the regiment in high 
spirits took the route to Cork, under orders 
for foreign service. The seat of war is the 
soldier's home : Be it love of glory, or of vi- 
cissitude, or that desire which every man with 
a gun in his hand is said to have for shooting 
at something, or a mere change of quarters, 
no air is so perfectly delightful, as ' The girl 
I left behind mc] which a full band now play- 
ed, as the military heroes of all ranks flung 
round their light passing adieus to friends 
and sweethearts. 

To those who love external nature, the fair 
face of creation, nothing can be more pleas- 
ing than travelling at leisure through a fine 
and original country, with the eyes, the ears, 
and the purse, all kindly and carelessly open. 
A perpetual accession of new ideas and ima- 
ges, and a rapid transition of characters and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 35 3 

scenes, preserve the mind in continual hilari- 
ty, and dispose it to view every object in the 
most engaging attitude. 

Macalbin and his noble pupils marched cm 
foot along with the soldiers : The former in 
the mood of enjoyment ; and the latter, wild 
with the exuberance of youthful spirits, called 
into play by light exertion, seemed to think it 
were an easy leap to pluck from the pale- 
faced moon, — not bright honour, but broad 
mirth. 

Though a close inspection of the country 
they traversed may be somewhat fatal to the 
enthusiasm it creates in inflammable minds, 
when viewed from afar, and through the me* 
dium of its poetry, eloquence, sufferings, and 
crimee, it is well calculated to increase that 
good-humoured facility, and disposition to be 
pleased, which is the most desirable travelling 
companion on a march of this kind, as well as 
on that more important journey, which too of- 
ten abates admiration, without enlarging be- 
nevolence. 

Leary deemed it incumbent on himself to 
shew the natives, as he called them, when as- 
suming his travelled airs ; and every peasant 
they met seemed to consider himself bound in 
honour to answer his jokes and blunders with 



354 CLAN-ALBIN, &C. 

other blunders and jokes, or by the retort- 
courteous ; where a Lowland Scotsman would 
probably have sulked, and an Englishman 
challenged him to a boxing-match. This " re. 
ciprocation of smartness" extended along the 
whole line of march. 

" I hope, friend, you don't intend to make 
your tea of that water," said Drummond, run- 
in g to overtake his company, and addressing 
himself en passant to a tall raw-boned swarthy 
figure, who filled a tea-kettle with its own 
lid, from a muddy pool before his cabin- door, 
in which many ducklings were dabbling. The 
Irishman heard that the accent was foreign, 
and with great nonchalance replied, — " Och, 
master, in this country, the thicker the water 
the stronger the tayT — Such was the universal 
spirit of the answers he received ; ridicule was 
ever quickly seized and adroitly magnified, 
and what could not be excused or palliated 
was skilfully parried off. 

On the third day they reached Cork, where 
troops were fast collecting from all quarters, 
waiting for convoy and equipments, previous 
to their embarkation. 

END OF VOL, III. 



Printed by John Moir, 
Edinburgh. 



ERRATA TO VOL. III. 

Page Line 

13 9 from the top, for Craig- gillian read Crag-gillian, 

51 1 for countrymen read countryman. 

CS 2 from the bottom, for hailed read hurled, 
193 3 from the top, for on read in. 

— 10 from the top, for given read green. 

252 12 from the top, for spirit read sport. 
291 2 from the top, after • A feeling many a year forgot? 
add ' And like a dream a-n&w recurring.* 



