A MARRIAGE 



IN HIGH LIFE. 



EDITED BY 



THE AUTHORESS OF ' FLIRTATION.' 



" I was compelled to her — but I love thee 
By love's own sweet constraint." 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. IL 



LONDON: 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



A 

MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER I. 

Now, in his turn, offended and surprised, 
The knight in silence from her side withdrew ; 
With pain she marked it, but her pain disguised, 
And heedless seemed her journey to pursue. 
Nor backward deigned to him one anxious view. 
As oft she wished. 

PsYcnr. 

Easter was now fast approaching, and 
Fitzhenry announced to Emmeline his 
intention of going out of town for a fort- 
night,— but not to Arlingford— And he 
concluded by saying, that, of course, he 

VOL. II. B 






2 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

supposed she would like to pass the 
time with her father at Charlton. 

At any other time, and under any 
other circumstances, how gladly would 
she have availed herself of the oppor- 
tunity of returning to her former, peace- 
ful, happy home! But, like a sick 
person, her feverish mind had for some 
time past dwelt on Arlingford. She 
longed to find herself again there, for 
there, they must meet — there they might 
be alone ! and she could not help hoping 
for some explanation between them, 
which might make her, at least, less 
miserable. Fitzhenry's manner towards 
her had of late changed : it had no 
longer the ease of indifference, the cold- 
ness of mere civility; but, alas! it had 
only changed to apparent dislike, or at 
least displeasure. He observed her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 3 

more ; but his observations seemed al- 
ways to prejudice him still more against 
her. 

And yet, what could she do ? or what 
leave undone ? She had tried all means 
to please him, and all had failed. She 
first had followed the dictates of her own 
heart, and then, relying on Pelhain's 
knowledge of her husband's character, 
and on his advice, she had played a 
part most unnatural to her — that of a 
gay, unfeeling woman of the world, 
when her heart was breaking. All, in 
turn, seemed to be wrong. 

For an instant, a horrid thought had 
crossed her mind. Could Pelham be 
deceiving her? Could he, for any view, 
either of his own, or Fitzhenry's, be en- 
deavouring to draw her on to what was 
lowering her still more in her husband's 

B 2 



4 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

opinion? Was Pelham untrue to his 
friend ? or what would be still worse, 
was it a concerted plan, to exasperate 
her, and at last to force her to break a 
connexion, which, to her husband, had 
become intolerable thraldom. Emme- 
line, shuddering, turned away from 
such thoughts, almost reproaching her- 
self for ingratitude in having, even for a 
moment, entertained them. But again 
disappointed in what she had looked to 
with some degree of satisfaction, and 
finding she must relinquish even those 
faint hopes which she had built, on their 
return to Arlingford, her sick mind preyed 
on itself, and conjured up these painful 
surmises, producing doubt and suspicion 
in the most confiding of all characters. 

Emmeline heard Fitzhenry's notifica- 
tion about leaving town in silent acqui- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 5 

escence ; and, having no choice, to 
Charlton she went ; but her heart sunk 
within her as she drove up to her father's 
door, for, aware of how much she was 
changed, she dreaded her parents' ob- 
servation, and feared, that when con- 
stantly in their society, she could not 
keep up those false spirits which she al- 
ways endeavoured to assume when with 
them. Poor Emmeline was in truth 
sadly changed. Instead of the active, 
cheerful being she used to be, she was 
now generally abstracted, and some- 
times even apparently totally insensible 
to every thing around her ; and then, 
when fearful of betraying herself, she at 
others suddenly broke forth into those 
unnatural bursts of feverish spirits, so 
painful to witness, because so evidently 
proceeding from internal suffering. 



6 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Mrs. Benson watched her in silent 
anxiety; but her loss of bloom, of ac- 
tivity, and appetite, even of spirits, all 
was attributed to a far different cause ; 
and, after some enquiries respecting 
her health, which Emmeline always 
evaded, the warm-hearted mother, not 
without smiling at her daughter's over- 
strained shyness and delicacy, question- 
ed her no more on the subject; but con- 
tented herself with paying every possible 
attention to her bodily comfort, while 
she indulged in the delightful anticipa- 
tion of new objects for her maternal 
pride and fondness. 

And thus deceived as to the cause of 
Emmeline's altered appearance, she 
spared her any more embarrassing con- 
versations. 

The stated fortnight was past, and 



A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 7 

Still she did not receive from Fitzhenry 
the promised letter, announcing his re- 
turn to town. But one day the servant 
put into her hand one with the Arlinglbrd 
post-mark. It was not franked by Fitz- 
henry ; the writing was unknown to her ; 
and, in alarm, she hastily broke the seal. 
She found it was from Brown, the 
housekeeper, informing her that Rey- 
nolds had been seized with a violent and 
dangerous illness ; that the doctors, who 
attended him, gave little hope of his 
recovery ; and that he so constantly 
expressed his anxiety to see her, and 
Lord Fitzhenry, that she could not help 
complying with his request, and inform- 
ing her ladyship of his situation and 
wishes. She added — ** I have also 
taken the liberty to write to my lord ; 
and not knowing where his lordship is. 



8 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

have sent the letter to the steward in 
town to forward to him." 

Emmeline knew but too well whither 
the letter would follow him ; but think- 
ing he might not receive it in time, or 
that, possibly, in the society he then 
was, he might be little inclined to attend 
such a summons, she determined imme- 
diately to go to Arlingford. How much 
the desire of being there, of visiting every 
spot, every inanimate object in her mind 
connected with Fitzhenry, and the possi- 
bility even of thus meeting him, might 
have influenced her benevolent decision 
— probably she herself did not know. 

On arriving at Arlingford, Emmeline's 
first question was, whether Lord Fitz- 
henry was there : and the feeling of deep 
disappointment with which she learnt 
that he was not, and that he was not 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 9 

even expected, betraying to herself her 
real object in coming, made her half- 
ashamed when at length she enquired 
after the poor invalid. 

The accounts of Reynolds's situation 
had been in no way exaggerated. He 
was still alive, and sensible ; but there 
was no possibility whatever of recovery. 
Emmeline therefore endeavoured to over- 
come her own selfish feelings, and went 
immediately to the sick room. 

Independent of the gratification she 
received from witnessing the pleasure 
which her presence seemed to give to the 
faithful old servant, the duty she under- 
took then was one every way better suited 
to her present state of mind, than the dis- 
sipation in which she had been lately en- 
gaged. It soothed and quieted the tu- 

B 5 



10 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

mult of her feelings, and brought back to 
her mind some of the innocent, calm re- 
membrances of happier days. Educated 
by her mother in the exercise of every 
religious duty, she, who had so lately 
been seen glittering in ball rooms, now 
knelt by the bed of sickness; and wliile 
raising the dying man's mind and hopes 
to that better world to which he was 
hastening, she found herself strength- 
ened to bear the sorrows of that, in 
which she was still appointed to suffer. 

Towards the end of the second day 
after Emmeline's arrival at Arlingford, 
Reynolds grew rapidly worse ; the symp- 
toms of death seemed to be fast increas- 
ing, and, aware of his approaching dis- 
solution, his anxiety for Fitzhenry's 
r.rrival, and the nervous perturbation of 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 11 

his mind, were painful to witness. Em- 
meline frequently asked if he had any 
request to make, any wish she could 
communicate to him ; but his only an- 
swer was, that he must see him before 
he died. 

To compose, and turn his thoughts to 
other things, Emmeline had again re- 
course to religion ; and, when thus em- 
ployed, and while the last rays of the 
evening sun shone faintly through the 
curtains of the sick room on her kneeling 
figure, and on the sacred book she held 
in her hand, the door of the apartment 
slowly opened, and Fitzhenry appeared. 

He started back on seeing Emmeline, 
and, for a moment, stood still, as if awed 
by the scene before him ; but Reynolds 
recognizing him, and exclaiming — " Tis 
him ! God be praised, I shall now die in 



12 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

peace," Fitzhenry hastened up to him, 
kindly taking his extended hand ; then 
again looking at Emmeline — " Good 
God ! Lady Fitzhenry, since when have 
you been here ?" 

" Only a day or two ; I was sent for," 
said Emmeline, hardly knowing whe- 
ther thus unexpectedly seeing her had 
given him pain or pleasure. 

" I was so bold as to send for her 
ladyship," said Reynolds. " It was my 
request, my dying request. I knew I 
had not long to live. I knew I should 
not die easv, unless I could once more 
see you, once more see that angel !" 
and still grasping Fitzhenry with one 
hand, he held out the other to Emme- 
line. 

At such a moment, not to comply with 
any wish of the sick man, was impos- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 13 

sible ; though, half fearful of his in- 
tention, she tremblingly put her hand in 
his. 

** Dear, dear Lord Fitzhenry," con- 
tinued Reynolds, " you know I love you 
as if you were my own son. Death 
makes us all equal, and it makes me 
bold. I have often wished, longed, to 
speak to you, but felt it was not my 
place ; and I had not courage ; but 
listen to a dying man's advice. I know 
all — you know I do. Oh, my dear 
master! repent, and turn from your 
evil ways! Do not any longer trifle 
with God, and with the happiness he 
has offered you ! Do not cast from you 
the angel Heaven has sent you !" — and 
he joined their hands. " God of hea- 
ven!" he continued, with a trembling 



14 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

voice, " look down on these, thy ser- 
vants, and make them happy together!" 

Fitzhenry's head fell on the bed, as if 
wishing to avoid the eyes of Emmeline, 
as he involuntarily sunk on his knees. 

As for Emmeline, overcome and terri- 
fied at what had passed ; fearful as to the 
manner in which Fitzhenry might inter- 
pret such a seemingly premeditated 
appeal to his feelings in her behalf; per- 
haps, even, humbled at the situation in 
which it placed her, she hastily, almost 
unconsciously, withdrew her hand from 
the feeble grasp of the dying man, while 
his dimmed eyes were still raised to hea- 
ven ; and, before either he, or her hus- 
and, had time to discover her intention, 
she hastily left the room. 

But she had no sooner quitted it than 



A MARRIAGE Ix\ HIGH LIFE. 15 

she repented her hasty flight. When Rey- 
nolds joined their hands, although Fitz- 
henry had not clasped hers in token of 
affection, still he had suffered his to re- 
main with it ; and, overcome by the old 
man's address to him, he had appeared to 
have given way to the kind — the virtuous 
impulse of the moment. That impulse, 
and those virtuous feelings, might possi- 
bly have produced a favourable explana- 
tion ; and she, by leaving him so abruptly, 
had now, she feared, evidently shown a 
reluctance to any thing which might have 
produced a reconciliation between them. 
Twice she had her hand on the lock 
to return ; but, timid from excess ot 
affection, each time her courage failed 
her. The door which she had scarcely 
closed, reopened of itself, and she heard 
these words uttered by Fitzhenry : "It 



IG A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

is impossible — indeed it can't be so ; — 
but depend upon it, nothing shall be 
wanting on my part to contribute to her 
happiness, and " 

Emmeline waited for no more. As 
one pursued by a horrid vision, she hur- 
ried to her own room. The shades of 
evening deepened around her, as, alone 
and half stupified with her various feel- 
ings, she counted the striking of the 
heavy hours as they passed. Not a 
sound was to be heard in the uninhabited 
house — no one came near her. 

At length, when the clock slowly, 
solemnly sounded twelve, she started 
up, and, recollecting that her maid was 
probably waiting for her, she rung the 
bell, that she might dismiss her for the 
night ; but she first sent her to enquire 
after Reynolds, whose room was in a 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 17 

distant part of the building. On the 
return of Jenkins, the report she brought 
was — *' That ray lord was still with 
Reynolds — that they were apparently 
engaged in serious conversation — for that 
no one was allowed to go into the room, 
my lord himself giving him the necessary 
medicines, and having dismissed the 
nurse." 

After her maid had taken off Enime- 
line's gown, unplaited her hair, and, at her 
desire, lit the fire in her dressing-room, 
as she fancied it would be a sort of com- 
panion to her, which, in her present state 
of mind, she felt to be necessary, she sent 
Jenkins to bed, and, drawing her chair 
close upon the hearth, Emmeline re- 
mained lost in reflections neither cheer- 
ing nor soothing. The near neighbour- 
hood of a death-bed gives an awful feeling 



ra A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

even to one in the full pride of youth 
and health. To be aware that so 
close to us a fellow-creature is probably 
just then passing, through the agonies 
of death, to that eternity to which we 
all look with awe, is an overpowering 
sensation ; and Emmeline shuddered as 
these thoughts crossed her mind. She 
cast her eyes fearfully round the room, 
and endeavoured to brighten the flame 
in the grate. Still death and its horrors 
hung over her imagination, which wan- 
dered now to future scenes of pain and 
punishment ; and the thought that Fitz- 
henry — her loved Fitzhenry, who had 
wound himself round every fibre of her 
heart — might perhaps be an outcast from 
that heaven to which she had been taught 
to look, as the end and aim ofh er exist- 
ence, was agony. For she could not con- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. J 9 

ceal from herself that he was living in 
bold defiance, or rather in total disregard 
and indifference to the will and laws of 
his God. 

Emmeline's blood curdled, and a cold 
shiver crept all over her frame. Instinc- 
tively she sunk on her knees, and prayed 
for him who had never been taught to 
pray for himself. Her head sank on her 
clasped hands, which rested on a chair 
beside her ; her long hair falling over 
her face and shoulders. The dead silence 
that surrounded her, appalled her awe- 
stricken mind ; she eagerly listened for 
some sound of human existence and neigh- 
bourhood; but nothing was to be heard 
but the regular vibration of the great clock 
in the hall. Emmeline remained kneel- 
ing, till her nervous agitation grew so 



20 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

painfully strong, that she hardly dared to 
move, and had not power to shake off the 
superstitious horror which had taken pos- 
session of her. Every limb trembled ; 
the cold sweat stood on her forehead ; 
and it was an inexpressible relief to her 
disordered mind, when, at length, she 
heard a slow step in the gallery, and a 
gentle knock at her door. She con- 
cluded it was her maid, bringing her 
some tidings of Reynolds, and she 
quickly and joyfully bade her enter. 
The door softly opened, and Fitzhenry 
appeared. 

An unearthly vision could scarcely 
have startled Emmeline more. She 
uttered an exclamation, almost of terror, 
as she hastily rose from her knees ; but 
almost directly sank into the chair be- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 21 

side her, her trembling limbs refusing 
to support her. 

** I think you gave me leave to come 
in," said Fitzhenry, still standing at the 
door. Emmeline bowed assent, when, 
closing it after him, he came up to her, 
and put his candle on the mantle-piece. 

It was the first time he had ever en- 
tered her room since that day when, on 
her parents' first arrival at Arlingford, 
he had conducted them to it; and, dread- 
ing the possible purport of his visit now, 
after the scene that had lately occurred, 
she had not courage to say a word. For a 
minute, both were silent — at length Fitz- 
henry said — 

*' I thought you would be anxious to 
hear about poor Reynolds ; and as he 
has now sunk into something like sleep, 



22 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

I came away for a minute to tell you he 
is more easy and composed ; but I fear 
this stupor is only the forerunner of 
death, and that all will soon be over. I 
shall lose a most faithful servant — in- 
deed, an attached friend — ." 

He paused ; but Emmeline, still too 
nervous to speak, said nothing. 

" I also came," said he, in an agitated, 
hurried manner, " to thank you for your 
kindness in coming to him : it was most 
kind — good — excellent ; — like yourself. 
I feel it deeply, I assure you, as well as 
Reynolds." 

These few words of praise, so unlike 
what she had expected from him after 
what had passed, still more overpowered 
Emmeline. Had she dared to give way 
to the feelings of the moment, she would 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 23 

have thrown herself into her husband's 
arms, and, in his tenderness, claimed a 
reward for an action which he seemed to 
take as a kindness to himself. But alas ! 
not for one moment could she be deceived 
as to the nature of his feelings ; not for 
one moment, after the decisive declaration 
which she had again heard him make, 
could she attribute his present manner 
towards her to any thing but mere grati- 
tude for her attentions to his old servant ; 
and, repressing the throbbings of her bo- 
som, and scarcely knowing what she said, 
with a breathless voice she answered : 

" I came to Arlingford because I 
thought Brown's letter might not reach 
you in time, and I did not know where 
to write to you — I mean, I thought you 
might be otherwise engaged yourself." — 



24 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

And then struck with the appearance of 
coldness and reproof in her words, and 
the possible interpretation to be given to 
them, she stopped short. 

Fitzhenry made no comment. Both 
were now standing seemingly occupied 
with watching the dying embers of the 
fire — at last he turned towards her, she 
felt his eyes were on her. 

" Poor Reynolds often names you," 
he said ; " but 1 think, unless you wish 
it- perhaps you had better not go to him 
again — such scenes are painful, and " 

He was continuing, but with the quick 
touchiness of love, (of unrequited love, 
which interprets every thing to its dis- 
advantage,) Emmeline, catching at those 
words, and fancying they alluded to what 
had lately passed, and were meant as a 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 25 

hint to her to avoid any possible recur- 
rence of the same scene, immediately, 
with a voice scarcely audible from agita- 
tion, said : 

" Oh no, certainly. And perhaps now 
that you are here, and that my presence 
is no longer desired — I mean not neces- 
sary — it may be more convenient if I 
return to Charlton or to town." 

'* Just whatever you prefer," said Fitz- 
henry, coldly ; and, after a moment's 
pause, *' you know my wish is, that you 
should always do whatever you like and 
judge to be best." And he put up his 
hand to take his candle, as if in prepara- 
tion to leave the room. 

Poor Emmeline had, in a moment of 
perhaps excusable irritation, artfully 
made the proposal of leaving Arlingford, 

VOL. II. c 



26 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

in the hope of its being opposed ; and 
this cold acquiescence quite overcame 
her. She could not speak, for her lips 
quivered when she attempted it; and, 
depressed and nervous with all that had 
passed, big tears again rolled down her 
cheeks, and she kept her head averted 
to conceal them from Fitzhenry. 

In raising his hand to take his candle, 
he somehow had caught on the button of 
his coat-sleeve a lock of her long hair, 
which was hanging loose over her 
shoulders ; and, during the pause that fol- 
lowed his answer, he was endeavouring 
to disentangle himself ; but in vain. 
Surprised at his still remaining near her, 
and in silence, she at last looked up, and 
seeing what had happened, her trembling 
hands darted on the entangled hair, and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 27 

with the vehemence of vexation, she 
broke and untwisted it till she again set 
him free. He looked at her for a minute 
in seeming astonishment, and then, coldly- 
wishing her good -night, left the room. 

He had scarcely been gone a minute, 
when recalling the kindness of his man- 
ner on first entering, and blaming herself 
for the irritation she had given way to, 
she determined to recall him ; and, pass- 
ing from one extreme to another, and 
buoyed up with instant hope — though she 
scarcely knew of what — she hastily col- 
lected her hair with a comb, folded her 
wrapper closer around her, and opening 
her door, hurried into the gallery. All 
there was dark and silent; she turned to- 
wards Fitzhenry's room — his door was 
open — but he was gone ! Stopping a 

c 2 



28 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

minute to listen and take breath, she 
heard him crossing the hall below on 
his way to Reynolds's apartment. She 
determined to recall him, and hurried 
along the gallery to the head of the stairs 
for that purpose. When she got there, 
she saw the last faint ray of the light he 
was carrying glimmering across the hall. 
Twice she endeavoured to pronounce his 
name — but it was a name that never could 
be pronounced by her calmly. She was 
frightened at the sound of her own voice, 
faint as its accents were, (so faint that 
they never reached him to whom they 
were addressed,) and her courage totally 
failed her. 

"Alas!" thought she, as she sadly 
leant against the bannisters for support, 
^' if he came, what could I say to him? 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 29 

what have I to ask of him, but pity for 
feelings which he can neither understand 
nor return? and may I at least never so 
far forget myself. I am humbled enough 
already." And now, even alarmed at 
what those feelings had so nearly be- 
trayed her into, she returned to her own 
room as hastily as she had a minute be- 
fore quitted it; so capricious, so incon- 
sistent does passion render its victims. 

Towards dawn of day, Emmeline, 
whose heavy eyes sleep had never 
visited, heard a bustle below; several 
doors were hastily opened and shut. In 
a little time, Fitzhenry (for she could 
never mistake Jiis step) passed hastily 
along the gallery to his own room, and 
closed the door immediately after him. 
Then there was again a dead silence. 



30 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" It is all over," thought Emmeline ; 
" Reynolds is at peace : the only being 
in this house who loved me is gone !" 
A cold shiver crept over her; she buried 
her tear-bedewed face in her pillow, and 
thus lay for long immoveable, no con- 
scious thought passing through her agi- 
tated mind. 

When her maid came to her in the 
morning, she informed her Reynolds had 
died about five o'clock ; that Lord Fitz- 
henry had never left him ; that he had 
supported him in his arms to the last, 
and, when all was over, appearing much 
affected, he had gone immediately to his 
own room, giving orders that no one was 
to go to him till he rung. 

Jenkins, unbidden, brought Emmeline 
her breakfast in her own apartment, al- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 31 

though at Arlingford that was a meal at 
which she and Fitzhenry had always 
hitherto met. How painfully did she 
then feel the separation between them ! 
Fitzhenry was in sorrow, and she, his 
wife, dared not go near him ; even the 
servants seemed to dictate to her her 
conduct, and to be aware of her situa- 
tion. 

As to her departure, she knew not what 
to determine. She had said she would 
go. Her husband had not opposed her 
declared intention, and she did not like 
again to be accused of caprice. Not 
feeling, however, that she could leave 
Arlingford without at least again seeing 
him, she put off her journey till the 
following day. 

To pass the slow unoccupied hours, 
Emmeline, knowing there was no chance 



32 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

of seeing- Fitzhenry for some time, wan- 
dered out. The country was now in its 
first freshness of beauty — all smiled 
around her. Those rides and paths 
which, the summer before, she had first 
seen, with Fitzhenry at her side, were 
again clothed in the lovely green of 
spring. Often at those spots, connected 
in her mind with some circumstance, 
word, or even look of Fitzhenry, which 
a few months back had, although in de- 
lusion, made her heart sometimes beat 
with the flattering hope that she was not 
quite indifi'erent to him, poor Emmeline 
would remain fixed, quite unconscious 
of the time she thus passed in vague 
reverie. For, compared with what she 
had endured in London, there was a sort 
of pleasure in her present state of mind, 
raised and soothed as it had been, by the 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 33 

late pious duties in which she had been 
engaged, and softened by the charm of 
renovated nature. How often does some 
accidental sound or perfume, wafted to 
us on a spring breeze, startle the mind 
by confused recollections of hours gone 
by, and by undefinable sensations of 
mixed pain and pleasure ! 

Emmeline had not been long returned 
to the house before a servant came and 
told her that dinner was ready, and that 
my lord was waiting for her. Their 
meeting was rather awkward on both 
sides. Fitzhenry never raised his eyes 
upon her; but she was now well used to 
that sort of cold neglect on his part. It 
was the first time for several months that 
they had been Ute-a-tete. This circum- 
stance, and the room they were in, all 

c5 



34 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

brought back forcibly to Emmeline's 
mind their wedding-day ; that day of 
exultation and joy to her parents, and at 
its dawn of hope and happiness even to 
herself — and how had it all ended ! 

To one formed for tenderness, for all 
the social charities of life, there could 
not be a more cheerless fate than hers ; 
for, repulsed from where her heart should 
have found its best home, she was even 
denied the consolations of confidential 
friendship. Occupied with these thoughts, 
Emmeline was little inclined to join in 
uninteresting, forced conversation. Fitz- 
henry, too, seemed much depressed, and 
they eat their repast in nearly total 
silence. 

When it was ended, Fitzhenry, under 
the plea of having several orders to give. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 35 

and many things to arrange in conse- 
quence of the death of Reynolds, soon 
returned to his own room, and Emmeline 
passed the remainder of the evening 
alone. On the approach of midnight, 
as he never appeared, she concluded that 
Fitzhenry did not intend to return ; she 
therefore rang for her candle, and left the 
drawing-room; but before she reached her 
own apartment, she was met in the gallery 
by her husband — they both stopped. 

*' I shall leave this place to-morrow," 
said Emmeline, in a low voice. " Have 
you any letters or orders to send by me?" 
She still fondly hoped he would make 
some objection to her departure; but he 
merely replied, that he concluded she 
was going to Grosvenor Street; that he 
would follow in a few days ; and that if 



36 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

she did not set out early, he would send 
some letters by her. 

" I can go at any hour," said Emme- 
line, " I am in no hurry ; it does not 
signify at what time I go ; all hours are 
the same to me." And so they parted. 

It was in the same cold, distant man- 
ner that they separated next morning, 
when Emmeline left Arlingford for town. 
For though she loitered on, always hoping 
Fitzhenry would let fall some word at 
which she might catch as an encourage- 
ment to stay, he never in any manner 
opposed her departure ; and at last, with 
a heavy heart, she entered her carriage, 
and, after a melancholy, solitary journey, 
drove over London's noisy pavement, 
now glazed by a burning May sun, into 
Grosvenor Street. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 37 

Those who have lived in London when 
melancholy circumstances have excluded 
them from participating in its amuse- 
ments, will enter into Emmeline's feel- 
ings when, during the first, and on many 
an ensuing dismal evening, which she 
spent alone, she heard the carriages 
hurry past her door in the constant bustle 
of pleasure. Often, as she sat in the dusk 
of the now long-protracted spring even- 
ings, Emmeline was only roused from 
some deep reverie to a consciousness of 
the lateness of the hour, by the glare of the 
lamps and flambeaux of some of these 
gay equipages passing her darkened win- 
dows, and hastening to some general 
resort of diversion. 

For it was now the high tide, the car- 
nival of London. Every one was there — 



38 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and every one went every where — hurry- 
ing and crowding after each other, al- 
though caring for no one. What a 
wretched, humiliating picture of human 
nature does London present during the 
months of May, June, and July ! Affec- 
tion, friendship, all the social virtues, and 
charities, disappear before folly, dissipa- 
tion, and selfishness. And so infectious 
is the disease, that almost the best hearts 
are, at least for the moment, tainted; the 
steadiest heads turned. It is a constant 
hurry, a perpetual bustle, in which no one 
has leisure to care, or feel for another, 
whatever may be the inclination ; and 
scarcely is there time to drop a tear over 
the grave of a friend. If an uncle, cousin, 
or some such near relation, is so incon- 
siderate as to choose these interesting, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 39 

busy moments to depart this life, it is 
looked upon as an almost unpardonable 
act of selfishness on the part of the de- 
funct, by which so much time, perhaps 
many entertainments and balls, are lost 
to his surviving family. On the other 
hand, the demise of some mere nightly 
companion in the resorts of dissipation 
is generally hailed with joy, not for their 
own demerits, but that not only their 
opera-box and ticket at Almacks, but 
that of all those nearly connected with 
them will thereby become disposable ; 
a short retirement being considered ne- 
cessary both to dry their tears, and 
give time to a fashionable tailor or 
mantua-maker to send home the becom- 
ing mourning, in which they can again 
sally forth to make up for the time they 
have lost, by returning with renovated 



40 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

spirits to their dissipated duties. In the 
mean time, anxious notes fly about town 
as soon as the death is announced in the 
papers ; and the doors of all the patron- 
esses of fashion are beset by the dear 
friends of the deceased, anxious to be 
the first to apply for the vacated sub- 
scription, which happily can neither be 
carried away from this world by the 
selfish, nor be disposed of by will by the 
obliging. 

And this was the world into which 
poor Emmeline had to carry a breaking 
heart ! 

After Fitzhenry had joined her in 
town, although nothing further had ever 
passed, — no dispute, no difference had 
taken place, — yet, they appeared mu- 
tually to consider themselves as more 
than ever, in short, totally estranged. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 41 

Both looked miserable : an additional 
shade of melancholy seemed to have 
gathered on Lord Fitzhenry's counte- 
nance ; and yet Emmeline was now 
certain that her rival was again in town, 
and that he passed with Lady Florence 
those hours which she now spent alone 
in Grosvenor Street. For Emmeline 
felt it impossible to return to her former 
life ; and, as there was no reason why she 
should, no one for whom she was called 
upon to make the exertion, she gave 
up what had already injured her health, 
both of mind and body. 

Emmeline's temper even was not what 
it used to be ; often, if Fitzhenry acci- 
dentally spoke to her, she answered him 
with asperity, and then the minute he 
had disappeared, she wept bitterly for 



42 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

her fault — for her offence towards love ; 
longing for his return, that, on her knees, 
she might implore his forgiveness. Yet, 
when they again met, it was the same 
repulsive coldness on both sides. 

But if there can ever be an excuse for 
one gifted by nature with the blessing 
of a mild, gentle disposition, for giv- 
ing way to irritation, Emmeline might 
plead it. Her heart was every way 
wounded ; even Pelham she now dread- 
ed ; Mrs. Osterley's hints eternally 
haunted her : if she caught his eye fixed 
upon her in anxious interest, her sick 
fancy took alarm, and the deep crimson 
in her cheeks betrayed apprehensions, 
which she wished to conceal even from 
herself. 

Tormented with this idea, she now 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 43 

shunned his society and conversation, as 
much as she had formerly sought it ; 
for, although her extreme diffidence 
with regard to her own attractions, (a 
diffidence which her husband's disregard 
of her had much increased,) her unsus- 
pecting innocence, and simplicity of 
heart, would rather have led her to prize 
than avoid the attentions of an agree- 
able man, regardless of their raising- 
suspicions in the breast of others, any 
more than in her own ; yet, now being 
aware of what the world could and did 
say, that very innocence and simplicity 
made her fly from the least appearance 
of evil. She was not one of those to 
play off* on a husband the arts of infi- 
delity, in order, by jealousy, to rouse 
his feelings, and by the fear of wounded 



44 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

honour, to attract his attentions towards 
her. 

Fitzhenry cared not for her ; but the 
vow of constancy which her lips had 
pronounced at the altar, and which was 
since engraven by strong affection on 
her heart, was too sacred in her esti- 
mation to allow even the uninterested 
world to suspect that she trifled with it. 

Her intercourse with Pelham being 
thus embittered, and her parents being 
the last to whom she could reveal her 
sorrows, she dragged on, in wretched 
solitude of heart, a listless, useless, 
aimless existence. The young, the gay, 
and the busy meantime bustled around 
her, careless of her unhappiness ; or, if 
they sometimes observed its melancholy 
symptoms on her pale cheek, or in her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 45 

heavy, absent eye, they only wondered 
" what could make Lady Fitzhenry so 
discontented, when she possessed every 
thing in the world to render her happy." 
It is thus we too often pass harsh and 
hasty judgment on those whose grave or 
suffering countenances chance to cross 
us in the paths of pleasure, checking, 
for a minute, by their sad and therefore 
unwelcome presence, our feeling of en- 
joyment, in reminding us, most disagree- 
ably, of its transient nature. 



46 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER II. 

Poured in soft dalliance at a lady's feet, 

In fondest rapture he appeared to lie . ... 

Their words she heard not — words had ne'er exprest 

What well her sickening fancy could supply — 

All that their silent eloquence confest 

As breathed the sigh of fire from each impassioned 

breast. 
While thus she gazed, her quivering lips turn pale, 
Contending passions rage within her breast. 
Nor ever had she known such bitter bale, 
Or felt by such fierce agony opprest. 

Psyche. 

Emmeline having a general invitation 
to the house of Lady Mowbray — one of 
her new acquaintance, who was at-home 
on a stated day every week ; and never 



A MARR]AGE IN HIGH LIFE. 47 

having" yet been to any of her soirees, 
she one evening exerted herself to pay 
her a visit. There were not many peo- 
ple assembled, owing to the rnany things 
to be done, a phrase in the fashionable 
slang of London, expressive of that 
delightful prospect of busy pleasure, 
which consists in passing the greatest 
part of the night in a carriage, fighting 
in and out of a dozen houses, the owners 
of which are, perhaps, never seen by 
their visitors. 

Among the few whom these many 
pleasures had that evening spared to 
Lady Mowbray, Emmeline found none 
with whom she was much acquainted ; 
so that after having remained what she 
thought a sufficient time, hearing a loud 
knock, announcing a fresh reinforcement 



48 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

of company, and thinking she had per- 
formed her duty of civility, she meditated 
her departure, when the door opened, and 
Lady Florence Mostyn was announced.^. 

At that name, Emmeline started so 
violently, that her neighbour turned 
round to see what had alarmed her; 
but could neither perceive any cause for 
her agitation, nor receive any answer to 
her enquires, whether she was well, for 
Emmeline's eyes, thoughts, and every 
sense, were fixed on her rival. 

Lady Florence, after speaking to one 
or two other people, went up to Lady 
Mowbray, and seated herself by her, 
luckily at some distance from where 
Emmeline was placed. Lady Florence 
was past the first bloom and beauty of 
youth ; but this was more apparent in 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 49 

the somewhat thickened contour of her 
figure, than in her face. Her deep blue 
eyes were still brilliant; her lovely chis- 
selled mouth still opened to show teeth 
like pearls, and the roses and lillies still 
contended in her cheeks. She was sim- 
ply dressed; but there was not a curl, 
however careless it appeared, but fell just 
where it should, and the large shawl in 
which she was wrapped, took some new 
graceful fold each time she moved, and 
by its brilliant colours gave additional 
effect to the delicate whiteness of a 
round arm, covered with bracelets. Her 
voice, and look, were sweetness it- 
self; but in her eyes, an expression 
lurked, that recalled to the mind, Wal- 
ter Scott's *' Wiley Dame Heron." 

VOL. II. D 



50 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 

Lost in a trance of most painful feel- 
in"s, Emmeline sat for some time 
like a statue, without power to form 
any resolution, as to whether she would 
fly or face her enemy. There was the 
being who reigned paramount in her 
husband's heart! Those were the eyes 
on which he gazed with fondness! on 
that hand he had sworn constancy! 
on those lips he had sealed his vows! 
the silver tones of that voice thrilled to 
hh heart, as his did to hers! 

Poor Emmeline gazed on all these 
charms, till, growing frightened at her 
own increasing agitation, she hastily got 
up, and moved towards the door. 

" My dear Lady Fitzhenry,*' ex- 
claimed Lady Mowbray, who unfortu- 
nately had observed her intended de- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 51 

parture, " I hope you are not already 
going?" 

At that name, the eyes of Lady Flo- 
rence eagerly followed those of the speak- 
er, and rested on Emmeline. And, for 
an instant, as if impelled by some power 
they could not resist, the rivals glanced 
at each other, and their eyes met. But 
Emmeline'ssoon fell beneath the scrutiny 
of her rival, and she turned away her 
death-like face. The whole expression 
of Lady Florence's countenance had 
changed. Emmeline's appearance, every 
way so different from what she had ex- 
pected, in an instant roused, within her, 
feelings she could scarcely command. 
Her uncontrolled passions were plainly 
painted in her face ; the deep crimson 
in her cheeks overcame the well applied 

d2 



52 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

rouge ; her eyes flashed fire ; and the 
lovely smile on her lips, was replaced by 
a fearful expression of " envy, hatred, 
and malice." 

Emmeline, scarcely able to support 
herself, and endeavouring to utter some 
excuse, still moved towards the 
door. 

" Well, really you are using me very 
shabbily," said Lady Mowbray, in reply 
to her uncertain accents, and following 
her with most officious civility. '* But 
I know this is the moment when it is 
impossible to keep any body for half an 
hour ; and quiet, sober people, like my- 
self, have no chance of collecting any- 
thing like agreeable society. I suppose 

you are going to the D e house, 

or some such gay thing." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 53 

Emmeline stammered out, that she 
was obliged to go home. 

" Home ! I fear you are not well," re- 
torted Lady Mowbray, now, for the first 
tune, observing her blanched cheek, and 
bloodless lips. " Do at least wait till you 
hear that your carriage is ready : " and, 
cruelly well bred, she rang the bell, en- 
quiring repeatedly whether Emmeline 
would not be prevailed upon to take 
something. 

Unable to speak, she shook her head 
in answer, and the instant the welcome 
sound of her own name reached her 
ears, she darted out of the room, though 
still followed by the civilities and offers 
of the lady of the house. 

When in her carriage, and when too 
late, Emmeline remembered Pelham's 



54 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

often repeated advice, to endeavour to 
control, or, at least conceal, her feelings 
better. She was aware she had humbled 
herself before her, who, of all people, 
she would least wish should read those 
feelings ; and she felt also that she had 
left herself and her husband subjects for 
animadversion, certainly not of the most 
charitable nature. But poor Emmeline, 
in common with all those who allow their 
affections to controul their judgment, 
never, till too late, discovered what her 
conduct should have been — an artless- 
ness of disposition, ill- calculated to con- 
tend with a guileful world. 

This evening's adventure completely 
sickened her of the amusements of Lon- 
don ; and aware from constant, sad ex- 
perience, of her inability to perforpi her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 55 

hard part properly, she resolved to avoid 
in future the possibility of any recurrence 
of such scenes ; for though her mind had 
long been intent on meeting Lady Flo- 
rence, from a sort of anxious, jealous 
curiosity, yet now she felt she could 
not endure the trial again; and, that 
weakened both in health and spirits, 
she was no longer equal to the exertions 
which she knew she should make. She 
remained, therefore, in spite of Lady 
Saville's repeated attacks and railleries, 
for some time entirely at home ; and, 
catching gladly at an excuse for avoiding 
even the opera, she gave away her box 
the following week, to some Hampshire 
neighbours, who she heard were in 
town ; and the weather being uncom- 
monly hot, she had, on the Saturday, 
ordered her carriage, after her solitary 



56 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

dinner, to take a drive out of town, in 
the hope that a little fresh air might re- 
vive and compose her spirits. 

But just as she was going, a note ar- 
rived from Lady Saville, to say, that 
she was disappointed of a friend, with 
whom she was to have gone to the opera, 
that night, and, who being now unavoid- 
ably prevented, had made over the box 
to her, but her carriage being broken, 
and having no one to go with, she would 
be obliged to give up the plan entirely, 
unless Emmeline would be compassionate 
and carry her ; and she entreated she 
would overcome her abominable laziness, 
and agree to the proposal — adding, it was 
the new opera, and that it would do her 
good, for she gave herself the blue devils, 
by moping so much at home. 

Too indifferent to every thing, even to 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 57 

refuse, Emmeline gave up her intended 
drive, changed her dress, and she and 
Lady Saville went together to the opera. 

About the beginning of the second 
act, she saw Lady Florence come into a 
box on the same tier, about ten or twelve 
off; she was alone — and at that dis- 
tance, Emmeline thought would pro- 
bably not recognize her ; but, wishing 
to conceal herself from her view, she 
made some apology to Lady Saville for 
being whimsical, and, begging to change 
places with her, she moved to the opposite 
seat, drawing the curtain of the box so 
as entirely to hide herself; although, 
like the poor bird ensnared by the ser- 
pent, she never could withdraw her eyes 
from her rival. 

Before long, a man entered the box 

D 5 



58 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

where Lady Florence was ; he seated 
himself directly with his back towards 
Emmeline ; but it was impossible for her 
to mistake him ; — the oval head, the 
brown, curly hair, the attitude and air 
of the arm that leant on the edge of the 
box, the action of the hand, all told her 
but too well it could only be Fitzhenry. 
Never before had she beheld them to- 
gether ; never before had she, in a man- 
ner, witnessed those words, those looks 
of love, addressed to Lady Florence, 
which should now have belonged to her. 
Though but too well aware of the whole 
truth, she had as yet suffered merely 
from a vague, unembodied feeling of 
jealousy. She had been wounded by 
neglect; by the mortfying conviction that 
she was not beloved by her husband ; but 



Ul 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 59 

had never yet actually witnessed his de- 
monstrations of love to another. 

Lady Florence leant towards Fitz- 
henry, and seemed to whisper something 
to him. He shook his head, as if con- 
tradicting her ; but soon after, Emme- 
line saw him look round towards the box 
where she was, with a glass, as if in 
search of some one. She hastily, al- 
though she hardly knew why, shrunk 
back, hiding herself behind the curtain, 
which she drew still more forward. 

They then appeared to be engaged in 
most earnest conversation for some time, 
till at length Fitzhenry, leaning back in 
his chair, sat with his hand over his face, 
and there seemed to be a total silence 
between them. Ere long, a third per- 
son came into the box. Fitzhenry 



6Q A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

then moved from his place, and disap- 
peared. 

To those who have known the tor- 
ments of jealousy, I need not describe 
Emmeline's feelings ; and to those who 
have not, my expressions would appear 
exaggerated and unnatural. Like a sta- 
tue, she sat during the remainder of the 
opera, not able to attend to any thing 
around her. Luckily, Lady Saville, who 
was engaged in a regular flirtation, ob- 
served neither her preoccupation, nor 
additional dejection; and when the cur- 
tain fell, Emmeline mechanically fol- 
lowed her companions out of the box. 
Her complete absence of manner, and 
Lady Saville's exclusive attention to 
him, who was whispering soft nothings 
in her ear, had so effectually driven 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 61 

away all other visitors, that Emmeline 
had no one to take charge of her ; and 
Lady Saville and her admirer soon parted 
from her, the former having found a 
friend to take her to the usual supper 

party at Lady L y's after the opera ; 

and the latter being too gallant, and too 
much epri'i not to accompany her to the 
carriage, promising, however, to return 
to Emmeline. At this minute, however, 
Pelham, luckily observed her, and forci- 
bly making his way up to her, exclaimed, 

" What here ! and alone ! I thought 
I saw strangers in your box, so never 
went near it; how comes it I find you 
in this desolate situation ? Do take my 
arm." 

Emmeline made no reply ; and, soon 



62 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

perceiving that she was more than usually 
depressed, Pelham, after one two in- 
effectual efforts, forbore even to speak 
to her. They made their way towards 
the door at the top of the great stairs ; 
and, leaving her there, Pelham went to 
look for her carriage. 

Emmeline shrunk behind the door, 
wrapping herself close up in her cloak, 
and not daring to raise her eyes from 
the ground for fear of meeting those of 
her husband, or of Lady Florence. Her 
own name, however, pronounced close 
by her, soon roused her, and she saw 
Mrs. Osterlcy coming up to speak to 
her, accompanied by Mr. Moore. 

•* My dear Lady Fitzhcnry," said she, 
** what an age it is since I have seen 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 63 

you! Where have you been hiding 
yourself? What can you have been 
about ? " 

" I have been out of town," replied 
Emmeline, in a faint voice. 

" Oh, yes ! I suppose at Easter, of 
course ; but surely you have been re- 
turned some v^eeks ; for I have fre- 
quently met Lord Fitzhenry : and, by 
the bye, now I recollect, I heard of you 
the other evening, at Lady Mowbray's, 
where I was so unlucky, as just to miss 
you ; and I was sorry to hear you were 
taken ill there : I hope you are quite 
recovered." 

** Perfectly so,'' said Emmeline, coldly. 

" How did you like our new opera, to- 
night?" continued Mrs. Osterley. "1 
thought it inexpressibly dull ; yet, in 



64 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Paris, I had liked it very much ; what 
did you think of it ? " 

" I ? " said Emmeline, absently, " I 
really don't know." 

"Don't know? I suppose you mean you 
have been so agreeably engaged in con- 
versation, that you did not attend," re- 
torted Mrs. Osterley, laughing. " No 
one comes to the opera for the music in 
London." 

At that minute, Pelham relieved poor 
Emmeline by saying, that her carriage 
was driving up, and that they had better 
be moving down stairs. She willingly 
took his proffered arm, bowing to Mrs. 
Osterley, who, before the door had closed 
upon them, and within Emmeline's 
hearing, exclaimed, (with a loud laugh to 
Mr. Moore,) ** Well ! that is the best ar- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 65 

ranged, best understood affair I ever 
saw. Lord Fitzhenry and his chh^e amie 
are just gone down one stair, and Lady 
Fitzhenry and Pelham are making their 
escape by the other ! and then we En- 
glish boast of our morality ! " 

The door closing, prevented Emmeline 
from hearing more than the burst of ap- 
plause which followed this remark. In- 
voluntarily she shrunk from Pelham ; 
but he, not aware of any thing that had 
passed, intent on getting her to the 
carriage as soon as possible, only pressed 
her arm the closer, to steady her steps, 
and hurried her almost forcibly after him. 

When they reached the bottom of the 
stairs, they found an unusual crowd and 
bustle among the servants ; and, by the 
noise and lashing of whips in the street, 
there appeared to be great contention 



GG A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

among tlie coachmen. Pelham, anxious 
to get Emmeline out of the confusion, still 
drew her on, persuaded that her carriage 
must, by that time, be ready. But, when 
they got outside into the street, he saw 
that her coachman was engaged in violent 
contest with another, both endeavouring 
to drive up their vehicles at the same mo- 
ment. 

The crowd of footmen who had gather- 
ed round the interesting spot, encouraging 
the merciless combatants, was so great, 
that to retreat was impossible. Pelham 
could not, among them, distinguish Em- 
meline's servants ; and, amid the din of 
voices, whips, trampling of hoofs on the 
pavement, and shivering of breaking 
lamps. It was vain to attempt to make 
them hear him. 

Emmeline, nervous and frightened at 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 67 

the uproar around her, forgot for a mi- 
nute all her former apprehensions, and 
clung terrified to Pelham ; who, to defend 
her as well as he could, from the unruly 
mob, put his arm round her. Just 
then, the horses in her carriage, high- 
bred, spirited animals, and lately little 
employed by their mistress, irritated 
beyond endurance by the lashing of the 
whip, became ungovernable ; they reared 
up, throwing themselves away from their 
opponents, and, in the struggle, one of 
them fell down on the foot-pavement, 
increasing the confusion. 

A loud scream was uttered by a female 
voice, and, by the rush of link-boys in an 
instant to the spot, Emmeline beheld 
Lady Florence Mostyn thrown back on 
Fitzhenry's breast. The pole of the car- 



68 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

riage had touched her, but it was the cry 
of terror more than of pain. 

" Stop! on peril of your life, you 
rascal!" exclaimed a voice, that shot 
through Emmeline's very soul. 

" Whose carriage is that?" demanded 
Fitzhenry, in an authoritative tone, while 
still supporting Lady Florence in his 
arms. There was a sudden silence ; the 
contending coachmen's whips instantly 
were both quieted. He again repeated 
his question more loudly than before. 

" My lord!" said one of Emmeline's 
footmen, going up to Fitzhenry, *' it is 
your lordship's carriage." 

** J/y carriage!" he exclaimed angrily. 
" Who ordered it here?" 

*' We are here with my lady," replied 
the terrified footman. *' Her ladyship is 



A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 69 

just getting in — shall I tell her your lord- 
ship wishes to be taken home ?" 

*' No, no, you fool !" answered Fitz- 
henry, in a tone of passion which Emme- 
line had never before heard from his lips, 
and which made her shudder ; " drive off 
as fast as you can." 

By this time, Pelham had put his 
charge, more dead than alive, into her 
carriage, and, not liking to leave her 
alone in the agitated state she then was, 
got in after her. Emmeline put out her 
feeble hand, meaning to prevent him ; 
but, quite overcome, she could not arti- 
culate a word ; and, no longer able to 
command herself, she burst into violent 
hysteric sobs. Totally mistaking her 
meaning, and interpreting the action into 
a wish that he should not leave her. 



70 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Pelham tenderly seized her hand, de- 
siring the servants to go home as fast as 
possible. The fallen horse was soon 
raised. The contending vehicles disen- 
gaged, and they drove rapidly off — but 
followed by cheers and laughter from the 
more blackguard part of the mob who 
had witnessed the fray ; to which were 
added personal jokes and remarks, that 
made Pelham hastily draw up the glasses. 
Emmeline still made efforts to speak 
but Pelham could not distinguish a single 
word which she endeavoured to articu- 
late; and, only bidding her compose her- 
self, said every thing most kind and 
soothing, while he again and again 
pressed her iiand in his. When they 
arrived in Grosvenor-street, he forcibly 
drew Emmeline's arm within his, to help 



A MARRIAr.E IN HIGH LIFE. 71 

her up stairs, and, placing her on a couch, 
demanded in a low voice, whether she 
would take any thing, and whether he 
should send for her maid. 

*' Oh no, I shall soon recover — make 
no fuss, 1 entreat — it is nothing — 1 have 
been very foolish — and frightened — that 
is all. But," added she, with an im- 
ploring look, " leave me — for God's sake 
leave me." 

** Not till I see you better, I really 
cannot." For her bosom still heaved 
with convulsive sobs, and her heart 
seemed bursting. 

Uncertain what to do, or say, and sur- 
prised at her repulsive manner towards 
him, Pelham walked, disturbed, up and 
down the room in silence, thinking it best 
for a little time to leave her to herself. At 



72 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

length, hastily coming up to her, " My 
dearest Lady Fitzhenry !" he exclaimed, 
" allow me to speak to you." 

Emmeline started, and looked at him 
aghast ; but without noticing, or even 
looking at her, Pelham continued in a 
hurried manner, " I trust you will pardon 
me for venturing on so sacred a subject, — ■ 
for touching on sorrows, which you, with 
such courage, such delicacy, conceal in 
your own breast — but I know all ; — and 
I know your husband so well, that I am 
sure I can give you comfort and hope." 

Inexpressibly relieved as Emmeline 
was by these words, which satisfied her 
that she still had a friend on whom she 
could rest, yet other feelings for the mo- 
ment prevailed, and clasping her hands 
with the vehemence of despair : " Oh, that 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 73 

is impossible ! there is no hope, no hap- 
piness for me in this world!" 

*' On' my honour," replied ' Pelham, 
with earnestness, " you may trust me; 
I would not deceive you ;" and, sitting 
down by her, he took her nervously 
shaking hand in his. A few minutes 
before, Emmeline would have shrunk 
from his touch, but those words had 
been sufficient to banish entirely all her 
former miserable apprehensions; soothed 
by hearing once more the consolatory 
voice of friendship, for an instant she 
smiled in gratitude on his kind counte- 
nance, and then, quite overcome with 
the variety of her feelings, tears again 
burst forth, and her head sank on his 
shoulder. 

At that instant, the door was hastily 

£ 



74 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

pushed open, and Fitzhenry appeared! 
He started on seeing Pelham and Em- 
meline. As she quickly raised her 
head at the noise he had made on enter- 
ing, involuntarily a faint exclamation of 
dismay escaped her, and even Pelham 
seemed disconcerted. 

" Lady Fitzhenry is not very well ;" 
the latter at length said, after an awk- 
ward pause, as if feeling that some ex- 
planation of the scene was necessary ; 
" and," added he, addressing himself to 
Emmeline, '' allow me to recommend 
you to retire to your own room." 

Emmeline rose from her seat ; every 
limb shook. Fitzhenry came towards 
them, fixed his eyes sternly upon her, 
but said nothing. " I have not been 
very well lately," she with difficulty 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 75 

stammered out : *' the heat in town does 
not agree with me; and, I think, I will 
go to Charlton to-morrow." 

Still Fitzhenry spake not, but Em- 
meline plainly saw anger and contempt 
written on his countenance : she faintly 
wished him and Pelham good night. The 
words died on her lips; for a sad fore- 
boding told her she was taking a final 
leave of her husband, as she was aware 
that it was impossible they could any 
longer continue even on the footing they 
then were. She paused a minute in 
hopes Fitzhenry would speak. One 
word would have brought her to his 
arms, all forgiven, all forgotten. But he 
seemed resolved on silence, and Em- 
meline went on into the inner drawing- 
room that led to her own apartment. 

Pelham perplexed, and uncertain how 

e2 



76 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

to act, followed her with his eyes with- 
out moving from the spot she had quitted, 
while Fitzhenry, in great apparent per- 
turbation, paced the room. At length, 
just as Emmeline had reached the door of 
her own apartment, seeing her trembling 
hands had some difficulty in opening it, 
Pelham hurried to her assistance. 

" You mean then," said he in a low 
voice, as he turned the lock, *^ to go to 
Charlton to-morrow. You shall hear 
from me, probably see me, and I will 
bring you good news, perhaps even Fitz- 
henry; — cheer up, I entreat you, all will 
yet be well." 

Emmeline forced a faint smile, and 
held out her hand to him; he seized 
it with affection. " God of heaven bless 
and support you," he said, with earnest- 
ness, and hastily left her. 



\ 



lii 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 77 

When he returned to the outward 
drawing-room, Fitzhenry was gone ; he 
hurried down stairs in hopes of finding 
him in his own room, but the servants 
informed him, he had again left the 
house. 

Emmeline ordered her carriage after 
church next morning, to take her to 
Charlton ; but how great a change do a 
few hours often make in our views ! She 
ah'eady repented having declared her in- 
tention of leaving town. Twice, as the 
hour named by her drew near, she delay- 
ed the carriage, wishing (much as she 
dreaded the interview) to see Fitzhenry 
before she went. It was now past three, 
but still he did not appear, and no mes- 
sage came from him. She rang the bell 
— *' Is Lord Fitzhenry gone out ? " She 
enquired, rather fearfully. 



78 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" No, my lady," answered the foot- 
man ; *' I believe my lord is not yet up ; 
at least he has not rung his bell; but 
shall I enquire ?" 

*' Oh ! no matter," said Emmeline, 
with a faltering- voice, and dismissing 
the man. Convinced by this, that it 
was her husband's intention they should 
not meet, she determined to write to 
him ; for to part thus, in what seemed a 
decided, open rupture, without some 
sort of reconciliation taking place, she 
now felt to be impossible : she there- 
fore sat down, and took her pen, al- 
though not knowing what to say. She 
once thought she would beg for an 
interview — demand to be released from 
her promise of silence, in order to come 
to some explanation. But yet what had 
she to say ? what had she to learn ? 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 79 

Even if Mrs. Osterley's strange and 
cruel hints had reached his ears, — if he 
could so mistake her and his friend, as 
to give any credit to them, could she 
flatter herself he was enough interested 
about her, to care whom she might pre- 
fer? On the other hand, to endeavour to 
exculjDate herself from suspicions which 
he might never have entertained, seemed 
ridiculous. Besides, could she now, as 
a new thing, charge him with coldness, 
dislike, and infidelity — all which he had 
openly declared, and for all which he had 
prepared her months before. 

Discouraged by these considerations 
from adverting to what had passed the 
night before, she at length, after various 
doubts and indecisions, merely wrote 
these words : — 



80 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

** A very few days in the country will, 
I am sure, quite restore me to my usual 
health. I will return to Grosvenor 
Street by the end of the week ; but if, 
for any reasons, you should wish me to 
come home sooner, I trust to your let- 
ting me know, and I shall be most will- 
ing to obey your summons. You will 
find me at my father's. 

"Emmeline Fitzhenry." 

This she intended should be given to 
Fitzhenry after her departure, and she 
sealed and directed it for the purpose. 

The carriage drove up to the door — 
the servants busied themselves in put- 
ting on the luggage, and, hopeless of an 
interview with Fitzhenry, Emmeline 
went slowly, sadly, to her own room, 
to prepare for her departure. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 81 

On opening a drawer, she saw the 
small Geneva watch and chain which 
Fitzhenry had sent her when a girl. 
Hardly aware of what she did, she 
pressed it to her lips — then hung it round 
her neck. She felt a sad presentiment 
that she was leaving her husband's roof for 
ever, and this watch was the only token of 
kindness she had ever received from him ; 
the only memorial she possessed, except 
her fatal wedding-ring, placed by him on 
her hand in reluctance and aversion. 

As Emmeline passed back through 
the drawing-room, she looked mournful- 
ly at each object in it, convinced she was 
beholding them for the last time. She 
slowly descended the stairs ; every 
limb trembling with nervous apprehen- 
sion. Again she thought she would en- 

e5 



82 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

deavour to see her husband ; and she 
paused at the door of his room to give 
herself one more chance ; for she thought, 
perhaps, when he heard her, he would 
come out to meet her ; or if she could 
only once more catch the sound of his 
voice, in its usual tone of gentleness and 
kindness, it would give her courage to 
demand admittance. But all was still. 
While thus standing debating with her- 
self, her heart beat so violently, that she 
could scarcely breathe, and she was 
forced to lean against the banister for 
support. 

" The chaise is quite ready, my 
lady," said a footman, coming up to 
her; for, seeing her on the stairs, he 
fancied her impatient to set off — " every 
thing is put in." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 83 

With no possible farther excuse for de- 
lay, feeling her fate was fixed, she drew 
down her veil, to conceal her agitation, 
hurried through the hall, and without 
allowing herself more time for reflection, 
got into the carriage. 

" To Charlton," said the butler, who 
had closed the door after her, the ser- 
vants being already placed in the seat 
behind, and the postilions immediately 
drove off. 

Emmeline looked back once more at 
the house from which she felt she was, 
probably, banishing herself for ever ; 
and then sinking back in the carriage, 
gave way to her feelings. ** Farewell, 
then, Fitzhenry," she exclaimed, "since 
such is your will ; and may heaven bless 
you, and have pity on me!" 

As she drew near Charlton, she en- 



84 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

deavoured to compose herself, but in 
vain : when she looked to the future, all 
was so dark and hopeless, and she was 
so strongly impressed with the idea that 
she should never see Fitzhenry again, 
that she felt her heart sink within her ; 
and, quite overpowered, and fearful of 
betraying her secret to her parents, she 
more than once thought of stopping the 
carriage. But whither could she go ? 

Fitzhenry had allowed her to depart. 
It seemed, indeed, even his wish that 
she should go ; and, unsolicited, she 
could not return. On they drove. It 
was a beautiful bright Sunday ; every 
one around her seemed to be enjoying 
the day in gladness and gratitude. The 
roads and fields were filled with joyous 
groups, the air with gay sounds. 

*' Do I sin in loving him so entirely, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 85 

SO passionately ?" thought Emmeline ; 
" that amid so many that rejoice, I alone 
am doomed to be miserable ?" 

In uttering these words, perhaps Em- 
meline did sin. But it is the sin into 
which suffering betrays us all. The 
wretched are hidden, or hide themselves, 
from our view ; and when, in sorrow, 
we look around us, we compare our 
situation with those only who happen, at 
that moment, to be basking in the tran- 
sitory sunshine of cheerfulness. How 
many, as Emmeline's gay equipage drove 
rapidly by, probably coveted her riches, 
her luxuries, her youth, and her beauty! 
while she envied the ragged, laughing 
beggar-boy, by the road-side, who, as 
her carriage passed, tossed his naked 
arms in the air, hallooing, in pure gaiety 
of heart and enjoyment of existence. 



86 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER III. 

Has thy heart sickened with deferred hope ? 

Or felt th' impatient anguish of suspense ? 

Or hast thou tasted of the bitter cup 

Which Disappointment's withered hands dispense .'* 

Thou knowest the poison which o'erflowed from 

hence 
O'er Psyche's tedious, miserable hours. 

Psyche. 

When Emmeline arrived at her father's, 
the servant informed her, that both Mr. 
and Mrs. Benson were out in the car- 
riage, but were expected home before 
dinner. At that moment, she felt their 
absence was a relief, and hastily getting 
out of the carriage, desired the coachman, 
on his return to town, immediately to ask 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 87 

whether Lord Fitzhenry had any orders 
for him — for she still fondly hoped, that 
on reading her note, he might follow her, 
and might himself wish for some expla- 
nation of what had passed the preceding 
evening. 

During the hour that elapsed before 
her father and mother returned, Emme- 
line endeavoured to compose her spirits. 
She bathed her red and swollen eyes, 
walked in the fresh air, and, hearing their 
carriage drive up to the door, resolved 
to command herself, and went to meet 
them with a cheerful countenance. But 
when the spirits are weak, there is nothing 
so difficult to bear as tenderness. Her 
father's fond benediction, the smile of de- 
light that beamed in her mother's face, 
on unexpectedly beholding her, were too 
much for poor Emmeline, unused as she 



88 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

was to demonstrations of affection ; and 
falling into her mother's arms, in spite 
of her resolutions and endeavours, she 
again burst into tears. 

"My dear love ! my child !" both ex- 
claimed, ** what can be the matter ?" 

" Nothing, nothing," said Emmeline ; 
" I have not been quite well lately, and 
my spirits are in consequence weaken- 
ed ; and I was too happy to see yon — 
that is all." 

Mrs. Benson shook her head, and 
looked at her incredulously. Her father, 
fixing his eyes stedfastly on her face, 
took her hand. 

•* Speak to me, my girl," said he. 
*♦ What is it that so distresses you ?" 

** Nothing!" again repeated Emme- 
line in a fainter voice ; ** I shall soon be 
quite well." 



, A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 89 

" Emmy! Emmy!" rejoined her father, 
**for once I don't believe you; it is too 
long since you have not been well, as you 
call it ; and there is a something the mat- 
ter that I must and will know." 

Emmeline averted her head, and did 
not answer. 

*' You need not attempt to deceive me 
any longer, girl," said Mr. Benson, stern- 
ly ; "I have long suspected that all was 
not right between you and your husband. 
1 will now know the truth, and I have a 
right to demand it of you." 

Still she was silent. 

*• What ! you will not speak ! you 
will not confide in me !" he continued, 
his temper rising ; *' then I must seek 
for information elsewhere :" and he 
moved towards the door of the room. 



90 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" Oh, my father!" exclaimed Emme- 
line, terrified — ** What would you do ?" 

*' Do? why I shall go to town di- 
rectly. I shall see Lord Fitzhenry," 
said Mr. Benson, in a calmer, but de- 
cided tone; " and from him I must learn 
what has passed between you, since 
you, my own child, will not trust me." 

" Oh ! speak not so to me, dear 
father ! indeed I have full confidence in 
your kindness — in your indulgence ; but 
really, I have nothing to tell which you 
do not know already — I have been to 
blame, perhaps — I mean I was not 
aware — I was deceived,— even you dear 
father "— 

*' Deceived?" repeated Mr. Benson 
quickly — catching at the word: *' de- 
ceived by me? what do you mean?" 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 91 

" Oh, nothing, nothing," said Emme- 
line, alarmed at her father's unusual 
look of anger: "we were all to blame, 
but — but — perhaps it would have been 
better if — " 

Poor Mr. Benson, like many both of 
his superiors and inferiors could not bear 
to be supposed to have erred, or even 
to have been mistaken, and all the less 
when conscious the imputation was true ; 
in a tone of violence, therefore, which 
Emmeline had never heard addressed to 
her, and suddenly letting go her hand, 
which he had been holding in both of 
his : " What, Emmeline," said he, " are 
you so unjust, so ungrateful, as to ac- 
cuse me as the cause of your misfor- 
tunes ? blame your poor, doating, old 
father for having given up his all to se- 
cure your happiness? For shame, for 

VOL. II. E 10 



92 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

shame, Emmy, I never expected that 
from you." 

" Oh hear me, hear me patiently !" 
she exclaimed, seizing on his arm. 

** No, Emmeline, I can hear no more, 
bear no more, I have long guessed how 
matters were between you and Lord 
Fitzhenry, and still I have forborne. I 
held my peace as long as I could ; but 
my pride will not allow me to be any 
longer silent. I will not be trampled 
upon ; I cannot endure to see the delight 
of my old age, my only child, destroyed 
by neglect and unkindness. Lord Fitz- 
henry presumes upon his superior rank. 
He thinks he may with impunity insult 
and break the heart of the humble 
banker's daughter. But his lordship is 
mistaken; I too have pride as well as he. 
Curse on Itis rank, curse on your money; 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 93 

they have been the cause of all this ; but 
I will have redress." 

*' Redress! Good God, what do you 
mean?" enquired Emmeline, terrified at 
his words and manner. 

" I will insist on an immediate sepa- 
ration ; on a divorce, in short, for the 
law will give it me." 

A scream of horror escaped from Em- 
meline's heart at these words. *' No 
power on earth shall ever separate me 
from him," she exclaimed, with the 
wild energy of passion. " Oh ! my dear 
father, be appeased ; have patience and 
all will be well." 

She had sunk on her knees, and, 
overcome with the variety of her painful- 
ly contending feelings, her head grew 
giddy, her sobs choked her, and she 
fell nearly senseless at Mr. Benson's 



94 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

feet. Every attention of doating fond- 
ness was lavished upon her. Before 
long, she became more composed, and 
her parents, whose every feeling was 
centered in her, seeing how weak she 
was, both in body and spirits, said no 
more, but turned their whole endea- 
vours towards cheering and restoring 
her ; avoiding, for the moment, every 
thing that could renew her sorrows. 

After some little time had elapsed, as 
if by common consent, they all forced 
themselves to talk on indifferent sub- 
jects, but, in the effort, poor Emmeline's 
lip often quivered. At dinner, she turned 
away her heavy, sickened eye from the 
food before her ; and when her father 
filled her glass with wine, bidding her 
drink it, for that it would do her good, 
and, assuming a gay manner, pledged 



ji 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 95 

her and drank to her health, tears 
again rushed into her eyes, as she re- 
collected the pride with which he was 
always wont on such occasions to unite 
her husband's name with hers. 

The next morning, resolving if possible 
still to deceive her parents, and by as- 
sumed cheerfulness to do away the im- 
pression made upon their minds the pre- 
ceding evening, poor Emmeline entered 
the breakfast-room with as composed a 
countenance as she could command, and 
even forced a smile, when, as in former 
days, she went up to her father to claim 
his parental kiss. Mr. Benson, how- 
ever, did not raise his eyes towards her, 
or even return the pressure of her hand, 
but in silence pointed to the seat pre- 
pared for her. She looked at her mother, 
whose eyes were fixed on the table be- 



96 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

fore her, and she saw that they were red 
with crying. Twice Emmeline endea- 
voured at conversation by making some 
remark on the weather, but no answer 
was given to her. Mr. Benson's atten- 
tion seemed entirely engrossed by the 
newspaper ^that lay beside him, his 
breakfast remaining untouched. 

Aware that something disagreeable 
must have happened from the disturbed 
appearance of her father and mother, 
a thousand vague but dreadful apprehen- 
sions soon took possession of Emmeline's 
mind, and at last, unable any longer to 
endure the state of alarm and suspense 
into which her fears had thrown her, she 
suddenly seized her father's arm, entreat- 
ing him for pity's sake to tell her what 
had so discomposed him, what had hap- 
pened. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 97 

** You, Lady Fitzhenry, can better in- 
form lis of that," he coldly said, as he 
put the paper into her hand, and pointed 
to the following paragraph : 

" A singular fracas took place at the 
Opera on Saturday night; not being yet 
informed of the particulars, we forbear 
making any reflections. As it is a double 
intrigue, and therefore neither party can 
complain, it is impossible to say how the 
affair may end. The chhre amie of the 
noble lord is well known in the fashion- 
able world both abroad and at home ; and 
it is not perhaps surprising that the neg- 
lected wife should have pris son parti, 
and found a champion to espouse her 
cause. He is said to be in the diplomatic 
line, and of course a particular friend of 

VOL. II. F 



98 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the husband. One rumour states the 
injured wife to have eloped — another 
that a duel has taken place. Certain it 
is that two carriages with the F — z — y 
arms were seen to drive furiously out of 
Grosvenor-street at different hours and 
in different, directions on Sunday after- 
noon." 

Emmeline turned deadly pale as she 
read this cruel paragraph ; but a still 
more ghastly hue spread itself over her 
mother's face as she anxiously watched 
her daughter's countenance, and fancied 
that in her emotion she read confession 
of guilt. 

There was a dead silence. Emmeline, 
entirely satisfied as to her own perfect 
innocence, and horror-stricken by the 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 99 

latter part of the paragraph relating to 
the duel, was occupied in dwelling on 
the possibility of there being any founda- 
tion for the rumour ; and her whole mind 
was so engrossed by that one thought, 
the safety of Fitzhenry, that she did not 
even think of exculpating herself from 
the charge. Indeed, she had totally for- 
gotten the presence even of her parents, 
when Mr. Benson, striking his hand with 
violence on the table, in a voice of 
agony exclaimed — 

" Speak Emmeline, are you inno- 
cent? or am I for ever disgraced?" 

Emmeline startled by her father's ve- 
hemence, looked wildly at him for an 
instant, as if not understanding his 
words. 

" I see, but too plainly, how it is. 

F 2 



100 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Don't speak, don't speak," he continued 
quickly; and, covering his face with 
both his hands, he gave way to the vio- 
lence of his feelings. 

Completely roused by the burst of 
passion in one so seldom moved to tears, 
Emmeline threw herself on her knees 
beside him, and, endeavouring to take 
hold of hisjiand, exclaimed, 

" Oh, my father, what can all this 
mean? is it possible you can suspect? — 
God knows how innocent I am." 

Mr. Benson, wiping away his tears, 
looked at her for an instant in silence. 
" Repeat those blessed words again, 
child, for I must believe you." 

** By the God of truth!" exclaimed 
Emmeline, as she clasped her hands 
with fervency and fixed her eyes stead- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 101 

fastly on Mr. Benson, " I am innocent 
of having, in thought, word, or deed, 
departed from the love and duty, I 
swore to my husband at the altar. 
Alas!" added she, as she hid her face 
in her father's bosom, " I only love him 
too well, too entirely for my happiness." 
These last words became indistinct, and 
choked by her tears. 

" Thank God, thank God!" repeated 
Mr. Benson, with a sort of hurried 
nervousness of manner, as he kissed his 
daughter's forehead: '* I could not have 
borne that; your dishonour I could not 
have borne, Emmy, it would soon have 
brought me to my grave. I believe 
you, Emmeline, on my honour I do; 
you never in your life deceived me; but 
what does that cursed story mean?" 



102 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

pointing to the paragraph to which his 
mind seemed again to have returned 
with doubt and anxiety. 

^' I will tell you all, as far as " 

and Emmeline stopped short, for how 
could she explain what had passed, 
without drawing on a necessary confes- 
sion of her whole sad story. 

*' No more concealments, Emmv, I 
will and must know all," said Mr. Ben- 
son sternly. 

Emmeline looked at her father as if 
supplicating for pity. 

" Spare her now Mr. Benson," said 
her mother as she folded her in her 
arms : " we have it from her own true 
lips, that she is blameless, and let what 
will have happened, we can bear any 
thing now." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 103 

'' Bless you, bless you for believing 
me," said Emmeline, as she threw her 
arms round her mother's neck in grati- 
tude: '* but," added she, with a melan- 
choly and reproachful look, '* my father 
does not, he still doubts me." 

** No, my girl, indeed I don't," cried 
Mr, Benson: " do you think I would 
call you my Emmy, and let you remain 
one instant under my roof if I thought 
you were disgraced. On my honour, I 
believe you, but I am fretted and un- 
happy. I have toiled for your happi- 
ness, and it has ended in nothing but 
mortification; for I see my darling is not 
happy, which is more than I can bear :" 
and tears once more rushed into his eyes. 
*' And who the deuce do they mean by 
their ^diplomatic champion V" added he, 
again casting his eyes on the paragraph. 



104 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" The whole is an abominable false- 
hood," said Emmeline, in a hurried man- 
ner. " They mean Mr. Pelham, I sup- 
pose, for he was with me;" and she red- 
dened as she spoke, at the bare possibi- 
lity of such an insinuation. " Coming 
out of the opera-house last night, there 
was a battle between the coachmen 
— and it seemed as if something dis- 
agreeable had passed between Lord 
Fitzhenry and Mr. Pelham — but it 
must have been only a misunderstand- 
ing — no one was to blame — only when 
I parted from them last night, they 
certainly seemed much irritated against 
each other." 

" And have you not seen your hus- 
band since?" eagerly enquired Mr. Ben- 
son. 

" No," said Emmeline, in a low tone, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 105 

and averting her head. Mr. Benson 
gave a significant shrug of his shoulders. 

*' And pray what had you, and Mr. 
Pelham, and Lord Fitzhenry to do with 
the fighting of the coachmen; and, above 
all, what in the name of wonder, had his 
chhe amie, as the idiots call her, to do 
with it at all? whose carriage fought 
with yours? for I presume, you and 
your husband were together ; surely you 
can sit in the same coach, though you 
can't sleep in the same room ? " 

" I really can't tell — it was all such a 
confusion," replied Emmeline, colouring 
deeply. '* But, dear father, don't waste 
time, but, for pity's sake, send some one 
to Grosvenor-street, and ask if all is 
well — and yet, perhaps," added she, 
the next minute, alarmed at the possible 

F 5 



106 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

consequences of her own suggestion, 
** perhaps it will be better not — it must 
be all a foolish story." 

** I shall go myself to Lord Fitz- 
henry's," said Mr. Benson, after a mo- 
ment's reflection. 

" You go?" exclaimed Emmeline, ter- 
rified — " indeed there is no necessity — 
it is only a trifle — in fact nothing has 
occurred, only the carriage I as- 
sure you. Lord Fitzhenry will be quite 
surprised to see you — perhaps dis- 
pleased — indeed you had better not go." 

" I shall judge for myself," said Mr. 
Benson, coldly. " I don't believe one 
word about the carriage story; your hus- 
band would not be such a fool as to fight 
about a scratched pannel ; and as for his 
displeasure, I shall care little for that, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 107 



for he seems very little to care for 



mine." 



This intention of her father's seriously 
alarmed Emmeline; for, in the state of 
irritation, in which both he and Lord 
Fitzhenry then were, she dreaded the 
result of their meeting ; and, clinging to 
Mr. Benson, she ejaculated — " Oh, then 
pray let me go with you !" 

Brought up in the good old fashioned 
system of filial obedience and depend- 
ence, Emmeline, although the object of 
the tenderest affection, had no idea even 
now that she was a wife, of putting her 
will in opposition to that of her parents, or 
of boldly declaring any determination of 
her own. She could only entreat, and 
that her countenance did most eloquently, 
during the moment or two that now 



108 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

passed before Mr. Benson answered her. 
At length, he consented, saying — " Yes; 
I believe that will be best, for I shall 
by that means hear both sides." 

These words raised fresh apprehen- 
sions in Emmeline's mind, for she saw 
that her father's intention was to come 
to some explanation with her husband ; 
and good, even kind as she knew those 
intentions were, yet she felt, that any in- 
terference on his part, particularly at that 
moment, would only widen the breach 
between them, and make her situation 
worse, by bringing matters to that crisis 
from which she shrank with dismay. 
She, therefore, said every thing she 
could venture upon, to induce him to 
desist ; but her words seemed only to 
irritate him still more against Lord Fitz- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 109 

henry, and to make him the more re- 
solved on seeking an interview with him ; 
so at last, finding how vain were all her 
arguments, and that having settled the 
matter in his own mind, Mr. Benson 
would listen to no excuse, no reason, that 
she could give for changing her opinion 
so quickly, Emmeline gave up the point 
in despair, and, in a short time, she and 
her father were on the road to town. 

At first, the miles appeared to her to 
be endless, but, as they drew near town, 
dreading the possible result of their 
visit to Grosvenor-street, poor Emmeline 
was several times tempted to beg the 
driver might slacken his pace, but she 
controlled her nervous agitation as well 
as she could, and they drove on in si- 
lence, till they entered London; when 



no A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

she suddenly seized Mr. Benson's hand, 
saying, with a look of entreaty — ** If 
we see him, you will leave all to me, — 
indeed, he is no way to blame, only a 
misunderstanding, which I shall soon be 
able to clear up." 

** Ay, and it shall be cleared up," re- 
plied Mr. Benson. *' If you, Lady 
Fitzhenry, are content to let this 
vile slur remain on your reputation, I 
am not, and I shall oblige those who 
can refute it, to do so. I shall most 
certainly see Lord Fitzhenry, and I must 
from him get a better explanation of all 
this strange business, than I can from you. 
My God!" added he, after a moment's 
pause, as if speaking to himself — ** to 
think that my daughter's name should ap- 
pear in a public paper, with such an im- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. Ill 

putation attached to it ! to think, that 
after all my labours, it should have come 
to this!" And, after striking his cane se- 
veral times w^ith impatience on the bot- 
tom of the carriage, he suddenly, as if he 
thought greater speed v^ould relieve his 
feelings, bade the coachman drive faster. 
This injunction was the means of soon 
bringing them into Grosvenor-square ; 
and poor Emmeline's agitation be- 
came almost unbearable. What was 
she going to learn? what was go- 
ing to be her fate? for on the next 
hour she felt that it depended. They 
drove up to the door of her husband's 
house — of her own home — and yet she 
shrunk back, in dread and dismay. A 
hasty glance showed her, that all the 
shutters were closed — and a cold, deadly 
sickness came over her. The servant 



r 



112 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

knocked — but no one answered — he 
knocked again, and rung; and at length 
the porter appeared, and a parley ensued 
between him and Mr. Benson's servant. 

Emmeline could endure the suspense 
no longer; and, with the paleness of 
death on her face, grasping her father's 
arm—" In pity!" she cried, ** speak to 
the man yourself." Mr. Benson beck- 
oned him to the carriage window. 

*' I want to see Lord Fitzhenry," said 
he. ** Is he at home ?" 

*' No, sir ; neither my lord nor my 
lady are at home" — for Emmeline had 
so shrunk to the back of the carriage, 
that the man did not see her. 

" Is Lord Fitzhenry quite well ? " re- 
joined Mr. Benson, not knowing very 
well how to get at the information he 
wanted. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 1 13 

** Yes, sir ! I believe so," said the 
porter, apparently surprised at the 
question. ** His lordship went away 
yesterday afternoon ; he did not leave 
his room till late, but I did not hear 
that he was any ways ill; I thought 
my lady had gone to Charlton." 

'* Do you know where he is gone to ? " 
continued Mr. Benson. 

" No, I really can't say ; his 
lordship ordered post horses in a 
great hurry, and the carriage was to 
take him up at some place in town, 
but I really can't tell where ; but I 
will enquire in the house if any one 
knows." 

"Did he leave word when he was to 
return ?" 

'* No, my lord said nothing, and we 



114 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

do not expect him back for some days, 
as he gave no orders." 

A new and appalling idea now flashed 
across Emmeline's mind — could Fitz- 
henry and Lady Florence have fled to- 
gether! and, not content with the entire 
possession of each other's afl'ections, 
could they have determined by that open 
act, at once to rid themselves of the 
thraldom of their respective marriages ! 
There was nothing of which she could 
not suspect Lady Florence ; but her 
heart smote her for thus, even for an in- 
stant, accusing Fitzhenry ; and, shocked 
at her own surmises, she hastily en- 
quired whether Lord Fitzhenry had left 
no letter, no message for her. 

** Not that I knows of, my lady," said 
the porter, bowing to Emmeline, and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 115 

evidently astonished at her question, as 
well as at her appearance, as she had 
hitherto remained concealed behind Mr. 
Benson ; but I will go and enquire." 

*' This is all very strange," muttered 
Mr. Benson to himself, while he was gone; 
" I can't make it out for the life of me." 

As for poor Emmeline, she was total- 
ly unable to express, or even to form an 
opinion ; so many fearful apprehensions 
succeeded each other in her mind. After 
an interval of time, which appeared to 
her endless, the man returned with a 
note in his hand. 

*' I can hear of no letter, my lady ; 
but this note the housekeeper found in 
your ladyship's room ; perhaps it is what 
you mean." 

Emmeline eagerly seized it ; but what 



1 IG A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 

was her mortification on finding it was 
her own note to Fitzhenry, with the seal 
still unbroken. In the confusion of her 
mind, she could not recollect whether, on 
leaving home the preceding day, she 
had given any orders about it : if she 
had, she must conclude, that Fitzhenry, 
occupied by other objects, had neglected, 
perhaps scorned, to read it. But at all 
events, as that note was unread, he must 
have gone from home in the full convic- 
tion that she, on her part, had left it in 
open, declared war. 

Quite overcome by the combination of 
distressinsf circumstances in which she 
was placed, after tearing her ill-fated 
note in a thousand pieces, with a vehe- 
mence of impatience very foreign to her 
nature, Emmcline again sunk back in 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 117 

the carriage, to conceal her disordered 
state from the servants. There was a 
moment's pause. At length Mr. Ben- 
son, enquiring where Mr. Pelham lived, 
desired the coachman to drive to his 
house. Emmeline drew down the blind, 
spoke not a word, but seemed to give 
herself up to her fate in despair. 

When they reached the end of the 
street to which they had been directed, 
Mr. Benson stopped the carriage, and 
saying he would return to her directly, 
got out. He was some time absent : 
when he returned, he evidently was en- 
deavouring to maintain a composure 
which he did not feel. 

" Mr. Pelham has likewise left Lon- 
don," said he. " He too went away 
yesterday evening with post horses — 



118 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

very strange ; but, I suppose, some junket 
out of town," added he, making an awk- 
ward attempt at cheerfulness. The step 
of the carriage was let down for him. 
'* Hang me!" continued Mr. Benson, 
'* if I know what to do next, or where to 
go to. To drive after them would really 
be a wild-goose chase ; for the chances 
are a hundred to one against our taking 
the same road ; for the plague is, that 
one don't know at all where they are 
gone to. Mr. Pelham's servants, too, 
can't tell where their master went — a 
parcel of stupid, outlandish boobies, 
that can't speak Christian-like language." 
And apparently much distressed and 
perplexed, Mr. Benson, with one foot on 
the step of the carriage, looked anxiously 
up and down the street, as if in the hope 



\ 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 119 

of seeing some one, or something, that 
could suggest an idea to him. 

*^Let us return to Charlton, directly," 
said Emmeline, in a low, broken voice ; 
for a new apprehension had entered her 
mind. When she reflected on the gentle 
nature of Pelham's temper, on his de- 
voted affection for Fitzhenry, and ad- 
^'erted to the falsehood of the newspaper- 
story in the part relating to herself, her 
mind began to be much easier with re- 
gard to the report of the duel. As to 
Fitzhenry's sudden departure from town, 
it was certainly strange ; and in spite of 
her endeavours to combat the idea, she 
could not help interpreting it in a way 
the most agonizing to her feelings : but 
still it was just possible that even there 
she might be mistaken ; and if so, nothino- 



120 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

would be more likely to incense Fitz- 
lienry against her, or to widen the breach 
between them, than finding she was fol_ 
lowing his steps like a spy ; and that 
even Mr. Benson took upon himself to 
enquire into his actions. The instant 
this idea entered her mind, her whole 
anxiety was to return to Charlton, and 
there wait patiently till time explained 
this alarming business ; and a very few 
hours must, she thought, relieve her at 
least from suspense : she therefore again 
intreated that they might go back to 
Charlton immediately. 

Mr. Benson paused for a minute or 
two, as if ruminating in his own mind 
on some method of obtaining informa- 
tion ; but none occurring, he, in a de- 
jected tone, bade the servants return 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 121 

home. The coachman turned his horses' 
heads, and the father and daughter tra- 
velled the nine weary miles back to 
Charlton in total silence. 

Mrs. Benson, who had been anxiously 
awaiting their return, soon saw she had 
little good to learn ; and forebore to 
question Emmeline ; but, after putting 
into her hand a letter that had come for 
her during her absence, went to learn 
what had passed from Mr. Benson. 

The letter was from Mr. Pelham : it 
contained these words, and was dated 
Sunday evening. 

'* I cannot, as I had hoped and in- 
tended, see you to-day, nor indeed to- 
morrow. 1 find Fitzhenry has left town, 
and I am about to follow him. Depend 

VOL. II. G 



122 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

on me for doing all that friendship can 
do, to restore him to you. So I still say, 
* be of good cheer.' As soon as Fitzhenry 
and I have met, I am sure I shall be 
able to bring you good news. By Wed- 
nesday, I think, you may depend on 
seeing me ; or, at all events, on hearing 
from me ; and I don't despair of even 
bringing Fitzhenry with me." 

This letter, meant to express comfort 
and hope, conveyed the very reverse to 
Emmeline's sick mind ; she had now no 
doubt but that Fitzhenry and Lady Flo- 
rence had left town together, and that 
if Pelham attempted at any remonstrance 
or interference, however mild and sen- 
sible, still every thing was to be feared 
from his meeting with her husband 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 123 

under such circumstances. That she 
had parted with Fitzhenry for ever, 
seemed now but too certain. There 
was a mystery in Pelham's letter that 
evidently showed he had something to 
conceal, and that could only be the most 
dreadful of all intelligence to her. Poor 
Emmeline raised her streaming eyes to 
heaven, while she clasped her hands in 
the energy of suffering, but not one 
prayer could she utter. Alas ! what had 
she to ask ? Could she wish again to 
behold him who scorned, who loathed, 
who had, in short, fled from her ? And 
could she wish to cease to love him ? 
What affectionate mind but recoils with 
horror from the dreary thought? She 
might, indeed, pray for release from an 
existence which was become insupport- 

G 2 



124 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

able to her ! And, perhaps, in the re- 
bellion of a young and suffering heart, 
she did give utterance to the impatient 
wish. But let mortals adore the Mer- 
ciful Power, who, pitying the weakness 
of short-sighted humanity, marks not 
down those prayers. It is the first pang 
of severe suffering that wrings them 
from us ; in time, we learn to endure ; 
and, in the evening of a chequered life 
we look back, perhaps, on those very 
moments of sorrow with the greatest 
gratitude, and say with the poet — 

" Amid my list of blessings infinite, 

Stands this the foremost — that my heart has bled." 

The next morning the following para- 
graph, which appeared in the news- 
paper, seemed very much to relieve Mr. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 125 

Benson; but, if possible, it only in- 
creased Emmeline's apprehensions. 

" It is with sincere pleasure that we 
can confidently contradict a report in 
our last, respecting a certain noble pair 
in Grosvenor Street, in so far at least as 
the fair fame of one of the ladies is con- 
cerned. Lady F y, we understand, 

merely left town in order to pay a visit 
to her father at Ch — 1 — n, where she 
now is. A legal separation between the 
parties may however be anticipated, as 
it is certain that the noble Lord has also 
most abruptly left home, and, it is whis- 
pered, not alone. Rumour also states 
that the diplomatic friend has followed 
the fugitives, in order, if possible, to 
prevent the scandal of a public eclat." 



126 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Mr. Benson's feelings had been so en- 
tirely engrossed by that part of the first 
newspaper story, alluding to his daugh- 
ter's supposed levity of conduct, and his 
mind was so relieved by this public and 
honourable acquittal, that he might have 
overlooked the rest of the paragraph 
just mentioned, had not Emmeline's look 
of misery reminded him, that though 
that unfounded subject for distress was 
removed, all her but too real causes for 
anxiety remained. 

Tuesday passed without any intelli- 
gence of any kind reaching them. Wed- 
nesday at length arrived, and during its 
heavy hours, the perturbation of Emme- 
line's agitated mind was painful to wit- 
ness. For on what Pelham was that 
day to impart, she felt her future fate in 
life depended. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 127 

With one so young, and unused to 
sorrow, hope still will linger, and even 
though against her reason and her con- 
viction, the concluding words in Pel- 
ham's letter sometimes for an instant 
caused a thrill of pleasure to her heart, 
and she gave way to delightful anticipa- 
tions. Fitzhenry might have mistaken 
her feelings towards him : she was aware 
that latterly she had given way to irri- 
tation in her manner. Pelham might 
let him into the real state of her aifec- 
tions, for she well knew that that friend 
had read her heart right, and, perhaps, 
when her husband knew all, his better 
feelings would prevail, and would restore 
him to her. 

But when Emmeline's imagination 
had carried her thus far, the chilling 



128 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

conviction of the truth came at once to 
destroy these dreams of happiness, and 
make place for despair. Thus, in all 
the miserable agitation of doubt and 
anxiety, she passed the day listening to 
every sound, starting at the noise of 
every bell, and the opening of every 
door ; and so wild were sometimes her 
fantasies, that she more than once 
thought she heard her husband's step 
on the stairs, and his voice in the pas- 
sage that led to her room. But the 
day passed, and no one came. 

Late in the evening, when she had 
nearly given up all hope, she heard the 
door bell ring. She started up — every 
pulse throbbed — unable to move from 
her place, she remained breathless, 
watching the door : it opened, but no 



A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 129 

Fitzhenry appeared ; and the servant 
entering, brought her a letter. It was 
not Fitzhenry 's hand-writing. A cold 
tremor crept over her ; the room swam 
round her, and the letter fell from her 
hands. Her mother caught it up, and 
seeing how unable her daughter was 
herself to read it, and dreading the ef- 
fects of such violent agitation on her 
already weakened frame, she ventured 
to break the seal, and hastily glancing 
her eyes over its contents. *' My child," 
said she, taking Emmeline's icy hand, 
" it is from your friend Mr. Pelham. He 
says, he could not, as he meant, come to 
you ; that pressing public affairs oblige 
him to return immediately to Vienna. He 
is already on his way to Dover. Your 

husband is quite well — but " 

G 5 



130 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

** But what ?" exclaimed Emmeline, 
with a look of horror. 

" He too is gone abroad." 

" Gone !" repeated Emmeline wildly ; 
*' then it is all over :" and she was car- 
ried senseless to her bed. 

Her wretched parents wept and pray- 
ed by her; for hers was a sorrow to 
which no earthly comfort could be given. 
In a few hours, however, composure — 
that dreadful composure of exhausted 
nature — returned, and the first minute 
she could read, she asked for Mr. Pel- 
ham's letter. It contained these words : 

" You will be surprised, and I fear 
painfully so, when you hear we are 
leaving England. Some unforeseen pub- 
lic affairs oblige me instantly to return 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 131 

to the Continent ; and, I am going to 
take Fitzhenry with me : but, for God's 
sake, keep up your spirits ; he is well, 
and we have had a great deal of con- 
versation. In time, you shall know all ; 
and very soon, I am sure, he will be 
restored to you ; but my poor friend's 
mind is at present in a state approaching 
to delirium ; and we must be patient 
with him. 

** Dearest Lady Fitzhenry, I would 
not for the world give you false hopes ; 
but, I still repeat, that all will be well ; 
you deserve to be happy, and heaven 
will take care that you shall be so. 
Fitzhenry has been infatuated, blinded, 
deceived, every way. But his eyes are 
no w opened, and, (not for the world would 
I deceive you, even to give you one 



132 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

moment of false happiness,) trust me, 
he admires and loves you ; I was cer- 
tain such excellence could not long be 
thrown away upon one so fitted to appre- 
ciate it. The fatal madness which has 
hitherto rendered him insensible to his 
real happiness, is now at an end — on my 
honour it is. 

** I have time for no more ; the car- 
riage is at the door ; I am only waiting 
for Fitzhenry ; he knows I am writing 
to you ; you shall ere long hear from me 
again." 

Emmeline hardly knew what to con- 
clude from this letter ; she read it over 
and over. Sometimes she interpreted 
its contents favourably to her feelings ; 
but, in general, the impression it left 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 133 

was not that of hope. She believed 
Pelham, when he told her that Fitz- 
henry's connexion with Lady Florence 
was at an end ; she must believe such 
solemn assurances ; but what had she 
gained ? Her rival, no longer the cause, 
still her husband fled from her. What 
could that mean, but that still she had to 
encounter settled, determined aversion ? 
for he was leaving England without one 
word, one attempt at reconciliation — 
and with no time even named for his 
return. In short, in spite of Pelham's 
encouragement, she felt but too well 
convinced their separation was for ever. 
Sorrow sunk deeply into Emmeline's 
heart ; but, for her parent's sake, she 
resolved to exert herself. She left her 
room, agreed to go out into the fresh 



134 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

air ; acquiesced in whatever was pro- 
posed to her ; forced herself to converse 
on indifferent subjects ; and even some- 
times endeavoured at cheerfulness. But 
such exertions could not deceive. The 
" sickness of hope deferred," preyed on 
her health ; she grew daily thinner ; 
and her cheeks were either deadly pale, 
or flushed with the deepest feverish 
crimson. 

Poor Mrs. Benson gazed at her in 
silent anxiety. There was their Emme- 
line again returned to them, to the same 
place, the same quiet home, avocations 
and duties she used to perform ; but, 
how changed ! Formerly, she was their 
joy, their pride : to look on her laughing 
eyes, and on her fresh smooth cheek, 
had been enough to make them happy ; 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 135 

but now the sight was misery. Mr. Ben- 
son also was changed. Though some- 
times, in the kind endeavour to cheer his 
melancholy companions, he attempted to 
resume his usual loquacity, and even 
tried his bad jokes ; yet, as they no longer 
proceeded from an exuberantly happy 
heart, they had lost their only merit ; 
and, seeing how ill they in general suc- 
ceeded, and that his intended wit and 
mirth oftener forced tears than smiles 
from his suffering daughter, he at last gave 
up the attempt entirely, and seemed to 
resign himself to the sadness which op- 
pressed him. He appeared also to have 
entirely lost his usual bustling activity. 
He often stood for hours at the window, 
with his hands in his pockets, staring at 
the blue sky and green grass, objects 



13G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

which he had never been seen to gaze 
at before ; or, sitting with the news^ 
paper in his hand, reading over and over 
the same page, almost unconscious of 
the words before him ; for now, neither 
public news, nor even the price of stocks, 
seemed to have power to arrest his 
attention. 

Fitzhenry was never named among 
them, nor that painful subject any way 
alluded to. 

One day, however, that Mr. Benson 
and Emmeline were alone together, after 
the former had, as was now usual to 
him, sat a long time silent, he suddenly 
looked up, and, addressing her in the 
decided tone of one who has well con- 
sidered the matter of which he is about 
to treat — 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 137 

" Emmy !" said he — for he had now 
quite left off calling her Lady Fitzhenry, 
which he had, with apparently proud 
satisfaction after her marriage, always 
done — " Emmy, I have indulged your 
fancies all this time — I have complied 
with your request — I have said nothing — 
done nothing. In short, to please you, 
I have, in truth, made but a silly figure ; 
but this cannot go on — it is impossible — 
you cannot yourself wish it. Something 
decided must be settled between you 
and your husband." 

Emmeline's pale cheek grew still paler, 
and, in answer, she put into her father's 
hand Mr. Pelham's last letter. He read 
it over and over and over several times, 
looked at the date, the signature, the 
direction, even with the precaution and 



138 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

accuracy of business, and then return- 
ing it — 

** I can't make head or tail of it. 
Lord Fitzhenry and you, Emmy, and 
your diplomatic champion, are all be- 
yond my comprehension. I declare I 
don't know what any of you would be at. 
If your husband has turned off his kept 
mistress, as I suppose he has by this, 
(shame on him ever to have had one — 
and another man's wife, too, into the 
bargain,) why, now the coast is clear, 
why can't he come and fetch you, his 
lawful wife, home, and live respectably, 
and be at least decently civil to you. 
What the deuce is he gone abroad for ? 
unless indeed it is to look out for some 
new lady, being, I suppose, tired of the 
old one — for such madams, I believe, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 139 

abound at Paris. In short, Emmy, I will 
not let this sort of thing go on any longer. 
I will give you one month; and if during 
that time, your husband makes no ad- 
vances towards a reconciliation, I will 
then come forward. Surely, Emmeline, 
your own pride must make you wish 
that I should." 

" Pride!" repeated Emmeline, mourn- 
fully. " Oh! my father, what has pride 
to do with affection ?" 

" What !" rejoined her father, warmly, 
" can you tamely submit to be insulted 
and neglected as you are? And pray 
what has affection to do with the busi- 
ness ? when this man don't seem to 
care one farthing for you ; and, now 
indeed that the truth comes out, it 
seems he never did. A pretty object for 



140 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

affection truly. I thought you had better 
feelings. Fool ! idiot ! that I was," con- 
tinued he, striking his forehead, **to be 
so proud of this marriage. Could I have 
guessed how matters would have turned 
out, I had rather have seen you the wife 
of the lowest clerk in my banking-house, 
than that of this Lord Fitzhenry, or any 
other lord in Christendom with his vile 
paramour. But who would have thought 
it of him ? such a fine young man as he 
was. I always liked the lad ; there was 
something so frank and manly about him. 
Do you remember those balls we used to 
give on your birth-day, Emmy, when he 
always danced with you, as a thing of 
course ? How you used to tear about the 
room together like a couple of madcaps, 
looking so happy ! Then, when he took 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 141 

leave of you going abroad — Lord, I re- 
member it as if it was but yesterday — he 
kissed you and called you his little wife. 
My silly heart jumped with joy at those 
words. And then he sent you that watch 
which I see still hanging round your 
neck. I thought all that promised so 
well. Who could have dreamt of his 
turning out as he has done ? And even 
since your marriage at Arlingford, how 
civil and pleasant he was to me, and to 
you even seemingly. I really can hardly 
now bring myself to believe any one so 
young can be so deceitful and hard- 
ened!" 

How long Mr. Benson might have gone 
on thus giving vent to the thoughts which 
apparently now constantly engrossed his 
mind, it is impossible to say ; for, kind- 



142 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

hearted and affectionate as he was, he 
had so little notion of the nature of 
love, of the refinement of poor Emme- 
line's passion, and of the feelings of a 
lacerated heart that recoils from every 
touch, that he had no idea he was run- 
ning daggers into hers ; till, no longer 
able to endure the torture of his words, 
and grasping his arm in agony, " Oh, my 
father !" she exclaimed, '* do not talk of 
him." 

" Well, well," said he, patting her 
hand as he looked with concern on her 
suffering countenance, " if it displeases 
you, we need not talk of the matter just 
now ; but remember, Emmy, one month 
more, and I will have my own way in 
this business." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 143 



CHAPTER IV. 

" Un siecle d'attente — un jour de bonheur." 

Ten days of the month passed, and still 
no intelligence of any sort about Lord 
Fitzhenry reached Charlton. 

Emmeline saw his and Pelham's name 
in the papers among those who had 
crossed the water to Calais ; but she 
heard no more. This strange silence 
seemed to confirm her husband's hostile 
determination with regard to her, and to 
fix her future fate. She uttered no com- 



144 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

plaint, shed no tears, was silent, and 
resigned, and appeared to be some figure 
wound up to perform the ordinary actions 
of life without taking any part in them, 
S.0 still was her composure. But some- 
times, when her mother looked at her, 
pressed her hand, or kissed her pale 
cheek, then, a momentary convulsive sob 
would escape from her oppressed bosom, 
and a solitary burning tear would steal 
down her face. 

There is a dead pause in affliction 
which is dreadful. As long as we have 
to act, to exert ourselves, even though 
those exertions may be painful, still they 
are more bearable than sitting down 
quietly with grief, without any thing to 
look to. When day after day passes the 
same, and when at last from the same- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 145 

ness of our thoughts and feelings, even 
suffering has np longer power to affect 
us, our tears cease to flow, though the 
heart within is breaking. 

The dreary desolation of her future 
existence, from which, appalled at the 
prospect, she at first shrunk with horror, 
now constantly occupied her, to the ex- 
clusion of every other thought, and of 
every ray of hope. A short twelve- 
month back, knowing no felicity be- 
yond loving, and being beloved by her 
fond parents, she was at peace, and 
happy — now, new feelings, new powers 
of heart, unknown to herself before, 
had been awakened in her, and she 
hated herself when she felt — (and she 
could not help feeling it) that not all 
their kindness, all their partial afFec- 

VOL. II. H 



14G A MARHIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

tion, could soothe and occupy a heart 
which love, love for Fitzhenry had now 
so entirely engrossed. Love is a draught 
of so inebriating a quality, that it is 
long before one who has known its 
delirious power can (even when that deli- 
rium ceases) return satisfied to the sober 
feelings of friendship. The sun which 
had warmed and illumined life is set ; 
and all other near and dear affections, 
are as the quiet cold rays of moonlight 
to the bereaved soul which shivers be- 
neath their chilling influence. 

How often when endeavouring to 
soothe those who are writhing under 
such sorrows, are the affections of pa- 
rent and kindred offered as compensa- 
tions. But such comfort, sickening 
the heart at its own ingratitude, only 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 147 

adds to its misery. Time alone, the 
sobering influence of years, can heal 
such wounds, or rather skin them over, 
for the scar remains, till at last it thick- 
ens and hardens, rendering it insensible 
to every impression; but is that happi- 
ness? When a sacred voice announced, 
that " a man shall leave father and mo- 
ther, and cleave to his wife" — it plainly 
told how overwhelming such feelings 
were intended to be; and if allowed, 
nay, commmanded in man, how much 
more in woman, whose existence is 
made up of the affections of the 
heart ! 

Poor Emmeline endeavoured to re- 
sume her usual occupations, but in vain. 
She tried to read — it was impossible ; 
once or twice, in the wish to pass the 

H 2 



148 A MARRIAGE IN HIQH LIFE. 

heavy hours, she proposed reading- aloud 
to her mother, as she had formerly done. 
Her lips mechanically uttered the words ; 
but, at a pause, Mrs. Benson making 
some remark on the book, Emmeline 
startled at the sound of her voice — 
looked vacantly at her, apparently un- 
conscious of what she alluded to. The 
mother, suppressing a sigh, endeavoured 
at some explanation, but seeing how 
hopeless was the attempt to fix her 
daughter's mind on any subject, she 
quietly closed the book, saying, " Em- 
my, my love, we will continue that 
some other time, for I think reading 
hurts your eyes." 

Emmeline gave her a meanless, me- 
lancholy smile in answer, and sat in si- 
lence ; her eyes fixed on the volume. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 149 

as if even unconscious that their lecture 
was over. Lost as she v^as in thought, 
it would perhaps have been difficult for 
her to have told what those thoughts 
were, all was so vague ; and on no one 
circumstance in her situation, could she 
rest her mind with expectation of any 
sort. Even religion could bring her lit- 
tle comfort. Had Fitzhenry, penitent 
towards heaven and herself, been taken 
from her by death, she would have found 
peace for her thoughts in piety. She could 
have said to her widowed heart — we shall 

meet again. But that way, Emmeline, 

• 

shuddering, dared not look. Often too, 
she aggravated her distress by reproach- 
ing herself for having brought sorrow 
and melancholy to that home, which 
had been always hitherto one of content 



150 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and cheerfulness ; and she sometimes 
thought it was her duty to leave it, and 
relieve her parents of her painful pre- 
sence — but whither could she go ? was 
Arlingford still her home? could she ven- 
ture to return there ? 

Thus, day after day sadly passed 
without her being able to form any 
plan for herself or the future, till she 
was one morning roused from the state 
of stupor into which she had sunk, by 
Lord Arlingford being suddenly an- 
nounced. 

Since the marriage, for which both 
he and Mr. Benson had been so equally 
anxious, there had been little intercourse 
between them. Lord Arlingford having 
obtained his object, and secured Em- 
meline's fortune, he was not particularly 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 151 

anxious to keep up any thing like inti- 
macy with Mr. Benson, whose honest, 
blunt vulgarity, did not at all suit the 
refined elegance of his own manners and 
habits. 

Emmeline was with her mother alone 
when Lord Arlingford entered. She 
turned deadly pale ; for, in a minute, a 
thousand apprehensions as to the possi- 
ble purport of his visit occurred to her ; 
and, hardly knowing in what manner to 
meet him, she remained in her place, with 
the feelings of a criminal awaiting the 
sentence of his judge. But such alarm- 
ing fears were soon dissipated — his man- 
ner was more than usually kind — she was 
his ** dear Emmeline, his pretty daugh- 
ter." He quite overcame Mrs. Benson 
with civilities, and was so very particular 
and anxious in his enquiries after Mr. 



152 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Benson, and whether he could not have 
the pleasure of seeing him, that at last 
Emmeline thought it best to go and 
inform her father of his visit, hoping 
that Lord Arlingford's conciliatory man- 
ner might pacify his justly indignant 
feelings. When she told him who 
was in the drawing-room with her mo- 
ther, 

" I know it — I know it quite well 
child," said he, impatiently; " you 
need not have come for me ; why did 
you not say I was out, or busy, or sick ? 
I am sure you may say the last with 
truth, for I am not half the man I used 
to be. I don't want to see him; he is 
only come to try and palaver me over; 
and if I do go down to him, what in the 
world can we say to each other ? Your 
marriage is the only thing we have talked 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 153 

about these last ten years, and the less 
now said of that the better, I am sure : 
and I am sore here," said the good old 
citizen, seizing on his waistcoat, and 
rubbing it across his breast ; " and I don't 
want him to make matters worse. I wish 
his lordship had staid at home ; for what 
the deuce can he be come here for ?" 

'' For no unkind purpose, I am sure," 
said Emmeline, wishing to pacify her 
father — *' for his manner to me is more 
than usually affectionate. For my sake, 
dear father, come down to him, and be 
cordial to him," said she, grasping his 
hand with fervency, while her imploring 
eyes, fixed on his face, spoke all the 
feelings of heart. 

. " You are a silly girl, Emmy," said 
her father: ** you have no proper pride. 

h5 



1 54 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

This abominable husband of yours has 
made a perfect fool of you ; but go away 
to the drawing-room ; say I will be down 
directly. Plague on him, he has turned 
me quite topsy-turvy." 

Emmeline returned to Lord Arlingford, 
and was happy to find him and her mo- 
ther conversing on indifferent subjects. 
In nervous agitation, she seated herself 
by them, listening with painful anxiety 
for her father's approach — while her eyes 
and ears were fixed on Lord Arlingford, 
eagerly watching for every look, every 
tone, that bore the slightest resemblance 
to his son. It is hard to say, whether 
there is most pain or pleasure in such re- 
collections of a beloved object, but who 
can help catching at them ? A glance, a 
word will sometimes make the heart start 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 155 

from a stupor of grief to which it had 
been reduced, and give it a passing sen- 
sation of something we, at the moment, 
mistake for happiness. So it was with 
Emmeline ; and, lost in such thoughts, 
she sat gazing on the still handsome 
countenance of Lord Arlingford, till, 
hearing her father's step, she hastily- 
rose, and walked towards the window, 
to conceal her nervous apprehensions as 
to the result of their meeting. 

Mr. Benson entered the room with a 
knit brow and both hands in his pockets; 
but Lord Arlingford's decided resolution 
to meet him cordially, at last forced one 
hand out of its repulsive retreat. 

" I am glad to find our Emmeline 
looking better than I expected," said 
Lord Arlingford, a little at a loss for a 



156 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

subject to begin with — the coldness of 
Mr. Benson's look and manner having 
rather disconcerted him. " I heard she 
had left town on account of her healtb, 
the heat having been too much for her." 

" I don't know what your lordship 
expected," said Mr. Benson, surlily, 
*' but Lady Fitzhenry can scarcely look 
worse than she does." 

Lord Arlingford not seeming to heed 
the incivility of his answer, continued — 
** Ernest, too, did well to leave London, 
for he knocked himself up in the House 
of Commons. No constitution can stand 
it ; and I was quite glad when I heard 
he had obtained leave of absence to take 
a little trip on the continent, with his 
friend Mr. Pelham," — and Lord Arling- 
ford glanced at Emmeline, with a look 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 157 

which meant to express gallant plea- 
santry, but the anxiety which accompa- 
nied it, was very perceptible. 

Mr. Benson cleared his throat — 
seemed beating the time of some tune 
on his knee, and, after a moment's pause, 
said : *' In my time, husbands and wives 
took those little trips together ; but I 
presume that is no longer the fashion ; 
at least, not at the west end of the 
town." 

Lord Arlingford made no reply — but, 
turning to Emmeline — " I suppose you 
can hardly have heard from our travellers 
yet ; that lazy boy, Ernest, has not 
written to me one word since he went. 
Indeed, it was the newspapers that first 
informed me of his departure ; but, in 
truth, I believe the wind has been directly 



158 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

contrary for packets coming over. I never 
remember, at this time of the year, such 
a continuation of high winds ; and those 
diplomatic people always travel ventre a 
terre, in order, I suppose, to give a vast 
opinion of their importance ; so we must 
not be too severe on Fitzhenry." 

Emmeline tried to speak ; her nervous 
lips moved, but not a word could she ar- 
ticulate ; and her mother, wishing to 
change the subject, made some remarks 
on the freshness and beauty of the 
country. 

" Yes, indeed it is particularly beau- 
tiful just now," said Arlingford ; "and I 
do wonder how people can remain in town 
as they do ; however, numbers have fol- 
lowed our wise example, and I thought 
the streets looked very dull and empty 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 159 

to-day, as I passed through. I suppose, 
Lady Fitzhenry, you have no thoughts 
of returnhig to Grosvenor Street, while 
Ernest is away. I dare say he would 
not trust you in the gay world of London 
without him," added he laughing. 

Emmeline, without raising her eyes 
frojii the carpet, on which they had been 
fixed, replied, that she meant to remain 
at Charlton some time longer. 

There was a dead pause. Poor Mrs. 
Benson was painfully occupied in observ- 
ing her daughter; and Mr. Benson seem- 
ed resolved on avoiding every thing like 
advances to his visitor, who, at last, was 
again forced to start a new subject. 
Taking, therefore, a desperate resolution 
to come at once to the point, and ascer- 
tain how matters were likely to be be- 



160 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

tween him and the Benson family, or 
rather, between his son and daughter- 
in-law, he said, " the principal object 
of my visit to-day, was to try and 
persuade you all three to come and 
pay me a visit at Wimbledon. I am 
now quite alone, and it would really be 
a charity" — and he addressed himself 
particularly to Mr. Benson. 

*' You know I am a man of business, 
my lord," said he dryly — *' my time is 
little at my own disposal. I cannot at 
present absent myself from home ; and 
as for Emmeline, I do not think she is 
just now in a state to make any visits." 

" But, coming to me," rejoined Lord 
Arlingford, with most determined civility 
and good humour, " would only be ex- 
changing one home for another. My 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 161 

dear Emmeline, will you not indulge 
me?" 

Emmeline made some answer, but her 
words were unintelligible. She saw, 
every minute, that Mr. Benson's temper 
was rising, and she shook from head to 
foot. 

" Well, you will think of it, and let 
me know when you feel inclined to 
come," said Lord Arlingford, seeing it 
was useless to endeavour to press the 
matter any further — " and, perhaps, if 
we put it off a little, Mr. and Mrs. Ben- 
son will be able to accompany you." 

Mr. Benson made no answer ; he had 
left his seat, and was restlessly fidgeting 
about the room. '* So it shall remain 
that you write to me, and name your 
own day," added Lord Arlingford, rising. 



162 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" Yes, your lordship will shortly hear 
from me," said Mr. Benson, with a 
meaning, in his tone and manner, that 
Emmeline understood but too well ; and, 
unasked, he rung the bell. 

*' Well, God bless you, my fair Emme- 
line," said Lord Arlingford, kissing her 
on both cheeks, with a sort of flirting 
gallantry of manner that was so habitual 
to him, that neither age nor the infirmi- 
ties of sickness had altered it, and which 
he maintained even with his daughter- 
in-law. " Make haste and recover the 
roses which, I must confess, the dissipa- 
tion of London has a little Jietri, that 
Ernest may find you in bloom and beauty 
on his return ; and we must mutually let 
each other know when we hear from 
him ; I am the most interested in the 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 163 

bargain, as I think we can guess who 
will have the first intelligence." 

Again Lord Arlingford forced Mr. Ben- 
son's reluctant hand into his, and over- 
coming Mrs. Benson with civil speeches, 
went to his carriage. Mr. Benson con- 
strained himself so far as to accompany 
his visitor to the hall-door. 

" By the bye, my dear Benson," said 
Lord Arlingford, stepping back just as 
he was entering the carriage, " when 
you do come, you shall find my horses 
to meet you in London, for it is too far 
to come the whole way with your own, 
and mine have positively nothing to do, 
so that it will be a kindness to give them 
a little exercise." 

** Your lordship is very kind," said the 
banker, with an expression of irony, and 



164 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ill concealed, offended pride on his coun- 
tenance, ** whenever I do visit you, I will 
certainly claim your obliging offer." 

After Lord Arlingford had driven off, 
all remained for some time silent; at 
length Mr. Benson muttered to himself, 
** I see through it all — I am not the fool 
he takes me for — I am not to be coaxed by 
a few civil speeches from a lord into mean 
forbearance. A fortnight more, and I 
shall most assuredly visit his lordship, 
and he shall see whom he has to deal 
with. You, Emmeline, I dare say, would 
wish to go and curry favour with him, 
that he may speak a word in your favour 
to his precious son, and you may, if you 
please ; but I'll be d — d if I do, till it is 
to tell him a bit of my mind, and inform 
him, in pretty plain terms, that you and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 165 

your husband are two, and that the law 
will give us redress." 

And so saying, Mr. Benson left the 
room more irritated in temper than Em- 
meline had ever seen him. Her head 
fell on her hands, and her long-stifled 
feelings burst forth. 

'* Bear up, dearest Emmy," said her 
mother, endeavouring to soothe her ; 
*' surely this visit of Lord Arlingford's 
must, in many ways, give you comfort. 
He never would have come unless he 
had known that all was likely soon to be 
explained, and to end well between you 
and your husband." 

Emmeline shook her head. '' You 
don't know them as I do. No two beings 
can be so different, can act on such dif- 
ferent motives, as Lord Arlingford and 



IGG A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 



Fitzhenry." At that name, that 



beloved name, for the first time for long 
uttered by herself, she sobbed as if her 
heart would break. *' And then my fa- 
ther," she continued, '* he terrifies me. 
Oh ! that he could, that he would for 
my sake, be more patient, more con- 
ciliatory ! He talks, too, always of pride, 
and forgets that one can have none where 
one loves as I do. Oh ! if I could but 
see him once again !" she exclaimed, 
clasping her hands, " I believe I could 
on my knees entreat of him to be kind 
to me, to love me — I am so very misera- 
ble; and yet when I was with him, when 
I saw him every day, I was cold and 
repulsive, I know I was ; I believe I was 
the most to blame. I dare say I could 
have won upon his kindness had I acted 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 167 

differently ; for he is so kind to every 
body, every thing — but me. It must 
have been all my fault." 

Thus did poor Emmeline comfort herself 
by voluntary self-accusation, rather than 
impute blame to him she worshipped. 

After the agitation occasioned by Lord 
Arlingford's visit had subsided, the family- 
party at Charlton returned to their former 
melancholy composure. Day after day 
still passed, and no letter came ; no in- 
telligence reached them. Every ray of 
hope now vanished ; all intercourse be- 
tween Emmeline and the being on whom 
her existence hung, seemed now at an 
end for ever. Her father never alluded 
to the subject; but she had every reason 
to think that he still kept to his resolu- 
tion of demanding an explanation ; and 



168 A MARRIAGE IN HfGH LIFE. 

indeed their formal and total separation 
seemed now almost unavoidable. Even 
Pelham, her best friend, seemed to have 
forgotten her ; and thus deserted, the 
few past months of her life, during which 
all the feelings of her heart had been 
roused, and a new existence had been 
opened to her, seemed a dream of de- 
lirium. All had vanished. Apparently 
also neglected by that gay world which 
so lately courted her with all its most 
intoxicating blandishments, the admired, 
flattered Lady Fitzhenry, had again sunk 
into Emmeline Benson, and was living 
in all the retired concealment of guilt, 
without one fault, one folly to be laid to 
her charge. 

Perhaps some of her fashionable friends 
when they chanced to drive through 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 1G9 

Grosvenor-street, and when their atten- 
tion was attracted by the closed windows 
of Lord Fitzhenry's house, at that season 
of the year when every open London 
balcony is gay with dear-bought sooty 
flowers, might, as they cast up their eyes 
on the deserted habitation, wonder what 
had become of its inmates, and what 
might be the most like truth of the many 
stories which were for some days circu- 
lated about them. 

But after those few days, the daily 
business of amusement, and some new 
tale of scandal, soon superseded that of 
theFitzhenrys; their vacated places were 
soon filled up at those meetings of plea- 
sure to which they had been invited ; 
and he was allowed quietly to prosecute 
his journey on the Continent, and she to 

VOL. ir. I 



170 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

drag on her melancholy existence within 
nine miles of all her former associates, 
unmolested and iinthought of. Who then 
would sacrifice happiness or comfort to 
the opinion of the world ? Often the 
sacrifice of a whole life to the idle talk 
of a day ! 

One evening, when the Benson family 
were as usual sitting together in mourn- 
ful silence, which was only at times 
broken by some forced remark from Mrs. 
Benson, as she sat dismally at her work, 
her husband having had recourse to his 
usual amusement, the newspapers, the 
latter looking suddenly towards Emme- 
line, said : *' At last I see the abominable 
west wind has changed, and has allowed 
vessels to get across the Channel : no 
less than four French mails are due. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 171 

Emmy, dear girl, cheer up," added he, 
patting her cheek as he spoke ; " there 
is no saying what news these mails may 

bring, for I dreamt last night " 

Mr. Benson was here interrupted in 
his intended story by a loud ringing at 
the door-bell ; he started up and hurried 
out of the room. No one spoke, but all 
had the same idea — all fancied it could 
only be Lord Fitzhenry. Mrs. Benson 
laid down her work, and moved towards 
the hall. Emmeline alone sat immove- 
able. Her father was at the house-door, 
and opened it before any servant could 
reach it. She heard the trampling of 
a horse on the threshold — heard a voice 
in brief commy.nication with him. A 
footstep approached the room — she fixed 
her eyes wildly on the door, scarcely able 

I 2 



172 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

to breathe. But again she had to endure 
the torture of disappointment — Mr. Ben- 
son entered alone, with a letter in his 
hand, brought, he said, by a man on 
horseback, who had orders to deliver it 
with all speed. The letter was for Em- 
meline, and the direction was inPelham's 
hand-wn'iting. She hastily broke the 
seal, and while evey pulse in her heart 
and in her head throbbed, she read 
these words : 

" You would have heard from us be- 
fore, but Fitzhenry has been ill — indeed 
is so still. We are here at Paris delayed 
on our journey. If you could, (I need 
hardly add, if you would,) I should wish 
you to set off immediately, on receiving 
this, to join us. Trust me, I would urge 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 173 

nothing that I was not certain was for 
your and your husband's mutual good. 
At Dover you will find a vessel ready to 
bring you over, and my own courier to 
accompany you, who will prevent all 
delays and difficulties. Lose no time. 
Fitzhenry has had a most violent and 
alarming fever; but to-day, I think, there 
is some decided amendment — the medi- 
cal people now are sanguine. God 
bless you. 

" G. Pelham." 

Emmeline held out the letter to- her 
father, while her full heart relieved itself 
by tears ; when he had read it, without 
looking at her, he said : " Well, how do 
you mean to act ?" 



]74 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIl^. 

** How !" said Emmeline, breathless 
with agitation, *' why set off directly." 

" I don't know that I shall agree to 
that," answered Mr. Benson, with the 
same forced sangfroid. " In this busi- 
ness you are not fit to judge for yourself, 
and I must consider for you." 

Emmeline grasped lier father's arm, 
endeavouring to catch his averted eyes : 
" Dear father! I think you have never 
yet had reason to doubt my obedience 
to your will, so you must now forgive 
me for saying, that no power on earth 
shall prevent my going to my husband. 
My only chance for happiness in this 
world, duty, every thing, in short, calls 
me to him. Do not, I entreat, forbid me, 
for I could not obey you." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 175 

" But," rejoined Mr. Benson, rather 
impatiently, " it is not your husband that 
sends for you. Mr. Pel ham does not even 
say that he knows of his writing to you ; 
and I am sure he would make the very 
best of the matter, for he seems to be a 
kind, friendly sort of man." 

" Indeed he is," answered Emmeline; 
" and indeed I can trust to him. He 
would not have written for me had he 
not been sure it was his wish. Dearest 
father, I must, I will set off directly ; 
and do not let me go with the pain of 
your displeasure." 

Mrs. Benson joined her arguments to 
Emmeline's entreaties, bringing in, with 
excusable artifice, something about the 
duty and devotion of a wife, till, at last. 



17G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Mr. Benson seemed somewhat moved ; 
and a glance which he caught of Emme- 
line's face, crimsoned with agitation and 
animated with painful anxiety, com- 
pletely overcoming his intended firm- 
ness, he opened his arms to his trembling 
daughter : " Well, well, you women al- 
ways get the better, always make fools 
of us men. The truth is, I am heartily 
tired of your dismal face, Emmy, and of 
all this weeping and wailing — that is the 
truth of it ; so e'en take your own way, 
so that we may be all happy again. But 
I can tell you, positively you shall not 
go alone, child j at all events, I will go 
with you to Dover." 

" But directly, dear father — no delay 
— the happiness or misery of my life may 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 177 

depend on an hour — now, this very 
night, let me set off." 

** Oh ! as for that, I am always for 
dispatch, you know. If a thing is to be 
done, let it be done directly, that is my 
saying. There is no fear of John Benson 
dawdling." 

And the good-hearted old man, rub- 
bing his hands, hurried out of the room 
to give the necessary orders. 

In an instant, all was bustle in the 
house. Mr. Benson himself paced away 
to the stables to hasten the harnessing 
of the horses ; and Emmeline, a few 
minutes before inanimate and almost life- 
less, now, with a flushed cheek, rest- 
lessly paced the hall and drawing-room, 
impatient at every moment's delay. She 
hardly knew whether she had most cause 

I 5 



178 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

for dread or hope from the contents of 
Mr. Pelham's letter. Fitzhenry was ill 
— plainly very ill ; and, as her father 
said, it was not even hinted that it was 
by his desire she had been summoned ; 
but still she thought she could trust to 
that kind, considerate friend ; and the 
idea, the delightful idea, that in a few 
days she would again behold Fitz- 
henry, got the better of every other 
thought. 

While Emmeline was thus counting 
every second till the carriage came to 
the door, Mrs. Benson busied herself in 
those necessary preparations for the jour- 
ney, which her pre-occupied daughter 
never thouglit of. At last, by midnight, 
all was ready ; and followed by the 
blessings and good wishes of her mother, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 179 

Emmeline set off with her father for 
Dover. 

*' I shall come back to you, perhaps, 
the happiest of human beings," said she, 
as she returned Mrs. Benson's fond em- 
brace — *' perhaps " She had not 

courage to finish the sentence. 

*' Foolish girl!" said her father, as he 
helped her into the carriage ; '* no more 
whimpering. Now shut the door ; bid 
the man drive on : and you, Mrs. Ben- 
son, my good woman, do you go away 
to your bed. Pretty wild doings these ! 
This comes of connecting oneself with 
quality!" 

The horses set oif ; and the rapidity 
with which they went, the feeling that 
she was hurrying to the object of all her 
wishes, and the fresh air of a fine sum- 



180 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

mer's night, all helped to compose and 
revive poor Emmeline; so that, at Dover, 
Mr. Benson, with a lightened heart, re- 
signed her to the care of Mr. Pelham's 
courier, whom they found there waiting 
her orders. Her father offered himself 
to go on with her to Paris ; but that she 
for many reasons declined ; and at last 
he consented to return to Charlton. He 
first of all, however, went with her down 
to the beach, saw her safe into the boat 
that was to convey her to the vessel, 
and, from the pier, watched its white 
sails as long as he could, with his glass, 
distinguish his daughter on the deck, 
waving her many a farewell with his 
handkerchief. At last, his dear Emmy 
became a speck, and vanished. The 
good man, then, brushing away a tear 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 181 

from his eye, and ejaculating to himself 
a benediction on his darling, returned 
alone to the inn, and resumed his jour- 
ney homewards. 



182 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Mercy, dear Lord, saide he, what grace is this 
That thou hast shewed to me, sinfull wight, 
To send thine angell from her bowre of bliss 
To comfort me in my distressed plight ? 
Angell, or goddess, doe I call thee right? 
What service may I doe unto thee meete, 
That hast from darkness me returned to light ? 

Faeuy Queene, Canto 5. 

With all superior characters, such as 
Emmeline's, the mind so supports the 
body, that, for the time, it is rather 
strengthened than exhausted by exertion. 
Although her health had been impaired, 
and her nerves much weakened, by all 
she had lately undergone — yet, fearless 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 183 

of fatigue, she travelled on without stop- 
ping, and arrived in Paris on the even- 
ing of the third day from that on which 
she had left Charlton. 

On entering the barriers, her heart 
almost ceased to beat; and when she 
drove into the court-yard of the hotel to 
which the courier directed the postilions, 
a death-like cold crept over her frame. 
But at the door, she saw Mr. Pelham ; 
and the smile with which he welcomed 
her again gave her life. 

** He is safe ; he is out of danger ;" 
he hastily said, as he ventured to receive 
in his arms Emmeline's almost inanimate 
form, and pressed her, as a brother 
would a beloved sister, to his heart. 

"Will he see me?" said Emmeline, 
looking still doubtfully in Mr. Pelham's 
face. 



184 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

** Soon, very soon," said he ; " but 
you must compose yourself first ; the 
least agitation must be spared him." 
And he led her up stairs to Fitzhenry's 
apartments. 

*' Did he send for me V said Emme- 
line timidly, as soon as her agitations 
allowed her to speak. 

** My dear Lady Fitzhenry," replied 
Pelham, ** I never have deceived you, 
and will not do so now ; Fitzhenry did 
not send for you ; did not even know of 
my writing. At that time, in truth, I 
despaired of his life ; but I know my 
friend well enough to be convinced, that 
had he had a moment's composure, he 
would have been glad to have had it in 
his power to demand and obtain your 
forgiveness. It has pleased Heaven to 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 185 

give a more favourable issue to this ill- 
ness than I then had dared to anticipate. 
Fitzhenry is now pronounced out of 
danger, but he is in a state of weakness 
that, of course, has necessarily pre- 
cluded all conversation on that, or any 
other subject. Therefore your presence 
here is no way expected by him." 

Poor Emmeline's countenance fell; — 
a thousand vague hopes and expecta- 
tions were in an instant crushed ! 

Pelhani observed her emotion, and 
added: " I cannot attempt to excuse 
my friend's conduct; a strange infatua- 
tion has blinded him, and, for a time, 
clouded his better nature; but I am 
much mistaken if that fatal madness 
is not entirely and for ever at an end." 

All must know how hard it is to bear 



186 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the blank feeling of disappointment 
when we have (even unreasonably) 
raised our hopes as to some desired 
bliss. Emmeline had pictured to her- 
self her husband changed — penitent — 
receiving her to his heart ; and, when 
she learnt the real truth, she almost lost 
the sense of happiness at his safety, in 
the bitter feeling, that even though her 
rival's reign was over, still she had 
never been thought of by him. She 
covered her face with her hands, while 
tears of mortification slowly stole down 
her cheeks. 

Meanwhile, the servants had un- 
loaded the carriage; and, as she heard 
it driving out of the court-yard, Emme- 
line, in the humiliating pain of disap- 
pointed feelings, almost resolved in- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 167 

stantly to leave Paris, again return to 
her father, and not force herself upon 
one who evidently wished not for her. 

With this idea, she suddenly rose from 
her seat. " I will see him once more," 
said she in a hurried manner : '* could 
I not unseen follow you into his room ? 
I will not speak to him — he shall not 
see or hear me — I will leave him di- 
rectly, and for ever " she added ; 

but in so low a voice that Pelham did 
not catch the words; and, attributing 
all her agitation to anxiety about her 
husband's safety, and thinking that no- 
thing but beholding him would satisfy 
her as to his existence, he drew her arm 
within his, and led the way to Fitz- 
henry's bed-room. 

On opening the door, the darkness 



1 



188 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

seemed so total, every window being 
closed, that Emmeline, satisfied she 
could not be observed, followed Mr. 
Pelham to the bed-side; the curtain 
was down, so that she coufd not see 
Fitzhenry's face, but merely heard him 
breathe ; by degrees, as her eyes got 
used to the obscurity, and judging by 
his immovable stillness, that he had not 
observed their entrance, she ventured 
gently to put the curtain aside and look 
on him. But to the fond eye of love 
alone was he the same Fitzhenry from 
whom she had parted scarcely a month 
before. His eyes were closed ; his cheek 
was sunk and colourless ; his brown 
curly hair fell lank on his pale forehead, 
which was contracted with the expres- 
sion of suffering. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 189 

The sight was too much for her, and 
totally overcame her recently-formed 
resolution of leaving him for ever. She 
sunk on her knees at his side; her hand 
fell on his, which lay apparently life- 
less on the bed; r.nd, in the agony of 
her feelings, careless of consequences, 
she covered with tears and with kisses, 
that hand which she had never before 
dared to touch ; but which now felt not 
her fervent lips ; was insensible to her 
burning tears, and lay passive within 
hers. 

Emmeline remained fixed at the bed- 
side of her husband. The former unhap- 
piness of their connexion, his indiffer- 
ence and even apparent dislike, her own 
punctilious distance of manner toward 
him, all seemed now forgotten by her. 



190 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Ill trembling anxiety, she watched each 
heaving of his bosom, each movement of 
his languid limbs ; and how her heart 
throbbed the first time his lips moved, 
and that she heard his voice ! It 
was weak and hollow ; but still it was 
that voice which thrilled to her inmost 
soul; he expressed a wish for something 
to moisten his parched mouth ; Pelham 
brought the glass to Emmeline; her 
trembling hand was steadied when she 
held it to his lips, while she put her arm 
round him to support his head. 

She now seemed his established sick 
nurse : what she should do when his 
amendment allowed him to know who it 
was that was attending upon him, never 
was talked of, indeed was never thought 
of by Emmeline. To be allowed to see 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 191 

him constantly, to perform for him the 
offices of affection, was such happiness 
that she would not destroy it by ven- 
turing to look forward. She gave him all 
his medicines. Sometimes, unconscious 
what he did, he took hold of her hand, 
and held it long within his ; but, ex- 
hausted apparently by his illness, he 
never opened his eyes, never enquired 
what he took, nor from whose hands he 
received it. The physicians, however, 
assured Emmeline, that this insensibility 
was merely the natural consequence of 
the violence of the fever through which 
he had struggled, that they hourly saw 
some amendment, and found increased 
strength of pulse. 

On the second evening after her ar- 
rival, he had sunk into something more 



192 A aiARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

like natural sleep than the state of stu- 
por in which he had hitherto lain. Fear- 
ful of moving, and thereby of disturb- 
ing him, Pelham had taken hold of 
the first book he could reach, and was 
reading it by the light of the lamp 
in the sick room. Emmeline was sit- 
ting at the foot of the bed, with 
her eyes fixed on her husband's coun- 
tenance, for it was serene and calm, and 
had more of its own natural expression 
than she had yet seen. At length, he 
moved, passed his hand over his eyes, 
which then rested on Emmeline, and 
endeavoured to raise himself. She saw 
that sensibility had returned ; and not 
daring to advance towards him herself, 
she made sign to Mr. Pelham to come to 
him. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 193 

** Where am I?" exclaimed Fitzlienry. 
— *' I have been very ill, Pelham, have I 
not? I have no recollection — indeed, 
my head is still confused. I could even 
now fancy," continued he, staring wildly 
on Emmeline, " that I see Lady Fitz- 
henry before me." 

" Yes, dear Fitzhenry," replied his 
friend, " you have been ill — long very 
ill ; but you are now pronounced to be 
quite convalescent, and a few more 
days will, I trust, restore you even to 
strength." 

** But my head is so weak— you will 
laugh at me Pelham— but I repeat it — 
I could swear that at this moment I see 
Lady Fitzhenry quite plainly sitting at 
the end of my bed ; but I suppose it is 
all weakness, and that such odd delu- 

VOL. II. K 



194 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

sions will go oft'— but how very strange 
such fancies are !" 

" Would you wish it to be no fancy?" 
said Pelham calmly : *' would you like 
vour delirious vision to be realized ?"' 

" Oh, Pelham, why do you talk in 
that way to me ? you will only confuse 
my poor brain still more — you too well 
know how impossible it is." 

" Do you still fancy you see her?" 
said Pelham. 

** Still — still : it is her very counte- 
nance, her melancholy expression ; and 
she looks at me now — I almost fancy 
1 see her breathe and move — Oh! Pelham, 
for God's sake give me something to 
rouse me out of this miserably nervous 
state ;" and Fitzhenry covered his eyes 
with both his hands. 



A MARRfAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 195 

** Fitzhenry," said Pelham, in a slow 
but tremulous voice, frightened at the 
possible effect of that which he was go- 
ing to impart, — " what if I were to 
tell you that this is no sick dream— but 
that the figure before you, is in truth 
and reality Lady Fitzhenry, your Em- 
meline ?" 

Fitzhenry gave a violent start, and 
grasped Pelham's hand — " Good God ! 
Lady Fitzhenry in reality, here ! — Speak 
to her Pelham — I dare not, cannot." 

Poor Emmeline, trembling with anxi- 
ety, had not courage to move or utter 
a single word, and during all this con- 
versation had appeared the phantom her 
husband had taken her for. 

''Fitzhenry!" said Pelham, *' compose 
yourself; you have nothing to fear from 

K 2 



196 A iMARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Lady Fitzhenry ; affection alone brought 
her here — and you will at last be con- 
vinced, that far from being hated, you 
are loved as few^ can hope to be." 

*' Is it possible! do you not deceive 
me?" said Fitzhenry, eagerly, a faint 
smile playing on his lips as he turned 
towards Emmeline. But she still, doubt- 
ing her happiness, remained immove- 
able. 

" What, Emmeline!" said he, " cannot 
you forgive me ?" 

At that name, at those words, all fear 
forsook her ; he held out to her his feeble 
arms, and she rushed to his heart; his 
head fell on her bosom ; and, overcome 
with his feelings, he wept like a child. 
In a few minutes, he recovered himself, 
and gazing in her face, their eyes met. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 197 

Oh ! who can describe the happiness 
of that moment ? Emmeline read affec- 
tion in those eyes which she had never 
before dared to encounter; and when 
Fitzhenry again pressed her to his heart, 
and, half timidly, kissed her burning 
cheek, — at that minute she almost could 
have wished to breathe her last, so per- 
fect was her bliss. 

Such emotion, however, was not good 
for the invalid ; and Pelham forced Em- 
meline for a time to leave the room, till 
she had recovered the power to endure 
her happiness with composure. When 
she returned, she again took her station, 
in silence, by his bed-side. Fitzhenry 
seized her hand, held it in both of his, 
but spoke not. One minute, one lock, 
however, had sufficed to open their hearts 



198 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

to each other; no explanation was neces- 
sary; indeed, Emmeline would have been 
fearful of breaking the dream of felicity 
in which she now lived, by one word 
recalling the past. 

Fitzhenry now daily seemed to gain 
strength. Occasionally, a short cough, 
which the physicians pronounced to be 
nervous, tormented him by disturbing 
his rest; but his eyes looked less languid. 
At times, some colour returned to his 
cheeks; and, supported by cushions, he 
could now sit up on a couch. And what 
a delight it M'as to Emmeline to wait 
upon him, to watch and prevent his 
wishes ; to smooth his pillow, and re- 
ceive in return a smile of kindness and 
gi'atitude ! 

Sometimes, however, a cloud would 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 199 

darken her present happiness. If Fitz- 
henry was more than usually silent or 
thoughtful, (and he now often fell into 
long fits of deep abstraction,) then her 
jealous fancy pictured to her that his 
thoughts and affections were wandering 
back to Lady Florence. When he talked 
of England, of his wish to return home, 
again she took alarm ; and, in spite of 
herself, interpreted his anxiety on the 
subject into the desire again to be in 
the same country with her rival — per- 
haps, indeed, again to return to her 
chains. 

Lady Florence had never yet been in 
any way alluded to — Fitzhenry seemed 
to shun the subject as much as Emme- 
line ; so that she hardly knew her fate, 
hardly knew by how strong, or how 



200 A AlARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

feeble a tenure she held her present 
felicity. 

One day, however, he suddenly seem- 
ed to summon courage for some sort of 
explanation between them. Emmeline 
had, as usual, been arranging his sofa. 
Her hand still lingered on the pillow 
which supported him ; and, after gaz- 
ing on it a minute, he seized it, and 
looking attentively on her wedding- 
ring — 

** Emmeline," said he, ** give me back 
that ring, you shall wear it no more ; it 
was one de mauvaise augure, and shall in 
future live on my hand for a memento, 
like Prince Cheri's. I will marry you 
over again with this.'''' 

And, with a half melancholy smile, he 
drew from his finger a small fretted gold 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 201 

ring, which appeared to have been in- 
tended for a woman. At the same time, 
apparently repeating some words to him- 
self, he put in its place that which he 
had taken off Emmeline's hand. " Give 
me a prayer-book," said he ; *' and look 
for the marriage ceremony, for I have 
forgotten what I then promised." 

When he got the book, he read it to 
himself for some time in silence. 

" Good God !" he at length exclaimed, 
"did I pronounce these words? did I 
make those vows ? villain that I was ! 
Emmeline, can you forgive the past ?" 

" Oh ! do not talk of the past," she 
eagerly exclaimed ; " I am too happy now 
to wish to think of it." 

*' But what an awful account I shall 
have to give," added he, again casting 

K 5 



202 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

his eyes on the book recording his solemn 
engagement with God. 

" Dearest Fitzhenry !" said Emme- 
line, sinking on her knees beside him, 
" a God of mercy will forgive all." 

" Pray to him for me," said he, in a 
low tone ; "1 fear I cannot. I never 
prayed ! " 

Emmeline shuddered, she seized his 
hand: "Oh! Fitzhenry, talk not so 
wildly ; God is now calling you to him, 
shrink not from him." 

Fitzhenry pressed her hand ; again 
took (he prayer-book, and with a tre- 
mulous voice read these words : 

" I, Ernest, take thee, Emmeline, to 
my wedded wife, to love and to cherish; 
and forsaking all other, keep myself 
only unto thee as long as we both 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 203 

shall live ; and thereto I plight thee my 
troth." 

The last words died on his lips, and 
closing his eyes, he sank back, seemingly 
both affected and exhausted. Emmeline 
was too much moved to speak: she 
pressed to her lips and to her heart, that 
hand now a second time given her — but 
in how different a manner ! 

From that day, Emmeline's prayer- 
book was his constant companion. She 
saw his mind was deeply affected, and 
left the strong impression to work its 
own effect. 



204 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER VI. 



-Whilst I remember 



Thee, and thy virtues, I cannot forget 

My blemishes in them ; and so still think of 

The wrong -I did myself. 

Winter's Tale. 

A FEW days after the scene recorded in 
the last chapter, when Fitzhenry ap- 
peared better than he had yet done since 
his illness, and that he had even some 
of his own natural and playful cheerful- 
ness, " Lady Fitzhenry," said he, with a 
smile, ** how long is it since you have 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 205 

liked me — loved me V added he faintly, 
colouring. 

Emmeline coloured too. "Oh! I can't 
remember," said she; ** I tried to hate 
you, for I felt it my duty to myself to 
do so ; but somehow, from the very first, 
I could not." 

*' How strange!" continued Fitzhenry; 
" I should not have thought I could have 
been so very blind and stupid. Our sex 
is pretty clear-sighted where our vanity 
is concerned ; but I suppose I was so 
conscious that I deserved to be hated 
by you, that I convinced myself I was so ; 
and every, even the slightest occurrence, 
confirmed me more and more in this 
opinion. Perhaps too I felt (at first at 
least) that it was an ease to my con- 
science to think you disliked me, trying 
to persuade myself in that manner that 



20G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

we were quits. Pelham, when he came 
to Arlingforcl, soon saw how things were, 
and took me to task — he had known me 
long; known all my history." 

Fitzhenry paused : at length, resum- 
ing in a lower, graver tone — " Emme- 
line! my wife ! " said he, '* I must ease 
my mind by confessing all to you. I 
have loved — madly loved — it was a de- 
lirium, an intoxication, an infatuation — 
but on my honour, before God !" and he 
fervently clasped his hands together — 
** before God, I swear it is over. My 
esteem, my admiration, all is now, in- 
deed has long been, yours." 

Fitzhenry had left out the word love ; 
and Emmeline missed it. She turned 
away her face from her husband, but not 
so quick as to prevent his observing the 
change in her countenance; and, drawing 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 207 

her towards him, he (smiling) added, 
" And my love too." Still Emmeline kept 
her eyes averted. " Listen to my story," 
said Fitzhenry, " and then you will be- 
lieve me. I need not tell you in what a 
pretty humour I was married. Good 
God ! when I recollect the state of mind 
in which I was— that dreadful day — I 
really now wonder how I got through it 
all as well as I did. 

" I resolved on civil indifference to- 
wards you ; and> at the beginning, it 
was easy enough to keep to my resolu- 
tion, although from the first, your con- 
duct astonished, and consequently in- 
terested me. I expected reproaches, 
suUenness, or childish repinings, and 
complaint, but found sweetness, good 
sense, and delicacy. Emmeline ! f 
could swear that you never in your life 



208 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

suffered as I did tliat morning after our 
marriage, when I had to encounter 
you in the breakfast-room. You held 
out your hand to me — there was a smile 
on your face, that went to my heart 
as a dagger. That day however over, 
my thoughts and feelings returned into 
their former channel, and I was so en- 
tirely engrossed by them, that my re- 
morse died away. I persuaded myself I 
behaved vastly well to you, and that you 
thoroughly deserved that fate which you 
had brought on yourself. The civil in- 
difference which I determined to main- 
tain in my conduct towards you, soon, 
however, became difficult to pursue. 
There was sometimes an archness in 
your smiles — in your look and manner — 
an appearance of reading my thoughts, 
and laughing at the awkward situation 



A MARRIAGE IN HIOH LIFE. 209 

in which I had placed myself, that piqued 
me, and made me almost in awe of you. 
I was often, too, I am ashamed to say it, 
provoked with you for your patient good 
humour, for not seeming to feel my 
abominable conduct towards you more. 
But, at others, I found you whom I had 
resolved to disregard — to dislike — to my 
surprise, I found you (forgive the seem- 
ing impertinence of the expression) a 
most intelligent, conversible companion ; 
and more than once I caught myself 
owning how agreeable you were. 

" But, although such thoughts at times 
occupied me, still my affections were 
so strongly engaged — my whole soul so 
enthralled by mad passion, that they were 
but passing thoughts; the impression, as 
yet, was not deep. I then left home for 
some time, and returned to you with all 



210 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

my old feelings strengthened. I had re- 
newed all my vows of constancy, of 
fidelity to another, perfectly regardless 
of the solemn, sacred engagement, into 
which I had entered with you — (profli- 
gate, unprincipled villain that I was !) 
Wishing to avoid, in future, the possi- 
bility of a tete-a-tete with you, I had in- 
vited several friends to meet me at Ar- 
lingford, on my return there. I thought 
that by that means, we might avoid even 
the common intimacy produced by living 
under the same roof, and meeting daily, 
as I flattered myself that you would be 
lost in the mass. But that plan failed. 
I heard your name, your praises, from 
every one, and every where. Your voice 
always attracted my attention, and the. 
very resolution to slight, and dislike you, 
made me constantly occupied about you. 



A MARRTAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 211 

" Among the party then at Arlingford, 
you remember, was JPelham. He had 
come to England, on purpose to see me, 
and to make your acquaintance. Know- 
ing my former history, he had, as a true 
friend, rejoiced at my marriage, for I 
had basely concealed from him the cir- 
cumstances that had attended it, fearing 
his strict integrity; but, when living with 
us, it was impossible for him long to re- 
main ignorant of our real situation. 1 
was forced to confess all to him ; and 
he did not spare me. He persecuted me 
eternally with your perfections. I allowed 
that you possessed sense, acquirements, 
gentleness, most pleasing manners ; but 
I insisted upon your total want of feeling, 
on your having no heart ; and I brought, 
as proofs of my assertions, your apparent 
perfect contentment under circumstances 



212 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

that would have roused the anger, if not 
broken the heart, of any woman who had 
a particle of sensibility. Even on that 
point he would not give way ; and, one 
evening, while the whole party were bu- 
sily employed in dancing, and you were 
engaged at the piano-forte, we were 
discussing the subject pretty warmly, 
(something that had passed having given 
rise to it,) and Pelham was maintaining 
you were even much attached to me; 
when a break in the music, a sudden 
burst of voices, and your name often re- 
peated, made me turn round, and I be- 
held you in apparent gaiety of heart, 
waltzing joyously by yourself — ' Look 
there,' said I to Pelham, (with the true 
selfish pride and impertinence of man,) 
* look at the sentimental girl, who is 
dying for love of me.' 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 213 

** Pelham stared at you in astonish- 
ment. He was silenced ; for, at that 
moment, 1 am sure he read you as little 
aright as myself. As for me, I at first 
looked at you in scorn ; but other feel- 
ings soon succeeded. You were, at that 
minute, perfectly beautiful ; there was a 
look of wild enjoyment, a brilliancy in 
your complexion, a grace in your per- 
son, that fixed my attention, and, in 
spite of myself, forced my admiration. 
I had never seen any one, (any but one,) 
waltz so well : at that moment, I almost 
thought I had never seen any one so 
lovely. The truth was, I seldom be- 
fore had ever looked at you attentively, 
for I feared to encounter your eyes, and 
somehow they always instantly seemed 
to know when mine were directed to- 
wards you. 



214 A MARRIAGE TN HIGH LIFE. 

" For an instant, I was lost in admira- 
tion, as I followed your light form round 
the room ; so I suppose was Pelham, 
for our argument seemed totally forgotten 
by us both. Suddenly you came up to 
me, and seized my arm. Had the mar- 
ble statue left its pedestal, and done the 
same, I could scarcely have started more 
violently beneath its grasp. I was alto- 
gether so thrown off my guard, that I 
hardly knew what to say or do. Your 
conduct surprised, (I must own,) even 
disgusted me ; I thought it was no sub- 
ject for ^joke, and that there was a want 
of delicacy in thus braving me. You 
may remember I was made to waltz 
with you." 

Emmeline's deep crimson showed she 
remembered it well. 

Fitzhenry pressed her hand, which he 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 215 

held still more closely, and continued — 
'' It seemed to me to be all a concerted 
plan to torment me; my momentary trance 
of admiration was dispelled, and was 
succeeded by feelings very opposite. 
You then appeared to me to endeavour, 
by old and hacknied arts of coquetry, to 
attract my attention : you fell almost 
entirely into my arms ; you laid yowx 
head on my shoulder, and complained 
of faintness. I cannot describe the 
strange mixture of feelings which at 

that moment took possession of me for 

though, even then I fancied I disliked 
you, yet, I verily believe regret and dis- 
appointment were uppermost on disco- 
vering (as I thought I then did j the com- 
mon-place, artful nature of your charac- 
ter. To extricate myself from you was, 
however, my first object; and, under 



21G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

pretext of gallant attention, I directly left 
the room to procure a glass of water. 

** In truth, your indisposition was evi- 
dently not feigned, for you were as pale 
as death ; but in my vexation I would 
not own that even to myself. I was in 
in a devil of a humour all that evening. 
The next day Moore made that foolish 
piece of work about the brooch, (which 
circumstance, by the bye, I still don't 
comprehend); however, I know well that 
I wrote you some impert'mence. What, I 
don't recollect, and I suspect I had better 
not remember. It seemed to me that you 
and Moore were in a league to plague and 
provoke me ; and I hated you both most 
cordially. I felt it was impossible to 
go on in this way ; and, to put an end to 
the whole thing, I pretended sudden 
and violent zeal for the welfare of my 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 217 

country, and announced my intention to 
go early to town, to attend parliament. 
But it was not politics which took me 
there ; nor did I, as I believe I basely 
let you imagine, pass my days and nights 
in the House of Commons. 

"But my conscience was perfectly at 
rest, for your conduct then seemed to sanc- 
tion mine. You plunged madly into dissi- 
pation, and for days together, although liv- 
ing under the same roof, we often did not 
meet. 1 believe I again gave a sigh when 
1 thought howl had been mistaken in your 
character, for I had fancied there was, 
at least, nothing of frivolity in it, and had 
frequently been forced to confess to my- 
self, that had I been free, and to choose 
one who would have suited me as a wife, 
(barring your supposed want of feeling 

VOL. II. L 



218 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and tenderness of nature,) I should have 
chosen you. On the whole, however, I 
rejoiced at your apparent levity of dis- 
position. I felt as if I thus regained my 
liberty, and that your follies excused 
my faults. It seemed to me that it was 
by mutual consent that we then each went 
our own way. But mine was no longer 
one of pleasantness. I felt — and yet 
the feeling was pain — I felt I did not 
love as I had done. I saw her as she 
was, wanting all that beauty of inno- 
cence, of virtue, which you so eminently 
possessed ; but, still infatuated, I sought 
her society although the charm was gone. 
"We had not been long in town, how- 
ever, before a strange madness came 
over me. I hardly know how, or when 
it began. You had general success — 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 219 

were universally admired ; but I fancied 
that Pelham in particular admired you; 
and, when once that thought had taken 
possession of my mind, every trifling 
circumstance gave it additional certain- 
ty ; till one night, at Almacks, I sur- 
prised you together in such earnest con- 
versation, and in such evident emotion, 
that I had no longer a doubt left on the 
subject. Although I had voluntarily 
rejected your affections, and repulsed 
you from me, yet 1 could not bear that 
another should awaken feelings which I 
had tried to persuade myself you did not 
possess. I really believe I was vain and 
ridiculous enough to want you to love 
me, when I had no intention of return- 
ing the partiality, and certainly made 
no attempt to inspire it. I had sought 

l2 



220 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Pelliam that evening, having something 
of consequence to say to him ; but when 
1 saw you, I totally forgot my errand. 
I looked at you stedfastly, to try and 
read your heart. You blushed deeply. 
How can I own my folly, my perverse- 
ness, my inconsistency ! I gazed on you 
in jealousy ! for I then saw and acknow- 
ledged your attractions : I saw that 
your smiles, your gaiety, your bloom 
was gone. I saw that some secret sor- 
row had changed the character of your 
countenance, had altered the whole tone 
of your mind, and of your manners. But, 
every way totally deceived, I never once 
dreamt I was the cause of that sorrow. 

"At Easter, I would not go to Arling- 
ford, for if I had, there could have been 
no reason why you, why Pelham, should 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 221 

not have accompanied me, and I did not 
feel that I could have stood the trial. So 
I went to Mostyn Hall ; but, on my ho- 
nour, it was more to avoid you, and Pel- 
ham, than to seek her; for all was there 
changed. Suspicion and discontent now 
poisoned our intercourse; and when I 
called to mind your gentleness, your 
feminine home perfections, she fell still 
lower in the comparison. I was then 
summoned home on account of poor 
Reynolds's illness ; she ridiculed my 
feelings for him ; but, for the first time, 
I disregarded her raillery, I resisted her 
allurements, and set off directly for Ar- 
lingford. You may imagine what was 
the effect produced on my mind, when 
on opening the door of the invalid's room, 
I beheld you kneeling by the bed of my 
old servant. I had no idea you were at 



222 A MARRIAfiE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Arlingford. I had left you apparently 
engrossed by the world and its dissipa- 
tion. Indeed, according to the suspi- 
cions of my jealous fancy, by still more 
powerful attractions, and could hardly 
believe my senses. Oh ! how my heart 
at that minute smote me for my hasty 
and seemingly unjust judgment of 
you. 

" Poor Eeynolds, you may remem- 
ber, joined our hands ; an unaccount- 
able fear, shyness, I know not what, 
came over me. I had not courage to 
retain your hand when you withdrew it 
from mine ; I felt you were a being too 
pure, too good for me ; and I allowed 
you to fly from me. Reynolds talked to 
me much about you — told me long stories 
about your goodness, your affection for 
me — about having found you gazing on 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 223 

my picture, and I know not what ; but I 
fancied his mind began to wander ; that 1 
could not trust to what he said ; in short, 
I would not be convinced, although I 
wished it. But still his exhortations, 
the awfulness of the scene, and my own 
accusing conscience, all combined to 
work on my feelings; and 1 resolved, the 
first moment I could, to leave him to go 
to you, seek an explanation, and im- 
plore your forgiveness. 

" When I reached your door for that 
purpose, my heart beat with various 
contending feelings. I hardly knew what 
I said ; I longed to fall at your feet, to 
ask you to forgive and love me. A word, 
a look of kindness on your part would 
then have fixed our fate— one smile, and 
I should have caught you to my heart— 



224 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

been yours for ever. But I found you 
cold, distant, and for the first time, since 
I had known you, even irritated and re- 
pulsive. There were traces of tears on 
your face, which you endeavoured to 
hide from me ; your whole manner be- 
trayed emotion and feelings, which you 
wished to conceal. I saw then, as I 
thought, but too plainly, how it was — all 
combined to deceive me. Mrs. Oster- 
ley's thoughtless hints came to my mind, 
and confirmed me in my suppositions. I 
fancied that the case was hopeless. My 
pride then closed both my heart, and lips, 
and I would not confess to you feelings 
which I was convinced you could not 
now return. 

" As I was leaving you, by accident 
your hair — one of these beautiful long 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 225 

ringlets — got entangled on the button of 
my coat sleeve. Had you been forced 
to touch a serpent, you could not have 
recoiled from it with more horror than 
you did from me. Do you remember 
all that Lady Fitzhenry ? and pray how 
do you explain your conduct?" said he, 
smiling. 

** In the whole of your supposed love- 
story, for ^Pelham' read ^Ernest,'" an- 
swered Emmeline, in a low voice, as she 
hid her face on his shoulder, " and all 
will be fully explained." 

'* What a pity it was, that we were 
both so proud or so stupid ! " continued 
Fitzhenry, sighing deeply as he gazed 
on her in tenderness: " I was both, 
and left you in anger ; although, I con- 
fess, I had little right to take the matter 

L 5 



22G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

up in that manner. The next day, pro- 
voked with you, with myself, miserable 
every way, I would not attempt to de- 
tain you at Arlingford, though I ardently 
wished it ; I only read impatience to 
return to Pelham in your resolved de- 
parture, and would not for the world 
have allowed you to think I wished you 
to remain. I remember, however, that 
as you drove from the door, you cast 
back one look — one melancholy look, 
which shot as a ray of light through my 
heart ; (for I was watching you from my 
room;) had I been at the door, I be- 
lieve, even then I should have endea- 
voured to stop you ; but, before I had 
time to decide, you drove off. I then 
persuaded myself that the look of regret 
which I had fancied I had seen on your 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 227 

countenance was mere fancy; I took 
your thus leaving me as declared war on 
your part; and, when I joined you in 
town, I determined that my conduct 
should be such as (fool, idiot, that I 
was !) I thought befitting my pride and 
honour — fine sounding words, which I put 
in the place of selfishness and passion. 

" In consequence of this resolution, 
1 totally neglected you ; we ceased al- 
most entirely to speak to each other 
when we did chance to meet, and I re- 
turned in desperation to your rival. 
I endeavoured in her society to forget 
every thing, to banish from my mind you 
Emmeline, my friend, and all the dreams 
of happiness — of domestic happiness 
which now eternally haunted me. But 
in vain ! the fascination of her society 



228 A .MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

was gone— we were both changed ; it 
was impossible to recall feelings which 
truth had destroyed. She could not 
again blind me ; suspicion made her 
exigeatite — her thraldom became insup- 
portable ; my feelings, my temper, both 
were irritated beyond my control; my 
mind was sick, as my body now is." 

For a minute or two, Fitzhenry hid 
his face in his hands, and seemed lost 
in no pleasing recollections ; at length, 
after a deep-drawn sigh, (whether of 
regret or repentance Emmeline could 
not decide,) he continued: 

** I now come to the last and the 
worst part of my story. I would fain 
forget it all ; but Emmeline, you shall 
know the very worst; shall be aware 
what a hot-headed fool you have to deal 



A MARRIAGE IN HlCxH LIFE. 229 

with, and then you must still love me if 
you can. I think I need hardly ask, if 
you remember a certain Saturday night 
at the opera. By accident, I happened 
to know, that you had, that night, given 
away your box ; and, therefore, feeling 
secure you would not be there, had 
agreed to accompany Lady Florence; for, 
abominably as I had behaved, you must 
do me the justice to allow, I never so 
far insulted you as openly before you to 
be seen with your rival ; how much 
certain selfish feelings and awkward 
uncomfortable sensations of shame in- 
fluenced me, I will not pretend to say. 
Well, I joined Lady Florence. After 
I had been with her a few minutes, she 
carelessly told me, she believed she had 
seen you. I directly looked round to 



230 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the box which she said she had observed 
you enter ; but, not being able to distin- 
guish you, I was satisfied that she must 
have been mistaken. Presuming on her 
former power, she then spoke of you. 
I could not bear to hear your name in 
her mouth ; I felt it almost an insult to 
myself. She spoke too of you with a 
sort of ridicule and levity that disgusted 
me; she hinted at the attachment be- 
tween you and Pelham, and seemed to 
enjoy the pain she saw she was in- 
flicting. Although a smile was on her 
lips, yet her eyes flashed fire — the fire 
of jealousy and revenge. This, in the 
present state of my feelings, was not 
to be endured. I dared not speak ; I 
knew too well also the violence of her 
temper ; it was not the moment for a 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 231 

scene, and I said not a word ; but still, 
there I remained, as if spell-bound. 
My mind was, however, busily at work, 
and I formed many resolutions for ex- 
tricating myself, from my present miser- 
able situation. You then rose to my ima- 
gination, gay, blooming, gentle, artless, 
as you were when I first took you to 
Arlingford ; when I had sworn to love and 
protect you ; and had then basely re- 
pulsed, and abandoned to your hard fate. 
My conscience smote me sorely. I felt 
how greatly I had injured you ; that, young 
and inexperienced as you were, I had, 
by my cruelty and neglect, driven you 
into danger. T thought, perhaps, you 
still had not wandered so far, but that 
your aifections might yet be recalled. 
On my honour, Emmeline, infatuated 



232 A xMARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

as I was, I had then no doubt of your 
innocence, your purity, your virtue. 
Nor could I even bring myself to suspect 
Pelham's honour. That you loved each 
other, I did not doubt ; but I respected 
you both too much to think I had been 
injured by you. I resolved, in short, 
that, on that very night, we should open 
our hearts to each other; that all should 
be explained between us. I determined 
to propose to you, Emmeline, to leave 
town with me — to leave England direct- 
ly, and by mutual forgiveness, to make 
up for the past, and begin a new life of 
penitence — I hoped finally of happiness. 
Lost in these thoughts, I sat unconscious 
of what was passing around me, till the 
falling of the curtain roused me from my 
trance. Lady Florence then seized my 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 233 

arm. She saw she had displeased me ; 
feared she had gone too far, and would 
not quit her hold. When we reached 
the lobby, I saw you and Pelham. 1 
hurried her down stairs in the opposite 
direction ; but she had seen you too, 
and I could distinguish a smile of tri- 
umph on her countenance. 

" What happened afterwards you know. 
The two carriages had got entangled, 
for your coachman, Emmeline, was fight- 
ing your battle for you, and contending 
with Lady Florence Mostyn's. In the 
confusion I caught a glimpse of you, at 
the moment when she had fallen back 
into my arms. I heard the coarse jokes 
of the mob of footmen as your carriage 
drove off. I was nearly frantic. Flo- 
rence had been slightly hurt, was still 



234 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

frightened, and nervous. I could not 
be so brutal as to leave her in that state. 
1 went home with her. I meant calmly, 
kindly, to speak to her; to represent the 
misery of our intercourse — in short, to 
open my heart to her. But the in- 
stant she suspected my meaning — over- 
powered by her passions, her fury knew 
no bounds, nor her envenomed malice 
and jealousy towards you. My blood 
fired — a violent scene ensued. I left her 

in anger and fully resolved for ever." 

Fitzhenry had latterly spoken so quick, 
that he paused for a minute, as if ex- 
hausted and overcome by his feelings ; 
but Emmeline was too much interested 
and agitated by the narration to make 
any comment; and, after a moment's 
total silence between them, he con- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH HFC. 235 

tinued, although in a still more per- 
turbed manner. 

" I hurried home — I was in that fever- 
ish state of mind, when to think, to pause, 
is impossible. I felt I must instantly 
throw myself at your feet, that our fate 
must be that minute determined. I meant 
to propose to you to set oif for Dover 
that very night. I had ceased to love 
her; but my mind was torn with con- 
tending feelings, my brain was on fire. 
As soon as I reached home, I rushed up 
stairs — I heard Pelham's voice in the 
drawing-room — the door was not closed, 
my ear caught these words, * Honour — 
you may trust me' — (and you will allow 
those are awkward words for a husband 
to overhear addressed to his wifb.) I was 
determined to be satisfied at once — to 



236 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

have all doubts removed. I burst into 
the room ; and my worst suspicions were 
confirmed. Pelham had hold of your 
hand; you were close to him ; your head 
rested on him — you were violently agi- 
tated — both started on seeing me — you 
were both evidently discomposed, and 
thrown off your guard. Was it strange 
that I converted all this into evidences 
of guilt? I had just enough command 
over myself not to speak. You attempted 
some excuse for the situation in which 1 
found you. Your effrontery surprised and 
shocked me. At that minute, I totally 
forgot your wrongs and my own conduct, 
and I only considered myself as basely 
betrayed and injured. Pelham then fol- 
lowed you to the door of your own room ; 
he said something to you in a low voice — 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 237 

again he took your hand. All that before 
my face was too much. I wonder how I 
contained the rage that burned within 
me. I felt that I could not then discuss 
the matter with him, and 1 left the house 
like a madman. I paced up and down 
the street, and watched for Pelham's de- 
parture before I returned home ; giving 
way to all the delirium of passion, and 
distracted by all the misery of doubt. 
My first impulse was to write to him, 
imperiously to demand an explanation of 
his conduct, and satisfaction for my in- 
jured honour. Heavens! to think that 
1 sought an opportunity to deprive of 
life Pelham, my best, my tried, my 
devoted friend ! I passed the night 
writing letter after letter to you both, 
and destroying them as fast as I wrote. 



238 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

By degrees, however, my passion cooled ; 
I sometimes thought, and fondly hoped, 
1 might be mistaken. When I recalled 
to mind my friend's strict principles of 
virtue and integrity — principles that had 
so often made me blush for my faults — 
I could not think that what I suspected 
was possible, strong as appearances were 
against you both. Your virtues too, Em- 
meline, your look of artless innocence, 
haunted me. How could I reconcile 
your present supposed conduct with all 
those perfections which I had so admired 
in you? 

" Hours passed on, daylight returned. 
The servants began to stir about the 
house. I heard footsteps in the room 
above — in your room, Lady Fitzhenry. 
Every minute 1 expected some message 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 239 

from you, some note, some explanation 
in short ; and kept my letter to Pelham 
unsealed, still hoping I might have been 
in error, and that something would un- 
deceive me. I soon, however, heard 
)3reparations for your departure ; your 
leaving my house thus, without even 
taking leave of me, I interpreted into a 
decided resolution on your part that a 
final, formal separation should take place 
between us. You had said you were 
going to Charlton. I sometimes hardly 
believed that you were really going there, 
and, in frantic moments, I suspected the 
worst. But at others, when my own 
conduct forced itself on my mind, when 
I reflected on your wrongs, I then thought 
that, exasperated probably by my ill 
treatment, you were leaving my roof for 



240 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ever, determined, perhaps, that the law 
should dissolve an union which had 
been but a source of misery to you, in 
order that you might legally unite your- 
self to the man you loved. Again, had 
not pride restrained me, I would have 
sought that explanation which I longed 
for, and then all would soon have been 
understood between us ; had our eyes but 
met, we must, at that moment, have read 
each other's hearts ; but in proud, sullen 
silence,! awaited some opening from you. 
" None came; at length your carriage 
drove up to the door; I heard your foot- 
steps on the stairs ; you stopped at my 
door; my heart beat to sufibcation; I 
thought, nay, I felt almost sure that you 
were coming to me; my hand was ac- 
tually on the lock to open it ; just then I 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 241 

heard one of the servants speaking to you, 

you passed on— I heard the carriage-door 
shut, and you drove off. I felt that we had 
parted forever; and, when too late, I re- 
gretted the blessing I had thrown away. 

"My Emmeline, I am not 7iow cishamed 
to own to you, that I wept in bitterness 
of heart. 

** The instant you were gone, in des- 
peration I sealed and directed my abo- 
minable letter to Pelham. I ordered 
post-horses directly, desiring that the 
carriage should follow me to his lodg- 
ings. On arriving there, I learnt he 
was gone out of town. This confirmed 
all to me ; I tore open my letter, said 
we could never again meet but in o?ie 
way, and for one purpose. That I was 
going instantly to Arlingford, that he 

VOL. II. M 



242 A .MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

might there follow me, and give me the 
satisfaction I demanded, unless indeed 
he was already far off with another. 

*' How perverse is human nature! 
Man's nature at least. On my arrival 
at Arlingford, I missed you whom I had 
always before shunned, at every turn. 
I missed the gentle being who had so 
long, so patiently submitted to my most 
impertinent vagaries. I missed my poor 
victim ! Every room, every inanimate 
object recalled her who would have 
given to all such a charm! I spent hours 
in your room, Emmeline, in useless, tor- 
menting regrets. In that room which I 
had hitherto avoided with such care ! 
Alternately condemning myself and you, 
1 felt that I had lost every thing — I was 
completely miserable ! " 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 243 

Greatly exhausted by this narration, 
during which Fitzhenry had often been 
interrupted by his cough, he leant back 
on the couch. The door, at that mo- 
ment gently opened, and Pelham ap-. 
peared. On observing the very visible 
signs of emotion on both his friends 
countenances, he was again hastily re- 
treating, when Fitzhenry called to him — 
" No, come in, Pelham ; what we were 
talking about need be no secret from 
you, for indeed you are principally con-, 
cerned. I was telling Emmeline all my 
history. In other words, confessing all 
my faults ; and as you are, God knows, 
well acquainted with both, I wish you 
would relieve me, by bringing the nar- 
rative to a conclusion ; I have owned to 
her all my strange fears and fancies, my 

M 2 



244 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

suspicions even of you. Can you, Pel- 
ham, ever forgive and forget them ? can 
you forgive the ravings of a madman, 
for such they now appear to me to have 
been." 

*' Don't be too humble in your apolo- 
gies to me," said Pelham^ smiling — ** for 
I am not sure how far I am myself in- 
nocent, if it is guilt to esteem, to ad- 
mire, to " Pelham stopped, for a 

minute. " In short," added he — " I had 
more than half a mind to punish you, 
Fitzhenry, for your extreme stupidity ; 
and endeavour myself to win the pearl 
of great price which you rejected ; but, 
from the first, I had, luckily for me, pe- 
netration sufficient to discover that the 
attempt would be perfectly hopeless." 

Pelham said this in the light tone 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 245 

of pleasantry; but, as he spoke, his eyes 
glanced mournfully on Emmeline, and a 
slight tinge of red momentarily suffused 
his sallow cheek. But his emotion to- 
tally escaped Emmeline's observation, 
whose eyes and attention were entirely 
fixed on her husband, fearful of losing a 
word, or look. 

Fitzhenry, however, saw all ; his eye 
moistened as he held out his hand to his 
friend, and warmly pressed his within 
it. " Well Pelham, now you must take 
up our history from my sudden depar- 
ture for Arlingford, where you found me ; 
and do not spare me ; I deserve thoroughly 
the worst you may be tempted to say of 
me. 

** Don't be afraid, my good friend," re- 
plied Pelham ; " I am, you know, not 



246 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

apt to compliment you. — Well, Lady Fitz- 
lienry, to go back to that fatal Saturday 
night : Fitzhenry had appeared in so 
strange a mood when we then parted, so 
agitated, so unlike himself, that I had 
determined to be in Grosvenor- street 
early next morning ; but the arrival of a 
courier from the continentwith dispatches 
of importance, obliged me directly to re- 
pair to our foreign minister's : he was, 
I found, gone to his villa at Putney ; 
thither I followed him, and was there 
detained so long on business, which could 
not be deferred, that I did not get back 
to town till late in the afternoon. I 
drove straight to Grosvenor-street, and 
learnt, to my surprise, that both of you 
had left London — but not together. I 
feared something disagreeable had pass- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 247 

ed, and when I reached my own house, 
I found Fitzhenry's letter, which con- 
firmed my apprehensions. I declare, that 
at first I thought he was mad — and could 
scarcely guess what he meant, what he 
could allude to. Although obliged in 
four and twenty hours to leave England, 
yet I could not go without seeing him, 
without endeavouring at least to clear 
up all this sad misunderstanding ; and 
I lost no time in repairing to Arlingford. 
It is fortunate that I am by nature blest 
with a very calm temperament, other- 
wise this meeting might possibly have 
ended in our running each other through 
the body. But Fitzhenry and I had 
been too long real friends for any un- 
founded misunderstanding long to exist 
between us. 



248 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" I at length succeeded in convincing 
him how perfectly absurd and unjust 
his suspicions were, as far as I was my- 
self concerned. But there, my powers 
of persuasion ended : he would listen to 
nothing I could say about you, Lady 
Fitzhenry : you hated him, he said ; if it 
was not me whom you preferred, it was 
some one else. You were quite changed 
towards him — he could hardly blame you, 
but things had now gone too far to allow 
of any hope of reconciliation. You had 
left his house in anger, just anger — 
gone to your father's ; had probably told 
him all, intending no doubt to insist 
on a formal separation — on a divorce. 
Perhaps legal proceedings were already 
commenced against him. And what- 
ever he might suffer, he could, and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 249 

would, only acquiesce in whatever you 
chose to dictate. 

" Fitzhenry then repeated to me again 
and again, all his proofs of your indiffer- 
ence and dislike, — all which were only 
proofs of his own blind infatuation. In 
short, poor fellow," added Mr. Pelham, 
smiling-—*' he talked a great deal of 
nonsense. However, at last, by setting 
up my proofs in opposition to his, I suc- 
ceeded in extorting from him an agree- 
ment, that he would go with me directly 
to Charlton. I was first to see you 
alone, and he promised that he would 
then be guided by my judgment as to 
his own conduct. The carriage which 
was to convey us t-o you was actually 
at the door, but, unfortunately, Fitz- 
henry, who was in a state of diseased 

JM 5 



250 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

anxiety, and restlessness of mind, in- 
sisted on waiting for the arrival of the 
post; it brought no letter from you, 
(which was what he had secretly hoped 
for,) but one from his father, that imme- 
diately destroyed all Iliad been labouring 
to accomplish. Gossip had been busy 
with you and your husband ; indeed had 
even brought in my name. The scene 
which took place at the opera, your 
both abruptly leaving town — these cir- 
cumstances, put together, and enlarged 
upon, had been formed into a regular 
story of rupture, elopement, duel, and 
the Lord knows what, till at last it found 
its way into the newspapers, I was told ; 
and thus reached Lord Arlingford, who, 
much alarmed at the report, wrote di- 
rectly to his son, entreating him to con- 



A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 251 

sider well what he was about ; to break 
off immediately a connexion which was 
now become so public, and consequently 
so disgraceful, and endeavour to be re- 
conciled to his wife. 

"So far all was well ; but unfortunately 
the arguments he used were the last to 
influence your husband's noble mind, 
for they were those of interest. Know- 
ing Lord Arlingford as well as he did, 
at any other time Fitzhenry would have 
treated such a hint with the contempt it 
deserved ; but he was then no way him- 
self — he tore his father's letter into a 
thousand pieces, and, with a bitter 
smile, while his face was ghastly pale 
said, ' he is right, quite right; it is my 
interest to be reconciled to Lady Fitz- 
henry — no power on earth shall make 



252 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

me seek her forgiveness — the first over- 
tures must come from herself. Even 
you surely would not have me go as a 
beggar, and sue and humble myself to 
her father : what an honourable appear- 
ance would repentance have just now! 
No, Pelham, 1 will not do it ; and any 
attempt to persuade me to such a step, 
I warn you, will be perfectly vain.' 

** During our friend's own story," 
continued Pelham, '* I think, Lady 
Fitzhenry, he has probably let you a 
little into the secret of his character; 
and, therefore, I may venture to say, 
that pride is his besetting sin. Had 1 
but hinted this at that time, I suppose 
he would have knocked me down; but 
we have him in our power now; and 
who would believe, seeing him, as he 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 253 

now is, so meek, so humble, so con- 
trite, and subdued, what a perfect devil 
he was then !" 

" Come, come, Pelham," said Fitz- 
henry, while his pale face was slightly 
coloured : " you are a little exceeding 
the liberty I gave — tell the story fairly, 
but no comments. Let Lady Fitzhenry 
find out my faults herself; she will do 
that quite soon enough without your 
assistance; indeed, God knows she has 
had full opportunity already " 

" Lady Fitzhenry has but one fault 
to find," interrupted Emmeline, as she 
looked half reproachfully in her hus- 
band's face : *' it is that you persist in 
calling her by that cruel formal name." 

*' Bad old habits, my Emmeline," he 
replied smiling; " which, if they offend 



254 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

you> shall be conquered ; but I could ex- 
plain why I never now pronounce that 
name without feelings very, very differ- 
ent from those of coldness or dislike; 
do I not by it claim you as my own? 
But I want to have done with my his- 
tory. So go on, Pelham, only remember 
no annotations and reflections." 

'' I was ignorant of what had passed 
between Fitzhenry and Lady Florence," 
continued Pelham, almost tempted to 
smile at his friend's sickly petulance : 
" he had never named her. Had I known 
of their rupture, I should immediately 
have entreated you. Lady Fitzhenry, to 
have come, or at least to have written to 
him ; but not aware of that connexion 
being at an end, I could not advise a 
step, which I felt you could hardly take. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 255 

and which I thouglit, indeed, would do 
little good if all was to go on as it had 
done for some months past. Fitzhenry 
was seemingly wretched ; but so he had 
long been. J had undeceived him as far 
as was possible for me to do with regard 
to your feelings towards him, and I cer- 
tainly felt it was for him to seek you, 
and to implore your forgiveness. 

** Hopeless, therefore, of bringing 
about a reconciliation between you at 
that moment, I informed him of my ne- 
cessary and immediate departure for the 
continent, and proposed his accompany- 
ing me ; T thought, by that means, the 
fatal connexion which seemed the bar to 
your mutual happiness might be broken; 
and, knowing well your heart, and cer- 
tain that affection would, with you, get 



256 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the better of every other feeling, I 
trusted that time and circumstances 
would restore you to each other. Fitz- 
henry directly with eagerness caught at 
the idea of leaving England : ' it is the 
best thing for us all/ said he : ' and it 
will break to Florence what at present 
I cannot say — cannot write to her.' 

*' On our way to town, however, be- 
ing still unwilling to give up all hope, 
and still thinking it was incumbent on 
Fitzhenry to make the first advances to 
you, I formed a little plan to decoy your 
husband to Charlton on our road to 
Dover, and I pleased myself with think- 
ing that I might, by this very allowable 
artifice, be the means of bringing about 
your mutual happiness ; but something 
betrayed my scheme ; and, as soon as he 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 257 

suspected my intention, he was thrown 
into a state of violence and irritation of 
temper, in which I had never before 
seen him, and which really alarmed me. 
It was Mr. Benson's presence which he 
dreaded, I believe: he could have laid 
his pride, (that stumbling-block of his,) 
at your feet Lady Fitzhenry, but he 
could not humble himself before others." 

" Indeed, Emmeline," said Fitzhenry, 
interrupting him, *' again Pelham barely 
does me justice.; it was not pride that 
made me dread encountering you. On 
the contrary, it was shame, fear, hu- 
mility, and all those perfectly contrary 
feelings." 

" Poh! poll! don't let him take you in 
with all that pretty sounding humbug," 
continued Pelham, laughing. " How- 



258 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ever, the real truth was, that he was as 
unlike his real self then, as, I am sorry 
to say, he is in many respects now. As 
we proceeded, I became more and more 
convinced that he was far from well. 
During the journey, I made little pro- 
gress with my headstrong companion in 
my attempts to bring him to reason, and 
at last his answers became so strange and 
incoherent, that I was really alarmed ; 
and, on our arrival here, I immediately 
sent for a physician. He found him, as I 
had suspected, in a high fever ; and I am 
convinced his illness (brought on pro- 
bably by agitation) had attacked his 
brain even before it showed itself visibly 
in his health ; as at Arlingford, he^cer- 
tainly was in a state of irritation per- 
fectly unnatural to him. Fortunately, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 259 

the letters I here found enabled me to 
delay my further journey for a short 
time, in order to devote myself to him. 

" You now know all," continued Pel- 
ham ; '* and whatever my future lot in 
life may be, it will be one gratifying re- 
collection that I was the means of 
uniting two beings so formed for each 
other, and whom I love so entirely." 

Mr. Pelham seized Emmeline's hand 
as he uttered these words, and pressed 
it to his lips. '* Reward my friend for 
his services to me and to yourself, Em- 
meline," said Fitzhenry, *' by letting him 
kiss that varying cheek of yours. Can 
I give a stronger proof that my delirious 
fever has quite left me ?" 

Pelham waited not for further leave; 
he pressed her to his heart, and, as he 



260 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

printed a fond kiss on her forehead, 
** God bless you, Emmeline, — God bless 
and protect you both !" he cried, with 
emotion ; " and in your future hours of 
happiness remember me." Then resum- 
ing a more cheerful tone, he added : 
*' And now, my dear friends, that my 
mind is at ease about you both, (for I do 
not now apprehend a relapse of ani/ sort,) 
and that I can leave you, Fitzhenry, in 
the care of so good a nurse, I must repair 
to my post, and set off to-morrow morn- 
ing for Vienna, in case any longer delay 
should bring me to disgrace — as politics 
have little respect for the feelings of 
friendship." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 2G1 



CHArXER VII. 

" In vain may art the couch of sickness tend^ 
Or friendship sigh, or sympathy implore, 
Or love, all sanguine, o'er the sufferer bend : 
The mortal sinks, — and every hope is o'er ! 
These brooding thoughts in useless pangs expire; 
More soothing sounds let struggling nature hear. 
Catch from religion's shrine an holier fire, 
And wake to duty, from her trance severe." 

After Mr. Pelham's departure, Fitz- 
henry became very impatient to return 
to England. He was better certainly, and 
had regained some degree of strength ; 
for now, leaning on Emmeline's arm, he 



2G2 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

was able to walk about his apartment ; 
but still he did not seem to recover as 
rapidly as he should. A degree of vary- 
ing fever still hung about him ; his cough, 
which the French physician still called 
nervous, at times exhausted him much, 
and he had a look of languor quite un- 
natural to him ; his cheek remained hol- 
low, his eyes looked sunk. 

Paris, meanwhile, grew insufferably 
hot ; his anxiety to leave it, and his 
desire for home became so strong — par- 
takino' of the feverish lono^ing- of illness — 
that in the hope that the short sea voyage 
might prove rather beneficial to him than 
the contrary, it was at last decided that 
they should set out for Arlingford. They 
went down the Seine by water, and then 
hired a vessel to take them to Pool, which 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 263 

was within only twelve miles of their own 
home. The voyage seemed to do Fitz- 
henry good, the sea air to refresh him ; 
and, on his near approach to Arlingford, 
his spirits and animation seemed to re- 
turn ; and Emmeline gazed with delight 
on the colour in his cheeks, and the 
sparkling gladness of his eyes ; and oh ! 
how eloquent was their language to her 
doating heart! what volumes did they 
tell in one single glance ! 

Perhaps many would not understand 
the emotion which made both their 
hearts beat even to pain, when they 
entered the well-known scenes of Arlin»- 
ford ; — but, again I repeat it, I address 
myself only to those who have known the 
deep feeling of tried affection, the wild 
enchantment of love. Emmeline fancied 



264 A .-SlARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

she saw sympathetic joy in every counte- 
nance, and as she returned the congratu- 
latory salutations of the country people, 
(who, smiling, took off their hats as the 
carriage passed,) she could scarcely re- 
strain her tears. At how many a turn in 
the road, or well-remembered path or ride, 
recalling moments and feelings of past 
unhappiness, did they almost involun- 
tarily look at each other ; and how often 
did Fitzhenry clasp Emmeline's hand in 
his, and entreat her again and again to 
forgive him ! 

Thus buoyant with joy and gratitude, 
they at last drove up to the door of their 
own home. Fitzhenry's spirits had been 
so much beyond his bodily strength, that 
they had quite exhausted him ; so that 
when he left the carriage, it was with 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 265 

difficulty he reached the drawing-room. 
As the servants all eagerly pressed for- 
ward to give him their assistance, " Poor 
Reynolds !" he exclaimed, tears starting 
into his eyes, " I wish I had his arm to 
lean on now, for how happy he would 
have been !" 

When he was assisted to the couch in 
the drawing-room, he looked round the 
apartment for several minutes in silence, 
and when the door had closed on the 
attendants, he held out his arms to Em- 
meline. They could neither speak — but 
they did not need words to express their 
feelings ; both knew what was passing in 
the mind of the other, and Emmeline se- 
cretly thanked the giver of all good for 
her present happiness. 

VOL. IT N 



266 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH L[FE. 

We poor mortals do well to catch at 
each passing moment of joy, and feed 
on them while ours; for alas ! how soon 
do they fade away ! and how wretched 
the condition of those who, weak in faith, 
see not the bounty of God in every bless- 
ing, and cannot " lift the adoring eye 
e'en to the storm that wrecks them," 
relying on the wisdom and mercy of his 
unsearchable providence. 

Fitzhenry had a restless night of cough 
and fever ; and although Emmeline at- 
tributed both to the fatigue and agitation 
of the preceding day, yet she sent off 
an express for an eminent physician re- 
siding at Winchester ; and on his arrival, 
with a beating heart, led him into her 
husband's apartment. Doctor Harring- 



A MARRIAGE IN HlfiH LIFE. 267 

ton, who had formerly often seen Fitz- 
henry, appeared much struck with the 
alteration in his appearance : he ques- 
tioned him minutely as to his cough, 
and other symptoms of his complaint; 
then, drawing out his watch, he re- 
peatedly counted his pulse. Emme- 
line, who in breathless anxiety watched 
every look and word, could not help 
taking fright at his manner; and her 
alarm was increased, when, on pretence 
of writing a prescription, he followed her 
into the adjoining room, and addressed 
her with — " Pray, Lady Fitzhenry, do I 
remember right, was not the late Lady 
Arlingford consumptive ?" 

Poor Emmeline's blood froze in her 
veins, and her pale lips betrayed the 
terror his question had conveyed. 

N 2 



268 A MARRIAGE IN HIOH LIFE. 

*' I beg you will not be alarmed," 
he added, in a sententious tone, observ- 
ing her emotion ; *' Lord Fitzhenry is 
young; has always, I believe, lived most 
temperately. At present, I apprehend no 
immediate danger ; but we must be care- 
ful. These hereditary complaints are 
sometimes obstinate, and difficult to deal 
with." 

And thus he went on for some time 
with the sang froid which some of his 
profession, perhaps naturally, acquired- 
fancying he could in that manner reas- 
sure his trembling auditor. But she 
scarcely heard him. The sudden tran- 
sition from joy and the overflowings of 
her grateful heart, to the dreadful appre- 
hensions which now took possession of 
her mind, was too violent to be endured. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 269 

Almost unconscious what she did, she 
received from Doctor Harrington's hand 
his written prescription ; and, with an 
altered countenance, returned to her 
husband. The flushed crimson of his 
cheek, the bright, feverish sparkling of 
his eyes, now made her shudder ; and 
she hid her face at the back of the arm- 
chair in which he was sitting, fearing 
she might betray herself. 

" Well, Emmeline," said he at last, 
" what news from Doctor Harrington t 
he looked prodigiously pompous about 
me ; but I hope he will give me some- 
thing to stop my cough, and make me 
sleep : in fact, that is all I now require 
to be well. But it is wearisome. Last 
night I never closed my eyes : however, 
I believe that was the effect of happi- 



270 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ness, at being once more at Arlingford, 
and with you. What does the sapient 
doctor recommend? Let me look at 
what he has written. This is all Greek 
and Hebrew to me," said he, in a light 
tone, as he returned the paper to Em- 
meline; " indeed, I hope, for my learn- 
ing's credit, even more unintelligible — 
but, Emmeline, are you not well ? how 
pale you look ! I think you require a 
little doctoring as well as myself. You 
have worn yourself out by nursing me ; I 
will not let you do so any more. Last 
night you did not leave my room for 
hours, I know, for I watched you, and 
at last was forced to feign sleep, in or- 
der that you might go and get some 
yourself. But this shall not be any 
longer. I really do not now want my 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 271 

servant, or, indeed, any attendance. 
We will have that little couch-bed moved 
into my room for you ; and no soporific 
which the doctor can recommend, will 
make me sleep half so well, as know- 
ing you have that rest which I am 
sure you need even more than my- 
self." 

Emmeline hid her face on the cushion 
on which his head was lying — she could 
not speak. 

" What, Emmeline !" he continued, 
" will you not agree to my proposal i 
Have I said any thing to displease you ? 
Foolish girl!" and he drew away her 
hands, that were hiding her face. 

On beholding it, he looked at her a 
moment in silence. His countenance 
changed. He took her hand in his. 



272 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

raised his eyes to heaven, but said no- 
thing. 

The apprehensions which Dr. Har- 
rington's report, guarded as it was, had 
raised in Emmeline's mind, made her 
anxious for further advice ; and yet she 
feared to alarm Fitzhenry by proposing 
it : but at her first word, he understood 
her, and calmly said — '* Do whatever you 
like, whatcer will ease j/owr mind." And 
she wrote immediately to Doctor Baillie. 

During the days that passed till his 
arrival, she made an effort to throw back 
from her heart the miserable anxiety 
that was oppressing it, and to pursue her 
usual occupations. Many a burning tear 
stole down her cheek in silence and 
solitude ; but she always met her hus- 
band with a smile : and if he ever saw 



A MARRIAGE IN FlIGH LIFE. 273 

traces of her feelings on her countenance, 
he forbore noticing^ them. 

With sensations of apprehension not to 
be described, Emmeline, at last, on the 
day he had appointed, saw Baillie drive up 
to the door. She felt that her fate hung 
on his opinion. Dr. Harrington had come 
to meet him ; and after a short private 
conversation between the two medical 
men, they proceeded, with Emmeline, 
into their patient's room. Fitzhenry 
welcomed them with cheerfulness ; talked 
for some time of the news of the day, 
and on indifferent subjects, to Baillie ; 
and then turning to Emmeline, who had 
been unequal to the exertion of a single 
word during their conversation,— 

"Lady Fitzhenry," said he, ''you 

must leave me to say my catechism to 

N 5 



274 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Dr. Baillie alone. I want too to make 
serious complaints of you," added he, 
gaily ; *' of your obstinacy and disobe- 
dience ; of the way in which you sit up 
all night, destroying your health and 
bloom." 

Baillie made some attempt at a com- 
pliment ; but his kind heart felt for the 
anguish he saw painted on her counte- 
nance ; and, unable to answer him, Em- 
meline in silence left the room. 

Those who have felt their very exist- 
ence depend on one word, may imagine 
how she passed the cruel, anxious, long 
half-hour that nov/ elapsed. At length, 
the door of her room slowly opened, and 
Fitzhenry himself, leaning on his stick, 
came in alone. His face was flushed ; 
and though he forced a smile, on enter- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 275 

ing, Emmeliue plainly read in it an ex- 
pression that was like a death-knell to her 
heart and hopes. She flew up to him, 
and helped him to a couch. After a mo- 
ment's pause, drawing her towards him — 
*' Emmeline," said he; "dearest! we 
have suffered too much, and too long, 
from concealing our feelings from each 
other, for me to have courage to un- 
dertake to keep another secret from 
you, although it is one which I know 
will pain you." Emmeline's pallid face 
showed she was but too well prepared for 
what he was going to say. " I have for 
some time suspected my real situation," 
added he ; " but I was determined to learn 
the truth; -and I knew Baillie's sensible 
upright honesty would not, at my seri- 
ous request, conceal it from me. I re- 



276 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

quired of him to give me his candid opi- 
nion as to my health." 

Fitzhenry paused ; Emmeline clung 
to him, as if to stifle what more he had 
to say ; but he continued, though in a 
faltering voice. 

'* I had hoped it might have been 
otherwise ; I had hoped, for your sake, 
that we might have been allowed to live 
for some little time at least, happily toge- 
ther ; but that God whom you have 
taught me to worship and submit to, no 
doubt judges wisely ; and, we must, I 
fear, look to our approaching, final se- 
paration." 

At these words, poor Emmeline could 
no longer command herself; an agonized 
scream escaped from her bursting heart, 
as she sank on the floor before him. 



A MARRIAGE IN HlftH LIFE. 277 

"My Emmeline! my dear Emme- 
line ! " he cried, endeavouring to raise 
her in his feeble arms — " Spare me — I 
entreat you — I cannot bear to see you 
suffer thus — have pity on me." 

" I will, I will," she almost con- 
vulsively exclaimed, ** but this is too — 
too much for me." 

" You mistake me, Emmeline," said 
he, endeavouring to calm the agony he had 
caused. " There may be hope yet ; Baillie 
is you know famous for seeing every thing 
en noir — he was very plain-spoken with 
me, for I forced him to be so ; but recol- 
lect, Emmeline," added he, endeavour- 
-' inof to cheer his voice, " even Baillie 
may be mistaken, and while there is life 
there is hope : before winter, we are to 
go to a warmer climate ; you will pray to 



278 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

heaven for me, and your prayers, dearest, 
will perhaps be heard. They have al- 
ready once restored us to each other ; 
they may do so again. I should not 
have said all this to you, 1 believe, but 
it is so necessary to me now to conceal 
nothing from you, that I could not have 
borne the load alone ; but, for God's 
sake, dear Emmeline, compose yourself, 
and for my sake, bear up." 

And for his sake, she did exert herself; 
for of what is the female character not 
capable, when nerved by strong affec- 
tion ? All was settled for their leaving 
England the beginning of October, when 
they were to repair to Lisbon ; till then, it 
was thought that the climate of Hampshire 
would be better for Fitzhenry than that 
of Portugal. The season was unusually 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 270 

fine ; and, sometimes, when well enough 
to wander a little way from the house, 
the balmy air, and cheering sounds and 
sights of a fine autumn, seemed to re- 
vive him ; and, if ever he prolonged his 
walk one yard further than he had done 
on the preceding day — if he had ever 
appeared rather more cheerful — his voice 
stronger — Emmeline, to whose young 
heart happiness was so necessary, then 
again, for the moment, gave way to de- 
lightful anticipations. Had she ventured 
to look back, and trace from week to 
week the rapid progress of the fatal dis- 
ease, that was fast hurrying its victim to 
the grave, she could not have indulged 
even such momentary gleams of hope, 
but then also, she could not have per- 



280 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

formed her hard task with the courage 
she did. 

Fitzhenry was generally calm, and even 
cheerful ; and he sometimes talked of 
what they would do on their return to 
Arlingford; and projected alterations 
and improvements in the place ; but all 
such plans for the future, usually ended 
in a sigh, and were listened to in mourn- 
ful silence by his wretched wife ; and al- 
though he thus forced himself to appear 
interested in worldly affairs, yet, by the 
turn his conversation now commonly 
took, it was plain to perceive that the 
whole tone of his mind was completely 
changed; and when Emmeline proposed 
reading to him, he always selected such 
books as led to reflection, to God, and 
to a future world. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 281 

Their wedding-day, the 19th of Au- 
gust, was the last on which he left the 
house ; his exertions to appear cheerful 
on that day, had been so much beyond 
his strength, that they had exhausted 
him. The next, he could not leave his 
room. A fortnight more, and he could 
scarcely raise himself from his couch. 
The end of September came, and the 
preparations for their departure for Lis- 
bon continued to be made, no one having 
the heart to countermand them, although 
it was very evident to all, that he would 
never quit his present home, but for that, 
where he would be for ever at rest. As 
his bodily strength failed, his mind 
seemed to gain fresh vigour, and to soar 
above the cares and sufferings of this 
transitory life. Resignation was an easier 



282 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

task to him, than to the wretched being 
who, strong in youth and health, was 
doomed to remain in that world from 
which slie saw her every joy fast depart- 
ing. But she never complained ; she never 
wept; at least, her tears were ever con- 
cealed from him for whom they flowed. 
With a steady voice, she read to him of the 
peace, the bliss of heaven — of forgiveness 
to penitent sinners ; and, when she saw 
her husband's eyes raised to that heaven 
in humble submission to its decrees, she 
clasped her hands beside him in silence ; 
and if a distinct prayer escaped from her 
meek heart, it was to implore that she 
might be released with him from this 
world of suff'ering. 

One night, after she had read to him 
that beautiful Essay of Miss Bowdler's, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 283 

on the Advantages of Sickness: "J 
am sure, Emmeline," said he, in a faint 
voice, '* it will ever be a comfort and 
joy to you to think, that through your 
means I have been saved from destruc- 
tion. When I think what I was only a 
short twelvemonth ago, I bless God for 
the change, although brought about by 
such cruel means. Oh ! if I could but 
live my life over again," he added vehe- 
mently: ** if I could but feel once more 
the strength and health of mind and 
body, of which I made so bad a use; if 
I could but see you, my own Emmy, 
the blooming light-hearted girl you were 
when I married you, when I so cruelly 
scorned and neglected you, how super- 
latively happy I should be. But all is 
over now; the past cannot be recalled, 



284 A 51ARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and there is no future for me in this 
world; and yet, convinced as I am of 
this, do you know that even now I 
sometimes, during the long, tedious, 
sleepless hours of night, still foolishly 
indulge in vain dreams of happiness, 
and picture to myself our future life 
here; I see you admired by every one — 
the charm, the ornament of my home, 
(for proud, worldly ideas will still cling 
to me.) I fancy I see that innocent 
beaming smile 1 once saw — I hear that 
joyous laugh I used to hear till my un- 
kindness silenced it ; in fancy, we ride 
together, we icaltz together," said he, 
forcing a faint smile: '* and this perfect 
earthly bliss, which providence offered 
me, I rejected and spurned — spurned you, 
who would have made my home a hea- 



A MARRFAGE fN HIGH LIFE. 285 

ven to me, and not one word of reproach 
have I heard from you. Oh, Emmeline, 
if you were less kind to me, I believe 
I should suffer less bitterly; that smile, 
that look of love cuts me to the very 
soul. There is only one comfort of 
which you have not been deprived by 
me, that of an approving conscience, 
and the hope of happiness beyond the 
grave ; for in heaven we shall be again 
united, and by your means. I trust 
I am not too presumptuous, but the 
entire resignation with which I look to 
approaching death, though now possessed 
of every blessing this world can give, and 
the hope with which I anticipate meeting 
you, my guardian angel, in the next, 
gives me a strong feeling of confidence, 
that my past errors are blotted out." 



286 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Fitzhenry's voice became choked, he 
sank back and closed his eyes, and for 
some time they both remained silent. 

'' I have talked too much," he at 
length said; '' I am rather exhausted, 
and at times I feel more low without 
knowing why. I think I shall sleep, so 
good night ; God bless you, my Emme- 
line :" and he kissed her pale tear- 
bedewed cheek, then turned his head 
away, and for about an hour all was 
quiet. Fitzhenry never moved, and Em- 
meline trusted he was getting some 
refreshing rest ; he had coughed less 
that day, his pulse had appeared to her 
to be quieter ; and as she clasped her 
hands in humble supplication, a faint 
gleam of hope even then shot through 
her sorrowful heart. 

" Oh! God of mercy, if possible, spare 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 287 

him!"' she ejaculated with such fervency, 
that her lips, unconsciously to herself, 
uttered the sounds. Fearful that she 
might have disturbed him, she went 
softly to the couch on which he was 
lying. He directly held out to her his 
feeble hand : " I am not asleep," said he, 
in a hollow altered tone, that made her 
shudder ; "I cannot sleep. 1 heard your 
prayer, my Emmeline, but it cannot be ; 
the decree is past; and, while yet I can, 
I have a favour to ask of you, though I 
am sure, beforehand, you will grant it. 
In my writing-desk you willfind a letter — 
when I am gone — senditto — to Florence. 
Do not start, dearest, — it is my wish, my 
last request that you will read it — I have 
purposely left it open. But I would like 
to die in peace with all — even with her. 



i 



288 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

A time may come when, like me, she 
may regret the past; and then it will be 
a comfort to her to know that I forgave 
her the evil she was the cause of to us 
both — and also it relieves my heart to 
ask forgiveness of her for what injury I 
have done, what pain I may have inflicted 
upon her. As for you, my own Emmeline, 
I know I should only grieve you if I were 
to ask for your forgiveness. I am sure I 
have it," said he, as he imprinted a fond 
kiss on her quivering lips : " Heaven re- 
ward you with its best blessings ! When 
you see Pelham again, you will for my 
sake be kind to him. Poor Pelham! 
he loved me most truly ! — he loves you 
too, Emmeline." 

Fitzhenry paused, and fixed his lan- 
guid, glazing eyes on her face ; he seem- 



A MARRIAGE IN IIIOH LIFE. 289 

ed as if anxious to say more, but he only 
sighed deeply ; and, after a few minutes' 
silence, taking from under the pillow 
Emmeline's prayer-book, which he had 
always kept since that day on which he 
had renewed to her his marriage vow : 
"And now, Emmeline," said he, *'read 
to me that prayer for the sick." 

In silence she complied, for she had 
taught her breaking heart to bear such 
trials : shfe had learnt to stifle her sobs, 
to swallow her bitter tears. 

" Blessings on thee, my love," he said, 
when she had finished ; " your voice , 
soothes me ; your prayers do me so much 
good. But there is still another I would 
have you read — that for the dying." 

Emmeline looked at him aghast — his 
countenance had within the last hour 

VOL. ir. o 



290 A MARRIAGE IN EllGII LIFE. 

visibly changed — death was upon it — 
her blood chilled in her veins; but, 
making a desperate effort, with a tre- 
mulous voice, broken by convulsive sobs, 
she began to read. When she came to 
these words, " Look graciously on thy 
servant, O Lord ! give him unfeigned re- 
pentance for the errors of his past life," 
Fitzhenry's hand pressed Emmeline's 
more closely with a sort of nervous, con- 
vulsive grasp. She continued to read — 

his hand stiffened — grew cold all 

was over . 

A loud shriek brought the attendants 
* from the adjoining room : they raised 
poor Emmeline's lifeless form from the 
ground; with difficulty unloosed her hand 
from that of her husband, and carried 
her to her bed. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 291 

When consciousness, after a lapse 
of some days, at length returned, she 
saw her father and mother hanging over 
her— But Fitzhenry, her adored Fitz- 
henry, was for ever shrouded in the 
close, cold habitation of death ! 



o 2 



292 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LI 



FE. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Vet still, thou mourner, o'er the death-bed stand. 
Still honour, as thou canst, the breathless clay, 
Still bring thy flowers, and strew with pious hand. 
And weep behind the bier in slow array; 
And raise the stone, inscribe the record kind, 
And all thy heart's vain tenderness reveal, 
And guard the dust, in awful hope resigned. 
And bow to heaven, that fornied thee thus to feel. 



Extract from a Letter front, the Rev. E. Pelhamj 
to Sir George Pelham, minister at Vienna. 



" You ask me if I can tell you 



any thing of Lady Fitzhenry. Being 
some little time ago on a visit to a friend 
at Poole, and anxious to be able to give 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 293 

you some more satisfactory account than 
mere common report, I resolved to drive 
over one Sunday, and attend divine 
service at the parish church of Arling- 
ford, as I was told that she was gene- 
rally there to be seen ; and, hearing she 
lived perfectly retired, I did not like to 
intrude upon her with the offer of a visit. 
" Y"ou know it is now nearly a twelve- 
month since the death of poor Fitzhenry. 
The pew belonging to the Arlingford fa- 
mily, the pulpit, and communion table, are 
all still covered with black, and with the 
escutcheons and arms of the Fitzhenrys. 
When the church-bell iiad done ringing, 
Lady Fitzhenry, with her father and mo- 
ther, came into the gallery. A deep 
black veil at first hid her face and 
nearly her whole person; but the church 



294 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

growing very hot, she at length put it 
aside. 

" Had I not previously known who it 
was, I certainly should not have recog- 
nised her. There is no trace of the 
laughing eyes, of the dimpled cheek, of 
the fresh gay young countenance, which 
I was acquainted with. Perhaps it was 
partly owing to contrast and to the quan- 
tity of black by which she was sur- 
rounded, but I thought I had never seen 
so pale a face. Still, though she has 
already lost much of the fresh beauty of 
youth, there is a charm in her faded sad- 
ness — an air of sentiment over her whole 
person, that more than compensates. 
Her hair was parted back on her marble- 
white forehead ; and the only thing about 
her that was not black, was a gold chain, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 295 

to which was hung a small watch. I am 
thus particular, for I know you wish for 
particulars — and I certainly never before 
paid such attention to the minutiae of a 
woman's dress.. 

" During the service, Lady Fitzhenry 
appeared engrossed by it as one whose 
heart's home is in heaven. When it was 
ended, all seemed respectfully to wait to 
let her pass ; the village children eagerly 
watching for an opportunity to catch her 
eye in order to make their little obeis- 
ances, in the hope of a smile or kind 
word from her in return. I too might 
then have spoken to her, but a deep 
feeling of respect for her sorrows re- 
strained me. I feared the sight of me 
might recall past days, and I did not 
like to intrude upon her. 



206 A MARRIAGE fN HIGH LIFE. 

" When all were gone, I still loitered 
in the church, and the clergyman and 
I at last were left alone. Seeins: me 
examining the Fitzhenry arms with in- 
terest, he came up to me ; and, after some 
usual civilities had passed, I asked him 
whether Lord Fitzhenry was buried in 
the church. 

" ' Yes!' he replied, pointing to a 
marble slab ; * beneath that stone is the 
family vault. It is now about a year since 
I read over it the funeral service : and 
many such sad duties have I performed, 
many melancholy scenes of death have 
I been witness to ; but never, I think, 
will the impression of that day be effaced 
from my memory. I remember it was 
unusually fine for the season, the bright 
sun forming such a striking contrast 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 297 

with the scene. It seemed to be a gra- 
tification to Lord Arlingford's feelings to 
pay every possible outward mark of re- 
spect to his son, and in every way to 
testify his deep affliction for his loss ; 
and, with this idea, he desired that no 
expense might be spared at his funeral. 
I don't think that would have been the 
way in which I should have indulged 
my grief,' added the respectable old 
pastor ; ' but we show our feelings dif- 
ferently; and certainly nothing could be 
more impressive than the sight of the 
long funeral procession, and the waving 
of the black banners and plumes, when 
moving slowly down the avenue that 
leads from the house to the village. 
The whole parish, even the county for 
many miles round attended; for Lord 

o 5 



298 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Fitzhenry was much and justly be- 
loved — and many too of course came 
for the mere show. Of all this costly 
dismal pageant, what struck me with 
the strongest feelings of melancholy was, 
the hearse, drawn by Lord Fitzhenry's 
own beautiful horses, which by his fa- 
ther's orders had been trained to a slow 
pace for the purpose; but, although pains 
had been taken to break them into their 
mournful duty, yet, excited and fretted 
I suppose by the crowd around them, 
and the trappings with which they were 
covered, it was with difficulty they could 
be restrained ; and when, at last, they 
were stopped at the gate of the church- 
yard, they proudly pawed the ground, 
and tossed their heads, as in the days 
when they drew their master in all the 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 299 

pride of youth and health, totally un- 
conscious of the last sad office they 
were then performing- for him. Lord 
Arlingford and Mr. Benson both at- 
tended, and were much affected at the 
ceremony, particularly the latter. 

" ' Late in the evening, I was,' conti- 
nued my narrator — ' roused from no agree- 
able reverie, by being told that Lord Ar- 
lingford's carriage was driving through the 
village towards the church, and that one of 
the servants had come to beg that the door 
of it might be opened without delay ; I 
immediately hurried thither. It was a 
bright moonlight night, and I saw Mr. and 
Mrs. Benson, who had already left the 
carriage, help out of it an almost lifeless 
figure; they supported her along— for, 
as you may guess it was poor Lady Fitz- 
henry. It seems, that nothing could 



300 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

divert her from the idea of visiting the 
vault before it was again closed, and at 
last the desire became so strono:, that 
they thought it best to comply with her 
wishes. Her hysteric screams, when 
she threw herself on the coffin, still 
ring in my ears ; and it was with diffi- 
culty they tore her away from it. Twice, 
as if agony of mind had given her more 
than usual strength, of body, she broke 
from them. I really feared for her rea- 
son, under the influence of such wild 
despair, and at length, by force, we car- 
ried her back to the carriage. By Mrs. 
Benson's desire, I accompanied them 
to the house : she wished to try the 
effects of my prayers and exhorta- 
tions on the poor sufferer. When she 
was laid on her couch, and had been 
given some composing medicine, I went 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 301 

to her. It seemed as if all was then over 
with her in this world. Not a tear fell 
from her fixed eyes. ' He is gone — quite 
gone — I shall never see him again — never 
— never,' she repeated, apparently quite 
unconscious of her words, and with a hor- 
rible composure of voice, although there 
was wildness in her looks ; for she ap- 
peared as if gazing on some invisible 
form. I knelt by her, I read, I said all 
that I thought was most likely to rouse 
her from her stupor of grief, and move 
her feelings ; and at last, after one or 
two convulsive heavings of her bosom, 
tears came to her relief. She fell sob- 
bing into her mother's arms; and I left 
that excellent mother to give her all the 
comfort she was then capable of receiv- 
ing, that of sympathy and affection.' 



302 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

*' The kind-hearted old man here 
stopped, much overcome with his recol- 
lections. 

" ' Lady Fitzhenry has, I believe, re- 
sided here ever since the death of her 
husband V I said, as soon as I saw he 
had sufficiently recovered himself. 
* Yes,' he replied: * by agreement, and 
the wording of the deed, which, at the 
time of Lord and Lady Fitzhenry's mar- 
riage, saved this estate from falling into 
the hands of Lord Arlingford's creditors, 
(it not being, like the rest of the property, 
entailed,) it became hers in the event of 
their having no children." * Does she do 
much good here?' I enquired: ' has she 
taken to the only employment left for 
the unhappy V ' Oh ! she is the friend 
and hope of all the poor of the neigh- 



A MARRIAGE IN HKJU LIFE. 303 

bourhood,' rejoined the good pastor with 
fervency : ' at first, indeed, she was so 
absorbed by her grief, that she seemed 
to heed nothing which was passing 
around her, and I have seen her mecha- 
nically bestow charity to any one who 
chanced to cross her path ; but her good 
mother gradually brought her to make it 
the occupation and interest of her life. 
Alas! I fear she has now no other. She 
is indefatigable in her exertions to do 
good; and may the happiness she be- 
stows on others be at length repaid back 
on herself, and at least bring her peace 
and comfort, if not enjoyment! I un- 
derstand she is in general quite calm, 
and even, at times, cheerful; she never, 
in the most distant manner, alludes to 
her loss, or to the past year of her life, 
and hastily turns off all conversation that 



304 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

can possibly lead to any circumstance 
connected with it; even with her pa- 
rents, since the very first, she has 
maintained this same reserve. It seems 
as if her husband's memory was buried 
within her own heart, and that she felt 
the grave had shut too close over such 
an adored being for its sacredness ever 
to be disturbed.' I further learnt from 
my companion, that Mr. Benson has 
given up all share both in his mercantile 
concerns and in the banking-house; 
that his spirits and health seem to be 
both much broken ; that he has lost all 
his bustling activity, and that he has just 
purchased a small place in the neigh- 
bourhood of Arlingford, intending there 
to pass the remainder of his days.' 

" By this time, we had reached the 
door of the parsonage; its owner invited 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 305 

me in, but I had already loitered much, 
and could delay my departure no longer. 
Finding that I could return to my 
place of destination by crossing Arling- 
ford Park, I gave my name at the lodge, 
and being admitted, although not without 
difficulty, I drove as near the house as 
I could venture. The hatchment dark- 
ened the windows of the principal room — 
many of the others were closed. How 
different the whole place looked from 
what it did only a few months back, 
when I met you there at the time of the 
large shooting party which Fitzhenry 
had collected! Poor fellow! I used to 
abuse him then for his strange unac* 
countable conduct and coldness towards 
his pretty, interesting little wife ; but I 
believe others had worked upon him and 
done mischief there. The place seemed 



306 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LiFE. 

kept in good order as formerly ; but all 
was silent, and had a look of desertion. 
I did not see a living creature, except 
some horses at grass, which I recognized 
to be Fitzhenry's favourite hunters. 
They eagerly pricked up their ears when 
I past, and threw back their long- 
neglected manes, as if a carriage was 
now an unusual sight ; but when I had 
driven by, they quietly returned to their 
food. 

" I travelled on many miles before 
I could get poor Lady Fitzhenry out of 
my head ; pondering too with some 
compunction on a silly report to which 
I had carelessly given credence. The 
said report concerned her and you ; 
for you must know, George, that the 
thoughtless, gossiping world, judging 
by its own unfeeling self, even while 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 307 

Lady Fitzhenry is still shaded by her 
weeds, and you are closely fixed at your 
political post at Vienna, have already 
married you to each other. 

" Remember, I am not so indiscreet 
as to ask how far this story comes home 
to yourself. That you admired Lady 
Fitzhenry was certainly very evident to 
my observation; but how far that ad- 
miration may lead you informing- wishes 
for the future, I can't pretend to say. 
Indeed, I almost fear the account T have 
now been giving, may destroy, or at least 
throw the gloom of doubt over some 
flattering vision of connubial bliss. For, 
(1 may be mistaken,) but if I can judge 
of woman's countenance, and by it of 
woman's constancy, I should say, the 
tirst could never beam with joy' again, 



308 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and that her every affection is for ever 
buried in the grave of her husband. 

" Time will prove whether I am right; 
for your sake, I hope I am not." 



THE END. 



ERRATA TO VOL. II. 

Page 5, for her heart sunk, read sank. 

lb. for then when fearful of betraying herself she at 
others, &c. read at others, fearful of betraying her- 
self, she suddenly, &c. 

Page 51, after beneath the scrutiny, omit of her rival. 

Page GG, after drive up, omit their vehicles. 

Page 86, after out of the carriage, read she desired, &c. 

Page 104, for Mr. Benson, read Mrs. Benson. 



LONDON: 

IBOTSON AND PALMER, PHIKTERS, SAVOY STREET, STT-AND. 
