CONSTANCE, A TALE.
CHAPTER I.
i'kaik nut 1 iutrt- him. thu I 4-4 fur tuai'— 'Ti* but 4 peevi;h ho% And *?ure h<?*- p-roud. and vet hia pride becomes him I Me lain n^t, dit kate bsm no*, ami yet 1 iu\e more cause tt* h*te fcisa that to lefve bim— For uhat bad ht Tu do ti« ^corn fit me ? ^4 Yon Like ir
Constance Raymond was the onlv child of a gentleman whose father left him-- his debts, an encumbered estate, and a younger brother to provide for. Seeing u
the endless and thankless trouble of vainly st living 1 to support the pomp of hi> birth oo such means, he sold off his inherit¬ ance, and, with the easy competency clearly teft, retired into the country, mar¬ ried a sensible, well educated, and do¬ mestic woman, of many virtues and un- bounded affection for him; not long after¬ wards seeing his brother united to a young lady of fortune and title. A few ye**r§ of exemplary content had blesssed the elder pair, when Mr. Ray¬ mond died, most generally lamented. leaving his widow in circumstances,which did not aggravate, tliough they could not atone her loss, Her chief consolation aiosc from the humble, though nacou- trollable consciousness, of that life of ol>edient fidelity and attention, on her pait, which had made the most reason¬ able and grateful of husbands—^the happiest. Aware that solitude must inevitably augment a depression she felt it her duty,
f«*r her infant daughter's sake, as much as pt>ssible to subdue, Mrs Raymond ac¬ cepted an invitation to the house of her mmt intimate friend,wbo»e husband fully joined in the generous wish of soothing her bereaved heart. Here, before her tranquillity was per¬ fect Iv restored, it sustained another severe blow, in the loss of her friend; whose widower, when the first shock had sub¬ sided, rejoined his regiment, and once more sought to dissipate his cares, in fo¬ reign scenes—while his only child, a son, returned with Mrs. Raymond, to share her house and her heart with the younger Constance. On tlie widower's final retirement from a military life, he found his boy growing beyond childhood, and capable of mak¬ ing home agreeable. Mrs. Raymond therefore resigned him; but an intimacy was ever kept alive between the families, less of congeniality than of mutual re- n 2
spect and gratitude, aided by habit, and the recollection of auld tang syne. With no material aid, Mrs. Raymond now perfected the education of her daughter ; but, however " delightful the task to teach the young idea how to shoot," to see it assume a will tu direct itself, even to virtue and intellect, is so mortif ing to maternal vanity, that it would go nigh to diminish even a mo¬ thers love, if it did not awaken a mo¬ ther's fears. " My task ,* Mrs. Raymond would say, " has not the merit of being arduous. Already she must do every thing her own way. I have only to won¬ der what she will be at next. She per¬ plexes me, yet she is mostly right in the end ; and would be obedient—(never im¬ plicitly though) if she could; for 1 think she loves me, and know her temper does not carry her away/* Gay and firm, though full of feeling, proud though cordial, just though ro-
mantic, trusting and worthy trust, though neither all credulous, nor all sparing, Constance, who sought in vain for con¬ geniality, was accused, even by those who disappointed her search, of shunning their acquaintance. In fact, this mother and child, by living together, spoiled eacfi other for common friendships. Mvb. Ray¬ mond preserving the youth of her heart by sharing the sports of Constance, who, on her part, anticipated the matunty of her mind, by those long conversations of perfect confidence, which she enjoyed with her mother. Constance was doubly unaffected ; free from affectation, and unmoved by the pursuits common to her sex and age: Nay, though her look was thinking, many might consider her but a. dull girl; tor " the most remarkable things," might happen before her eyes, without calling her attention for a moment. This ab¬ straction, however, was rather wilful than constitutional; for her vivacity and en-
thusiasm, on favourite subjects, equalled her patience aud application. The de¬ cision of her air might, almost, have been called manly, though never masculine; for the quietude of her eA-ery action was all the woman, though a contrast to the mere Miss. Her passions and impulses, not from caution, but delicacy, ever kept within doors; nor did any thing she did or said come under the head of interesting, whatever impression it might make. It might be truly said of her, (and what better can be said of any one ?) that she was capable of making great sacrifices, and of resisting strong temptations. Contrary to all precedent, she was not a beauty. It was remarked, however, that she looked always rather more than less to advantage beside a handsome wo¬ man, for the unqualified delight she took in that sight, almost taught her counte¬ nance to reflect what it admired. At least, envy or jealousy had never exag-
gerated the defects of her face, She ea^ tered into no competitions, and was therefore easy and self-possesisecl, without being self-conceited. Her awkwardaeteeii C*J never seemed those of a person who knew no better, therefore had less excuse; for the timidity which caused them, she cotiM conceal, though unable to master its effects. In her admiration of loveliness^ she was quite impartial, and was oeirer suspected of confining it exclusively to her own sex. With all these preparations, did Con¬ stance actually attain the advanced age of fifteen, without discovering the iadis- pensability of a love adventure,—and longer blindness was not to be feared, from her father's daughter. One winter's day-—I wish it had been one summer's evening—she stopped at the door of her mother's agent on such occasions, to commend to her nearer care a poor invalid whom she could not herself so frequently visit, as the snow,
which, for the week past, had seemed frozen in the sky, was now finding its way down, with every promise of a deep and lasting fall. She was making this request, when a young gentleman passed her, from tbe bouse, with a look between a demure smile, and a contemptuous sneer. " Who is that strange person, Mrs. Watson ? M she asked, as soon as he was out of hearing. 46 Strange, ma'am ? that handsome—-'* li And what would you have stranger here T u Nothing, I own, my dear Miss ! No¬ thing stranger here— you may well say; but come, you cant deny that he is handsome. Pray come in, and Fll tell vou all I know of hira/' u Nay," replied Constance; " it is no affair of mine, you know; only I thought, as he passer 1 he looked down upon me— I don't know how, nor why/ " But I do, Miss Constance," said Mrs. Watson importantly,—flattered at cu-
riosity so unusual; " So do come in! you used to, when I was ill, and if yoa re¬ fuse, you may soon have me on your hands again, for my rheumatism won't be the better for all this air/* " I forgot tht indeed," returned Coo- stance, following without another demur; while Watson congratulated herself oo having addressed the good feelings of her young lady with such effect: for she longed to have an opportunity of, at last, pouring forth her favorite news, to her favorite listener. She was however nearly disappointed a second time; for as soon as she had seen Watson out of the air, Constance looked at her watch, and perhaps with little enough intention to depart, declared she must return home; instantly raising the value of that " attent ear,** she was not very inexorably bent against affording a story she resolved to hear; as most ladies would have done, who had, like her, seen its so beautiful title page! b5
Watson, however, was an old general. fc * Very well* Miss," she said, " then if you please, take only my respects to Mama, and say. I should be very ungrateful if I did not feel she has a right to know every thing I do ; and that I have some¬ thing I shall think it my duty to teli her, about my young lodger, as I will do no¬ thing without her advice, and approba¬ tion ; but that I can't come out yet, and that you won't tell her for me." " Oh yes I will, Watson," cried Con¬ stance, " if it be indeed so particular/' She seated herself, and Watson, who ac¬ cordingly began without farther preface. " Well Miss, he has lodged with me this week. His name is Mr. Vailori—- Edgar Vailori! See—here is his name in his own hand writing. Is it not a pretty one ?" " It's legible enough." " I mean his name, ma'am." " Oh, yes ! a good name too^—so ?" " And so—nay don't tear it, Miss—
give it back, if you please, to me—unless you will take care of it." Constance put the card in her ridicule mechanically, and Watson smiling went on : M Well, he is an orphan, he says, and poor; he can't be rich, to put up with such a home as mine, though I do keep it as clean as a palace." " No more—but so :'* cried Constance. " Miss ?" " Nothing—go on.'* " And he pays like a prince." " Your similes are lucky, Watson/* " Well, but you won't kt me go oa— well, and he looks used to have every thing elegant about him. He is a foreigner, but speaks English as well as / do nearly /'* u Is it possible ?'* exclaimed Constance gravely. " Yes, indeed does he! he is so afraid of giving trouble; and he knows nobody here; but just sits in the parlour, writing or reading, singing—singing do what he
will; not that he's so merry neither. He never goes out but to do good—and how d'ye like him now, Miss r" « Why 'tis a well drawn portrait, Watson—but he need not have sneered at one he never saw before, nor heard of, good or ill, I doubt." " That's just what Fm coming to, my dear Miss. 1 had described his ways to Counsellor Collins's daughter, who had seen him, and longed to get acquainted with him; for I can tell you, his coming has made a noise here, though he lives with me. So! here she comes—I did not know her, drest as plainly as you are, a flail basket on her arm. Fancy ma'am, '^ iss Collins! She stood just where you did—so unlucky ! and, after finding out that my gentleman was within, began, in a high, fine voice, very unlike that her servants tremble to hear. —' My good Watson ! (Her good Watson.'J Allow me to recover myself here ; Fve just left a scene that has so shocked my sense and
ability T You know the fuss they make about fill that ma'am." Constance laughed; as Watson thought, in applause of her imitation. " Sensibi¬ lity/' she must have said. It was her sen¬ sibility's turn this time, Watson, depend on't !"• " Aye, so it was, Miss. Lord! and one hears the word so often now-a-days, there's no excuse for my forgetting it, only I don't know what it means.*' u Nor she neither, so you are botli qualified to use it—as times go—but Miss Collins ?" " Well, ma'am, she thanked God—now that was shameful—that the poor Joyces were much comforted by her humble means—and though I saw alt this was meant for Mr. Vallori's ear, still I did believe it true ma'am, you know/' " And was it not then ?" "Not a word of it all ma'am. Mr. Vailori heard it—but would not be seen ; so that Miss Collins, poor Lady! had the
trouble of her walk, and her falsehood, if that was a trouble to her, for nothing. Presently Mr. Vailori went out; and, at night, I looked in at the Joyces. He had been there ; enquired into their dis¬ tress—nothing extraordinary they said; they had to support a large family, by their own hands; which, in a season like this, they might not be able to do, without help; but we know that don't come from Miss Collins." " Pshaw V* " Why sure I may praise your mother, if you take me up about yourself—well, I'm not going to say a word more about it then! However, Mr. Vailori asked the Joyces if a lady had called on them that day ? No ! If she had desired them to conceal her visit, being one of cha¬ rity ? still no! He persisted- they per¬ sisted. Miss Collins's name was men¬ tioned ; and then Mrs. Joyce said Miss Collins never spoke to such as they were,
and thought more of her beaux than of any thing else. Mr. Vailori gave them something handsome, and poor Joyce said, she could not help laughing at the odd look he had when he went out. Now you can forgive him ? He only saw Miss Collins's figure and dress, so perhaps he mistook you for her; but I'll soon teach him ------" " Not unless you would disoblige me for ever," cried Constance. "What is it to me if a stranger thinks—" ec But he may not always be a stranger." " He has made a likely beginning for a friend—so say no more ;" and she rose to depart. The same fate attended her exit as her entrance. Vailori past her at the in¬ stant, and Mrs. Watson began emphati¬ cally ------ " I shall flatter Miss Collins, when I tell her she was mistaken for you, Miss
Raymond. My duty to Mrs. Raymond, Ma'am, if you please, and good day; and many thanks, Miss Raymond," " Then there are two fools, instead of one" thought Vailori. His landlady, satisfied with having done all she could do to clear up the mistake, without violating Constance's in¬ junction, little apprehended so ungallant an inference as that of her sceptical lodger. He would have rightly thought a parade of real charities a sufficiently mean bait to disdain it; but that hypocrisy and ostentation should unite to catch him, and succeed, he thanked the wisdom of two-and-twenty, was impossible! little guessing how incapable of either was the lady just obliged to him for that sneer, which would have so deservedly fallen on the still unpunished Miss Col¬ lins. After this, it is but just to say, that Constance was above encouraging the gossip of her inferiors ; but Mrs. Watson
was so incapable of flattery or falsehood, that she had grown by degrees a privi¬ leged exception, and got into habits of comparative familiarity with her " young lady," as a child, which she still retained without abusing. Accordingly Constance had no scruple in diverting her mother by this little ad¬ venture ; and, when the partial hearer had exhaled her maternal spleen against the imknown who had dared mistake her child for Miss Collins, she joined in a laugh at the expence of that heroine. Miss Collins was indeed a fair butt. No faith, no conscience, no remorse, was kept in store for her foibles. They were incorrigible. She united all the con¬ trasted follies of her sex. With a cold heart and a vacant mind, she assumed susceptibility and intelligence in their superlatives. She had the cant of every science she had ever heard of. Yet with all her meekly borne, but blinding assur¬ ance, with those on whom she could im-
pose, she was notoriously a coward before Such persons as really were what she pre¬ tended only. Passing the tremor of ex¬ pected detection, for " tliat delicacy of nerve, and absence of mind, too often the attendant of genius." With all her arts, and some personal beauty, added to birth and fortune, Miss Collins had passed her youth without a lover, and now reluctantly approached her wane without a friend. But to return to those more worthy of attention: a month elapsed, and Con¬ stance had not again ventured near Mrs. Watson's. She had not forgiven Vailori; and his hostess's prediction, that " he might not always be a stranger," still, now and then, recurred to her mind. She had found out, that it was no longer cor¬ rect for her to walk without her mother, or some protection. She grew also sorry* that as she had always gone every where with Mrs. Raymond, since her absolute
childhood, she had no sensation left to make; and no one would hear of her " comin<* out." She was amazed, and angry at herself, for being only fifteen, and obliged to any one who thought her older. How short-lived are these follies, and into what laudable extremes do la¬ dies run to avoid them, after twenty! At last Mrs. Watson appeared, with a piteous tale, of her " dear Mr. Vallori's being very ill, from venturing through the snow, on an errand of charity." " Hang his charities and his illness !" cried Constance, spitefully. " Provoking thing! and why tell me of it ? but is he very ill?" " Oh, Miss, he makes nothing of it, and bids me do the same; 'for else,* says he, c I shall have your Miss Collinses besieging me with relief/" " He can't forget, then ;—but has he no advice ?" " Yes, Ma'am; I happened to say that
poor Mr. Morton ought to know how to revive him, as his six children had been so long ill, in colds; and then he sent for him at once, and lets the good man send him what he likes; and praises things he never tastes, to flatter poor Mr. Morton, who dines with him very often. 1 * " Lucky Mr. Morton!" cried Mrs. Ray¬ mond, whose knowledge of the worthy apothecary's circumstances taught her how to appreciate this trait. " Lucky in the intimacy of such a young man ; not to speak of being so delicately served by his benevolence." " And is this something you thought it your ' duty to tell us ?" asked Con¬ stance ; " for 'tis just as important as the tale to which you tacked your parade of advice and approbation." (t Nothing escapes you, Miss; but this is what I wanted to say. Mr. Vailori, Ma'am," turning to Mrs. Raymond, with
a softened eye, " for all his manly looks, is very young—a spoiled child, I fear: and he fancies little delicacies like, that I can't make, nor get for him, for love nor money." " The great baby !" said Constance. " Easily for love," replied Mrs. Ray¬ mond ; " name whatever he would like best, and I will take care he shall be hu¬ moured, since he is so careful of every one's comfort before his own." " But," rejoined Constance, " never mention us." " What! you advise me not to tell the truth, Miss !" said Watson; " it would be a sort of introduction/' " Yes, a sort; but we don't wish to be introduced ;—least ofall in such sort/' Mrs. Watson was silent, and departed, like a bee loaded with " sweets to the sweet;"—favours, which were continued till the invalid was quite recovered. Vailori now wished to defray the added
expence he supposed he had incurred; and to prevent this, Mrs. Watson con¬ fessed the presents. " Well, whoever from," he said, " I should still wish—" « Oh, Sir, no! a lady." " Miss Collins ?" he asked, slyly. " No, a motherly, though not an old lady. I was not to tell ■ but for fear you should suspect you had made another conquest, it was the mother of Miss Ray¬ mond, who really did not come to look for you, and did not like meeting you at all." " Look for me I like me P echoed he ; c; no, I never presumed that of her, or any lady: but such kindness to a stran¬ ger! I have known others, who only wanted opportunity, more generally to exert those motherly virtues."—His lips quivered at the word—" I've not been used to them; but I dare say they are amiable; so tell me more of this Mrs. Raymond."
" Oh, Sir!" began Watson, <f she is the best mother that ever lived." " How do you know?" he exclaimed, angrily; and abruptly left the room. The conversation was never resumed.
CHAPTER II.
s And here, in this lone little cot/ I exclaimM, 1 With a maiden, attractive to heart and to eye, ' Who would blush when I prais'd her, and weep if 1 blam'd, < How blest could I live, and how calm could I die !' Moore.
Spring was now rapidly advancing. One splendid day beguiled Vailori into a walk as yet unknown to him, from whence he could discern no human habi¬ tation; as he was employed in this search, he was joined by a country gen¬ tleman, who, in spite his half repulse. forced him into casual chat. At last, —« Yon look fatigued, Sir," said the
stranger; " have you walked far?"— (a bow) —" From whence may I ask ?" Vailori named the village in which he resided. u Call you that far ?" said the other, laughing. Vailori stared. " I fear," he said, " I was born for some humbler destiny than that of a pedestrian. I confess, having been lately much confined by illness, I feel anxious for rest and refreshment, at some house of public accommodation, if one could find such, in these wilds." " I think," said his companion, " I can lead you to such a place; a coach leaves it, in the evening, for your village, if that will suit you, Sir." " Exactly, and I shall-. be much obliged/' " Allons done .'" " To the world's end, if you bid me thither in French," cried Vailori. They descended a wooded hill; at its base stood a plain but handsome house. c
" What an odd place for an inn P ex¬ claimed Vailori, u and how superior even to English inns in general!" (i I said nothing of an inn" retorted his new friend, drily ; " this is my house* and if it don't afford you what you wish, why, never more visit Frank Hastings/' Diverted by this rencontre, Vailori entered, and dined sumptuously with his whimsical host. Evening was far ad¬ vanced before he remembered the ex¬ pected stage coach. " A stage coach !" repeated Hastings, " and an inn ! I will set you down where you will to-morroW ; but, when I said this evening, I did not think I should like you so well. A stage coach! Your lively fancy—" " I freely forgive it, Sir, if you can, since, for once, its promises fall so far short of reality ! but, I am expected to sleep at home—at my lodgings, I mean." " No, you are not, Sir, so do not sigh about it; a person from your village re¬ turned to it from hence two hours ago,
with the news of your safety, Mr. Vailori; so that Dame Watson may sleep in peace, and so may you." Left as little will as power to oppose, Vailori consented to stay. Hastings knew all the families of " the village," with whom, except the Ray¬ monds, Vailori had, even against his will, a general acquaintance; after ex¬ hausting their names, tc You know Mrs. Raymond—of course," he said, confi¬ dently. " I do not, indeed," replied Vailori. " Why then you know nobody; the rest are nothings to her. But how came it? Though Charles was away, she might have sent for me, to call on you. What! live at her Factotum's, and never see her, nor her daughter ?" " I have seen, one or the other—I for¬ get which," said Vailori. " Ah ! you may forget, who have only •seen them ; intimacy alone can do them justice." < 2
61 Nay," exclaimed Vailori, recollecting himself, and abandoning at once his air of indifference, " I am indebted to them for the most unmerited attentions." He then told Mr. Hastings the story of his illness. u Just like her," cried the good man— (i Sir, I could tell you such things of Mrs. Raymond! I am unworthily her most intimate friend, having married her first chosen companion." Heathen related the story already known, adding, " We are both fond of our children, and they of each other—naturally—for my Charles, now in the ariny, is so elegant a fellow, that his rude father would blush beside him, if he were not too proud of his son, to be ashamed of himself. I expect him home daily. You will like one another, I'm sure. He is not much your elder, and were he more so, 'tis a fault on the right side, in the choice of a friend; so my only intimate thought, in selecting me. You and Charles, I hope,
will be more fortunate than we were— went into tae army together, Sir—but I left him behind me—dear brave boy! Yes, I've had my trials—My wife's death too—Since that I've returned to the hermit's life of a bachelor ; and, I'm mo¬ rally certain, that but for travelling field sports, races, good company, and good living, I should have died, long ago, of solitude and ennui," This description of a " Hermit's life," was made too se¬ riously to be laughed at; but Vailori might already have taken that liberty, without offence : for his vivacity, gentle¬ ness, and elegance, had as much attached his host, as Hastings's blunt originality and undisguised admiration, diverted and flattered his guest. Early next day, the carriage of Mr. Hastings stopped at the door of Mrs. Raymond, to set down its proprietor, and proceed, with its « better half," to the cottage of Mrs. Watson. Constance and her mother, from an
open window, welcomed their old friend, the younger adding, " And Charles, tliough 'tis well bred in toivn to turn your back on a country acquaintance, we'll not betray you, if you break bounds here" Vailori turned towards her, " baring his head, and lifting his fine face."— Constance instantly discovered the mistake into which her expectation of seeing Charles had led her, and men¬ tally exclaiming that " some people were always in the way," she bowed, and drew back in confusion. li And do you tliink him like Charles ?" was the first question Mr. Hastings asked her. " Not I; but when you have only two acquaintances who don't look like jockies, tis no wonder I should take the one for the other. How should I expect to see Mr. Vailori with you ? when and how came ye known to each other ?" Hastings related their meeting. " The
moment I looked in his face," said he, " I resolved to be friends with him." <* And the moment he looked in mine I resolved not to be friends with him;' retorted Constance. iC I shall think ill of your good nature, if you don't use your sex's privilege, and change your mind,*' said Hastings. " If you were in a strange country, without relations, how should you like to meet repulse, from people to whom you felt so much obliged 1" " Does he think himself so to us." " Ay, that he does ! Every body has a weak side, and a taste for sweets seems his. He has been for months near places that every stranger visits, and knows nothing of them, though he dotes on fine scenery; the walks are too far, forsooth ! Now in my carriage he could enjoy them ail; but I should not like having to do showman to him—to answer questions I should not understand. He has been highly
educated; and our habits are so different, that I feel as if he condescended in beinsr familiar witli me. 'Tis true, men of as high birth, be his what it will, think it no disgrace to be seen with Frank Hastings ; but my fox-hunting friends are—not like him—and the contrast has gone nigher to sicken me of my usual life, than all my son's preaching, or yours into the bargain. Now, Mrs. Raymond, if you and Constance would undertake to amuse him, it were just in your line; and the weather is so fair, we might make some delightful days for him. Do you con¬ sent ?" " With all my heart," said Mrs. Ray¬ mond. " Call on him, from me, and bring him back with you, to dinner; we won'tlo se time on ceremonies ; he may not have much to spare." " True ; he is a bird of passage, and enough has been wasted already." " But Mama," interposed Constance gravely—
" What! teaching your Mother pru¬ dence—and against Edgar Vailori too ?" interrupted Hastings, " Look in his face and then preach ?" « So I could." <c And practise ?*' u Pshaw! it seems as if it was to ie." " To what is the child giving herself over 1" asked her mother. " To what doom are you thus resigned ? To a few pleasant jaunts in congenial society." " Inconsequent! but, have it your own way." " Yes, I suppose I may, after your condescending permission !" How soon was this foresight forgotten, in the pleasures it had vainly striven to avert! The same day saw introduced to each other persons so long mutually avoided. The three succeeding ones rose on hope, and set on satisfaction. All things combined to make these excur¬ sions surpass every thing expected of them. Vailori was charmed with the
scenery, with the conversation of those who had enabled him to enjoy it, and with his own successful endeavours to please ; but his raptures were safe ones ; for, having persuaded himself that Con¬ stance most probably, on her escape from childhood, (for he decided her to be " a mere child") would be engaged to her absent friend Charles Hastings, that hope was excluded, which, in some natures, can alone feed love. Constance, on the other hand, gave herself up to his idea, with that " incon¬ sequence," she had, so lately, the power to blame in her mother. The flattering distinction of theirs being the only coterie in which he voluntarily mingled; he, a being of that mould in which so few are cast, of which he was the first she had evev seen. He was a novelty, a wonder to her: her long vain search for conge¬ niality, her secluded youth, all conspired against her; and, unresisting, because unconscious of her danger, she sacrificed
the liberty and peace of her mind, to an object who might excuse even the unso¬ licited attachment of a female. A return to her affection seemed as improbable as unnecessary. It was too much of bliss for her, to meet his praises every where, and to see him pleased with an esteem he so well deserved. Her candour, and even pride in the subject, misled others, as well as herself; and her affection was as little guessed by its object's vanity, as by her mother's watch¬ fulness. If ever they had an hour of mutual love, it was in a walk they took together, to a retreat which had been always a favorite with Constance. An avenue of tender trees terminated in a rural seat, beside which a little cascade made its final bound to earth, babbling and glistening, as if glad to be again in the -un, after its long struggle through the overhanging lichens of the rock above. Vallori's sensibilities had been awakened
by a late indulgence of natural grief His companion to this lovely spot was a sensible and innocent girl, whom he hoped regarded him as a brother. " What a consolation were such a sister!" he thought, and prest nearer to his heart the hand which hung on his arm. " Dear, dear——England !" he murmured. " Will you call It so when you return to your own country T asked Constance. " This is my country now," he said, and I will never leave it." They said little more during this walk, but never forgot it; and, when Vailori came within sight of Mrs. Raymond's house, he ex¬ claimed, with peculiar warmth—" If the world did not deserve better things of me, here could I live, here could I die/' Whetheranyambitious plansthen floating in his brain, were the preventives im¬ plied, or whether the quotation was the first in his mind, and as sincere in his se¬ lection, as in its original, Constance knew not; cared not; for her friend, imme-
diately, though in the open road, began that sweet song of Moore's, which we have chosen for the heading of our chapter, and which exactly accorded with his present feelings and situation. This brought them to her gate; where, refusing to " intrude," he took a gay and kind leave of her, whom he left lapped in con¬ tent she thought it in no human power to overthrow. But she did not live many moments without learning what humble agents may achieve the most important catas¬ trophes. At that very instant Mrs. Watson joined her, exclaiming, " I'm glad you have power, Miss Constance, to restore my young gentleman's smiles; for this morning, he was so shook, I did not think he would ever recover it. Such a stout heart to feel so much ! Well, there is no knowing your nearest friends, till yon see them in their solitary hours !" Trembling with anxiety,Constance begged
her to proceed. She obeyed. " This morning I was going in to set the parlour more to rights, and I believe, for the sake of a kind word or two, as I always get from him; the door was a-jar, at his back, Ma'am, and there I saw him, with a picture in his hand, on wdiich he was so intent that he never heard me; and so, before I stepped back, I thought I ?night just peep over his shoulder, as I was so close to him, at the picture. 'Twas of a lady, richly drest, as far as I could judge at one glance, young and beautiful. Then, then I knew why he sobbed so heavily ; for love can pull down the strong, as easily as it props the weak : love it must be, or there would be no mystery ; and he never made a secret of any of his pictures, with me, but this one/' The veil was now torn from the eyes of Constance. In an instant she saw that she loved, for the first time and the l as t—for ever, and in vain !
Disguising her feelings, with ready presence of mind, she dispatched Watson, and flew to her chamber, to give vent to emotions which, though wild and resist¬ less, were pure as the heaven to which alone she confided them. Why will they not last for ever ? their agony is worth all the rapture of our heart's maturer years, from which the reason flies, and even the imagination extricates itself with a sicklied wing. Constance had no thought to remem¬ ber, which cost her a blush of shame, or a shudder of disgust. She had, perhaps, been too presumptuous, and was left to wonder how the extinction of a hope she was unconscious, till now, of having en¬ tertained, could be so formidable an evil. The conclusion, only, of Mrs. Watson's disclosure, recurred to her mind with a gleam of consolation. She repeated its homely truth. " / am weak !" she sighed, let love then support, since it will not leave me .Alas ! what inadequate aid do
I invoke! There is but One capable of sustaining my heart, in the path of trials it has thus early chosen for itself." But even devotion could only calm her for a time ; too soon the violence of this, her first grief, returned. The better she concealed, the more she suffered from it. She shunned society, Vallori's most of all; at last health sunk beneath her struggles, and she was thrown, helpless, on the cares of her alarmed but uncon¬ scious mother. Mrs. Watson, however, with a quick- sightedness often denied to more exalted minds, added Constance's praises of Vai¬ lori, and her hasty flight on hearing of the portrait, to her avoiding him, and subsequent illness; and not being over delicate on such subjects, she told him all she thought, enlarging on the advan¬ tages of his making love to a lady who, though so young, had her equal in no¬ thing ; and, to crown all, was of a dispo¬ sition so similar to his own.
Vailori prohibited the subject in incre¬ dulous displeasure; but, in private, it hannted him in spite of his endeavours to forget it. Accustomed to continental marriages, he could not deem Miss Ray¬ mond's youth an objection. " With such a woman," he said, " I could be happy, though at present I feel no more for her than respect, admiration, and gratitude for this unsought preference. Pshaw! no such thing exists. I am growing a despicable coxcomb. The only way left to retrieve my character is to turn lover, and try my fortune with the first oppor¬ tunity.
CHAPTER IIL
Farewell! if ever fondest prayer For others* weal avail on high, Mine will not all be lost in air, But wait thy name above, the sky ; My soul nor dares nor deigns complain, Tho' grief and passion there rebel; I only know—I love in vain! I only feel—Farewell, farewell I Lord Byron.
In a few days, youth, and the cares of the best of mothers, enabled Constance again to see her friends ; among them, his tenderer claims unguessed, was ad¬ mitted Vailori. His touched respect, his implied apo¬ logies for the mistake of theii 1 first meet-
ing, hints at having supposed her be¬ loved by Charles Hastings, and a con¬ fused, agitated, reluctant allusion to the miniature, as representing a deceased re¬ lative, all convinced Constance that she had betrayed herself; for she never sus- pected others so soon, nor so unjustly. His attentions neither gave her hope nor content. His heart was not in them ; where, then, was that heart? He had said nothing satisfactory relating to the portrait. She was more perplexed than before, and liked him less than ever, she thought- Allowing that many of the errors once dividing them were cleared up, the truth they shewed only resolved her how to act in the trial, between which and herself no impediment now remained. It was not long before Mr. Hastings, wishing to give an entertainment to the families who had paid attention to his new favourite, resorted to the usual sanc¬ tion of Mrs. Raymond, and sent an in-
vitation to her and Constance. The lat¬ ter, on plea of indisposition, declined go¬ ing, fearful of meeting Vailori. Mrs. Raymond reluctantly departed without her ; and that event was thus hastened, which, though prepared for, Constance strove to delay. Vailori, the hero of this fete, had post¬ poned going to it till the evening; and per¬ ceiving, an hour before his designed de¬ parture, that Constance was also a truant from Mr. Hastings's festivity, he entered uninvited, and with great delicacy offer¬ ed her his heart, his hand, his moderate fortune, and unbounded confidence. Con¬ stance fixed her eyes with desperate scru¬ tiny on his face while he was speaking. She saw no more there than she expected, and shook her head with a sigh, in which her last hope took flight. By having deeply studied her own heart, Constance, though not yet sixteen, was better versed in human nature than she was herself aware. Many close a
long life with less knowledge of their kind. Not even the selfishness of a first love could blind her now. True, Vailori sued, vowed, and even feigned a doubt of her regard ; but, had she dared confess, each word had been a rent portion of her heart. She knew Vailori of that ardent nature, for which a day must come, when passion, mighty as her own, would deny him all this eloquence, and convince him how much he had mistaken his feelings, if he ever thought he possessed more than friendship for her,—fatally too late, if she accepted him. She saw what strug¬ gles, what sacrifices, her consent would prepare for him. Unless she could in¬ crease his happiness, it mattered little what became of her own. Since one of them must suffer, she offered herself. Vailori did not love her, he never could as she loved him, nor could she barter an affection like hers, for such a poor return as gratitude. Collecting her powers of utterance
much sooner than might be expected, she replied with affectionate firmness. " I feel your worth, and thank your motives for this proposal, though I refuse it; nay, don't interrupt me, I heard you pa¬ tiently. I know it will be better for us both. I am at liberty to dispose of my¬ self, therefore any importunity through my mother, would do nothing. Had you never addressed me, we might have lived on as we have done, no friends happier. But you have been doomed to mistake me and yourself,—I, to see too clearly. You will not regret my decision, since I shall not. 'Tis fit we should part; but, go where you will, you will find some good hearts in which you must always meet a home. Some other woman will make you happier than I could. For my sake choose prudently, when you do marry; and, if your fate equals your deserts, I resign you: but, if you ever look around for a friend, and see none who have not in turn betrayed all who
trusted them, then think on me. I shall always be free as now to serve you. Claim my heart, in any way but love, and in life or death, it is for you and yours." She was gone before he could reph\ Nay, what reply was left him ? Perplexed, astonished, and disappointed, he was rooted to the spot. That such a girl—the first he had ever addressed, and that rather in pity than in passion, should reject him/ when he was so confident of success I—misled by his own vanity, and the flatteries of a confidante who might put his intentions of proposing for Miss Raymond, and his hopes of acceptance, into the exaggerat¬ ing power of the whole . village, — dis¬ gusted him. Had Constance then never regarded him ? did she despise his Cl Mis¬ take!" Why was she so kind, in her manner of bidding him—leave her for ever ? Her residence would be no longer in-
deed a home for him ; he resolved to take one farewell of the fountain to which they had wandered together, and leave the place, instantly, for London. He dispatched an apology to Mr. Hast¬ ings, begging him to thank his assembled friends for their attentions, during his residence among them, which urgent business thus abruptly forced him to terminate. He endeavoured, though needlessly, to bribe Mrs. Watson to atone the past, as much as possible, for Miss Raymond's sake, by future silence on so painful a subject. His intended reproof was de¬ feated, by her sincere assurance that" her fault brought its punishment, by depriv¬ ing lier of such an inmate!" , His sudden disappearance caused a suspicion of the truth, notwithstanding her secresy; and Vallori's former rivals agreed, that " tbe girl who could refuse him, would accept no one beside/' The
seal of celibacy was accordingly set on the name of Constance, for ever. If, as one exception, this refusal raised a hope in a bosom, ever willing to be¬ lieve itself beloved, its brevity needs as brief a notice. Charles Hastings loved, without addressing Constance, from habit; Vailori had addressed, without loving her, from novelty; but, in reality, she was fated never to inspire a passion, that consciousness could not prevent her from feeling. Yet she looked forward already, to greater gratification from Vallori's equal friendship, than from the inadequate love of any inferior being. She fixed her eyes on the remainder of her life, in which she should be able to think of him calmly; and determined on devoting the whole energies of her mind to the ceaseless task of keeping her love down to his standard, since it was impossible to raise his to the height of her own. She knew that a warm heart and a o
lively fancy, had but too much power to keep a life, unmarked by adventure, as active, within itself, as many passed in a rapid succession of important events. She felt, too, that the powerful feelings which overthrow, and the tender ones, more dangerous still, were given, not to be prided in, but resisted ; for nothing is irresistible but truth. We know we might create more in¬ terest by a detail of sensations, however weak, than of actions, however merito¬ rious ; nor could any character afford a sentimental reader more acceptable mi¬ nutiae, than that of Constance. But, in a tale not intended to enervate the heart, if we endeavour to paint a passion, it is as an adversary, whose power, if unable wholly to exterminate, she at least brought over to the service of virtue. Time flew. The hemisphere of fashion was brightened by another star. Edgar Vailori was an object of attraction in London, to the vain and the wise alike—
all gaiety and nobleness of soul, uncon¬ scious what a wreck he had left behind! Constance was the victim of her own sacrifice. Yet her time, though dreary, was neither unemployed nor unimproved. Her virtues, aa if by habit, still shed happiness around her, on every heart but her own. It had been her reasons wish and prayer, to see and hear no more of Vailori, till she could do so without emotion ; for tw T o years now that wish had been fulfilled. Her mind was too well regulated to repine; but its resigna¬ tion was that of despair. She was tran¬ quil, without having approached one step nearer freedom. Her passion was suppressed, but it was still to be feared; it might yet break forth, in all its hoarded force—and what consequences might not be anticipated ? Too soon^, however, her powers of suf¬ fering were afforded another channel, through which, if not inexhaustible, to exhaust themselves; too soon was she d 2
roused to a more " active agony," by the sudden death of her mother, at an age which reasonably promised many years of health and enjoyment. Almost her last words were " Though leaving you so young and unprotected, my dear child, I depart without a fear for your future conduct; but, for your content's sake, oh, that you had accepted Vailori!" Constance knew not, till this instant, that his proposal was known to her mo¬ ther. How it became so, she never knew; but in the height of her affliction, the assurance that this virtuous and sen¬ sible being would have approved the early choice of her heart, gave to its object a dignity, with which her imagination's self had failed to invest him; so much did she doubt her own judgment, of worth, the charms of whose possessor might have lent her too dazzling a medium through which to view it, When her pious filial cares were closed^
and she found herself left—with friends, youth, and adequate support, indeed, but bereft of the only person she had ever loved mutually, and without disguise; then, and not till then, did she give way to the full force of her grief. Whom should she now have to ad rise and watch over her ? whom, at least, with that interest in the cause, and that en¬ dearment in the manner, which could belong only to a mother, and bless only her own child! She felt her loss was ir T reparable. Soon after this melancholy event, Mr. Hastings invited Constance to quit her gloomy solitude; and, as Mrs. Raymond had done on her widowhood, seek con¬ solation beneath the roof, whose mas¬ ter's age would now supply the want of other sanction. But Constance knew that there also Vailori was un forgotten ; and she wished not to dissipate a holy grief, in a forbidden indulgence. She disliked, too, the " hermit's life," wliich
.she knew it was too late now to reform, and against which Charles, in case she resided there, would appeal, perhaps so strongly as to impair the hitherto un¬ broken unity of the father and son. Charles had, from her birth, a brother's affection for Constance, which she had gratefully returned; till, unluckily, it took a more passionate character, at the very period when she became incapable of rewarding it. Till she saw Vailori, a doubt of Charles's infallibility had never occurred to her; and with ali her natural penetration, per¬ haps, but for this stranger, never would have done so, with sufficient force to pre¬ vent her from making her lover happy. She heard him speak well of most people, and guessed not how little these unknown friends might deserve his praise, except by lavishing similar ones on himself. She saw his confidence in their affec¬ tion, and had never seen thern laugh at his credulity. In fact, she knew no-
thing of that world of which Charles was an epitome, and could, therefore, know nothing of him till she became ac¬ quainted with Vailori; when, by observ¬ ing what he was, she, for the first time, discovered what Charles was not. With such feelings Constance wrould have been as impolitic as ungenerous, by sharing his home, to give her admirer either hopes or advantages which she could not complete. She respected his peace, and both their liberties. She fore* saw, feared, and avoided the influence his amusing converse, and many good qua¬ lities might regain over her—an influence to which she knew he was neither con¬ tent to attach the name of friendship, nor resolved to attempt adding that of matri inonial authority; and often* in retro¬ spect, did she bless the indecision which saved them both from pain and lasting repentance. Mrs. Raymond had been dead a month,
and her mourning orphan still occupied their once happy home, when a letter from Lady Emily Raymond, her widowed aunt, held inducements for change not likely to be long resisted. This lady, though with no more mind than sufficed for the forms of society, gathered the most distinguished persons about her, by the affability of her man¬ ners, and the propriety of her conduct; not to name the attractions of her enter¬ tainments. She had no family, but had seen ^ v Jd admired her niece when a child; and now, hearing that she was left, at the age of eighteen, without a female guardian, offered herself a candidate for so pleasing a charge. Constance, after some deliberation, wrote a grateful consent, and named a day for her removal, as requested. She felt, indeed, that it was her duty to quit a place, whose every path was thickly set with snares for her peace, every where
haunted by images she trusted new scenes might banish. " I shall breathe freely there /" she thought, looking forward to 5 her departure, as to her emancipation from the slavery of grief and passion. This hope inspired her with a compa¬ rative quiet, which lasted till the night previous to her intended flight: then, in¬ deed, nature reclaimed her own, and fortitude was swept away, before the tide which, with overwhelming violence, poured back on her soul. " All then is ready !" she cried: « Little outward preparation was required! How soon it is over! Every thing now is ready —but myself. I seem spell-bound to this birth-place of my heart: Oh, that it would break as I leave it! I shall soon have nothing to live for; not even seeing one inanimate object which will be dear to me! I never loved my home so well as now; and must that but add a reason for my quitting it r He did not say fare- d 5
well to me; ! but sure he left an adieu on every thing so long adorned by his pre¬ sence, and now they all speak to me at once! May he return, and find the heart I leave here, in quitting these haunts for ever!"
CHAPTER IV.
" There is then such a one > I dreamt not of it ! >J Basil : By Joanna Baillie.
It was midnight. A loud rap at the door aroused Constance from her farewell reverie. Her little household were re¬ tired to rest; she answered the summons herself; and, in an instant, her plans, her fate, and her emotions, were changed for ever! Whether by weal or woe she asked not; fGr Vailori brought it. Slie was in his presence once more. He came to claim the fulfilment of her parting promise—to call once more into action the too long dormant energies of her mind.
Before he spoke she had received from his arms, a young female, trembling with timidity and fatigue. What a history did one glance at that fair form convey! " Let me know her at rest f began Vailori, " before I apologize for intruding so early on a grief with which I know but too well how to sympathize. We married and eloped from London this morning: I have no friend to offer her but you; no home but yours. I will sa¬ tisfy you that she deserves it when you have led her to a room," What an office for Constance! She bowed in pale but firm submission to his commands, and bore her singular fate in a manner on which she often re¬ flected with wonder. u Your bride is welcome to me, Vai¬ lori," she said, saluting her fair rival, who hid her blushes on that bosom she had just unconsciously laid waste. Even this shock could not render Con¬ stance forgetful of that hospitality so con-
spicuous in her nature. She would throw no impediments in their way to happi¬ ness ; she never disclosed the state of her house, in which every thing was packed up, but the furniture in the immediate service of its solitary inmate. Without disturbing the servants, she instantly af¬ forded her guests refreshment; and made every arrangement for their comfort, at the expence of her own; nay, when at¬ tending on the helpless bride, in that very chamber which had so often echoed her own despairing sighs, she forgot herself, and strove, by the most sisterly re-assu¬ rances, to tranquillize feelings, the possi¬ bility of which to herself she now resigned for life. When she rejoined Vailori, he re¬ marked, with regret and solicitude, the change in her appearance, attributing it to the recent death of his lamented friend. u I am not changed for you,'* she re-
turned, and was hurrying away; but he caught her hand. " Nay," said he, " 'tis time to deserve the kindness you have extended to us on trust. We can have no reserves with you." « We!" thought Constance : " So, he is no longer single even in speech now; he who went from me upon the world alone!" " My wife," continued Vailori, " is an orphan, rich, and of age—Lady Felicia Wilmer. Her fortune was left in the hands of a guardian, (whose name and abode I don't know,) till she married; or for ever, unless she married as he pleased. Among the many factions of fashion, there are two, in which we, luckily, be¬ longed to opposite sides; so our plans were not suspected by one party, and aided by the other. Our retreat is safe, if my friends can mislead hers. Poverty and concealment are the best things we
are sure of; for my means are naturally inadequate to the support of one, who has resigned such splendor in her love for me. How she will be rewarded, Heaven only knows; but she vows to bear any woe— any change." " Which she has wrought!" thought Constance, " Did / repay thee thus ?" iC She is cheaply purchased by my ruin,'* resumed her lover ; and while she thinks the same of me, we can, but not without your aid, be happy. She knows not the presumption which caused our parting. I led her to you as to one who promised to be a friend to me and mine, when we should have no other." " And I will keep my promise," said Constance. Vailori thanked her by a kiss, which, though his first, she dared return; as a proof of pardon for the sorrow he had already caused her, and a pledge of willing endurance for the future. She fled from him, flung herself on a
sopha in the first room she came to, and, for awhile, every painful part of his changed situation was lost in her sense of the privileges it thus early bestowed. Alas! her coldest sorrow had been safer than that joy:—it was too soon expiated by a consciousness of the singular destiny now spread before her. " Fatally rash boy !" she cried; " he exults in what he may too soon deplore. In what care has he involved his—his— wife ; his friend, himself, thafs worst of all—to gratify an imprudent, perhaps a misplaced passion. Yet 'tis thus he should love, and 'tis such a beauty he should bless. I knew it must be so, at last; and so it would have been, one day or other, even if he had been my husband. He is spared that falsehood, that vice, that misery—but —married ! Vailori! how unfit for such a charge ! To bring his bride to we—to announce her so abruptly—how incon¬ siderate, how indelicate—to the house of mourning—how prophetic ! Yes, 'tis all
unblest—the lovers, the union, myself, my home, doomed past redemption now, and who may guess to what afflictions ?" Yet, though Constance spoke thus, she as yet hardly understood her own words. It always took time for grief or joy to penetrate tbe depths of her heart; and the more familiar either became, the more intensely it was suffered. Her's was exactly the reverse of those externally sensitive natures, whose feelings over¬ throw them at the first blow, and then depart. Not at this moment could she calculate on the worst of what she might be called on to endure. How many habits, till now innocent, she had to re¬ linquish, or indulge in shame and se¬ cresy ! How total a change to make in all her dearest thoughts, or to consign the rest of her life to remorse, for that love which had been so long her pride, which was itself unchanged, undimi¬ nished in purity, hallowed by its dura¬ tion, and its despair—yet henceforth to
be branded as criminal, if not destroyed or disguised! Could marriage in reality make Vai¬ lori less deserving her esteem ? She had but few wishes left to resign, but must she barter her senses, and her reason? for in so doing only could she cease to love him. Was that the only road left her to regain her self-respect? Was it virtue who demanded this at her hands ? Surely not! But we do not live for virtue only ; we must adapt our virtues to the general fashion, or risk suspicion, let us mean however irreproachably. She owned that all the world expects of us is a just debt, but felt it not the less difficult to discharge. It was long before she could think thus connectedly; but, as gradually her ideas formed themselves, she saw before her a mental warfare, which had not even the consoling prospect of a period, except in the grave.
The grey and balmy dawn was now fast invadingthe moon-light and extinguishing the stars. Constance became sensible of the length of her vigil. "Still awake!" she cried, in accents of shame ; " may I not sleep and forget—for this night at least ? I shall never need oblivion more than now. Yet there is not even rest for me; nor, in my watchfulness, dare I even indulge a thought—a grief—while others---- '* She opened the window, and leant gasp¬ ing out of it. "TiH now," she said, I have never loved wholly in vain. I shall never be happy more. I shall for¬ get what happiness means, though I must see it daily received and bestowed by Vailori! Shall I die?" she murmured, looking down on the depth beneath her. —" Yes, that were the surest escape—" She paused, " What! betray myself, and disappoint his only hope ? sacrifice earth and heaven at one desperate and cowardly instant ? No, I am all in error: till now I have never loved to any pur¬ pose ; and I have often heard my mother
say, f we should never think of know¬ ing peace no more, under any trial that does not deprive us of the power to con¬ fer it on others/ My mother! I will live j—I will bear even life, as long as heaven wills it, that my death may be one that shall not exclude the hope of re¬ joining thee!" Here her tears at last found way; nor, sanctioned by the name of filial grief, could she longer repress them. The phrenzied fever of her brain ceased to threaten her reason, and she at last sunk into a sleep, which, though it more re¬ sembled a swoon, gave her a respite from these tumultuous horrors, and hoarded up a little strength for the commence¬ ment of her new existence. No dream of joy nor sorrow broke this death-like trance; so that when Con¬ stance awoke, the full weight of her ca¬ lamity fell back with new and stunning violence on her mind. Some village fete had set their bells ringing; and these sounds, so suited to a bridal, mixed with
the whirling of her brain, where the same few ideas recurred and recurred, with the same monotonous and persecuting regu¬ larity as the few though loud notes of that peal; till the association of ideas haunted her long after their causes had ceased, and she sickened for ever, at a sound once not entirely unpleasing to her ear. In these miseries, envy and jealousy had no share. Let nothing persuade us that love cannot exist without these dark companions. They are artificial passions, to which weak minds work themselves up, because it is expected of them by prejudice. To man they may be more natural; but woman's love cannot be pure that admits them, and is never so in¬ tense and lasting as when, absorbed in reverence tor its object, it can oppose nothing to that superior will, nor selfishly deny itself to any thing dear to that being. But while such rare attachments as those of Constance claim most praise,
the meed of pity falls to weaker flames; for those who have personified Innocence, never lent her one attribute for bestow¬ ing pain. Circumstances alone tormented Con¬ stance ; her feelings were, though not in¬ dependent of them, of that fortunate temperament, which bestowed her best support, beneath that of heaven ; so that she was firmer in her disappointment than the sufferer from a more earthly adoration would have been, at the in¬ stant when ail her wishes were about to be fulfilled. There was now no reprieve for Con¬ stance ; she had to enter on her fresh duties, to begin her life over again, in¬ stantly ; and was resolved not to dis¬ grace it—at least on the first starting. " My thoughts may still awhile be swayed by fate," thought she; " but my actions shall keep better pace with my better will. My mother's last words were a confideut hope in my consistency; and,
though she little guessed then, to how speedy and severe a test it would be brought, still I will not prove unworthy the trust she reposed in me, nor forfeit the respect of him she so respected." When Constance met Vailori and Lady Felicia, she mentally owned that time had even increased the difficulty of her reform. Vailori was but too much im¬ proved. His air had gained a decision which was graceful, because unpretend¬ ing : and his mind, brightened by com¬ munion with wit and wisdom, gaiety and greatness, breathed about him that " di¬ vine oblivion of low-thoughted care," in which was still preserved, through many temptations, the noble simplicity of heart, which could alone render safe the inevi¬ table destiny of loving and trusting so young and imprudent a man. Nor was it here alone that Constance had reason to pride herself in her former choice: Vallori's delicacy to the feelings of his bride,spared from outrage the stronger
and more painful ones of his friend. His attentions were those of a brother; and Felicia received them with an artless sa¬ tisfaction, which, completing the contrast to the fawning and coquetry of vulgar honey-moons, forced Constance to ap¬ plaud her own taste, with more joy in the proof, than sorrow at the occasion. Yet, though she impartially owned Fe¬ licia's beauty and amiability, she could not help fearing her incapable of remedy¬ ing the imperfections of her husbands character. The hurry of gay life had left little time for the exquisite traits of her dispo¬ sition to develope themselves. Though Constances elder, she was many years less mature in principle, and ready to re¬ ceive any new impression from those with whom she might live; but she loved, and her husband was her superior in intel¬ lect : much might be expected from emu¬ lation in such case. As Constance was sitting between her
guests, at breakfast, Surl, her only man¬ servant, a Yorkshire youth of eccentri¬ cally blunt address, entered saying— " You must tell me all the rest Fm to do, now; for the chaise is ready." Never, till this instant, since the arrival of Vailori, had she remembered her in¬ tended departure; which, of course, was now set aside. To conceal it from her friends was all her present anxiety. She motioned Surl to the door, and rose to follow him; but, mistaking her inten¬ tion, he persevered— " Mind you lock up all that you leave behind: you ought to be o^by this time/* " I do not go at all, Surl," answered his young mistress. Surl opened his eyes, his mouth, and the door. The colour rushed to his face; he looked as if about to say, " I wish you would know your own mind." Constance failed in dislodging him from the room, before he found voice, E
and grumbled rapidly, though at inter¬ vals. " Why, isn't that Lady Emily, your aunt, a come to fetch you ? and ar'nt I discharged, and the house shut up f and not going after ali ? Come, I like that, however !*' " Do you r" said Felicia, laughing; you look quite angry that Miss Raymond stays here, and you stay with her/' u Angry !" exclaimed he, u I've as much ?yght to be glad as any body else." " Dear Edgar, did you ever see such an original before ?" " I've seen him before," replied VaUori, " though he does not remember me." Surl said nothing; but putting his hand into his pocket, produced a silver pencil case, which Vailori had left behind him by accident; and grumbling, "There's some¬ thing you forgot when you went away!" bolted from the room, after his mistress, without vouchsafing a word of welcome
to one he scorned to defraud of a trifle, which, from length of time, must have been forgotten. Mrs. Watson, equally honest, but more warm of manner, flew, on the first news of her " dear young gentleman's" return, to see bim once again, not a little disap¬ pointed to find herself a false prophetess, in always having said, « She should yet live to call Constance Mrs. Vallorir
CHAPTER V.
' This potent beauty—this victorious fair— This happy object of our different care— Her let me follow—her let me attend!" Prior,
We need not detail the re-arrange¬ ments Constance made for continuing her household, and declining Lady Emi¬ ly's invitation. The activity to which they forced her, however, was of service, at this juncture, to her mind; and she determined, since the discovery had been accidentally made to the Valloris, to deny nothing; as mystery would have bestowed a consequence on what she had
given up, which she really did not feel it deserved; since to stay with those we love, in the home of our childhood, in preference to departing for the abode of a stranger, claims little enough praise for self-denial. She re-entered the sitting-room, where Lady Felicia (or, as she was, for safety, to be called, Mrs. Vailori) was still laugh¬ ing at the " poor serf, so unlike the people of her town friends, whom nothing could astonish." Vailori was silent, from a glimpse at the truth, and cast a look of comparison from one to the other, little in favour of his bride. Constance felt, when the flush of flat¬ tered vanitv had subsided, that it was not right he should discern this difference between them. " I will watch," thought she, "latent—dormant— must be the qua¬ lities that can alone constitute his content in this unthinking Beauty; but, under Heaven, even my humble agency may rail them to light and action. 1 will
make him respect her; and can at leas teach her how to love him P While these visions were diffusing rap ture over her countenance, she remained gazing fondly on Felicia, unconscious of the grateful regards of Vailori. At last, finding their silence grow embarrassing, she looked round, and meeting his glance, smiled enquiringly, which giving him the wished-for permission, he cried— " And have you relinquished plans so matured, so near completion—for your departure to Lady Emily's, too; can you, without a murmur, for our sakes ? In any one else I should be even more asto¬ nished !" Felicia now awoke to her sense of the affair. " Invited there!" she said, "The sweet¬ est place—such splendid doings always go, .g on there ! and you refuse, and stay with us, in such on out-of-the-world little spot as this ? What a sacrifice !" " This !" returned Constance : " Oh,
you don't know me yet; for you, the wife of my friend, so sacred a trust, what would I not do ? But I owe you every thing for releasing me from the necessity of leaving my home; which, before I hoped for such a pretext, such an induce¬ ment to stay, or any ray to break its gloom, I anticipated with horror; but out of the world as it is, it has long been all the world to me, and will now be dearer than ever!" Felicia had no words for a reply, but threw herself into the arms of Constance. " Yes, take her to your heart," cried Vailori, and make her like yourself." " God forbid !" thought Constance, shuddering. He left them; and recovering, she ob¬ served, with a smile— " He will make you jealous." " True," answered Felicia, *' of antici¬ pating my sentiments/' " Then I shall not love you in vain!" iC No, indeed ! for I'm not so used to be
loved; as you may judge from my marrying the first man who offered for me." " Your first love! Happy woman P " Why," returned the little wife, <l c As for your first loves/ an Irish lady said to me, * I've had fifty of them.' Other fine fellows have talked of dying for me,— though none of living for me, you know; of the highest rank and fortune, too: but I'm sick of such every day affairs; so I resolved to strike into something new. I had never liked any one so seriously as I did Vailori. God forgive me! there is no hope of amendment, and the fault is likely to bring its own punishment." " Forgiveness! fault! amendment! pu¬ nishment P repeated Constance, " for loving the virtues of your husband /" '• Ah, my dear; since he is my hus¬ band, that part of the bargain is more tlian I deserve; for / never thought of his virtues, and might have married a man without any; so, that there was a
possibility of its being worse, is one con¬ solation." What language for Constance to hear without retort! She, however, only re¬ plied— " Vou cannot need consolation, who are so enviable; and ought to be, must be, so liappy;—whose deserts I read in Vallori's choice, as yours confirm my confidence in his. If my endeavours can be want¬ ing to complete your content, and reward you for blessing him, you shall be happy — in pity to me, who will henceforth have no happiness but in yours!" The young pair had not resided many days with Constance, before, returning late from an evening at Mr. Morton's, where Felicia was not, likely to meet any of her former acquaintances, Surl opened the door to them, in darkness; having fallen asleep, and let liis light burn out. He soon brought them some paper, for the purpose of kindling the candles from the tire; and, being still drowsy, left it £ 5
on tlie table. VaUori, ever curious, opened, and began reading it to himself; but soon exclaimed, " Do listen, mes belles! Surl has been copying something from a novel, I fancy. I'm grieved 'tis so imperfect; but pray, hearf and he read the following frag¬ ment :— '* ' Speaks kind when she does speak, and is always satisfied with her clothes, and her fare; but as for being waited on, board, or dress, she can't abide it. Laughs with any body ; but, if alone for a mi¬ nute, she sighs so, and talks to herself, and sings songs I never heard any where else ; and writes letters nobody takes to the Post; and, just at dusk, walks up and down the garden for hours- a bad sign. " Stay, here are a few words more :- " ( You ought to know, and I doubt you are of my mind, tliough you won't say so. He was a fine fellow ; and they was always together. She have never been the same since he left her/—
'* Any, more ? Oh— " * Dear Mrs. Watson, your humble servant, Sam'l Surl/—- " Why, this is the rough copy of an old letter. Watson told me she was from home some months since." " Give it me/' cried Constance, vainly striving to assume composure. Vailori looked at the paper again; grew confused, and threw it into tbe fire, adding— " There's nothing else but Mr. Charles's name." The turn he thus gave to his sense of SurPs letter relieved Constance, at the moment, from the terrors of detection ; but the name Vailori had read, was not that of Charles Hastings. He dropped the subject, never resumed ; nor did he enquire of Surl, or Watson, a key to this mystery : if it raised a suspicion, he soon checked it—the easier, as it was not one that eould affect him. We easily forget what we have no interest in. It was not.
however, to be doubted, that Surl had described his mistress, not without a guess at her attachment to VaUori. He too had read a proof of it, and was in¬ sensible to that proof. Constance owned with a sigh, that so it ought to be; but, that her abstraction had been observed, even by such a looker on, lent an added guard to her manner in future. 4 * How worthy I find that Morton !' said Vailori, this same evening. " The poor man who risks making a foe, among the rich, in tlie cause of truth, will do even better things." " I give him credit for much of that sort of spirit," said Constance ; " but to what instance do you allude ?" 4i Why, Miss Collins, one night, at a party, after I had lost the battle I made to avoid her acquaintance (as if knowing one such, nothing more or less, could make a difference), Miss Collins, then, told me in confidence, that you had your faults."
" Me ! how came such an inconsider¬ able person to be her theme r" u Why I agree you were very young then, which nobody could accuse her of. She could not forgive it; and repeated that you had your faults, when Morton, who was at her elbow, interposed, that 4 among them he trusted, that of slander¬ ing the absent was not to be found/ ' Insolence to one's face is ill excused under such a clause, Sir/ retorted the lady, looking, guess how lovely ! ' I own, for me she has a deference; but you, Mr. Morton, I wonder you defend her, pertly as she treats you/ ' Bless her!' said Morton, * our squabbles go nearer to make me forget my cares, than all the pitying condescensions some people pa¬ tronize me with ; besides this, her pert- ness flatters me, for she never disputes with those she thinks incorrigible/ Miss Collins was not so easily beat off l Tis well she don't talk much, for I'm never prepared for what she's going to say; aud
when it comes, though it sneaks forth so quietly, its effects always terrify me. She is fit but to converse with men/ c That is what few ladies are fit for Ma'am.' * Nay, but she has already caught an unfeminine vulgarity.' ( Yes Ma'am, the vulgarity to think health no disgrace, and the use of her speech and senses no positive evil!" " Enough ! enough of all loves !" in¬ terrupted Constance. Felicia begged Vailori to go on—she could listen for ever. " I have no more to tell ye, or I would; so my power obeys Constance, and my will is on your side. I promised Miss Collins to attempt this young person's reform, if ever I should meet her; but I was too vain: I over-rated my influence, for she has her faults still, and the same of which Miss Collins then convicted her." Felicia grew so fond of Constance, that, by degrees, she conformed to all the
most favourite habits of the " little out-of~ the-world spot," to which she was now reconciling herself very fast. She reformed her hours, read and worked at home, dispensed with super¬ fluous ornament and attendance, heard of balls and plays in the neighbouring- towns, read of the more congenial de¬ lights of London, without many repinings, and soon seemed to live but for her husband and her friend. Constance, though a well educated woman, had hitherto indulged all the contempt of a true character, for the host of accomplishments, whieh so often supply the place of that education, they are falsely supposed to constitute. She had not been, as yet, ashamed, when asked to dance, to sing, to play, to display her fancy works, or her skill at cards, to confess her ignorance; but now, seeing what Felicia could best com¬ prehend and admire, she toiled away her leisure in reviving her acquaintance with
these agreabilities, to amuse her fair guest; not without a view to the future service of their family, when they should be blest with one. A hope which lit her perseverance with smiles. She also cultivated the natural genti¬ lity of her manner, and gave scope to her taste in dress : it was not, however the companion of Lady Felicia she was thus anxious to render more worthy her new honours, but the friend of Vallori's wife. Felicia, whenever they ventured into the society of the village families, was anxious, with friendly vanity, to display her friend's superiorities ; but Constance would not be shewn off, and jealously re¬ served her talents for home. There, if ever, (as will sometimes occur between the most adoring pairs) a word, a look, disturbed the peace of the Valloris, its effects were always abbreviated by the mediation of Constance. When alone with Edgar, " How can
you," would she say, " resent the mistakes of that dear girl, who would hardly sur¬ vive the pain of thinking your displeasure serious, while conscious of no intentional offence. Come, set her the example of forgiveness—'tis your duty." Felicia met with similar pleadings. Cl Poor Edgar looks out of humour; but indeed, he is only low spirited, be¬ cause he longs to own himself in the wrong. Seem to forget your mutual folly ; or if he be ashamed to begin con¬ cessions, remember 'tis a wife's and a woman's pride to yield. I know you are only spiting yourself by this pretended gravity, and, to own the truth, if it did not make me uncomfortable, I should laugh in your faces !" These reasonings never failed to pro¬ duce the effect desired. Perhaps it may not be saying much for the Valloris, in confessing them called into action even in their honeymoon ; but the fact is, that Edgar and Felicia were old acquaintances,
at least, th ugh they themselves too young, and too lover-like, always to agree ; but, as there was not one particle of rancour in either breast, nor an atom of coldness in either disposition, the mild interposition of Constance soon suc¬ ceeded, ol all occasions, in restoring a state of happiness, which, though but comparative, was yet too fair to last.
CHAPTER VI.
Ci It was a fearful sight, to see Such high resolve, and Constancy, In form so slight and fair!" Marmiow One day, as Constance was sitting at a window with Felicia, and replying to her questions as to the inhabitants ofall the villas the view presented, Felicia asked, " And who, in the name of taste, can live in that large grey house, at the bottom of the wood, to the left there, as far as you can see ?" " A widower of fortune," replied Con¬ stance, " Very good, and very odd ; you would call him quite a rustic, yet he is
so lively and sensible, so fond of Edgar, <and such a favorite of his, that Vm sure you could not help liking him. I wonder I never named him to you before. I dare say you may have met his son, in town, though Vailori, yet, has not—that Charles, he teazes me about." u Charles who ?" asked Felicia. " Charles, son to the fox-hunting Frank Hastings, who lives in that gvey building." Felicia screamed, and clinging to her friend, beseeched her c v save her. Beset by a thousand inconsistent and contra¬ dictory alarms, Constance begged an ex¬ planation. " My Guardian!" cried Felicia at last; Ci I have flown from the risk to the certainty of discovery. Mr. Hastings, the name—the description accords. Oh! he will tear me from my husband for ever !" £i He shall not—he dares not—who¬ ever you mean," cried Vailori, catching her terror as he entered. " If you tvill
stay with me, if you can forgive me your ruin. 'Till you desert me I cannot be all miserable!" Constance saw that he was pale and agitated; but attributed it to sympathy with his wife, till, as if striving to recall his ideas, he abruptly demanded, *' What have you heard ?" " Mr. Hastings, my guardian!" began Felicia, " I never till this instant knew he had a seat in this neighbourhood." Vailori heard this, but scarcely seemed to feel it. tc Is that all ?" he murmured ; but Felicia heard notlung to excite her curiosity in his accents, and Constance postponed her questions, to remind the trembling girl of what she could never, for an instant, forget herself,that "nothing now, in the power of this world, could separate her from her husband/' As ready to receive a hope as a fear, Felicia followed up the train of thought thus suggested.
" Is Mr. Hastings here now?" she asked. " He has been, and is likely to con¬ tinue absent for some time ;—your only chance my love, for he is my most inti¬ mate friend." " Oh, no, I've yet another chance: ten years ago, as soon as I was left to his care, he entrusted me to Mama's friend, Mu. Dallas, and has never seen me since; he could not ;^jllect me, only I must never be called Felicia before him ; and, for the rest, there's now no daring to resume my style, till some eclaircissement has taken place. Mrs. Vailori I must continue still, I suppose. That formal, vulgar ' Mistress/ which never let me be a bride, and find out my new consequence hy degrees, but thrust the wife upon me, at once, must I for ever— t " Aye, for ever," interrupted Vailori, distractedly: " Your title would now but
mock you ; it will be henceforth an empty one, indeed:" and he rushed from the room. The light hearted Felicia took a book, and flung herself on a sopha, while Con¬ stance went in search of Vailori, on the cause of whose unusual disorder, her mind painfully misgave her. She found him pacing an adjoining room. When he saw her he stopped, and said with desperate trembling haste— " Oh, to hear that dear heedless thus lamenting trifles which she would forget, did she know, as soon she must—but who shall dare to tell Iter, that she has in¬ volved herself in thefateof an unfortunate, marked out, even from the hour in which headlong passion bestowed his being, for the football of Fortune. Oh, my poor Felicia ! k it thou, who, after a youth of careless splendor, art doomed, in the spring of thy love, and of thy beautv, to * ml 7 penury—and by the man who swore to cherish and protect thee ? Why did she
return my unlucky passion ? but she will expiate that imprudence ; she will hate me, iesert me ; and I deserve it, for trusting our all to a villain!" He fell back on a seat, overpowered by emotion. Constance hung over him, for some moments, in speechless terror ; at last, pressing his cold damp hand, she mur¬ mured, soothingly ; " Come, come! take courage ! your misfortunes — be they what they may—cannot be the offspring of any misconduct that deserves such self-accusations as these; and were it possible that they should, 1 will pledge my word for Felicia's pardon and sym¬ pathy. We are rich enough for hap¬ piness—fear nothing for your wife—-we will share each other's fate, each other s home. There uow! tears! for shame, then, Vailori! for her sake be yourself, or she will suspect, and why should she— at least till we have devised a remedy! Confide in me; I am fitter to bear it; only let me see you more composed : till
then, I can think of nothing. Let not grief boast such a victory as the overthrow of your mind!" " Grief!" answered Vailori, in strug¬ gling accents: " No Constance,"—this was the first time he had ever called her so;—"Let gratitude now excuse my weak¬ ness, with one so every way my superior. Had our Felicia your fortitude, I should less fear the effects of my explanation; for, after all, I will tell her, and know the worst at once. Here she comes, smiling on me ; and must it be for me first to cloud that brow with care ?" Felicia entered, u Edgar," she said, " After that tremendous Hastings affair, I read myself to sleep over a novel, and have had so sweet a dream!" (i Ah, why did you awake then ?" cried Vailori sadly—" Your life has yet been but a sweet dream, my love ; reality is a widely different thing P "Good God!" cried Felicia, "What F
makes you speak and look so gloomily - and you, too, Constance, are you ill, or have 1 offended either of you ?—if I have pray tell me; I had rather be scolded, than looked on thus—do forgive me!" u It is Edgar." said Constance, "who thinks he has to ask your pardon. What would you say to him if he had consigned you to absolute poverty ?" Ci Why, that he had a right, as Surl would have it, to do what he would with his own." Vailori hung on her words : Constance proceeded, " then you would. not hate him, nor desert him, if he were suddenly deprived ofall he possessed r" 6i Hate him r desert him ? who taught vou lo torment mc by such impossible nonsense?"' '-< Vollori himself!" u No, he must be sure, if he judges my heart by his own, that if we were beggared, I could but love him the bet¬ ter; to prove it I almost wish we were,"
4 - 1 have nothing left in the world," said Vailori, solemnly. " Yes you have>" cried Felicia, growing very pale: " Constance and I will be all the worid to you—" and she threw herself into his arms. Had not Vailori required so strong a re-assurance of his wife's truth, Constance would not yet have been taught trie burning pang of first witness¬ ing such a sight. Much revived by the firmness of Feli¬ cia, Vailori now begged to explain the cause of his affliction. " I was but twenty-one," he began, 41 when I first saw England;—an orphan, destitute of friends, and desolate upon the earth ;—my heart just lacerated by the death of my nearest, most beloved, and only relative. The first person who was kind to mc, in this country, and you may guess how acceptable was kindness, from any source,- was a Mrs. Stanhope, a handsome widow, between thirty and p 2
forty; who lived in London, dashingly enough too, though on a small income. She was obviously fond of me, but I re¬ ceived her attentions as those of a mother, nnd my filial return was not exactly—" he paused—hesitated, and continued : "To be sure she gave me very good, and I was dull enough to think it, very disinterested advice, against the heartless excesses of town. I took her advice, but not her alternative; and by falling into extremes, offended her. But she is married again now; sol must not play the coxcomb at her expence. On my return to London, after residing here, I hoped she had forgiven my blindness ; for she introduced me to her new husband, Mr. Charlton, a rich stock¬ broker, who had just married her, for her person and connexions. He seemed a plodding honest sort of man; talked to mc of liaving made the fortunes of several friends who had entrusted tiieir capitals lo him ; disgorged a commercial jargon.
which, like the harangues of a charlatan, awed most where they were least under¬ stood. I transferred half my small pro¬ perty to him ■, not that I knew how to value the wealth he promised; for to me, till lately, luxury had been in common, but that my residence in England soon taught me I must reduce my expences, or enlarge my supplies. The first was out of the question, to a lover on the point of becoming a husband ; and the idea of effecting the last by the exertions of my own talents, had never yet entered my head ; so I embraced his plans for my aggrandizement, which Charlton seemed successful in forwarding. He dilated on my, or, as it proves, his good luck ; and the day before I left London with Felicia, I gave him my written power to use the whole as he pleased. Well has he obeyed —well repaid me. To-day I find a letter from my banker, full of professional cau- tioiH, all too late now, telling me of ' the transfer made by my order to Mr. Churl-
ton;' and adding l that he has decamped, and gone no one knows where.' A se¬ cond letter is from his poor wife. I must read it to you. " * My injured Friend, " ' Do you, indeed, share the ruin of a woman, who, trusting like yourself to a villain, has been severely punished ? By this time you must have heard that Charlton has gone off with my, and, I fear I must add, your property. I shall use all possible efforts to redress you, though a prison welcome him back. 1 will never see him more, and abjure liis name for ever. Your calamity rfflicts me beyond my own. It defeats, reverses —the aim for which alone I presun ed to insult you by an introduction to so low a wretch- an aim which consoled me for stooping to call him my husband; J mean, that of your advantage. 'Tis well I never trusted him with my heart, or he would have borne that away too, de¬ priving me of the only pleasure left me
mii earth—that of signing myself, as iu our happier days, " * Your " f Sibylla Stanhope.' u ' Write me instant permission to put your wrongs into the hands of my ablest friends in the law.' u I have interest in the law," cried Constance; " a relation of my father'* stands high in that profession. Owe no¬ thing, trust nothing, to this woman: there is no foe so dangerous as a woman whose base passion has been repulsed/' " I believe it," said Vailori, " from the reverse—that there is no friend so safe as a woman who was unable to be more." Constance was pleased with tliis tri¬ bute ; but Vailori went on— < c Trust nothing to lier! Too late, I have trusted every thing to her. She knows my story, my marriage, my re¬ treat; and if she he my enemy, my bes! interests are in her power; but I must
believe a too great tendency to the oppo¬ site extreme is her only fault. She is ro¬ mantic, but not vicious." iC 'Tis a vice to be romantic, at her years," said Constance; " but you know best -. yet, since poverty did not cause her husbands flight, I should fear bad coun¬ sel." ' " But she is ruined herself, you see." " We have only her word for that. Much as I should enjoy hearing Charl¬ ton reviled by another, I cannot think it to his wife's credit to begin. She can be nobody's friend who is no ther husband's." " Can this be Constance," exclaimed Felicia, " with whom every body used to be in the right? I did not think you could be suspicious." " Nor would I," said Constance, " step out of my character, if I feared your blame, for a caution only taught me by affection for you." < : You are a wonderful young crea-
ture," cried Vailori, shaking her hand, " and I will not answer this letter." " Did you ever intend it then ?" " Oh ! common politeness------" " Pshaw ! the letter is not one of com¬ mon politeness." " Well; but the man who receives such, and from such a woman, cannot account for what mad things he may intend ; but, after this, I swear—" " No swearing,—no confessions/' cried Felicia, putting her finger to his lips. u What a silly boy! when you might pass for faultless for ever, only by keep¬ ing your own counsel." " To-day," said Constance, " I will write to the relation I named, on your affairs. Felicia, thus unknown, will soon, I know, conciliate Mr. Hastings, and then we will disclose all. Wait the event of these plans in patience here; if it be fa¬ vourable, dispose of yourselves as you will; if not, this is still your home." " No," returned Vailori, with ardour: f5
" I have made one victim by my fate; let me not add another by my will. 1 am young, and wish for independence; there are professions enough for which I am fitted. I cannot live inactively. You are not rich, and I will burden your ge¬ nerosity no longer than necessity obliges me." " I applaud your motives," said Con¬ stance ; "and, if I can assist, I will not oppose your schemes. I liave interest in the army; will that suit you?" u Not in a war against France/' he said, " which I may live to hear pro¬ claimed again. Nothing should have tempted me to take arms against Eng¬ land. I owe a filial forbearance to both countries; but a voluntary reverence to France, as the refuge of hei* who had no other." " Ah ! pray, tell her your story," cried Felicia ; I'm sure she will enjoy it. Do you know, Constance, he would not let me marry him till I had heard it. He
rhinks always it would be so easy to un- ^each one to love him ; but, indeed, I rnought him the more interesting after it. I dote on any thing so out of the way. Pray teli it, Edgar; 'twill divert us from our ennuir i( There is nothing very diverting in it," he said; " but Constance shall hear it,"
CHAPTER VIL
" I will obey, not willingly alone, But gladly, as the mandate were her own, And, while that face renews my filial grief, .Memory shall weave a chanu for my reliet. By Contemplation's aid, nor sought in vain, I seem to have lived my childhood o'er again : And, white the wings of Fancy «till arc free, And 1 can view this mimic show of thee, Death has but half succeeded in his theft, Thyself removed, thy power to sooth me left'." Cottper, on his Mother'* Pi'-turv
' « About forty years ago," began Vai¬ lori, " the French, in re-capturing a ter¬ ritory of India, which had been just disputed by its chief, or prince, I be¬ lieve, burnt his harem to the ground.
One of the few lives saved, was that of his infant daughter, Nelika. She was never ransomed, as her father had fallen, and she might be supposed to have perish¬ ed in the flames. Considerable booty was taken with her, and unanimously voted, in just proportion, to an officer who had gallantly distinguished himself in the affair: his wife, before she had a hope of such reward, having kindly offered to protect the orphan. " Her husband fell in the next contest, and they leturned to France, where Nelika lived happily in the chateau of this lady's father, till she was sixteen, and time had left the generous French woman no one but her young favorite to share her wealth, and console her for her lost relations. " At this time an English officer, wlio had been wounded in a recent skirmish, threw himself on their generosity, toavoid being re-taken. He was admitted, and attended in secrecy. His recovery pre-
seated Nelika with a lover, youthful, brave, handsome, and eloquent. Frederic Bertie had owed all to the compassion of liis elder friend, who had so inveterate a prejudice against his country, that the young pair trembled for her discovery of their attachment; and, forgetting ihat they went the surest way to that catas¬ trophe, were secretly married. -' Bertie having soon no plea to urge for his longer stay, agreed to set off privately for a place of safety, on the coast, where he was to be joined by his bride, and from whence they were to depart for England together. "They separated, without one fore¬ boding. He was recognized by some French soldiers, and, in spite of the as¬ sistance of his bosom friend, who came up by accident and nearly lost his life in the defence, Bertie died in his arms, co¬ vered with wounds. "This friend broke the dreadful truth, with the greatest delicacy, to the young
widow ; but her secret was too soon re¬ vealed to her protectress, who, too much grieved not to forgive it, effectually con¬ cealed the birth of Bertie's posthumous son, and, at her death, which took place a few years after, left her whole fortune to Nelika. " She had set her heart on her protegee's forming some high alliance; and consi¬ dering, as the marriage had been secret and informal, the parties differing in faith, and being both under age, that a doubt of its legality would place Nelika's imprudence in a light very disadvan¬ tageous to that hope, she from the first insisted on that privacy, which alone lent romance to the affair. Its consequences at least were harmless; for Bertie, though well born, was poor, and without one relation; so that the acknowledgement of his child, could have answered no purpose. " The first name which occurred was therefore given the child, ami Edgar
Vailori passed for a foundling of the camp; the charities of my mother and her friend being too numerous for one addition to excite astonishment, or suspi¬ cion. I was brought up in the Protestant faith, not only in remembrance of my father, but with a view to my probable residence in this country. " My life was like that of the page to some captive queen, so retired were the habits of Nelika, and so easy tbe duties she imposed on me. At fifteen I became her secretary; in which capacity, from her own lips, I wrote her history, she reserv¬ ing the names for our last interview: and thus I learnt to sympathize with her unconsciously, unconscious too of her claims on my heart. But her genius. her melancholy, her affection for tne, and the proud pre-eminence of her still increasing beauty, filled my whole soul. She rejected many brilliant offers ; and, I believe, not from a supposed duty, but
a real devotion to my father's memory, and his child's interests. "I can just remember her sitting for this miniature, and weaving, at the same time, this chain, of her fine hair, to which it is suspended. See, she is just lifting her head from the employ, as if to look on him she loved; did you ever see such hands as these r" He took from his neck the portrait Mrs. Watson had seen him weep over, and gave it to her whom it had cost so much. Constance gazed with reverential af¬ fection on the conntenance of Vallori's mother. " How lovely ! how like you !'* she cried, forgetting the compliment her words included, ;i Ah !'* continued he, " How little did I tliink the picture, or the braid, was for mo ! When my princess, for so without knowing her birth, I always called her, as ihe only name worthy such charms— when she put it round my neck, on the
day of my completing those nameless memoirs, I was lost in wonder at her condescension. I could not remember how I had deserved such favour. I know not how dear I was to her. 'Twas she accustomed me to being carressed, and taught me to believe the same evi¬ dences of fondness, must have every where the same purity of motive: for I lived so long without knowing her to be my mother, that even now, remembering how young she looked, and was, I con¬ sider her rather as my guardian angel. I treasured up her words, even before I understood them : for me she did nothing in vain. I could almost enumerate, at this distant day, all I ever heard her say, or saw her do, from the first dawn of my intellect to that parting which so nearly deprived me of it. The world held no other being for me, I lived but for her— for her I would have died. Thus past twenty-one years of my life, without a
care, without a wish. I can imagine no happier state. " The only part of my doom whicli seemed strange to me, was, that all niy instruction was through the medium of the English language. In that I wrote, read, and conversed with Nelika. Of this country she taught me the history, scene¬ ry, and manners; for its literature had been her favorite, even before love di¬ rected her taste; aud soon became mine also. " I was so contented in this way of life, that I thought it would last for ever. I did not think Nelika could die, like common mortals. Her youth seemed eternal; I hoped her life was as sure; yet she knew, that the blush which I thought that of health, was preparing for me—— * lie paused—" It was not till a day or two before she died/' he continued, " I hat she broke the truth to me, and I learnt thai I was to lose in her—a Mother!
Why did she not tell me from the first, or never ? Why make herself dearer to me than ever, so too late ? How pre¬ cious were the few private interviews, in which we conversed in our own charac¬ ters, f My spirit were jealous/ she said, ' should you stay here when I am gone, my child. Go to England: although in that country your fortune will be small, I do not despair of your finding- friends/ Some angel, surely, had shewn her the two dear girls, who now supply her place ; or, if she be permitted to look down on them now, how must she bless their care of her son ! She was beauti¬ ful to her last moment, which I alone witnessed. * Edgar,' she cried, em¬ bracing me, c Oh ! if you knew what a strife between joy and sorrow is mine, when the same moment which restores me to my husband, tears me from his living counterpart, our boy ! My poor young love! I leave thee alone, on a
world of which thou knowest nothing.' She expired in my arms in the prime of her age. I saw—I saw her laid in the tomb, yet, still I lingered in scenes to which I almost expected her return—they seemed never meant to be without her. " At last, with an effort strengthened by remembrance of her injunctions, I tore myself away. The whole of her pro¬ perty had become mine; and, as the peace permitted free change of abode, soon arrived in the land of my father, where I knew not a single being. iC I believe the few people I knew in France regretted me; but I confess my ingratitude,-—I repined at leaving nothing but the ashes of Nelika. " What has happened since, you both know;—you, who have so cheered me, that I sometimes accuse myself of a de¬ crease of feeling, in so soon recovering from the loss of my mother." He ceased ; arid words were not need-
cd to assure him of the sympathy of Constance. " Who," she said at last, " was the the gentleman possessed of your parent's secret ?" " My mother never saw him but once," returned Vailori; " and either did not hear his name, or forgot it, in the horrid occasion of his visit. The sole proofs I have of my identity, are the memoir and picture; of my legitimacy—none. I shall, therefore, never abandon the name which I love, because it was given me by Nelika. You see now, Constance, that the romance you have so often lamented in my character, has been the offspring of my fate. My life has been a strange one; but it was longer without care than those of my fellow beings; and now I must expect my share, and will sustain it as Heaven shall support me I" And VaUori did endeavour, after the first shock, to disguise his fears and his sorrows: but it was in vain; though,
luckily only so with the observer who (not from want of feeling it) could best endure the truth. He bore trifles too ill to succeed in seeming patient under real evils. There was a delicate irritability about his lips and eyes, which spoke a temperament too finely strung for ' this working-day worid ;' like that of the Eolian harp, which murmurs even against the assaults of the air. His face now lost its usual repose, and i looked delightfully with all its might/ He became ali wit and humour; while that judgment, late investigating and adorning every thing,—that taste, so late¬ ly extracting honey from the humblest flowers of genius, while it levelled the loftiest weeds of pretence, was now laid aside ; and Felicia alone did not detect, in this change, the blight of hope, the fever of discontent. Constance's legal friend gave no hopes of recovering Vallori's fortune, but con-
tinued to use all possible means towards discovering the retreat of Charlton; in whose flight, strange to say, no other sufferer, had been involved. Whether the property of Vailori was the only one then in his hands, with the exception of his wife's, or whether his partial crime pre¬ ferred the mischief it effected to the re¬ ward it secured, was left in doubt. Mrs. Stanhope, it appeared, had left London " for the country,"—that wide world, that indefinite word. Mr. Hastings and Charles returned. They had not yet heard of.the elopement, from reasons hereafter to be explained. They called, and were introduced to Mrs. Vailori. Her unconscious guar¬ dian mistook lier terror for modesty, and her flattery for respect. She won his heart; but Constance advised delaying the disclosure, till the departure of Charles, from the following cause.— Though that liero had spent much of the time which elapsed between Vallori's de-
parture from the neighbourhood as a disappointed suitor, and his return as a bridegroom, the young men had never been there together. Charles, with whom his father's descriptions, though often more just than his own, went for nothing, expected to find, in Edgar Vailori, a fo¬ reign protege of his lost friend Mrs. Raymond, who would deeply feel the condescension of his notice. Indeed he came prepared to offer him the unreserv¬ ed service of his active friendship ; but Vailori, in the mood just depicted, glean¬ ing his visitor's expectations and inten¬ tions at a glance, received him with cere¬ mony so exaggerated, and mock gravity so imperturable, that Constance was, un¬ luckily, detected by her lover in a stifled laugh. Not to leave a possibility of mistake, or an avenue for forgiveness, Vailori re¬ peated this ostentatious bustle, on the entrance of Mrs. Watson, who happened to call at the instant; swinging two G
chairs for her choice, and filling the wine glasses before her, in such reverential style, that the good woman could not help saying, "Why, I must be out of favour here!—you are never so polite to people you like !—It used to be a sudden smile, and a violent Shake of the hand ; but I suppose Mr. Charles is teaching you elegance, sir." Charles cared not how often be made a fool of himself, but could never pardon being placed in a ridiculous situation by another, attd felt now conscious of look¬ ing, for a moment, to disadvantage— staggered by being thus received a regal, and thus disappointed in the person he cattie td meet. He Strove in vain to conceal this from Constance, and from himself. She soon repented her smile at his expence; re¬ membering, that if there was one person whom it was more Vallori's interest to conciliate than Mr. Hastings himself, it was the Son, Who held so entire an influ-
ence over him. Had Constance not sided with this stranger, Charles could have forgiven his ' unpatronizabie pride,' and even having been placed by him on a level with Mrs. Watson; as it was, Con¬ stance feared she bad made him Vallori's enemy, and determined to let that im¬ pression subside before they were all put more in his power. Meantime, he sighed at Felicia, called Edgar a happy man, and, though he af¬ fected to think little of that scape-grace's bon mots, he nevertheless retailed them elsewhere, with the trifling omission of their author's name, and the occasional substitution of his own. Two mornings after his first visit, Charles entered saying, " My father was grieved at being hurried away, without taking leave of ye; but a letter from a Mrs. Dallas informs him, tbat his ward, Lady Felicia Wilmer, went off two months ago, with one Blake, a fortune- hunter; they are now supposed to be g2
living in the north of Ireland. Mrs. Dallas, having tried in vain to regain the fugitive, now does what she should have done at first. She never saw this Irish¬ man ; but my father will only be obliged to him, for a jaunt he has long proposed. The shooting season just begun, whether his search succeeds or not, he will not hurry his return. By the time he has sported his way to the turtles, they will be heartily sick of each other, and glad to be divorced. I hear she is a superb little thing ; her fortune is safe, and she may, if experience mends her taste, still be happy." Here he looked at Con¬ stance ; but her perfect unconcern be¬ neath this threat, disconcerting him, he did Fallori, as well as he could, by leav¬ ing the house without a farewell. iC Blest reprieve!" cried Felicia, laugh¬ ing ; " but, how well he was settling our future fate, Vailori! I beg pardon, Mr. Blake, you really have very little of the broffue. How well your set played their
cards with mine ! They promised us a good story; but I did not expect half so complete a thing. I could hardly hear it with any countenance. Had it been told of another, I should have believed it, if I did not recognize a style never de¬ voted to vulgar facts. When Travers tells a falsehood he always makes it worth his while; but who is this poor Blake, who is to bear the burden of all your sins, Edgar ?" " God knows ;" replied Vailori, " but I trust in the invention of Travers, that no such person exists." <f But," went on Felicia," what a good situation were mine for a Farce ! My guardian, setting oft' in pursuit of me, sends an apology for not taking leave of me, ere leaving me behind/' " Positively,*' said Vailori gravely, " 1 can't permit Mr. Hastings so absurd a journey ;—your guardian, and my good old friend, are different persons. I will write instantly, and explain every
thing. I've heard him say, he could forgive any thing but deceit; besides, what would his son say ?" " Oh !" replied Constance, " he would say a great deal; but confess nothing to him. Felicia is not his ward/'
CHAPTER VIII.
*' To soothe thy sickness, watch thy health. Partake, but never waste thy wealth, Or stand with smiles unmurmuring by, To lighten half thy poverty ; Do all, but close thy dying eye— For that I ne'er could live to try :— To these alone my hopes aspire— More can I do, or thou require ?" Bridr of Abydus
While Vallorijwrote the purposed letter, Felicia attacked her friend on her indif¬ ference to Charles Hastings ; and Edgar, who had the power of attending to every thing at once, often joined in their chat.
" You have no excuse," cried Felicia ; " he loves, he deserves you; his father would pride in the match; it is every way suitable, and your hand is disen¬ gaged." " But he has never asked me," replied Constance, simply. " Pish ! mere prejudice ! you can't blind me to it, till you are blind yourself. You would make so good a wife !" " I am happier single." " How d'ye know child ? Fm sure J advise you disinterestedly, for your hus¬ band would drive us from you; we should no longer have all your heart." " Who told you that we had it now ?" demanded Vailori abruptly. i( Her actions !" answered Felicia. " Thank you," cried Constance; " they were overpaid by that word, even if they were worthy my friendship for you, or the justice they do it." " Yes, but at your age friendship does not fill the heart; you seem formed for
love, yet I never heard you say you had felt it. Nay, you will hardly, even now, give the subject a patient hearing; only say you can love, and I'll forgive your secret." " People say I cannot" replied Con¬ stance, quietly. " I see," exclaimed the deceived Fe¬ licia, "it is yet to come. May you be but as happy as I am !" " I am happier than all the world be¬ side ; let that content you, as it does me. I cannot improve, and will therefore never many." " True," rejoined Vailori, " Love could add nothing to your virtues, for you could not have done more for me, if you had loved me." ff she had loved him ! " Perhaps not so much," said Felicia; " for what have I done, by loving you, but sunk you intodirBculties ; but for me you would never have trusted Charlton, nor feared a foe in Mr. Hastings; while g 5
Constance—" Constance stopped these wondering praises by a kiss. Opportunities of scene, so often afforded by her peculiar situation, were thrown away upon her. She did not think the motive of her kindness to the Valloris could, if discovered, exalt her in their re¬ spect, and she wished to keep above even their pity. In short all of her heart, which words could have told them, must have awakened their alarm ; while, in its real state, even its self-doubting possessor had a right to confide. She did so, the more as these naive questions of Felicia's convinced her she had kept her own secret, by the correctness of her manner. Vailori had, by this time, despatched liis letter to the post, by Lydia, Con¬ stance's maid. He did not read it to the ladies, because it contained sueh praises of both, as he did not choose to turn to his ow r n advantage. In spite of these, and similar conver-
sations, Constance had soon to endure the struggles of a new discontent. Must she not despise herself, if the interesting cause, which was now pre¬ paring fresh raptures for her friends, was but a source of yet untried torments to her 9 All the bashful fears and tender plaints of Felicia, all the hopes and pride of Edgar, were alike poured into the bosom they unconsciously wounded, In vain she reminded herself that this trial was but whai she must have known inevitable. As yet the marriage of Vailori had been but a name, and the happiness of Felicia merely that of sentiment; but she must now see the truth, in its proofs, and not yet without a pang. At this time, an infectious fever was raging in the village. A man of the name of Jennings had lately settled there, and endeavoured in vain to establish a Meet¬ ing-house, or attract a congregation ; but, being more skilful in his cure of bodies
than of souls, his restored and grateful patients soon became his converts, neg¬ lecting every thing to follow him, and sacrificing every thing to supply his want?. He had a sister living with him, who had noticed Constance's maid, Lydia, effected her reform, and en¬ couraged her visits, to render that rege¬ neration secure. Defying every precaution, the subtle contagion thus communicated itself to the household of Miss Raymond ; but, at first, threatened only the person who had drawn it on herself. Lydia, with every symptom of the fever, was borne, at her own request, to the house of Mr. Jennings. Her female fellow servant fled in dismay. Watson supplied her place, pro tempore; but Constance imme¬ diately commissioned a friend to take lodgings for herself and the Valloris, be¬ yond the reach of danger. As this arrangement would occupy a day, or probably more, and as no time
was to be lost in Felicia's case, she was prevailed on to set out before the others, and remain with this friend, till apart¬ ments could be procured, in which the little society could re-unite. Before this purpose could be effected, before Felicia could have reached her place of safety, the infection, which had proved fatal to so many, poured itself into the veins of Vailori, and threatened to render the first parting of the young pair their final one. Struck with the desolateness of her situation, ^for the inevitably unfrequent attendance of Watson ill supplied the want of her female servants) Constance turned to Surl; " Why don't you too leave me ?" she said, " have you no fear ?" " FearP repeated he, indignantly, " Come, I like that! /'ve as good right not to fear as you have; and, as for leaving you, or he either," jerking his head and hand towards the bed of Val-
lori, " If I do I'll be ■ ----- ;" he swallowed the oath that mounted to his lips, and rushed out of the room. A physician of great eminence was the substitute of Morton (then taking pos¬ session of a property just left him in a distant county). This gentleman was a stranger to Constance, and urged her to quit her perilous post; but in vain. At last, he said, with some hesitation; " But, my dear Ma'am, I was informed, that your situation —at any time I should forbid a lady a charge so hazardous; but now— who could console Mr. Vailori, if he recovered, but to find his hopes in you were lost ?" " HisM>ife, Sir," answered Constance, guessing his mistake. " Can it then be possible that you are less r " May be not, Sir; I am his friend/' < c I could not have imagined, Ma'am, that so young and slight a frame couid be inspired to dare and endure all to
which you expose yourself, by common friendship." Anticipating the candour promised her in Vallori's death, Constance replied. " Do not imagine it, Sir, mine is no common friendship; Vailori is no common object for its zeal For his wife's sake,who is un¬ able to supply my place—for his own sake, left by her absence without another nurse, none at least so fit, so ready, so welcome— I repeat, that while I feel the approbation of Heaven in its support, no other power shall force me to relinquish this duty." The physician felt himself in the pre¬ sence of a superior being; and bowing, said, " I hope you are designed—I'm sure you are worthy to save him. Your life must be already charmed by its virtues; but, if my prayers can add to your safety, persevere and fear nothing! That life must be a precious one, for wliich you are ready to hazard your own. Both, I trust, will be preserved !" Thus encouraged, " for ten days, with-
out rest, and almost, nourishment," Con¬ stance attended the helpless, and fre¬ quently delirious Vailori. At the end of that period his life was despaired of. She heard the sentence, and yet survived. After, however, lying all night, reviving from one swoon but to rave himself into another, his exhaus¬ tion produced a heavy sleep, which, though death-like in its commencement, soon disclosed more hopeful symptoms; the mortal traits of the malady gradually decreased, and the physician observed, that" the miracle of his life lasting to that moment, was the best augury he could afford. He would not say what should overthrow a constitution which had re¬ sisted thus much." '* There is then a chance— -just a pos¬ sibility of his surviving!" cried Con¬ stance, and in her desperation, even such cold comfort fell like balm from Heaven. When Vailori awoke, it was to a return
of reason : consigned however to silence, lest he should relapse, he fixed his grate¬ ful eyes on those of his faithful nurse, and sunk by degrees into a light and easy slumber, from the sight of which Con¬ stance stole, to " rejoice in trembling," and, at last, give way to her feelings, in tears and devotion. It was now that she awoke to a sense of her own value, and power to be of use. She no longer repented having taken every precaution to avoid sharing Val¬ lori's pain. Much more did she exult in not having obeyed the first impulse of her disappointment, on his marriage. " Am I," she ejaculated, " Can I be the same being who oncecontemplated suicide with toleration ? W T hen my rash and im¬ pious end had embittered his days, who would have been left to act thus by him ? No ! it is to preserve him this tenderness was given me—not to destroy, not to dis¬ grace myself!"' Meantime Felicia remained at the
house of Constance's acquaintance; and was told, that as no apartment could be procured, her husband and friend pre¬ ferred enduring a separation from her, for the present, to her returning before the danger was entirely at an end. Having a dearer life than her own to preserve, she was easily persuaded. When, however, Vallori's conva¬ lescence rendered her return secure, Con¬ stance thought it necessary to prepare her for his altered appearance. She bore even the sight of this change heroically; but could not hear Mrs. Watson's ac¬ count of his late sufferings, and Con¬ stance's sisterly attentions, without giving such violent indulgence to her emotions, that her friend, lest she should get out of practice as a nurse, had soon to divide her cares, between Vailori, his wife, and a new claimant, their infant daughter. The anxiety of Vailori for his wife's re¬ covery retarded his own; but, though slow, it was at last complete; and, amid
their raptures, the young parents felt Constance dearer to them than ever, in having restored them to each other. Yet she could hardly be satisfied without a hope of ever being loved for her own sake. She saw that (steal their sorrows as she would) they must have joys in which she could not share, joys which they would not owe to her ; " yet such were in her nature," and once in her power; still so, if she could be content to accept t hem—not of VaUori; and, when she saw them enjoyed, but not as she could have enjoyed them by another, she could not help doubting the merit of that rejec¬ tion, which had been productive of no¬ thing but trial to her, and little real be¬ nefit to VaUori; while her vow of celi¬ bacy, in Felicia's cause, seemed worse than in vain. " Every one must be blest," she thought, " who can feel or in¬ spire all this. I have forsworn it, for a pair who could be just as happy without
me. Did Charles guess my wavering now, even he might sink me into a mere child of nature, and teach me to relin¬ quish philosophy for happiness!" The dawning beauty of the little girl, first recalled the feelings of Constance to their former state. What a privilege, to attend on the child of her friends ! This was the first tie which had united them in her heart; she had another power of serving them, another opportunity of proving how boundless was her regard ! And, as she saw the babe's fair cheek dimple beneath her kiss, she felt its smile like the sanction of Innocence. She had once more an object of undisguised af¬ fection ; and ofall the visions of her fu¬ ture, this unconscious being became the heroine. How did she long for the time when this fondness would be mutual! Every probable event of woman's life did she, in anticipating for this dear infant, deck with all that could bless her parents and
herself; while the slightest indisposition which threatened this treasure, alarmed her, not only for her present darling, but her future friend, who was to reward her for her past cares. Her time and thoughts were now fully employed; and while her friendship was for ever studying and toiling in the cause of its objects, in all important and useful plans, it comprehended, with equal ar¬ dour, all those minute and delicate traits, which mostly belong alone to those mu¬ tual loves, in which it is no marvel that such flowers have room. Nothing could ever tempt her into the platonic style. To VaUori she spoke with the frank praise or blame of a sister : it was only in naming his mother, wife, or child, that a tenderness crept into her manner, diffusing interest over the sub¬ jects, as well as the countenance of the speaker. Never was Constance known to look even calmly sad; never was she de-
tected in a sigh, tear, blush, or tremor, of a nature to betray her. 'Tis true she was pale and thin, but her health was firm ; and, supported by the presence of her friends, her spirits were buoyant. It was a life in wliich she was obliged to be for ever on her guard t yet, within she was under no restraints, for religion and virtue warred not with one of her thoughts. While ali was order in her mind, she was content it should remain the order of af¬ fection, rather than woo, by the vain struggles of prejudice, the confusion of unmerited remorse. Had the useful attributes of her pre¬ sent life been always natural to her, Con¬ stance would have prided less in them; but in her long-gone days of freedom, she had on no occasion been accustomed to the domestic perseverance, and active duties, which now distinguished her days. She had frequently to hear the invidious remarks of her female acquaintances on
Felicia's qualifications, personal and men¬ tal : nay, even the goodness of her heart, her love for her husband, and her fitness for him. Constance was never gratified by this, but would always reply—" I know her worth; your opinions can't af¬ fect it, either actually or in my eyes; and if you think any thing that you pre¬ tend to know once past between Mr.Val- lori and me would make such speeches ac¬ ceptable, you mistake. His happiness is in the hands of her whom I would not have impair it, even for the feminine plea¬ sure of reviling one whom you might call a rival. Had he married ill, he would still have been married. His wife's de¬ fects could have afforded his admirers no hopes. Let us not, therefore, forfeit the treasure still left in his respect, by de¬ grading ourselves in vain efforts to de¬ grade his wife." The birth, and former name of Felicia, was neither disclosed nor mysteriously concealed. The disappearance of Mr.
VaUori at the same time with her, was, among the fluctuations of London society, unobserved; besides that, he was very little known in the faction to which Mrs. Dallas belonged. Mr. Hastings continued in Ireland, almost forgetting the ostensi¬ ble object of his visit, in hospitalities so congenial to him; and, thus safe, the Vallories awhile were happy; and even Constance caught the kind contagion the readier, as she had not to forget the heroic necessity of being wretched.
CHAPTER .IX.
Not faster does the rippling bright Melt in the lake away, Than men from memory «rase The benefits of former days! Then, stranger, go! good speed the while, Nor think again on the lonely isle. But, if on life's uncertain main, Mishap should mar thy sail, If woe or exile thou sustain Beneath her fickle gale, Waste not a sigh on fortune chang'd, On fickle courts, and friends estrang'd, But come, where kindred t>ouh shall smile, To greet thee, at the lonely isle ! The Lady of the Lvkr
It seemed as if poor Constance was never long to remain unreminded thar ^hc had no tie, no pledge to ensure the ii
continuance of her present blessings ; no hold on the content she heaped up with such industry, and hoarded with such care. No answer had yet arrived from Mr. Hastings; all seemed still to be done in that affair, while disappointments in se¬ veral schemes for Vallori's future support, in spite of her persuasions to the con¬ trary, made him begin to fancy himself and family a burden to their friend; his restless honour in time denying com¬ fort to all around him. A letter from Mrs. Stanhope gave form and decision— we wish we could say consistency, to the visions with which, as she expected, it so exactly accorded. It ran thus : " My dear Sir, "That you did not notice my last letter I attribute to the influence of others, and therefore presume to trespass again, but not on the same subject. I have heard no more of Charlton, nor of
our properties, in spite rny best efforts to that effect. With the wreck of my fortune I have retired to a small house of my own, at-----------, forty miles from your present dwelling; where a most promising idea has occurred to me, for you. Surely I, who was the innocent cause of your misfortunes, thus gained at least the privilege to propose a re¬ medy, even though with shame and sor¬ row at its inadequacy to your merits and your wrongs. My most intimate friend, a gentleman of whom, from his personal obligations to my family, I have a right to ask what I please, happens to possess the highest and most extensive interest under the crown. He has purposed paying me a visit, on condition of his meeting you, for which 1 stand pledged. I have already interested him in your behalf, and I am confident he will only require to see you to advance you in any way you prefer. You could not engage a more powerful h 2
friend, nor one who has more delicacy for the pride of those he obliges. I long- to introduce you to him, and to see ani¬ mated into action those wishes for fame and independence, which, I am sure, must occupy the mind of a young man of your abilities, above all a husband, and a father! The noon of your life should not he wasted; it is the duty of every real friend to enforce this truth ; and if un¬ able to serve the cause in person, at least not to shut you from the society of those who can. I calculate on an answer to this, remember. Say, will you bring your family at once to me ? Your wife should find a mother in Sibvlia Stanhope/' The first thing which alaimed Con¬ stance was the mystery Vailori made of this letter—so unusual with him. He banded it, however, to Felicia; and, as Constances recognition of the hand-writ¬ ing was her sole fear, she now was satis-
fied; for his wife was the only person, besides himself, who had a right to its contents. All her services had given her no demand on his confidence. " Weli, the style is less romantic," cried Felicia, " and includes my name." " It includes a vast deal of truth—good advice- and good opinion, that I don't deserve. What objection have you ?" " None." " So, you are not afraid of her ?" " Afraid ! no, only"—and she glanced towards Constance. " All that, of course, I shall consider," returned her husband—"but for my own part—Where are you going, Constance?" " I am one too many, here," replied she, coldly, yet with embarrassment, " I intrude." " Never in your own house; it is we who are intruders. You shall see my motives for not shewing you tbis let¬ ter at once ; read it now." She obeyed, in agitated silence ; and,
for the first time, learnt that jealous hate, which she had never felt for Felicia. " Well, Constance!" cried Vailori, as, lifting her eyes "from the letter, she sunk into a seat, under the rapid effects of its subtle venom. " I wish it may be well:" She an¬ swered with difficulty, " I wish now you may have found a real friend, who knows her * duty/ I, it seems, have been 4 unable to serve you ;' but if I c did shut yoti from those who could'—if I ' have wasted' the c noon of your life,'and delayed your c fame aud independence,' think how much easier it is for this specious woman to summon you to her, than it had been for me to bid you leave me.—Felicia, I cannot have been ' a mother' to you. She, perhaps, may—Here, Sir, pray take her letter; encourage her by au answer; don't let her attribute your silence to my in¬ fluence. Mine! God help me! I have none 1" and here she actually sobbed with
passion, while her hand was convulsively rumpling the letter of Mrs. Stanhope. " I feared this!" cried Felicia; then embracing her friend, she continued soothingly, " nay, that you have, my dear, all the influence in the world, and we will be guided by it implicity." " Ah, if you would!" said Constance. Vailori turned to Felicia ; " Come," he said, " you overpower her. Constance, listen to reason: I can't believe Sibylla would dare to intend throwing your con¬ duct, as you fancy, in the shade. You are a stranger to her; and as our friends, both mean alike. But, were it as you fear, any attempt against you must fail with us. Her offer is promising; my wants accummulate without a prospect of supplying them. I can't think of depend¬ ing longer on you." " So you prefer putting yourself in the power of Mrs. Stanhope ?" " No; I will owe her nothing, but an in-
troduction to this friend., whose interest will, most probably, enable me to over¬ pay her." " Judge the future by the past, Vailori, This will not he the first friend to whom she has introduced you/' i( Nay, don't reflect on her misfor¬ tunes. Charlton's baseness was no fault of hers; on the contrary, the best motives were there most unjustly abused; it is but fair to allow her an opportunity of atonement." A man may have great talents without good sense, as well as great beauty with- v>ut good health. Tlie reverse were prefer¬ able in either case. But though Vailori wanted no judgment in the management of his genius, he often was in need of common prudence in the regulation of liis actions; with him the last impression was always the strongest. In vain he now endeavoured to recall his former just misgivings. Sibylla's one word of
kindness for his wife overruled his last remaining scruple. In other cases he had been found easy to persuade ; but now, honour, justice, and gratitude, seemed to enforce a stub¬ bornness, which Constance knew not how to oppose, lest a selfish wish to keep him near her, might seem, or indeed, (so dif¬ ficult is it to be sure of one's own motives in such cases) might be the cause. She had also as proud a heart as ever beat in female bosom ; and after going as far as she could without degradation, she stop¬ ped short, and saw an acceptance sent to Mrs. Stanhope's invitation, before she could be convinced that the Valloris evei intended to leave her. She vvas as much displeased as grieved at this arrangement; and, on second thoughts, decided that she could pari without regret from the pair, who aftei sharing her house for a year, were so .sud¬ denly in a hurry to quit it: but theii child had not offended her; and thea h 5
she lavished all the tenderness denied to those who could have better felt and un¬ derstood it. The infant had scarcely ever been yet out of her sight; it was just be¬ ginning, she fancied, to know her; and would come to her arms, as to those of a second mother. As she relinquished her to Lydia, who had been engaged for the purpose, at her own entreaty, and first took her place in the chaise which Was to bear the party away, Constance turned very pale, and trembling violently, looked to heaven, saying, with more agony than any former woe in this cause had ever forced her to betray—" This was all I had left to joy in ! What have I done that itis so wilfully and needlessly torn from me?" " Ah, Constance!" cried Felicia, " if we should repent this journey, whom can I fly to but you ? Shall I be again received as I first was ?*' i£ Yes, dearest girl," answered Con¬ stance, firmly; u let nothing persua^
you to forget, if fate or fortune inclines you to remember, that this house, and my heart, is still, and for ever, your home." She shook hands with Vailori last, he thought, from reluctance; but the loyal soldier, who never submitted his hand to any, clasp, after the farewell of his Prince, could better have translated her motive. " Write to me instantly, and very of¬ ten ;" she cried, as they drove off. Feli¬ cia assented, by kissing her hand, till they were lost to each other's sight. Constance, for the last year, had been the mistress of an establishment 5 the hostess of the very friends she loved best to oblige: now she returned to her sitting room, just in time to see Surl effacing the last tokens of their ever having been there. " Ah, my mother !" she thought, a I lose you again!" However painful were Constance's fore¬ bodings, in her doubt of the power to
which she had just consigned her friends, they would, unfortunately, far from being cleared, have deepened, under a more perfect consciousness of the truth. ' As fairies, who had once been human, were tnought to preserve more ascen¬ dancy than the rest, so Mrs. Stanhope, from having originally possessed a good heart, retained a power over the un¬ suspecting, which those, if such there be. who are all, and have been ever evil, must have failed to acquire. By her past self she judged her victims; by her present, her accomplices. Instead of devoting her strong mind to the correction of her passions, she taxed it to their aid. The events which most elicited the virtues of Constance, called forth the vices of Sibyl¬ la ; and, could her heart have been seen, where contended the poisons of unhal¬ lowed love and self-detestation, it must have been the cause of perfect wonder, her power of cherishing a manner so
frank, while suffering all the agonies to which she was not yet lost enough to be dead, for an instant. Several days dragged on, without a letter for Constance. At last the same post brought her two. One from Feli¬ cia, such a one as suspense only could have welcomed. All the feeling of her farewell was ef¬ faced by change. Mrs, Stanhope, her house, their hopes, alike were painted in colours glowing and exaggerated. " To be sure the great man was not yet come, but time was before them. The air agreed with them all much better than that which they had left. Vallori's appear¬ ance had already attracted general ad¬ miration. They had met Mr. Travers, who told them that Mrs. Dallas, ever famed for taking things coolly, had said, on concluding her letter to Mr. Hast¬ ings, ' now my duty is done ;' and had never mentioned Felicia's name after¬ wards."
" So, time is before them there," re¬ peated Constance, sighing; " that threat¬ ens a long absence. And the air ! Why what ails this air ? Oh variety ! Oh no¬ velty! What poor comparison will friend¬ ship bear with ye in the mind of a wo¬ man !" With this unsatisfactory letter came the follovTig, from Lady Emily Ray¬ mond. " The disappointment of my first hope of your intimacy, my dear niece, does not decrease the wish I feel for it; which is, on the other hand, increased by long chats with your friend Charles Hastings. I am enviably intimate with that excel¬ lent young man. He comes to me again, as soon as you will name a day for ac¬ companying him. I'll accept no excuse this time. I therefore only beg you wont make Charles wait longer than in¬ evitable. I hear you are disengaged now ; for ali onr sakes long may you continue so, at least from such ties; as, till one
has a family of one's own, 'tis not fair to be burdened with that of any one else. Still I applaud your benevolence, and am glad it is relieved from its charge, before you had reason to be tired or ashamed of it. " Charles says you don't like the gay doings I sometimes have here ; for your consolation, I have no one staying with me at present, nor am I likely to have; and, as for the people about me, I will invite them as seldom as you please; so we shall have a friendly triumvirate, after all—one of the very best things in the world. Come, then, and save from abso¬ lute solitude, " Your kinswoman and friend, E. Raymond." Constance would have agreed with Lady Emily, that "afriendly triumvirate was one of the best things in tbe world," had not the one proposed consisted of a lady of whom she knew too little, and of
a gentleman of whom she knew too much, not to qualify her anxiety to constitute its other personage. The depreciating style, with the word, * benevolence,' as ap¬ plied to her regard for the Valloris, dis¬ gusted her. She read Charles Hastings in it; andin her aunt's double entendre, begging her not to make him wait longer than inevitable, she saw with annoyance, that for once she had relied too confi¬ dently on her lover's fickleness. 'Tis true, that she little doubted he would long ago have offered her his hand, had not the word wife militated against what he miscalled his liberty, and all its darling abuses; still Constance had lately hoped she had worn out his passion witli his patience, and now saw, with regret. all the absurdities of its returning fit. Still the overbalancing resolve, never to trust herself to solitude, if she could avoid it, which her loss of self-possession since the departure of the Valloris had confirmed, made her, a second time, ac¬ cept her aunt's invitation.
She accordingly discharged her debts and her servants, and was driven by her triumphant lover, through a country he admired all the more, that it severed her still farther from her favourites ; he even expected her to join in his feelings on the subject: but she had arrived at her place of destination, and been warmly received, before she would praise anything.
CHAPTER X.
" Thy Malcolm, vain and faithless maid !" 'Twas thus accusing Conscience said; Forgive, forgive ! Fidelity! Shew me the maiden who could spy And scorn such conquest of her eye! The Lady of the Lake. Tho* dearly thine errors have cost thee, Far more than we once could foresee, Thou shalt find, that whate'er they have lost thee, They cannot deprive thee of me ! Lord Byron.
The splendour and comfort of Lady Emily's abode, the beauty of the grounds, and the attentions of their mistress, raised the spirits of Constance, which she did
not think it her duty to depress, though absent from her friends. She would have loathed the toilsome routine of every-day good society ; but Lady Emily's guests (for her absolute solitude was a crowd to Constance) were all clever; or, more diverting still, would- be clever people. Constance had never before been among those who are singu¬ lar by profession ; and enjoyed their lan¬ guage, as soon as she got a key to it, prizing more than ever her memory, and imitative talents, which enabled her to treasure up every peculiarity for the future amusement of the Valloris. Among many other things she learnt to value her own manner less, and that of her friend more. She looked in vain for his equal, and forgave herself. All glided on, without one of those adventures, which the only way to find is to seek or invent; and, as Constance did neither, she deserved to go without one. She made no conquests, created no
sensation; she acquired some pleasant acquaintances, and did not look for friends. Sometimes she heard Vailori men¬ tioned, but merely en passant, as one of the many fine men who had lived their day in London, and were gone by. Lady Felicia Wilmer's elopement was once alluded to, and her present fate widely conjectured ; but, luckily, the two sub¬ jects were never connected. A lady, in¬ deed, did say, before Charles Hastings, " They tell me Miss Raymond, knows something of young Vailori; I've a mind to ask her who it was he married, if he be married." But Charles, unconscious of the ser¬ vice he rendered Constance, replied, 44 Nay, as you love me, don't do so ma'am; I hardly think she could tell you, or I should be able to, myself. Pray don t let us have her tirade of his virtues instead." " His virtues !" repeated the young
lady, laughing; " No, she is welcome to keep them all to herself." Constance could not deny to herself that, to move in such a sphere as that of her aunt, had its advantages over her former situation. Charles Hastings never read in her looks an allowance of thus much, without following up the conquest, by whispering, " This is life; this is worthy of you ! Something better than vegetating the juvenile Lady Bountiful of a village cot—squalled to death by children not your own. Not to mention inorning gossips with the enlightened Mrs. Watson, and evening entertain¬ ments with the polished Mr. Morton. This is the fate you must be designed for, or you would not move in it now, with the ease of a person all their days accus¬ tomed to such scenes. Here your worth is appreciated, by those who will never desert you, and whom you could not desert, without overwhelming them with
regrets." Constance was often angry at this, yet her heart confest its truth. Her heart owned, too, that for much of the attention she received, she was indebted to the example of Charles Hastings. He was actually bringing her into fashion ; he was for ever at her side, at once use¬ ful and ornamental—proud and happy of being both. She saw him for the first time, as she had never seen Vailori, ad¬ mired by impartial and competent judges. His star was certainly in the ascendant. " Chacun a son tour .-" <c and oh ! and oh! the hobby horse was forgot!" Lady Emily hoped to see her amiable scheme soon realized. She had antici¬ pated the end of all her niece's aims, and wished to give her affections a more happy channel, a more grateful object too, in a man whose fidelity, aud many other good qualities, merited the distinction; for this she had brought them together, and, on a short intimacy with Constance, thought
that her favourite only needed such a wife, to bring his character to the per¬ fection it was already so near. Charles was quite content to be thus plotted against; he even promised soon to offer his hand to Miss Raymond, who, mean while, fancied all this new found decision his own. She felt the irresistible but indefinite spell of Presence, which, such is the social cowardice of our nature, decreases the power of dislike. She recollected their early friendship, in those days when Vailori was unknown to her. She could have married Charles Hastings, but that she knew she must, in doing so, resign all endeavours to serve the Valloris, for Charles bad always loved her alone; and could not, knowing what friendship for such a man must be, have reconciled with wedded faith, the most innocent friendship for Edgar, Even this impediment seemed to de¬ crease ; for though she had written fre-
quently to Felicia, she had received only, at distant intervals, unconnected and un- circumstantial letters. She was there¬ fore forced to doubt the stability of their friendship, whom she had only lived to oblige, in proportion as she learnt the full value of his love, to whom, completing the contrast, she also remembered she owed so much. Thus thrown on hei fate, Constance, who had refused the man she loved, was in danger of accepting the man she did not love. How near the Valloris were to losing her, were hard to define. She had been six months with her aunt; her anxiety for their regard, or for their fate, was, in spite of herseit, obeying their apparent desire to diminish it, for she had not for some weeks heard from them; when an event occurred, which forced the whole soul of Constance back to those, who in their prosperity alone she was capable of forgetting! One day, the guests of Lady Emily received an accession, in a gentleman,
who was introduced to Constance as Mr. Travers ; she heard the name with emo¬ tion, as associated with those of her friends; and soon discovered this to be the same person, of whonVshe had heard them speak. Sitting between her and Charles Hast¬ ings, he began praising the place iu which Mrs. Stanhope resided; then looking anxiously at Constance, " You know Mr. Vailori, I believe, ma'am ?" he said. " He is my most intimate friend." " Acquaintance/' interposed Charles. " I always call those to whom your Father introduces me, friends." " Much obliged to you and to him too. If ever he made one blunder more mischievous than the rest—" and here Charles walked away, muttering as he went. Thinking herself safe, Constance begged to know what Mr. Travers had to say concerning the Valloris. " What is it to i
you ?" cried Charles, stepping angrily back. " Every thing,"replied Constance;—for tliere is proiection in a croud; and you can assert those opinions to strangers, that you would shrink to name before a friend in Ute it tite. Charles drew her arm through his; and assuring her there was some very fine music beginning in the next room, was leading her away; but she extricated her¬ self, and again taking her seat beside Mr. Travers, had the satisfaction of see¬ ing their persecutor leave them to the freedom of the mutually wished for com - munications. ** Miss Raymond," began Travers, " I have heard the Valloris speak of you frequently." '• I may say the same of you, Sir," re¬ plied Constance, smiling." " I dare say," continued he ; " but, though, if I had been obliged to tell my
tale before Mr.Charles Hastings, I should have given Lady Felicia a name as wide of veracity as my ready made Mr. Blake; yet, believe me,it is only where lean serve mv friends, that I romance* I believed Vailori safe With you, when I was never more surprised than by meeting him once more in the trammels of—that woman ! How he dared take his wife with him to her, I can't guess. He must either be the most innocent or the most impudent of meu. Mrs. Stanhope is very extrava¬ gant ; her connexions, far from being of any service to him, are living on them. She never had a chance of affording him a road to independence, as she pretended. Yet still he lingers with her, blind to the inevitable ruiri before him—twofold ruin ; for the beautiful Felicia is exposed to the flatteries of the most dissolute men, while Sibylla talks equivocally of her Edgar's mutual and unfortunate regard!" iC Then she slanders him, believe ttiC, I 2
Sir," cried Constance, eagerly. " I know he would not for his life wrong his wife. I am confident also, that his honour is safe in her hands. Is he a man to fear a rival in a libertine ? or she a woman to dread one in age ? This base woman as¬ serts only what she wishes, in hopes of fulfilling it. She thinks, when she has robbed him of his reputation, he will less scruple to be what he is reported; but, indeed, Sir, his truth is beyond her reach/' 4 Oh, Miss Raymond I" exclaimed Travers, charmed by her ardour; " fly to him! plead the cause of decorum thus; it cannot be in vain. Prevent his fall— you only can preserve him and his wife to their lovely little Constance!" All the anguish of his hearer's face vanished at this magic word. They had not then forgotten her. They had be¬ stowed her name on their first and only child ! Hourly, perhaps, at that very in¬ stant, they were calling by it tbe dearest
being of their world! It was an unex¬ pected reward for all the past, it gave her back their confidence, and her own. It made their child hers. The house of God had echoed her name, in the presence of its parents; it was a pledge that they never could forget her. There needed not this generous and delicate re-assur¬ ance to bid her obey the solicitation of Mr.Travers. In spite of the distress he had told her, this was a too happy moment. ec Fly!" she repeated, " yes, over the world, out of the world, to save them! What do I here, even this instant, while they are in danger? Oh, my dear Sir, how I bless your candour !" At this moment Lady Emily appeared, and gravely begged to speak with her niece. She led her to another room, where they found Charles Hastings ready to second ber ladyship's harangue, with sighs, leers, starts, or frowns, as should suit the sentence. i( Constance, my love," began Lady
Emily, " now don't be offended with me. Consider I am your only female relative; and although not quite old enough to be your mother"(apardonable mistake)"still I feel as one for your interests." " lam sensible—" faltered Constance. < * 4 Yes, very sensible, I knpw you are, for your years/' interrupted Lady Emily, attempting the sportive; u but not so perfect in your own eyes, I know, as to reftise the advice of experience." " I am waiting for it," cried Con¬ stance, cutting short $h}s rigmarole, <* HiuppbT said her aunt, u I regret, then, to hear that you left the arm ot an old friend just now, to hear accounts of those people who used to be staying with you. Now, as I find the man js very handsome and profligate**—" " Who dares to call him so ?" demand¬ ed Constance. " You terrify me, my dear," resumed Lady Emily; " I was only going to ad¬ vise you, in future, to name his wife
alone, as your most intimate friend ; be- caue, though she is, God knows who, even that were better than to give my acquaintances a riddle they will read their own way. I believe your every thought is propriety; but I cannot oblige every one to adopt the same opinion. What people can't understand, they com¬ monly misrepresent." " Most certain, Madam," observed Constance; " but, in this instance, my enigmas can bring no discredit on you, as they are confined to the possession of yourself, Mr. Travers, and Mr. Charles Hastings/' In fact, Lady Emily, like a great num¬ ber of the advisers of youth, kept by her a collection of very choice common places, which she liberally paraded for all occasions, without much reference to their aptitude to the subject before her. " True," she continued, unabashed; " but how long can we be sure of their continuing so ? I would provide, not only
remedies for the ills that are, but preven¬ tives for such as may be ! w i( You are too good, Lady Emily/' said Constance, demurely; her ladyship went on. " You don't know the world, see, that's it. Your ideas are too fine for common wear; but, if you will descend to the affairs of this world—to your own affairs, I promise to point you out the road to happiness to-morrow/' " To-morrow I shall be with the Val¬ loris," returned Constance. Her audi¬ tors looked blank with amaze; but she continued unmoved from what she had constituted her duty ; " they are distrest, and have no other friend." " What can that be to you, my sweet girl ?" cried Lady Emily ; " pray let them sink or swim their own way. They will never thank your interference; besides, it would be too late, I dare say."
" I shall know that to-morrow," re¬ peated Constance. Charles, who was just recovering from the shock of her first reply, now burst forth in a rage. Lady Emily checked him, saying, " Nay, since you are disdained, *t were meanness to betray your passion thus, Charles." The tottering gravity of Constance was nearly overthrown at advice thus pur¬ posely defeating itself. " But," resumed Lady Emily, " as a friend, you have a right to reason with this perverse little lady." " No," he cried, " she has said it, and she will do it. Nothing can break a de¬ termination she makes with that cool quiet air.—Provoking girl! and yet, will you be mine ? will you stay ?" " What! to witness such vehemence for life, Charles? you would bribe me most alluringly, I allow.' 1 " Nay, I will be whatever you please, 1 5
my dear Constance—stay, I conjure—1 implore you ! Have I not known and loved you from your birth ? Were not our parents friends ? Was I not every thing to your childhood ? Was your affection, then, or is your coldness now, undeserv¬ ed ? Tell me how to regain you, and I will do it, at any price. God ! that my father, who always wished you mine, should bring, to supplant me 5 this stran¬ ger, this foreigner—without fortune, fa¬ mily, or friends !" " You forget that you are ennumerat- ing reasons for, and not against my friendship." Charles proceeded. " I have done: take your will. I shall not oppose the harshest word I may hear of you." " No, I do not expect such justice of you' —she returned. " 'Tis your own fault—once you deserved that I should ; why do you force me to think less of you, by abusing one who never inten¬ tionally wronged you, nor would be-
lieve that the man whom he exalts as the pattern for so many virtues, would counsel his last friend to desert him in his utmost need! Your claims, I own, are elder; and, were you in distress, I would act by you as I now shall by Vailori; but he would aid me in your relief: yet, though you will never be in circumstances that couid enable me to prove what my friendship for you once was, do not force me to betray how much it may be decreased !" Constance thanked Lady Emily for her kind intentions in her behalf, and for the good advice it was out of her path to act by ; warmly acknowledged the plea¬ sures she owed her, during her visit; and retired to her room, with feelings as little complacent as those she left behind her. It is but just to own that Constance was as much prejudiced for, as Charles was against the Valloris. Truth was between them, but neither of them had it. Could the medium have
been struck between their opinions, on this and most other subjects, impartial justice would have been attained; for they were, if congenial by nature, each other's antipodes in habit; and, from the extreme out-posts of their respective theories, on which they hoped to practise with impunity, if not credit, what wonder that, when they did address each other, it was in a tone so loud and harsh, as to seem at least like that of defiance ? The next morning, without farther op- position^Lady Emily took aformaljCharles a scornful leave of Constance; and she set forth to rescue, if possible, her friends from ruin. As the house and grounds of her aunt disappeared, she thought on all the ac¬ quaintances she had formed, all the gay hours she had spent there—but with feel¬ ings how different from regret! " To turn from the banquet untasted, as I did before," she thought, exultingly, u was nothing! but to stop short in the
full career uf pleasure, for the sake of those wlio have no visible claims on me, is something at least. I have, till now, been angry with myself for enjoying this visit; but now, I thank it for being worth resigning*. I will cherish its recollection in flying, even before I was called on, from happiness with strangers, to misery with mv friends T
CHAPTER XL
Pile rocks on rocks, bid woods and mountains rise, Eclipse her nativ shades, her native skies ! In vain 1 through Ether's pathless wilds she goes>, And lights, at last, where all her cares repose! The Pleasures of Memory
Constance arrived, that same evening, at the residence of the Valloris. Lydia received her in confusion. She had the baby in her arms ; but, instead of being improved by this vaunted air, it was pale, and looked neglected. Constance embraced it with a sigh of disappoint¬ ment ; but it cried to return to its nurse,
who said, " it was always frightened at strangers -."--another pang I Felicia now appeared; she looked i|l, though her dress was gay,, and her bare neck and arms guttering with ornaments: she was much agitated at seeing Constance, in doubt how she should receive, or be re¬ ceived by her; but that noble and artless friend allowed not one moment to six¬ pence. " Come I too late ?" she asked, em¬ bracing her. " Well may you fear it," cried Felicia, falling on her neck in tears, surprised out of her recently acquired affectation. " You promised," said Constance, ten¬ derly, " to fly to rae, if ever you repented your coming hither; but since you would not, I am come to you. No matter how, so we are brought together again." " Ah, Constance!" sobbed Felicia, " why did I ever leave you ?" " You never shall again/' returned she.
" Nay, now you are too good—we do not deserve it, lost as we are P Constance was alarmed. The altered appearance of Felicia, and her child, the absence of Vailori and Mrs. Stanhope, brought all that Travers had said to her fears ; and fixing her eyes with piercing scrutiny on the face of her friend, she repeated, in agony, " Lost! no, no ! not you, Felicia! say but one word ! I can bear any thing but that." " I deserve that you should think it pos¬ sible," cried Felicia; " yet there, dearest! you may listen to your fondest hopes, and only do me justice." " Then I am armed for all that can arrive!" exclaimed Constance. " But what a friend you are !" cried Felicia ; " how came yon here ? how op¬ portune !— so like you 1 We feared we had offended you.^—Oh! did you know ali we had suffered!" " And why do I not ? did not you know, unkind girl ! that the moment in
which you called me friend, you parted with all right to have a sorrow which I did not share ?" " Why, my dear, my letters must, in part, have convinced you.—But> from your long silence ------" " Mine! indeed, iove, I wrote every week, but received few replies; 'tis a month or more since the last." u I might have feared it. Tbat wretch must have intercepted our letters. She meditated every misery for me which jealousy could invent; but I forgive her other successes, since she has failed in alienating from me the hearts of my hus¬ band and my friend." " That is well, then," said Constance. " Poor Edgar!" cried Felicia, " you are forgetting him." " Forgetting him ! never ! Where is he r Vailori was now heard making some cautious inquiries of Lydia. As soon as the name of Miss Raymond passed her
lips, however, he rushed into the room ; but, when he saw her once more with his child in her arms, and his wife's hand leaning on her shoulder, all the scenes of her home came back upon his mind, and he could not bid her welcome, from feeling her too strongly so. " Edgar," said Felicia, " after all our wanderings and our woes, this looks so as usual, does it not? She comes, and, in an instant, peace returns with her." Vailori did not speak, but flung himself on the sopha at the other side of Con¬ stance. Their age of separation seemed at once cancelled, and yet it was before them both. That absence increases the power of a beloved object, we feel but in the moment of reunion. " Then they,"—-he burst forth at last, pointing to his wife and child, " they will have one friend, while I am away." " Where are you going," demanded Constance, startled at this threat of ever parting again.
" To prison," replied he calmly. " Nay, Constance, don't look thus—my mother could not receive the word more sadly; but you, bad I taken your advice, yon might remind rae." " / upbraid you in such a situation ! / reflect on my advice so too late ! No, let us leave that to more 'powerful* friends; what right have I } but go on." " Well, I should not mind it, but for poor Felicia's sake ;—in her present situ¬ ation/' Constance blushed stiU deeper than Felicia at the word—" To be sure, Nelika and I little expected—but I am only punished as I deserve to be, and shall have solitude enough for reflec¬ tion." " Solitude," repeated Con stance, firmly, u not while you have a friend, Vailori." " Would you then visit me/' he de¬ manded, in a— " Not that word again" she inter¬ rupted, with a hasty shudder: " such a fate could not rob you of your worth in
my eyes, but its remembrance would im- bitter the whole of our future. It must not be! I beard something of you last night, from Mr. Travers, little thinking- it was so soon come to this." " Last night," echoed VaUori, " what active promptitude ! but how could you escape from Lady Emily's ?" " No matter how, so escape I did;~ and now, will you tell me your exact situa¬ tion r " Will I ? without doubt; and in few words, you shall guess how wretchedly blind I have been: yet, believe me, I never forgot what was due from the husband of Felicia, and the friend, let me say, the brother of Constance ; for you have ever been more than a sister to me!" Constance, with heart full of rapture, met his grateful embrace half way, and Vailori continued. " I no longer doubt, that, to make me regardless of botli, was Sibylla's plan, from the beginning. I know it was her wish to ruin me, and
have me at her mercy; to rob me of my real friends, nay even of my wife, by making our principles as vile as her own. But my little Felicia is an angel!" " And let me," said Felicia, " boast of Vailori, what he will not of himself—that his conduct with regard to me, through¬ out all his trials, has been worthy the highest esteem you can feel for him/' " That is fortunate," replied Con¬ stance, " since, were it otherwise, 'twere too late now to unteach me my esteem for him." " At home," continued Felicia, " we will tell you all; and really, Mrs. Stan¬ hope (we will call her Sibylla no longer, Egdar) was so fascinating, that though not blind to her fault, while I fancied she had but one, 'twas easy for me to forgive a passion for Vailori." Constance piessed her hand in silence ; she could hive challenged Felicia's scru¬ tiny on her earliest dream, after this par¬ don of so much less chaste a flame.
Vailori continued. '* She saw too late that she had unmasked, not in vain, but with an effect exactly opposite to her wishes. She suspected Travers also, who knew much of her early history, and did his possible to put us on our guard. Mrs. Stanhope, the day after his departure, left us, pretending business, and promis¬ ing return. Immediately the real owner of the house and furniture, (for it is not hers,) aud all the others with whom she had contracted debts in my name, ap¬ plied for their rights, of course in vain ; and—oh that we should ever guess even the existence of such vulgar miseries ! I was threatened with an arrest, which I expect hourly." Constance inquired the amount of his debts; it was only considerable from his inability, the necessity, and alternative, of its instant liquidation. " Your cha¬ racter," said Constance, " must not suf¬ fer for such, or any other consideration. I see property before me sufficient for the
purpose" (in this she exaggerated)—" at present doing little credit to its owner;" and she pointed to the ornaments which bad example had taught Felicia lately to assume on all occasions. " These w T ould defray your pecuniary obligations, and their sacrifice would aid the long account you must have with your duties, before I can recognize my princess in this poor child, or her mother my friend, Vallori's wife," in—but suddenly checking herself, in pity to Felicia's emotion—" 'Tis all Mrs. Stanhope's fault." Felicia, without a word, began remov¬ ing her ornaments. " You have others," said Constance; " give them to me likewise. I can ob¬ tain their value, and all shall yet go well." " But," interposed Felicia, " I shall only be able to live on the hopes of one day purchasing them again." a You will have little else to live on, indeed," replied Vailori, bitterly; " but if
fortune ever does smile on us, we shall have many juster claims, and more im¬ portant uses for her blessings. Before that tipae, however, I fancy you will have lived too long to attach hope to such trifles as these/' Next inorning Constance wrote to her banker for the sum, required, and became herself the: secret purchaser of the orna¬ ments. In another day the affair was settled ; and the Valloris thanked her ac¬ tivity as an agent, unconscious of her generosity as a principal. After this her ever limited se!f»permis- sion of such gayeties conscientiously de¬ creased; a considerate delicacy, which Edgar and Felicia felt as it deserved. Thus had Constance contrived, in one act, to save her friends without appearing to impose an obligation on them, and to give a salutary check to their vanity, still seem¬ ing as if the one thing depended on the other. As yet Vailori, conscious in some de-
gree of the advantage it would obtain over her, had abstained from naming his daughter to her namesake, under recent circumstances; but now Constance can¬ didly confest her delight at the disclo¬ sure, and claimed the privilege granted by this new tie, in bestowing some valu¬ able presents on her princess. In alluding to her name, Felicia said, " Why we dared not give her mine, for fear of the Hastings's." Constance was mortified. Had they then been driven, by fear, as a last resource, to call their child after her earliest friend ? It w T as never ex¬ plained; but proceeded, in truth, from an inadvertence solely, which now and then marked Felicia's conversation still. But, as Constance did nothing without dis¬ tinct motive and meaning herself, she was ill prepared to account for such blun¬ ders in another. Seeing the benefit of Felicia's sharing the domestic exertions, she ought to con¬ sider a blest exchange for the disgrace K
and poverty so lately threatening her, Constance resolved on retaining Lydia as her only servant, till increase of family obliged an addition. The day previous to her return she accordingly announced it in a letter, consigning the keys and preparations to Mrs. Watson, who, as usual, when she had no one lodging with her, was promoted to all the immunities of house-keeper at Miss Raymond's. On reaching her home, however, Con¬ stance was amazed to see Surl loitering, as usual, on the little terrace, with his hands in his pockets. As he saw the party arrive, he spoke not a word of greeting, but stood, unbent in figure, and unmoved in face; yet his heightened com¬ plexion spoke a not-unprized welcome. " I thought you were in Yorkshire, Surl," said his mistress. He was right in thinking his presence there a sufficient reply. " Are you in a situation T " Yes, Ma'am." " How came you here, then r** " I axed/
" And for what purpose ? What to do?" " What I've done." " Only to see me return r" " Only i" repeated Surl ; then, as if fearful of being too civil, " No, 'tis not, you only as does return/* " Nay, then," said Constance, " I am the more grateful for your good-will." She was entering the house, but still he lingered; and, though she knew his hor¬ ror of receiving presents, happening to have her purse in her hand, she beckon¬ ed him to her. He approached with his hands behind him, and his eyes raised to hers, pretending not to see the appre¬ hended reward; and, muttering, "Missus Watson's in at our house, she'll tell ye something from me," he passed Con¬ stance, and instantly disappeared. Watson had so exactly adhered to the ancient regime, that the house of Con¬ stance looked as if it had never been un¬ occupied. There was a warmth, and even k 2
an air of studied negligence, in the dis¬ posal of some books, music, and port¬ folios, left behind; which cancelled the absence of the friends from home, and from each other. After affectionately welcoming them, Watson said, " Poor Surl, Ma'am, bade me say, that he wishes to return here. He gave his master warning as soon as I told him you were coming back. The gentleman offered him any terms if he would stay; but he is not to be bought, and only wishes to live again with you." Constance begged to decline this offer, of which she heard no more. For a day or two Constance suffered all the inconveniences she anticipated, from her reduced establishment; but, by degrees, the effect of Lydia's inexperience decreased, and her mistress could almost have fancied her household restored to its original number. So perfect was the It/L^^v-that she sometimes even ima¬ gined she heard the well reihtt:: - /
song or whittle of Surl, ascending from below: but it always ceased on her at¬ tempt to define it. One day, however, it so possessed her, that, resolving to be satisfied, she followed the sound; and, on entering the kitchen, actually found Surl comfortably installed in one of his former offices. cf What do you here, Surl ?" she asked, in amaze. He bowed, and resumed his employment as a reply. Ci What business have you here r" she then demanded. " The same as usual," replied Surl; Constance laughed. <c But, my good fellow, your master-— are you not wronging him r" " I'm so fond of such things," returned Surl, in rude irony. " Does he know where you are ?" fc He has nothing to do with that : this time's my own, and I should like his asking how I spent it." * f You might spend it better," said Constance. Surl rose, looked as if he
could have cursed her ingratitude; but only muttered, " enjoy your own opi- mon. « You loveXydia, perhaps," suggested Constance. « No more than I do yourself," pro¬ tested be ; without intending either eva¬ sion or compliment. " Well, since you love neither of us, your motive puzzles me the more; but I ara quite unable to reward it, be it what It may." " No, you are not." "HowT " Why just let me have my own way; the place is natural to rae, Ma'am; and I come to please myself.'* Constance said no more, but hastened to relate to the Valloris, this trait of local attachment, and animal fidelity. Inquiring the particulars of this affair, she learnt from Watson, that his master, a single man, and much from home, ren¬ dered his situation an easy one, and left
him many hours to himself; for these Suri could hit on no pastime so agreeable as the routine of his old life. His ab¬ sences, though not accounted for, were permitted, and his present duties con¬ scientiously fulfilled. The only reward Constance dared offer, was a supper to Surl and his favourite friends, at which himself and Mrs. Watson presided, as Charles would have called it, a regal. The most remarkable part of this little fete was, that when Lydia was called on to drink the health of her master and mistress, as Surl a ways called Vailori and Constance, she burst into tears, for which she refused to assign a cause, and abruptly left the festivities. With all his rudeness Surl was not ignorant. By obstinate perseverance he had devoted his leisure to instructing himself in writing and reading ; he at¬ tempted drawing; began his own me¬ moirs ; and of his epistolary genius, Con¬ stance had once been rather awkwardly convinced.
Being a man of much consequence in his own sphere, he was often deputed to read the ( papers, whieh his mistress al¬ ways., lent him ; and often repaid herself by the diversion of hearing him discuss their contents, explaining them with great clearness to his less learned au¬ dience, He was a humourist too in his peculiar line., When waiting at table, he would hear Vallori's stories with that imperturb¬ able gravity, common indeed to servants, but in those of SmTs intelligence not the less remarkable on that account. At night, when he had mostly some visitor, he would repeat them, with a zest which gave an added merit to his former self- possession, stopping the praises of his laughing audience, by u oh, but you should hear he tell it." Suri received favours without thanks ; he would never take an advantage by softening his manner ; he was honest and faithful; but by those qualities he excused
to himself a thousand worse, with abuses and liberties beyond numbering. Indeed Constance had been perplexed how to do with him, or without him. She parted with him without regret, but would never have thought of another in his place; knowing she might meet with his faults with greater ease than his redeeming traits.
h 5
CHAPTER XII.
Revenge, from some baneful corner, shall level a tale of dishonour at thee, whieh no innocence of heart, nor in¬ tegrity of conduct, shall set right. Cruelty and Coward¬ ice, twin ruffians, set on by Malice in the dark, shall strike together at all thine infirmities (the best of us lie open there)- and, trust me, when, to gratify a private ape- tite, it is once resolved that an innocent and helpless crea¬ ture shall be sacrificed, it is an easy matter to pick up sticks enough, from any thicket where it haa strayed, to make a fire, and offer it up with I Sterne.
Inactivity again becoming irksome to Vailori,Constance proposed the following plan. He drew exquisitely, and had by him some foreign views and original heads, for which she promised a pur¬ chaser. This plan, from its' privacy and independence, was eagerly accepted; and,
to soothe his pride, he was now permitted to share the expences of their moderate establishment.—But by whom enabled to do so ? Constance knew, from the first, that there was no person near them' who could give them full value for these drawings ; she therefore secretly purchased them herself, at as high a rate as she could, without adding suspicion to Vallori's wonder, at the liberality of his unknown patron. She would have kept these treasures, as "food for fancy,when alone," but that something told her that Vailori and herself had now, at last, met to part no more. She therefore preferred doing good in two ways at once, and keeping up appearances at the same time. Mrs. Watson had a brother beginning life, with a young family to support. He kept a library at a distant watering j>lace. To him she sent the productions of VaUori, as presents from him, with permission (o turn them into profit ; and VaUori, see-
ingthemgooff weekly,never suspected the truth, nor was he likely to meet the young man, and glean it that way. Mrs. Wat¬ son might also be confidently trusted—■ because the secret was not in her power. Constance was not sure her friendship would not, in time, reduce her small for¬ tune ; but she trusted, ere that hour, to see the Valloris reconciled to Mr. Hast¬ ings, and blest by Felicia's wealth; she therefore resolved to make their present bappy, at the expence of her own future ; for though so delicately sparing of their pride, it would have been no mortifica¬ tion to hers, the necessity of depending wholly on them, of owing every thing to her friends. She almost wished to be poor, since then they could nevei' desert her. Felicia's infant lived but a few days, in spite of the unremitting care of Con stance, who saw, with a tear, her hopes for the son of Vailori defeated, and on« transcript of his clnrms (she trusted she
should one day find it also of his worth) lost to her, and to the world for ever. To soften the manly but powerful grief of the young father, to attend on the des¬ ponding mother, was not, it seemed, enough task for her feelings. Felicia had weakened her mind by the indulgence of vain though natural re¬ grets ; and now, with far less reason, per¬ sisted in believing her own life in danger, and in tormenting Constance with her forebodings. Once, even before Vailori, she said, " If I die, my only friend, let not my child want a mother; promise me that you will love Vailori." Convulsed by contending passions, and covered with shame, Constance sunk into a seat, and hid her face. Edgar, attributing this to grief alone, acted, by chance, as delicately, as if he had known what feelings he was sparing. f Felicia," said he, « you forget that she has once refused me." " How could she ?*» cried Felicia.
Constance, knowing what form now shone over her closed lids, in spite of her¬ self, mentally repeated, " How could I refuse him ?" Far from wishing Felicia's death* she not only loved her too well, but saw too plainly how well Vailori loved her, ever to have done so, for an instant, even in her dreams ; but now, since Felicia herself believed it approaching, was it absolute crime to prepare her heart for obeying that friend's last wishes ? She was roused from this dangerous reverie by Vallori's continuinghisreassurances thus: " She alone, 'tis true, could succeed you in my heart, were it capable of sur¬ viving your loss; yet I should sue her for our child alone, nor ever intrude my- self,'now so much poorer,and less eligible, than when I addrest her first. Let my composure assure you I have better hopes. Good God! I could not talk thus if I did not know you were recover¬ ing fast. Cease Ihen to terrify your friend, and to outrage my patience, by speaking thus idly !'*
Till Felicia recovered,Constance hardly knew what mischief this scene had done; but, conscious that she had been thrown on that forbidden shore, by her who had thus lost all right to blame her, could she guess her feelings, she would not accuse herself too severely; but, with all haste, and more difficulty than she at first cal¬ culated on, forced her heart back to its former well regulated state. Constance learnt many particulars of Mrs. Stanhope's conduct, (unnecessary to our tale) which restored her to her self- respect, and taught her to thank Heaven more than ever, for its guard over her warm heart. She often amused her friends by re¬ counting the scenes at Lady Emily's (omitting the final one of course)* Felicia declared " they had been thrown away upon her;" but Vailori preferred her just and natural satire to that volatile plea¬ sure, which, instantly evaporating, leaves but insipid satiety, wearying and profit-
less, to the votary of the gay world, and all who'may be condemned to inhale its vapours. Thus passed their time ; so peacefully, that, after whole days without a shade save from those recollections which Re¬ signation would not exchange for careless forgetfulness, Constance would awake to a vain curiosity, and tremble with secret fears. The least change of situation must impair a content which nothing couid improve; and she longed to ask some spirit of the future or of the past, if a union of soul and fate so pure and per¬ fect, as that which bound her to her friends, had ever been known to last on earth ! A year had thus passed, since the re¬ turn of the Valloris to the house of Con¬ stance. Mr. Hastings was still absent, still silent; and, as if by miracle, Feli¬ cia's real birth undiscovered, even to his .son. AU at once Constance perceived a ces-
sation of attention on the part of her ac¬ quaintances, and even an air of disrespect in the villagers, whom her benevolence had so often served. Conscious of having dven no cause for this, she the less re- ■o gretted it; and lived too entirely for home, to need any auxiliaries from without. She was one morning walking alone, and came suddenly on Mr. Jennings, and his fair convert, Miss Collins; to whom Constance spoke, as usual; but the new saint turned in alarm to her pastor, with¬ out a w T ord. He exhorted her to " take courage." With all the kindness of her nature, Constance enquired what had alarmed the lady; but Mr. Jennings hastily drew her away, as if from the danger of contagion. Constance cared little even for this, from such a source ; but meeting several other of her greater favourites, who, coldly returning her salutations, passed her with looks of doubt, anger, contempt, or pity;
she began to be staggered at such marked repulse, and was returning, perplexed and chilled* when Mrs. Watson overtook, and thus accosted her. " Oh, my dear Miss Raymond! I never thought to say so of my kindest friend; yet now, I am glad that your good mamma is not alive, to see this day. Though to be sure if she were, no one would dare------" €e Dare what ?" asked Constance. " Ah ? Ma'am! that Jennings is preach¬ ing you down in chapel and field P This abrupt and coarse disclosure, stunned Constance with a loathing sense of shame and degradation. " What have I ever done to deserve it of him ?" she said, in humble tones. "Lord! one may tell exactly what peo¬ ple deserve, by its being the very reverse of what they get, in these times. If every body had their deserts, that Jennings-— but this it is, Miss Constance. You see your servants, that's Surl and I—for
though we don't live with you, we think ourselves part of the family: we don't at¬ tend Mr. Jennings's meeting house. That has enraged him, I suppose; and Surl speaks against methodists;—butbeknows no better, as I told him ; for there are more good than bad among them: indeed that's so notorious, that, with the name of methodist, the greatest rogue passes for all that's boly; but that is not to the purpose: Lydia is a great Stickler for Mr. Jennings, you know Ma'am; and from her, for who else should tell him? he learns every thing you do and say. That you sometimes sing and draw, and read plays on the Sabbath, instead of going to church." " Pshaw P said Constance, breathing freely again. Watson continued. " Ah! if that were all! but, my dear young lady, he has got a pack of slan¬ ders, like enough to your story, to re¬ quire no names; and with these he has so blackened your character, that nobody
now thinks you fit to visit; nor Mr. and Mrs. Vailori neither." " Vailori!" echoed Constance, more alarmed for the honour of that name than her own; " what dare any one say against him ?" " Why, Ma'am, that he is not mar¬ ried ; that you know he is not, and let them live with you, because you are too fond of him yourself. Well may your colour mount at such a falshood! You love a married man indeed !" Constance gasped with horror. Did she then hold the confidence of her last and humblest friend on this precarious tenure? at last she said. "But they deny his marriage/' " True, Ma'am; that makes it, if pos¬ sible, w T orse." " If possible ! well, well, Watson ; but if you believe me incapable of loving such a man as they misrepresent Mr. Vailori, you do me but justice there." " To be sure I do, Ma'am ; why they
say that Vailori is not his real name; and that the picture—how they heard of it I can't guess^—I'm sure not from me— that the picture is that of some, lady, whom he seduced and left in France." " 'Tis false!" replied Constance; " but how can the calumnies of such a low wretch as Jennings ha/e reached the ears of my friends r" " By their servants attending him, Ma'am, and by a sister of his who is con¬ fined to the house for ever by illness, do¬ ing such seeming charities for the poor ignorant creatures, that they believe just what she pleases. Then Miss Collins vouches for the truth of it all too. Tin's I learnt from poor Surl, who came here all disfigured with the bruises he had got in contradicting the first he heard of it." " Faithful fellow !" sighed Constance. " And you too, dear Watson; I shall never repay ye in this world ! Oli, that I could fly from it, to some sphere in
which trutii only was spoken, where I might make my few remaining friends happy, without having the purity of my motives thus suspected, and my only con¬ tent snatched thus rudely, thus unjustly away ! God knows I never injured one of my enemies j and even now, I ask for no revenge, but the power of convincing them of their error/* Watson was already in tears ; fearful of followiug her example, Constance "wrung her hand, and left her. Hitherto she had been enabled to re¬ medy any wound of fate as soon as in¬ flicted, on her friends; but slander was a master-scheme of misery. The good know not how to defeat, because they cannot comprehend it. She would have suspected Mrs. Stanhope as the original of this malice, from the intimacy it be¬ trayed with Vallori's story. But that ladv would never choose an agent so humble as Jennings—nor so moral as Miss Collins. She knew not what changes
such characters can assume, to achieve any favourite aim. Without one friend with will and power united to avenge this insult, she resolved, from feelings of delicacy also, to conceal it, fearing its con¬ sequences on Edgars ardent nature. Constance was surprised, on her re¬ turn home, to find Charles Hastings, who begged to speak with her alone. Fearing a thousand things as to the business on which he came, she consented; but his first words put her at rest on the score of Felicia and her guardian. " I come from Lady Emily/ 5 he said, " on an errand which concerns your hap¬ piness and mine. We know that from reports, wliich it is impossible to dis¬ prove, your residence here must be un¬ pleasant to you : Ave are going on a tour; leave these people, whose acquaintance has disgraced you, and accompany us/* " That would be tacitly acknowledg¬ ing the charges." " Lady Emily's protection were a suf ficient contradiction."
" But not as they relate to my friends." " Pshaw! you keep Vailori in leading strings. He can and must defend his wife and himself. Your thinking your aid and countenance indispensable, pays him but a poor compliment. If you would have an example set him, give me a legal right, and see who shall dare to asperse my wife!" Constance was touched by this open avowal, under such circumstances, from one who had hitherto been so fearful of committing himself. "This is generous— this is yourself once more, Charles !" she exclaimed, warmly. " But I can never be yours. I have long ago chosen my destiny. I will not involve you in my quarrel. Go, be happy without me, and I will combat my foes alone." " At least," said Charles, who, his duty done, was (inconsistently) as glad to come off freely, as to witness this return of affection: " at least, accompany us on our tour; and I will trouble you no
more. Let these Valloris have your house and your fortune, for Lady Emily intends bequeathing her immense one between us ; only live with her—'tis all the return she requires/' " Tell her," said Constance, " that I trust she will alter her kind intentions, in your favour; I cannot accept a for¬ tune for which it is out of my power to make the only return required." " Out of your power H " I have said it; and you know I never give but one answer." " Nay, consider, and let me see you again ere I depart." She shook her head. " Come then," he said, taking her hand, " I am leaving you for a long time, perhaps; 'tis true I have done so often—but never with such strange re¬ luctance ; forgive my claiming the privi¬ lege of an early friend." She did not oppose his embrace. " Good God !" he cried, with sudden emotion, " What have you done with mc ? Don't despise L
me as a man of the world now; I feel as I used to, in my boyhood, when I did not feel thus in vain. Had you loved—you might have made me what you pleased. Even now, 'tis not too late; we might be happy again ; "tis not too late, while yet 1 hold your hand—while yet I gaze upon you. Dearest girl, don't force me to de¬ part without you ; you will repent it!" " I can never repent what I do from principle/' " Your principles are of your own in¬ venting, Constance. They have taught you to make the first friend of your life, the child of your mothers chosen companion, tlie man who dote-, on you, wretched—for the sake of a stranger, who has not, never wished to have, a claim on you. They have taught you to say you did not expect justice of me. Judge, by this, if such principles are incapable of deceiving you." " I could not be just to you both," cried Constance, wildly. u But do not
make me shame in all that used to be my pride; do not persuade me that I have lived in vain, or I shall wish to live no longer !'* " Nay," cried Charles, " live and be bappy your own way." "Happy!" " Well, how can I make you so ? by heaven! though I swore I would not when I never expected to be tried, 111 be your champion—Vallori's champion! will that please you r" - s My dear Charles!" Ci On one condition," continued he: *' It is but fair that I should know on what ground I am going. If you will assure me that tbe whole of the reports now circulating are false, and put me in possession of every particular of tlie t ruth, I'll go through any thing—and every thing.—How ! you look as if you could not do this /' " Nor can I," cried Constance, sadly; " yet, believe me, we are not unworthy l 2
your noble offer! a short time will, I trust, clear these slanders, which are the more cruel, because they mingle truth, distorted indeed, with their falsehood." Here she ceased, covered with con¬ fusion. " Oh, Constance !" exclaimed Charles, excessively shocked; " and is it thus I must leave you?—but, you assure me you are worthy my regard, still; and I will upbraid you no more/' « Never thus, at least," she cried, see- ing a tear upon his cheek. " This is your fault too," replied he; " but I forgive you all, and can never cease to love you; treat me, however, as you will i" He was gone. Constance knew not why she felt inclined to recall him—it was not to retract her refusal; but her heart smote her: she burned to ask his for¬ giveness-—but it was now too late. Her conscience was disturbed by its first doubts as to the rectitude of her actions, The
complexion of her past conduct seemed entirely changed, by its results, and the opinion of others. She fancied the bles¬ sing of Heaven was not with her, and gave herself up to despair.
CHAPTER XIII.
Death ! death I ye mean not that ? What's all this waste And idle talk of murder ? Ye suck it in with cold insatiate thirst; Oh ! ye smooth Christians, in your tones and looks! Ye say, " God save him! God deliver him !" While ye are beckoning the bloody axe To smite his unoffending head ! Fazio.
Constance had yet a severer task to undergo. The next day, about sunset, she was returning to Felicia, who was alone, Vailori having gone on a solitary ramble. Coming to a stile which com¬ municated with the fields, she paused an instant, debating with herself whether
that would not be her nearest way. Her back was towards the road, in which two of Mr. Jennings's converts were engaged in a conversation too interesting to ad¬ mit of their noticing her. " I knew it would be so sooner or latter," said one woman. " Not," said the other, " that the aven¬ gers are faultless." " But any hand is worthy to shed the blood of the law-breaker." " I wish our dear man may be by, to improve his last moments, in the next dis¬ course." " He will,'* answered the other; iC he followed them in pious hope of seeing the world purified of one or both. What will she Who calls herself the wife, or what will the other young misguided one gay, when he is borne back to them, cropped off in the flower of his sins ? Will the picture of " the scarlet Woman," which he wears, turn from his breast ttie steel of just retribution ?"
" See what gifts are thrown away," concluded the younger of the two. " He was a very shining and comely young man ; but beauty is vain !" Constance dared no longer doubt that these women alluded to Vailori. He was thenin danger, perhaps even at that very moment—she would not trust her¬ self with her fears, but turned towards them with a sudden impulse. Ashamed of having been overheard, most of all by her, they were retreating; but she caught an arm of each, and looked at the youngest with an entreaty so piercing, that she said, " Ah ! 'tis ail too true ! You are all betrayed, and like to be pu¬ nished. God pardon ye, I say! Vailori is to meet Charles Hastings in fight, and the father is returned, and seeking him in equalrage. One or the other is by this time murdered, or murderer." " Then," returned Constance, in a low and almost confidential tone; u your falsehoods have shed the noblest blood-— have broken the most sacred ties—black-
ened the purest fames ;—and, trust me, the God whose name ye profane, will eternally avenge us in the despair of your hypocritical souls!" The women were awed by this violence, in a female usually so calm. They were even staggered as to the truth of Mr. Jennings's statement; they were shocked too at the death-like appearance of her free, and by the convulsive clasp by which she detained them. Trembling for the consequences o* their disclosure ; the least inexorable of them continued : " Hush ! hush ! who knows ! they are not men of blood; the loves, and not the hates of this world,lead them astray. They may pause before they dip their hands for the first time in slaughter. God forbid that sin should be added ! they may live yet." " They may!" echoed Constance, fling¬ ing them from her, with much force. " Why did you not say so at first ? You look human again! Follow them like light, and I'll forgive!"
" We don't know which way/' u Go a thousand ways. Do ye refuse to use one effort to avoid perdition ? I will reward ye. Send your husbands- children-—every one you meet—to pre¬ vent it; or be their blood upon your heads!" The women promised, with a shudder. Constance flew to Watson, and urged, though in far different phrase, the same charge; then, without another word, again set forth, and reached her home, breathless with haste. Tbe first sound she heard was the laughter of Felicia^ who was romping with*her child ; but Constance, fancying that Vallori's safety alone could give his wife a right to be thus gay, said hastily, " He is returned theu ! No ? Yet, thank God, that at least she knows nothing yet." She then briefly explained her fears to Lydia, adding, u Bring all informa¬ tion privately to me. If he return
hurt, or*—Oh my brain !—then come to me; make no tumult. If safe, and any thing has happened to either of the others; still let me alone receive him; let his wife be as long as possi¬ ble unconscious of what I suffer now. But don't look so horror-struck! You will alarm her. See, I am calm." Having done all in her power to save Vailori, she knew she could do no good elsewhere; and therefore joined Felicia, who sawnothingin her manner to awaken suspicion. She was, herself, in uncommonly high spirits, the beautiful daughter of Vailori sporting at her feet; and, while Con¬ stance excited their mirth to drown any sound which might approach, her heart ached to think, that, already, those un¬ conscious beings might be deprived of such a husband!—such a father ! For what mercy could she expect of Charles ? — or Vailori from Mr. Hastings ? In half an hour (and what an endless
one did it seem!) Lydia entered, with a face df intelligence; and Constance left the room, Mrs. Watson awaited her; and, without preface, began— . " I don't think any thing can have hap¬ pened yet, Ma'am. The whole village is out; Surl has been at every inn, but heard nothing; at every place likely for a duel, but can see nobody ; nor, search how he will, any sign of mischief." " Thank ye! Bless ye! But has any one been to Mr. Hastings's ?" " No, Ma'am." " Ah! then, the rest is no satisfaction. No one will go such a distance at this hour,; I can't expect it." " I'll go," said Surl, advancing to the light; " I'll borrow a horse, Ma'am, and be back in no time." cs My dear Surl!" cried Constance, clasping his rude hand, " go, then, in¬ quire for Mr. Hastings, or his son ; say I had no time to write; tell them what you know; beg them, as they value my
life, to forego their purpose. Should you see Charles, say I will deny him nothing in return for such mercy! If they are not there, ask when and where they went. Go! God reward you with suc¬ cess ! I know you disdain all other pay¬ ment." Surl bowed with a respect he never paid her happier hours, and hurried away, covered with blushes. Constance, not deserted by her presence of mind and self-possession, even in tbis extremity, pursued—" And you, Watson, take your station at the gate. Let nothing enter till I am informed, lest his wife be driven mad with me." " God comfort you !" ejaculated Wat¬ son, in some apprehension as to the na¬ ture of Constance's feelings, and flew to her post. Constance returned to Felicia, who, little guessing the agony which that faith¬ ful bosom was enduring, and concealing for her sake, said,
" I Wonder where Edgar is so long r" Constance replied, with apparent ease, and no violation of truth, " I met him as I went out; he said, you must not expect him home early." " Well, he is seldom a truant; so I won't scold him when he comes back; but, tell me, had you a pleasant walk ? Did you meet any one particular?" How this unsuspecting speech went to the heart of Constance! She had hardly stammered out a negative, when the sound of a carriage, moving slowly and heavily towards the house, struck her ear: she left the room. "Hark!" she whispered to Lydia: "lie is murdered; they are bringing him home!" Lydia, pale and trembling, could no longer restrain her tears. At this instant Watson entered, assuring Constance, whose fears she had anticipated, that the carriage had nothing to do with their ob-
ject* Constance looked to Heaven, in silent gratitude for this momentary re„ prieve, and was returning to the sitting- room. " How well she bears it," said Watson, apart to Lydia. " She has a right to!" murmured the poor girl. Felicia now joined them, her child in her arms ; who, having fallen asleep, she was bearing to its bed. " Why did you not come and see me, Watson?" she asked: "every body deserts me now—even Vailori; and you too, Con¬ stance, to leave me alone so often. Do you understand what I am saying ? Why, what is it ? You are not attending to me at all!" " Hush ! hush !" cried Constance, her face flushing violently ; " don*t you hear? Oh ! Fm in Heaven !"' " 'Tis only her fancy; she will betray all," whispered Watson to Lydia.
" No, no," answered Lydia, rushing to open the door; "God has spared me from the sin of murder, at least!" The event explained. Constance had heard what she now saw,—Vailori conversing cheerfully with Hastings, as they entered arm in arm. Suspense so terminated,—terrors so cancelled—joys so unhoped, and feelings so long represt—overwhelmed lier. "Then he is not dead," cried Constance; and fainted at Vallori's feet. The wondering Felicia was all ques¬ tions ; but as soon as Mrs. Watson saw the mind of her dear young lady reani¬ mating its feebler frame, she had the sense to dispatch them all for restora¬ tives, and sc jure the door against their return. Constance would have given her life to obliterate for ever the recollection of this involuntary desertion of that firm¬ ness, whose late over-exertion, though its cause and excuse, it seemed at once to render void. For a moment she forgot
in her shame, that the safety of Vailori, and his reconciliation with Hastings should lend her joy unmixt; she feared, as she saw neither him nor his wife, that she had forfeited their confidence, and hastily asked Watson, "what she had said ?" Watson, now confirmed in her belief of the truth, assured her she had " not committed herself/'adding, " but I sent them all out of the way, because, my dear Miss, I thought you would like to be alone a little, just now." Constance's eye met that of her humble friend ; and blushing deeply, she fell on her neck, in a shower of grateful tears. The good woman, longing for a scene, thought she might now take upon her the air of a confidante: but she here defeated herself; for Constance, perceiving her ex¬ pectations, rose, and hearing Felicia beg¬ ging admittance at the door, left the room with her, to the great disappoint¬ ment of the well-meaning gossip.
When Vailori saw Constance approach¬ ing, he ran to support her, saying ten¬ derly, " Come, all is well now, my guar¬ dian angel! if you felt so much, how must I bless you for concealing it from Felicia! it would have killed her." " What would?" asked Felicia. " Fm so bewildered! know nothing clearly vet." " You shall know all instantly; but, Constance, you don't welcome Mr. Hast¬ ings back to England." In fact she stood, gazing in silence on Vailori, as if still only trying to unlearn her terrors for his life. " Why 'tis very Vailori /" cried he, smiling. " I see it is, now," she replied, " but, my dear Mr. Hastings, let me congratu¬ late you—thank, I mean—that is, wel¬ come you once more!" Hastings embraced her tenderly, ex¬ tending also the kiss of peace to Lady Felicia, and her child. " Well my pretty ward," he said ; " though not, as would
have been more in character, a cruel guardian, I've been a very careless^ one, and have to thank myself for your dis¬ regard of my authority ; but, you might indeed, as I was told, have fallen a prey to some vulgar and ungrateful fellow: so, since to run away was to be a part of your story, there is but one man whom I could forgive you with ; and, luckily, that one man is Edgar Vailori. And now," he said, seeing how faint Constance still remained, " we will, by our little hostess's leave, all pledge each other in a glass of wine, to drown the recollections of every animosity; and then your scape-grace shall tell ye his adventures. He will do it better than I could." They obeyed, and Vailori thus began : " I had not walked far this evening, When I met Mr. Hastings, fds, whom an anonymous letter had just informed of Felicia's story. He accused me of having treated his fixther with disre¬ spect and ingratitude, in permitting him
to take so absurd a journey, and to re¬ main so long in ignorance. I assured him I had written to prevent both, but had received no answer. Having heard of no such letter from his father, whom it had never reached, he would not believe me. He called me his worst of foes, and said a great deal, which I wish I had not beard, and therefore shall not repeat. Weparted, to meetin an hour, with friends and weapons to decide the cause. "NowCharles abhors duelling as much as I do -, but, having been told I might think myself honoured beyond my de¬ serts in being considered worthy to be murdered like a gentleman; I could not refuse so elegant an executioner—and had no time for deliberate reasoning. Mean¬ time another anonymous friend had be¬ trayed me to Mr. Hastings; but with aggravations which I cannot repeat." " I know them already," said Con¬ stance, inadvertently. " Heavens ! do you though r" cried
Vailori, blushing. " My dear friend I what have you not borne for our sakes 1— but, to my story. Mr. Hastings had flown to England without announcing himself, and ha- 1 .,jt even been to his own house, nor met his son, when he too came upon me, full of accusations, and begrudging Charles his prior claim on my law-break¬ ing and felonious life. I must apprize ye that the first of these rencontres took place, in a spot where the worthy Mr. Jen- ningshappened tobeedifyinga smailfiock who, with the exception of two women, dispersed,as soon as they found their pas¬ tor too interested in our vocation, to pursue his own ; even these fair suffered a respect for the 'Squire to overrule their curiosity ; but Jennings still followed us at a distance, and had the benefit, if not of all our conversation, at least the whole of our pantomime, to the end of the scene. I told Mr. Hastings the truth ; referred bim to you, Constance to Felicia, and to Travers. Having long anticipated so
much worse a fate for his little runaway he readily accepted an apology, for what I could not defend. And now only one doubt remained. " Among my other c high crimes and misdemeanours,' I was accused of wear¬ ing the miniature of a third victim, whose fate, the letter said, c Mr. Hast¬ ings would find I should not explain.' Here, however, the nameless correspond¬ ents deceived themselves. You sec how exaggeration defeats its own purpose; for I would, had explanation been neces¬ sary, have given a full one : but, no sooner had I put the portrait of my mo¬ ther into his hands, than the power of bestowing information was transferred ; for this was the last friend of Frederick Bertie my unfortunate father! this was the man who, after vain attempts to save hinij received his last breath, and heard bim connde to his care, should it live, and come to England, the expected in¬ fant of Nelika, to whom Mr. Hastings also bore the tidings of her widowhood!
" I can't tell you how he told me all this; how he disclaimed all his merit in the affair ! I wished you had been with us then— and now I wish w T e could go over that part again !" " Pshaw, child !" interrupted Hastings, " go on with your story, and make an end on't." Vailori obeyed. " I had not yet pro¬ cured a friend for my meeting with Charles; but his father, already qualified for the office, by a more perfect know¬ ledge of events than I could have given another, volunteered to accompany me. Charles was much startled to find his father, whom he believed in Ireland, the second to his expected adversary: he swore c 'twas very effective, and dramatic if *'e a hit'—readily credited our expla¬ nation ; and, after vainly persuading him to return with ns, we parted friends for life, I trust; for his tenacious jealousy of your honour, fair ungrateful! deserves better treatment from us all, than he
fancies he has hitherto met.— Bien ! thus far I held my amiable person safe ; but we had not long turned this way, when we were nearly run over by an equestrian of singular speed and appear¬ ance; c Who thundering comes on blackest steed ?' cried I; the rider checked his horse, with all his might, at my voice. " 'Is not it Surl? 'asked Mr. Hastings. " c Well, I'm sure! come,I say though, I like that, however!' burst out Surl, on finding us together, and friends.' ' I was going to your house, Muster Hastings; God's sake make haste back ; there's fine work at home about ye !' " e I've cheated you of your ride, it seems,' said our friend. " 'Oh, never you fear,' said Surl, * I'll have my allowance, if it's only to carry this news as far as the beast can go— that I've made up my mind to!' And he vanished like an arrow.—We hurried hither, and you both know the rest."
CHAPTER XIV.
My heart's sole wish Is to sit down in peace among its inmates j To see my home for ever bright with smiles, Mid thoughts of past, and blessed by hopes of future, Glide through the vacant hours of waning life. Then die the happy death of aged honour, Clasping thy hand of faith, and fixing on thee Byes, that though dim in death, were bright with love ! Bertram
" Well !" said Felicia, as Vailori con¬ cluded his narration; " I do confess that such scenes as these teach me what you are to me, Edgar!" " Aud do you need the occasional danger of losing me, to remind you of my value ?" he asked, laughing. M
" Not so, vain one ! but it always gives you more value in my eyes, than you really possess. After your illness, just given back to me from the tomb, I fancied, pale and thin as you were, that I never saw you to such advantage ; but now I feel this sail more, because you now escape a risk run for my sake!" Constance had no need to covet these feelings, but she did envy the freedom with which they were exprest. She would have wanted the power, even had she possessed the right. " And you," pursued Felicia, " dear Constance, to know and to conceal his danger from me. How much more use¬ ful is friendship than love!" " Still," said Hastings, " I here see to¬ gether the only instances I ever knew of friendships improving as they descended from father to child. All your parents were my friends ; and may that recollec¬ tion forsake me, when I cease to feel like a father for those they left behind ! Why,
Fve a large family. A sweet grand¬ child too, iu spite of you, Miss! Poor Charles will never hand down the oid name, unless you relent." " I wish she would," rejoined Vailori, eagerly. " Already anxious to rid yourself of me again !" returned Constance. u No, Heaven witness for me!" he re¬ plied: then turning to Hastings, said, " but, my good Sir, ail this does nothing towards discovering the origin of our wrongs." 61 True, well thought of," answered he ; and proceeded, as if still in his late com¬ mission of justice of peace, to examine the fidelity of Lydia, whose conduct dur¬ ing the evening liad excited some doubts. Overcome by the scene she had wit¬ nessed, her talent for deception deserted her, and she wept out a full confession. It appeared that the invalid sister of Jennings, who had taken up her abode with him, just before the fever began its m 2
ravages, was no other than Mrs. Stan¬ hope ! who, her first letter unnoticed, resorted to that disguise, and purchased the power of revenging on the man she loved, by lavishing on the wretch she de¬ spised, favours more consonant with her known immorality, than with the strict life of a village pastor. Here the wretched woman, in her as¬ sumed character, first noticed Lydia, knowing her to be the servant of Con¬ stance. She pretended to attempt her reform; and trying on her the effect of those slanders afterwards more exten¬ sively circulated, won her over, to bring her an account of every thing that tran¬ spired at Miss Raymond's, and at length even to suppress Vallori's letter to Mr. Hastings. The attentions of Mrs. Stanhope, dur¬ ing her illness, completed the poor girl's captivation; save these, she had been £ promise crammed/ for Sybilla never wasted bribes to seal a conquest which
her blandishments failed to achieve. She knew, as a last resource, that gold can buy any base miod; but, as long as possible, she loved to keep up the appearance of a disengaged, and uncon¬ cerned person, as well as to leave her dupes their disinterestedness to pride in, flattering them for incorruptibility, till they fancied they possessed it. After leaving Jennings, she wrote to Lydia, apprising her of her real name, still feigning her relationship to the preacher. She bade Lydia offer herself again as a nurse maid to the Valloris ; and, on arriving at her house with them, to behave to her as to an entire stranger. While the Valloris resided with her, Mrs. Stanhope instructed Lydia to bring her every letter for or from the post. These she invariably opened, sometimes resealing and permitting them to reach their destinations ; but more frequently, after reading, committed them to the flames. Lydia confessed herself asto-
nished at the contrast of Mrs Stanhope's present dress and manner, with what she had originally known them ; but the artful woman told her, that, havirg of¬ fended her brother deeply by her marri¬ age, she was obliged, while she lived with him, to conform with his habits, and bear his name. Leaving Vailori in circumstances which she thought but inadequately revenged bis coldness, she returned once more to Jennings, and forced him to propagate the slanders whose blackening touch reached even Constance, the unknown foe to her interest, who might be consi¬ dered the good, as she the evil genius, of the man they both loved, though with such different flames. The effects of these tales not soon enough contenting her, she wrote their counterparts to Mr. Hastings, and afterwards to his son. She hoped, should Vailori find any confir¬ mation to her hints of Constance's affec¬ tion for him, that he would treat her as
she had herself been treated by him; and in this trust alone she forebore to scan¬ dalize Miss Raymond with him too. This account, as far as its actions go, was gained from Lydia: we, of course, have used our privilege, of disclosing the motives for these actions. Lydia was excessively amazed at dis¬ covering the double hypocrisy of Mrs. Stanhope; and, as she had not been her purchased confidant, had less scruple in blending accusations of her baseness, with those she lavished on her own. The inquisitor, iri whose stern forma¬ lity his friends could hardly recognize the careless cordial Frank Hastings, now released Lydia; whom Constance, how¬ ever little she owed her, did not dismiss without a liberality, which might pre¬ serve froin the temptations of want a mind already proved so weak, yet so ca¬ pable of tormenting its possessor with all the horrors of remorse. Next morning, unwilling to part so
suddenly with a character revived with such success, Hastings accompanied Vai¬ lori to the house of Jennings. No admit¬ tance could be gained; but several of his late disciples, awakened to conviction by their own wrongs, informed tbe gentle¬ men, that neither himself nor bis f sister' were to be found; and,that having trusted their supposed honesty, the whole village were deeply defrauded in this flight. As the friends were returning, Surl, unusually gay in his attire, overtook them, and said, bashfully, to Vailori, <c I was wanting to speak with you, Sir." (( As how ?" asked he, " Mussus ar'nt going to keep that Liddy." " How do you know ?" " Mussus Watson told me." " And is it she or you who want to be Miss Raymonds maid, in her place?" Surl hung his head sulkily ; he had begun a serious subject, and was angry that it should meet so irreverent a reception.
" Neither of us," he replied; " but we know a tidy young woman as would just shute her: she would not hurt a fly." " An odd character that for a good shot," said Hastings, laughing. " I mean," continued Surl, teized, yet half inclined to laugh too, " I mean she would not lie, as t'other did." Vf How, then, would she lie ?" asked Vailori: here Surl chuckled; but with¬ out answering, went on. " And she's twice as sprack." " You will teach me English in time !" said Vailori. " She have lived where I do, from her first leaving home; but, he's a bachelor, and now his mother's dead, she won't stay. She's a townswoman of mine— and—and—" Vailori, guessing the tender cause of his hesitation, said, " We shall make your situation less agreeable then, by taking such a companion from you." m 5
iC Not a bit," cried Surl; u master knew what he had to trust to, when mussus same back. I told him if I could ever catch her in a humour to let me come home again, I should leave he in a mi¬ nute ; so that's off your mind." " But Mr. Hastings stays with Miss Raymond for a day or two; she won't have room for you both." u Yes she will, when Liddy's gone. I knew that would be an object; so, I was in such good humour, after all the news, that I went to Mary, and—and—I just married her this morning, to accommo¬ date things like !" a Very good humoured and accom¬ modating, upon my word, Surl! Well, I should be sorry at your taking such trouble—and putting yourself so out of your way, for our sakes, to no purpose. Have you told your master ?" " No; but I will—he's a wag—but—I dont mind you, Sir!" Constance, delighted which this scheme.
on Lydia's departure gave permission, and Surl brought his bride in triumph " home." That day's post proved that the wheel of fortune was indeed turned. It brought Vailori a packet from France, with bills to a large amount, and this letter. 11 Sir, " I hear my wife is living with another victim, who, like me, she has made an instrument to your ruin. I know no¬ thing that will punish her so severely as an act, which I hardly needed the mo¬ tive of jealousy to resolve on. I return your fortune, as it stood increased by my efforts in London, taking care that Mrs. Stanhope shall hear of this also. " Believe me, Sir, I never thought of wronging you, till I possessed the whole of your property ; and never should, but for the persuasions of a woman, my fond¬ ness permitted to rule me in every thing. She promised to follow me hither; I re-
joice at her breaking this, as she has the rest of her vows ; and only wish she had never come in the way of an honest man, to make him villain. " I hear she accuses me of having de¬ frauded her; on the contrary, I left her, besides her own income, a considerable sum to support her till we met. " I have never been happy a moment since I left England; but my conscience will be easier when I hear of the en- closed's safe arrival. I have taken care to prevent its interception ; and have now only to beg your forgiveness, and that you will believe in the sincere peni¬ tence of, " Sir, " Your most humble, and obedient " Servant, " J. Charlton/* Vailori acknowledged this packet, freelv pardoning the misguided writer: he never learnt by what means Charlton
became acquainted with his wife's con¬ duct. His agent must have given him the earliest information ; but with that allowance, though the catastrophes most opportunely crowded all about one little portion of time, still, in the common course of the posts, they could hardly have happened otherwise. It was amazing how rapidly Constance learnt, from Hastings, every particular of Vallori's family, not one of whom sur¬ vived. In the loves and hates of each did she readily identify herself; and could have sworn her old friend was more elo¬ quent than aBurkc,though she had never before listened to his long stories with a moment's patience. The day he left them they accompanied him a little on his way, as he preferred walking. On their return, so much had time effaced from Constances mind the me¬ mory of the place, she found herself once more before the little fountain, mentioned
in the beginning of our tale, before she recognized it. " The scene is the same," thought she ;—" and is that all r" At this instant she discovered one addition to its interest. Through the dazzle of the water, on which the sun shone brightly, she perceived, carved on the soft stone, the one brief, emphatic word—" Lethe !" Lady Felicia read it aloud, adding, " how classic! just to your taste, Ed¬ gar." " Ah !" replied he, " I brought many sorrows to this spring, and its waters proved the Lethe I had, till then, imagin¬ ed fabulous. The last day of my first stay here—before I had seen you—I left that farewell of thanks." Constance, without affecting to mis¬ take him, returned, " I never saw it till now." " Amazing!" " Not at all; I have never been here since/' " Nay, that's stranger still."
" Tm not excursive, when I've no com¬ panion." Vailori could glean no flattery from this ; for men are not so alive to these minutiae as women. Had he remained single, he would have loved the past well enough to visit this scene daily. Con¬ stance, from loving it better, had never visited it at all. " You may, at least," he said, with an expression of pique, more for the credit of his poetical conceit itself, than for that of the feeling which had dictated it, " You may at least deign to remember the day on which we came hither toge¬ ther/' " I do," answered Constance quietly ; i( and remember your singing, as we re¬ turned, some pretty wishes, which have been, since then, more than fulfilled to you in Felicia!" Never had Constance said any thing which so rapidly increased the respect of Vailori for her.
Here was a woman, not only incapable of an instant's wandering in her own mind ; but superior to taking advantage of it in another. If this speech proved that she never had loved him, it increased the merit of her services; if it did not prove so, how generous the sacrifice of Vanity at the shrine of Friendship! how noble the rejection of Hope, at the command of Virtue! Even Constance's feelings were less gratified by his grateful remembrance of their only day of mutual love, than by her own performance of her duty, in re¬ directing his thoughts to their right ob¬ ject. This was a scene Felicia could not comprehend, nor was it at all necessary that she should : she saw, however, that some compliment had been paid her, by Constance, which excessively pleased her husband, and she was content!
CHAPTER XV.
J Tis she! but why that virgin bosom gor'd ? Why dimly gleams the visionary sword ? Oh! ever beauteous—ever friendly ! tell I Is it in Heaven a crime to love too well ? To bear too tender, or too firm a heart ? To act the Lover's or the Roman's part ? Is there no bright reversion in the sky, For those who greatly think or bravely die ? Pope.
I'he same eveningVallori again walked out. The female friends were sitting still in that light which was his favourite, dis¬ coursing on the changes of their fate, thankfully enumerating the blessings so
suddenly showered upon them, which promised to light their aged days. Surl announced " a woman wishing to speak with Lady Felicia alone." She left the room, but instantly re¬ turned for her purse, saying, " I must give her something, and get rid of her. She is mad, I think. I don't understand what she says ; nor, by the twilight, can I well make her out. Her face is bound up, and she looks deformed. It has quite alarmed me; but I promised to go back to her directly/* " Indeed you must not, my dear," said Constance. " There; don't give way to your fright; forget her deformity, and her face: I will carry her something." Constance did not call for a light, but went instantly to relieve and dispatch the mendicant, whom Felicia soon saw has¬ tily depart, and waited for a minute with¬ out her friend's return. She then called to her; but receiving no reply, followed,
and found her lying in a swoon. Her shriek brought Surl and Mary to her aid. The former raised his mistress without a word; but, when he saw that down her neck the blood was feebly trickling, his face grew blank with horror. He bore Constance to a sopha, and stood be¬ tween it and Felicia, that she might not too suddenly discover the worst. u She is not dead—She may not die!" he mur¬ mured, in awkward tremor. ;c Die!" repeated her terror-stricken friend. " No, God forbid ! How can you ever name the death of Constance to mer Surl, never famed for rounding a tale, retorted, " I've as much right to wish she may live as yourself; but I must fetch somebody, for wishing won't save her." He flew for assistance. Felicia now learnt the truth,—dispatched Mary for water, and was supporting the still sense¬ less form of Constance, when Vailori,
pale and agitated, rushed into the room, When, however, he saw his wife safe, he embraced ber eagerly ; then, falling on his knees, f with a defeated joy/ found breath to utter, «I feared for you. You alone were tiie intended victim. She must not die, even to save you !** " Ah I I'm dearly bought," said Fe¬ licia, looking in agony on the face of her friend : but it was reanimated. A voice which never sounded in vain for her, had recalled the senses of Con¬ stance, " And did I save you?" she asked, looking up in extacy. " For Vailori too ! fear nothing; the life which pur¬ chased yours, is grown too dear to part with in haste. Yet, should I die, you are cheaply preserved. I thought lo prevent your terror, Felicia; but I have given you a sad sight. I saw no one as I en¬ tered ; but, from beliind the door, the blows reached me. I strove not to scream, and fell instantly. Who could it be ?" i{ Sibylla," returned Vailori: u I should
never have recognized her, but, as she met me, she said, * I have heard all! You thought to defy me 1 how sure you were of happiness! Now, be wretched as you have made me. I have killed Felicia!' I did not secure her, but flew home, to find, oh God ! what horrors ! Could nothing but this avail!" (< Nay," said Constance, Ci consider, had not our similar dress and height de¬ ceived her, (you can forgive the mistake!) her crime might have been more fatal, even if I must not live; but if you regret me thus, I too shall repine—even I—" and here she fainted again. Her friends bore her to the nearest room, and loosening her dress, laid her on a bed. The change revived her. " How came I here T she asked, look¬ ing round, with a blush ; " why not to my own room f yet"—and pausing, she looked tenderly on them both : " I re¬ member—on your wedding night—I — Felicia—I— yes, yes ! It is but fair—'"
Surgical aid now arrived, in the per¬ sons of Morton, and the gentleman who had attended Vailori in the fever. They examined the wounds, for the blow had been repeated: both were deep, and re¬ luctantly pronounced mortal! While the sentence struck despair through the hearts of her friends, Constance said, calmly— " I fear the last pang, and the grief it will inflict on those who love me ; but I fear nothing beyond it. All is indeed awe and uncertainty. I have thought too little on such an hour as this, expecting it would not arrive till I was more weaned from life. Yet it is better thus. I could not otherwise have died for you. That feeling could never have killed me, which has been so long my life. I might have survived it, in surviv¬ ing the power to serve—and already you need me no r^ore. I was not eager to die, for I was not ashamed to live;— but heaven's will be done !'* The professional gentlemen assured her
she might survive some days, on condi¬ tion of her remaining silent. " No," replied she, " let ray future be, as my past has been—all theirs f " This," cried the physician, much af¬ fected, il is not the first time you have offered your life to preserve your frieiuK I never saw your equal. I shall never forget you." The same considerate foresight whicli had ever attended Constance, was now seen in her cautions to Felicia. " Don't look on me so intently f would she say ; " you will remember my poor face when you should not/' " How can I refrain," sobbed her friend, " if you so soon must be lost to me ?" " No, not lost to you, I trust, my love ! I ask no heaven but that of still being to you what I have ever been; and I feel as if 1 should be so permitted. Nay, to prove a more powerful friend. Perhaps, too, I may be permitted to know your pa-
rents, Vallori's, my own, your son; am I trusting too confidently in being par doned ?" " Pardoned !—you who never yet of¬ fended !" She smiled, and shook her head " You would forgive me, I know," she said, " even if I spoke in death, of a feeling which has been dumb through life. My actions at least testify all its purity, if they could not expiate its weakness. I might have been inactive, or vindictive. I might have wanted opportunities of doing good. But now—I must not boast—my efforts have not been in vain. Two sorrows, however, I have been spared, that of ceasing to love you, and of think¬ ing you unworthy. Still I often wished to give you some stronger proof of my regard. I embrace my death as the fulfilment of that prayer,—the crown¬ ing blessing of a singularly enviable fate. Many may have had my will, without my power. If my feelings were crime,
death is their punishment; if virtue, heaven is their reward/- She sunk back, exhausted ; and, after this, was only able to speak at intervals. Vailori hung over her, in tearless an¬ guish. Since his mother's death he had felt no grief like this. Seeing her striving to raise herself, he mutely offered to support her. " No," replied she, (( I have lived, and can die, without your support, Vailori. I have a better—the only one I could prefer to yours ;"—and she cast her eyes to heaven. Felicia asked her if she wished to see a clergyman. " Don't you remember/' returned Constance, smiling, " the dying French soldier; who, unable to speak, wrote, as his only confession—' Vive 1'Einpe- reur !' Mine were as brief," Vailori beheld her, for the first time, with the consciousness of all she might have been to him. A thousand proofs of N
affection, till then misinterpreted, now rushed back upon his memory ; and, execrating his past blindness, he once more mentally pronounced, " Felicia, you are dearly preserved!" Perhaps Constance saw this struggle ; for she shortly afterwards said, " If you are at any time asked, who was the hap¬ piest woman you ever knew ; say—One who made her own happiness. She had neither beauty, wealth, nor fame; pa¬ rents, kindred, nor even a confidant. She was slandered by many, and loved by few; lived mostly in seclusion. Saw— the love of her youth the husband of an¬ other.—Yet she was to be envied, above all other women ; for she was always of use to those she loved best." Popr Felicia was lost in wonder and admiration. Constance continued : " Ah, Vailori ! how little did I think, when I saw you first, that I should see you in my last mornin ts. As little, as that those
was a frown, because you did not know me then ; but you will smile on me now/' " I shall never smile again," said Vai¬ lori, in a low and desperate tone. " Then I have, indeed, preserved your wife to you in vain!" exclaimed Con¬ stance, reproachfully: but this was no time for Edgar to apologize, even to Fe¬ licia. Constance had forbidden their sending to Mr. Hastings, but now begged to see their dear little girl once more. They feared the exertion wou!d be painful to her. " No," replied she, " all sensation is over, beneath the wound, but my heart is stili alive. That will hold out to the last! Pray let me feel its darling near it, yet again !" Mary accordingly brought the child to the room. After kissing her tenderly, she asked Mary where her husband was; l( breaking his heart for you Ma'am!" n2
replied the young woman, with streaming eyes I —" He has a heart, then ! poor Surl! take him this brooch, and tell him------" She was unable to proceed. Mary was about to take her charge out with her; but Constance started up, and stretching out her arms, eagerly cried, " No ! no ! leave that treasure -. my last farewell must be hers. I wish I had time to take leave of all my friends ; but I feel I have not, and must be resigned. Tell my enemies I forgive them freely. Teli Mr. Hastings, and Watson, and Lady Emily,— she would never forgive this as¬ sociation of names,—that I gratefully re¬ membered them. Above all, let Charles know I regretted ever having annoyed him. I believe I did injnstice to his character : our last interview so unde¬ ceived me as to his affection, that I in¬ tended, on finding fortune would enable you to do without me, to examine my heart, as to its power of rewarding him. Death has defeated that intention, and
rendered my change of feeling unneces¬ sary. I am thankful that it has, and that I may die as I have lived, yours alone, and carry my love for you both, unmixt, to heaven Vith me. There, c if after death our souls shall be transparent, every thought unveiled, and friend meet friend, to read each other's hearts, ye'll know, at last, where ye were held most dear !' " She then embraced ' her Princess,' and murmured a blessing over her. ci How many plans," said she, " have I formed for her womanhood, and only trembled lest her death should prevent my seeing them realized!" Her friends, though young and doat¬ ing parents, were so sensible to the mise¬ rable reverse, that, at this moment, the loss of their only child would have been less insufferable than that of a benefac¬ tress and companion, endeared to them by years of services, and advice; a life of
exemplary generosity, and inexhaustible affection. * c Now, my mother" cried the young martyr, " I know what you must have felt in parting with me! bow soon we shall meet again ! Constance, remember your poor name-sake! teach her, Vai¬ lori!" The baby clung to her, and cried. A visible emotion passed over the face of the dying friend, at this sight; and her last tears fell on the cheek of her half- conscious favourite. She strove to speak, but foiled in the attempt, and clasped Felicia's hand, as if to save herself from a doom too sweet for her, and liable to leave too deep an impression on the mind of her beloved; but her last act of magna¬ nimity, was her first in vain—she fell back on the bosoEi of Vailori, and died, in the cause for which alone she had lived !
