gratified; but if they meet with a rapid sale, and fill my pockets, I shall
be elated.

THE AUTHOR.

SPECTRE
OF

ANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER I.
Despair reigned triumphant in the mind of the unfortunate Agnes
as she paced with folded hands her miserable chamber, wretchedly and

scantily furnished as it was; the thought of being drove from it filled
her with terror; yet how could she avert the impending evil? money she
had none, and every resource to procure it had failed her. Her child
slept, and its least motion made her apprehensive to its waking, as it
would ask for that food which its hapless mother could not give. She
thought not of her own wants, but must her child perish with hunger?
no, forbid it heaven, she would sooner beg. A sob from the sleeping
Charlotte agonized the mother, and she rushed into the street regardless
ofthe rain that soon drenched her tattered garments.
Mendacity was not a trade suited to Agnes; when she wished to
address the passing stranger her tongue refused its office, and the
outstretched hand recoiled back to her side,
"It will not do," said the wretched sufferer, "and we must perishl"

She turned round, with an intent to retrace her steps, but an
overwhelming faintness laid her prostrate on the pavement. At this
instant the carriage of lady Cecilia Martimel drove up to the door; she
humanely checked the footmen who were abusing Agnes for
obstructing the way, and were proceeding to remove her with a
roughness that bordered on cruelty; and ordered them to convey her
into the hall, and send up the housekeeper. By her aid Agnes soon
recovered; in reply to lady Cecilia's question, as to the cause ofher fall,
she ascribed it to the united effects of hunger and sorrow; an assertion
which her pallid face and worn-out garb seemed to vouch for.
"I am sorry," said her ladyship, presenting her with some silver,
"that my purse is so ill provided; but this is not my home, I am now
trespassing on my brother's house, but come to me on Friday morning,
and I will then listen to the cause of your distress, and if possible afford
you some permanent relief;" then ordering one of the footmen to give
the poor woman a card, she ascended the stairs, her heart replete with
satisfaction at having relieved a fellow creature.
The housekeeper offered to send one of the maid servants home
with Agnes, lest her faintness should recur, but this was most civilly
declined, for some wine and light food had completely invigorated her
frame.
-21

-

-L--l

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Agnes hastened to her child, whom she found weeping bitterly at
the absence of her tender parent, and almost famished with want and
cold.

Again was the fire rekindled, and the humble board spread with
cheap but nourishing viands, and Agnes, as she surveyed her child
regaling on a plenteous meal, felt a temporary respite from woe, and
she soon sought her pillow with a thankful heart.
She arose early, and as she sat at breakfast with her beloved
Charlotte, recollected the card given her on the preceding evening, and
drew it from her pocket, wretched Agnes! truly unfortunate woman!
had a basilisk met thy view, you could not have started more, as the
name of Sir Edward Martimel appeared to your astonished sight; was it
then possible that she had been rescued with her child from starvation
by his wife? but the fact was too glaring to admit a doubt. "Dearly
purchased blessing," she exclaimed, "and but for thee (clasping her
infant to her bosom) I should ever regret the boon." To repair to Bruton
Streetlon Friday, was not to be thought on; and the promised benefit
which had given rise to hope, was now erased fiom her mind. Again
she resumed her enquiries after employment, but no success attended

her exertions, and she was once more on the verge of the

keenest

distress.

What was to be done? this question had often of late agitated the
breast of the grief-worn sufferer, and it now claimed a most serious
consideration. Her head rested on her hand as she sat absorbed in
thought, when a tapping at the room door interrupted her, and she arose
to open it, supposing it to be a lodger in the same house, to whose good
offices she had been indebted on several occasions, and would have
been more so, had the means kept pace with her inclinations.
Agnes hung back with surprise on beholding a lady clad in a neat
but elegant walking dress, attended by a respectable elderly woman. "I
fancy, ladies, you mistake," said our heroine, "your visit cannot be
intended for me, I have not the honor to know,""Your name is Bennett," said the lady.
Agnes faintly sighed out, that it was.
"You did not keep the appointment I made," said the stranger,
casting back her veil; and Agnes beheld features that were intended
(short as had been her opportunity of beholding them) indelibly
engraven on her memory: her unexpected visitant was lady Cecilia
Martimel.

' Bruton Street, a very well to do address, leads into Berkeley Square,
Westminster.
11

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"You did not keep the appointment for last Friday," repeated her
ladyship, in a tone that indicated doubt and displeasure; "may I ask the
cause?" Agnes remained silent, and Cecilia regarding her with strict
scrutiny, continued; "you doubtless wonder to see me here, and indeed
it seems to give you more pain than pleasure. Unknown to you, you
were followed home by one of my brother's female domestics, not from
undue curiosity, but humanity; for she thought you unequal to the task
of proceeding far, and to her surprise, found you an inmate of her own
sister's house; it was natural that she should then make some enquires
concerning you, and the answers were to your advantage, as to conduct,
honesty, &c. since you had been with them; their only complaint was
your poverty, and the husband and wife observed, that their large
family prevented them from showing that forbearance in respect of
rent, which they could otherwise have wished. This was reported to me,
and on your account I looked forward to Friday with some anxiety,
supposing you withheld by indisposition, or a too modest fear of
obtruding, or the loss of address; and I came hither, as you have excited
in me no common interest. You are very young for the mother of this
sweet girl, and it is evident you have moved in a genteel sphere; I wish
to learn to the cause of your extreme wretchedness, but possibly you
deem me unworthy of your confidence, and indeed my zeal to serve
you, has impelled me to border on impertinences."
"Give not such a term, I entreat you," said Agnes, "to your
unexampled goodness; and believe me, that till my heart ceases to
vibrate in this hapless bosom, my gratitude will always be yours. That I
was once blessed with affluence is indeed true and it is equally true that
I am now the most wretched of human beings that linger in existence. I
will impose no fictitious tale on your ladyship, were it to snatch me
from immediate ruin; and to impart my real history is impossible. I
must therefore resign whatever goodness your ladyship might intend
for me, and submit to my hard fate with as much resignation and
patience, as it is possible for me to command, under such unhappy
circumstances."

Lady Cecilia was indeed chagrined and disappointed, more

than

she chose to express; but pity soon returned to her breast for the pale
interesting object before her; and there was a frankness in what Agnes
had said, that called forth a latent admiration. The beauty of Charlotte,
who had just completed her third year, and her prattling tongue, rivetted

her ladyship's attention on her. "What a pity," she exclaimed, "that
such a lovely blossom should be allowed to wither in the chills of
penury and want; suppose I stretch forth a hand to save it, her
maintenance will only cause me to curtail a few of my unnecessary
expenses; but it is possible you

will not part with her?"
-z-r

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
The agitation of Agnes was so extreme, that every nerve seemed
palsied; afier some minutes' silence, a sudden idea struck her mind, tbr
she hastily exclaimed, "It shall be so, providence surely ordains it fbr
some wise purpose:" then turning to lady Cecilia Martimel, she said,
"the sacrifice will be great, but I submit, fbr her happiness is dearer to
me than my own."

"But in what way," said her ladyship, "would you wish

her

educated; is there any prospect tbr her as to the tuture?"
"I fear not," signed fbrth Agnes; "but yet it might be."

"Suppose, then," remarked lady Cecilia, "that I bring her up as a
it will enable her to procure an excellent and praiseworthy
subsistence; and if any favorable reverse of tbrtune should break
through this mystic gloom, she will not disgrace her exaltation. By
what name am I to call my pretty charge?"
"Charlotte Bennett," answered the weeping mother. "And when
will you resign her?" reioined lady Cecilia.
Agnes knew this very hour, or were it a month hence, the pang of
separation would be the same, if not worse, fbr anticipation would but
increase it. The arrangement was therefore instantly made, and Agnes
embracing her child with an emotion that bordered on agony, gave her
to lady Cecilia's attendant, to convey to the chariot that was in waiting,
at a small distance fiom the house. Agnes was then presented with ten
pounds by her benefactress, and having promised to improve her
personal appearance, and call in Bruton Street the next day to see her
governess,

child, they separated.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER II.

Lady Cecilia was scarce seated in her carriage, when she began to
repent that she had been hurried away by her feelings into an act which
her cooler judgment condemned; she had come to the humble abode of
Agnes, with a determination to assist her, if the account she gave of her
former life was such as merited approbation and pity; but she had heard
no elucidation, and the slightest account had not only been withheld,
but absolutely refused: and yet she had taken the child, the offspring
most probably of an impostor, one who, enured in scenes of vice and
depravity. could put on a specious appearance, and appear an innocent
sufferer.

Her ladyship's ideas were strengthened by the remarks of her
attendant, Mrs. Drew; this faithful servant had been her nurse in
infancy, and yet remained with her, and was placed on her domestic
establishment, on the most confidential and respectable footing. The
extreme readiness of Agnes to part with her child, had given this really
good woman an unfavourable opinion of her motives; and Cecilia was
so much vexed at what she had done, that she was more than once on
the point ofordering the carriage back and renouncing her protdgde; but
it was finally settled that Mrs. Bennett should be informed next day,
that the fear

of offending Sir

Everard,

or any of their

respective

families, by supporting an unknown child, had determined lady Cecilia
to relinquish the plan, and settle in lieu an annuity on Charlotte, toward

her support and education; and in the mean time the child was
committed to the care of Mrs. Drew, who was to pass her off as a
young motherless relation of her own.
The morrow came, but with it no Agnes, and in the evening Mrs.
Drew went to enquire after her, and found that she had absent herself
immediately after lady Cecilia had quitted the house, and left no trace
behind.

Lady Cecilia was astonished at the intelligence when it reached
her; but ashamed of being discovered as the dupe of her own folly, she
took measures to silence the few, who knew the real circumstance of
her adoption of Charlotte, and determined to keep the matter a profound
secret.

Charlotte was no longer beheld with complacency, even her beauty
was disregarded, and prejudice blighted all her prospects; she wept for
her mother, called on her to come to her babe; but no consolation was
offered her, and she literally cried herselfto sleep.
In a few days she was sent to a cheap school, near Bethnal Green;
here she remained two years; during which no enquires were ever made

-25

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
after her by her mother, nor was the smallest tidings received of that
mysterious woman.
A change now took place in the situation of Charlotte, which was

eventually of great service in adding to her comforts, which had been
very circumscribed.

Martimel Castle was an ancient fabric, but in good repair,

and

situated in a most delightful part of Monmouthshire; yet it was seldom
visited by its owner, who, wedded to a lif'e of folly, prefened gayer
scenes. The old housekeeper was dead, and Mrs. Drew, who wished for
more ease and retirement than her present situation afforded, solicited
for and obtained the post. Lady Cecilia was loth to part with her, but
her health and the near approach of her favorite's old age, would have
made it cruel to deny.
Lady Cecilia now,was not the lady Cecilia, she had beeqmany of
qualities, which had rendered her amiable and exalted above the
her
generality of her sex, were either eradicated from her bosom, or laic
dormant. The infidelity of Sir Everard, his conduct toward her, and her
regret at having no offspring, had wrought the change; she had recourse
to gaming, to drown thought; she was at first successful, and thus urged
on, she continued the dangerous practice till she was in debt to a
considerable amount; retrenchment of every kind became an absolute
necessity, and among the rest, the small stipend paid for Charlotte was
withdrawn, and she was sent with Mrs. Drew to Wales.
In the retirement of Martimel Castle, Charlotte became a welcome
companion, and her engaging, docile, and obedient manners, soon
removed every lurking prejudice from the mind of Mrs. Drew, who
acknowledged that it was an unjust severity, to reflect on the child for
the conduct of the mother; of which she was not only innocent, but
unconscious.

About a mile distant from Martimel Castle, stood a small village,
called Rosedale; Charlotte and her aunt Drew (for thus she called the
housekeeper,) were frequently visitors at the Curate's, whose children
had imbibed a strong predilection to our little heroine. One evening as
they were taking tea in the arbour, farmer Morgan's daughter, Rose,
entered with the intelligence, that a very accomplished gentlewoman
who had hired the white cottage belonging to her father, was going to
open a day school on the following Monday; "but who, my dear Rose,
is this new comer," said Mr. Hervey, "we must know something of her,
before we entrust our young ones to her care, and then if we approve, I
must acknowledge that she will be a most desirable acquisition to
Rosedale, where a school is much wanted."
"She comes," replied Rose, "most highly recommended from my

father's sister, whom you know, sir, keeps
-26

-

a

boarding school in

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
London; she has been her chief assistant these two years; it appears she
is a widow, and has a very small annuity; my aunt is loth to part with
her, but her delicate state of health has induced her to send her here.
relying on my parents to serve her."
This introduction was sufficient, and Mrs. Stockley opened her
school under the most favourable auspices; Charlotte was one of her
pupils, and soon became a decided favourite.
Mrs. Stockley was tall and well formed, and the turn of her hands
and arms were exquisitely beautiful; of her face it was impossible to
judge, for she had some years since met with an accident, as she was
travelling, by the overturning of a coach, that had caused a cancer in
her face, which was partially covered with a black shade; and her hair
was of a fiery red. Her appearance, it was therefore easy to conceive,
was singular and forbidding; but this was soon forgot. Her amenity of
deportment, and charms of conversation, rendered every one pleased
with her; and happy were those whom she favored with a visit, but that
occurred seldom, as ill health and (it was also evident) inclination led
her to seek retirement; and one of her chief enjoyments was, to wander
at twilight with some of her scholars among the beautiful walks that
sunounded Lanmere Abbey, the seat of the honourable Mr. and Mrs.
Godolphin.2
Of this unfortunate pair, the following story was oft repeated by
the inhabitants of Rosedale, and its vicinage.
In early lit'e they were blessed with two children, a son and a
daughter, on whom nature had lavished every perfection of beauty and
mind. Albert Godolphin's heir was a most noble youth; to know him,
was to love him; the pride of his parents, the hope of their tenants and
dependants. Magnificent were the rejoicings that marked the day of his
coming of age. The Abbey was thrown open to all comers, for in Wales
they were not afraid of improper characters intruding.
The gothic edifice and the long vistas of trees were so illumined,
that the whole appeared like fairy land: Lanmere could yet boast its
minstrel; Godfrey, the blind harper, was led inro the hall to give his
mood of rejoicing; then the sprightly dance succeeded, and Albert led
off the lovely Matilda, his affianced bride; after dancing, an elegant
collation was served up in the banquet room for the higher orders, and
suitable refreshments provided for the rest, according to their several
conditions. When the cloths were removed, the wine circulated briskly,
and toasts were given to the healths of Albert and Matilda; nexr, the
hall resounded to that of Mary of Lanmere, and a speedy union with the

'

This could be a self portrait of Wilkinson herself.
n1

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
beloved of her hearq again the minstrel tuned his harp, and all was
harmony and joy.
The ladies retired from the banquet room, the gentlemen were to
fbllow in half an hour to the ball-room, and the light movements of the
fantastic toe were to be resumed; of a sudden, shrieks, yells, and groans
assailed their ears: "My son, my son, my own Albert," exclaimed Mrs.
Godolphin, "Oh! I hear them pronouncing his name in accents that tell
me something has befallen that treasure of my heart."
The anxious mother flew to the spot that was so late the festive
scene of joy. Albert, the heir of Godolphin, was indeed expiring, and by
poison. Strong was the deadly mixture, for life was fleeting fast away.
But he was sensible; he clasped his mother to his breast; "I have a foe,"
said he, "and his vengeance has been sure, but how I deserve it, I know
not;-I know of no rival in Matilda's love-I have had no quarrels-

and I-." More he would have added, but death arrested his lips, and he
expired.

In vain was every investigation, nothing transpired, not even

the

breath of suspicion lighted on any object, and all that the parents could

do was, to pray that Heaven, in its own good time, would visit

the

murderer with retribution.
Matilda, the daughter of a neighbouring earl, sunk under the stroke
in three short months followed her lover to the grave.
and
Mary of Lanmere was now the most wealthy heiress Monmouth or
its shire could boast, and it was expected that she would soon give her
hand where her affections had long been known to have rested, and that
with the consent of her parents, united to the wish of her late brother,
who had lived fiom infancy in terms of friendship with her suitor. But
shocking to relate, an unnecessary ambition now seized the minds of

Mr. and Mrs. Godolphin, and they determined to aggrandise their
family through the means of their daughter, and an act of parliament
was obtained for her and her heirs taking and bearing the name of
Godolphin; and a wealthy commoner, who was content to relinquish his
own family appellation fbr hers, was selected for her husband; Mary of
Lanmere wept and entreated, but they were callous.
An anonymous letter, addressed to Mr. Godolphin, informed him
of the private marriage to his daughter; he reproached her with the most
bitter curses and reviling, and she denied the acq he searched her
papers, but nothing was found to confirm the report; and on enquiring
for the supposed husband, he found he was gone to the Continent; anc
he became satisfied that the report was a malicious one, to wound his
peace. But to make assurance doubly sure, he hastened the preparations

for the wedding, but on the

evening immediately preceding

the

appointed day, Mary was not to be found. After some hours' search, a
28-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
mantle and veil were discovered suspended on a bush, to which was
affixed a note in her own hand writing, too plainly reciting her destiny;
her body was never seen, but the river at that time swelling with an
overwhelming flood, rendered their labours abortive.
From that hour Lanmere Abbey appeared more like the mausoleum

of the dead, than the abode of the living. The principal apartments were
closed, a number of servants discharged, and the wretched pair lived in
the utmost privacy, nor ever quitted Lanmere for their town residence.

-29

-

r

I

--__

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER III.

To this piteous tale Mrs. Stockley often listened with the utmost
sympathy; she blamed the sordid views of the parents which had
occasioned the loss of their daughter; but severe had been the
punishment, and she, as well as Mr. Hervey, the worthy curate, thought
them entitled to the pity of every feeling heart. But to return to
Charlotte, one year under the care of her excellent governess wrought
such an improvement on her, that Mrs, Drew, struck with the opening
talents of so young a child, wrote to Lady Cecilia, endeavouring to
interest her in the behalf of Charlotte, and to stimulate her to fulfil her
first intention in regard to her little charge.
To this Mrs. Drew received an answer that was merely an evasion.
She would do nothing more than she had done, the mere supply of
clothes and board, and the small stipend paid to Mrs. Stockley weekly

for Charlotte's schooling, till she herself should come to Lanmere,
which would be in a summer or two, and she observed that it was time
enough to think of establishing a child who was not yet eight years old.

Mrs. Drew thought otherwise, fbr Charlotte was friendless and
unconnected, and would have her way to make in the world, and the
sooner she was prepared to do it the better. On Lady Cecilia little
dependence was to be placed, and she felt a sad presentiment that when

death should call her away, Charlotte would be forlorn indeed, if
something was not previously done for her, and with this view she
resolved to impart to Mrs. Stockley and Mr. Hervey, under the seal of
secrecy, every particular respecting their little favourite, and take their
advice how to act.

Mr. Hervey was severe in his censures on the unnatural mother,
who had thus abandoned her child, but Mrs. Stockley urged that there
might be some pressing necessity for such an act, and it was probable
that the mother had watched over the child till she had ascertained that
Lady Cecilia would provide for her; but as this was only a matter of
opinion, it was useless to discuss it.
Mrs. Drew stated, that previous to her coming to Martimel Castle,
she had settled on her relations, who were poor people, all her savings,
which were not inconsiderable, to receive at her decease, with her
wardrobe; that all she could now do for Charlotte, was to bestow on her
what she could in future accumulate, and promote her interest while her

life should

be spared.

Mrs. Stockley praised, as it deserved, such generous intentions. "l
like the child," she observed; "and her orphan state, for such it may be
called determines me to be her friend. I will exert all my abilities to
instruct her, and in time she will repay me by being useful in my

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
school." By the aid of Mrs. Drew, musical and drawing instruments,
and some superior books, were purchased, and the task of extensive
tuition were soon began, to the mutual delight of preceptress and pupil;
and these arrangements enabling Mrs. Stockley to take children of a

higher class, her school flourished beyond her most sanguine
expectations.

Summer after summer passed away, and Lady Martimel never
made her appearance at the Castle, and Charlotte attained her thirteenth
year in the most happy manner, fully justifying the opinion of her
abilities, and such was the dawning beauty of her person, that she was
universally called the Flower of Rosedale.

Mrs. Drew was very infirm, and often confined to her room by
serious indisposition, and on these occasions she invariably received
the most unremitting and endearing attentions from her supposed niece.
One evening Mrs. Drew was seized with such violent spasms, that
she thought her dissolution approaching with rapid strides, and she
wished to see Mrs. Stockley. Charlotte was dispatched to fetch her, and
ran with all possible speed to the White Cottage, but to her great
disappointment found her governess from home; and, the little maid
informed the anxious enquirer, that that her mistress had taken the road
to Lanmere Abbey.
Charlotte almost flew thither, and repaired to a small building
called the Hermitage, a place where she knew Mrs. Stockley often sat
to rest from fatigue.
As she entered, her bonnet blew off, and her hair, which was
luxuriant, fell on her shoulders. "You must come with me, my dear
ma'am, immediately," said she, "for Mrs. Drew is very-"
At this instant Charlotte started back, for she now perceived that
she had been addressing herself to the Lady of the Abbey, for she knew
Mrs. Godolphin by sight; and to add to her trepidations, the latter gave
a sort of hysterical shriek, and then said in a quick tone of voice, "Who
are you, what do you want with me, why did you seek me here?"
"I intreat pardon, madam," said Charlotte, "I was looking for my
governess, and the faint uncertain light this place affords, led me into
the error, and I am seriously sorry at having thus alarmed you."
"You did indeed agitate me," said Mrs. Godolphin, with a peculiar
emphasis, followed by a deep drawn sigh, and she immediately left the
Hermitage, conversing with Charlotte, who gave her modest but ready
replies to the questions she put.
In a short time they beheld Mrs. Stockley advancing toward them:
'That is the person I was seeking," said our heroine, and her companion
immediately stept into another path, faintly bidding her good evening.

-31

l-r

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"Was not that Mrs. Godolphin conversing with you, Charlotte?"
"Yes, ma'am, it was; but you seem ill and tremble so, has any thing
happened to alarm you."

"Nothing, nothing, my too anxious love; I have taken a longer walk
than usual: but how came the Lady of the Abbey, as you romantically
term her, to depart from her usual custom of shunning every one, and
converse with you?" "I will tell you, my dear governess, but first let us
take the road to the Castle, my aunt is so ill, that I scarce expect to find
her alive on my return, and she is most anxious to see you."
They quickened their pace, though Mrs. Stockley showed she was
ill calculated to endure the exertion, and frequently leaned for support
on her young companion.
They had scarce entered the courtyard of the Castle when a
travelling chariot met their view, servants were unfastening trunks, and
(for it was now dark) several lights were seen moving about the interior
of the building.
Charlotte, with all the sprightliness belonging to her age, where
every novelty is delightful and eagerly sought fbr, was bounding
forward to learn the cause of this singular phenomenon, for such it was
at the Castle, when Mrs. Stockley called to her, intreating her to stay. "I
am," said she, "scarce able to proceed; I know not what is the matter
with me this evening: let us enter by the side door, and you can run up
stairs and see if Mrs. Drew is alone, for I am not in spirits to encounter
strangers."

The child did as she was desired, and soon returned with

the

welcome intelligence that Mrs. Drew was better and by herself. Mrs.
Stockley proceeded to her, and after a few enquires concerning the
attack she had so recently suffered, asked who had arrived at the Castle.
Mrs. Drew replied, "that it was Sir Everard Martimel, who had not
visited his hereditary domains for many years, and was now come,
accompanied by a gentleman of the law, to search for some papers of
consequence, but did not intend to prolong his stay an hour longer than
was absolutely necessary, for he had some how," continued the old

woman, "taken

a great aversion to this place, which was once his

favourite abode, and it was now suffered to fall into the most shameful
neglect; had he a son, or indeed any child, I dare say the case would
have been widely different, but his disappointment in that particular has
been very great, and it is not to be supposed, that after a lapse of so
many years, my lady is likely to produce an heir."
The conversation then turned to subjects more immediately
connected with themselves and Charlotte, who of course was not
admitted to the conference. They wondered whether, on this occasion,
Lady Martimel had deigned to notice that interesting girl, or sent any

TIIE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
addition to her wardrobe, a desideratum that had long, very long, been
forgot by her first patroness; and they looked forward with eagerness
f-or the morr&w, Sir Everard having signified by his valet his intention
of seeing her, and delivering some commissions from London

-JJ

-

--L

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER IV.

The communications of Sir Everard to Mrs. Drew, were indeed
calculated to impress that good woman with astonishment. Lady Cecilia
Martimel, after a marriage of more than twelve years' continuance, had
for the first time declared a pregnancy, to the great delight of her lord
and master, who, in the event of a son's being born, would derive from
the marriage settlements valuable advantages, which he had long
looked on as lost to him, though that idea had not given him prudence
in his expenditure.

This event caused him to look for papers, deeds, and
had long laid neglected, and it was also
determined that Lady Cecilia should bring her first born on the
memorandums, which

hereditary domain, as had been tbr time immemorial the custom of the

Martimelfamily.
Tradesmen

of every description were coming down to modernise

the interior of the chief apartments, and refurnish them. This was Lady
Cecilia's desire, and in the present state of affairs how could her
husband deny her any thing she chose to ask.
A new housekeeper was also provided; Sir Everard observing that
the fatigue of superintending the domestic concerns of the Castle would
then be too much for Mrs. Drew, but suitable apartments would be
provided for her use in the southern wing, and her salary continued.
Mrs. Drew had no fault to find with this arrangement; on the
contrary, it was calculated to give pleasure to one whose lif'e was
drawing to a close; but there was an unkindness in the manner of Lady
Cecilia Martimel, that pained the heart of her foster-mother, who had
been her first nurse, the guider of her infant steps, and her faithful

attendant

till the weight of

years called

for

retirement. And

she

expected at least a note, or some small token of remembrance; but
dissipation, and a crowd of interested flatterers, had completely blotted
a mind, whose amiable tendency was once unequalled.

Mrs. Drew sighed for herself and poor Charlotte, and she
determined to write without delay to her lady, and procure, if possible,
an answer as to her intentions respecting her in the nouvelle
establishment that was to take place at Martimel Castle, when of course
some arrangement must be entered into.
An answer was returned so soon, that Mrs. Drew was almost

electritled at the receipt

of it, for it

was as quick as the mail could

possibly bring it.
Snow is chilling, but in winter we expect it, and are prepared fbr it;
it is one of the attendants of the season. But Mrs. Drew was not
prepared for the reply of Lady Cecilia; it was not only a chill, but
-J+

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
petrifying. No delicacy to the invalid spared what she termed her anger
and her astonishment at being applied to on such a subject. Had she not
sent the child to the Castle? Had she not fostered her infant years and
paid her schooling? And though not exactly felt, her board must have
been an expense to her and Sir Everard; and as Mrs. Drew was aware

that her first designs concerning her had been abandoned, she

had

hoped (and indeed relied on) that long ere this she would have sent the
girl out to get her bread in some manner or other in the world. Her age
was not much it was true; but that was all the better, it would be early
servitude, and use her to proper habits of subordination and respect to
her superiors. Mrs. Drew was not to suppose she was going to spend

her money on the offspring of a beggarly impostor; she had already
paid enough, as the punishment of her credulity; and she ended with a
command, that on her arrival at Martimel Castle, she might find it
disencumbered of that useless inmate.

"That she shall," exclaimed Mrs. Drew, "I see her ladyship does
not like incumbrances, an old worn out sickly being like me will be as
much in her way as the present object of her anger. Yes, yes, she and

her modern attendants shall have a clear course! Ah, my good Lady
Countess, peace to her soul, little thought her child would thus slight
me in my old age."

Here her reflections were laid aside for the present by the entrance

of Mrs. Stockley, to whom she presented the ungenerous letter. If Mrs.
Drew was hurt, that gentlewoman, whose feelings were rendered acute
from the refinement of education, was more so at that part concerning
Charlotte, and she burst into tears; but soon reviving, said, "The child
shall never want a home while I have a roof to shelter her. We will not
desert her, and in a very few years I hope to see her settled according to
our wishes."
Sir Everard Martimel and Counsellor Scran made brief dispatch of
business, and after a week's stay at Monmouthshire, the next day, or at
the furthest the second, was fixed on for their departure.

The Castle was a stupendous edifice. It consisted of a square
building, from which branched out four complete wings, each
terminated by gothic turrets. One of these, on the southern extremity,
was named the Martyrs' Turret; but from whence it derived the
appellation, tradition had ceased to record. But where is there an
ancient building, especially in Wales, that has nor its horrors or its
spectres? And to pass this part of it at night, or even its first shades,

would have appalled the heart of many a stout peasant belonging to the

-35

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY,
adjacent villages.3 Happily for them it was seldom their courage
required putting to the proof, for there were plenty of other and far
more eligible paths; but his was a short, and certainly very pleasant cut
to Lanmere.

Sir Everard Martimel, while quite a boy, had taken a fancy to this
turret, and his parents indulged him with frlling it up according to the
dictates of his own taste as a library study and boudoir; and to secure
his treasure from any plunderers who might be tempted to invade it,
from its distance from the inhabited part of the Castle, he had massy
locks fixed to the pondering doors that communicated with the
building, and the one leading into the wood was carefully barricaded on
the interior.

When Sir Everard abandoned the Castle, he made use of this place
as a depository for many articles best known to himself, or indeed only
to himself, fbr he was the sole conveyancer. And having secured the
locks with keys of the most curious mechanism, he affixed his seals to
them, and they yet remained unbroken. But to this place it turned out to
be expedient that he should repair, and alone, except that Cicely went
with him to clear away the cobwebs from the library, light a fire, and
place candles. To these were added the pleasing auxiliaries of a bottle
of wine, some sandwiches, and biscuits; and the old housemaid having
completed all her required duties, left Sir Everard, blessing herself at
his temerity, in voluntarily passing the night in such a fearful place.
It was near the fourth hour of the morn ere he found the principal
object of his search; for the many years that had rolled over his head
since he had placed it in security, had erased from his memory the exact
spot.

He gazed on the record of a transaction now excruciating to his
memory-he sighed-powers of astonishment!-his sigh was re-

echoed.-He started,-he listened,-he could scarce respire,-and

the

cold dew-drops chaced each other down his fear-blanched cheeks, for
conscious had made him a coward.

I This

decree is similar to Wilkinson's declaration in the opening pages of The

CastLe Spectre.

Castle Conway, situated on the borders of Wales, in a most romantic spot,
took its name from the rapid flood of waters that laved its walls.
completely surrounding the west and northern boundaries ofthis
stupendous edifice, the ruins of which remain till this day, to tell the
curious and enquiring traveller what it once was. Oft did the peasant,
while regaling after the labours of the day, with his nut-brown ale, repeat
the horrific story of the Spectre of Lady Evelina, and the base Earl
Osmond.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
In vain his eye pierced every nook,-no one appeared. He fancied
it only the effects of wind rattling through some crevice at that critical
moment, and restoring the record into a little bag of blue and silver that
contained it, and several other articles of consequence relative to that
same subject, he quitted that part of the turret, and descended to the
library. The logs burnt cheerily and casting himself into a chair, he
greedily poured out and swallowed a whole goblet of wine. Still
thoughts obtruded of a most disagreeable nature; and to banish them
seemed impossible. He had yet to seek for a miniature which was in the
boudoir, and he took a second libation of wine. His eye then glanced on
a book that had lain, ever since his last visit, on the chimney-piece. He
took it up,-it was much decayed. An idea struck him that in this very
identical volume there was a name and a memorandum written which it
might be as well to erase. While he was accurately searching, sleep
overtook him.
He awoke with a confused start, and beheld a female figure gliding
swiftly from the library, and turn up the stairs. Her face he saw not; for
her head, and even her shoulders, was enveloped with a veil of gauze,
thickly spangled. But her dress of white and azure, so richly adorned,
so singular in its make-he could not forget! Ah, no! it too well
proclaimed the wearer, if such a term can be given to one no more.
"Can the grave give up its dead," said Sir Everard, "and in its true
corporeal form? Not for kingdoms would I sojourn here another hour."
He rushed to the boudoir, seized the picture, and then returning to the
library, went to take repossession of his blue and silver bag;-but his
hand grasped, and his eyes rested on vacancy. It might have fell on the
floor,-he looked,-vain was the solitary hope! it had vanished, as well
as the ghost. The baronet extended himself on the floor in despair.
"Here," said he, "will I terminate my miserable existence, though I
perish inch by inch." But a second thought told him this would not do.
Cicely knew of his visit to the turret; it is true he had imposed secrecy
on her, and accompanied his commands by a golden argument, more
powerful than his ostensible motive given to the simple, unsuspecting,
good-hearted Cambrian, that if he was known to have treasure, it would
soon, in these degenerate days, be an object of nefarious pursuit. And
his valet, who could have told the tale that his master had not been in
bed all night, he sent to a distant town, on business of pretended
urgency. But when he did not join the counsellor at breakfast in the
morning, amazement would mount her rapid steed; and his humble
confidant, her head, brimming full of terror and visions, would think it
her bounded duty to reveal the transaction, and he should soon be

discovered.

-3t

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
He seized a pistol that lay on the table, for he had brought a pair
loaded with him in case of any unpleasant surprise or interruption, and
pointed the deadly weapon towards his head. At this moment his ears
were assailed with an awful groan. He dashed the pistol from him; it
went off; and the bullet shattered the opposite casement with a
tremendous noise. "Surely," exclaimed Sir Everard, in a transport of
fury, terror, and perplexity, "all evil spirits have joined in a league to
torment me this night, and they are led hither by Mary of Lanmere. Ah,
no! she is a happy ministering angel in heaven, while I 3p-."

We leave

it to the reader's imagination to complete the honid

sentence. He left the turret; and as he did so, he found the door locked
on the inside, exactly as he had fastened it upon dismissing Cicely for
the night. No one could have entered there.
He had scarce closed the door and advanced a f'ew steps along the
stone passage that led towards the hall, when he was assailed by a fresh
dilemma, and from this there was no possibility of a retreat. He heard
Counsellor Scran say, "l tell you, my good Cicely, fbr I believe you are
so called, that the report you heard, and indeed I heard it too, is no more
than some poaching rascal invading one ofSir Everard's coveys."

"No such thing, no such thing," exclaimed the dame, with

some

anger, "we shall find my master weltering in his blood. Beshrew me but
he went there on purpose to make away with his own precious life,-oh
he had a deadly wild look about the eyes when I left him. Fool that I
was to give way to such freaks, when I ought to have roused the whole

Castle immediately; and now his ghost will haunt me for ever, unless
our good parson, Mr. Hervey, can lay it in the Red Sea for ninehundred, ninety, and nine years. The Lord and St. David have mercy on
us, here it comes sure enough!" And Cicely, giving a loud scream,
clung to the counsellor's dressing gown.

"What mummery is this?" said Sir Everard, advancing,

and

surveying the astonished group, which consisted of all the household.
"Could I not indulge an hour or two in privacy without this alarm?"
"The report of fire-arms, sir," stammered out the gardener,
"alarmed Cecilia, and so she called to us, that your honour was in
danger some how or another; and she led us here."
"Well, well, retire my friends," said Sir Everard, forcing a smile,
but it was one of ghostly hue; "I thank you for your zeal, and it shall
not go unrewarded; but I am safe, I accidentally dropt my pistol, and it
exploded. To you, Scran, I must apologise, though an innocent cause of
your rest being thus broken."
"Oh, no apology is necessary, day-light is now visible, I have had
several hours sound sleep, and I will just slip on my coat and take a
walk among some of your plantations; I will join you at eight, and

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
depend on it, with an appetite that
hot cakes and new laid eggs."

will enable me to do justice to your

-39

-

I
--,.-l

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER V.

When the Baronet and the Counsellor met at breakfast, they

of health, gaiety, and
good humour; Martimel pale, woe stricken, and the very words
presented a striking contrast: Scran the emblem

"despair" written on his face.

Mr. Scran began several points of conversation, but he soon

abandoned them for a very weighty reason, want of replies; for his
companion was wholly taken up in his own thoughts, and the worthy
member of the law, therefore, finished his breakfast in silence; and
then, taking a volume, seated himself in one of the window recesses,
and began perusing its contents.
After some lapse of time, Sir Everard said, "Well, my friend, are
we to turn our back to day on Martimel Castle or not?"

"That is for you to determine, Sir Everard, I yield to your
conveniency or desire, thus far independent of the time required in the
journey, I have three or four days to spare; afier that, I promise I shall
be uneasy, as term will soon commence, and before I left town I had an
inundation of briefs."
"I thank you, Scran, for the frankness of the reply. It enables me to
make a little delay. Have the goodness to cater fbr your own
amusement till dinner; by that time, I shall have decided on a subject I
am trying in my own mind; you will therefore excuse me." Scran
replied with much courtesy, and they separated; the Baronet to his
chamber, where he soon flung himself on his bed, and his learned
friend to make another excursion. He had never been in
Monmouthshire before, it pleased him, and he resolved to make as
much as he could

of the little time allowed for

research and

observation.

As he gazed, when at some distance from the height that
commanded a beautiful view of the Castle and its grounds, he
involuntarily caught himself saying, "I wish I was Sir Everard
Martimel," but he instantly checked himself, "No, no, not to be the
Baronet, would I barter my peace of mind; all may be well-seeming
without, but something must be wrong within, or why the scene I
witnessed this morning?" Richard Scran, content thyself with thy house
in town, thy neat furnished chambers in the Temple, and thy cottage
o.neeo at Putney5. Thy wife is not a dasher, but she is a comely, good
tempered woman, and has brought forth six lovely children, to greet

4

s

A rustic building of picturesque design.
Putney is a district of southwest London in the London Borough of

Wandsworth

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
thee after the shortest absence when you return home; many in thy
profession havc rose high with, perhaps, not more abilities than this
poor brain could boast, but thank Heaven, I never wrung the hard
earned crust from the hand of a poor client, or accepted a golden one

from that of a rich man." How far the good counsellor might

have

extended his soliloquy is unknown, had he not at that moment been
interrupted by Jacob Matthews, the gardener of the Castle, with,
"please your honor, I believe you are the judge who is now visiting my
master Sir Everard, and if so, he wishes to see you immediately."
The whimsicality of the address overturned all Mr. Scran's gravity,
and he laughed heartily; but honest Jacob and him soon came to a
perfect good understanding, and they took the way to the Castle, the
counsellor learning that four of the domestics had been dispatched
different ways to seek him, but the gardener had been the successful
one.

On entering the anti-room leading to the apartment where they
usually sat, Scran found Sir Everard reclining on a settee; on perceiving
his entrance he arose instantly, and exclaimed, in hurried disjointed
accents, "My dear Sir, I am glad you are come, I have much to
impart-indeed I don't know whether to make you a confidant or not,
yet I believe I must do so-indeed Scran I am a very great fool."
Here a direct pause gave the Counsellor an opportunity of saying,
"To be a fool, and acknowledge yourself as such, is somewhat singular,
for many pretend to wisdom, who have not one jot of brains, but their
pericraniums too are crammed with some vile composition or other."

"But when I reveal to you the matter that now agitates my mind,
you will laugh at, ridicule my weakness, and expose it."
"Nay, Sir Everard, there you wrong me; I might laugh, I might jest,
but when it comes to exposure-"
"Forgive me, my friend," said the Baronet, "and impute

the

I utter to a mind ill at ease." They shook hands, and the
worthy Counsellor remarked in a few words, that he sought not the
confidence of the Baronet, but, if he thought proper to give it him,
every word should be as sacred as the Alcoran6 to the followers of
inconsistencies

Mahomet."
"I believe it," replied Sir Everard; "know then that last night I went
to the turret to look for some papers, of incalculable consequence to
me; after a tedious search, I found them; I returned with them to a little
room that in my juvenile days was my library; I was fatigued and sat
down to some refreshment, which the careful hand of Cecily had
provided; the place, the time, the many little mementos I had seen of
o

Alcoran is Arabic and literally signifies a Book or Collection.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
former days, gave rise to a peculiar train of thoughts; memory recalled

both pleasing and painful occurences,-and-and"-here

the

faultering returned-"sleep surprised mel awoke and found myself
robbed; yes, Scran, I was plundered, and made wretched indeed; the
papers were to me invaluable. Destruction! when I think on it, my brain
seems on fire," and Sir Everard paced the room in agony.
"But you put up tamely with the loss," said the Counsellor, whose
curiosity was now indeed excited; "or was the report of the pistol the
consequence of the discovery of any person retreating."
"Breathe it not to the winds, (whispered the Baronet); I intended
the pistol for myself; I had fixed it in a sure direction, a moment more
and all would have been over, when something interposed. I dashed the
weapon from me, you know the rest. Now, Scran, tell me what you
think of this strange affair, as I could trace no human being."
"Papers could not go without hands," said the Counsellor, affecting
badinage to cheer his companion, which was indeed
foreign to his heart, for sympathy made him a sufTerer.
"But my grandmother or aunt Penelope, dear sage souls, had they
been living, could have told you that, and from me, a learned

a gaiety and

Counsellor, you will expect something more; my opinion, and I give it
without any consultation or retaining fee, is this; you were bewildered
in thought, the place, the time, the recollections you indulged in, all
helped to deceive you; you placed the papers in some obscurity or
other, and then persuaded yourselfyou had lost them."

"Impossible!"

"I must own I do not see the impossibility; if you will admit me to
your sanctum of all sanctorums, I will be bound we shall find this blue
and silver bag, for that, I think you say, was the outer case of the whole
concern."
"It was; be it so after dinner, we will visit the martyr's turret." A
lurking hope arose in his mind, he might, indeed have launched into
perplexing mistakes; he had encountered enough to bewilder him; the
spectre, that spectre he did not dare mention to Scran; now, that was a
confidence he never could give, that was enough to annihilate all
thought indeed."
"Find the papers for me," said the Baronet, starting up, "and the
name of the turret shall be altered; it shall be called after you, I will
canonize you."

"It is Hervey, an excellent man, I assure you, though a poor curate
incumbered with a wife and a large family, and a very small salary. On
my honor, Scran, I have some tweaks of conscience on his account, he
was my playfellow in that very nursery, and continued my juvenile
companion at intervals, until I went to Cambridge. I believe I made him

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
many promises, not one of which has ever been filled, and he has had
the modesty never to remind me of them but once, and that on a most
urgent occasion, and then he had but an evasive answer; we will detain
him to dinner, and I must take the opportunity to send his boy Everard
my godson a little remembrance, in the shape of a fifty pound note. I
dare say it will be an acceptable windfall to my poor friend."
He rang the bell, and enquired for Mr. Hervey; he was informed

that he was reading prayers to Mrs. Drew, who was worse this

afternoon: "let him know, then, we desire the pleasure of his company
as soon as he is at leisure, and tell Morgan to forward the dinner as
much as possible."
Mr. Hervey soon made his appearance, and pressed Sir Everard's
offered hand with courtesy and respect, but free from all fawning
servility or meanness.

"Is it possible," said the Baronet, "that you could come to

the

Castle with so much nonchalance towards your old intimate, that had I
not sent for you, I believe it was not your intention to have asked me
how I did, after such a long absence; it is years since we met, and the
last time was in London."

"Excuse me, Sir Everard, as I heard from your servants that you
did not receive or pay any visits, but was merely here incog. I did not
think it became me to intrude; I intended to reserve my congratulations

to a period not long distant, when
most festive and happy occasion."

I

hear they are to be called for on a

The Baronet made a suitable reply, the invitation to dinner was
given and accepted, and the time went away very cheerfully titl eight in
the evening, when the curate departed with the gift for young Everard,
and the gentlemen began to talk of their excursion to the turret.
"I must replenish my courage," said Sir Everard, "with a bumper,
before we go."
"Pshaw," said the Counsellor, "a bottle or two will not harm us
when we return; but take my maxim, of going to business cool and
collected, and then imagination will not steal the reins from reason."
They repaired to the turrer, and after they had minutely
investigated every part, were assured that no blue and silver bag was
there. "I knew it, I told you so," said the Baronet, again relapsing into a
state bordering on distraction.
"But which way did the despoilers enter? some thief must have
been here; you fastened the entrance door after you?" "Yes, exactly as
we have left it now."
"We will then examine the other doors; I think there are two."Yes, there are, besides that leading into the woods."

-43 -

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
The Counsellor investigated them most minutelY,-llo one could

have passed through the cobwebs and hoards of dust accumulated
around, and adhering to every ledge and crevice, a proof positive that
they had not been opened for many years; the locks, also, encrusted

with rust.

"Of this, however, I will make sure," said Sir Everard, and seizing
the book he had left on the table the preceding evening, spread the
leaves over the candle, and setting them a blaze, threw the volume into
the grate.
Scran could not but feel amazement, but he questioned not; and his
conviction was strengthened, that all was not right within Sir Everard's
breast. The loss of the bag was a puzzler; but the worthy lawyer began
to think, that the Baronet, in a start of passion, had served it in a similar
manner to what he had done the book; but he did not hazard the
declaration of his conjectures, for his companion's feelings seemed in a

very irritable state.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER VI.

As soon as Sir Everard arose the next morning, (Friday,) the
servants received orders to be ready to start at nine the following
Sunday, from the Castle.

His valet then informed him, that Mrs. Drew was no more. The
suddenness of the event surprised him, more than any one else about
her, for they had long expected her to sink under the repeated attacks of
a spasmodic affection, with which she was assailed.
There being no housekeeper or house-steward to manage for him at
the Castle, Sir Everard dispatched a note to Mr. Hervey, enclosing the

of money he intended for the funeral of this old and worthy
servant, and intreating that gentleman to give the proper orders, and
provide mourning for Morgan and Cecily, who had been her kind
sum

attendants.

After breakfast the Counsellor proposed a walk over the Castle,
which was assented to with pleasure. They entered several apartments
on the basement, and marked down many alterations that might be
made to advantage.
"This," said the Baronet, flinging open a door, the walls, hangings,
&c. of a bright green, "was my mother's favourite sitting room, and this
is her whole length portrait, in the queen of Scot's stile, an unfortunate
woman whom she is said greatly to resemble, as far as regarded person;
happily fate assigned her a more tranquil scene to play on life's suge."
"She had indeed a lovely majestic form," said the Counsellor, "but
is there no flattery here?"
"None in the least, indeed it scarce does her justice."
They then turned, to look at a fine old painting, when a sweet voice
broke on their ears, uttering, in the most condoling accents, "do not
weep and disturb yourself, my dear Charlotte, and wander about thus;
the grass is damp from last night's rain, and you will get cold; come,
return with me to the house, I have leave to stop with you all day, and

surely that must be some comfort to you; you used to love your
Emma."

"I do love you, I always shall, my dear good Emma Hervey, but
my grief is very great indeed."
"But we have long expected this event," said Emma.
"Here seems some juvenile sorrow; no age is exempt, Scran," said

the Baronet. "It is not fair to listen and steal into their artless
confidence, but I cannot resist the impulse; we may be of service,
perhaps, to the afflicted one, when we know lhe cause."
The window was open, and they continually neared it, and peeping
out, observed one young girl sitting on a bench, and tenderly supporting

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
another, whose arms were round her waist, and her head reclining on
her shoulder.

The conversation began thus. "Yes, we have long looked for my
aunt's death, (fbr such I still call her) but there lies my grief; she is no
relation of mine; 'tis true indeed I discovered it yesterday, and have not
had a happy moment since. Tired with sitting up so much of late, I had
flung myself across the foot of Mrs. Drew's bed; how long I had slept I
know not, but I was awakened by your dear father coughing; I thought
he was come to read the office of the sick, and Mrs. Stockley was in the
room, and I still felt fatigued, I kept my station, and some one (Cecily I
suppose) had covered me up very comfortably with a quilt. After a little
conversation respecting the now alarming state of my aunt's health, Mr.
Hervey said, 'Well, have you had any good news respecting our dear
sleeper here?"
"I have had an answer from Lady Martimel (said my aunt), but she

absolutely refuses to do any more tbr her; nay, insists on it, that she
may not find Charlotte here on her arrival at the Castle. I am going fast,
I really think the agitation the letter caused will shorten my days. I have
scraped together fifty pounds; take it, Mr. Hervey, and as occasion may
require, assist Mrs. Stockley out of it, toward bringing her up; I would
do more if I could, but my own relations have claims upon me which
cannot be set aside for one who is a total stranger; her mother in all
probability is dead, if not she has never claimed her, and it is folly now
to expect it. Lady Martimel should not have been thus severe to an
innocent child, to whom she once promised her protection. But God
help and protect the dear deserted one!"

"'God is all-sufficient,' said Mr. Hervey, and here ended

a

discourse that has filled me with astonishment and trouble. I now call to
mind, that when I used to ask Mrs. Drew after my parents, she used
merrily to say, they were dead; and now it appears she does not know
even that much; Mrs. Stockley has very bad health, and if she dies too,

then I am forlorn indeed. Alas! what have I done, to make Lady
Martimel hate me; and I suppose Sir Everard does the same, though it
was not mentioned, fbr he never enquires after me; and Mrs. Drew and
my governess have commanded me to keep out of his way while he is
at the Castle; and now, Emma, I will tell you something else, for human
nature is very perverse, and I long to see the Baronet. I wonder whether
he remembers the picture of his mother, in the parlour behind us. O, I
could gaze on it for hours unwearied; I am sure, if he is like her, he
cannot be proud and cross, and I do not know what else, that people say

of him."
"People wrong him," said Emma, "but my father lays these reports
to his long absence from the Castle, and the oppression of his agents to

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
the poor, of which he is ignorant; was he to reside here some part of
every year, many grievances would be redressed, and many of the
peasantry employed, who are now more than half starved, and
numberless acts of benevolence extended to them: for he will have it.
that Sir Everard, though a little spoilt by the dissipation of a town life,
has an excellent heart, and a liberal spirit. But as he is still young,(not
more, I believe, than four or five and thirty,) much is to be hoped;
especially as my Lady is coming here to lay-in. I dare say there will be
fine doings at the Castle; bon-fires, sky-rockets, and plenty of ale and
caudle to be given away. How I should glory in seeing old Jacob and
Cecily leading off the dance in the servant's hall; one so fat, and the
other so lean, what a contrast! Well, I have done, I see you are angrybut I must try to cheer you up a bit, it will not do for me to cry too, and
yet I am almost ready to do it, when I think of your troubles; but see,
Morgan is beckoning to us; come Charlotte:" and away tripped the
young friends.

"I think (said the Baronet, putting his arm within that of Scran's, as
they left the apartment) that listeners never do hear any good of
themselves; it is a most excellent adage. I have received a lesson from
the mouth of a mere child, by which I shall profit. I have indeed been
too long an absentee, yet I shall never like Martimel Castle again, and I
fear (but all this is in strict confidence) my friend, Lady Cecilia will not
conciliate matters with my tenants and dependants. I should have
brought her here at first, she was then formed for domestic enjoyments;
it was my fault, my conduct that worked a change; but no more of this;
Hervey's daughter is a fine sensible girl."
"Ah, but the other pretty creature," (said the Counsellor) "her
whose grief is so great, and so naturally pourtrayed. Who is she, Sir
Everard?" and he fixed his penetrating eyes on the Baronet's visage.
"On my soul I know not; this is the first time I ever saw her, and I
solemnly protest it is the first time I ever heard of her. It is mysterious;
you perceive by it that Lady Cecilia Martimel has her secrets; yet I
know her virtue to be unblemished when I espoused her. It is an odd
affair, I will walk over to Hervey, and seek out what he knows; will you
go with me?"

"Certainly, I would go much further than you, in behalf of
I know not how it is, but the little baggage has so twined

Charlotte:

herself about my heart, that I am almost ready to adopt her, and place
her among my own sisters at Putney."
Mr. Hervey was at home, and Sir Everard having briefly related the
occurrence of the morning, the Curate, without hesitation informed him
what he had heard from Mrs. Drew; but this threw no light on the origin
of Charlotte, or her mother.
A1

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"Who was Mrs. Stockley?" (was the Baronet's next question). "A
widow lady, long used to the school line, who had been highly
recommended by farmer Morgan's sister; and her little establishment
had succeeded wondert'ully at Rosedale, where she was much beloved
both by rich and poor; and to the latter, she rendered herself very
serviceable by advice, working for the sick and lying-in gratis, at her
needle, and contributing to their aid as much as her circumscribed
means would possibly afford. On the other side, for no character is
perfect, she had some peculiarities; she was apt to take violent
attachments or strong dislikes, and could not be diverted from many
scheme she once formed, and it was evident she did not like to have her
opinions opposed: she was fond of solitude, avoided all strangers, and
never suffered a man, no, not even Mr. Hervey, or Powell the village
apothecary, though she had medicines tiom him, to pass over the
threshold of her door: she was very partial to Charlotte Bennett, had
already made her very accomplished, and intended to complete her
education in a most flnished style, a task of which no woman was more
capable. Charlotte (continued the Curate) is now going to reside with
her, and this arrangement will no doubt prove of mutual advantage."
"But I will pay fbr Charlotte's board (said the Baronet), it would be
cruel to let a woman, such as you describe, encumber herself with it:
no, I will give thirty pounds a year, and let Mrs. Drew's giti remain
untouched, for Charlotte's use; the interest will accumulate, and the
whole may at some time prove of essential use to the poor girl. But you
tell me, she will not see me or the Counsellor; you must make the
arrangements for me; I give you a deal of trouble, but when Lady
Martimel comes fiom town, she must bring you something new for the
tea-table, my dear Hervey."
The next morning Sir Everard, on descending to the breakfastroom, found the following letter on the table.

"Mrs Stockley has heard fiom Mr. Hervey, the oft'er of Sir Everard
Martimel to pay for the board of the amiable child, called Charlotte
Bennett; she thanks him, the intention does him honor, but Sir Everard
must rest satisfied with the intention only; no salary will be accepted by
Mrs. Stockley, as Charlotte's services in the school will more than
repay her board-nor was it ever the intention of Mrs. Stockley to
break in on the money bequeathed by Mrs. Drew; Charlotte, when of a
proper age to know its value, shall receive it, a memento of the worthy
woman to whom she owes so much.

"Should the vicissitudes

of lit'e at some

future period render

Charlotte in want of a protecting hand, let Sir Everard Martimel then
step forward, and act according to the exigence of the circumstances

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
then before him; at present his attentions are superfluous, as Charlotte
will be treated with maternal love and care: Mrs. Stockley intreats the
offer may not be repeated, as she is too ill to attend to any further
correspondence.

"While Cottage;'
"Proud, saucy woman," exclaimed the Baronet, handing the epistle
to Mr. Scran, who soon read it over.

"She has an independent spirit, however, (remarked

the

Counsellor); there are few of her sex who would refuse the offer; for I
generally find the dear creatures to be fond of money, and like to
receive it, if they squander it away the next moment on gew-gaws."'
"She is an extraordinary being, I must own, (said the Baronet); I
wonder whether she is handsome or ugly."
"If the former, do you mean to go a wooing?"
"Oh no, no, no;" said Sir Everard, joining in the hearty laugh
which concluded the Counsellor's speech. "I never should have the
temerity to approach such a formidable lady; depend on it, my friend,
that if I was to venture to pass my head under her roof, I should be
attacked by some dread monster or other, whom she keeps to guard her

virtue."
Jacob Mathews the gardener entered at his moment with some
curious roots of hyacinths, jonquils, and polyanthus, which he had
promised the Counsellor.

"Pray, my good fellow," said the latter, "do you know

a

gentlewoman about these parts, named Stockley, who keeps a
school?-I believe, I think I knew her in London; (this was an untruth,
but Scran made use of it as a finesse, to cover the singularity of the
question.) If it is the same that I mean, she is a fine shaped, handsome
woman."

"It

may be her, and

gardener); "now, Baronet,

it
I

may not," (said Scran, dismissing the
think I need not caution you against

forming an illicit attachment with the Lady of the White Cottage."
"Oh, I am safe from her fascinations (said Sir Everard), but you
perceive this woman is devilish ugly, nay, she must be disgusting, and
has recourse to peculiarities to mark her as a character. The ladies love
notoriety, they must be singularly lovely, graceful, or excel in taste, or,
in short-"
"I will finish the sentence for you, (said his companion), goodness
of heart, benevolence, and fidelity, are not singular traits among them."

7

A showy trifle.

--l
THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"I know, Scran, the fair sex have ever a ready advocate and adviser
in you. 'Love and law' shall be your motto. Pray have you looked over
farmer Owen's lease?"
The Counsellor replied in the affirmative, and they then entered on
business belonging to the estate, and the next morning beheld them
taking their departure from Martimel Castle.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER VII.
As soon as the remains of Mrs. Drew were consigned to the grave,
Charlotte left the Castle for Mrs. Stockley's; Morgan, Cicely, and Jacob
attended her to the very door of the White Cottage, (for her gentle
behaviour had endeared her to these honest people); they each forced
on her a parting gift, and intreated her to come often. "You may have
cream, fresh churned butter, and new-laid eggs, when you like, (said
Cicely,) and your good governess too, for sickly people like such
things." "You shall be as welcome as the flowers in May to what I have
in the garden, (said Jacob); O we shall miss you most sadly, but I hope
all is for the best." They then severally embraced her, and in a few
moments she was received into the extended arms of Mrs. Stockley, on
whose bosom she reclined her head, and burst into a flood of tears.
"Forgive me," she said, as soon as she could speak; "I am not sorry to
come and live with you, but I have been long used to these good
people, and the expressions of their good will overcame me."

"Heaven forbid," said Mrs. Stockley, tenderly wiping the tears
from her eyes, "that I should blame the grateful effusions ofyour heart;
I overheard what they said, and respect them for it. You shall frequently
go to the Castle-at least till Lady Cecilia arrives, and then, you shall
not intrude an unbidden guest."

Charlotte found her time glide away very happily with Mrs.
Stockley; ennui was unknown at the White Cottage; and to add to the
comfort of our youthful heroine, Emma Hervey almost lived there, and
shared in every lesson.
Exactly three months after the visit of the Baronet, a letter to the
new house-keeper at the Castle, (which had long been sent down),
announced the approach of Lady Cecilia Martimel, tbr the first time, to
Monmouthshire.
To dwell on her journey would be superfluous, but the roads were
bad, the weather cold, and her ladyship fatigued. Sir Everard had
allowed her to quit London by herself, but promised to overtake her
before she got half way; but there was yet no appearance of him, and
she arrived within sight of the hereditary domains in a very ill humour,
which certainly was not inexcusable; but the respect with which she
was received by the tenantry, who ranged themselves along the roads,
and the attention of a deputation of the principal gentlemen, who met
her on horseback, restored her smiles, and she tried to make a favorable
impression; and did not want success.

Complaining

of indisposition, which was no outrageous violation

of the truth, Cecilia made her apologies to Mr. Hervey, and

a few other
persons who were assembled in the Castle to greet her, and retreated to

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
her dressing room, where she ordered her dinner to be served up. A
very handsome and plentiful repast had been provided, but her ladyship
only selected fiom the bill of fare a boiled chicken and a tart, and of
these she scarce tasted, for her heart was

quite mortifying: no

husband

to

tull; indeed her situation was
or assist her in

introduce her

performing those honors and hospitalities, that were of course expected
on such an occasion.

Miss Arboyne, the lady who accompanied her to Monmouthshire,
of the family for
the comfbrts of life, for her own income was trifling in the extreme.
She paid the most servile adulation to her cousin, and was certainly
unremitting in her attentions, but most injudiciously kept dwelling on
the conduct of Sir Everard, which she termed cruelty and marked
neglect, till, acting on a mind already intlamed with anger and too
prone to jealousy, it produced a most dangerous effect, and, for the first
time in her lif'e, lady Cecilia had violent hysterics, and she writhed in
was a very distant relation, dependent on the bounty

convulsive agony.
Mr. Powell was tbrtunately at the Castle, where he had remained
with several others, the land steward presiding, to dine, and then take a
bottle to the health of Sir Everard and his lady. This worthy practitioner
of pharmacy and physic, immediately predicted an event on the eve of
taking place, which threw the whole Castle into confusion; and as he
did not choose to run the risk of incurring blame, by taking the whole
affair on himself, as there was no answering for the consequences that

might follow a premature labour, he sent

one^

of the grooms

to

Monmouth for Dr. Salter, a celebrated accoucheur,o and another to get a
careful nurse.
Lady Cecilia had engaged both a monthly and wet nurse; and a
gentleman of eminence in his profession had so arranged matters, that
he was coming to Martimel Castle, (in consideration of a munificent
sum) in proper time to bring forth the expected heir; but they were not
to commence their journey for at least three weeks to come, and it was
now most probable they would have to remain where they were.
Lady Cecilia Martimel passed a dreadful night, and not till six the
next evening did she give birth to a miserable looking female infant,
whose weak and plaintive cry was indeed piteous.
Mrs. Hervey, who, at the request of her husband, had flown to
render what assistance was in her power, received the little stranger
with the utmost tenderness. What was to be done with it? though born
several weeks before its time. it was likelv to live. No nurse had been

" One that assists at a birth.

52-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
provided in this dilemma, for Dr. Salter had not rhe least idea of its
surviving the birth.
"Cannot it be brought up by hand?" said Miss Arboyne, "at leasr
till the nurse hired in town, and who was now lying-in, would be able to

travel."
The doctors declared the thing impossible; rhat the child would
soon be numbered with the dead was most probable, notwithstanding
present appearances; but without the nourishment nature intended for it
they would not answer for its life a single day.
"My milk is yet young, Mr. Powell knows I have not been put to
bed two months," said Mrs. Hervey, "and if my lady does not object I
will take it home with me, and foster it with the most loving care. Poor

little thing!"
Lady Cecilia did not object, in fact she cared little about the young
Ellinor; she was disappointed of a son, and so offended with Sir
Everard, that she bestowed unjustly on the child some portion of the
resentment she considered due to the father; and she scarce embraced it
when given to her by the nurse, after Mr. Hervey had half baptized it,

which ceremony was performed immediately

it

was dressed, and the

name was in compliment to the Baronet's late mother.

Miss Arboyne must find fault; she thought Mrs. Hervey very kind
in making the offer, and no doubt would be a most tender nurse; but
then she seemed so delicate. so unfit for a wet-nurse.

"Psha!" said Mr. Powell; "who has finer children than my good
little friend here, and she suckles them all herself; and as for being a
wet-nurse, pray do not place her on such a footing, for I am sure her
offer was not dictated by any latent motives of a pecuniary nature, but
from the most pure and refined benevolence of heart."
Miss Arboyne made no reply, and the little Ellinor being carefully
wrapped up, to defend her from the inclemency of a January snow,
which had just began to fall, was taken from the Castle to the neat and

truly comfortable dwelling of Mr. Hervey, the pilgrimage

being

performed on foot, Morgan carrying the infant, for the parsonage house
was so situated that there was no access but for pedestrians and
equestrians, therefore no carriage was ordered, as it could not have
proceeded more than half way; and the sudden change, in Mr. Powell's
opinion, would be more hazardous, than having the whole walk.
"Unfortunate babe!" said Mr. Hervey, as soon as they were seated
by the fire-side, and taking one of its small hands in his.
"Unfortunate, my love, what are you possibly thinking of? surely,

dear William, you cannot apply such a term to one who, in all
probability, (for I do not think my lady will have any more children)
will be the sole heiress of Sir Everard Martimel."
-53 -

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"It is not consistent with sound sense, or indeed with the religion I
profess," replied the Curate, "to be superstitious, or use predictions;
but, my dear Betsey, in this instance, I cannot help it: it rushes
involuntary to my mind, that if she lives, it is not fbr happiness; such a
sad commencement of her career, such a falling off where such great
preparations have been made: her father, too, so unaccountably absent;
something dreadful must have happened in that quarter, he never
wilfully would have been guilty of such glaring misconduct."
Mrs. Hervey assented to this idea and this amiable couple then

busied themselves in making such arrangements as were required for
the comfort of their unexpected guest. In the mean time, Mrs. Morgan
had proceeded to the White Cottage, to tell the news.
With the mistress of this humble mansion Morgan had long been a
favourite, from the honest bluntness and simplicity of her manners,
independent of her being a near relation to the farmer of that name, to
whom she stood indebted for her recommendation to Rosedale.
Mrs. Stockley had been informed of the arrival of Lady Cecilia,
and the non-arrival of Sir Everard, but she was a stranger to the latter
event which had taken place, and she heard it with the utmost surprise:
and she soon after appeared so abstracted with thought, that Morgan
arose and took leave.
"I beg pardon, my good Mrs. Morgan," said she, attending her to
the door, "for my apparent neglect; but I have this evening received
some intelligence that so nearly concerns myself, as to wholly occupy
my mind and supersede every other idea." After the usual parting of
good night and Morgan's fervent God bless you, Mrs. Stockley
immediately retired to her chamber.
When Mr. Hervey went over in the morning to make the proper
enquiries after Lady Cecilia, he heard from Miss Arboyne that she had
passed a bad night, and letters were received by express from Sir
Everard, which stated, that he had almost immediately followed his
wife, but at the end of the third stage where he stopped to sleep, he was

taken violently

ill,

and was obliged to return

to town to

see his

physicians. The danger was over, but they were fearful that many days
would intervene before they could permit him to recommence so long a
journey.

Sir Everard was indeed ill, for mental agony had produced a
nervous fever, attended by symptoms of a singular nature.
On his retiring after supper at the inn where they had put up for the
night, his valet presented him with a packet, on which were three
enormous seals, and, to his surprise, they bore the impression of the
arms of the Martimel family. It had followed him from the town-house

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
in all possible dispatch, according to the orders expressly attached to
the superscription, should he have quitted Bruton Street ere its arrival.
He eagerly proceeded to make himself master of its contents.
Horror, amazement, and distraction! the contents were the blue and
silver bag, so mysteriously conveyed away at Martimel Castle,-yes,
the empty bag was thus sent him; it was like the gauntlet of a champion
thrown down to bid defiance; not a word, except on the envelope, was
written; but the poor remnant of velvet, and a few paltry spangles,
spoke volumes. It brought to his mind his guilt. Conscience, that true
monitor of the wicked, told him he had done that which nothing could
compensate-no, not the wealth of the Indies; but conscience was not
all he had to encounter. There must be some, if not more, who knew the
fatal secret: no supernatural being was capable of such acts, if indeed
such being existed; and yet he must be an infidel if he doubted, had he
not with his own eyes beheld Mary of Lanmere? that was a proof the
dead could revisit the earth!

His mind grew more and more disordered; to go

to

Monmouthshire, seemed impossible. He rung the bell, and ordered post
horses back to town. His valet represented the time of night, the road,
and the dangers they might incur, but all in vain, the Baronet was bent
on returning, telling his anxious faithful attendant that the packet
obliged him to take such a step; and had it not done so, a sudden

indisposition which had attacked him, would have prevented his
proceeding.

When the Baronet arrived in Bruton Street, he was scarcely able to
support himself, yet it was with difficulty Bruce could persuade him to
go to bed, and take some coffee; he then seemed composed and rather
inclined to sleep; but suddenly starting, he exclaimed! "let Counsellor
Scran be sent for immediately; haste, or he may be gone out. Good
Bruce, go yourself, and hasten him to me; I cannot write, but you will
impress on his mind the necessity of coming immediately; and Dr. B.
and Sir Alford King. Yes, yes, I will have both, or either of them, or a
whole army of physicians if you like," added the impetuous Baroner,
"but not till Scran has been here; quick, dispatch, for I feel that in a
little time I may not be capable of business, my very brains seem in a

whirl."
The affrighted valet having cautioned the other servants as to the
of their master, set out on his mission, and happily found Mr.
Scran still at breakfast, and he lost no time in repairing to the chamber
of the invalid, of whom he made such enquiries as the circumstances
state

dictated.

"Here is the cause of my illness, my agony of mind," said the
Baronet, drawing fiom under his pillow the blue and silver bag.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"You have then retrieved your loss," said the Counsellor
doubtingly, "and if so, why this agitation?"
"No," said Sir Everard, "the fiend who, in cruel mocking, has sent
me this, has kept back the contents; my peace is destroyed, what would
you have me do?"
"My dear Sir," said the sympathising Scran, "as I observed to you
before on this very affair, how can I be competent to advise on a
subject, of which I am totally ignorant?"

"True," replied the Baronet, "mine was indeed a

madman's

question; burn this hated bag, never let it cross my sight again; every
time I behold it my agony increases."
"But is it right to destroy it," said the Counsellor, "does it afford no
proof?"
"Yes," remarked Sir Everard, hastily interrupting him; "it affords a
proof that I once was happy, that is all it serves for: away with it to the
flames."
Scran did as he was desired, though with a feeling of reluctance
among the spangles he observed the words "Love and Friendship"
neatly embroidered in corresponding silver, and he repeated them.
Sir Everard sighed deeply as he said, "the fair one who wrought
those words, was a pattern of 'love and friendship,' but she was ill
requited, and was hurried into another world-yes, Scran, I was her

murderer! Nay, start not, and look so ghastly; I am no assassin,-I
mean, my cruelty and injustice destroyed her, for she rushed unbidden
into the presence of her Maker. Oh God!"
"Oh God, indeed!" re-echoed the Counsellor, "this is a piteous
story."

"You would say so, Scran, did you know all. You must be my
confident, I can no longer keep my troubles to myself; with you they
will be sacred; I am not equal to the task now, I grow worse every
moment; but tomorrow evening give me a spare hour, I entreat you."
The Counsellor assented; the kindness of his nature would not
allow him to refuse Sir Everard, at the same time that he lamented the
decision that had made him a party in a business that could not be of a
nature to give any thing but pain and anxiety.

He called the next night, and fbund to his inexpressible concern
and regret, that the Baronet was delirious. "The doctors," said Bruce,
"call it a nervous fever, Sir, but I call it a brain fever, or something very
like it; they say the turn will be for life or death in a f'ew hours, so God
help my poor master."
Scran, very much afl'ected, told Bruce, that should Sir Everard
survive the dread crisis, and ask for him, he would immediately come,
let the hour be what it would.
-56

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
The Baronet overcame the struggle, and at seven the next evening,
the company of Mr. Scran was requested in the dressing room to coffee,

&c.
Sir Everard was more composed but still agitated; he began at first
to talk on the common place topics that were then passing, but soon
brought forward the material subject, and poured into the Counsellor's
ear a horrid tale. Various were the ideas that rushed into Scran's mind,
but he hesitated to declare them; he wished to heal and not to increase

the sufferer's wounds, and he remained silent, till the old question of
"well, Scran, what would you advise me to do?" forced him to speak.
"Do nothing, what can you do? you have dreadfully involved
yourself,-fame, happiness, every thing, is placed in jeopardy; were I
in your place I would trust to time to develop these mysteries: let your
secret accuser (for such I term the person who has thus irritated the
feelings of my friend), come forward, and you must then make the best
of it. This is seriously my advice."
"I am a paltry coward, or I should be beyond the reach of such
persecution, in one short hour, dear Scran," said the Baronet.

"Psha (the usual word of the worthy member of the law when
vexed) don't let me hear such a sentence again or you'll cut the band of

unity asunder; none but cowards commit suicide, brave men will
I will revolve your case in my mind,
and to motrow give you the result; but remember my judgment is not
endure their lot. But, Sir Everard,

infallible, and do not act on it unless it coincides with your own."
The Baronet thanked him for his intentions, and they took leave.
The next morning Scran was again there, and imparted the result of his
deliberations to Sir Everard, who was much better, possibly from the
very act of disenburthening his mind; their conversation was long and
interesting, and the Baronet agreed, however painful to him, to revisit
Martimel Castle, as it was expedient he should join Lady Cecilia as
soon as possible; but he still delayed it, till a letter from Miss Arboyne,
announcing the event that had taken place, caused him to quit town.

-57

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER VIII.

The appearance of Sir Everard Martimel, on his arrival at the
Castle, fully justified his late non-attendance on Lady Cecilia; she was
affected, and even the splenetic Miss Arboyne gave a short respite to
her revilings.
All the rejoicings that Emma Hervey had so gaily predicted, and
indeed set her heart on, at the birth of Martimel's heir, never took place,
the mother being confined to her bed in one room, the father in another;
for Sir Everard had a dangerous relapse the very day subsequent to his
arrival, and the poor baby lingered betwixt life and death, to the great
anxiety of Mrs. Hervey, whose care was unceasing. In this respect she
wished for the advice of Mrs. Stockley, whom she had often observed
to have great judgment in cases where children were afflicted; but that
lady had taken some offence, which she refused to acknowledge or
explain, and neither came to the parsonage herself, or allowed Charlotte
to pay her usual visits; yet to Emma she was kindness itself: the Curate
and his wife had ever thought her perhaps more than a little eccentric,
but now they were really vexed at the inconsistency and caprice she
displayed.

The revolving of another month found Sir Everard and his lady
the latter eager to return to town, where she
calculated to arrive at the very zenith of the reign of tashion. Sir
convalescent, and

Everard having remained undisturbed since his arrival at the Castle, had
in a great measure regained his tranquillity, and his health was daily
improving; and great as his reluctance was to come, he was now as
loath to quit; yet to suffer his wife to return without him would not look
well.
The woman who was to have the charge of the young Eleanor, now
arrived, and Mrs. Hervey resigned her nursling with many tears, for the
tender office she had performed endeared that babe to her heart, and
filled her mind with a strong interest in its fate.
"We must make the Curate's wife, my dear Sir Everard, (said Lady
Cecilia) some more substantial return for her kind services, than the
thanks she received this morning."
"That is already done," replied Sir Everard, "I would not give it
direct to her, for she declined all remuneration; but I divided so much
(mentioning the sum) among the children." Lady Cecilia coloured
violently, as she wished the guineas in her card purse, but was silent."
"Ridiculous!" exclaimed Miss Arboyne, watching her cousin's
change of countenance; "what a golden gift for suckling a child a few
weeks! and such a fuss about her goodness; any body would have done
-58

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
the same, she was sure of being well recompensed, so there could not
be much sacrifice in the case."

Sir Everard cast on her a look of the utmost contempt, as

he

exclaimed, "Hervey's wife is at least free from envy, detraction, and

ill-

nature! thank my stars these rank and noxious weeds are not of
luxuriant growth in my native land."
The whole party had a safe journey to town, and Martimel Castle
and its vicinage relapsed into its usual monotony.
Mrs. Stockley renewed her visits to the parsonage, where she was
but coolly received; she pleaded ill-health and distress of mind, from
domestic intelligence which had been which had been communicated
some time past. "But why not say as much before, my dear friend,"
questioned Mr. Hervey? "The wretched are slow in speech," was the
reply; she extended her hands to each of the worthy pair, and friendship
reigned again after the slight shock it had received.
About this period, chance brought Mrs. Godolphin and Charlotte
together a second time; the former immediately resigned the sweet girl,
and addressed her in the most pleasing accents when questioned as to
her parents, her present mode of life, and other particulars; Charlotte

coloured violently, but she disdained a falsehood, and after some
hesitation she imparted all she knew respecting herself, which consistec
chiefly of what she had overheard between Mrs. Dixon, Mrs. Stockley,
and the curate.

"Poor child!" said Mr. Godolphin, "you are indeed to be pitied, so
young and already visited with trouble; for I perceive the knowledge of
your orphan state sinks deep into your mind, and lessens your present
enjoyments; I like your candour and love of truth, but be careful to
whom you confide-this account of you will become an object of
curiosity to the idle, and there will be a hundred tales circulated
according to the pleasure or surmises of the inventor, and it was
undoubtedly to avoid all this, that lady Cecilia Martimel desired you
should pass for the niece ofher housekeeper."

"Mr. Godolphin," she continued, "had once a heart warm with

benevolence, but sorrow, which softens some people's feelings, has
hardened his; I wish I could interest him for you, I should like such a
companion, but I would not withdraw you from your present pursuits
for the world, without I could settle on you an equivalent, and this is
not to be effected without his knowledge and approbation."
She soon took leave of Charlotte, and returned to the Abbey, the
latter pursuing the way to the Castle, where she was going to visit her

old friends.

In a few days subsequent to this interview, Mrs. Stockley was
flung into a tremor by the receipt of a letter from Mrs. Godolphin,
-59

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
requesting the favour

of her permitting Charlotte Bennett to pass the

next day with her at the Abbey.

As soon as she recovered sufficient composure to write, Mrs'
Stockley returned to Mr. Godolphin a most polite answer in the
affirmative; when the servant was gone, she called Charlotte out of the
school-room, and informed her of the invitation, at the same time
questioning her, when and where she had seen the lady of the Abbey?
"I met her last week in my road to the Castle, and we had a long
conversation." "Which it appears you concealed," said Mrs. Stockley,
with an air of reproach; "do I deserve this, my child?"
"Oh no! dearest madam, but I was afraid you would be angry il'
you knew what I revealed to Mrs. Godolphin, so I said nothing about it;
it was my first concealment and shall be my last, for I have suffered
enough from this."

"Charlotte, you distress and astonish mel what could you have to
tell? what secret could you have to tell? what secret to perplex and leac
you from your duty? I thought you as free as air from duplicity, but it
appears I am mistaken; deceived in you, where shall I look fbr purity of
heart?"

"Dear madam, I will tell you all, and you will then, I trust, forgive
me." Charlotte then unfolded every particular of the conversation, that
had passed between her and Mrs. Godolphin.
Mrs. Stockley appeared more surprised and pleased than otherwise,
but still slightly rebuked Charlotte for the secrecy she had used. "But

what,

in the name of

wonder," she continued, "made you

so

communicative to a stranger?"
"I know not how it is," replied Charlotte, "but when

Godotphin,

I

could almost fancy

I

I talk to Mrs.
had known her ever since I was

born."

"I find,"

said Mrs. Stockley, laughing, "that the lady of the Abbey

is a formidable rival to me in your heart."

"No, dear governess, I shall ever love and esteem you, but yet I
must love Mrs. Godolphin too."

"I hope you will, my dear, be always fond and grateful to those
who are kind to you; narrow is the heart that can esteem but one
individual; we are indeed to love all mankind. But I must attend to my
pupils," and tenderly saluting Charlotte, she took her hand, and they
returned together to the school-room. That lovely girl now shone in all
her native cheerfllness, for her mind was freed from the act that had
hung heavy on it; and to add to her comfort, Mrs. Stockley appeared in
better health and spirits, than had long been usual to her.
It was a fine morning, and the spring was bursting tbrth in all its
vernal sweetness, and Mrs. Stockley and Charlotte had scarce
-60

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
breakfasted when a servant from the Abbey came for the latter, who,
taking a kind leave of her friend, joyfully accompanied him to
Lanmere.

Mrs. Godolphin had just began breakfast, a meal which

her

husband, owing to indisposition, generally took in his own chamber,
and she received Charlotte with the most flattering condescension and
urbanity. The walk had sharpened her appetite, and she did honour to a
second dejune.

The morning passed away very pleasantly, and Mrs. Godolphin
took great delight in examining into the progress which Charlotte had
made

in the various branches of education. She observed, that Mrs.

Stockley must have been a very accomplished woman, and from the
great expense that had been bestowed on her, she should suppose she
had once moved in a much higher sphere than that she now filled; but
Charlotte could give her no information in that respect, as it was a
subject her governess never entered on.
Mr. Godolphin did not join them till near the dinner hour, when he
seemed as much struck with the appearance of Charlotte, as his lady
had been in the hermitage. From a sentence he began in French, it was
evident, that her features recalled to memory some one lost to them,
and most deeply lamented. But Mrs. Godolphin checked him, saying,
"you might as well speak English, for our little friend is very forward in
the language you use." "Do you speak Italian, Charlotte?" "No, madam,
a few words and short sentences is all I know; Mrs. Stockley is a

proficient, but she does not wish me to begin, until I have made a
further progress in French."
Mr. and Mrs. Godolphin then conversed in ltalian, till dinner was
announced. They were just sitting down, when a little bustle and
intenuption was occasioned by the anival of a Mr. Alderton and his
daughter, a girl about two years older than Charlotte, to whose modest,
neat, and unassuming appearance, she formed a direct contrast; being
drest at every point in the extreme of fashion, accompanied by a pert
self-sufficient air, that set very ill on a set of features by no means
attractive.

The master and mistress of the mansion seemed all amazement at
appearance, by which Charlotte found they were wholly

their

unexpected.
"Bad roads, sir," said Mr. Alderton, "execrable for travelling; but

I

could not resist the impulse I had to visit you, since I heard at your
banker's how ill you were. How are you now, sir? better I trust, though
you look but sadly."
"I have not been so well for months past," said Mr. Godolphin,
with much petulance, "and I think your present journey a very foolish

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
one.

If you wished to know the state of my health, a letter by the

general post would have answered all purposes. But since you are here,
we must make the best of it, pray be seated, for the dinner is already

half cold."

Very little conversation took place at dinner,

as

Mr. Godolphin

was

at no pains to conceal that he was put clut of his way, and hated
intrusion; cof'fee was served up immediately after the dessert was
removed, and the old gentlemen retired to his own room.
Mr. Alderton then remarked, that he wished he had not travelled as
many miles, only to get a cool reception.

"To be candid with you," said Mrs. Godolphin, "I do not think it
the wisest movement you ever made; our mode of living is now so
recluse, that my husband does not like his retirement broken in on
without previous notice; you should have wrote first, and consulted his
inclination." "But, my dear madam," replied Alderton, not much
abashed by the rebuke thus conveyed, "surely such ceremony might be
dispensed with in the relative situation in which we stand."
"Pardon me, nephew, it is the situation you allude to, that makes
Mr. Godolphin fastidious; what he might regard as a troublesome wellmeant attention in another, in you he attributes to self-interest, and a
wrsh for his decease."
"Is it possible!" said Mr. Alderton, colouring violently and biting
his lips with restrained passion, "that you can impute to me such
motives."

"I am not speaking of myself', Alderton, I am explaining Mr.
Godolphin's sentiments; you must endeavour to conciliate matters, and
not touch on his state of health; it is a topic he cannot endure, especially
fiom you."

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER IX.

Mrs. Stockley listened with much interest to Charlotte's account of
her visit to the Abbey, and the sketches she gave of its inmates, which
were well drawn; she did not think Mr. Godolphin by any means so
cross, eccentric, and disagreeable, as she had often heard represented;
she thought in time she should like him very well, as yet could not
judge decidedly, for he certainly was very severe and repulsive to Mr.
Alderton.
"I have heard much of that gentleman," observed Mrs. Stockley,
"and what has come to my knowledge justifies the behaviour of Mr.
Godolphin to him; the premature loss of their children, placed him very
unexpectedly in the situation of next heir, and his eagerness for
possession has been ill concealed, and, consequently, it has justly
inspired resentment and disgust in the mind of his uncle and aunt, for
that lady's censure, though more mildly given, was by your account
very pointed."
The next day brought with it another letter from Mrs. Godolphin to

Mrs. Stockley.
Madam,

You will, I am apprehensive, consider me in the light

of a very troublesome selfish being, when I confess that I again wish to
dispossess you of your treasure. I mean our Charlotte; the amiable child
tells me you love her with a mother's fondness, I wonder not at your
partiality to one so truly deserving, she is a plant of great promise, may
no rude storm blight her maturity. You will think me tedious, but I have
scarce the temerity to make the request that prompts the troubling you
with these lines,-will you spare her to me for a week? yes, for a whole
week, it will be a charity to an invalid like me; a great niece of Mr.
Godolphin's is to remain at Lanmere Abbey for that period, and I want
Charlotte to take the trouble of entertaining her off my hands; (there's a
candid confession for you;) a task for which I am wholly unequal, and
the poor girl will have a dreary time if it is left to me. If my petirion is
granted, let Charlotte come as soon as possible; no fuss about dress I
entreat you, my favourite looks to more advantage in her brown stuff
and blue trimmings, than my young relation in all her fashionable
finery.
Yours &c.
When Charlotte had perused the letter, which was handed her by
governess, she said, "I can scarce expect your compliance, nor
her
indeed do I wish it, a week is too much to be away from you."
-63

-

-._--1,-1

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"It is a task for me to part with you for seven or eight days, my
Charlotte, but I am too grateful to an over-ruling and all-wise
providence who is miraculously raising you up to powerful protection,
to refuse Mrs. Godolphin such a request; go, then, and heaven prosper

you."

"But if you are taken ill, you will send for me, my dear mother, for
as such I regard you. Promise me." "I do, my grateful love, but let us
hope better things."
Miss Alderton was glad of the company of Charlotte tbr a two- fbld
reason: first, she detested solitude, and secondly, she calculated that her
brilliant talents would overawe and astonish a little Welch rustic, who
would serve as an excellent tbil to set her off to advantage.
Miss Alderton soon found her mistake; Charlotte was evidently her
superior in every branch, but in music she distanced her beyond alcompetition. Mrs. Godolphin seemed much attached to her, and even
Mr. Godolphin humoured her with an approving smile. How was this!
who was she? was the question of her enemies, for her talents anc
situation had inspired Mr. Alderton and his Letitia with the most deadly
hatred. The fact was, that the young lady had been brought to Lanmere,
with the hope that she would be retained as a companion to her aunt,
and to use Mr. Alderton's own term, "he should then have a friend in
the camp, to apprize him of all changes." He thought himself secure of
the estates, but the personals were immense, and to them he had a
longing eye, fbr they would enrich every branch of his tamily. He soon
found his scheme abortive, and though the Godolphins constrained
themselves to treat them with politeness, it extended no turther; all
confidence was denied, and he felt an indescribable sensation of
revenge against

the innocent individual who had

unconsciously

offended him.
Charlotte from the lectures received had grown cautious, and when
asked by Letitia concerning herself, she merely told the simple truth,
that her friends were deceased, and she had been placed under the care
of Mrs. Stockley. He instigated his servant, who was a shrewd cunning
lad, to make enquiries; and the result was, that Charlotte Bennett had
come to Monmouthshire when very young, with the late housekeeper of
the Castle, in the character of her niece, and as such she had ever been
considered, till the relations of Mrs. Drew had somewhat puzzled the
people, when they came down for the effects of the deceased, by saying
it was the first time they had heard of such relationship; but still it
might be so, as she had some relations on her first husband's side, with
whom they kept no correspondence; but it was strange it should not
have been mentioned, nor was her name in the will.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Mr. Alderton's curiosity did not suffer him to rest here, and the
next day, as Mrs. Stockley was seated in the midst of her scholars, she
was startled by the appearance of a stranger, who opening the door
made his entrie without the least ceremony, to the great annoyance of
the mistress of the White Cottage. Before she could ask his commands,
he seated himself in a vacant chair; "A pleasant place this, madam."
"Sir," said the astonished woman; "Oh! I forgot to tell you who I am,
and see you are flunied; my name is Alderton, I am Mr. Godolphin's
nephew-his heir indeed; you have a young lady at Lanmere Abbey
belonging to you." "What of her, has any thing happened to the dear
girl?" said Mrs. Stockley, starting from her seat. "Nothing, my dear
madam, so pray compose yourself; I left her and my daughter carolling
away like nightingales."
"I would thank you, sir, if you would be brief as to the business
which has occasioned me the honor of this visit; it is now, you
perceive, highly inconvenient to have my time intruded on."
"Miss Charlotte Bennett is a sweet girl, and does you great credit; I
wish her to go with us to the metropolis, as companion to my Letitia,
who has taken a great fancy to her; and the connexion will prove very
beneficial to her interest; such offers are not made every day. But first,
madam, I must know who she is, and to whom related; for it would be
impossible for me to introduce to my friends, who move in the highest
circle, a nobody-knows-who, I therefore wait on you for particulars."
"Did Mrs. Godolphin or Charlotte refer you to me, sir," asked Mrs.
Stockley.

"Neither of them," was the reply; "I considered it time enough to
mention it, when you and I had made the arrangements."
"Then, sir, as they never will be made, for I decline the high
honour you intend for my pupil, it is unnecessary for me to explain who
she is, or to whom belonging." "Peggy," speaking to her little servant,
"open the door for this gentleman; sir, I wish you a good morning.
Mary Spencer, come and read."
Mr. Alderton retired in high pique at this manner of dismissal, and
the dearth of intelligence that had attended this most brilliant invention
to acquire the wished-for knowledge.
Near a fortnight elapsed before this troublesome gentleman could

prevail on himself to withdraw from the Abbey; and he then went
reluctantly, for he had Letitia to take back with him; and what was
much worse. Charlotte to leave behind.

-65

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER X.

Nothing particular occurred to any of the parties mentioned in this
volume till midsummer day was fast approaching; during that interval,
Charlotte was a frequent guest at Lanmere; and kept continually
improving in the good graces of Mr. Godolphin and his lady, who made
her many valuable presents; the latter never personally visited Mrs.
Stockley, but she often wrote kindly to her, and as often sent game,
poultry, or any choice productions of the hot-house or grounds
belonging to the Abbey. These met with no repulse, and tout au
contraire, were received with the most grateful pleasure.
This calm enjoyment of lif'e was broken by a packet received from

London by Mrs. Stockley, which caused her the most distressing and
visible agitation, though she breathed not a syllable of her sorrows or
their source; she contented herself with informing Mr. and Mrs.
Hervey, that letters of importance from a friend called her to the
metropolis, she must therefbre extend her usual summer vacation of a
fortnight, to double that period, which would be the utmost limits of her
absence. "And now, my good tiiends," she continued, "I have a favour
to ask; dame Durbins and her husband will keep the White Cottage for
me till I return, for I could not trust their daughter Peggy by herself;
and my Charlotte, can she board with you, or am I too intruding; be

candid, your refusal

will not

offend, but

I

acknowledge yoL

acquiescence would delight me."
"Not another word, I intreat," said the good and amiable pair, both
speaking at once, and in nearly the same words. "Do we not love her as

one of our own, and welcome, thrice welcome, is the dear girl to the
shelter ofour rooi and every comfort it can afford her."
Preparations were soon made, and Mrs. Stockley set out the very
next day from Rosedale, having taken a most afTectionate anc
impressive leave of the weeping Charlotte, and given and received the
kind adieus and good wishes ofher friends and pupils.
To Charlotte, she delivered a letter for Mrs. Godolphin, which was
to be presented on her next visit, which was fixed for the fbllowing
Sunday; a day on which our young heroin was always expected.
The villagers had scarce done wondering at the departure of Mrs
Stockley, (fbr in this secluded spot the slightest movement or incident
was a topic of conversation,) when they were all thrown into violent
amazement and consternation, by the announced arrival of Sir Everard
Martimel, the little Ellinor, her nurse, and the proper suite of attendants;
but no Lady Cecilia accompanied the unexpected train.
This of course occasioned surprise, and various reports to be
circulated; but no one presumed to question Sir Everard, who looked

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
misery personified; but they did not exert the same degree of delicacy
toward the nurse; but she was as ignorant as her inquirers, only that,
after the short notice of two hours, she had accompanied her young
charge into Monmouthshire, they had left Lady Cecilia in Bruton
Street; nor did she know that any quarrels had taken place, though for
some time past she had observed a coolness and formality with each
other, that did not meet her ideas of a wedded life.
Mr. Hervey paid an early visit, and was most kindly received. He
enquired after the health of Lady Cecilia, but receiving no reply, he did

not repeat the compliment.-A short time unravelled the mystery;
newspapers from London announced the infidelity of Lady Cecilia with
the gay Colonel Templeton: and at an age when mature reason, and her

situation as a mother, ought to have guarded her against a licentious
passion, she had boldly trampled on every moral duty; names were not
inserted, but the characters were too ably pourtrayed to admit of a
mistake; the paragraph concluded with stating, that the lovers had
winged their dove-like flight to the continent.
Sir Everard was pitied and respected for his attentions to the poor
little deserted Ellinor, who suffered much from constant illness, and
had improved very little in growth and appearance since her birth. She
had been but little noticed by her father, who had satisfied himself by a
visit to the nursery once a day, for the space of four or five minutes, till
he made the fatal discovery of the infidelity of the mother. From that
hour, his care and anxiety for the comfort of the infant was incessant, as
if he wished to supply the place of both parents; all his gaiety fled, and
he became, as it were, an anchorite in his own Castle.
One morning as Charlotte was proceeding from the Parsonage
House to the Castle to ask Jacob for a few flowers, of those sorts which
Mr. Hervey's garden did not produce, she met Mrs. Grey the nurse, and
the young Ellinor, whom she had seen several times at Mr. Hervey's;
the nurse having orders from Sir Everard, to carry her charge frequently

there. They had scarce spoke, when Mrs. Grey, complaining of
faintness through the intense heat of the weather, asked Charlotte to
take the child; which she was no sooner done, than the poor woman fell
insensible to the ground.
Charlotte took the shawl from her neck, and spreading it on the
grass, laid the sleeping infant on it; and then tried what she could do
toward restoring Mrs. Grey, by chafing her hands and temples, and
wiping the perspiration from her face; while she was thus benevolently

employed,

a

gentleman crossing an adjacent stile, suddenly stood

before her.

He began enquiring what accident had occuned, when Charlotte
turning her head to reply, he suddenly exclaimed, "Who are you, what

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
spectre is this, conjured up to cross my path, and make me wretched;
am I never to be at peace?"
His looks and gestures were so wild, that Charlotte concluded he
was some insane person escaped from his keepers; and perceiving him
turn toward the child, as if his intention was to take hold of it, she took
the alarm, and starting up, seized the infant, which she clasped to her
bosom, and winged by fear she flew toward the Castle, never venturing
to look behind her.
Her appearance there was calculated to excite terror; she briefly
explained the cause, by saying, that Mrs. Grey had fainted, and she had

been alarmed by a madman, who was going to take away the child;
Jacob and two other men, alarmed for the safety of the nurse, who
might be assailed by the supposed lunatic, set ofT with all speed to look
after her, but they met her not far from the Castle, supported by Sir
Everard. He resigned his charge to them, and then enquired fbr the
child. "She is safe, sir," replied Jacob, "Charlotte Bennett brought her."
"Was that Charlotte Bennett that I spoke to then," said the Baronet, in
accents that implied surprise; "what alarmed the girl," continued he,
"for she flew from me with the speed of lightning, and regardless of my
calling on her to return."
"I suppose you honour spoke hastily," said Jacob, "and terrifted
her; fbr pardon me, Sir Everard, but she said she had been accosted by a
madman."

Sir Everard forced a laugh, but he was much vexed at his own
inconsistent behaviour, and he regretted that he had never spoke to
Lady Cecilia on the subject of Charlotte Bennett; but it was now too
late, and regrets could not avail; and he had been assured by Mrs.
Hervey, that Mrs. Drew had solemnly affirmed, that to her positive
knowledge her ladyship knew no more of the child or its connexions,
than what had been represented. Was it possible she was less ignorant
or innocent than she appeared to be, and had imposed on the simplicity
of this good woman? His meditations were interrupted by Charlotte
herself, who passed him as she was on her return; she could not forbear
smiling, as she made a slight courtesy, at her late groundless alarm.
Sir Everard spoke most kindly to her, and apologized fbr the fiight
he had unintentionally given; which he imputed to his being hurried
into an inconsistency of speech, by his fears fiom the scene before him,
that some fatal event had happened to the child; and intreating she
would often come and nurse his little Ellinor, they separated, Charlotte
convinced that Sir Everard was an excellent man. for he resembled his
mother's portrait.

-68

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XI.

A week having elapsed over the period fixed for Mrs. Stockley's
return, uneasiness and surprise began to prevail. Mr. Morgan wrote to
his sister, naturally supposing she had seen the lady, and could give
some intelligence of her; but the answer destroyed that hope, by stating,
that Mrs. Stockley had never called on her tbrmer friend.
Charlotte had always regretted the absence of her excellent
governess, but she now felt it most forcibly, and a thousand fearful
images presented to her mind, and embittered her peace; Mrs. Stockley,
who was punctuality itself, would never, she was convinced, have
forfeited her engagement with her pupils and Mr. Hervey, but from
some very powerful cause. She might be ill, or dying, at some inn on
the road; and such was the anxiety she felt to ascertain the cause of this
painful delay, that she was almost ready to set off on foot to seek her
justly-esteemed friend, had not Mrs. Godolphin and the Curate
convinced her of the romantic absurdity of such a step, and exhorted
her to patience.

Another week elapsed, and suspense gave way

to a dreadful

certainty; letters were severally received both by Farmer Morgan, and
Mr. Hervey, from an unknown correspondent, who signed his name
Charles Baker, attorney at law, but gave no address; nor did the very
laconic contents of those epistles afford the least clue, whereby to
discover the residence of this sprig of learned profession, and obtain
more satisfactory intelligence.

It stated that Mrs. Stockley was no more, and had previously
instructed him to write to Mr. Morgan and the Curate, to have all her
effects at the White Cottage immediately disposed of, and after
deducting the rent and expenses, and discharging the persons who were
in the care of the tenement, the residue was to be added to the sum
already in the hands of Mr. Hervey, bequeathed by a Mrs. Lydia Drew,
for the use and benefit of Charlotte Bennett, to whom Mrs. S. had sent
her benediction and good wishes, with her fervent hope that they should
meet hereafter.
Charlotte's fortitude sunk beneath this stroke; she was seriously ill,
and near a month elapsed before she was pronounced out of danger,
during which afflictive period she received the most parental treatment
from the amiable couple at the Parsonage; and the liberality of the
Godolphins was unbounded in supplying physicians, and every
necessary to facilitate her recovery; and as soon as she was declared
convalescent, she was removed to Lanmere Abbev. to remain a
constant lnmate.

-69

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
During Charlotte's illness, Sir Everard Martimel, who

had

interested himself very much about the youthful suff'erer, wrote at the
insistence of Mr. Hervey to counsellor Scran, to enquire for the
gentleman who had sent such an unsatisfactory account of Mrs.

Stockley's decease

to

Monmouthshire, and learn

from him

the

particulars of this unexpected event.
Mr. Scran's answer stated, that there was no such person as the one
he sought on the list of attorneys; and though his pains and that of his
clerks had been indefatigable, to trace out this Charles baker, they had
been unavailing; and from the strict reserve Mrs. Stockley had always
kept respecting her connexions, it was impossible to investigate the
affair, and he advised them to act according to the instructions they had
received for Charlotte Bennett.
This was done with good management and justice, but did not
produce any material sum; not a shilling was left in the house, nor any
papers to afford an idea or clue of what Mrs. Stockley had done with
her savings, which, from her frugal and retired habits, and her long and
successful school-keeping, must have been considerable; and this
excited apprehensions, that she had fallen into the hands of mercenary
designing people, or why conceal the time of her decease, and the place
of burial.
Sir Everard would now have most willingly stepped forward to
promote the interest of Charlotte, had not the liberality and protection
of the Godolphins rendered it unnecessary; and she was scarce settled

at the Abbey, when letters from London called on him to quit
Castle, that he might direct the proceedings now commenced in

the
the

consistory court against Lady Cecilia. Her family had resorted to every
argument, intreaty, and even weighty pecuniary considerations, to
induce the Baronet to be contented with a private, but lasting
separation, and not disgrace them by the publicity of a divorce; but to
them he was adamant itself, and Mr. Scran was ordered to use all
dispatch in this painful affair.
The proofs against the lady and her gallant paramour were strong,
and too flagrant to be disputed; but we shall not stain our pages with the
indelicate subject, or insult the ear of purity with the unwelcome recital.
Heavy damages were awarded in the court of King's Bench; and the
subject afforded a nine days delectable gossip at the tea-table or toilet
of many a fashionable lady, who was not wise enough to profit by the
fall of Lady Cecilia, but kept on her unblushing career of licentious
vice, till she herselfbecame an object ofscorn and pity.
Every thing was proceeding in a proper train for the much-wished

divorce, when one morning (about three months subsequent to the
elopement of Lady Cecilia,) Sir Everard was informed that Miss
-70

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Arboyne requested an interview; this was repulsed, for he could not
receive with the least complacence, a person who had accompanied his
late partner in her disgraceful trip to the continent; but the lady was not
to be repulsed, she sent the servant with another message; but before he
had time to deliver it, she was in the room.
Her sable garments and mournful aspect struck the Baronet with
surprise, and doubt as to the individual to whom this tribute was paid:
the latter was soon removed-Lady Cecilia was no longer an inmate of
this world.

Always fond to excess of riding, she had mounted in spite of the
remonstrances of Colonel Templeton and her cousins, a bloodhorsee
which the Colonel had just purchased, and was obviously very spirited,
and scarce broken in; and the consequences were fatal.

They had not proceeded more than a mile on their way to St.
Cloud, when the mettlesome steed was startled by a beggar on the
hedge-side holding forth his hat, and Lady Cecilia was thrown with
violence on the ground; her right arm and leg were fractured, and the
latter so dreadfully, that amputation was deemed necessary; and she
heard the fat pronounced with an agony of mind, that nothing could
equal or describe. In vain she was entreated to compose herself, as such
exertions, that proceeded from her almost frantic behaviour, would only
operate to her injury; but she kept reviling herself and seducer, and
deploring the step she had so criminally taken, till she was lulled to a
forced repose by opiates.
For a few days all went on better than could be expected under
such tenible afflictions; fbr appearances were favourable, and Lady

Cecilia calm. She had taken an eternal leave of Templeton, strictly
determining for the future to lead a life of penitence and seclusion; nor
did her lover strive to combat against, or overcome this resolution; for
short lived is that love (if love it can be called,) which has neither virtue
nor esteem for its basis. He admired Lady Cecilia, all life; gaiety, and
pleasure; but he had no wish to be encumbered with a cripple, and a
repentanti and without having the decency or feeling to wait till the fate
of the sufferer could be ascertained, he joined a party of gentlemen who
were proceeding on a tour, regretting his own folly, and the diminution
of his fortune by the verdict against him.
Symptoms of a mortification were too soon apparent, and Lady

Cecilia, with every possible tenderness, was apprised

of

her

irremediable condition. Miss Arboyne, out of a false tenderness, wished
her ladyship kept in ignorance of this fatal occurrence; but the doctors,

'

A bloodhorse, before the Thoroughbred breed, was a horse of mostly Arabian,
Barb or Turkish blood.

-'n

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
very properly, were firm in their resolves to do their duty, and afford
the dying woman an opportunity to make her peace with God, and man,
according to the time spared her.
Lady Cecilia, whose love of life, as well as her vanity, was almost

extinct, having no longer fuel to feed on, received the melancholy
disclosure with a much larger share of propriety, and conformance to
her situation, than what her former behaviour had led them to expect.

She enquired with much earnestness how long it was possible she
might survive, and received for answer, that it was out of their power to

fix

a precise time.

"A week," said Lady Cecilia; Dr. P....s shook his head: "Three
days then," sighed forth his patient, much shocked. "Yes, and possibly
somewhat longer."
Her ladyship immediately ananged her affairs, and then had a long
and private conference with Miss Arboyne, whom she charged to
deliver a packet, which caused her to seal in her presence, to Sir
Everard Martimel; requiring from her an oath, that she would not seek
to investigate the contents, but personally deliver them to the Baronet,
as soon as circumstances would admit; and not, on any account, trust
them to another's keeping. To this was added a verbal hope, that he
would be a tender parent to Ellinor, and not visit her with unkindness
for her mother's faults;-and that mother now sincerely intreated his
pardon for the uneasiness she had given him,-and the belief in her
assurance that she died in perfect charity with him and all the world.
Sir Everard thanked Miss Arboyne for her attention, in so speedily
fulfilling the posthumous mission; he heard with pleasure that Lady
Cecilia had left her an independence; to this he added a present sum,
and they parted to meet no more without the least regret, for theirs were
not congenial souls.
With amazement, the Baronet discovered that the packet was
letters addressed to her ladyship, since the birth of Ellinor, with the
signature

of a

secret colrespondent, minutely developing every

particular of a transaction that had taken place in Sir Everard's earlier
days, accompanied by suggestions of a most dangerous tendency. The
last letter had been received on the continent, and contained a promise,
that if Sir Everard persisted in suing for a divorce, she should be
furnished with further particulars, which might possibly prove of the

utmost importance to her, as well as some other persons nearly
in the event; her ladyship was exhorted to the strictest

concerned

till the whole should be developed.
She had enclosed them without comment; but he was aware that
they must have caused many contradictory sensations in her mind; and
he could not but wonder at, and feel obliged, even to grateful
secrecy,

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
admiration, at her causing them to be conveyed to his hands, and the
manner in which the act had been effected. It evinced. that on her death
bed all her native generosity of character, and excellence of heart, had
returned with undiminished lustre, for she might have acted a far
different part, and he was affected even to tears.
He confided the letters to Mr. Scran's perusal before he destroyed
them, for they shared the same fate with the blue and silver bag; and

again solicited his advice how should proceed in this intricate and
painful affair; and received the same counsel, to take no steps whatever
in the business till time, or his secret accuser, should develop more of
the mystery. The first part of their representation was strictly true; but
their latter account might have its rise from malice, or a wish, when
time served, to extort money, by a person who had thus wonderfully got
possession of a transaction which, the Baronet considered, was
consigned to oblivion.
"Indeed," continued the counsellor, "I depend much on the latter
idea; for, in the name of common sense, is it possible that the principal
personage in the drama would have acted in such a strange, and indeed
criminal manner, entailing misery and disgrace on themselves and other
people!"
"I should think, I should hope not," said the Baronet, musing; .,if
their plans are founded in malice, they have too well succeeded; for
they have given me days of wretchedness, and nights of torture."

-73 -

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XII.
The White Cottage in the valley,r0 after remaining some time shut
up, became the residence of Mrs. Mathews, father Morgan's sister, who

now retired from the fatigue

of

school keeping,

to enjoy

the

independence so usefully and praise-worthily acquired. She kept no
servant, and lived very retired; admitted no guests, but frequently
visited her own relations, by whom she was received with a pleasant
welcome. From what she had heard relative to Charlotte Bennett, she
f'elt interested for her, and a wish to see the amiable child; and the
introduction was brought about by Mr. Hervey, whom Mrs. Godolphin,
with whom she was quite domesticated, allowed her to visit; and Mrs.
Mathews now intreated her to extend them to her abode, for one half at
least, out of the time allowed for each excursion, and this was
cheerfully assented to by the parties concerned.
Charlotte found her new friend sensible, accomplished, and well
informed; but she could not avoid thinking her too curious by half; she
had often heard her own sex censured for this trait of character, but the
united precepts and examples of those excellent persons, to whom she
was indebted for the formation of her mind, had guarded her against the
illaudable use of this propensity, to seek into the affairs of other
persons.

The good lady appeared never weary of talking of the Godolphin
family, and questioning Charlotte as to the treatment she received at the
Abbey, till our young heroine was quite tired of the theme.
One evening a storm drove Charlotte and her friend Emma Hervey,
to seek shelter at the White Cottage; they had not been seated but a few
minutes, when Mrs. Mathews began her usual topic.

"You must find it very dull, my dear Charlotte, never to see any
faces at the Abbey but those of its owners; and they of such a
misanthropic turn."
"My domestic amusements and employments are so blended," was
the reply, "as to leave no vacuity; therefore dullness is unknown to me;

and as for misanthropy, pardon me, but never was the term

so

misapplied; they live in self-sought seclusion, but neither their hearts or
purses are shut to the distresses of others. I love Mrs. Godolphin, she is
all that is gentle, good, and amiable; and I feel as if I were her daughter.
Her husband too is kind to me, I revere and pity him, when I hear him

sigh and lament a past obduracy, to which he attributes his being

l')
Wilkinson's chapbook title'.The White Cottage of the Valley; or, The
Mysterious Husband. An Original, lnteresting Romance. London: R- Harrild,
n.d.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
childless; and without accounting (or I should have said explaining) to
me, what that so much-deplored event was, he often cautions me
against harbouring sentiment of revenge, and presumptuous ambition,
or making rash vows. Poor dear gentleman, I do not think he will exist
much longer; and sincerely do I wish he was happier in his mind."
Here a sigh, or rather a groan, burst on the ears of the little party;
and the two youngest uttered an exclamation of amazement.
"It was only the wind," said Mrs. Mathews, "I perceive no one
near."

"Nor I neither," rejoined Charlotte, looking round rather fearfully,
"yet I must say't was very strange."
"Strange indeed," said the lovely Emma, whose spirits nothing
could long subdue; "I dare say it is only the spectre of the eastern turret,
whisked here by way of change; for you know that locks, bolts, bars
and all those sort of things, cannot confine an aerial being, they can
make their exit through a key-hole in the twinkling of an eye, and leave
you all amazement at their disappearance; yet, I frankly own, I should
like a vacant space better than such company; and that must be the
opinion of Sir Everard Martimel, or he would not have the doors
leading into the turret so closely blocked up; but think you, if he will
not visit the spectre, that the spectre will not visit him, if her inclination
so lead her, when he comes to Landrenness; oh! I warrant me, but her
Lady Ghostship will be even with him, for trying to manacle her
actions, which of course she would wish to be free as air."
"Oh Emma!" said Charlotte, "you know you must not indulged in
such flights as these in the presence of your parents, so here you have
taken full liberty; you know the ghost was only the absurd creation of
good old Cicely."
"I am sensible there was more in it than that, my dear wise,
censuring Charlotte; but I have done for the present, since you wish it."
"I must own," said Mrs. Mathews, "your conversation, young
ladies, has excited my curiosity to know its source, will one of you
oblige me with an elucidation."
"It was reported, madam," replied Charlotte.
"Oh! that beginning will never do," interrupted Emma; "indeed,
madam, my friend will make but a poor narrator of those wonderful
events that disturbed the peach of the lord of these fair domains, and
terrified the domestics out of their proper wits. Indeed I doubt if some
of them have ever been right since; do, Charlotte, let me do justice to
the story, and the merits of the lady ghost."
She here recited all she had heard from Cicely in so whimsical a

manner, that her companion could not resist from laughing; the
conversation took a lively turn, and the mysterious sigh was forgot.

-75-

_

t-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
On her return to the Abbey, she found Mr. Godolphin much worse
than he had hitherto been, since she had resided with them; and he was

then occupied with his attorney and some gentlemen, on particular
business relative to his estates, signing some fresh codicils, and other
weighty affairs; which he himself, much more those around him,

thought had been too long delayed to admit of any further
procrastination; though to settle them, was now very harassing to the
invalid, both with regard to his suffering frame and mental faculties.
To add to the general distress, Mrs. Godolphin was seized with
violent spasms in her stomach, and was conveyed to her chamber
attended by her own maid, and the sorrowing sympathising Charlotte;
the latter staid to assist in administering the embrocations," and the
medicines prescribed fbr her excellent friend's relief; and it was near
one

in the morning, before that lady was restored to

ease and

composure.

Her maid was going to set up with her, but previous to dismissing
Charlotte to her own room, she requested that affectionate girl to step
across the gallery into Mr. Godolphin's apartments, and enquire how he
found himself; or if he slept, to charge the nurse to be very watchf'ul
and attentive in her office.
She had to pass through an anti-room before she entered the sick
chamber, and in this Charlotte expected to find nurse Evans, as she was
used to sit there; and Mr. Godolphin rang a little hand-bell when he
wanted her assistance.
Nurse Evans was indeed there, but stretched out on a mattress in a
kind of recess; Charlotte did not at first perceive her, she now called to
her, but the dame was too fast locked in the embraces of sleep, to be
conscious of a visitor.
At this instant, Charlotte fancied she heard Mr. Godolphin's voice,
as if he were calling for something in a low faint tone; again she tried to
wake the nurse, but tinding it was not to be done without difficulty, she

ventured into the adjoining chamber, with a view of enquiring into the
wants of the invalid; she placed her own lamp on the table, and the
apartment, which was large, and at any time gloomy, from its dark
purple hangings, was now materially rendered more so, by a faint light
suspended from the ceiling, in a small arch that faced the foot of the
bed.

Charlotte was hastening

to the

side

of the couch, when her

footsteps were arrested, and every sense bound in the chains of terror,
by an appalling sight; a tall figure drest in white, and a long transparent

"

A medicinal liquid that is rubbed into the skin to relieve muscular stiffness

and pain.

-76

-

*-.1

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
veil flowing over her whole form, glided across the room, and vanished
in an arch. Her head grew dizzy, a cold perspiration bedewed her
forehead,-she tried to shriek, but her power of utterance failed, and
she sank on the ground. In this state she was discovered by Mrs.
Godolphin's maid, who, wondering at her long stay, had come to seek
her.

Alice soon roused the sleeping nurse, whom she well chided for
her inattention; and with her assistance, Charlotte was conveyed into
Mrs. Godolphin's chamber, and placed on the mattress, where proper
restoratives were administered.

Her senses being restored, she began to declare the cause of her
alarm; but this was listened ro with pity, and ascribed to her late sitting
up, and fatigue, having caused a temporary derangement of idea. A
composing draught was given from the medicine chest, and her eyes
soon closed in sleep; yet, fancy was busy, and that sleep presented
several well known forms, accompanied by imaginary dangers of
tenific description; one time she thought, a man masked, and his person
disguised in a sable wrapper, caught her in his arms, bounded up
immense rocks, and then hurled her down a precipice; but she fell
unhurt, into the out-stretched arms of Mrs. Stockley; again, she thought
the same figure pursued her, and would have plunged a dagger into her
bosom, but for the interposing hand of Sir Everard Martimel, who laid
the intended assassin a corpse at her feet.

Hurt as her mind had precedingly been, by the awful and
mysterious form on which her eyes had rested in Mr. Godolphin's
room, these dreams could not fail to make a deep impression, and fill a
mind, till now free from the trammels of superstition, with forebodings
of evil; but she was silent on the occasion, for she was perfectly aware,
that the mention of arguing misfortune from dreams, would not only
displease her benefactress, but bring reproofon herself.
When she awoke, she found that Mrs. Godolphin and Alice both
slept; and after giving way to the above-mentioned reflections, she took
herself most seriously to task, had she or had she not deceived herself,
and only fancied the tall white figure? ah no! the conviction of the truth
could not be erased from her mind, and it rendered her very unhappy.
As soon as she had breakfasted, she intreated permission to walk
out for an hour or two. "Certainly, my love," said Mrs. Godolphin, "I
am glad you are equal to it this morning, for I have suffered myself to
fear the contrary; air and exercise will brace your nerves, and chace
away the white-robed visions of the night."
Charlotte sighed. "Seriously, my child," continued she, "I must
have no more of this, or you will make my servants as silly as those of
Sir Everards; I fear you have been to the prohibited shelf in the upper

library,

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
and perused some romances; and these, as I expressed

to you

before, I do not wish you to do, till your character is formed, and your
mind more matured. The pages of elegant fiction will then be a source
of amusement fbr a vacant hour, but now they might have an evil
tendency, by softening the heart, and intlaming the imagination."r2
Charlotte assured Mrs. Godolphin she had not transgressed. "I rely
on your word, my child," said the lady, and folding her in her arms,
dismissed her with a warm embrace.
Our young heroine directed her steps to the Parsonage, and
informing Emma that she wished to be the companion of her walk,

leave was immediately obtained, and the young friends hastening
through the village, repaired to the grotto in the grounds of Lanmere
Abbey, which was a spot mutually favoured, as here they were wholly
uninterrupted, to amuse themselves as they thought proper.
Mrs. Godolphin had made an addition to the grotto of a small case
of books, judiciously selected, so as to blend amusement with
instruction. The visits of Emma Hervey to her friend, were known and
allowed; and one of the young people usually read, while the other
workedt but Charlotte's mind was not now in unison with industry or
literature, for it was clouded by the recent events, and sad presages,
strengthened by the mystery which, she was conscious, hung over her
birth.
She felt that innate sensation inherent in many afflicted breasts,
that she should lessen her sorrows by participation; and who was there
that would listen to, or sympathise with her, but Emma; and to her she
resolved to confide the cause of her sorrow.
Emma listened with uninterrupted attention to the narrative, and
when she had tinished, replied: "Were I, my dear Charlotte, inclined to
treat the subject with levity, I would say that the spectre of the turret
came to Lanmere last night, to appear before you, as a punishment fbr
denying, as you did at Mrs. Mathews, the existence of her lady
ghostship."

"Do not trifle with me, my love," said Charlotte, "I am too

depressed to bear it; but tell me truly your opinion."

"My opinion, if you indeed wish to have it seriously, coincides
with that of the lady of the Abbey; the conversation at the White
Cottage; the alarm occasioned by supposing your valuable protectress
in danger; your sitting up and fatigue; the hour in which you visited Mr.
Godolphin's gloomy chamber; perhaps the waving of the lamp-all

r2
This is one of many cautionary notes about Gothic novels that Wilkinson
includes. While she is utilizes the Gothic for financial support, she is hesitant to
let young women read them.

-78

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
combined to deceive your eyes and form an illusion; for however I may
jest on the subject, I do not in reality harbour an idea of supernatural
visitants; and to dwell on dreams that occurred after such an alarm.
displays still greater weakness:-but why these tears?"
Charlotte flung her arms round the neck of her beloved companion,
and as soon as she could speak for the emotions that agitated her, she

said, "If, indeed, there are no erial visions allowed on earth, and till
now I never harboured such an idea, what as the form I saw?"
"Still positive to that idea, my love!"
"I am; indeed nothing can shake my conviction, that something in
the human form alarmed me, either real or supernatural."
"Suppose you watch to night," replied Emma, "you can well hide
behind some of the cumbrous hangings you so often talk of; oh! that I
were mistress of the Abbey for one year, what a transformation would I
effect of sombre suits and tenific tapestry, for lively satins, flowing
muslins, and gay chintz!"

"No doubt you would; but its present owners are attached to the
grandeur of ancient times, and regard that part of their furniture which
has been handed down for three or four generations as a heir loom to
the possessors with veneration. But as to what you observed, of
satisfying my doubts, it cannot be, for a two-fold reason: first, my
nerves are not strong enough to support me in such an undertaking; and
next, it would not be right for me to become an eavesdropper in the

of my kind protectors. If the figure is of no earthly mould, I
might be punished for presumption; and if there is to me an unknown
inhabitant in the Abbey, sacred be the secrets of the family. I shall
never venture into that part of the building alone, I shall rely on God to
protect me; and by diligently seeking mental employment, drive the
unwelcome recollection from my mind; and now, to begin, I will relate
to you a lively copy of verses, which I learned out of the last Magazine
abode

we received from London."
Another hour elapsed, and Charlotte profited by her own lesson;
she grew more lively, and listened to Emma's simple innocent song
with pleasure; at length she was warned by the shadows reflecting from
the sun, that it was nearly time she should return to Mrs. Godolphin's;
she conducted Emma out of the nearest gate, that opened into a lane
very rarely frequented; her friend was soon out of sight, hid from view
by a sharp angle covered with embowering shrubs.
In a moment she heard a faint shriek; no idea of danger possessed
her mind, for evil deeds were very rare in this part of the world; but she

thought Emma had fallen, and hurt herself on the flints that had lately

been put down to raise the road; and she flew toward her. Poor
Charlotte! Two tall men, habited like foresters, seized her. and cast a
-79

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
thick mantle over her head, and hurried along the lane to some distance,
and lifted her into a coach; the door was shut, and the carriage, like the

wind, rolled swiftly on. Her head was now uncovered; the men, who
seemed the biggest and the most hideous she had ever seen, were with

her. They told her outcries and lamentations were in vain; but if she
were quiet, they would treat her with tenderness and respect;
refreshments and wines were in the coach; they changed horses three
times, and at night slept at a miserable house on a low heath.

END OF VOL. I.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY
VOLUME II
CHAPTER XIII.

Mary of Lanmere (as she was universally called,) the daughter of
person, and interesting in
manners; highly accomplished, and esteemed as very amiable; but there
was one trait in her disposition, one great blemish, that might have
never been called into action, had not misfortune visited this fair

Mr. and Mrs. Godolphin, was lovely in

flower, and blighted prospects that seemed pre-eminent.

From childhood she loved, and was beloved by Sir Everard
Martimel; but he also had an error in his disposition; he wished to blend
love with ambition; two things that can never be really united. The fact
was, his estate was encumbered with mortgages, and these Mary's
fortune would more than pay off. He had no friends to consult, he was
master of himself and his own actions; her's were not deceived, they
knew the state of his finances.

On due consideration, Mr. Godolphin was content with

the

proposed alliance, and every thing seemed propitious to the young
couple, when the awful, sudden, and unaccountable death of the heir of
the family, gave a change to affairs, and the parents, particularly the
father, destined Mary to move in a higher sphere than what they hac
hitherto calculated on.
A private marriage, but under the most sacred and legal forms, had
already taken place between the young people; it was celebrated at
midnight, in the parish church of Rosedale. Sir Everard relied on the
love of the Godolphins for their offspring, that all would be rendered
huppy; but he soon found that they were quite inimical to his views.

Love cooled, and the fond confiding wife who had yielded to his
wishes, seemed no longer the beauteous and well endowed maid, whom
he had wooed to be his own; and he blamed while he regretted the
mutual passion that had thus clandestinely urged them on, to tie a knot
that could not easily be severed.

The ardent love of Welch families is well known for

their

hereditary names, titles, and possessions, and the houses of Martimel
and Godolphin were at the head of those who could boast a long and
unsullied pedigree, coeval with the first branch of Llewellins; and it
would have puzzled the whole college of heraldry, to have known to
whom the palm of priority ought to be adjudged. But the owner of
Lanmere Abbey deciding for himself, reckoned his own claims far
superior to the Martimels; and determined that no one should have the
hand of his Mary, who would refuse to bury his own name for that of

-81

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Godolphin; and then, said he, probably I shall see in her first-born
male, my family and honours handed down to posterity.
Everard Martimel sickened at these conditions; he loved the race
from whence he sprung, and tenaciously adhered to it, that his children
should bear his name. In vain Mary, at a private interview, (when the
Baronet was supposed to be on the continent,) declared the conditions;
and kneeling, besought him to accede to it, and acknowledge their
marriage, or again espouse her, and that publicly-"Charles Revel," she

continued, "has proposed for me, and that on my father's avowec
terms; and I am driven to despair-what am I to do?"
"Marry Charles Revel my love, oblige your father, and free us both
from a dilemma, into which the imprudence of youth has drawn us. The
clergyman who united us is no more; the witnesses absent, and our
secret safe!"

"You jest, Sir Everard," said the apprehensive Mary.
"Far from it, I never was more serious."

"I will declare my marriage, and abide the consequences,"
exclaimed Mary; "if my father abandons me, still you have wealth
sufficient to answer our every want; and a few years economy will
restore your estate to its pristine value."

"Excellent, most exalted creature, it will so," said the Baronet;
"important business now tears me from you, but meet me at dusk to-

morrow evening, near to your favourite grotto, I will have a carriage in
readiness to convey you hence; you shall not be left to brave your
father's fury at the discovery that must now be made; time, his love for
you, and your mother's pleading, for I feel convinced she will sue for
us when she finds we are united, will soften his heart, and all will end
happily; forgive my seeming cruelty, it was only done to try the state of
your heart toward me, and I now am gratefully satisfied." After some
further conversation, highly interesting to the parties, they separated,
and Mary felt a transient gleam of happiness; transient indeed-for
soon was it dissipated, never to return.

True to the appointment of her husband, Godolphin's heiress
lingered near the grotto, long ere the given time; the promised hour
seemed to revolve on leaden wings, at length it arrived, and elapsed;
Mary grew impatient; a man past hastily along the path, and threw a
letter at her feet,
She picked it up, but had scarce power to do it, so much was she
shocked at this unexpected circumstance; she placed it in her bosom,

and returned with slow steps

to the Abbey, and

sought her own

chamber, the chamber from which she had fondly hoped, ere this, to
have been many miles distant, supported in the arms of him who had
sworn to cherish and protect her through life.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Tears so dimmed her eyes, that it was some minutes before she
could decipher the well-known characters by the light of her taper, and
the conviction of Sir Everard's cruelty almost maddened her brain.
In the letter, or rather note, for the contents of the heart-rending
epistle were very laconic, the Baronet informed her, that after-thought
had convinced him of the impropriety of their flight, and the ruin it
might bring on their heads; time, it were possible, would work wonders
for them; they were young enough to wait the dispensations of
providence; he vowed eternal constancy to her, and doubted not her
fidelity to him; but this strange unfeeling scroll ended with a sentence
strongly indicating his own doubts as to the legality of the marriage.
Not a tear fell from her eyes, not a sigh escaped from her bosom,
she stood the figure of transfixed despair, her hands clasped in agony
toward heaven.
From this painful state she was aroused, by hearing footsteps
ascending the stairs that led to her dressing room; and had but just time
to commit the fatal scroll to the flames, and cast herself on a sofa, to
hide the emotions that now began to agitate her frame, even to
convulsive spasms, ere Mrs. Godolphin entered, and began most
tenderly to chide her daughter, for absenting herselfall the evening; and
now requested her to accompany her to the saloon.
The thought, that had not her own inclinations met with a severe
disappointment, her excellent parent would now have sought her in
vain, gave a fresh, and not unsalutary turn to her feelings, and she burst
into tears.
The affectionate matron clasped the lovely, sorrowing child to her
bosom; alas! she had not the most remote idea as to the extent of that
grief, or of the deep source whence it arose.
"You must conquer this weakness, my Mary,o' said Mrs.
Godolphin, "for I guess Sir Everard is the theme on which your dear
heart is occupied; he is not worthy of such an inestimable prize as you,
or he would yield to the conditions by which he might obtain your
hand; he would lose nothing in dignity, by giving up the name of
Martimel for the honourable one of Godolphin; and what vexes me
most, he appears to resign her he professed to adore without a struggle,
or trying to overcome your father's mandate as to your alliance; I do
not think he would have met success; yet, I acknowledge, the effort
would have pleased me; I could not have supposed the youth I so
respected, and of whose sentiments I had formed an high estimate,
would thus have acted; brood not over his loss, it may prove in the end
a desirable incident, and call forth gratitude to an interfering overruling power, who sees not with our eyes, hears not with our ears, and
works our good out of seeming evil."

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"It is better," continued the good lady, not in the least aware of the
very tender chord she touched; "it is better you should have to lament
the fickleness of the lover, than the inconstancy or want of affection in
the husband."

The latter word acted as an electric stroke on Mary; husband,-had
she indeed a husband? or had she not.

The wretched bride was on the very point of confessing

the

ceremony that had taken place in the church of Rosedale, to her mother,

but the thought of its alledged illegality, in Sir Everard's letter,
unhappily restrained her; she was aware of the rage with which her

father would receive the intelligence of her clandestine marriage; but if
she had indeed, through the artifice of a seducer, aided by her own
credulity, forfeited her own honour, and tarnished that of her parents so
proudly tenacious of the good name, and illustrious virtues, that had
ever distinguished the house of Godolphin, (where all the men were

brave, and

all the women chaste,)

what could she expect, but

annihilation from the hands of her sire; and to see her amiable revered
mother sink to the grave with grief and shame, a fatal resolve was the
determination of secrecy, which she innately and most fervently vowed;
mentally calling on God to witness and register her oath above, and
deal with her as she kept or broke it.
I use the term fatal resolution because she then avowed the
indiscretion of which she were guilty, though it would have brought a
storm over her head at the time, and given lasting disappointment to her
father, yet a calm would have succeeded, and herself and parents have
been spared years of needless sufferings; for if the maniage was legal,
it would have proved so, andjustice done her.
The feelings of Mary could not support her mother's arguments,
under the conviction of her own unworthiness, and she fainted on the
sofa; she was scarce recovered, when a message was brought from Mr.
Godolphin, requesting the presence of his lady and daughter. The
former obeyed, and made apologies to him and Mr. Revel, whom she
found in the saloon, for the absence of Mary; which she truly attributed
to indisposition, and not to sullenness, as imputed by the former
gentleman, when informed that she could not make her appearance that
evening; for he foresaw there would be great difficulty in bringing her
to favour the pretension of her new lover, though he certainly was both
an amiable and handsome man; but he lost in the scale of comparisons,
with the exterior advantages of the all honourable Baronet, Sir Everard
Martimel.

-84

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XIV.

The letter received by Mr. Godolphin, intimating the marriage of
Mary to Sir Everard, was sent by an humble individual, who only
suspected, but on very strong grounds, the event that had taken place;
for the parties were seen to enter Rosedale church with its minister. The

view of sending the notice was a good, and not evil idea; they loved
Mary, and feared something was wrong in the conduct of the Baronet;
and they thought this might lead to an explanation, which would benefit
the heiress of Lanmere; but finding this laudable hope disappointed,

they ever after remained in silence: and the result of Mr. Godolphin's
expostulation with his daughter, so violent in its course, led her to deny
her marriage having taken place, and promise she would never wed, Sir
Everard Martimel; but all she could urge, in behalf of her wish to live a

single life, was disregarded; the Godolphin family was

to

be

perpetuated through her means, and no plea to the contrary could be
received, or was even listened to with complacence, either by her father
or mother.
Thus, urged to desperation, she knew not what course to pursue;
honour would not allow her to impose herself on Mr. Revel; and if that
sentiment had not swayed her breast, another barrier presented itself,
and forbade the idea; she had but just discovered her pregnancy: at one
time, she thought of flying to Sir Everard, but the hapless Mary soon
abandoned that idea, for her love was now converted into the deadliest
hate that ever filled the human breast; all the gentle passions that had
hitherto vibrated there were fled; and in their place reigned rancorous
enmity, and a self-sufficiency of judgment; instead of leaving her cause
to heaven, for justice and retribution in its own time, she boldly seized
the reins in her own hands, and vowed to seize on every opportunity
that presented itself, to harass and perplex Sir Everard Martimel.
Mary had by her, (the accumulation of years,) a sum of money
much more considerable than her friends were aware of; she had also
some valuable trinkets, which Sir Everard had privately given her, at
the time he professed what he meant, and deceit was not an inmate of
his heart.

Having, with much adroitness, procured a plain decent suit of
mourning, such as would become a mechanic's widow, Mary deserted
the Abbey; and not only bade adieu to its ivy-mantled walls, but also to
her parents-those who had so fondly protected her from the hour of
her birth; but her heart was steeled against them for proposing her
marriage with Revel, forgetting that they were ignorant of her real
situation. It is true, they were too much swayed by the prejudice of
birth, and a wish to give their name to posterity; but they were not

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
singular in this, nor did their conduct merit the punishment

it

brought;

for Mary contrived to make it

universally believed, that she had
drowned herself, to avoid becoming the wife of the man her parents had
chosen; their manner of living after this supposed event, their voluntary
seclusion, showed their misery, and the opprobrium that fell on them,
was a deep wound to their hearts; little did they repent having been deaf
to her pleadings, but she had left them no means ofatonement.
Sir Everard Martimel had scarce landed on the continent, when
compunction touched his heart for the injured Mary; he no longer
(disgusted with the conduct of Mr. Godolphin, who could so soon
fbrget the amiable son torn from him, to plan absurd schemes of
aggrandizement, at the expense of his former engagements,) wished the
alliance, nor did it suit his finances to take a portionless bride; tbr such,
he presumed, her father's resentment would make her; and he
determined to go back to Monmouthshire, and if he found Mary was
allowed to pursue her own inclinations unmolested, to remain passive
and secret; if the contrary, to rescue her from such a perilous situation,
let whatever consequences ensue.

Mary was no more! what a dread shock! his feelings were

overpowered, he went not near his own Castle, nor was his person, or
that of his faithful valet recognised, through their deep disguise; he set
spurs to his horse, nor did he stop to bait, or take the least refreshment,
till they arrived at an obscure inn, in a very lowly village, at least
sixteen miles distant from Rosedale, through all the dangers and
inconveniences of a pelting storm. A serious illness followed, and
confined him for a week; but with the assistance of a humbly situated,

but not unskilful

apothecary, aided

by a good

constitution,

he

recovered, and repaired to London; and after a short stay in that busy
metropolis, once more embarked for the continent.
For some time he indulged a hope, from the body of Mary not
being found, that she had only used a stratagem to deceive her parents
for the present, till she could fly to him; but the lapse of time chased
this idea, and seemed painfully, and most unequivocally, to confirm her
death. At times a deep gloom would overspread his mind, and he would

reflect on himself as her murderer: at others, he would have the
sophistry to lull his conscience to repose, by mentally avowing, that
Mary had no occasion to commit suicide, to deliver herself tiom the
domestic troubles that enthralled her; even had she, by compulsion,
been dragged to the marriage altar to give her hand to Revel, she was
still, from the very nature of the ceremony, allowed a negative voice,
which no power could over-rule; the act was her own; why then should
he needlessly reflect on himself, as the primary author of it; and added
to this, time blunted the edge of his feelings; and the charms of Lady
-86

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Cecilia caught his eye, and soon rivetted his heart. The marriage was in
every respect suited to his wishes,-youth, beauty, and fortune; she was
also well accomplished, and possessed a mild urbanity of manners, that
rendered her the universal object of esteem and admiration; the lady
had other and noble suitors, but she gave the preference to Sir Everard
and he seemed for a time the happiest of men; few earthly pleasures are
permanent, and the miseries that attended the wedded life of Martimel
and Cecilia, with its fatal termination, are already before our reader.
At the death of that hapless woman, Sir Everard was still young,
still attractive; and there were several among the British fair, who did
not behold him with indifference; it was natural to suppose he would
make a second choice, and many were the suggestions as to the happy
fair one; but his frequent visits to the Bellaston family, 13 seemed to
favour the surmise, that his heart would be the prize of Lady Elizabeth
Darcy,ra eldest daughter of the earl, and a widow with a noble fortune,

and of years suited to his own; for she was scarce entered into the
meridian of life, and with no surviving offspring.
Lady Elizabeth was amiable, delicate and circumspect; no one
could call her honour as a wife, or her prudence as a widow, in
question; and three years had now lapsed as the relictls of Mr. Darcy;
their union had been happy, and free from regrets or domestic jars,
though he had had been the choice of her parents; but she was now free
to choose for herself, and determined to be wary how she parted with
her liberty, however favoured the object, on whom she intended to
bestow not only her hand, but her heart; and her father, the Earl of
Bellaston, frequently rallied her on the rejection of her suitors, for it is
not to be supposed such an object was to be overlooked, in the midst of
the gay and fashionable world in which she was destined to move;
some few heaved sighs of real admiration, and others, those of interest.

Sir Everard Martimel appeared in her train, and was a frequent
guest at the earl's, from the time he was introduced to her by her
brother in Paris, Lord Towers, in the saloon of the Opera house; he was
attentive and assiduous, but he breathed not one word of a soft passion;
and except that his eyes frequently rested on Lady Elizabeth with
admiration, there was no pretence of announcing him a lover, but it was

-

''

Bellaston In Henry Fielding's Tom Jones Lady Bellaston is a London lady,
and a relative of Sophia, whose passionate, lusty personality leads her to dabble
in intrigues. The stem of her last name "Bella-", meaning "war" in Latin, points
to her malicious nature-she thinks of no one but herself. Lady Bellaston
caries out a vengeful battle against Tom and Sophia with the utmost glee.
ra
A possible connection to Jane Austen's character Elizabeth Darcy nee
Bennett.
15

A widow.
-87

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
easy to perceive, guarded as the fair one was in her deportment, she did

not behold him with indifference. Every revolving day increased his
admiration fbr this desirable woman, and every hour seemed
unprofitable that was not passed in her company; yet, he was
unconscious of the state of his own heart and mind, till called to a sense
of them by the raillery of a friend.
"What, again to Grosvenor street! eh Martimel, my boy," said Lord
Woodville, on meeting the Baronet in Bond street; "carriages bespoke,
liveries ordered, bridal friends selected, all in readiness against the
farce of mourning is over; sooth, you are a happy man, that is the truth
on 't."
"I am not so happy as to understand your meaning, Charles."
"Bless me! what an answer, I could not have expected a more
maidenly one from a girl of eighteen, were I to accuse the blushing
damsel of being on the eve of marriage; come, Martimel, this is sheer
nonsense among friends: all the world knows you are going to unite
your fate to that of the charming widow; remember, I expect a card on
the occasion;" and pressing his hand, he left him to benefit from his
own meditations.
All the world knows I am going to marry Lady Elizabeth! Thought
he, the world is a set of meddling beings, who handle every one's
concerns indiscriminately. The words of Lord Woodville, however,
prompted him to examine his own actions, and the result was, that his
conduct had been indeed particular enough to walrant such surmises,
and that his heart was engaged in the affair, but would his suit be
propitious? At the moment he mentally asked that question, he found
himself on the steps of Lord Bellaston's door, but his mind was so
unhinged by some reflexions that would intrude, and told him that Lady
Elizabeth was not his second choice, and the unhappiness he had given
to his first, that he felt a wish to postpone the intended visit, till he was
in a gayer or at least a more collected mood; but this was rendered
abortive, by a chariot driving up at that instant. It was the fair one
herself, returned from a morning ride; to retreat was impossible, and to
hand her into the house indispensable; Lady Elizabeth soon remarked a
change in his manner, and enquired the cause, which he attributed to
indisposition.
The tender anxiety that was displayed on this account put all other
ideas to flight; they were alone, the season seemed propitious for a
declaration to try this fate, and Mary of Lanmere was completely
forgotten.
He respectfully took Lady Elizabeth's hand, and possibly might
have knelt, but at this critical juncture the door flew open, and Amelia,
the Earl's youngest daughter, a girl of the most lively, playful, and
-88-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
indeed in some respects, of a volatile disposition, entered the room,
without the least regard to etiquette or form.
Sir Everard drew back, and Lady Elizabeth gently asked her sister
if it was her she sought? "Oh no," replied Amelia, "I want this gallant
knight, I have been watching for him these three days past, and now, by
all that is charming, he is here." Sir Everard, though much vexed at an
intrusion so mal-apropos, was forced to bow, and intreat to be favoured

with her commands.

"My governess has been affirming, in answer to some of my
remarks, and I assure you with some heat too, that there are gothic
buildings without spectres or legends of a ghostly nature attached to
them; now, what is a castle or abbey worth without such an appendage?
do tell me candidly, are none of the turrets of your old family mansion
in Monmouth rendered thus terrific, by some unquiet wandering spirit?
dare the peasantry pass it after twilight, or, if they are forced into that
temerity, do not their teeth chatter, their hair stand erect, and their poor
knees knock together? You do not answer, but you stand convicted!
why, your countenance condemns your castle: I'll wager all my
trinkets, and they are not few, that you, Sir Everard, have in your own
proper person been favoured with the visit of a spectre-like form; of all
things I should like a romance, and if you would be ingenuous, and tell
me what your ghost said and did, it might help me to a subject."
Conscience, it is true, make more coward than the sword; and the
Baronet stood as one confounded, for he thought there was more
meaning couched in Amelia's words than what was allowed to meet the
ear, of Martimel Castle, its turrets, and its spectres. What a theme! and
at what a time did it come; he expected every moment the fair
unwelcome intruder would enquire of him, as to the contents of the
blue and silver bag, or reproach him with them.
Lady Elizabeth perceived the vexation and chagrin of the Baronet,

but she did not attribute it to the real cause; for she was far from
supposing the rude folly of a spoilt girl, (for she had no mother living to
control her, and was the Earl's pet, indulged in every whim,) could
have such a serious effect; her own self-love, and the idea was plausible
and blameless, whispered her, that it was the consequence of Amelia's
interruption to their tete- a-tete.
She apologized to Sir Everard for the attack her sister had made on
his domains; and then, in a manner all her own, in which reproof and
sweetness were blended, she dismissed the offending Amelia.
It was now Lady Elizabeth's turn to be surprised, for the Baronet,

instead

of

embracing the opportunity thus given,

to

resume the

interesting conversation, took his hat, and, with an hasty adieu, hunied
to his own house. The order of not at home to any one. was issued to
-89-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
the servants, and he shut himself up in his dressing room for the
remainder of the day, to reflect on the events of the morning. After
much debate on the subject, and revolving every point in question, he
determined that he had been guilty of an egregious folly, in allowing
the romantic nonsense of a child to make such a conquest over him; for
could it be possible the daughter of the Earl of Bellaston could be the
least aware of the mysterious visit in the turret; and he execrated a
conduct by which it were likely he had lost or rationally lessened the
favorable opinion of the Lady Elizabeth.
Immediately this idea struck him, he penned an elegant note to her

ladyship, ascribing his hasty exit from Grosvenor street,

to

the

indisposition that had hung over him the whole morning, and intreating
her indulgence of that plea; he desired his kind remembrance to the
lively Amelia, with his hopes that at some future period she would
honour his ancient castle with her fair presence, when she should be
free to explore its long windings, subterraneous caverns, and scout and
exorcise all the spectres within its walls.

-90

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XV.
When Mary of Lanmere had thus created an implicit belief of her
death, and left her parents to deplore their murdered son and selfimmolated daughter, she made her way to London, that grand place for
concealment; for, in that busy mart of corrrmerce, few people have
leisure to note the actions of any individual out of their own immediate
circle, or family connexions; and many are strangers to the very persons
of their next door neighbours.

She travelled in the humble manner suited to her present
appearance, and hired a lodging in an obscure part of the town; here she
had time for meditation, even to madness; and the subject ever
uppermost in her mind was, the dreadful perplexing one of, was she or
was she not the wife of Sir Everard Martimel? and the usual conclusion
was the latter; else she argued, Sir Everard would not have dared to
have acted as he had done toward her. The clergyman (a friend of the
Baronet's) she knew not where to find, and he most probably was not
priest at all, but a gay unprincipled companion of him who had never
appeared to be a libertine, but must have really well merited that title.
The clerk of Rosedale who introduced them into the church was dead;
he survived that event but three days; thus she lost the principal witness

to the ceremony, which had in reality taken place in proper

form,
whether the other part of the proceedings were legal or otherwise; for
obvious reasons, the marriage was not registered in the parish books,
but the supposed clergyman made minutes of it in one he had brought
with him, and handed a certificate to Mary, and another to his friend.
The place of meeting between these married lovers was in Sir
Everard's favourite turret, and Mary, not in the least suspecting the
after events which so soon clouded her destiny, and made her a child of
woe, gave this important paper, which she was fearful of returning, to
the Baronet, and in her presence he placed them, with some other
documents, in a blue and silver bcg wrought with her own hands.
On the eve of his first departure to the Continent, after their
clandestine marriage, Mary presented him with an elegant book of
poems which she had received from the authoress, who in childhood's
happy days had been their mutual friend; and in a blank leaf he wrore as
follows:

"The gift of the lovely Mary Martimel, to her adoring

husband

Everard, January 9," (with the date of the year:) in the eastern turret of
the castle, on the eve of a separation which he trusts will be short, and
that they shall then meet under more auspicious circumstances, and part
no more until heaven sends its decree to waft them into happier
realms;" and this book he carefully treasured along with Mary's
-91

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
miniature in the blue and silver bag. How affectionate! how pious! how
sentimental! the memorandum thus noted-but alas, how hypocritical!
would the forsaken fair one exclaim, as her thoughts, reverted back to
these circumstances, and how bitterly did she lament her unlimited
confidence in the destroyer ofall her earthly happiness."
She sought no society, books and work were her only resource; she
described herself as a widow, and as her rent and expenses were
regularly paid, no one troubled themselves about her; blessed efTects of
independence however humble, while poverty and embarrassments
bring down animosity, and a train of evils on the hapless possessor.
In due time, Mary, or as she now called herself, Agnes Bennett,
r6brought
into this world a fine girl, Charlotte, the minor heroine of our
history. As she gazed on its features, in which were blended those of
her own with Sir Everard's, the sigh of regret at its forlorn state would
rise in her bosom, but it increased her rancour to its father; more than
once she seized on pen and paper, to infbrm her parents of her existence
and present situation; then the dread of their resentment, and of her

father's curse, deterred her, and she felt unequal to brave

the

consequences; still the idea lingered in her mind, but was from time to
time delayed; she suckled the child at her own bosom, it throve fast, but

her own health decayed, and she began to imbibe the said idea, so
torturing to a mother, that she should at a period, not far distant, leave
her child unprotected and unprovided for, to a wide world, to endure
the stings of penury. Thus were her days clouded with additional
anxiety, and her nights rendered wretched by sleepless care.
"I will write," said she, and going toward the table for that purpose,
"I will at least send a letter to my mother, and plead for my babe."
At this the mistress of the house, a good sort of woman, and rather
intelligent, entered the room, to offer the perusal of the newspaper, a
civility she had ofien shown her fair lodger, and was very acceptable as
a temporary relaxation of her mind.
The paper was the Morning Herald, and her eyes had not long
wandered over its columns of fashionable news, when the marriage of
Sir Everard to Lady Cecilia met her eyes; she felt her eyes grow dim,
and her limbs fail her, and she had scarce time to extend herself on the

tloor, when she fainted.

16
Agnes Maria Bennett wrote several Gothic novels includingEllen, Countess
of Castle Howel (1794) ctnd Vicissitudes Abroad; or, The Ghost of My Father
(1806). She also wrote the very popular didactic novels The Beggar GirL
And Her Benefactors ( 1191) and Agnes De-Courci: A Domestic TaLe

(1789) which Wilkinson was clearly familiar with.
-92

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
This event caused her to set aside all thoughts of writing to
Lanmere Abbey; she did not dare to plead for an illegitimate child; this
act of Sir Everard's had put it out of the power of her family to

privately investigate her claims, and she knew the proud spirit of the
Godolphins would rather meet death itself, than have their names held
up to public view, and banded about in courts ofjustice.
She lived with the utmost economy, yet her money gradually took
its flight till none remained; she then converted her jewels into cash,
but they did not produce one third of their value. Mary, who now called
herself Agnes Bennett, expected, and she now began seriously to
reflect, that the period could not be far distant when herself and child
would be exposed to the pangs of want, and the many horrors attending

on adversity; she removed to a more humble lodging, and sought
employ, but found this very precarious, scarce to be obtained, and ill
paid, particularly works of fancy, such as she excelled in; for in the
more common, domestic, and useful sort, she was but a novice.lT
From one gradation to the other, she came to the most poignant and
bitter distress, till she rushed out, as was seen in the beginning of the

first volume, overwhelmed with despair for her own fate, and that of
her truly suffering child.

She felt extremely repugnant at first to receive benefit either for
herself or Charlotte, from the hands of Lady Cecilia; but a sudden idea
struck her, that she would fling her child wholly on the protection of the
Martimel family, and then leave the rest to destiny, and the wonderful

--i:t"::?#:flli"

,ourn, ror Mrs. ruru,r,"*r, rhe sisrer or Farmer
Morgan, whom she was aware was somewhere creditably settled in
London, and a widow: she had been brought up at Lanmere Abbey, and
there received, by the goodness of Mrs. Godolphin, an excellent
education; for though some years older than Mary, she was honoured
by being her domestic companion, and received instruction with her,
from the governess and various masters. It was her good fortune, at an
early age, to attract the notice and engage the afTections of a young
tradesman from London, who came down to Monmouthshire to visit his
relations, and they were married at Rosedale church; the Godolphins
rejoicing in their favourite's fortunate settlement, presenting her with a
handsome portion. Martha was soon left a childless widow, and she
established with her property a ladies boarding school. Her
astonishment is much easier to conceive than describe, on being visited
by Mary of Lanmere, (who after some pains found out her residence,)

"

This is clearly a reference to Wilkinson's own experiences as a single parent.
See her Letters to the Roval Literarv Fund.

l

.rl

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
whom of course she had long supposed an inhabitant of another world,
hurried by her own act and deed out ofexistence.
Before she began the melancholy tale of her adventures, she swore
Martha to secrecy, inviolably to be maintained, and that by no slight
oath. Her friend, (for by that appellation she now addressed her,) heard
her with horror and alarm; nor could she avoid expressing a strong
censure on such unjustifiable conduct; but the secrecy required she had
not a wish to break. She earnestly exhorted Mary not to disturb the
peace of Lady Cecilia, by any disclosure or investigation, which could
now only tend to the misery of all parties, and expressed a hope that
Charlotte would be amply provided for at the Castle.
With money received from Lady Cecilia, Mary purchased a new
wardrobe, and she proposed to become a teacher in the establishment,
that she might learn the business of school keeping, as a future
resource. Mrs. Mathews, who knew well the superior talents of Mary
and her extensive abilities, was not sorry to have such an auxiliary and
a bargain was made, which ultimately proved of great advantage to
both parties; and Mary, disguised, and under the roof of her friend,
passed as Mrs. Stockley, and enjoyed a comfbrtable asylum.rs
The force of maternal love exceeds all other feelings, and Mary's
heart yearned for her child, and to fold her in her arms. Mrs. Mathews
laid a plan fbr this purpose which succeeded, in Mrs. Stockley
becoming the tenant of the White Cottage in the valley; and when
Charlotte became her pupil, she had an opportunity of displaying her
affection in the character ofgoverness.
Numberless were the ardent wishes and desires, that arose in the
bosom of Mary of Lanmere, as she gazed on the form of her lovely,
amiable, and most truly interesting daughter, and deplored that such a
sweet blossom should be doomed to wither in obscurity, and literally
waste her sweetness in the desert air. At length she fbrmed a bold
design-even to this day she retained a key that unlocked one of the
doors of Martimel Castle, and seizing a favourable opportunity when
the moon shone with radiant brightness, to light her on her way along
the galleries and winding corridors, through which she proceeded with
a palpitating heart and anxious mind. She knew of a sliding pannel
which had been shown her by the late Lady Martimel, the mother of Sir
Everard, as a curiosity; but for some reason or other, best known to the
good hostess of the Castle, she never imparted this secret to her son.
Mary in a short time found herself once more in the turreq she
sickened as recollections crowded on her mind, and had she not burst

'8 This scene is reminiscent of

her

Wilkinson's experience becoming a teacher. See

lrtters to the Royal Literary

Fund.

94-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
into tears, must have fainted. She lighted a match with phosphorus, and
illuminated a taper she had brought with her, and began a search which
proved futile for the blue and silver bag, for not a trace of it was to be
seen, and she imbibed the idea that he had destroyed it and the
documents it contained; and those documents she now wished to
possess, to try their validity or deceptive purpose. After two hours thus
employed, she abandoned the pursuit as hopeless, and returned in
despair to her cottage.
The pregnancy of Lady Martimel was a piercing stab to the heart
of Mary; this was followed by the arrival of Sir Everard and the
Counsellor at the castle; and Mrs. Stockley, as she was then called,
having heard from the loquacious Cicely that the Baronet was going to
pass the night in the turret, determined on paying a visit also, in the
hope of making some important discovery; casting off her disguise, and
habiting herself as Mary of Lanmere with studied elegance, in a dress
long since prepared against any favourable occasion that might present
itself, to annoy the once-loved but now long since hated Everard.
The events of that night were truly distressing to the Baronet, and a
source of triumph to our wily heroine. She watched him unlock an iron
chest placed in the wall, which had previously escaped her notice, and
she gained possession of the blue and silver bag, and, on a subsequent
visit, of the book in which he had penned a memorandum of their
union; for though in the presence of Counsellor Scran he had flung the
volume on the fire, yet that memorable, and to her sacred part, had
remained untouched by the flames, the covers being the chief part
damaged by the then expiring embers.

-95

-

_--l

IL

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XVI.

The certificate, signed by a gentleman named Charles Beverley,
of Smallwood in Cambridgeshire, was of that nature as to
impress a conviction on the mind of the unfortunate self-wllled, self'
guided mother of Charlotte, that her marriage was legal, and of course
her child the true heiress of the Martimel and Godolphin families. For

rector

any advantage to herself she cared not, but for her girl; it was
distraction when she turned her thoughts that way, or they rested on the
much injured innocent Lady Cecilia, and the censure her own actions
would incur from the world; as to her parents, she could expect neither
mercy, forgiveness, nor support from them; and her father's
malediction seemed to ring in her ears. The notice taken of Charlotte by
the owners of the Abbey, and the child's partiality to Mrs. Godolphin,
added another strong link to the chain that bound her feelings: but in all
this her hatred to Sir Everard gained ground, and hence arose the
stratagem which, with some contrivance and more expense, was
effected, of harassing him by the re-appearance of the blue and silver
bag emptied of its precious contents, thus making his punition truly
severe. Ill health, doubts, and loss how to act, delayed any measures
which Mary meant to take till the birth of Lady Cecilia's child; after
this, by an anonymous letter, she imparted to her the dread intelligence
that Sir Everard had a wife whose claims were prior to hers in
existence, and an heiress to his property.
Lady Cecilia, as was natural to suppose, felt alarmed at intelligence
ofsuch a nature, and so unexpected; several letters were sent to her on
the subject, but her ladyship breathed not a single sentence of the affair

to any individual living, as she did not attach much belief to

the

assertions of her unknown colTespondent: her love for Sir Everard was
vanished, another had taken his place in her heart, and alas, her child at
that time little thought of; illicit pleasure was the order of the day, yet
she treasured up the letters from an idea, if the Baronet prosecuted a
divorce, they might prove of intinite service to her, as she would then
put him to the proof; and if the assertions were true, her freedom and
the restoration of her fortune would be the result; but when she had run
her short but guilty career, and the world began to glide from before her
view she enclosed the papers to Sir Everard, as an act ofjustice due to

him.

The death of Lady Cecilia opened to Mary a fresh view of the
subject, but Ellinor the poor baby, what was to become of her, such was
the contradiction of Mary's mind: it was true she hated Sir Everard, and
the child was his offspring, yet she was innocent, and for her she felt;
still her own daughter had the strongest claim, and her wish was to

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY,
repair to the clergyman whose name was signed to the certificate, and
abide by his advice, if he was to be found; if not, the whole must be an
imposture; she would then sit down but not contented, and suffer
herself and Charlotte to vegetate in obscurity.

The incretsing kindness of the Godolphins toward the young
object of her cares and maternal solicitude, made her reflect that in her
new undertaking of seeking truth or falsehood, it was best to fling her
on their patronage and support; she had, it is true, once before played
the same man@uvre, and as yet had not met success; that was on the
father's side, this was now on the mother's; she could not internally
blame herself were she never to return; for was not Charlotte the heiress
of Lanmere Abbey, and in the sight of heaven the benefit she received

was indeed her own right, and she doubted not, that when it was
supposed Charlotte's benefactress (in the character of Mrs. Stockley)
was deceased, but the charge she thus left would be powerfully
supported; she thus, like a desperate gamester, cast her fortune in a
single die; she would either return to be reinstated in the honours due to
her by birth and marriage, or return no more. How wavering, how
impolitic is the human race! (that is, with some few exceptions.) Mary
did not consider this awful truth, that we do not make circumstances
fall as we wish ourselves, but that our actions are impelled by them,
and for us to strive against them is our duty, in a discreet anc
exemplary manner; but stratagems, subterfuges, and all the trains of
deceit too often used, can but at the best be of momentary avail, and
finally appear as witnesses against us, and hurl us down the muchdreaded precipice.
She sought Mr. Beverley, and found him; all was indeed correct as
to her marriage, it was legal, and by special license, which authorised
the midnight ceremony, and the non-insertion in the books of Rosedale,

but it was in another place, belonging to the ecclesiastical court, duly
registered.

Mr. Beverley heard with astonishment the account given by Mary
of Lanmere, or, as she certainly was, the Lady of Martimel; her features
were of that remarkable cast, that to see them once in a way that would
impress them on the mind, they were not to be forgot, never could be
erased.

When she had concluded her narrative, a silence ensured; a silence
no doubt painful to both parties: the lady all expectation, the gentleman

not knowing how to advise, yet feeling it his duty to interfere; but he
spoke not, till pressed by his fair visitor to give relief to her suspense;
he then said, I will give my opinion, but trust not to it; you ought to
have followed the paths of truth; when your father taxed you with your
marriage you ought to have owned it; by its denial, you have brought

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
accumulated evil on yourself, and numbers of innocent persons; neither
I know, after propagating the report of your own death, that the law
will allow you the benefit of your maniage; as to your child, no one can
dispute her claim, as you say you had it duly registered according to her
true appellation; but this I would advise, as she is adopted into her own
family, and you have sufficient to subsist on, aided by your own talents,
let the affair rest, unless Sir Everard ofTers to marry again; then your

do

silence would be a crime, a real guilt-his lady would not be a wife,
and her children branded with illegitimacy; think what a blow this
would be to a woman of virtue, family and connexion, and all through
your fault."
Mary humbled, and brought still more than ever to a sense of her
own folly, repaired to London, with a determination never again to visit

Monmouthshire; but a fertile ill-conceived romantic imagination still
urged her on to be singular in her actions; and she again reported her
own death under the name of Stockley, and solicited Mrs. Mathews, by
a subterfuge, to favour the deceit.

She again embarked in the school business, but her mind ever
turning on Charlotte, rendered her unfit for an occupation that requires
a soul enlightened and at ease with itself and all mankind, to perform its
duties, was not adequate to the task, and she relinquished it with
disgust, though her finances began to grow very short.
Mrs. Mathews about this time wished to retire to Rosedale; it was
her native place, and as such, though years had estranged her from it,
wished once more to become one of its people and spend her days
there; she was honest, grateful, and humane, without making any
pretensions to those blessed gifts; and she thus considered:-the
Godolphins were my friends, they educated, clothed, and portioned me,

so that

I

was enabled

to many well in life, far, far

above any

expectations my friends or myself could form; my present success and
independence is owning to that beginning, and shall a child of that
noble house (poor murdered Albert, how short was thy earthly career,
that left they sister an only one!) be a sufferer. She has erred, she is
guilty, and that in no common degree; but it is not for me to cast the
stone, I will if possible rescue her from a situation so abounding with
trouble.

With this generous idea, she offered Mary the school she was
about to relinquish, though she had advertised it at a thousand pounds
premium, only for a certain annual rent. The Lady of Martimel burst
into an agony of tears, as she clasped her dear friend to her bosom, and
suggested another scheme. "Take me with you to Monmouthshire, hide
me in one of your rooms, there I may at times see my child and hear her

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
voice, you may dispose of what work I can do in a private manner, and
there let me live and die unknown."
Mrs. Mathews saw many objections to this plan, but she was in a
manner compelled to acquiesce; her vow of secrecy still remained in
force, and her wish to serve her was redoubled; she wrote to her brother
to procure her a suitable habitation, and the White Conage, by a curious
train of circumstances, once more became the home of Mary of
Lanmere.

In this rustic habitation she was not without comforts, but they
were balanced by severe privations; no light could be in her chamber,
she dare not venture out to breathe the air of heaven, except when all
but herself were hushed in calm repose, and that with extreme caution,
for Mrs. Mathews was supposed to be the only inhabitant of the solitary
dwelling; it is true she had her wish of beholding Charlotte;
occasionally she heard her much loved accents, but she did not dare to
clasp her to her bosom, or make one tender enquiry.
The alarm of her father's evidently approaching decease was
another stimulus to action; she wished to see him, to solicit pardon, and
remove the curse from off her head.
To find access to his chamber was not difficult, to her who knew
every winding of the Abbey: she had achieved her wish, and was just
going to address him, when Charlotte entered, and flight was her only
resource; but the next night was determined on as a renewal of her
enterprise, though at the hour appointed in her own mind she was
differently engaged.
When Emma Hervey was leaving her beloved friend and just
turned the sharp point in the road which obscured her from view, she
beheld a carriage. In London or any provincial town, this would scarce
have attracted a momentary glance, but in a remote lane of Rosedale it
was a wonder: and as she stood gazing a tall man seized her, and was
about to convey her to the vehicle; she shrieked, but he soon prevented

a repetition of the

sound;

at this moment a comrade in iniquity

approached, and in terms not very gentle, upbraided the other with
being a fool; "you have not got the right one," said he, "be quick, or all
our labor is lost; hush, by all that is good she comes;" poor Charlotte
was seized hold ol and made captive to her secret foes; and Emma was
compelled to say she would be silent as to what had passed relative to
herself and young friend, and she was then suffered to repair to the
Parsonage.

The treatment of Charlotte, her being borne away, was too much
for the spirits of Emma, and when she arrived at home, her pallid looks
and downcast eye alarmed her father, and he eagerly enquired the
cause.

-99

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"I dare not tell!" "And has my daughter," said the good divine, "a
trouble she dare not reveal to me."
"I promised," replied Emma, "I promised secrecy."
"You shock me," interrupted Mr. Hervey; "in what can you
possibly have been engaged?"
"My dear father, it was involuntary, I was compelled."
"Tell me instantly this horrid business, no oath of iniquity, no one
of compulsion, is binding; a good vow must spring from heart, and be
founded on the pure basis ofreligion."

Thus urged, Emma told the dread circumstance, and her tender
mother, who had been witness to the foregoing scene, conveyed her
weeping darling to bed, and used every fond endeavour to soothe her
mind.
"I am more easy, my dearest parent," she said, "now I have no
secret, but my Charlotte, my sister, as I have oft in friendship called
her, where is she now?" Tears followed tears, and the next night was
passed in unavailing lamentations.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XVII.
As soon as Mr. Hervey could leave his interesting child he repaired
to Lanmere Abbey, to impart the dread intelligence that Charlotte was

torn from the circle who so tenderly loved her. He found Mrs.
Godolphin anxiously uneasy about her favourite, who had in vain been
sought for in the grounds, on being missed at the appointed time.
That a mystery attended the birth of this sweet girl, was known to
all parties, but the reality, as visible by our explanation to the reader,
was not at that time even guessed at, though Mr. and Mrs. Godolphin,
when gazing on her features, had often traced a resemblance to the
regretted Mary.

Mr. Godolphin, lying as it were at the point of death, for his
dissolution was every hour expected, was not in a state to be apprised
of this incident; but his lady took the most prompt measures in sending
men on horseback, as the horses of the nearest inns. without loss of
time, were put in immediate requisition; but those who had committed
this outrage had too well concerted their plan to be so easily pursued,
they travelled by cross roads, and thus eluded the equestrians from
Rosedale and its neighbourhood, and nought was left for her friends but
deep regret.

Yet there was one who resolved to take more active measures to
regain her heart's darling, the suffering wandering mother, she resolved
to seek her child, and, for that loved creature's sake, brave every peril:
she considered she had a clue to guide her, and of that she would avail
herself.

The clue was not of silk or thread, it was simply a pocket
handkerchief, but it was marked in the middle with the name hateful to
Mary. It had been dropped in the lane, and found by that hapless
woman, as she was accidentally passing along, unconscious of the loss
of Charlotte, about an hour after that event had taken place, having
ventured out from her friend's house in the habit of an old Welch
peasant, by an impulse she could not then account for.
Another night detained her at Rosedale, but it was a night big with
important events; she then departed for London, and arrived there, took
an obscure lodging, and in a consistent garb to the tenement she
inhabited, she thought she might, without exciting suspicion, watch the
motions of the enemy. She did so, but it only yielded disappointment,
no place he resorted to led in the least to the discovery so earnestly
panted

for, and hope fled; to return to

Monmouthshire seemed

expedient, yet from day to day she delayed
project that had brought her hither.

it, loth to abandon the

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
One morning as she was sitting at breakfast (fbr she boarded with
the people of the house) in the parlour behind the shop, a man entered
rather abruptly, and addressing her, requested a few minutes' attention
in private, she hesitated, but he whispered something in her ear that
rendered refusal impossible, and she led the way to her own room.
"I have witnessed you," said he, "often lurking about my master's
house, and watching his steps; I humbly conceive that I am no stranger
to your motives, and the more I gaze on your features, the more I am
convinced that you are related to the young lady whom he brought from
Wales. I had a share in that transaction, God knows much against my
will; but I knew not till all was completed, why we undertook such a
very long journey, and for such a child toot yet he avows to me, when I
have humbly dared to remonstrate, that it was for the young lady's
good; heaven knows that, my mind misgives me, and I truly repent my
involuntary crime."

"That may be," said Mary, (whom his harangue had tired')
"Clandestine actions," and she heaved a sigh, "never bring peace; you

have excited my curiosity, and

I

intreat you to be brief, as to the

purpose that led you to seek me."

"Possibly," said the man, still procrastinating, "the fair young
damsel is your daughter."

"That cannot concern you,-my time is precious, and if you are
only come to teaze me with questions, I wish your immediate absence."
"Oh! if you are so indifferent," said he, "I am off; but if you had
been inclined to gratitude, or a trifling generosity for the hazard I run,
this night that's now approaching should have beheld her delivered into
your arms; but it seems I am mistaken in you, your interest in this affair
is not so great as I imagined."
"Then the truth is," said Mary, haughtily, "that for the love of gold
you have aided your employer in a vile transaction, an now for a further
sum you will betray him; in short, money is the deity you worship, and
to obtain it, you hold any sacrifice cheap."
The man seemed much agitated, his passion was rising, but he
repressed it, though the struggle was evident, and every movement of
his countenance was watched by Mary, who was more anxious than she
chose to reveal, but was fearful of imposture.

"You judge hardly, madam, he replied, "but under such
I can scarce blame you; your child, or at least her I took

circumstances

for such, is committed to the care of my wit'e, who is placed for that
purpose in a fine house not three miles hence; I remain ostensibly with
my master; but at twelve every night I visit them, and carry the
provisions and other required necessaries, and return before the dawn,
that no suspicion may be excited in our family, for the domestics know

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
not that I am a married man; and I have keys that answer our secret
purpose. It is the pleading of the innocent captive that has softened our
hearts, and we wish to restore her to her home, and those she so
plaintively laments; we will liberate her, and run the risk of imposing a
tale to exonerate us with our employer; but you will allow the hazard is
not slight, and we deserve some recompense; we may lose our
situations, and then money will be acceptable.
"Name your terms," said Mary.
"We ask but a guinea now, and ten when I have conducted you and
the child to a place of safety. I mean an inn, or any place you choose,
where you will be at liberty to guide your own actions."

Mary was astonished at the smallness of the demand, she drew
forth her purse, and immediately doubled the first stipulated sum; she
then asked how they were to proceed.

"You must meet me to night at a quuter past twelve, be not a
moment later, at the north porch of Westminster Abbey;le come
muffled up, and bring a cloak to wrap the child in, for the winds are
cold and she but delicate; she is much reduced since she came from
Rosedale, for she is continually sobbing and weeping, as if her heart
would burst."
"Has your master visited her in this confinement," said Mary.
The man replied in the negative adding, "he did not consider

prudent; and that he intended

to

send her

off

it

aboard the first

opportunity that presented itself."
The man soon took himself off, and Mary returned to the breakfast

table with very little appetite to finish her meal, and teased by the
people around her, who with a troublesome officiousness observed, that
something had disturbed her, and offered consolation without knowing
on what to ground it.
The day wore tediously away, and at eight in the evening Mary left

her lodging with the bundle she had brought with her from
Monmouthshire; she paid the debt incurred, saying, she was going to an
inn to pass the night, that she might be ready for the stage which was to
convey her toward Oxford the next morning.
The offer of the boy to carry her parcel, or the maid to sleep with
her and see her off in safety from the inn, were alike rejected; and she
quitted them, leaving a most unfavourable impression behind her, from
the visit of the morning, which evidently seemed to dictate her abrupt
departure; many were the opinions they formed of her, and all equally
le

Sarah Wilkinson spent most of her life in Westminster and operated a
circulating libraryjust around the corner. She lived down the street from the
Abbey when she wrote part of this novel.

-103-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
etroneous, so

little are we calculated to decide on the actions of

strangers,

Mary's task was dreary; she walked from place to place, and, to
elude observation, chose the most unfrequented; just as the shops were
closing, she took some refreshment

at a

pastry-cook's, and then

resumed her wanderings, which were soon rendered more intolerable
from a cold wind and drizzling rain; as the clock struck twelve she
entered St. Margaret's Church-yard, and proceeded to the appointed
spot, where she leaned against the rails for support, for she was not able
to stand: ten minutes were scarce elapsed in this dismal situation, when
the man accosted her carrying a lantern.
His punctuality pleased, and his presence revived her. "Have we
far to go," asked Mary. "Yes, I am sorry to say we have," was the
unwelcome answer, "and the road is aukward and lone, but we will
hasten through it."
Mary followed her guide through several narrow streets, next they
crossed a cornmon of no great extent, then entered a lane, the path of
which was uneven, and edged on each side by a broad ditch bordered
with trees.
Mary's courage began to fail, and she mentally asked the natural
question, whether or not she was betrayed.
Suddenly the man stopped. "What is amiss?" said the agitated
companion, "why do you not proceed? surely I hear footsteps following
us, and in such a place, and such an hour, it is dreadful."
"I hear no one, and we are at our journey's end;" and holding up
his lantern that he might descry the keyhole, he opened a wooden gate
painted of a dark colour.
They crossed a rude kind of court-yard, which took them to a large
gloomyJooking double-fronted house; he pushed the door with his
hand, and it opened. "Proceed on," said the man, "and enter the room
on the right." Mary did so, a wood fire blazed on the hearth, and by its
cheerful beams she discerned a small bed in the room, and a table laid
for one person; a candle was on it, but not lighted.
"Good night, ma'am," said the man, in a sarcastic tone, "I hope

your fatigue will make you sleep well, you have now got a snug
lodging rent free, and it is your own fault if you do not make yourself
comfortable; and as for the ten guineas, I leave them in your purse, as I
cannot at this time perform that part of the contract."

"Wretch!" said Mary, '1ell me,"-but the door closed on her; the
key grated in the lock, and abandoning herself to despair, she cast her
hapless form on the ground.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER

XVI[.

Mary passed the night in wretchedness that was indeed beyond the
power of language to describe; betrayed into the power of her enemy,
and unable to seek her child, that darling whom the actions ofher youth
had consigned to misery ill-suited to her tender years. Alas! where was
she now? possibly under the same roof with herself! She stared from
the ground; but was it so, were mother and daughter both within the
same walls, yet it availed them not! and again yielding to despair and
anguish, she resumed her former lowly position; nature was exhausted,
and sleep though unsought surprised her.
She awoke by some one bustling about the room; it was a large
coarse woman, who had re-kindled the fire, and was now setting some
breakfast things.

"Oh ma'am!" said she, "I am glad to see you awake; I did not like
to disturb you lest it should cause a fright in this strange place, as I dare
say your narves are very weakly, but I will do all I can to make you
comfortable; it was very wrong of you not to go to bed, and another
night I must see that you do; now pray lay down a bir, and I will get the
tei ready, and give you."zo
"I would wish first to see your husband, if his conscience will let
him approach me."
"My husband, indeed! come into your presence, God help your
poor head! how came that idea in it, he has been dead many years, and I
dare to say you never saw him when he was in this life."
Surely, thought Mary, she considers me a maniac. "Well, my good
woman, perhaps I mistake, but I mean the man that brought me here
last night, he told me his wife was in this dwelling, and had the care of
a young lady whom I came here to see."
"There is no young lady here, or any woman but myself, but pray
compose yourself;" the woman was not ill-natured, and seemed willing
to exert herself for the comfort of her guest, whom it was clear she
thought insane.
"You have been imposed on," observed Mary, "I am not mad."
"Oh dear no! that you're not," she replied, with an alarmed look,
"or I would have had nothing to do with you; only a little wavering and
fancifuf, a nervous infection I think your relation called it; and you will
be better off here than where you came from."
"Why, where did I come from?"

20

wilkinson's attempt to imitate an accent.
-105-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"Since you will not let me alone, but keep teasing me with
I must tell you plainly, from a private mad-house at

questions,

Hoxton.2l where you was sadly used: and you ought to be thanklul to
your relation for his kindness, in thus providing tbr you;" and she
quitted the room in some heat.
To counteract this deep scheme was now Mary's study, and she
thought it not impossible to succeed; she deported herself toward the
woman with the utmost condescension and affability, and even
compelled herself to listen to several long and tedious harangues, with
which she thought fit to favour her, as to her past life and misfortunes.
Three weeks had thus winged its courses, when Mary thought it fit
to begin her operations; all this time she had seen no one but the
woman, who called herself Hedgeland; it is true, she heard noises and

various voices

at times, of a night especially; but she remained

unmolested, and seemed (as she wished) to grow in great favour with
her attendant. She had not been deprived of her money, and drawing
forth her purse, Mary presented her with a guinea, saying, "I claim your
attention, and as for the folly of supporting me, or treating me as if I

were not

in my

I

think you too wise to persist in such an
do not blame you, you have been imposed on and
senses,

unmerited act; I
tempted by your employer, but if you will now serve me it will be in a
just cause, and benefit yourself; for according to the aid I receive from
you, such shall be my gratitude. Nay, no interruption; hear what I have
to say, and then judge for me."
Mary of Lanmere related to her every circumstance of her life, her
fears-her hopes-and expectations, and, wondrous for her, without
the least reserve, while Hedgeland gazed on her in wonder; her story
was so marvellous-so abounding in uncommon incident, that the poor
woman knew not what to think, or how to decide.
Mary saw her indecision, and acted accordingly; she knew the
power of a strong mind over one of weak intellects, and she pursued the
subject till she had completed the meditated conquest.
She ascertained beyond a doubt that Charlotte was not a fellow
captive in that lone and almost dilapidated mansion, nor had she been
seen by Hedgeland.
The man who had betrayed her hither came twice a week, on
Monday and Friday, and on the first-mentioned day his employer
accompanied him to see that all was saf'e, according to the phrase
Hedgeland put into his mouth; this was Friday, and on the next night

2l Hoxton is an area in Hackney. immediately north of the financial district of
the City of London. In the eighteenth century Hoxton was known for its
madhouses.

-106-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
their flight was determined on, as there would then remain a space to
enable them to elude pursuit ere their absence was discovered.
Hedgeland did not dare to remain behind, she stipulated to
accompany her new mistress, who, however reluctant to have such an
appendage, was forced to acquiesce.

Mary found they were in the vicinity of Chelsea, near a place
called the Willow Walk," and that they must walk to some distance
before a coach could be procured; the snow fell thick, and the night was

yet she would not delay the undertaking,
something innate whispering, that if she did it might be too late.
They had scarce proceeded to the end of the dismal lane, through
which they had to trace their steps, when they heard a man
expostulating, and some one replying in feeble accents.
otherwise inclement,

Again he spoke, "Mercy defend me!" said Hedgeland,

"it

is

Gabriel, and what can he want here."
"Oh! I die, I die," exclaimed a faint voice that seemed to indicate a
suffering female.
Every nerve in Mary's frame thrilled with honor. "She is surely
dead," said Gabriel, "I must go for assistance;" he ran past the tree
behind which the fugitives had concealed themselves, toward the house
they had quitted.
"Shocking! shocking!" ejaculated Hedgeland, "what a mischance,
all will be discovered, and we are lost."
"Be quick," said Mary, "and we may yet save ourselves." She flew
toward the inanimate form; it seemed a young girl; it was too dark to
see her face, but the size and form were that ofCharlotte's, and to leave
her was impossible, though Hedgeland kept urging the necessity of
escape before Gabriel returned.
A sigh escaped the sufferer. "She lives," said the anxious Mary;
"you try and raise her, now for one effort to save us all, and God assist
me." She flew back toward the isolated tenement, despair lent her speed
and courage,--the door was open, and she heard Gabriel's voice raised
in loud execrations as she entered the lowered room, which had so
recently been the scene of her confinement. The key was on the outside,
she sprung forward, and the object she most dreaded, in his turn
became a captive; she then returned with the speed of lightning to
Hedgeland and her charge, who was partly recovered.
They led or rather carried her to the high road. A chaise was
passing most fortunately; it proved on calling to the driver to be a
return going to the city, and they got in with hearts filled with gratitude
for this most favourable succour.

22

A small walk off Hacknev Road

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
By a turn of the road which afforded a view of the hateful house
they had flown from, they saw Gabriel groping from it with a lantern;
he had burst open the door (which Mary presumed he would do) with

difficulty, for the window had gratings; but they had a fair start of him,
and as no one saw them enter the chaise, there was no danger of
immediate pursuit; though doubtless the wretch from whom they were
speeding, would not leave a stone unturned to find them, and she
thought Gabriel would be well punished in being left to his resentment,
for she knew his ungovernable temper would not listen to reason, but,
like a torrent, drive all before it.
It was necessary to determine on some shelter, but Mary dreaded
an inn, from the publicity it afforded researchers. The people from

whom Gabriel had deluded her, were honest, civil, and obliging;
suppose she should confide in them, and reveal as much of her story as
might interest them in her cause, and bind them to secrecy; but she
could not expect either protection or seclusion, without confidence
being extended to them.
Charlotte (for her it was,) had as yet scarce spoke, and seemed in a
dangerous state, benumbed with cold, and nearly insensible.
"Who are you, ladies? where am I going? will you restore me to
my friends?" were the short sentences she uttered; and once, on hearing
Mary of Lanmere speak to Hedgeland, she started, and said: "O that
voice! ah good, benevolent stranger! for such I trust you are; your tone
reminds me of a dear friend. a mother indeed, for such she was to me."
Mary only answered with a sigh, but this observation recalled to
her mind, that it was necessary to apprise Charlotte, and that with the
most delicate caution, that she was indeed under the protection of her

lamented friend, but his could not be done in the presence of
Hedgeland, without enlightening that person too much in the affairs of
the Godolphin and Martimel family.

They were set down

in Fleet street, and having

walked some

distance for the better eluding any trace of their movement, they hired a
hackney coach to convey them to Mr. Brown's. The hour was late, the
shop was shut, but they were not retired to bed, and the knock, most

vehemently given by the driver, was instantly attended to with some
degree of amazement, as to the occasion of so late a visitor.
Mrs. Mowbrav." for bv that name was our heroine known to the
worthy people, stepped out of the coach, and lelt her companions, till

" Perhaps a reference to Amelia Opie's Adeline Mowbray: or, The Mother and
Daughter. A Tale. ( | 805). Wilkinson uses the names of several Cothic novel
characters and writers in this novel.
-108-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
she had made some explanation, and seen whether they could

be

accommodated.
She was at first received with a distant coolness, and some hint that

business was better attended to in the morning than at such
unseasonable hours. But no sooner had she informed them, that she was
lady of family and fortune, under circumstances of domestic though not
pecuniary distress, and had been deluded form them; to which she
annexed a light outline of the events attending her absence; than both
husband, wife and daughter, who was admitted to their confidence,
were eager in their offers of service; and it was settled, that Margaret
should take Charlone for the present under her immediate care, and that
night she was not to see her real protectress. Comfortable apartments at
the back part of the house were soon in readiness, to which the weary
travellers were conducted, and comfortable refreshments provided.
Charlotte most anxiously wished to see the lady who had brought
her there, but was informed she was indisposed, and could not be
disturbed that night.
"How strange!" said our young heroine, and felt rather alarmed;
"surely!" she continued, "I am fallen into good hands,"
"We have every reason to believe," replied Margaret, "that Mrs.
Mowbray is an excellent woman; and as for our own family, I can only
say, we are honest and respectable; my parents have resided here many
years, and amassed a decent property by business and industry. From us
you have nought to fear, and no one, who had evil designs, would have
brought you hither; besides, Mrs. Mowbray, as well as yourself, it
appe.us, have escaped from unjust confinement and persecution, and it
appears to me that you ought to be very thankful for her providential
interference."
"I am convinced, I am safe; your appearance and every thing
around, confirms it; forgive me, I have suffered much, and that made
me suspicious, but I am indeed grateful."
Her mind soothed, Charlotte retired to bed: she hailed this as the
first night of returning liberty, and that thought soon lulled her to calm
repose, which lasted unbroken many hours.

-L

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XIX.

While Charlotte and Hedgeland were enjoying the reviving balm of
renovating sleep, Mary's mind was actively employed; her frame was
weary to excess, yet the cares that oppressed her denied rest till she
could in part arrange her plans.
Never did she more admire or confide in a wonder-working
providence than now, or more severely censure herself for past acts. To
avoid a father's anger she had braved that of her Creator, and deviated
from the paths of ruth, and hurled on herself years of misery, disgrace,

and trouble,

of which she could not discern

the end. Gabriel

had

deceived her, and in the result deceived himself; for in a manner almost
miraculous she had recovered her lost treasure. Her first determination
was to reveal herself to that dear girl, but second thoughts made her
abandon the plan, as she would not delude her with false
representations, and she found it not time to give the true one; and the
most safe and eligible way appeared, to send Charlotte without loss of
time to Monmouthshire. But how to effect this was the grand
consideration! Hedgeland she feared to trust; she thought, during their
flight, a sort of regret for what she had done had struggled in that
woman's heart, and to appease her employer and enrich herself she

might give up her trust. Would Mr. Brown spare Margaret? no,

she

argued; it was scarce to be thought he would let a young woman of two
or three-and-twenty travel so far without protection, only a child to
accompany her there, and to return alone; yet she resolved to hazard the
question, which was done as soon as they met at a late breakfast; and,
on Mrs. Mowbray's account, in her own room; Mrs. Hedgeland,

Charlotte and Margaret, taking that repast in another apartment.
The request, as Mary foresaw, was not complied with, and she
began to fear she must abandon the so-much-to-bedesired project; her
surprise therefore kept pace with her gratitude, when, in less than an
hour, Mrs. Brown entered and proposed herself in the room of her
daughter, adding, that the offer was made by her own desire and with
her husband's entire approbation. Mary embraced her in a transport of
joy; she was indeed a most eligible protectress, humane, active, and not
much past the meridian of life; but she could never allowed herself to
suppose, that for her, a stranger would become a temporary absentee
from a home to which she seemed so much attached.
The next morning at five their journey was to take place in the
regular stage-coach; Mrs. Brown was to see her young charge safe into
the hands of Mr. Hervey, and then return with as much speed as suited
her own pleasure or convenience.

ilO-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Charlotte was delighted

at the idea of her speedy return

to

Monmouthshire, and the many individuals it contained so dear to her;
but she thought, as did all around her, it was very mysterious that Mrs.
Mowbray would not see her, even to bid farewell.
"You find from Mrs. Hedgeland," said Margaret, "that the lady in
question had but just escaped from the house to which you were on the
point of being conveyed; you are both the objects of persecution to one
individual, though you say you know him not; I daresay she does, and
has wise reasons for seclusion."
"From me, I should think, concealment is unnecessary," answered
the sighing Charlotte, "but I will follow the precepts of a dear young
friend, much more a philosopher in petticoats than myself, and cease to
grieve for what admits no remedy; assure Mrs. Mowbray for me, that I
shall ever retain a high sense of the service she rendered me, and shall
never forget that she delayed her flight, and risked her own personal
safety, to ensure minei and had I been permitted to see her, I am certain
her features would be indelibly engraven on my mind, and I should
need no artist's pencil to refresh my memory."
Mrs. Brown and her lovely charge arrived at the Crown Inn,
Landrennen: the good matron, tired with her journey, the first she had
ever taken in her life exceeding ten miles beyond the sound of the Bow
bells' and Charlotte, whose happiness superseded every thought of
fatigue, was all spirits and exultation.

She was well known at the inn, where her mysterious
disappearance caused deep regret, and where several consultations had
been held, and advertisements issued, to no consequence, in the vain
hope of her recovery. Charlotte was now overwhelmed with questions,
but she intreated silence on the subject till Mr. Hervey arrived. A
messenger was dispatched for him, the distance being about two miles
and a half; our young heroine would most willingly have gone with
him, so eager was she to see the beloved family at the Rectory, but it
was going dusk, and the paths bad from a recent thaw; and, also,
respect to Mrs. Brown withheld her from leaving that kind-hearted
friend, whose behaviour during their journey had indeed entitled her to
that name. The good rector and his wife received the intelligence with
thankful joy, and immediately set out for Landrennen, where he found
the church bells ringing merrily, in gratulation of an event so delightful
to many, and pleasing to all.
But he had scarce past over the threshold of the Crown inn, when
unlooked-for lamentations met his ears, and where he expected a house
of mirth he found one of sorrow-Charlotte was again lost, and that in
a very short time after the departure of the man who was sent to
Rosedale.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Mrs. Brown went to an upper chamber to lay down till Mr. Hervey
arrived; Charlotte attended, and having closed the bed-curtains, left her,
as

it

was proved on her being missed.

One of Mrs. Simpson's (the landlady's) daughters coming home
from spending the day with a neighbour, was told of Charlotte's return
to Landrennen, and anxious to see her fellow pupil, for she had been
educated at the White Cottage in the valley, she went (as directed) to
Mrs. Brown's chamber but she was not there nor could she since be
found, and the former person was almost in a state of distraction.
To her Mr. Hervey applied for an explanation of the events that had led
her and the dear lost one to Monmouthshire: the account she gave of
that affair only added mystery to mystery, and the conduct of Mrs.
Mowbray seemed inexplicable.
The town and adjacent villages were soon alarm. To oblige their
rector, independent of their wish to serve an amiable injured child, who
seemed the sport of some malicious fiend, made every one alert in the
search, and every horse and mule was soon in requisition.
But poor Charlotte seemed to have been borne through the air by a
sprite, or conveyed through the bowels of the earth as no trace could be

found

of her: no shriek had been heard, nor had the least bustle

disturbed the tranquillity of the inn: once, and that only a suspicion,
glanced on Mrs. Brown, but common sense soon chased it away; it was
not necessary for her to come to Monmouthshire and create an alarm, if
she meant to play Mrs. Mowbray false; besides, her respectability in

life vouched for her truth.
As Mrs. Godolphin had formerly taken Charlotte under her
protection, Mr. Hervey thought it a duty incumbent on him to wait on
that lady, and inform her of the recent events concerning her beloved
protdgde; and, at an early hour, as was suitable to the occasion, he
repaired to Lanmere Abbey, and was instantly admitted to the presence
of its mistress, whom he found in her sable weeds, her husband having
been interred three days since at Landrennen, (where his ancestors'
remains had reposed for time immemorial), after laying in state a week,
according to family usage.
On the good rector's entering the saloon, she exclaimed , "Oh! my
dear sir, where, where is my Charlotte, you need not fear to surprise
me, I know she is returned, I heard the pleasing intelligence from one
of my servants who past through Landrennen last night."
"I was in hopes the intelligence would not have reached you,
madam."

"Why! is it a delusion? you seem labouring with some afflicting
intelligence."

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"I am, indeed; but I will not keep you in suspense, for I think that
is more dreadful than the reality." Mr. Hervey then related what had
passed at the Crown Inn.

He expected to find Mrs. Godolphin troubled with the account, but
she was agonized, and clasped her hands together in despair. It was
some minutes ere she could speak; when she did, she exclaimed, "I
guess the author of this outrage; but r/ris Mrs. Mowbray, she can
explain. Oh, that I could fly to her-but these aged limbs would not
even bear me in a coach-and-six such ajourney, unused as I have been
for years to travelling; neither could I be guilty of the indecorum of

leaving the Abbey during my widowhood; then, alas!

it is mine

no

longer."

"It struck me as it does you, madam," observed Mr. Hervey, "that
it is proper some one should see Mrs. Mowbray, who is interested for
the dear child, and I propose to myself a double task, with your
approbation; Mr. Williams, the young curate of Landrennen, as the
rector is at present residing at this living, will do my duty the only
Sunday I am absent from my flock;-I will escort Mrs. Brown to
London, and have an interview with her lodger."
Mrs. Godolphin was pleased with the project, and insisted on being
a party concerned in the travelling expenses, and urged the worthy man
to use expedition.
"Mrs. Brown received the offer of Mr. Hervey's company with
great satisfaction; she passed a whole day at the rectory, and the next
they spent at Landrennen.

At

every stage toward London Mr. Hervey made enquiries

respecting Charlotte, but they proved of no avail, and they arrived
without either accident or uncommon incident, at Mr. Brown's. It was
night when they arrived, and Mrs. Mowbray no sooner heard the voice
of his wife in the passage, than she rushed forward to welcome her
return; but at the sight of Mr. Hervey she uttered an exclamation, and
was hastening away. "Merciful heaven!" said he, "that voice-that
fbrm-it must be Mrs. Stockley;" he rushed toward her, and just in time
to catch her fainting form in his arms.
The face was not Mrs. Stockley's but it might be /rer's
undisguised; the cancer might be all a pretext; the more he gazed, the
more he thought the features familiar to him; a thousand confused
unconnected ideas rushed on his mind, and his trembling limbs could
scarce support him and his additional burthen.
It was so long before the afflicted fair one recovered, that they
began to entertain serious apprehensions for her safety; at length she
opened her eyes, that still beamed with loveliness: there was in them
(now they were both open and visible to view, which was not the case

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
with them at the White Cottage), a peculiar kind of expression; she saw

Mr. Hervey's fixed attention, and she had a too quick discernment not
to perceive its effect, and knew not whether to mourn or rejoice.
"I am discovered," said she, extending her hand: he pressed it
respectfully to his lips, as he stammered out "Mary of Lanmere,
Godolphin's heiress."
"l wa\ but can scarce say now what I am, Ah, dear Mrs. Brown,
why those tears, and why is this respectable man here? Oh relieve my
fears, where is the sweet girl you took hence?"
Mrs. Brown, unable to speak, rushed from the room, and Mr.
Hervey had the painful task of unfolding to the mother, for as such she
stood now confessed, the again mysterious loss of Charlotte.
The fortitude of mind, the command of herself which had hitherto
attended Mary (with some few exceptions) in her wanderings and
troubles, now forsook her; her maternal feelings were powerful, and
such were their effects, that they were obliged to have recourse to
medical aid.
She was better the next morning, but too weak to leave her bed;
and such was the impatience of herself to have a conference, that he
was admitted to the invalid's chamber. where she received him
supported by pillows.
From her he received an ample explanation of every circumstance
particular in its event, from her brother's death to the present hour, and
confirmed the suspicion of Mrs. Godolphin, by stating in reality the
person she described to be the aggressor in the first instance, and, no
doubt, equally so in the second.
"He is a villain," said Mr. Hervey, "yet excuse me speaking with

freedom as your pastor, for such I am proud to call myself, and
according to my conscience as a Christian.-But you have been a great
aggressor; had you not have erred, he would not have committed these
base acts: but it is useless to retrace ground; the veil you have thrown

over several people's senses must now be removed, and with
precipitation."

"I

I

have

would not burthen my mind," said the rector, "with

such

must intreat you," said Mary, "not to betray a word

revealed to you, at least for the present."

"I

accumulated secrecy, for all the treasures of the east; could I behold the
excellent lady your mother---could I hear her, as I did the other day,
assert that death's shafts had left her an isolated being-that sorrow had
by its repeated pressure bowed her more down than age and infirmities,
and continue silent on a subject that she had yet a daughter, yet a grandchild, to soothe the winter of her days!"

-ll4

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"I

can never behold her, never have courage to let my story be

made public; but what mean you by the term, isolated."

"As a widow, and supposing herself childless; the word is not

misapplied."

Mary seemed to suffer acutely, but recovering, she said, "Thank

I had his blessing ere he died; ah! Mr. Hervey, I have yet that
trying interview to explain to you, but leave me now, in the evening I
heaven

will see you again, and I entreat you to employ the intervening time, in
considering what is best to be done in the present most unhappy state of
affairs. My Charlotte! there is the pang that rends my mother's bosom;
ill-judging woman, why did I send her from me?"

-l15-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XX.

On being apprised of her father's illness, which was of such a
nature that every one around him foresaw, that it must end in his
dissolution, nature being exhausted, she determined to see him, and
endeavour to avert his curse, and procure his blessing on her ill-fated
marriage, for the sake ofher lovely offspring.
Every corner of the Abbey was so well known to her, that she
found no difficulty in entering unseen, and making her way to the
chamber of the venerable invalid, she drest herself in such a manner, as
would impose on the timid or credulous the belief of a supernatural
spirit; and she chose the most silent hour of the night for her purpose,
for it was impossible Mary could perform any act, without connecting
with it the marvellous and mysterious. All was silent within the walls,
and she entered the bed-room by means of a private door, that went

with a spring beneath an arch, the contrivance of one of her ancestors,
but for what purpose was not recorded; though this secret way was only
known to the principals of Lanmere, by whom it was tenaciously kept,
in case ofany emergency.
Mr. Godolphin slept; his daughter in an agony of grief, tenor, and
indescribable sensations, knelt by his bedside. His slumbers were not
quiet, he uttered short sentences, intermixed with heavy sighs, and gave
many indications his sleep would not last long and she awaited his
awakening in the most anxious suspense; the entrance of Charlotte
aroused and alarmed her, and though truly sorry to affright the muchloved girl, she was obliged to trust to her spectre-like appearance, and a
demeanour suited to it; to escape without detection.
The loss of Charlotte followed, and to seek her was the mother's
firm resolve; one night only intervened between it and the intended
journey, and to see her father was indispensable. She succeeded, and
impressed by her flowing draperies, and his mind weakened by illness,
he imbibed the idea she was a supernatural being, sent from another

world, on a mission; a belief that in full health and understanding,

he

would have scoffed at.

Mary perceiving her advantage, pursued it; and as a secondary
character gave him the history of herself and Charlotte, but imposed on
him secrecy for the present, till the latter should be restored to safe
protection.
He was all wonder and amazement; but what seemed to impress

him with the most joy, was that,

if

the information was true,

his

detested nephew would not enjoy the estates, or be entitled to change
his name to that of Godolphin. "I could" said he, "then in peace quit
this world, and in the hopes to join my murdered Albert in a better-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Never did
suspicions

I before breathe my suspicions, for I had nothing but
to work on, but they have long rankled on my mind; his

must have been the hand that administered the deathdealing potion; no
one else was interested in the death of that excellent youth-but my
daughter, she did not do it; she fondly loved her brother, and she
idolized Martimel, and her portion was most ample; it was my vile
hard-heartedness that drove her to destruction; but Alderton was the
insidious tongue that urged mg 6n.-fe6 late I perceived my error, and
his sordid views; but if you are a ministering spirit of peace, and say

my child still lives, and Charlotte is the legitimate offspring of her
Martimel, I bless them both;" and here he made on behalf a most
fervent prayer and ejaculation to heaven, "and may her errors be visited
on my head, not hers; for I consider myself as the primary author of
them."
Mary was almost overpowered with the scene, she pressed his
hands to her lips and then to her heart, and hastily rising from her knees

rushed from the room, and left the Abbey without detection. A
faintness stole over the invalid which terminated in sleep, and he did
not awake for several hours; when he did, as soon as he had collected
his scattered thoughts, they returned to the transactions of the past
night:-was it a dream? no, he still seemed to feel the pressure of
affection, and he came to a conclusion, that it was no supernatural
guest, but a living one, and his own child; he wished he had pressed the
question.
He felt so grounded in this belief, that he took prompt measures; he

drew up a paper,

in which he declared his opinion, that Mary of

Lanmere, his heiress, according to the title-deeds of the estate, was stili
in existence, and had offspring; and his nephew Alderton was to wait
six months to see if they made their claims; if not in that time, he was
then free to take possession; this paper, properly witnessed, and attested
to as his hand at the time, was delivered to his executrix Mrs.
Godolphin, to be opened the day after his decease.
This event took place in less than a week after this last direction,
and Mrs. Godolphin's surprise exceeds cornmon language to describe;
if her deceased husband was in possession of facts concerning Mary to
warTant such an injunction, it seemed a refinement on cruelty to
withhold them from her; and yet surely he would not have acted in such
an important affair on light grounds: she recollected Charlotte's terror

on the night she sent her to Mrs. Godolphin's chamber, and

her

affirmation of a female form. Surely there was some foundation for that
dear girl's affright; her ideas reverted to the mystery that annexed itself
to that amiable child--+he likeness herself and husband had repeatedly
traced to their own lamented Mary. Surely her own protdgde must be
-

rt'l

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
the offspring alluded to; sincerely did she wish it might so prove; she
hoped, doubted, and wept in anguish, when she remembered that the
interesting being was conveyed from her she knew not whither; and on
her bended knees she entreated heaven to restore her safe to her

maternal arms. "If she is indeed my own descendant," said the
widowed matron, "how invaluable a treasure;-and if not, even as

Charlotte Bennett, she is dear to my heart."
Mr. Alderton, on being informed of his uncle's death, hastened to
Lanmere Abbey with indecent speed; and had scarce placed his foot in
the hall of the venerable pile, when every look and act seemed to
impress the pleasing consciousness of being master. "I will do this, I
will alter that," were grating expressions in the ears of the aged
domestics; and the venerable grey-headed steward took the freedom to
remind him, that he understood by his late master's will, Mrs.
Godolphin was to reside in the Abbey if she chose for the ensuing year,
and he was sure her local attachments were too strong, to relish any
modern innovations.

Mr. Alderton bit his lips, but did not deign to reply.
The first day he felt too much fatigue to enter on business, but the
next he began to talk about the will. "We will leave that affair, if you
please," said she, mildly, "till the funeral is over, concerning which I
have separate and detached directions to follow." Mr. Alderton
acquiesced, but followed with a rude remark, "that he did not see any
occasion for such delicacy."
Mrs. Godolphin acted with much caution, as she foresaw a heavy
storm of passion and painful altercation would follow the delivery of
the deceased's six month's injunction; she was aware, that he would
have no forbearance either towards her age or sex, and she wished to be
spared the ebullitions of his rage and disappointment, and to preserve
the mansion in peace and decorum, while it contained the remains of its
late owner.

And she acted wisely, fbr on declaring the injunction to Mr.
Alderton, (when she could no longer procrastinate,) his conduct was
more like an inmate of an incurable ward at Bethlem Hospital,2a than
any other human comparison we can makel and had it not been for the
presence of witnesses, to whom Mrs. Godolphin made the contents
previously known, he would have torn it to atoms as a forgery.
He now said, "it was a conspiracy against him, and that he should
have recourse to the law to obtain iustice."
2a

Bethlem Royal Hospital ofLondon, which has been variously known as St
Mary Bethlehem, Bethlem Hospital, Bethlehem Hospital and Bedlam, is the
world's oldest psychiatric hospital. The wordBedlamhas long been used for
lunatic asylums in general.

-l18-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
To this the afflicted widow answered, "he was at liberty to act as
he thought most fitting to his own interest, that she had placed the will
and codicils in safe custody till the time appointed, but should of course
bow with due submission to any legal mandate she should receive for
its previous production; that she was alike innocent and ignorant ofany
conspiracy against him, nor was she aware of her husband's reasons for
the injunction." It would be needless to dwell on the remainder of the
altercation; the lady remained firm to her trust; and the gentleman,
though daily giving orders to his servants to prepare for London, as
constantly counl.ermanded them, and remained at Lanmere Abbey.
This was the substance of the communication given and received,
between Mary of Lanmere and Mr. Hervey; when he seriously advised
her to return with him to Monmouthshire, and urged her again as to her
mother.
Tears filled her eyes, as she said

"I will

return with you to

Rosedale, and once more seek an asylum at the White Cottage in the
valley; yes, I will go while I have strength for the journey, for I feel that

will not be long; I have sacrificed myself to a romantic feeling, and
absurd notions of revenge; I would wish to see my mother, but that
requires much preparation; in my present state of mind I could not

support myself in her presence, she has so much to forgive; I would
wish her to see and bless my child, and be conscious that she was in a
fair train to possess the noble fortunes she is by birth entitled to; and
then, my good sir, this world and me could freely part; that effected, I
have no desire for existence; and the tomb, to me, would be a haven of
rest."
"We are not to mark the time of our own exit," replied the Rector;
"nor to cherish despondency; but I will take you at your word, and
convey you to Monmouthshire with your attendant, for I suppose we
must take Hedgeland with us, she will be useful to you, as your health
is so impaired." Mary answered in the affirmative, and orders were
given to prepare accordingly.
Mr. Hervey did not cease his enquiries after Charlotte, but no
success attended them, nor was the suspected person in London.

-l19-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXI.
Presents from London are in high esteem at Rosedale, the good
Rector determining the dear family at home should not complain of his
negligence in that respect, walked out the day before the one fixed for
their departure, to select what he thought would be most choice and
acceptable, fiom the West-end of the town.
As he proceeded along Piccadilly, "Hervey! and in London, by all
that's wonderful!" met his ear: he turned round, and beheld Sir Everard
Martimel, who extended his hand toward him, repeating his last words

"in Londonl why

I

should as soon have thought of meeting the old

venerable Abbey of Lanmere, as the Pastor of Rosedale."
This remark, so a-propos to circumstances, fetched the colour into
Mr. Hervey's cheeks, as he replied with forced gaiety, "I am not
Lanmere Abbey, but weighty affairs relative to that venerable pile have
brought me to the metropolis."
"News flies fast," observed the Baronet, "for I have already heard
that there is some litigation between the Dowager and Alderton."
"Have you heard, Sir Everard, the cause of that litigation?"

"I have not, nor do I feel much interest now in the Godolphins;
there was a time, as you know, Hervey, when I did; wont you call on
me before you leave town,-tGmorrow morning for instance, I
breakfast at nine, adieu;" and away went the Baronet before Mr.
Hervey could reply, but he soon formed a resolution.

He concealed from Mary, on his return, that he had met the
Baronet, fearful of her opposition to his going, but he told her that he
had met with an old friend, and it would oblige him to delay their
journey a day longer; this was cheerfully agreed to, and at nine next
morning, he was punctual to the Baronet's appointment, fbr such was
the weight on his mind, and his wish to enter on an explanation; but
through embarrassment how to commence, he did little honour to the
plentiful repast before him, being often lost in thought.
Sir Everard, on the contrary, was all life and gaiety, and rallied the
Rector on having left his good humour at Rosedale.
Mr. Hervey made no reply, and the Baronet continued, "I verily
believe, friend, thal thee hast turned apostate from the cloth, and
become one of the faithful,-a very broad -brim; but I would wish the
spirit to move thee to speak, or else, as there is no one here but
ourselves, the meeting will be a silent one: I must try my powers, and
strike out some subiect that will compel an answer."
"What has become of your Emma's companion, Charlotte Bennett,
I believe Mrs. Codolphin has taken her into protection; am I not right? I
feel interested to an uncommon desree about her."

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"Interested, interested," said the Rector, pacing the room.
"Hervey, this is intolerable; surely you are under the influence of
derangement, or in great trouble; if the latter, use me as a friend, and
tax me to my utmost ability, you will find me sincere."
"I am not deranged, nor am I personally in any trouble; 'tis for you

I feel."
The astonished Baronet now became convinced. that the Pastor of
Rosedale was actually insane; and assuming a very serious tone, he
said, "may I intreat the favour of knowing what brought you to
London?"
"I do not feel equal to an explanation at this time, however I might
be so this morning previous to coming here; I could not have supposed

my nerves so very weak;

to-morrow

I

depart

for

home,

and

immediately on arriving there, I will in writing copiously explain what
you seek to know, Sir Everard."
"Be it so then, valued friend of my youth; but here is a fresh supply
of warm coffee brought in, let me intreat you to resume your seat, and
finish your breakfast."-Mr. Hervey obeyed.
"I hope soon to see you at Martimel Castle," said the Baronet, "and
to bring a fair lady to welcome my friends, to its once famed but too
long neglected hospitality; for I tell you, in confidence, every thing is in
a fair train for my marriage with the Lady Elizabeth Darcy, the Earl of
Bellaston's widowed daughter."
The cup dropt from Mr. Hervey's hands, and dashed to pieces on
the hearth. "God in mercy forbid," said he. "Oh! Sir Everard, do you
remember the mysterious form in the turret of the Castle, and the loss
of the blue and silver bag."
Martimel stood aghast, it was some minutes ere he could articulate,
"Surely, Hervey, whatever was or is the plot against me, you would
never stoop to lend a hand to it."
"I give you my word, Sir Everard, I knew not of the transaction till
within these few days; and knowing it and other important events, I
hold it my duty not to bury them in my bosom; proceed not in this new
alliance, I beseech you; I will write fully as I promised, you will then
know how to act."

"Tell me, I intreat you," said the Baronet, "for uncertainty

is

torture; does Mary of Lanmere yet fill a space in this habitable globe?"
"Lady Martimel is indeed in existence," replied Mr. Hervey, "and
it is almost needless for me to add, that she was the spectre of the
turret."
"Cruel obdurate woman," said the Baronet: "I own I was at one

time cold and unfeeling to her, but she might have renewed her
influence by proper and judicious conduct; instead of that, she has

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
hurled me into crime: happy for Lady Cecilia she is no more; but my
poor Ellinor, what is she?"
"As a girl," replied Mr. Hervey, "the difficulty is not so great as
with a boy, and ample provision may be made for her; one single error
was the ruin of your hapless wife, and when any individual embarks in
a crime, can they see where it will end? for one bad step is in general
the parent of many thus it was with Godolphin's heiress, she entangled
herself in a labyrinth ofdifficulties, from which she had not the courage
to complete an extrication, by the avowal of the truth; and I believe,
was not for a powerful motive that has lately arisen in her bosom, and a
sense

of the injustice of consigning a lovely, well-borne, and truly

amiable child to obscurity, she would be content to live and die in the
humble station to which she consigned herself; even now she shrinks
from the task to which I urge her, and implores my secrecy, but that

must not be; she knows not of this interview, nor our meeting; I
intended to visit you on arriving at Rosedale, but our accidental
meeting has hurried me into this partial explanation."
"Plead not fbr her," said the Baronet; "but ii as your words seem
to intimate, there is an issue of our inauspicious marriage, I am willing
this very hour to clasp it to my bosom, and extend my paternal

protection; especially if the fbrebodings of my heart is right, that I am
father to that sweet girl, whom I ever beheld at Rosedale with partial
f'avour."

"All-powerful instinct

of

nature be praised!

it is the same,

Charlotte is your child, and Mrs Stockley, the proud mistress of White
Cottage in the valley, was the concealed mother. Oh! Sir Everard, think
what the feelings of Mary must have been when her wants, under the
character of Agnes Bennett, were relieved by Lady Cecilia."
"Again I intreat you, Hervey," said the Baronet, "not to use any
endeavour to soften my heart toward the bane of my peace; bring me
my child, and then I will bless thee. I suppose her mother can have no
objection to resign her to me. I do not mean to be harsh, I will respect
her maternal feelings, and allow her daughter to pay her frequent visits,
if her place of residence admits of it."
Mr. Hervey could now no longer delay the dread intelligence that
Charlotte was lost.

The Baronet was agonized, and Mr. Hervey was pleased to

perceive, that he felt indeed as a father ought to feel, at the same time
that he pitied his mental sufferings. The Rector now found it necessary
to repeat the double outrage Charlotte had endured, and Lady
Martimel's conduct on that occasion. under the character of Mrs.
Mowbray.

-t72

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Sir Everard expressed his admiration of Mary in that respect, and
added, with a sigh, "had the connubial feelings of my wife been as
strong as her maternal cares, we might both have been happy; though
indeed I was very guilty, and cannot exculpate myself. That villain
Alderton has, I dare venture to say, a suspicion of the truth, if not an
absolute proof of the existence of his cousin and her child; but he shall
feel vengeance when he little expects to meet it; yes, Hervey, from this
arm!"
Before the gentlemen separated,

it was resolved, that the Baronet
should take such measures in respect of Charlotte as Mr. Scran should
advise, and Mr. Hervey was to proceed with the invalid to
Monmouthshire, without any further delay.
Mr. Hervey found Lady Martimel seriously altered for the worse
since the preceding night, and he began to coincide in her own opinion,
that if the journey was longer delayed she would not have strength to
support it, for her feelings relative to her own situation, and the loss of
Charlotte, overpowered her frame.
Mr. Hervey, with the view of quieting the agitated mind of the
unfortunate lady, imparted to her cautiously the meeting between him
and the Baronet, without concealing or palliating any circumstance.
"For his sentiments towards me I care not," she replied, "I
disregard his hate, and I wish not for his love; he has heaped injuries
and woes enough on my unhappy head, it is butjust he should have hrs
share;l see you are ready to blame me, but I intreat nointerruption, I
wish I was as good and as forgiving a Christian as you would have me;
perhaps that change may yet arrive, for your advice and precepts have
in this short time done much good. But to tell me that Sir Everard feels
a paternal love for my Charlotte is a healing balm to my wounded
heart; and may heaven in mercy bless his endeavours to restore her to
my arms. Surely that wretch, that unprincipled Alderton, will not dare
to destroy my sweet blossom; but who knows to what lengths he may
proceed: he once had the temerity to ask my hand, and from the hour I
firmly denied the required boon, and blasted his interested views, I had
his deadly hate! nor do I doubt, for he is very subtle, that he discovered
in Mrs. Stockley, of the White Cottage, his cousin Mary Godolphin;2s
(what a blow to his hopes and expectations!) since then, I presume, a
25

Mary Godolphin was the pseudonym for Lucy Aikin (1781 - 1864), daughter
of John Aikin and niece of Anna Letitia Barbauld, born at Warrington,
England, had some repute as a historical writer. After producing various books
tbr the young under the pseudonym including a poem, Epistles on Women, and,
a novel, Lorimer ( I 8 I 4), she published in I 8 I 8 her M emoirs of the Court of
Queen Elizabetft, which passed through several editions. Miss Aikin died at
Hampstead, England, where she had lived for forty years.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
spy has watched my every action; and if he was not before certain, the
injunction my dear father left his stamped conviction of the truth; nor
should I now be safe, but for your well-timed protection."
Fatigued with talking, and her sensibility affected by many scenes

to mind, she had a return of the
of late oppressed her on any emotion, and their
duration was so long and violent, as to prove very injurious and
which the conversation brought
hysterics, which had

exhausting in her weak state.

Lady Martimel (as

it is now expedient to

term her), felt

an

additional depression of spirits, an indescribable presentiment of some
fatal event, whenever she thought of Monmouthshire, and especially
the antique walls of the venerable Abbey,-sweet scenes of infancy
now embittered to the thought, but she had promised Mr. Hervey, and
she knew he was impatient to return to his family and parishioners, and
she urged no further delay; and having taken a suitable leave of the
worthy family where she resided, and promised to acquaint them with
the fate of Charlotte, for whom they f'elt the most lively concern, she
entered the chaise, and accompanied by the good divine, and attended
by Hedgeland, commenced her dreaded journey. They were obliged to
proceed by very short stages, and a second Sunday's absence from
Rosedale passed over the head of the anxious Mr. Hervey; he had
previously wrote to his amiable partner, to prepare Mrs. Mathews for
the reception of Lady Martimel, according to her wish; and she was
reinstated in her old apartments, which were now fitted up, by the

orders

of the rector, with many additional

comforts and even

elegancies.

Mary shook her head significantly; "I had no desire to be received
as any other than the humble Mrs. Stockley, or her successor Mrs.
Mowbray; these things become not my fallen state."
"You, my dear lady," replied Mr. Hervey, "have dealt too long in
the mysterious, to choose the plain paths of truth and reality; they may
seem thorny at first, but in the end, (to speak in allegory) they lead to
bowers of bliss. You are lady Martimel, and as such must be regarded; I
hope you will now use every endeavour to calm and fortify your mind,
to meet your mother, and mine shall be the arduous task to prepare
her."
"I must intreat you not to be precipitate," said the trembling Mary,
"you must give me time."
"I will act with proper caution" was the reply, "but your safety, and
many other important affairs connected with you., do not favour
procrastination."

l1A

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXII.

Mr. Alderton, the nephew of the late Mr. Godolphin, was from his
very childhood self-willed, arrogant, cunning, and ambitious, never
content with what he had in possession, but craving for more; self, and
self-indulgence, was with him the ruling principle, and the guiding star
of every action. His mother, proud, vain, and haughty, and considering
her son as a non-parcil of excellence, was early left a widow; his tutors,
selected by her, were parasites, and thus young Alderton was left
without any judicious controul over his mind and actions, and thence it
is not a fact to create surprise, that in early life he became a libertine,
and soon impaired a very ample estate which descended to him in a
very flourishing improved state from a father whose name he was not
worthy to bear.
It has been previously observed, that Lanmere Abbey, and other of
the Godolphin estates, were, in failure of the male issue in the lineal
descent, equally inheritable by the female, in the same manner and
under the same regulation as the crown of England, from which this
was an original grant.
Mr. Godolphin, the only brother of Mrs. Alderton, did not marry
very soon in life, and then for some years ensuing he was childless.
This raised his sister's hopes that her darling son would become a
Godolphin, for the name was to be taken with the estates: very
imprudently she made this her frequent topic to the child, and in such
terms, as he soon began to think them certainly his own, but in his tenth
year Albert Godolphin was born, and next the lovely Mary. In early
years, though restored gradually by care and good management as to
exercise and diet, they had both very delicate health, and Mrs. Alderton
pleased herself and son by affirming that it was impossible these
barriers to her sordid views should arrive at maturity. Often were these
unnatural hopes raised and as often disappointed. Some important
affairs called her and her son from England for the long space of three
years; on their return her brother and his family were in London on
purpose to meet and congratulate them on their safe arrival, and the
prosperity that had attended the cause oftheir absence.
Mrs. Alderton sickened at the sight of the really elegant Albert and
his interesting sister, and she could scarce keep up the seeming of
affection.
"You must perceive, my dear sister," remarked Mr. Godolphin,
"what a pleasing alteration has taken place in your nephew and niece,
to glad the anxious hearts of their parents; and I know you fondly
participate in our feelings; my son is really grown robust, and as for

-t2s

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Mary, she has actually been toasted as the rose of Lanmere and

the

flower ofLandrennen."
Mrs. Alderton now thought fit to have recourse to mancuvres, and
by her advice her son proposed for Mary, who was yet scuce sixteen,
but was firmly rejected both by father and daughter as too many glaring

acts of his nephew's unprincipled conduct had reached Mr.

Godolphin's ears, and hurt both his pride and good sense; and Mary
had not a heart to bestow; it was already a truant from her then innocent
artless bosom, and if it had been in her own safe custody, she would not

have bestowed it on her cousin. But young Alderton could not brook
the refusal, though couched in gentle terms, and it ever after rankled
like a thorn in his malicious heart.
His next attempt to repair to the sacred shrine of matrimony
increased the smart, and added fuel to the fire of revenge that had

against the guileless victims of his fancied
wrongs. The lady he selected was of noble family, pleasing person, and
considerable fbrtune; had she not been endowed with the latter, there
would have existed no charms to attract young Alderton beyond
common gallantry; how galling, then, to be informed by the earl her
father, that her fair hand was designed for Albert of Lanmere, that a
lively affection subsisted between the parties, but the ceremony (on
account of their youth) was delayed till the bridegroom should have
celebrated his twenty-fist birthday, when the necessary arrangements

kindled

in his bosom

would commence.
Alderton then repaired to his mother, who was at Bristol for the
benefit of her health, to impart his second disappointment, and she had
the wickedness, for such conduct admits not of a gentler term, to join

him in execrations against Albert and Mary, as the bane of his
prosperity. Ill, and almost in a hopeless state, this unworthy matron
must still be worldly-minded, and step further into error, instead of
repentance.

She directed her son's attention toward a Mrs. Crawford, a rich
widow, yet young, and her fortune at her own disposal; she had
apartments in the same house with Mrs. Alderton, and had visited that
lady, who from interested views, in case of her hopeful ofTspring's
failure in his Monmouthshire visit, had given her the most flattering
reception, and urged a repetition of her kindness in passing an hour or
two with an invalid. But, thus, she spoke of Mrs. Crawford to her son;

"in person she is aukwardly tall, her face plain, and her eyes, though

a

fine azure, lack ofexpression; she has been brought up by an old doting

grandmother,

who thought, I

suppose,

her darling

sufficiently

accomplished when she could read, write, and ornament the parlours

with embroidery and carpet work; but as to her mind,
-t26

-

it

has

no

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
A rich old bachelor fell in love with her. to use her own
words, heaven only knows for what, except her simplicity; he lived but
three years after their marriage, and to show his discretion, he left her
uncontrouled mistress of his posthumous property: though she is not
handsome her money is, and will daily become a more necessary
ingredient."
"But such an incumbrance to drag about with one," replied her son.
"I believe her habits," said this accommodating mother, "are very
domestic, and there will be no necessity for having her tied to your
elbow; and, as an incumbrance, it will clear off others of a more
pressing and troublesome nature; Edward is constantly teasing for the
interest, and in his last letters threatens to wait but a short time longer;
and if he is resolute, ruin, and a disgraceful exposure, must ensue."
Mr. Alderton commenced a suitor on the most ardent terms to the
fair widow, declaring his life or death were in her hands, for affection
like his could only end with existence, nor could he survive the total
extinction of his hopes. But she was not inexorable: he talked of his
estates (but not of his debts and mortgages,) and connexions, and she
allowed they were equal to any expectations she could rationally form
as to her second nuptials. His person was good and his countenance
imposing, and he rendered himself at this time agreeable to her, by
assuming the most amiable and insinuating manners, and conducting
cultivation.

himself

in a

mode that might have deceived

a

woman

of

more

penetration than this destined victim ofdeceit possessed.
To finish Mrs. Alderton's sketch we will give a brighter cast to
Mrs. C's character: she possessed an affectionate heart and a guileless
mind; she never said what she did not mean, nor give a promise which
she did not make a point of fulfilling, and judging of other people's
sincerity by her own, gave implicit belief to the professions made her:
she was not calculated to shine in the routine of gay life as a modern
fine lady, but with a partner who loved and attended her, would have
been capable of improvement, for she was not deficient of intellect but
of information, and would have done honour to the characters of wife
and mother.

Mrs. Alderton was not destined to leave Bristol till her lifeless
form was conveyed in a hearse with sable trappings, though she
struggled against the tyrant death for many months; and when all
around her foresaw the melancholy event, she would not hear of her
dissolution, nor prepare for it, and cherished a false hope to the last
awful hour, till speech had failed, and it was then too late.
The conduct of Mrs. Crawford was such during this long period of
affliction as ought to have moved the heart of Mrs. Alderton in her
favour, and averted the doom that hung over her head, by a marriage
-t27

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
with a man who literally held her in contempt; but her virtues had no
such effect, and the marriage took place exactly one month before the
decease of her mother-in-law.

Mr. Godolphin was pleased with his nephew's marriage, and it had
the effect of reinstating him in his favour, which he had almost entirely
forfeited, and he made him many elegant presents on the occasion.
The fatal and mysterious end of Albert was a severe blow to the
surviving parents, and on this occasion Alderton acted in the most
endearing, soothing manner, and was admitted to the confidence of his
uncle, whom he artfully urged to act as he did by the hapless Mary, for
he did not, for many secret reasons, wish the alliance between her and
Sir Everard Martimel, or in fact for her to marry at all; he knew the
Baronet had won her affections, and he hoped by opposition, her
conduct would be such as would operate to his advantage,

Desperation drove Mary into romantic acts

of fblly, and

her

supposed death left him the heir apparent of Mr. Godolphin. The
rumours of her private marriage reached his ears, but it met no credit,
and Mrs. Alderton was overwhelmed with the ebullitions of his rage,
for observing that it was possible the heiress of Godolphin might only
have withdrawn for a time till she could avert a father's anger and
avoid his curse, if she was in reality the bride of Martimel, but the lapse
of time, without any re-appearance of Mary, seemed to confirm her
suicide, and made him perfectly at ease in that respect: but he had still a

canker-worm

to

annoy him, he had waded through crime for

possession, and it was yet at a distance; and to have recourse to the
same means to remove his uncle as he had used to his cousin, was too

dangerous

a

step,

for

suspicion being awakened, detection might

follow.

Mr. Godolphin soon perceived that he had lived too long to please
his nephew, and was regarded as an incumbrance on his own hands;
this served to add moroseness to a soured temper, to give him an ill
opinion of the human race, and bend him toward misanthropy; he
became suspicious of his the f'atal truth, and quite estranged himself
from Alderton.
The wife of this unprincipled man too soon discovered the motive
for which she had been wooed and won, and that a female, whom he
really loved, was kept in a handsome style at a cottage erected in the
Italian mode, near Richmond.
Her grandmother, who was her guardian on the death of her own
parents ere she attained her second year, had in fact reared her with
over indulgence, and her first husband was truly affectionate, and
anticipated every wish she could possibly form; she was therefore illprepared to put up with Mr. Alderton's treatment; and a fatal discovery
-128-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
she made, that his conscience was stained with a deadly crime,
completed her woes: but grief does not kill at once, for many years she
was a declining victim, and then welcomed death as a sweet repose
from corrosive care; leaving behind a daughter, not the counterpart of
herself, but the image of her father in person and mind, and of course a
great favourite.
The appearance of Charlotte at Lanmere Abbey, and the mystery
he discovered to belong to her, roused his suspicions; her features
alarmed him, and from that time he was indefatigable in watching her
motions and Mrs. Stockley's, and to his confusion he discovered that
latter to be his cousin Mary; nor could there be but one opinion in his
mind respecting the protdgde of Mrs. Godolphin, and he cursed his fate.
But he did not sit down content with reviling, and determined to
use every effort to remove both mother and daughter: he superintended
himself, in disguise, the removal of Charlotte, but dropped unperceived
in the bustle a pocket handkerchief, on which his name was marked in
full length; he soon discovered by Mary's conduct in watching about
his house that she suspected him, but wondered what clue could have
led her to do so; and she was also made his captive. Charlotte till some
time after this remained in the country; but to make one trouble serve,
he resolved to confine her in the same house with her mother, but not to
have access to each other; and his vile confederates readily undertook
to serve him, with the exception of Hedgeland, who shrunk from the
task when she discovered that her charge was no maniac, but an injured
woman.

The first intelligence he received of the failure of his vile scheme
to immure them for life was at Landrennen, for Geoffrey's letter had
not reached him, business having brought him to that town just as the
bells struck up to announce the safe arrival of Charlotte at the Crown
Inn.

Distraction and desperation seized him, and without forming any
plan he rushed into the house in question. What a chance! Charlotte
was in the very act of descending the great staircase, and alone; no one
was near, he hurried toward her, seized her hand, and affectionately
embraced her, exclaiming, "what happiness to have you returned to us,
I participate in Mrs. Godolphin's fbelings on the occasion, and my
venerable aunt's affection fbr you has brought her hither."
"Where, where is the dear lady," said the delighted girl.

"In her chair, a few doors off; she does not choose to come exactly
to a common inn." He hurried the poor girl down a lane at the corner of
the house; she was instantly seized with alarm, and a consciousness of
her own folly, in believing that the lady of the Abbey could soon have
heard the news and come to Landrennen.
-t29

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
Mr. Alderton dragged her over trackless fields, and avoided every
path, even the most obscure ones; and such was the terrific nature of his
threats, that she durst not utter a single shriek when they were obliged
to pass near any solitary dwelling.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXIII.
How to dispose of Charlotte was the next question to the criminally
agitated mind of Mr. Alderton, when the strange idea struck him, of
immuring her in the deserted turret of Martimel Castle, conscious that
he would meet no interruption from any of the inmates of the mansion,
from the superstitious prejudices that existed. He had some time since
effected an entrance by one of the windows, unbarred the door that
opened into the wood, and possessed himself of the key; and this had
been the hiding place of himself and hired assistants, previous to our
young heroine's conveyance from Rosedale.
Hither was Charlotte forcibly taken, with an intention to remove
her across the seas the first opportunity; Mary's ill-health gave him
hopes of her death, so that her child appeared to be the principal barrier
to his wishes.
Charlotte was terror-struck at the idea of being immured in the
turret; all the dread stories she had heard relative to it rushed on her
mind, and added to the misery she felt as to what was to be her own
fate, perhaps left to starve in that isolated place; what a horrid situation!
the thought almost overpowered her, and she uttered piercing shrieks;
her persecutors were alarmed, for the turret seemed to re-echo the
sound; in vain he renewed his threats, or demanded silence.
"I will not be silent," replied the suffering girl, "I will make my
sorrows heard to the furthest part of the Castle, though I die for it!"
Mr. Alderton's fury was raised to the highest pitch; he fancied he
heard approaching footsteps; every thing seemed at stake; a stiletto,
which Sir Everard had brought from ltaly, lay on a marble slab; the
villain seized the weapon, and would have plunged it in her bosom, but
a deep groan palsied his arm, as the shade of the murdered Albert stood

before him, and exclaimed in hollow, awe-inspiring tone, "Fiend in
human shape, desist thy horrid purpose, is not your catalogue of crimes
yet sufficient, to glut a heart so base?"
Alderton heard no more, he dashed the stiletto from him, and sunk
into a chair trembling and pale as death; a cold sweat bedewed his
forehead, he closed his eyes for a minute, and then ventured to open

them again, to take another look at the appalling monitor, but the
ghostly shade had vanished.
Charlotte gazed on her intended murderer with speechless surprise,
for she had been spared the sight of the spectre, and the hearing of the
supernatural voice; to the wretched Alderton, only, was the awful
visitation made.
He rushed from the room, as soon as the first impression of terror
had subsided, but was yet sufficiently on his guard to lock the door
-

l3l

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
after him, and secure the lovely prisoner, and,

if

possible, his own

reputation, which appeared to be placed in a very critical and precarious
point of view.

Charlotte implored the protection of the omniscient Power that
guards the innocent, and then stretching her wearied limbs on the floor,
resigned herself to sleep, and she rested better on that hard pallet than
Alderton on his bed of down; guilt haunting his conscience, and the
dread giant detection seeming to tread at his heels.
All the next day his captive remained without his appearance in her
wretched prison, suffering hunger and thirst; to which were added, the
most dire apprehensions. In vain she made every noise in her power, or
strove to reach the high grated window, and at length, as evening
arrived, she gave way to despair.

Soon after nine, (for she could hear the castle clock strike,) she
heard the outer door unlock, and some one ascend the stairs to her; it
was a joyous sound, even if assassination was intended; it was to be
preferred to the lingering death caused by starvation; it was Alderton

with a lantern, he placed some provisions on a table, and instantly
withdrew, without uttering a sentence.
Alderton imposed the task of attending the prisoner himsell till
Geoffrey and another man, whom he had sent for from London, shoulc
arrive, and convey her to a distant land, every arrangement for which he
had most skilfully planned in his own mind.
Invigorated by refreshment, and the distressing idea removed, that
was left to perish in the turret, Charlotte became more calm, anc
she
turned her thoughts how she could possibly procure her liberty.
In the room there were several books, and fortunately for her plan,
she was provided in her pocket housewif'e with scissors, thread, and
needle.26

She selected a volume with the largest print, as best adapted to her
purpose, then taking a blank leaf she cut our letters and tacked them on
till she had completed the following sentence:

"Charlotte Bennett is confined in the haunted turret of Martimel
Castle; be quick, and release her, or it may soon be too late."
There was a long stick in the room, and by its aid, and standing on
the table, she pushed the important scrap through a broken pane of
glass, and trusted the event to chance; but with many fervent
ejaculations for success.
She had no sooner parted with the paper, than a terrible idea
entered her mind, that it might be picked up by her enemy, and
26

Wilkinson owned a small parlour where she sold these types of items, along
with children books and remainders.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
accelerate her doom; this reflexion came too late, but

it

painfully

recurred several times during the day.

Night came on, and with it her gaoler; his behaviour was not
changed, she was therefore relieved from that fear.
Day after day passed in this manner; it is true there were books
within her reach, but she could not compose her mind to reading; and if
she took up a volume, she soon cast it away unheeded: her scheme had
failed, and her dread of Alderton was so great, that she had not the
courage to repeat it; no bed allowed, nor a change of raiment, she was a
great sufferer, and at length she ventured to solicit them, and was
answered, she would soon be removed from the turret, and then her
request would be amply complied with. This added to her distress, for
alas! whither was she to be taken?

Sir Everard Martimel and Mr. Scran, to whose friendship and
advice he applied under these accumulated dilemmas, had taken every
means to trace the dear girl, but without success.
The arrangement in respect of acknowledging his legal marriage
with Mary of Lanmere, and proving his innocence to the family of the

late Lady Cecilia, were perplexing considerations, and required
cautions and very nice conduct, but these were not to be entered into till
the young heiress of Lanmere was found.

They got hold of Geoffrey, and he for gold informed them of all he
knew respecting Lady Martimel's imprisonment, and the conveyance of
Charlotte from the Abbey, but persisted in declaring his innocence of
her second captivity, and his remaining in London proved his truth; but
he did not tell them, that himself and another were to proceed to
Monmouthshire in a few days, to engage in secret business, respecting
the young lady in question.
The half-witted villain, forgerting that his base employer might
again have occasion to use the turret, informed Sir Everard of the
purpose for which they had used it.
The Baronet smothered his indignation till he was alone with his
friend it then burst forth, and he expressed his determination to proceed
to his hereditary domains, and call Alderton to account. "In three days,"
said he, "we will be off, as there is a vacation, if you will extend your
kindness so far."

Scran answered in the affirmative, with his wonted pleasantness;
and endeavoured to cheer the spirits of Sir Everard, though his own
sunk whenever he thought of his little Rosedale favourite.
"In three days," repeated the Baronet. At that very moment letters
were brought him by the general postman, one sealed with black, the
mark Landrennen was conspicuous. "Good God!" said he, "Lady, I

-r33-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
mean Mary, has not survived her journey; but why am I thus agitated, I
once loved, and-Scran open the letter, I am not capable."

It was not Lady Martimel that caused this mournful emblem of
fashion on the epistle, no, it was the blossom Ellinor, to whom the
measles proved fatal; as a parent he shed tears of affection for his
offspring, thus prematurely taken from him, but in a prudential point of
view, the circumstances of her birth made it the less to be regretted, and
the feelings of her mother's family would be sooner soothed, as this
innocent object of litigation was removed.
It tended to hasten his departure from town, and one day only was
allowed for preparation; that day was devoted to a scene of the most
affecting nature, this was, to disclose his situation to Lady Elizabeth
Darcy, the barrier that had sprung up to oppose their union. Their
affection was natural and sincere, and the separation was fatal to their
peace: to meet again as common friends, was not in their power, and
they agreed to meet no more, unless fate ever placed it in the power of
the Baronet to renew those vows to which the amiable enslaver of his
heart had listened with modest approbation.
On Lady Elizabeth's imparting in confidence to her sister the cause

of the breaking off of her expected wedding, the lively girl exclaimed,
"There now, you perceive I have the gift of inspiration; I could see
there was something very mysterious about your fascinating Baronet,
and his gloomy turrets; I dare say he has got a blue chamber either in
the eastern or northern one; you know his sensitive nerves could not
bear my raillery on this old Monmouthshire Castle."

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXIV.

Hubert the son of Lord Alfred Percy, was entering into his
nineteenth year, at that period of our history when Lady Martimel had
just returned with Mr. Hervey to Landrennen, and her daughter was a
captive in the turret; and he, in the literal sense of the word, was an
amiable youth, of excellent mind and disposition, accompanied by an
elegant form and face, from which a painter might have drawn an
Adonis.

His noble parents resided for the most part of the year at

a

handsome modern building, erected on an ancient site, called Willow
Bank, and the mid-winter months in town; and their house being
contiguous to Sir Everard Martimel's there, and only a mile and a half
distant from the Castle, a very close and unbroken intimacy had always
kept up by the respective families.
Hubert was fond of field-sports, and often with his dog and gun

took his way through the wood that skirted Charlotte's prison, at an
early hour.
One morning as he was thus proceeding in his shooting dress, his
dog started a wild rabbit, and pursuing it into the midst of wood, killed

his prey. Hubert followed; just by the animal lay a paper, he was
leaving it, when a singularity as to the form of its characters met his
eyes; he picked it up, and his attention was still further excited ; he had
never seen Charlotte, since she was a mere child, but he had heard
much of her, and who in the neighbourhood of the three principal
estates of that part of Monmouthshire had not, for her twice mysterious
removal made her a very popular topic of conversation.

It was her paper, which drifting by a high wind, had thus been
distantly conveyed to a place so very unlikely to be found; heavy rains
had fallen, but such was its sheltered situation, that

it

remained

undamaged.

He repeatedly gazed on the contents, and read them over. "This is
an adventure, and a curious one; is this the hoax of a school miss, or
reality? if the latter, I am ready to become a knight errant, and use all
my prowess to deliver the fair damsel;" exclaimed the wondering
Hubert.
He went close to the turret, and called on Charlotte Bennett to
answer him, but she was in the upper story, and fast asleep; he then
bent his steps toward the principal part of the Castle, when he thought
that if she was indeed confined there, he would only be hurting her
cause, by going into the enemy's quarters, made him retrace his road,
and he determined to proceed to Landrennen, where he was to meet

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
some young friends for a day's sport, and he would take time to
consider how to act, or consult an abler head than his own.
Their sport was propitious, a collation succeeded, and joy and
hilarity was the order of the day, and the turret, or its presumed inmate,

did not once occur to his memory. As he was leaving the inn, the
travelling chariot of Sir Everard drew up to enquire, as it was the post
house, if any letters for him or Mr. Scran had preceded them from
London; the Baronet perceived his young friend, and warmly greeted
him; "the evening is unfavourable for walking," he added, "and we can
make room fbr you as far as the Castle."
The ofl'er was frankly accepted, but the chariot had scarce moved
on, when Hubert recollected the paper he found in the morning, and
was hesitating whether to notice it to his present companions or not;
while he yet remained undetermined, the axletree broke, and the
gentlemen were obliged to proceed on foot, taking with them their
travelling pistols; and one of the men going before to guide them, by
the aid ofone ofthe carriage lanterns, a considerable delay took place.
When they came within a distinct view of the Castle, the Baronet
suddenly exclaimed, "either my eyes deceive me, or there are lights in
the shut up turret, let the intruders beware my vengeance."

"Then it is not with your knowledge any one is an inmate of that
place," said the youth.
"Certainly not; but what is the reason, Hubert, of such a strange
question? the turret can have no inmates."
"It has, indeed it has: pardon my unjust suspicions, my respected
friend, it was base in me to suppose for a single moment that you would
aim at the seduction of one so innocent, and premature in years; let us
haste, mischief is on foot;" being urged for an explanation, he gave a
short but very perfect one; and repeated the words of the paper he had
found in the wood.
The Baronet groaned in agony, and Mr. Scran joined in urging
haste: they came to the turret, the bottom door stood wide open, and to
an adjacent tree were tied two horses, bridled, saddled, and equipped
with travelling bags; they heard the faint scream of distress and terror:
My child, my child," exclaimed Martimel, and was in the act of rushing
up the winding stairs, when the Counsellor stopped him; "They are
descending," said he, "let us retreat behind this angle, we shall then see
their numbers, and, at all events, have them at more advantage."
Charlotte was carried down by the villain Geoffrey and another,
Alderton following, menacing her to silence, and prepared to lift her on
one of the horses. "There are four of us to three. well armed. and in a
good cause," said Hubert, and rushed forward and surprised the enemy;
one of the men fled, and Geoffrey was thrown down and overpowered
- t36

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
by the servant, a stout athletic young man; Alderton aimed his pistol at
the breast of Sir Everard, Scran struck his arm, the weapon went off
sideways, and unfortunately wounded Hubert in the left arm; the
Baronet seized the advantage, and laid his enemy prostrate on the earth.
The sound of the pistols reached the Castle, and the inmates joined
the victorious party.

"Bind those wretches, and convey them in the turret for the
present," said Martimel; he then led Charlotte toward the mansion, and
the Counsellor supported the bleeding Hubert; but their progress was
delayed, and attention arrested, by the following awful event. Alderton
was armed with a dagger, and while the men were pinioning one arm
down, he seized the opportunity to draw forth the weapon, and stab
himself mortally. "I shall now be made no public spectacle," said he; "I
have freed myself from your manacles, and your trials!" Death spasms
came on. "My child! my Maria!" he continued, after a pause, "may you
find friends, and may your conduct"-again he stopped, and groaned
heavily; he did not finish the sentence he began, but cried out,
convulsively, "Albert, I gave you death! now, now, you are avenged!
flames surround me, take away that hideous form, oh! oh!"
Thus ended his vile career. Charlotte fainted from terror at the
scene. On her recovery she found herself sitting on Sir Everard's knee,
and his arm round her waist; she felt this an impropriety and was gently
withdrawing herself; "stay," said the Counsellor, gently reseating her,
"'tis your father supports you."
"My father!"
"Yes," replied the Baronet, "my friend says true, I am your father
and legal protector, and as such you shall henceforth find me."
Charlotte's sensations were again too much for her, and

it

was

necessary to have her confided to the care of the housekeeper, that she
might seek returning calm from salutary repose.
Hubert's wound was but slight, it was skilfully drest, and he also
retired to a chamber, a message being sent to Willow Bank, merely
stating that he had met Sir Everard Martimel, and should remain that

night at the castle. The dawning beauty of Charlotte, her improved
appearance since he had last seen her, and her amiable manners, made
this youth for the first time feel he had a heart susceptible of a tender

impression; but a natural daughter of Sir Everard's (for such he now
considered her), must never he his-and he resolved to smother this
inauspicious flame.

Charlotte's anxiety to know more of herself prevented her from
enjoying any but transient slumbers; she arose early, and seeing her
father walking on the lawn, joined him. He seemed pleased with this
attention, and immediately commenced an explanation of past
- t3'7

-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
circumstances; as he proceeded, Mary thought of her dream, and its
singularity; of being rescued form peril by Mrs. Stockley and Sir
Everard, now her acknowledged father and mother: how did she long to
be clasped in the arms of her maternal parent, her fiom whom she had
received such kindness and benefits; she feared to offend the Baronet
by condemning him, more than he did himself, in denying the legality
of his marriage to Mary, and wishing to break that sacred tie through
interested motives; but affection and the tbrce of nature made her
eloquent in her mother's cause; she pleaded that it was the view of her
mother, not so much to wound his peace as to sacrifice herself to
obscurity, and not afier circumstances impelled her to act differently.
He embraced her tenderly, but made no reply, and, taking her hand, led
her toward the breaktast saloon, where Mr. Scran and Hubert were. The
latter most respectfully handed her a chair, and behaved during the
repast in the most attentive manner; in short, he seemed to have eyes
and ears for no other person, to the great amusement of the Counsellor,
who however from delicacy forbore making any comment.
Clothes had been procured from Landrennen for Charlotte betbre it
was light that morning, and she now looked to much better advantage
than in the state to which her enemy had reduced her, but Hubert even
then had been powerfully attracted. In the short time Mr. Scran and him
were alone, the former had briefly explained the situation of Charlotte
as the legitimate child of Martimel and the presumptive heiress of
Lanmere, and the youth's eyes became illumined with joy.
They had scarce breakfasted when the messenger which Sir
Everard had dispatched with the intelligence that he had found and also
acknowledged his daughter, returned with a gratifying answer; she
intreated that she might see Charlotte without delay and Martimel
resolved to accompany her thither, and the carriage was immediately
ordered for that purpose.
"I wonder," said the Baronet, "our friend Hervey is not yet come, I
sent for him to breakfast-I dispatched Robert with the note before I
left my dressing room; but we cannot wait, the dear lady at the Abbey
has the strongest claim."

Charlotte, surrounded with every elegance, endowed with fortune

and family, was as yet far fiom happy, the thoughts of her mothet
embittered every joy, and her tears flowed for the little Ellinor.

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY,
CHAPTER XXV.

By one of those strange fatalities which serve as links to connect
one passing event, Mr. Hervey did not receive the note from Sir
Everard Martimel; the servant gave it to one of the children, who was at
play in the garden; he put it on the bench while he finished his sports
and then meant to take it to his father, but being called to breakfast, and
then sent to school, forgot it.

Mr. Hervey went at an early hour to Lady Martimel, and it

is

presumed that the inhabitants of the Rectory and those at the White
Cottage, were the only ones in Rosedale, who had not heard of the
arrival of the Baronet, and the events of the preceding night.
Several letters in the course of each day since her arrival had past
between Mary and her mother; the former was now seriously ill, and
she no longer resisted the pleadings of her mother to come to Lanmere
Abbey and make it her home, assuring her one one would be allowed to
intrude on the strictest retirement she should think proper to impose on

herself. Mrs. Godolphin offered

a chariot for the invalid but

she

declined it, and with the assistance of Mr. Hervey and Mrs. Matthews
took a private path to the Abbey, and entered at the garden gate.
Lady Martimel was still kneeling at the feet of her mother, who
was shedding over her tears of mingled joy and sorrow, when Sir
Everard and his daughter entered the room unannounced, for the
servants informed them Mrs. Godolphin was alone.
On beholding them Lady Martimel shrieked aloud, but presently
recovering herself, she stretched out her arms toward Charlotte,
exclaiming, "my child, my child, will you not embrace your mother?"
"My mother, yes, it is her, but never till now did I see that dear face as
it now is;" the amiable girl rushed into her arms, their sensibility could
not support it, and they swooned on the floor.
Mrs. Godolphin was with difficulty preserved from fainting, and
was supported by Mr. Hervey: Mrs. Matthews had withdrawn.
Sir Everard could not behold such a scene unmoved, and unwilling
to have it witnessed by any domestics, he busied himself in restoring
them; a vase of spring water was in the room, and this was of essential

service; he gently removed Charlotte from her mother's clasped
embrace, and she soon revived.
Mary was still lovely in her face, though you might trace in it the
tixed expression of woe, and her form was wasted to a shadow.
The tears of Sir Everard fell on her face, as he conveyed her to a
sofa; as she opened her eyes he prest her to his bosom, and unable any
longer to contend with his emotions, he rushed out of the room; he
paced the lawn several times, and then returning called Charlotte to

t_-l

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"I shall leave you here," said he, "fbr the present, and write me
every day an account of your mother's health and your own; tell Mrs.
Godolphin she shall have a letter from me in the course of the day:" he
then retired, followed by the Rector.
All that affection could do, or art and skill contrive, was resorted
to, to save Lady Martimel, but it were all exerted without efl'ect; yet she
was placid and resigned, and according to her own avowal happy; her
child was endowed with her right, Alderton was no longer an object of
terror, her mother was all goodness, and aided Charlotte to perform
every endearing attention; and three months exactly from the day on
which she returned to Lanmere Abbey as her home, beheld her lifeless
form conveyed to the silent tomb.
As Lady Martimel she had a considerable sum to bequeath, and to
the Hervey's, with the worthy Browns, and Mrs. Matthews, she left
considerable legacies. Hedgeland had still remained with her, and she
had found nothing in her conduct to disapprove, and she settled on her
an independence suited to her station.
A few days previous to her death she had received and taken a
most impressive farewell of her husband, but she left him a posthumous
him.

letter,

in which she stated to have heard from Mr. Hervey of his
to Lady Elizabeth Darcy; she had heard her amiable

attachment

character, and she wished the alliance might take place. In that case she
would be a guardian to, and an excellent pattern for Charlotte, in case
of Mrs. Godolphin's decease, but while that lady lived she wished her
not to be deprived of her grandchild.
Every legal form was attended to by Mr. Scran in regard to
Charlotte, and she was soon acknowledged and known as the Heiress of

Lanmere. Proper masters attended her education, and Emma Hervey
had the happiness and advantage to be chosen as her constant
companion at the Abbey.

Mrs. Godolphin survived her daughter four years; happy with
Charlotte, and uncertainty at an end, she became cheerful, and for the
sake of her young charge, whose years were not suited to seclusion, she
had often select parties at the Abbey, and mixed again in the society the

neighbouring gentry afforded. Sir Everard visited the castle twice in
every year, and on this third appearance he was accompanied by Lady
Elizabeth, whose elegant manners and real goodness soon conciliated
all hearts, and she became the patroness and founder of several very
useful charities at Rosedale and Landrennen.
Her lovely sister was delighted with the castle, and Charlotte's
being immured in the turet was a most entertaining theme; but when
she heard of the manufactured billet found by Hubert Percy, his being
one of her deliverers, and the wounded arm, she declared it excellent.
-140-

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
"Did I not tell you, Sir Everard," said the laughing girl, "that I should
find a subject of a romance in your Monmouthshire residence, and her I
have it;---a castle, a turret, a winding staircase, an assassin, a suicide, a
spectre, an imprisoned damsel, and a valiant knight; surely these are
ingredients enough, and I want nothing but the pen of Mrs. Radcliffe to
give it a descriptive effect: but I must be silent, for here comes the hero

of my tale."
This was Alfred Percy; he never visited at the Abbey but in
company with some of his family on receiving invitations; but when Sir
Everard and Lady Martimel were at the castle, on which occasions
Charlotte left her grandmother to reside with them, (paying her a daily
visit), he seemed to take the privilege of a friend, to find himself al
home.

On these occasions, Charlotte endured much raillery from Amelia,
but as she never outstepped the bounds of propriety, by exercising her
wit in Hubert's presence, they called forth smiles, blushes, and
retaliations, but not anger.

On Mrs. Godolphin's decease, Charlotte became one of her
father's family; she was now a most lovely interesting young woman,
sensible, well informed, and most rational in her ideas, for she had
profited by fatal example, to avoid every thing that would tempt her to
be clandestine, and mancuvering, to avoid intricate ways, and keep the
beaten path!

Lord Hubert Percy (for his father was at this time no more,)
became an avowed suitor to Charlotte, nor had he any difficulty with
Sir Everard; he had long anticipated this application, and received it
with delight, and the friends on each side were propitiously inclined to
share in the general joy. Never did Counsellor Scran attend the drawing
up of the marriage settlements with more heartfelt interest and delight,
then on the present occasion; he had also another wedding on the tapis,
his own second son, a brave young naval officer, to the pretty Emma

Hervey; the bridegroom would in a few weeks be obliged to join his
ship, and the bride was to be a guest of Lady Percy's during his
absence; their marriage took place a week previous to that of Lord
Hubert Percy, to her who was now called by courtesy and royal grant,
according to the tenour of her noble possessions, Lady Charlotte
Godolphin, which name all her heirs were to take, except she had a
second son, who was to perpetuate that of his father's.
The wedding took place at St. George's Church, Hanover Square,
with all the pomp, 6clat, and numerous train that could be expected
from the Martimel, Percy and Bellaston families; they partook of an
elegant breakfast at the Dowager Lady Percy's; and the new married

THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY.
pair then set out to pass a few weeks at a pretty and very rural retreat,
belonging to Lord Hugh, on Windsor Forest.
Sir Everard's marriage with Lady Elizabeth proved very happy; her
amiable manners converted him from dissipation; and two fine babes,
both boys, cemented their mutual happiness. Charlotte remained his
only daughter; rich, virtuous, benevolent, and happy, and the pride of
her father and his wife, who sincerely loved her, envy or covetous
