CHAPTER I. 



It is not the city of Lima, as it now 
is, that Ada Reis describes ; he speaks 
of the wonder of South America, the 
city of the kings, as Lima was called 
in the days of her glory ; and not of 
her in her fallen state. He tells of 
times gone by, when magnificence 
and opulence were displayed in her 
feasts ; and knights, and scholars, and 
fair ladies, adorned the capital of so 
large a portion of the western world. 
He tells of her vast riches, of her 
splendid buildings, her v/ealthy citi- 
zens, and the gay brilliancy of their as- 

VOL. II. B 



£ ADA REIS. 

semblies; her processions and tlicatrcs; 
her bull-figlits, hunting-matches, and 
revelings ; her steeds, unmatched for 
strength and dexterity ^ : much, too, lie 
dwells upon the beauty of the surround- 
ing country, abundant in wine, grain, 
fruit, and flowers, wool, cotton, and 
silks, and rich perfumes ; he speaks 
of her mines of precious ore and 
jewelleries ; her seas abounding in 
pearls ; and her great rivers, which 
water the rich country around. 

The city of Lima was founded by 
Don Francisco Pizarro, on the feast 
of Epiphany, 153.5. It is situated in 
the spacious and delightful valley of 
Rimac — Rimac being the name of 
an idol to which the native Indians 
used to offer sacrifice under theincas : 
and as this idol was supposed to return 
answers to the prayers addressed to it, 
it w\as called Rimac, from an Indian 



ADA RETS. 



word, meaning properly, lie who 
speaks. 

Lima, once the capital of Peru, com- 
mands the prospect of a country diver- 
sified by rivers and mountains, adorned 
by forests and groves of olives, orange 
and lemon trees. Northward, though 
at a considerable distance, runs the 
Cordillera, or chain of the Andes, from 
whence some of the hills project into 
the valley, the nearest of which are 
those of St. Christopher and the Aman- 
caes. The river in its course approaches 
the very walls of the city : a superb 
stone bridge is built over it; at one 
end of which a gate, remarkable for its 
architecture, forms the principal en- 
trance into the town, and leads to 
the great square. In the centre of 
the square is a fountain, from which 
the purest water is thrown up by the 
trumpet of a bronze statue of Fame, 

B 2 



4« ADA REIS. 

and is also poured from the mouths of 
eight lions which surround it. Here 
every morning, Ada Reis informs us, 
flower girls and market-women, with 
their mules, and runa Llamas^, sta- 
tioned themselves with baskets filled 
with vegetables, fresh flowers, and 
fruit, whilst singers and dancers en- 
livened the scene. The young, the 
rich, and the fair, in their carriages, or 
on horseback, assembled thither before 
their morning and evening drives, to 
purchase flowers. The east side of 
the square is filled with noble build- 
ings : there stand the archiepiscopal 
palace ; the cathedral, a massive struc- 
ture without, and within adorned 
with paintings, sculpture, and magni- 
ficent altars : there also is the palace 
of the viceroy, in which arc the several 
courts of justice, together with the 
offices of revenue ; wliilst on the west. 



y\DA REIS. O 

the council-house and city prison face 
the cathedral. The south is reserved 
for private houses, erected upon an 
uniform plan beneath regular colon- 
nades. 

The government of the viceroy is 
triennial; but at the expiration of that 
term, the sovereign has power to pro- 
long it. The office is of the highest 
dignity and importance ; he who holds 
it enjoys all the privileges of royalty ; 
he is absolute in all things, civil, 
military, or fiscal ; to him are subor- 
dinate all the tribunals for executing 
the several functions of government : 
so that the power of this employment 
is equal to the dignity of the title ; 
and the pride, and pomp, and expen- 
diture of the viceroys of Peru were 
in those days proverbial. 

Ada Reis alone exceeded these tem- 
porary sovereigns in profusion and 



ADA IlEIS. 



inagnificeiice, and was wont to say 
carelessly, that were the appointment 
offered to liim he would disdain it. 
He had, indeed, assumed the symbols 
of royalty ; his slaves were dressed in 
superb Eastern dresses, and he had 
hampers to guard his palace, such as 
are employed in the service of the 
Pasha of Tripoly : he had, besides, 
other adherents from different coun- 
tries, so as to form a considerable re- 
tinue. Notwithstanding which, it was 
sometimes his pleasure to ride about 
the city or into the neighbouring coun- 
try alone and unattended. His daugh- 
ter was seldom seen, and never went 
into public, except closely veiled. 

But, as it may be supposed, this 
concealment only increased the report 
of her extraordinary beauty, so that 
little was talked of in Lima but Fior- 
monda. She was called at times the 



ADA REIS. 7 

Kebbiera^ of Tripoly (the greatest of 
princesses), and at others, the beautiful 
Calabrian. 

Suitors were on all points vying for 
the acknowledged and only heiress of 
all Ada Reis's immense wealth. Don 
Antonio de la Cerda, and the Marquis 
de Santa Spina, were ever on the watch 
to seize the first occasion of urging their 
pretensions — all persons of the highest 
rank, whose homage any other lady in 
Lima would have received with glad- 
ness, paid obeisance for Fiormonda's 
sake to Ada Reis ; and amongst the 
many who, morning after morning, 
watched impatiently in the pub he 
square for the chance of a moment's 
interview, the most distinguished of all 
her suitors was Alphonso, Duke of 
Montevallos. He never had spoken, 
but she was well aware of his feelings 
— Love needs not the intervention of 



8 ADA RE IS. 

Janguage ; a single glance can commu- 
nicate the sentiment of the heart as 
fully and more forcibly than words. 
Fiormonda knew his passion ; and with 
that passion it is not in the nature of 
woman, however innocent, however 
modest, or however preoccupied, to be 
offended or displeased. 

The Duke of Montevallos, though 
not so rich as many of those who were 
anxious to offer themselves to the no- 
tice of Fiormonda, was absorbed in 
family pride ; he was connected with 
the royal family of. Spain ; he had fifty 
titles. His ancestors had risen from 
their tombs in horror, could they have 
now heard and credited that he enter- 
tained even an idea of lowering his 
Castilian blood by uniting it with that 
of the illegitimate daughter of an Alge- 
rine merchant ; yet was he seen wan- 
dering at early dawn and of an even- 



ADA REIS. 9 

ing late in the public walk called the 
Ala Mode, between the rows of orange 
and lemon-trees, or strolling along the 
banks of the river, whither the calashes 
conveyed all the youth and beauty of 
Lima, to enjoy at that hour the balmy 
and refreshing air, and eagerly did he 
watch there, in the hope of catching a 
single glimpse of Fiormonda's form as 
she passed. 

If by chance she appeared in the 
great square, where the ladies assemble 
to purchase, almost at any price, the 
most valued and precious of plants, 
the chirimoya, for which there is much 
rivalship, the largest sums being given 
for a single blossom, to her the fairest 
and most fragrant were instantly pre- 
sented by the young Duke ; and envy 
itself durst hardly murmur at the pre- 
ference he showed her, so cautiously and 
coldly did she receive his proffered gifts. 



10 ADA UEIS. 

Yet, although she frequented so little 
the public places of meeting, she drove 
often into the country, beyond the ex- 
tensive gardens which for miles around 
adorn the environs of Lima, as far even 
as the golden hills of the Amancaes, to 
gather the yellow flowers which first 
gave them their name. 

By some it was, however, suspected, 
that neither the flowers nor the beauty 
of the country were the objects which 
led her to such a distance : it was ru- 
moured, that notwithstanding the ge- 
neral reserve and even pride of her de- 
meanour to the Duke and to her 
other admirers, these excursions gave 
her the opportunity of meeting and 
conversing with Condulmar. 

The young Duke was perfectly igno- 
rant that he even had a rival ; he hesi- 
tated to declare his passion for Fior- 
monda to Ada lleis simply upon the 



ADA REIS. 11 

knowledge that such an alliance would 
never be suffered by his friends. He 
was to have returned with the last en- 
voy to his native country, where his 
mother eagerly awaited his being of 
age, to unite his hand in marriage with 
a kinswoman of her own noble parent- 
age and fortune. He hesitated, he de- 
layed: at length he resolved to wait 
one month longer at Lima, upon the 
pretext of witnessing the entry of the 
new viceroy into the city ; at which 
time he was informed Fiormonda would 
be presented to the public, and allowed 
to mingle in the gaieties which take 
place at that period. The Duke of 
Montevallos was well known to the 
new viceroy ; he had visited him twice 
at Chili since his residence in America, 
and his mother had in some measure 
placed him under his care. 



12 ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER II. 

Of all the solemnities observed in 
America, the public entry of the vice- 
roy into the city of Lima was con- 
sidered as the most splendid. Nothing 
was to be seen in the days to which we 
have gone back, on this occasion, but 
gilded carriages, the greatest pomp of 
retinue, the most laboured magni- 
ficence of apparel, in each of which the 
families of old Spain and the native 
nobility vied with the most profuse and 
eager emulation, and every thing was 
now preparing for the celebration of 
this day. For at this period, Don 
Joseph Manso de Velasco, Count of 
Superunda, knight of the order of San- 
tiago, and late governor of Chili, had 
arrived to assume the viccroyalty of 



ADA REIS. 13 

Peru, to which he had been appomtecl 
on the 12th of July, 1745. According 
to custom, he remained at the fort of 
Callao until the day fixed upon for his 
grand entrance into the city of Lima. 
Here he was waited upon by all the 
Spanish and native grandees, and here 
he inquired of one of the officers of 
his predecessor's suite, who it was 
whose superb state liveries and richly 
caparisoned steeds had attracted his 
attention. " The arms in particular,'* 
said Don Joseph, " are singular ; for, 
I being somewhat read in heraldry, 
know them to be the sigil of Mel- 
chior, one of the three Magi kings." 

*' It is Ada Reis," replied the Mar- 
quis de Santa Spina, '* a merchant of 
Tripoli, or, as some say, an Algerine 
Reis — a singular personage, who has 
made millions. He has been resident in 
America these three years past. He is 



14 ADA REIS. 

supposed to be the ricliest sii])ject in 
Lima. He is of great use in the consu- 
lado, to which he has at times advanced 
considerable sums of money. He has 
agents at Quito, Carthagena, Porto 
Bello, and indeed in every province 
and city belonging to his most Catho- 
lic Majesty; and these agents purchase 
the first of every thing at the greatest 
price, which gives a life and spirit to 
commerce, of late much needed." 

The result of this information was 
the highly respectful and gracious re- 
ception with which the new viceroy 
greeted Ada Reis upon his first pre- 
sentation. Nor was he less struck witli 
his conversation and manner, than he 
had been before with his magnificence, 
insomuch that he insisted upon his ac- 
companying him that evening to the 
theatre'*, where the ladies, all veiled in 
their usual dress, wTre admitted, ac- 



ADA REIS. 15 

cording to custom, in order that they 
might have an opportunity of seeing 
the new viceroy. He had, however, 
brought with him a formidable rival, 
who withdrew from him much of the 
public attention, for all female eyes, 
in particular, were fixed upon the won- 
derful, the beautiful, the magnificent 
Ada Reis, who but seldom appeared in 
public, and had only once before visit- 
ed Callao. A young man, who some 
said was his son, and others a noble 
Venetian, stood near him : his coun- 
tenance was peculiar ; the expression 
varied every moment, as if his thoughts 
were painted in their passage across 
his dark intellectual brow. Don Joseph 
Manso eagerly inquired who he was^ 
He had accompanied Ada Reis, it was 
believed, from his own country ; he 
inhabited his present residence atLima^ 
was ever with him, and was supposed 



1() ADA REIS. 

to be the intended husband of the 
beautiful Fiormonda. "And liis name?" 
said the viceroy. 

" It is Condulmar." 

** And Fiormonda?" 

** She never appears in public." 

The ensuing day being appointed for 
the viceroy's public entry into Lima, 
the streets of the city were cleared, 
and hung with tapestry ; and triumphal 
arches were erected at proper di- 
stances. At two in the afternoon, the 
viceroy went to hear mass, and meet 
his predecessor, at the church belong- 
ing to the monastery of Montserrat^ 
which was separated, by a triumphal 
gate, from the street, where the caval- 
cade was to begin. 

As soon as all who were to assist in 
the procession had assembled, the vice- 
roy and his retinue set forth, and the 
gates being thrown open, tlie proces- 



ADA REIS. 17 

sion began in the following order: the 
militia, the colleges, the university, 
with the professors in their proper ha- 
bits ; the chamber of accompts ; the 
chamber of the audience, on horses 
with trappings; the magistracy, in crim- 
son velvet robes, lined with brocade of 
the same colour, and a particular form 
of cap upon their heads, used only upon 
this occasion ; the courts of inquisition 
in full dress, according to order, attend- 
ed by a number of noblemen ; whilst 
some members of the corporation, who 
walked on foot, supported the canopy 
over the viceroy, and the two ordinary 
alcaldes, who acted as esquires, held 
the bridle of his horse, a magnificent 
steed from Chili. The procession w^as 
of considerable length, but not so long 
as the description of it given by Ada 
Reis. They passed through all the prin- 
cipal streets till they came to the great 

VOL. II. c 



18 ADA REIS. 

square, in which the whole company 
drew up facing the cathedral ; then 
the viceroy aHghted, and made a ge- 
neral obeisance, whilst the archbishop 
and chapter advanced to receive him. 
The whole of the immense assembled 
multitude were silent as the grave. 
At this moment burst upon the ear the 
solemn hymn of Te Deiim laudamus, 
chanted by the most melodious voices, 
and accompanied by the greatest power 
of instrumental music. 

The recollections of the greatness of 
the Spanish monarchy, the thought of 
the vast territories of which the new 
viceroy was, as it were, taking posses- 
sion, the immense display of wealth, 
and the gorgeous magnificence of the 
Roman Catholic religion, continued at 
once to subjugate and overpower the 
minds of all who witnessed the in- 
spiring spectacle. 



ADA IlEIS. 19 

At that moment, when even the very 
soul of vanity and pride must have 
been touched and gratified, when man, 
vain man, drest in a little brief au- 
thority, must have felt something like 
piety and enthusiasm, the viceroy's 
eyes were attracted by Ada Reis and 
his daughter. Ada Reis, whose ob- 
ject at all times was distinction, and 
who sought it by deviating from every 
general rule, appeared on this occa- 
sion in plain but becoming attire : he 
seemed to make one in a mere show; 
to be a subordinate character in the 
drama that was performing : he liked 
nor viceroy, nor pageant, which could 
rival or even approach himself in mag- 
nificence. He attended, therefore, the 
ceremony as a common observer, whom 
curiosity alone drew to be present at 
it. But the observation, which this 
peculiarity of dress and manner would 

c 2 



20 ADA REIS. 

otherwise have attracted, was now en- 
tirely lost in the deeper interest excited 
by the appearance of his daughter, 
who, trembling and agitated, sup- 
ported herself upon her father ; so 
deeply was she affected by the sublime 
choir of voices, and the solemnity of 
those religious rites, of the effect of 
which she had hitherto known so little. 
First she knelt in enthusiasm, and now 
she wept upon her father's bosom. 

When sudden hope springs up in the 
mind, or when we are moved with un- 
expected pleasure — when we meet with 
those whom we love — we shed tears ; 
and these are the tears which spring 
from the fullness of joy. We shed 
tears, too, w^hen we part from what we 
love, whether it be friend or country, 
or, still dearer, a parent : but they are 
tears of bitterness and regret. There 
are tears, too, which flow less freely, 



ADA REIS. 21 

and these are for the dead ; such tears 
save the heart from breaking. But 
the tears which Fiormonda shed were 
of none of these -, they partook of the 
anguish of all of them, without afford- 
ing any of their relief. They were as 
if a lost soul had heard the prayers of 
saints, the hymn of angels ; yet could 
not, might not, join in the hallowed 
strain and pious supplication. They 
were as if the heart dropped blood, for 
her agony was great and real. When 
the pealing organ rolled through the 
vaulted nave the fullness of its note, 
when the whole choir swelled at once 
through that vast edifice the song of 
devotion and praise ; the strain came 
upon her with the memory of past and 
better times, like the voice of those who 
were no more, of those who had left 
her for ever. Virtue, honour, early 
piety, and sacred faith were ia those 



22 ADA RKIS. 

blessed sounds. She remembered her 
youth, when she also had knelt and 
prayed, when her guardian spirit had 
borne her hymn and orisons upward to 
her Creator. But now she never prayed. 
She was conscious that she was present 
at this solemnity, as at a mere spectacle 
and vain pageant, deprived of all its 
essence and meaning, without belief, 
hope, or comfort ; with the greater 
mortification of witnessing in others 
those feelings and those aspirations of 
better things, which she had herself 
abandoned and relinquished. Her fa- 
ther reproved her for betraying so 
much emotion, and one dearer than her 
father chided her for her weakness and 
superstition. Condulmar smiled with 
scorn upon a scene which appeared to 
him either vanity and folly, or fana- 
ticism and imposture. 

" It is the only daughter of Ada 



ADA REIS. 23 

Reis/' whispered the Duke of Monte- 
vallos, in answer to the viceroy's in- 
quiring look. The maiden was veiled, 
— no feature was exhibited, — he could 
only contemplate the grace and sym- 
metry of her form. She never cast her 
eyes upon the assembled company, nor 
upon any part of the pageant, but ap- 
peared entirely absorbed in the emo- 
tions of her own mind. 

After the ceremony, the viceroy pro- 
ceeded to the palace gates, where he 
was received by the audiencia, and 
conducted to the banquet which await- 
ed him. "Is Ada Reis served?" said 
Don Joseph de Velasco to his attend- 
ants ; " if not, send to desire that he 
and his daughter may sit at my table." 

Ada Reis had returned to his own 
house ; and when the message from the 
viceroy was delived to him there, he 
politely declined the honour intended 



24 ADA IlEIS. 

liim for himself, and said his daughter 
could not appear in public until she 
had formally been presented to the 
Spanish governor, which could only 
take place after the whole of these so- 
lemnities had concluded. 

Suppers and public assemblies, and 
moonlight dances, and bull-feasts, fol- 
lowed in long succession, as w^as the 
custom of the country ; but during 
almost the whole continuance of the 
festivities the viceroy saw not again 
either Ada Reis or his daughter ; forthe 
former was too proud to appear often 
in places w^here there w^as a greater 
than himself. At length, on the last 
day of the bull-fight, as the viceroy was 
passing on horseback to the crowded 
scene, the royal arms again attracted 
his attention, and he eagerly watched 
the calash, ornamented wdth gold, and 
containing wdthin it two females, as it 



ADA REIS. 25 

passed him. The beautiful girl he in- 
stantly recognised to be Fiormonda ; 
and she appeared to be entreating and 
imploring an inexorable old woman to 
permit her to stop and see the specta- 
cle. The cross gouvernante, with a 
tone of voice at once querulous and 
resolved, was commanding the driver 
to turn about. The viceroy imme- 
diately approached the calash, and 
was silent for some moments as he 
took a nearer view of the young Fior- 
monda, who stood up all unveiled, her 
countenance animated, and her eyes, 
naturally gentle and timid, now bril- 
liant with eagerness : a cavalcade of 
gentlemen surrounded the calash, and 
the viceroy himself now requested the 
duenna to permit her lovely charge to 
indulge her inclination. But ShafFou 
Paca, in a language strangely formed of 
a combination of almost every tongue, 



26 ADA REIS. 

loudly remonstrated against any such 
intention. A grandee present reminded 
her that it was to the viceroy himself 
she had the honour to speak. She cared 
not, she said, to what or to whom she 
addressed herself; she had her master's 
commands, and, whatever might be 
said, the Lilla Fiormonda should not 
see any thing, or be seen of any one. 

During this altercation, Fiormonda, 
with great sweetness and dignity, stood 
up in the calash, silent, but casting a 
contemptuous glance upon ShafFou 
Paca, whose tongue, being once set 
in motion, continued a sharp and un- 
ceasing alarum. Don Joseph Manso 
de Velasco in a moment understood 
the proud contempt indicated by her 
silence, and the indignant feelings she 
repressed: he also saw a little smile 
and assumed tranquillity curling upon 
her lips, as she listened to her govcr- 



ADA REIS. 27 

iiess's haiaiigue. He seized the op- 
portunity of breaking forth into ex- 
pressions of unbounded admiration ; 
he gently took her hand, and raised it 
to his lips ; she received the honour as 
she might have done a courtesy from a 
slave, with politeness, but with marked 
indifference. 

At this moment Condulmar rode up ; 
his pale sallow complexion, dark hair^ 
and deep intelligence of countenance, 
had already attracted, it may be re- 
membered, the attention of Don Jo- 
seph the first time he had seen him at 
the theatre ; he recognised him im- 
mediately, and slightly bowed — the 
young Venetian, without parade, re- 
turned the salute, and with an air of 
easy familiarity, said to Fiormonda 
these words : " And does my lovely 
mistress wish to see a festival, which 
ladies more timid and gentle fear? and 



28 ADA REIS. 



;> 



does Shaffou Paca dare to oppose her 
Follow thy desires; indulge freely thy 
pleasure or thy curiosity, and I will 
remain the while and teach thy gou- 
vernante somewhat of more compli- 
ance ; for thou wert born to command ; 
thy least wish should be a law to all." 
Fiormonda hesitated, — but Condul- 
mar, dismounting, handed her from the 
calash. The viceroy now also dis- 
mounted, offering to lead Fiormonda 
to a seat, where some of the ladies of 
his own family were already stationed ; 
he said they would be delighted to have 
this opportunity of making acquaint- 
ance with one of whom they had heard 
so much. He asked her, however, 
more than once, as they proceeded, if 
she thought her father would be really 
displeased at the liberty he was taking; 
for the viceroy had no desire to offend 
Ada Reis. 



ADA REIS. 29 

" Oh, he never can be long displeased 
with me," said Fiormonda, smiling ; 
'' and if Condulmar plead for me, I am 
sure of being forgiven directly." 

" And does Condulmar, whoever he 
may be, hold as great a power over the 
heart of the lovely Fiormonda as it 
would appear he does over the mind 
of her father ?" 

Casting her eyes down, whilst a deep 
blush overspread her complexion, Fior- 
monda answered, " I scarcely know, 
sir ; but this I will say, that whenever 
I desire any thing, he is kind enough 
either to obtain it for me, or to show 
me the manner in which it should be 
obtained ; and I consider him, upon 
the whole, in the light of a friend." 

" Upon the whole !" said Don Jo- 
seph, eager to penetrate the young 
maiden's real thoughts ; " wherefore 
upon the whole only?" 



'30 ADA llEIS. 

" Oh, sir," said Fiormonda, " 1)C- 
cause a real friend woidd, perhaps, re- 
press those wishes sooner than indulge 
them ; and I sometimes tliink — nay, I 
am intruding upon you that which 
concerns only myself." 

" Oh, no intrusion! Speak frankly to 
me; you know not, you cannot believe, 
the interest you have already awaken- 
ed in me." 

" Why then, sir, to be sincere, I 
considered one, whom I left in my own 
country, as a brother and a friend ; 
but Condulmar as a very dangerous, 
though, alas ! too fascinating, com- 
panion." 

" And who is he whom you left in 
your own country?" 

" Why, I hardly know how to an- 
swer," said Fiormonda, smiling : " his 
name, sir, I believe, is Zevahir; lie 
was a playmate, a friend of mine, a 



ADA REIS. 31 

boy; and yet, under his fair locks, it 
may be truly said, ' Sotto bionde capei 
canuta mente,'' for he had indeed all 
the wisdom of age. He was not a na- 
tive of our country, neither do I think 
he came from this land, unless he is 
from the Eldorado, or perchance the 
bright mountains of Calitamani. There 
is no silly tale that is not told of him ; 
but for himself, he never spoke to me 
of his parents or his country; and," 
continued she, with a sigh, " of what 
matter from whence he came ? This I 
know, at least, that he was all good- 
ness, ay, all gentleness and goodness \ 
but he is lost to me, and I only named 
him because I thought him a real 
friend. Condulmar hates me to re- 
member him ; calls him a foolish boy, 
and affects to be jealous of him, as if 
one so young could have inspired me 
with ." 



32 ADA llEIS. 

** With what?" said the viceroy, 
seeing the deep bkish wliich now again 
overspread her cheeks. ** With love, 
were you going to say ? Has that young 
bosom then ah'eady felt those danger- 
ous fires ? Is it possible ? Alas ! I see by 
your hesitation at the very name, that 
I am not wrong in my presumption." 

A sigh was Fiormonda's answer. 

At this moment the Duke of Monte- 
vallos appoached them. *' Alphonso," 
said the viceroy, '' will you accompany 
us ?" Pale, trembling, deeply moved, 
he hesitated for a moment, then placed 
himself on the other side of Fiormonda, 
w^ho, on her part, drew her veil more 
completely over her countenance, and 
turned away her head from the ardent 
gaze which she was conscious he w^as 
fixing upon her. 

Love, though strong in itself, re- 
ceives a great accession of strength 



ADA REIS. 33 

from perceiving the admiration paid 
by others to its object. It becomes at 
once confident in the justice of its 
choice, and alarmed for the success of 
its suit ; it feels itself sanctioned by 
example, and stimulated by rivalry. 

Such were at this moment the feel- 
ings of Alphonso. The sight of Fior- 
monda leaning upon Don Joseph's 
arm, and the general devotion paid 
by all who beheld her, so inflamed 
his soul, so vehemently excited a dis- 
position naturally impetuous, that he 
could no longer conceal or suppress his 
passion. '' Of what avail is it to me,'* 
he said, " that I am allied to kings and 
princes, if this malady consume me? I 
love, I worship this beautiful girl. The 
earth contains no other like to her : 
the young and the great surround and 
kneel to her, whilst I keep aloof, and 
by this means shall lose her. She 

VOL. II. D 



34f ADA REIS. 

knows not, as yet, the world ; her in- 
experience may be misled ; she may 
believe others to be as great as myself, 
because more rich. See at this mo- 
ment what crowds are gazing upon 
her.'* A circle, in truth, was formed 
around Fiormonda ; it was the first time 
she had been seen unveiled. " I will 
open my heart to her father on the in- 
stant," continued the young Duke, as 
he stood at some distance, intently 
watching her : "in the title of Duchess 
de Montevallos the merchant's daughter 
will be lost, and the unrivalled Fior- 
monda be my own." 

No sooner had he formed this de- 
termination, than, impatient at the 
length of the show, 'and still more at 
the increasing admiration bestowed 
upon Fiormonda, he called the Mar- 
quis de Santa Spina apart : the latter 
heard his intention with the utmost 



ADA RE IS. 35 

surprise; insisted that he should con- 
sult the viceroy; and upon his de- 
murring, himself communicated the 
secret to Don Joseph. They could 
by no means believe him to be so mad, 
— his youth, — his distance from his 
friends, — the relation in which he stood 
to the court, were all reasons why this 
precipitate step should be suspended ; 
but in vain they reasoned. Montevallos 
looked again upon Fiormonda, and 
would hear of no prudential delay. He 
gazed with fatal passion upon the too- 
conscious lady, and remounting his 
horse, galloped rashly off, to lay him- 
self, his dukedom, and all he possessed, 
at the feet of Ada Reis. 



D 2 



36 ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER III. 

Ada Reis was seated, according to 
the custom of his country, upon a small 
flat cushion, laid upon a Turkish car- 
pet ; a scarf of the finest cachemire half 
concealed his resplendent dress. His 
turban was of cloth of gold, having an 
heron wrought upon it ; the foot of the 
bird was worked in diamonds ; a collar 
of large pearls hung about his neck ; 
sherbet, and a Persian apparatus for 
smoking, were upon a marble slab near 
him, whilst slaves, in magnificent attire, 
were standing with their hands folded 
before them at the entrance of the 
apartment. He appeared lost in 
thought, and there was a gloom upon 
his countenance, wliich repressed fa- 
miliar intercourse. The Duke, young 



ADA REIS. 37 

and inexperienced, hesitated as he ap- 
proached ; at length he broke silence. 
He hoped, he said, his intrusion would 
be forgiven ; he had much to commu- 
nicate. Ada Reis rose, and laying his 
hand upon his bosom, with eastern 
courtesy saluted him, and bade him 
speak without reserve. The Duke 
hastened to explain himself at once. 
He expressed his love, and declared 
his intentions ; he then adverted, al- 
though with some timidity, to his rank ; 
but said that the consciousness of it was 
only precious to him, inasmuch as it 
might render the offer of his hand more 
acceptable to the father of Fiormonda. 
He paused, and in anxious silence 
awaited the answer. 

How great was his surprise, when 
for that answer, the words, ** My 
daughter is highly honoured -, but I 
aspire to a greater match for her,'* 



38 ADA UEIS. 

were tranquilly pronounced. His in- 
dignation was so great, that it rose to 
absolute fury; — death, destruction, re- 
venge ! — insolent, low-born merchant ! 
a torrent of abuse rushed from the in- 
coherent and offended suitor, but in 
vain. 

Ada Reis listened to his rage with an 
unconcern as calm as he had before 
listened to his professions ; then, with a 
smile, resumed his pipe, nor vouchsafed 
him any further reply. Stung to the 
quick by this neglect, the Duke was 
hurrying out of the apartment ; when 
Ada Reis following him ceremoniously 
to the entrance, requested the honour of 
his presence at an entertainment he was 
about to propose to the viceroy upon 
the day of Fiormonda's presentation ; 
and assured him that if he felt himself 
hurt at the honour of his alliance hav- 
ing been declined, he might console 



ADA REIS. 39 

himself with the information, that he 
was about the hundredth of those who 
had already been obliged to submit to 
a similar mortification, 

" But not a prince," replied the 
Duke. 

" Ay, sir,** said Ada Reis, gasco- 
nading a little, and concealing some- 
what of the truth, " the Bey of Tri- 
poli, himself, the son of the Pacha." 

" The Bey!" rejoined Monte vallos; 
" heavenly powers ! to name him even ! 
— a Moor, a Mussulman ! Why, the 
alliance of the Pacha is not to be com- 
pared with mine ! No wonder that Fior- 
monda disdained to add herself another 
slave to his harem. But to refuse 
me!" 

" Of this," said Ada Reis, " I pre- 
sume the young lady is innocent j I 
alone, therefore, am guilty." 



iO ADA IlEIS. 

"To what, then, do you aspire for 
her?'' 

" I deem her worthy of an imperial 
crown." 

** So do I, Heaven be my witness !" 
said Montevallos ; " and were I pos- 
sessed of an empire, I would share it 
with her on the instant. But why await 
for impossibilities ?" 

** It is enough," said Ada Reis ; "you 
have my answer. Bear it like a Chris- 
tian," he added with a sneer, " and I 
will not betray your secret." 

The Duke had now recovered him- 
self, and perhaps still cherishing hope 
that neither Fiormonda nor her father 
would ultimately prove inexorable, ac- 
quiesced for the present in the advice 
given to him ; and Ada Reis, taking 
down from its place a beautifully 
wrought Turkish scimitar, requested 



ADA REIS. 41 

that the Duke would accept it as a 
token of good-will and reconciliation : 
" And if she whom you must not pos- 
sess," he continued, " should ever be 
in danger, draw thou this weapon, the 
gift of the father, in defence of the 
daughter.'* 

** I will," said Montevallos with en- 
thusiasm. " Pardon the offence I have 
given you ; I am not yet twenty years 
of age — I have been taught ever to 
consider myself, save my sovereign and 
my own kinsmen, as the greatest per- 
sonage in the world. The presumption 
of pride and passion have led me to ad- 
dress to you language such as none of 
high parentage and courteous manners 
should ever use — forgive me. You 
know not what it is to love as I do." 

" Not know it, young enthusiast — 
not know it !" said Ada Reis, and he 
laughed aloud. " I too have permitted 



42 ADA llEIS. 

my eyes to wander ; I too have given 
myself up to the dominion of passion ; 
I too have made an idol of that which 
is but dust — beauty has misled and be- 
trayed me, as it has done others ; but 
with this difference, my heart felt with 
more desperate force, my feelings were 
stronger, my power greater. — Not love ! 
Ye gods ! may you never feel what I 
have felt. I have been the greatest 
slave that love has ever made. Mon- 
tevallos, believe me, no Castilian blood 
ever flowed with more fervid violence 
around a heart than mine ; but where 
the feelings are deep and strong, they 
give not utterance often to their mag- 
nitude by words and outward gestures. 
Neither can the contumelies you have 
not disdained to use affect one like me : 
for the sneer of ridicule, and the grin 
of folly, I can return a bitterer and 
more deadly jest : to the clamour of 



ADA REIS. 43 

the multitude, and the erroneous judg- 
ment of the world, supreme contempt 
and real indifference is my answer. 
At passion, outrage, and the petty 
wrongs which make common men mad, 
I smile : but arouse me — injure those 
I love — awaken the sleeping lion — 
and dread Ada Reis as a fiend, at 
once above and below mankind. Dread 
him who dreads nothing, who acknow- 
ledges no superior, no law, no master ; 
who hopes for nothing in life, and fears 
nothing beyond it ; to whom pain is as 
a scratch, existence but a dream, and 
death the termination of all things ! 
Bestow your professions and regrets, 
your contumelies and abuse, on such 
as seek the one, or fear the other : Ada 
Reis thinks of his fellow-men as the 
leviathan thinks of the tribes who inha- 
bit with him the depths of the ocean !'* 
As he said this, his muscular form 



4f4f ADA REIS. 

became convulsed; his eyes kindled 
and rolled with anger ; his teeth 
clenched within each other, and he 
exhibited to the young Duke the dis- 
gusting and appalling picture of un- 
controlled passion. 

The Duke retired; but encountered, 
as he quitted Ada Reis' palace, the 
object of his entire devotion ; for whilst 
this interview had been taking place 
between himself and Ada Reis, the 
viceroy, proud of his charge, and eager 
to show every possible attention to 
her father, resolved to accompany 
Fiormonda home himself, and to ask 
forgiveness in person for having, con- 
trary to the orders of her governess, 
ventured to conduct her into the gay 
and fair assemblage which she had 
been so anxious to behold. Fiormonda, 
animated, but no way flattered, by the 
encomiums she had heard on all sides, 



ADA REIS. 45 

added to the grace and dignity of 
eastern reception somewhat of the ease 
and freedom of manner which charac- 
terizes the European courts. Happy 
she was and proud — too proud to be 
rendered vain. With the Marquis de 
Santa Spina and the viceroy she con- 
versed easily, and her conversation was 
full of spirit, and even of good-hu- 
moured raillery. When Condulmar 
addressed her, she w^as reserved, em- 
barrassed, and almost affected. Thus 
they proceeded, Shaffou Paca following 
after, fatigued and angry, and keeping 
up, in a low voice, a never-ceasing 
murmur of complaint at her pupil's 
disobedience and apparent disregard 
of her father's displeasure. 

As soon as they arrived in the pre- 
sence of Ada Reis, the gouvernante 
commenced an harangue which she 
had been preparing ; when a glance of 



46 ADA REIS. 

his eye at once imposed silence upon 
her. He received the viceroy with the 
most marked respect, and was evi- 
dently flattered by his condescension 
in paying him this unexpected visit ; 
he conversed with him on manv sub- 
jects, and before he withdrew respect- 
fully entreated that he would honour 
his dwelling in a few evenings with his 
presence. The viceroy accepted the 
invitation, and with a look of admira- 
tion cast upon Fiormonda, took leave 
of her and of her father ; and thus the 
visit which had begun with some awk- 
wardness and apprehension, terminated 
with general ease and satisfaction. 

" Fiormonda," said Ada Reis, when 
the viceroy had retired, " I have been 
thinking, child, that it is time to pre- 
sent thee to the world and marry thee, 
as thy years are many ; and the ac- 
complishment of a w^izard's prophecy 



ADA REIS. 47 

seems too long deferred. Blanch, the 
fair Princess of Ildebar, of whom all the 
grandees were last season enamoured, 
is thy senior alone by two years — thou 
wilt number thy eighteenth year in a 
few months : I must not let the flower 
wither upon its stem, to be devoured 
by the caterpillars that seek to destroy 
it. Appear, fair child, in all thy splen- 
dour and beauty ; accept the hand 
of him who is the highest ; and when 
I have seen thee rendered great, I shall 
perchance depart, — for a restless spirit 
torments me. What is grandeur ? what 
are honours ? what are riches, if the 
mind remain idle and unemployed?" 
Then, addressing his discourse to his 
attendants, he commanded, that upon 
the first day of the ensuing week, a 
magnificent entertainment might be 
given, for the double purpose of show- 
ing honour to the new viceroy, and 



48 ADA REIS. 

presenting Fiormonda to an astonished 
and admiring world. 

These commands were promptly 
obeyed. The arrangements for the 
entertainment were of such extent as to 
employ many hundred workmen. Con- 
dulmar undertook the whole manage- 
ment and direction ; all that apper- 
tained to arrangement, taste, ornament, 
beauty, comfort, he fully understood ; 
and Fiormonda, assisting him with de- 
signs and hints, thus obtained a pretext 
for passing hour after hour in the so- 
ciety of her lover. 

Display and ostentation are generally 
delightful to the female mind. The 
poet Virgil tells us, that Camilla, in 
the midst of the action, was suddenly 
and deeply attracted by the armour of 
an adversary. Fiormonda was not in- 
different to the magnificence wliich sur- 
rounded lier. To her was now arrived 



ADA RETS. 49 

that term of life which excites in the 
bosoms of the young the liveliest feel- 
ings of interest and pleasure. She was 
now to see that world she had so long 
looked forward to and anticipated: she 
was now to be free from the tyranny of 
ShafFou Paca, to go where others go, 
and enjoy the society of those, of whose 
wit, talents, beauty, and rank, she had 
heard so much. 

Condulmar painted in glowing co- 
lours the delights of liberty, the enjoy- 
ments of the world, the various amuse- 
ment of company. Her hopes were 
raised, her mind perturbed by his de- 
scriptions ; but his discourse sunk still 
more deeply into her soul, when he 
assured her, that by the side of others, 
that even amidst all the beauty of Lima, 
that even by the as yet unparalleled 
Princess of Ildebar, she would still be 
the most lovely in his eyes, and the first 

VOL. II. E 



50 ADA REIS. 

in his affections. She heard him with 
pleasure ; but she loved, and there- 
fore doubted. This her apprehensive 
doubt, her strong solicitude, her desire 
of pleasing him alone, and fear of 
losing him ; these feelings, which in 
the vain eyes of men communicate an 
interest even to ordinary features, gave 
to Fiormonda a loveliness and fascina- 
tion the most seductive and irresistible. 



ADA REIS. 51 



CHAPTER IV. 

At length the night of the enter* 
tainment arrived, and exceeded all that 
even expectation had imagined. The 
carpets were of gold tissue ; emeralds, 
amethysts, and rubies adorned the can- 
delabras ; the service for the banquet 
was, without intermixture, of highly- 
wrought gold. Yet, amidst objects 
so costly and brilliant, no eye could 
look on any thing but the daughter of 
Ada Reis. The beautiful women of 
Lima, who valued themselves on their 
rich brocades, short full petticoats, and 
little feet adorned with diamonds^, 
were outshone by the more simply- 
attired Fiormonda, whose ringlets, ac- 
cording to their mode, falling grace- 
fully behind the ear, were fastened by 

E 2 



LIBRARV ,^, 

UNIVERSnV OF ILUNOl 



52 ADA REIS. 

a gold pin, called the polyzone, adorn- 
ed with a diamond aigrette at each end. 
Her rosary was of pearls ; her dress 
was somewhat longer than that worn 
by the other ladies, and of it the girdle 
alone was remarkable for its splendour; 
the stones which composed it appeared 
to be rubies, and cast an almost super- 
natural light : they were, alas ! the gift 
of Kabkarra ! Vanity could not resist 
the display on such an occasion, and 
Condulmar's piercing and jealous eyes 
had not apparently as yet detected 
them. 

Fiormonda, perfect in loveliness, 
seemed already to set some little value 
upon the admiration of the men, and 
the envious observation of the women, 
to whom she was now for the first time 
presented. Yet she demeaned herself 
with a modesty, reserve, and dignity, 
which added to her attractions. Her 



ADA KEIS. 53 

personal charms were heightened by 
those of her mind, — ^inviting love, but 
commanding respect. The delight of 
her conversation was beyond common 
praise ; her ideas were all original, na- 
tural, and just; her expressions the 
purest, and her manners the most art- 
less and innocently playful. Such was 
she the first time she was publicly seen 
at Lima, and introduced into a world of 
gaiety, which had appeared to her, in 
its distant prospect, replete with amuse- 
ment and happiness. 

With Fiormonda the Duke of Mon- 
tevallos opened the ball ; to her alone 
every honour was paid. The viceroy 
seized every opportunity of addressing 
himself exclusively to her, and Mon- 
tevallos gazed till his eyes beheld 
scarcely any thing beside : the gay 
scene appeared to vanish from before 
him ; his brain turned, and feverish 



54f ADA REIS. 

illness disturbed his whole frame. 
Whilst in this state, Condulmar ap- 
proached him. — " How I pity you !" 
he said : *' though a rival, you are not 
a hated one : trust in me, and I w411 
assist your wishes." 

" Assist me /*' said the Duke, start- 
ing with surprise : " Assist me ! when 
I have plainly witnessed your own at- 
tachment : — this is beyond even ro- 
mance ; and, believe me, if I cannot 
win the lady by my own merit, I will 
never be indebted to another for her 
favour." 

As he said this with an indignant 
warmth, his eyes met Fiormonda's ; and 
the glance she gave Condulmar struck 
like a poniard into the heart of Mon- 
tevallos — it was the expression of entire 
and devoted attachment. The Duke 
knew no longer how to endure his 
situation J he could not bear to leave 



ADA REIS. 55 

the apartment, and he could not com- 
mand his agitation whilst he remained. 

In the mean time, exclamations of 
astonishment were breathed around at 
the fineness of this painting, the beauty 
of that china, the magnificence of the 
decorations ; and Ada Reis was almost 
fatigued with bowing to the numerous 
assemblage. 

The attachment of the Duke of 
Montevallos to Fiormonda was a sub- 
ject of much raillery to the viceroy ; 
and the lady's indifference, of surprise. 
The questions with which he perse- 
cuted her upon this and other subjects 
almost passed the bounds of good- 
breeding, whilst her acute and dignified 
answers evaded his curiosity. 

At length he too observed her eyes 
turn towards Condulmar, and the 
glance and the smile she gave irritated 
him also ; for lie was little less in lovje 



56 ADA REIS. 

with her than Alphonso. " And who," 
said he, endeavouring to penetrate her 
inmost thoughts, " is he to whom you 
have granted the envied privilege of 
that smile ? I observed his remarkable 
air, his easy grace, his light intellectual 
glance, the first time I had the honour 
of beholding him at the theatre at 
Callao — I would I were like him, in 
the hope that you would grant me also 
some little share of your attention !" 

Fiormonda's cheeks became of a 
deep red ; the colour quickly extended 
to her throbbing bosom. In early youth, 
nothing is so beautiful as a blush, that 
quick transition of colour, and the 
change of countenance which accom- 
panies it. 

At length, recovering herself, " He 
is,*' she said, " a stranger here ; some 
say he is an Italian, one of my own 
country : but I believe his history is 



ADA REIS. 57 

known to my father ; he came to Lima 
with us ; his vessel was wrecked at sea, 
and he was saved by ours ; of his birth 
and parentage, I am in truth ignorant." 

" And yet, lovely lady," said the 
viceroy, " you seem to me to take no 
common interest in this stranger's wel- 
fare : your eyes have followed him the 
whole of this evening ; when he spoke 
just now to the Princess, you trembled 
and changed colour, and your present 
confusion shows me plainly that he is 
not indifferent to you." 

A deep sigh from Fiormonda was 
her only answer, while her eyes, bent 
downwards, again testified extreme 
embarrassment. Her silence and her 
manner naturally increased Don Jo- 
seph's curiosity, and he instantly began 
to make inquiries of all respecting 
Condulmar. 

How strange it seemed to him, that 



58 ADA REIS. 

no one could gratify his curiosity! 
Great personages cannot bear to be 
thwarted ; and princes and viceroys 
are at all times over-curious : they ask 
fifty questions in a breath, without 
waiting for an answer. In this case it 
was different ; the questions were asked, 
but the viceroy waited in vain. In the 
mean time, the object of so many 
inquiries stood abstracted from the 
throng, leaning against a pillar, and 
gazing with a wild and anxious eye 
upon the Princess of Ildebar. The vice- 
roy observed him narrowly; various 
emotions seemed to be passing in his 
mind. At one time his eye brightened ; 
at another he smiled ; at another 
frowned : his manner excited surprise, 
and commanded an attention not en- 
tirely unmixed with awe and terror. 

Ada Reis performed the honours of 
the feast with princely dignity. The 



ADA REIS. 59 

entertainment concluded with a superb 
banquet, and during the repast the 
strain of music, and the voice of the 
singer, sounded full, and yet softened 
in the distance. There was a young 
Italian singer, in particular, whose voice 
was the theme of general commenda- 
tion, to the annoyance of Fiormonda. 
Condulmar hung over her whilst she 
sung, and seemed more than others 
delighted. Nirza returned the glance 
of admiration. Fiormonda felt the first 
pang of jealousy at that moment. 

" Are you happy?" said an old man 
with a long beard, addressing Ada 
Reis as he passed from one of the 
tables to another in order to pay a 
fitting attention to all his guests. "Are 
you happy?" said the old man, in an 
abrupt tone of voice, and in a foreign 
tongue. Ada Reis inclined his head, 
with his hand upon his heart. " Be- 



Go ADA REIS. 

ware, then/' said the old man, " beware 
of yon cloud !" and as he spoke, he 
raised his eye towards the heavens with 
an expression of prophetic fear. 

Ada Reis, who saw nothing but his 
painted ceiling, and the hundred light- 
ed tapers, made sign of inquiry as to 
his meaning. " Beware," repeated 
the old man, " of the approaching ruin ! 
Upon the 28th of October, at half an 
hour after ten at night, five hours 
and three-quarters before the full of 
the moon, thy signal crimes shall meet 
with their recompense, and the deed 
that thou didst in the far distant desert 
shall be revenged !" 

Ada Reis started : he thought, now, 
he recognised in the stranger the mer- 
chant Muley Hadgi, long since, as he 
had good cause to know, dead ; but 
the different habit could not disguise 
those grim features he had too just 



ADA REIS. 01 

cause to fear. He shuddered, and 
pressed his hand to his head ; the word 
Kabkarra was distinctly heard, and a 
laugh rose, hollow and triumphant, 
none knew from whence, no one could 
say from whom ; but all eyes were turned 
upon the master of the feast, who in 
vain attempted to recover himself, and 
appear as before. At length, making 
apologies for his sudden indisposition, 
he retired, and the amusements of the 
evening concluded with something of 
disorder and precipitation. 



62 



ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER V. 

The ensuing day Ada Reis sent, at 
an early hour, for Condulmar. When 
he came, he told him that he was ill in 
body, and miserable in mind ; that, 
without being superstitious, he was 
subject to the weaknesses of human 
nature ; that either sudden madness 
had fallen upon him, or he was pursued 
by an avenging spirit. If either were 
the case, what was to become of Fior- 
monda ? He spoke wdth an inquiring 
look, as if to penetrate Condulmar's 
intentions ; but he noticed only the 
former part of his discourse, and ex- 
pressed surprise at his terrors ; saying, 
they were the effect of mere indisposi- 
tion, and would pass away with the 
momentary disorder. Ada Reis re- 



ADA REIS. 63 

plied, with impatience, that it was not 
momentary, and regretted in bitter 
terms, that he had so abruptly rejected 
the offer of the Duke of Montevallos. 
" Death,'' he said, " is striking at my 
heart ; I know it by the single beat of 
that heart, and the sudden stop of the 
pulse ; and what is to become of my 
child ? Even now," he said, grasping 
Condulmar by the hand, " now that I 
gaze on you, methinks your eye glares 
like fire, and I see before me a fiend, 
not a m.an. Recall Alphonso; he shall 
marry my daughter." 

" A favouring look soon recalls a 
lover," said Condulmar, scornfully; 
" and the impassioned Duke is too 
deeply enamoured to despond." 

Ada Reis heaved a sigh, and was 
silent; and Condulmar seemed little 
inclined to continue the conversation. 

As the day advanced the viceroy and 



64 ADA REIS. 

many of the nobles waited upon Ada 
Reis, to inquire after his health. Fior- 
monda wished not to receive them ; yet 
so many compliments and professions 
had been made to her on the preceding 
evening, and so much interest express- 
ed, that she could hardly decline re- 
turning this courtesy by a moment's 
interview with her father's illustrious 
guests. Condulmar encouraged her to 
admit them ; and it appeared somewhat 
strange to her, who liked not her lover 
to look at or to speak to any other wo- 
man than herself, that he was so little 
jealous and apprehensive, and per- 
mitted every one to approach her ; he 
seemed even to assist and encourage 
the hopes of the proud jMarquis de 
Santa Spina, and the Duke of Monte- 
vallos ; and yet, with a malicious smile, 
he whispered in her ear that he knew 
those hopes would be disappointed. 



ADA JIEIS. 65 

Was his real love? xllas ! it bore none 
of the beautiful features of that holy 
passion. Love for the young and the 
innocent is pure as youth and innocence 
themselves. It delights to strengthen 
and cherish virtue, and is ever anxious, 
that even its most ardent desires should 
be sanctioned and purified by the sa- 
credness of religion : but Condulmar 
was continually scoffing at constancy, 
and deriding marriage : andFiormonda, 
while she had suffered him to establish 
an irresistible dominion over her heart, 
had too much sense not to feel, that 
him, whom it was now impossible that 
she should not love, it was impossible 
that she should esteem. To beauty has 
been given, by nature, a fatal ascendant 
over man and over woman. Condul- 
mar was more than beautiful : every 
feeling, every passion of his soul ani- 
mated and spoke in his countenance ; a 

VOL. II. F 



66 ADA REIS. 

depth of thought, apparently the most 
profound, gave at times an external 
calm and repose to his features ; but the 
quick intelligence of his eye relighten- 
ed in a moment at the slightest look or 
word, that moved the quick sensations 
within. His gifts were the most va- 
rious ; his language the most impressive. 
He could touch the hardest heart and 
excite the coldest; yet when he had 
made others feel the deepest, he could, 
by a jest, make dignity descend, and 
gravity forget itself, and turn at once 
the beautiful and solemn into the ridi- 
culous. With such qualifications he 
was naturally admired and sought by 
all ; but whilst he encouraged their 
court, and was evidently gratified by 
it, he had the dexterity to persuade 
Fiormondathat, asbefore upon winning, 
so now he was solely intent upon fixing 
and retaining her affections. 



ADA REIS. 67 



CHAPTER VI. 

How often is love described! its birth, 
growth, decline, and death, in all lan- 
guages, in all countries ! Authors of 
both sexes seem never to tire of de- 
scanting upon this master passion. In 
the MS* there follow 662 pages of ro- 
mantic love, such as former times were 
enthusiastic and patient enough to read. 
The present age, though as liable to 
the affection, is somewhat more impa- 
tient of common-place dissertation upon 
it. So many lovers sighed round Fior- 
monda, that many petty adventures 
of course took place : sighs, presents, 
moonlight walks, balls, plays, rides, 
quarrels, treacheries, frowns, jealousies, 
hopes, follow in the regular order ; and 

f2 



68 ADA RRIS. 

at length, upon the lover's side, neglect, 
inconstancy, and coldness. 

Fiormonda yet, notwithstanding, 
seemed to have forgotten every thing 
on earth but Condulmar. Vain was her 
pride ; vain a promised diadem ; vain 
the distraction of Montevallos; vain the 
adoration of so many courtiers ; vain 
the flattery of the viceroy : weeks and 
months passed, to appearance, in around 
of amusement; but really in the in- 
dulgence of violent and restless passion. 
The period when young ladies require 
the greatest care; when the feelings 
are the strongest, and the reason the 
weakest, when they are exposed at once 
to the temptations of novelty and the 
ardour of solicitation ; that period is 
often selected, even by the wisest of 
parents, for removing from about them 
those who have hitherto guarded and 
restrained them. This was now the case 



ADA REIS. 69 

with Fiormonda. SliafToii Paca, offend- 
ing Ada Reis one evening by an abrupt 
and unsolicited intrusion upon his pre- 
sence, he sent her back to Egypt; but 
previous to her departure, she boasted 
that Fiormonda was now no longer in 
need of her assistance ; — that her son 
Kabkarra's predictions had been ful- 
filled, and that before long he would 
pay her an unexpected visit. 

Fiormonda was thus left entirely to 
her own guidance. Indeed, Ada Reis 
was not much used to watch over the 
female sex, with a view to admonishing 
and protecting them ; and as he ad- 
vanced in years, began, as is sometimes 
the case, to feel her somewhat of a 
charge and burthen. With her childish 
sprightliness and infantine caresses, her 
chief charm in his eyes was gone. He 
was engrossed by his own favourites, 
and he now viewed his daughter merely 



70 ADA IlEIS. 

as a means of gratifying his pride and 
ambition. His love for low society 
had never left him, nor slackened in 
the slightest degree ; and he preferred 
dancers, buffoons, and revellers, to vice- 
roys, state, and ceremony. 

The Duke of Montevallos, suffering 
under a hopeless passion, and despairing 
of success, resolved to quit Lima, and 
fix his residence in the mother country. 
He wished, however, to make one more 
effort to recommend himself to Fior- 
monda before he bade her farewell for 
ever. For this purpose he asked and 
obtained a last interview. He spoke 
for some time with calmness, but at 
length the vehemence of his love broke 
forth, and in a tone of anguish he de- 
manded of her — "Answer me but this, 
this one question — Are you to be the 
wife of Condulmar? Who is lie? Has 
he any right over you? If he has, it is 



ADA REIS. 71 

well ; I must be satisfied ; but if not, 
let me save you before it be too late." 

Fiormonda hesitated. 

" You know not," he said, " how 
cruelly the world speaks of you — -you 
are not happy." 

" None can be happy," said Fior- 
monda, with a sigh, ** who act as I have 
done." 

** I will save you." 

" My name must never be united to 
yours," she replied ; " there is a shade 
cast over it would mar your brightness. 
Go you and pursue your honourable 
career, and remember these words from 
one who has made the trial — happiness 
cannot enter, where guilt has been re- 
ceived.'* 

" Guilt," said Montevallos, throwing 
himself at her feet, " can never have 
defiled that spotless bosom." 



72 ADA REIS. 

" Alas f said Fiormonda, mournfully, 
" you know me not: you judge me by 
the semblance it has pleased Heaven 
to endow me with j you judge me, too, 
by the wealth, the honours, and the 
pleasures with which I have from in- 
fancy been surrounded; but you can- 
not see into my heart.*' 

" And if I could," said Alphonso, 
" what should I read there but ge- 
nerous feelings, and benevolence, and 
kindness?" 

Fiormonda's tears alone answered 
the duke's vows and protestations. 

Compelled to leave her, he forced 
himself from her presence in the utmost 
misery and perturbation. "She is scarce 
eighteen years of age," he said to him- 
self: " even if seduced from duty, there 
is time for amendment. Oh ! that she 
were a Christian — that she would kneel 



ADA REIS. 73 

and repent ! But that atheist lier father, 
and that evil genius her lover, to what 
ruin may they not lead her ! If it be 
possible, I will save her. However 
misled and perverted by the wicked- 
ness of others, could I but gain her 
consent, I would espouse her on the 
instant, and rescue her from the evil 
by which she is surrounded. Who can 
this Condulmar be? What can give him 
the right thus to destroy with impunity 
the loveliest of human beings? Her al- 
tered looks, her dow^ncast eyes, her em- 
barrassment, her floods of tears, all too 
plainly declare the base and cruel ma- 
lignity of his conduct. He shall either 
openly acknowledge her to be his wife, 
or decidedly resign her. I will awaken 
her father to caution ; I will inform him 
of my more than suspicions ; I will win 
her yet, — by ardent attachment and 



74 ADA REIS. 

devotion: yes, I will win her. — For 
young as she is, the depravation of her 
lawless and artful companion cannot 
have reached the purity of her mind, 
or degraded and corrupted the original 
nobleness of her nature." 



ADA llEIS. 15 



CHAPTER VII. 

FioRMONDA had sufficient cause for 
the bitter tears which she had shed 
during her interview with the Duke of 
Montevallos. The conduct of Con- 
dulmar was too plain to allow even the 
most devoted love to deceive itself any 
longer. Amidst her sorrow and re- 
morse, she had no longer the consola- 
tion of believing, that she was preferred 
or even beloved by him. The beautiful 
singer, who had lately appeared, of the 
name of Nirza, and the Princess of Ilde- 
bar, a lady of high rank, but of little mo- 
rality, engrossed all his time ; and, after 
the manner of women, lost no oppor- 
tunity of displaying power, and of sub- 
jecting Fiormonda to as much morti- 
fication as possible. There is no man, 



7G ADA KEIS. 

however unfeeling and remorseless, 
who does not fear and dislike the re- 
proaches of a woman wliom he has in- 
jured. This dread made Condulmar 
avoid seeing Fiormonda alone as much 
as possible. In public he still paid her 
attention ; such attention as was cal- 
culated and intended to proclaim his 
triumph and the empire which he had 
established over her. His conversa- 
tion, when near her, was in the most 
personal and scornful tone of satire. 
" Nothing," he would say, " can be 
more fatiguing than a permanent at- 
tachment; a beauty or an heiress are, 
either of them, the most wearisome of 
human beings ; they are never content- 
ed or satisfied : but both characters in 
one form a compound that is utterly 
mtolerable. We take infinite pains to 
win a woman's affections exclusively to 
ourselves, but when they are gained we 



ADA REIS. 77 

find them the most troublesome posses- 
sion with which a man can be encum- 
bered. When one of whom we are 
enamoured bestows upon another aught 
of preference, we are apt to suppose the 
suffering we endure the greatest that 
can be inflicted upon us ; but we shall 
find that it is nothing when compared 
to the tedium of having all her affections 
concentered upon ourselves." 

This sarcastic levity increased rather 
than diminished the infatuation of 
Fiormonda. She sought him in so- 
ciety, as she could rarely find the op- 
portunity of seeing him otherwise : for 
his sakeishe submitted to the humilia- 
tion of courting those with whom he 
associated; and the continued round 
of company, into which her devotion 
to Condulmar led her, in some measure 
drove and banished the recollection of 
her miserable situation from her mind. 
Involved in the pursuits of this world. 



78 ADA REIS. 

she thought not of that wliich is to 
come. A hurried life, though not happy 
in itself, suspends and postpones the 
day of unhappiness. The pause of 
quiet that succeeds the return to tran- 
quillity comes attended with remorse 
and sorrow. The hours that are passed 
in mourning and prayer are numbered, 
but the mind takes no heed of time 
when worldly pleasures are varying 
every scene, and worldly interests ab- 
sorb all attention. Fiormonda sought 
without in a crowd of adulators for that 
peace of mind she could no longer find 
within. 

Early, very early the next morning, 
after her interview with Montevallos, 
she heard beneath her window the step, 
as she believed, of Condulmar return- 
ing from his nightly revels ; she arose 
in haste, and opening the lattice of her 
apartment, saw the Duke of Monteval- 
los, who called to her in a tone of re- 



ADA REIS. 79 

proach and impatience, and urged her 
to speak one moment with him. 

Immediately as he left her, he had 
hastened in search both of Ada Reis 
and Condulmar. But they were en- 
gaged in those pursuits to which they 
now devoted the whole of their time; 
and he had been unable to meet with 
either of them. At length, two or three 
hours after midnight, he had entered 
the coffee-room where the young men 
of fashion were wont to assemble, in- 
stead of returning to their homes. He 
heard the loud laugh of revellers, and 
found Condulmar at that hour of the 
morning drinking with his libertine as- 
sociates. The subject of the conversa- 
tion was woman, and, one by one, 
every fair character was impeached by 
the profane and dissolute. Princesses, 
countesses, merchants' wives, were all 
mercilessly branded with the foulest 



80 ADA REIS. 

aspersions. The name of Fiormonda 
was now hesitatingly pronounced by 
the captain of the viceroy's guard ; with 
a thousand oaths he protested he be- 
lieved her at least to be immaculate. 
Condulmar laughed, and, to the hor- 
ror and astonishment of Montevallos, 
boldly proclaimed this paragon of ex- 
cellence, this puie, cold, and chaste 
daughter of Aua Reis, this spotless 
maiden, who had refused the hand of 
so many great and powerful dukes and 
princes, to be his mistress; voluntarily 
and almost unsolicited to have resigned 
herself to him, and to be more the ob- 
ject of his contempt and indifference 
than of his love. In the first impulse 
of his wrath, Montevallos clapped his 
hand to his sword, but recollection of 
the exposure to which any rash step 
upon his part would subject Fiormonda, 
restrained his indignation, and he with- 



ADA REIS. 81 

drew, sensible of the difficulty of his 
situation, and undetermined how to 
act ; deeply wounded and irritated, but 
at the same time confounded and over- 
come. In this temper of mind he 
hastened on until he found himself in 
the open square near the viceroy's pa- 
lace ; his servants were there awaiting 
him. He dismissed them, and walked 
beneath the windows of the house of 
Ada Reis: the lattice opened ; he heard 
Fiormonda's voice. 

" Condulmar,*' she said, "is it you?" 
" No, by heavens !" he answered, " it 
is a wretch, a madman ! and if you 
would not have me destroy myself, or 
expose you to the scorn of the whole 
world, see me for one moment." 

Fiormonda looked from beneath the 
veranda, and with that look of inno- 
cence seen so often on the browof child- 
hood, she gazed upon him, surprised 

VOL. II. G 



82 ADA REIS. 

and struck with the vehemence of his 
agitation. She was scarcely dressed ; 
her dark blue eyes, with their black 
rims and jetty fringe, as if awakened 
by the hasty step of one she expected, 
spoke of love, it is true, but the love an 
infant might have felt ; and impurity 
vanished from every thought even upon 
beholding her: her dark rich locks fell 
carelessly upon her white neck, and 
her still whiter robe, clasped in front, 
which showed nor art nor care ; all was 
simple nature. Yet she wore bracelets 
adorned with jewels, and a broach made 
of the hair of Condulmar. 

" He has wronged her," said the 
duke, gazing upon her. '' I will tell 
her what the traitor has dared to say : 
I will save her from the seducer's grasp, 
and bear her away to my own country 
as my bride. She is innocent ! I see 
it, I feel it; for purity and virtue show 
themselves in every look." 



ADA REIS. 83 

Fiormonda now descended the stairs, 
opened the door of the house, and 
stepped half fearfully towards the duke; 
she had thrown her veil over her head 
and face. " I am doing wrong," she 
said; " I am acting an imprudent part : 
but I feel for your agitation ; and at 
this hour of the morning I may con - 
verse with you a few moments, perhaps, 
without interruption. What mean you 
by those horrid expressions? Why do 
you appear thus moved, and why looks 
your eye so wild ? Were I not used to 
Condulmar in these moods, you would 
terrify me.*' 

" Do not name him, I conjure you!" 
*'Iam aware," said Fiormonda, *'that 
you hate him on account of his once 
great attachment for me ; but did I in- 
deed possess the power over your affec- 
tions which you say I do, would you 
not at my request, and for my sake, 

g2 



84 ADA REIS. 

moderate the violence of your feel- 
ings ?" 

The duke now informed Fiormonda 
of what had passed. *' And tell me,'* 
he said, "tell me, can you ever see 
again, or ever forgive the wretch who 
thus has dared to defame you ? Say, 
at least," he cried emphatically, " say 
that he is false, and that you are chaste 
and innocent, as I believe you to be — 
as you now look. Speak !'* 

Fiormonda was greatly agitated. 

" Say," continued Alphonso, his 
voice broken by the violence of his 
emotion, "that the beautiful semblance 
of all that is honourable and lovely in 
woman, the flower and blooming rose 
of this fair city, has not a canker in tlie 
bud: say that your young heart is 
chaste, that those lips, those eyes . .*' 

" Oh, spare your commendations t 
Your praise, sir, makes me sad. You 



ADA REIS. 85 

have learned much, I think, amongst 
kings and courtiers.'^ 

" And have you learned nothing 
there, madam ?" 

" I know not what you mean." 

" Happy innocence !" said Alphonso, 
bitterly. 

Fiormonda made a motion as if to 

depart ; the duke seized her arm. 

'" By what power do you detain me?" 

" By the power of love, wrought up 
to madness," he cried : '*by the feelings 
of injured love and desperation !" 

" Will you harm me ?" 

*' Not for worlds !" 

** What do you wish?" 

" To save you." 

** It is too late." 

" Is it possible ? — Oh, Fiormonda ! 
can guilt put on the appearance of such 
innocence? Can early youth admit of 
such perversion ?*' 



86 ADA llEIS. 

** I am miserable !" 

" How long — oh ! how long, have 
you been the prey of this monster?" 

" Call him not so harshly : — how 
long? — Too long, sir, for my peace of 
mind." 

" You have a proud spirit : — does it 
not kindle into wrath within you, when 
you remember how he has repaid you ? 
You weep: do you not hate him now?*' 

" It is a hard task to learn to hate, 
when we have once loved too well ; 
but I own that I feel some resentment. 
I feel that I was worth more than the 
price for which I have sold myself — I 
see others, whom I consider as less than 
myself, set up above me — I love, too, 
and " 

" Have you no regard for your fair 
name? Can you bear to hear the sneer 
of the multitude, to be the laughter of 
men j the jest, the scorn, the word of 



ADA REIS. 87 

reproach amongst women; to find your- 
self the sport of slander ; you, who have 
been flattered, followed, extolled be- 
yond even your rare deserts ? Can you 
outlive the world's contempt?" 

" I have outlived his love : after that 
I can endure any thing." 

" If you think you can endure the 
world's contempt ; if you believe, that 
you value not its opinion ; be sure, un- 
happy Fiormonda, that you deceive 
yourself. Too powerful is that world 
to be opposed ; too precious its good 
report to be despised. It is pleasant 
and honourable to be loved and com- 
mended. A woman's name should be 
sacred ; it should be rarely thrust upon 
the public notice ; and whenever it is 
drawn from its sacred and pure retreat, 
modesty and dignity should surround 
it. You are running the career which 
many have run before you : you are 



88 ADA REIS. 

throwing away your fair name, before 
you know its value and importance ; 
throwing away that character which 
you will pass the remainder of your 
days in deeply regretting, and seeking 
in vain to recover and re-estabHsh. 
Can it be possible? are you '* 

" Say nothing more, sir ; I wish you 
every happiness : but when I refused 
your hand, I told you I was not worthy 
of your devoted attachment. Go, now, 
and every blessing attend you! Leave 
me to my fate, and judge me not." 

" Not judge you ! Who should be 
judged, if you are not ? Who possessed 
your advantages, your understanding? 
Who might have filled, more worthily, 
the loftiest situation ? — For shame ! for 
shame ! Break this disgraceful con- 
nexion ! Away with those bands, and 
braids, and jewels ; the opprobrious 
tokens of dishonest love. Put on sack- 



ADA REIS. 81) 

cloth and ashes; — kneel in the church ; 
do penance in thy soHtude. But I am 
mad, I know not what I say. I swear 
to be revenged !" 

" On whom ?" 

" On you — on him — on Ada Reis !" 

" There is vengeance enough here," 
said Fiormonda : " seek thou for no 
more. Sufficient punishment is it for 
me to have lost his affections.'^ 

At this avowal Alphonso could trust 
himself no further; he hurried from 
her, and passed rapidly forward ; but 
upon approaching to the bridge, he 
paused, for straight before him, with a 
cold and haughty air, he beheld Con- 
dulmar ; and he was for a moment 
checked by the perfect tranquillity of 
his manner. 

The mist of morning had dispersed, 
the sun's all-glorious rays shone full 
upon the desperate features of that 



90 ADA REIS. 

mysterious stranger, who seemed nei- 
ther to seek nor shun the present inter- 
view. 

*' You liave wronged," began tlie 
duke, " the sweetest and fairest lady 
the earth ever saw ; you have profaned 
her name, and disgraced yourself for 
ever." 

*' I seek not your good opinion," said 
Condulmar ; ** nor shall I account for 
my words or my actions to a madman." 

" If I am mad," said Alphonso, ** you 
have driven me to it ; stand — prepare 
yourself — one of us shall die on the in- 
stant." 

" You have no right over me : I 
scorn and pity you ; I will not tight 
for that which I have obtained without 
risk or trouble." 

*' But you shall expiate your crime 
thus," said the furious duke, rushing 
upon him, and attempting to stab him. 



ADA REIS. 91 

Condulmar calmly struck the weapon 
from his hand. Alphonso, baffled and 
astonished, regarded his antagonist with 
something of apprehension. '* What 
are you?" he cried: " I adjure you 
meet me as a man meets man." 

Condulmar smiled — Alphonso leapt 
forward to grapple with him. Con- 
dulmar opposed coolness to his fury, 
and seizing the frantic youth by the 
arm, threw him to the earth, saying, 
" Foolish boy, beware whom you at- 
tack." His head struck with violence 
upon the edge of a projecting marble ; 
he fell motionless. Condulmar watched 
him — approached him — raised him up 
— felt that his pulse had ceased to beat, 
that life was extinct. " What have I 
done ? Is this death — can it be ?" he 
cried, contemplating his lifeless antago- 
nist for some moments^ — " Will the 
silence which has followed such vehe- 



92 ADA REIS. 

ment and loud parley be eternal ? Is 
that energy of character, and that ac- 
tivity of frame at an end thus, and for 
ever, in one instant ? Are those fierce 
passions, that ardent faithful love, the 
thoughts that passed so rapidly through 
that romantic mind, the palpitating 
Jieart, the eager hurried tone of voice 
— is all terminated, all quiet, and am I 
the murderer ?'* Condulmar now look- 
ed around him. The sun already shone 
bright above the horizon ; — the people 
were passing to and fro, and the city 
began to stir with the daily occupa- 
tions of its inhabitants. The street in 
which he stood was still lonely and de- 
serted : — its stillness amidst the general 
movement appalled him for a moment, 
but collecting himself, he left the spot 
without delay, returned to the house of 
Ada Reis, sought his own apartment, 
and there awaited the event. 



ADA REIS. 93 

With the early morn, the news of the 
death of Montevallos spread through 
the city; and a burst of grief and ge- 
nerous sympathy sprung from every 
heart. From the wound he had re- 
ceived, and the place in which the body 
had been found, it was difficult to as- 
certain the cause and manner of his 
death ; but it was generally supposed 
that it had been his own act, and that 
the unkindness of Fiormonda had 
driven him to despair. His romantic 
attachment was known to many ; every 
circumstance that could interest was 
recalled to mind ; all pitied, all sympa- 
thised with him who was no more, and 
the murmur became general against 
the cold and cruel girl who had, as it 
was supposed, driven him to his un- 
timely end. The anguish of her feel- 
ings may be imagined, when the recol- 
lection of their recent conversation 



94 ADA REIS. 

recurred to her mind, and with that 
recollection the bitter thought that the 
knowledge of her degraded state, and 
the misery of ill-requited love, had oc- 
casioned and hastened the dreadful 
catastrophe. 

The day ensuing the corpse lay in 
state. The viceroy ordered a general 
mourning ; the festive dance and song 
were discontinued ; the theatres were 
closed ; and at the hour of night-fall 
the whole of the nobility, and amongst 
the rest Condulmar, serious, but col- 
lected, followed the funeral of the 
much-lamented youth. 



ADA RETS. 95 



CHAPTER VIII. 



FiORMONDA sat at her window, and 
saw the procession pass : the light of 
the torches fell upon the beautiful fea- 
tures of Alphonso. She watched the 
funeral train ; she heard the tolling of 
the distant knell ; she felt that she had 
lost a faithful friend, one who, when 
slander was busy with her name, would 
have risked his life to defend her. She 
now lamented the want of firm princi- 
ple she had shown ; she then thought 
with regret upon the ill conduct of 
Condulmarj but love was still in her 
young heart the predominant feeling; 
she felt with ardour, and she knew not 
the vanity, the transitory nature, the 
little importance of all these illusions : 
she knew not of how little profit, of 
how little even pleasure it is to yield up 
the affections of the heart and soul to 



90 ADA REIS. 

any one in this world, be he even really 
possessed of all the grace, talent, and 
beauty we imagine in him ; for in the 
end he will merely betray the heart 
which doats upon him, and mock at the 
devotion which has served to feed and 
gratify his vanity. To hate is wiser 
than to love ; but the wisest is to do 
neither. Better is it to pursue our 
course upon the earth as the blind mole 
does beneath its surface, working our 
way, without seeking or attaching our- 
selves to aught, that like ourselves, is 
but dust. 

Fiormonda continued at her window, 
restless and melancholy, expecting one 
who came not ; she felt oppressed by 
the intense heat of the atmosphere. She 
arose ; she approached her table ; she 
wrote a letter, then tore it — it was 
filled with reproaches, and of what use 
were reproaches ? She struck her harp 



ADA REIS. 97 

— the notes reminded her of times past, 
and brought with them the remem- 
brance of her past life. The singular 
events of her youth recurred; she 
recollected her guardian spirit, his 
care, and his admonitions ; she wished 
again to see him ; she sung the song 
he loved ; she thought how happy and 
pure she once had been, and she suffer- 
ed her tears to flow without restraint. 
At that moment, a refreshing breeze 
blew upon her from the open window, 
and a note, sweet as that of a distant 
horn, sounded from below. 

If there be in souls a sympathy with 
sounds, so that the chime of the village 
bells can melt the heart by awakening 
the memory ; if that simple air, played 
by the Swiss mountaineer upon his 
pipe, which calls the herds at evening 
to their home, can in a distant land 
make the iirm soldier foiget and aban- 

VOL. II. H 



98 ADA REIS. 

don his duty ; it is no wonder that 
Fiormonda dwelt fixed and absorbed 
as these words were sung by a voice at 
once familiar and dear : 



I. 

Sing not for others, but for me, 
In every thought, in every strain. 
Though I perchance am far from thee, 
And we must never meet again : 
Though I may only weep for thee. 
Sing not for others, but for me. 

II. 

My spirit still is hovering nigh ! 
Then breathe for me that sacred sigh ; 
The sacred sigh, the thrilling tone. 
Which tells of time for ever gone ; 
Oh, when the heart's tear dims thine eye. 
Think that my spirit hovers nigh. 

III. 

In starry night, or soft moonbeam. 
By mossy bank, or rippling stream. 



ADA REIS. 99 

In balmy breeze, in fragrant flower. 
Though dearer hands may deck thy bower ; 
In all that's sweet or fair to thee. 
Think not of others, but of me. 

IV. 

If e'er thou sing'st thy native lay. 
As thou wert wont in happier day ; 
That lay which breathed of love and truth. 
And all the joys of early youth ; 
Though all those joys are past for thee, 
Sing not for others, but for me. 

V. 

I 've mark'd the struggles of thy mind, 

Like bird in gilded cage confined ; 

Vain was the costly jewell'd chain— . 

The heart breathed forth a mournful strain ; 

The spirit panted to be free— 

And I could only weep for thee. 

VI. 

Farewell ! Alas, I may no more 
Than weep and blame — and yet adore. 
Thy hour is come — I cannot save — 
But we shall meet beyond the grave : 

H 2 



100 ADA REIS. 

The sinner's prayer may reach to heaven ; 
Pray then, and mayst thou be forgiven. 



** And I will pray," said Fiormonda, 
kneeling. She did so, and a calm she 
had not felt for a length of time per- 
vaded her whole frame. S)ie threw 
herself upon her bed ; but the thought 
of Condulmar again returned ; — twice 
she started from her couch and listened 
to catch again the voice, as she deemed 
it, of her long-lost guardian spirit. 

It was not yet midnight.. Fior- 
monda's mind had not been affected 
and heated by romances and tales of 
spectres ; yet an indescribable horror 
took possession of her mind at this par- 
ticular moment. She had witnessed the 
sudden death of one who loved her pas- 
sionately; the thought of it chilled her. 
" Alphonso," she said, " art thou no 
more — thou w^ho wert so young, so gay. 



ADA REIS. 101 

SO handsome, and so much beloved? 
How often have I seen thee the first 
in the dance, in the chase, and even 
(so weak is woman) whilst my heart 
was Condulmar's, how even I added 
my tribute of admiration to the general 
voice!" As she thus lamented him, 
she felt, as it were, the breath of some 
one near her : there was in the chamber 
that deep stillness, which can impress 
awe upon the mind, even when occu- 
pied with overwhelming grief. The 
light of the moon faintly illumined the 
apartment, and by that pale light there 
appeared a dark substance, a gathering 
mist, which slowly embodied itself, un- 
til plain before her stood the shade of 
Montevallos! His countenance was 
mournful : his hand was raised to his 
temple, as if he still suffered from the 
mortal wound. In a low voice, at 
length he spoke, " Fiormonda, prepare 



102 ADA REIS. 

thyself: be not alarmed ; but repent, 
for death is at hand.*' 

She looked fixedly upon him ; she 
had no power to avert her eyes : her 
very heart trembled, whilst her limbs 
were fixed under the influence of pre- 
ternatural awe. 

The low sepulchral voice again ad- 
dressed her ; "Fiormonda, awaken from 
the delusions of life ; thou hast sinned 
beyond thy years : repent, for even 
now sincere repentance may avail." 

** I have not sinned," she cried ; 
" he—he first " 

" This will not avail thee," said Mon- 
tevallos, mournfully; ** I also have sin- 
ned. We believed not in our hearts 
the true faith ; we prayed not for 
strength in the hour of temptation j 
we thought it little to yield to the vio- 
lence of our passions; to live alone for 
love, — for pleasure, — for hurry, and 



ADA REIS. 103 

amusement. Prepare thyself to answer 
for every word, for every thought, for 
every neglect : for where I am, there 
is no respect paid to persons ; neither 
the soft voice, nor the bright eye, nor 
youth, nor beauty, nor fashion, nor 
rank availeth : humility, charity, faith, 
forgiveness of injuries, are virtues 
here." 

" And must I, who am so young, 
die ?" said Fiormonda : ** will no fur- 
ther time be allowed me ?" 

*' No further." 

" Will Condulmar " 

At the mention of his name, the 
shade passed mournfully away. 

" He did not slay thee ^" said Fior- 
monda, rising with frantic eagerness 
from her couch : ** he is too good, too 
kind ! — Speak, yet once more ! — nay, 
thus, thus let me retain thee." Her 
arms clasped themselves,, as she 



104 ADA REIS. 

thought, around Alphonso ; but terror 
unparalleled overpowered her, when, 
by a sudden light which now blazed 
through the chamber, she saw before 
her, laughing with horrid malignity, 
not Alphonso, but the fiend Kabkarra! 

" Thou art mine! Thou art mine!" 
he cried. 

Fiormonda fainted. She recovered, 
and in the distance, as in a picture, she 
thought she beheld Condulmar laugh- 
ing and drinking with his abandoned 
low associates in the house of his new^ 
favourite, Nirza. Her father was with 
them — she seemed to hear their loud 
mirth, whilst a long procession, clad in 
black, floated ever and anon before 
her. The knell for Alphonso now di- 
stinctly rung upon her ear ; the torches 
blazed, when again loud laughter and 
merriment was heard. Suddenly, there 
passed before her, in all her seductive 



ADA REIS. 105 

charms, the Princess of Ildebar ! — Now, 
now she aroused herself. All had been 
a dream ! She was alone — she was dis- 
consolate, and what had really appeared 
to her distracted fancy, and what had 
not, she could not tell. It was near 
upon day-break — she had slept long : 
she arose, and returned to the window 
she had remained at the preceding 
evening. She thought again to hear the 
soothing voice of her guardian attend- 
ant, she thought to breathe the fresh 
reviving air of the early morn, and 
watch the all-glorious sun in its first 
brilliant beams ; she thought too, per- 
haps, again to see the shade of Al- 
phonso; and thus watching, thus listen- 
ing, she heard, as will frequently be the 
lot of those who look for supernatural 
events or celestial sounds, in their stead 
only peals of laughter— the rude and 
noisy laughter of unlicensed revellers, 



106 ADA REIS. 

when reason has fled, and nothing is 
left of man, except that laughter, to 
distinguish him from the brute he with- 
out reason despises. She started. Arv. 
other laugh, loud and lawless, again 
proceeded from an abandoned crew, 
whom she now perceived approaching 
the house. Amidst them she was 
shocked to recognise her father and 
Condulmar, both of them heated with 
wine, and crowned with ivy and vine. 
They were preceded by musicians, 
and surrounded by maskers, buffoons, 
dancers, and actresses, who were con- 
ducting them home in licentious tri- 
umph from their nocturnal orgies. 
Condulmar was walking by the beauti- 
ful Nirza, whilst Fleur de Rose (a pretty 
Parisian dancer) and Ada Reis followed 
them, supported by her husband, a 
French coiffeur, who was vaunting his 
art, and offering to dress Ada Reis ac- 



ADA REIS. 107 

cording to the fashion of his country. 
In the mean time, the bravura song of 
the singers was accompanied by guitars 
and tambourines. 

As the procession approached the 
house, Ada Reis, perceiving Fior- 
monda, declared it to be in her honour, 
affirming that this should be her wed- 
ding-day. ** Ay," said Condulmar, 
" we have attended my only rival to 
the grave, and I am now returned" 
(he said, with cruel mockery,) " to 
espouse thee, Fiormonda." 

Fiormonda turned with desperate 
grief from such a scene. 

The custom of rejoicing upon the 
night of any great funeral was common 
at Lima, as in many other places, but 
it was seldom that any person of rank 
assisted at these lawless revels. 

Condulmar's familiar air, his jests, 
lowered from the refinement of wit to 



108 ADA REIS. 

the vulgar coarseness of his society, his 
indifference shown so plainly either to 
Fiormonda's conduct or her reputation, 
his perverted laugh of malignity and 
scorn, were all so many causes of misery 
to the woman who still adored him with 
the folly, enthusiasm, and romance of 
raw and unadvisedyouth; andwhoeven 
now, notwithstanding his manner, not- 
withstanding the associates by whom 
he was surrounded, was soothed in 
some measure because she saw him 
again. For the passion of jealousy in 
young minds breeds no withering prin- 
ciple as in later years : desire of re- 
venge, deadly hatred, envy, malice, 
find no harbour in tender open hearts ; 
these love and break ; but as life ad- 
vances, and as bitterness mingles with 
disappointment, fiercer thoughts spring 
up. Fiormonda, however, knew only 
Jiow to love. 



ADA REIS. 109 

** By the by," said Condulmar, ad- 
dressing the Parisian hair-dresser as he 
entered Ada Reis's apartment with all 
his Bacchanalian rout following him, 
and there met Fiormonda, who had 
come forward to receive him, ** here is 
a chevelure worthy of your attention ; 
these long dark tresses, I should ima- 
gine, are such as you were speaking of. 
See how well this head is set upon this 
white and unmatched bust. Fiormonda, 
put off some of your gravity, and amuse 
yourself awhile : here is a gentleman 
who has been dressing me, as he calls 
it, a Paile de pigeon, and Ada Reis au 
coup de vent. Mademoiselle seroit 
mieux n'est-ce pas," he continued, 
" coiff^e avec ses grosses boucles en 
repentir." The hair-dresser replied 
respectfully, " Mademoiselle est bien 
comme elle est." Condulmar con- 
tinued, the newest of all fashions 



110 ADA REIS. 

was, he heard, at Paris, to be drest en 
d^sesp^r^ ; but that would not do for 
him. 

They then called for refreshments, 
and seating themselves around a table, 
ate dried sweetmeats, and drank mares- 
chino with cream ; after which, in a 
loud chorus, they sung wild and licen- 
tious songs, until they retired, long 
after daybreak, to bed : and this, this 
was the night, or sooner the day, after 
the interment of the young and noble 
Montevallos ! 



ADA REIS. Ill 



CHAPTER IX. 

He who with open force and by de- 
sperate deeds obtains the object of his 
guilty wishes does not harm his victim 
to the same degree as he, who, by con- 
summate art and flattery, seduces a re- 
luctant mind, and corrupts the purity 
of the soul. Fiormonda's mind was per- 
verted, and she resigned herself to her 
love more than to her grief. Yet the first 
time she had an opportunity of speak- 
ing to her lover alone, she reproached 
him with bitterness for his conduct. 
" My dear friend," said Condulmar, 
'* how it grieves me to hear these com- 
plaints ! After all, c'est mieux d'etre 
lobjet du caprice d'une femme que de 
sa passion, et le pire de tout c'est d'etre 
Tobjet de son amour.*' 



112 ADA KEIS. 

" There is something,** said Fior- 
monda, ** in that French language, in 
its phrase, in its tone, which mocks at 
truth, and violates even virtue itself, 
forcing her into the train and service 
of vice. Their love, their sentiment, 
their expressions of passion, their pro- 
fessions of attachment, are all frivolous, 
heartless, and corrupt. When I was 
dear to thee," said she, trying to smile, 
" it was in Italian, in Spanish, in my 
father's language, thou didst speak to 
me." 

^* Quarrel not with the French lan- 
guage,*' said Condulmar: ** it can ex- 
press love in all its pathos and beauty 
as well, if not better, than any other ; 
but in good truth, why should we make 
miseries for ourselves, seeing that so 
many are already inflicted upon us? 
Heaven knows, youth and happiness 
last not long : why shoukl we, by 



.ADA RETS. 115 

anxiety and ill-temper, misemploy the 
one and mar the other ? Love should b^ 
light, gay, and joyful ; a pleasure and 
an amusement. By the importance we 
attach to it, and the violent passions 
with which we associate it, we make it 
the most serious of occupations, and 
the heaviest of cares/' 

*' Well, then, we will be merry, if 
such be thy desire," said Fiormonda, 
mournfully; " I will speak French, 
too, if it please thee : yet in that lan- 
guage, entre I'amour et la mort, the dif- 
ference is but of two letters." 

" This is an idle conceit," said Con- 
dulmar. 

" All is over!" said Fiormonda. " I 
shall not, however, as you have told me 
the fond Englishwomen do, annoy you 
by sighs and tears, by whining com- 
plaint and vexatious jealousy: it is 
done — ^you have struck here — you have 

VOL. II. I 



ll^ ADA REIS. 

ended all ; — I esteem, I admire, I love 
you no longer !" 

" Then wherefore do my liaisons 
with Fleure de Rose and Nirza give 
you pain? and wherefore, my dearest 
child, do you mind if the Princess of 
Ildebar makes me some little d^dom- 
magemens for your coldness ?" 

Fiormonda turned from Condulmar. 
„with proud contempt. ** These are,'^ 
she thought, *' unworthy rivals for me. 
Their names will be forgotten when 
mine is celebrated, though their insults 
and unkindness send me to the grave. 
In beauty, in talents, in understanding, 
in heart, they are my inferiors ; yet for 
them I am abandoned. Oh ! what a 
lesson of humility is this ! What are 
the gifts of nature ? What is the devo- 
tion of love ? The first new features, 
the first gay vision, that passes by, 
leads away, in triumph, the affections 



ADA REIS. 115 

which we have passed years in seeking 
to secure. I gave thee, Condulmar, my 
virgin heart; I gave thee the purity of 
my youth ; I gave thee the freshness 
of the affections, and the entire pos- 
session of a mind, let me tell thee, equal 
to thine own ! — All these thou hast re- 
nounced; — for me thou hast blighted all 
below!" As she spoke a transient feel- 
ing of ambition and revenge, passions 
not congenial to her nature, sprung up 
in her bosom, and for a moment ap- 
peared to supplant the softer feelings 
she had so long cherished. 

Under such adverse and mortifying 
circumstances, the hand, which she 
had refused to the young and ardent 
Montevallos, she began to entertain 
the idea of bestowing upon the Mar- 
quis de Santa Spina, who was destined 
by the general voice to be the succeed- 
ing viceroy of Peru. '* I know," she 

I 2 



116 ADA RE IS, 

again thought within lierself, " I know 
the conduct which will make Condul- 
mar love me as he used. He shall see 
me at the head of the society he courts. 
For his sake I have neglected the forms 
to which others are slaves. I have 
thought only of him ; they have thought 
of the world. The Princess of lldebar, 
who now passes me with such insolence 
of contempt, shall do me homage." 

As these thoughts shot through 
her mind, Condulmar turned suddenly 
round, and fixed his eyes triumphantly 
upon her. " Do so," he cried, as if 
reading her soul ; " and I myself will 
carry the welcome news to the future 
viceroy. Do so, once beloved Fior- 
monda; — 'tis well, 'tis well. Those 
who are ever casting back a retro- 
spective eye, doom themselves, in a 
world like this, to everlasting repining 
and regret. Let our hopes tend forward 



ADA REIS. 117 

to that wliich has not been. The past 
has flown for me, like a dream, and 
left nothing but weariness and fatigue 
behind. 'Tis well that at length thou 
driest thy tears, and takest these mis- 
chances proudly, as becomes thee. I 
love not your weak watery plants : — 
the streaming eye has small power over 
me. I have read in verse of women 
looking lovely through their tears, but 
in nature I have always found them 
produce a contrary effect." 

" Yet the full heart will find a vent 
or break,'* said Fiormonda. 

" Let the latter be its choice," re- 
plied Conduhnar : *' inconstancy is a 
great evil, and causes many woes, I 
admit it ; but it is in our nature, and 
admits of no remedy. Many idle rhap- 
sodies, much bad poetry, many scenes 
of absurd violence and desperation, 
would have been saved, had it been 
generally known, for truth, that when 



118 ADA REIS. 

two hearts, which have loved passion- 
ately, sever, they never can re-unite. 
We either die in the agony of the strug- 
gle, or recover, as I have, our reason and 
our calmness." 

*' These are hard truths, if as truths 
they must be admitted," said Fior- 
monda. 

" It is a pity," continued Condul- 
mar ; " but in this world, all that is 
bright and fair must perish. The 
sweet scent of the rose — the maiden's 
blush — the infantine smile of childhood 
— the bloom of spring, which adorns 
every shrub and tree, as with a magic 
wand — all fades, even whilst we are 
gazing upon its beauty, and inhaling 
its fragrance. We must submit to the 
law of our nature, and endure the con- 
dition of our existence." 

" Endure then my tea;'s," said Fior- 
monda. 

"Be it so," replied Condulmar: 



ADA REtS. 119 

** weep if thou wilt, and I will sing to 
thee the while. 

Weep for what thou hast lost, love ; 
Weep for what thou hast won ; 
Weep for what thou didst not do. 
And more for what thou hast done. 

Time that 's gone returneth never ; 
Keen repentance lasteth ever. 
Heart that 's pierced refuseth gladness : 
Melancholy causeth madness. 

Yet if tears avail not. 

Tears of fond regret ; 

Arm thy mind, and proudly, girl. 

Endeavour to forget. 

Shouldst thou spend thy days in grieving. 
What is past there's no retrieving. 
Once the hour of passion over. 
Tear nor frown recalls a lover. 

Weep for what thou hast lost, love ; 
Weep for what thou hast won ; 
Weep for what thou didst not do. 
And more for what thou hast done." 



120 ADA REIS. 

** Ah ! sing not now," said Fiormon- 
da : " once thy sweet full voice was 
my delight ; once I lived but upon thy 
song, and thy enchanting smile ; but 
now all is over, and all I now ask is one 
sympathising sigh, nay, one last em- 
brace, and then farewell for ever !'* 

" It shall be so/^ said Condulmar, 
embracing her, " and thou shalt learn 
to sing with me after this fashion. 

DUET. 

" The kiss that 's on thy lip impress'd 

Is cold as parting kiss should be ; 
And he who clasps thee to his breast 

Again can never feel for thee : 
The chain I gave — a true love-token — 
Thou see'st in every link is broken. . 
Then, since 't is so, 't were best to part ; 

I here renounce the oaths I swore; 
Correct thy faults, amend thy heart. 

And let us meet no more. 



ADA HKlS 



*U<^ 



Th^ Music Ccinposrd Exp/Ysslyhj MCA^TJfAN 





! I l ' ^ 



4 



Horns 



* ^a^lU 



-(— i. 



6-r-^ 



* 



C^ 



i 



s 



^ 







'""P 






Weep f<:r what th<ni st lost Tove 




vol..!?. 



V20 



ADA rp:is 



■^•^ 




^m 



& 






Weep iur what thonVt won Mn-p fhr what thou 



1* 5 » ^ -S cS- -* I;t 

— 1 — «• - I -Jie^^ : 



^^ftl 



i 



*^ 



haC ga 



tf: 



^^^^^^ 



didtt not do ar d more f<)r what thoust done 




%J rr:„ A...» .u 



Time th.rt« vnne rt— tvi rii_eth ne. .ver 




ADA iu:is 



*12I 



^ ^^^^=^ 



^ 



w 



Ket*n r. _])'entance last_eth p_ver 




^ 



F^rrj-j 



i 



W 



m 



-•-fr 



heart tliatl piercH refuseth gladnes* 




^ Me_lan_rho_lv cau_feth mad-n»'ss 



(^ 






^122 



ADA REIS 







niot>* f<)r Hhat th'/Usi <!• nt , 





\ V| » X» ■ ' ! ♦ V ' *V 1 -«'~v1 



ADA REIS. 1^1 



* 
THE ANSWER. 



" I go : but ere I go from thee. 

Give back what thou hast ta'en from me — 
A heart that Vnlew nor care nor guile, 

A parent's fond -approving smile. 
The hopes which dared aspire to heav'n — 

Give these, and thou shalt be forgiv'n. 
Take back the ring, take back the chain ; 

Thy gifts, thy oaths, I will resign : 
Take back thy heart, since pledged in vain. 

But, oh ! restore what once was mine ! 

" Hope not for this, thy course is run ; 

All that is left thee is to die. 
The dew drops with the setting sun. 

And see the winds pass scornful by : 
So when thou'rt left by me, thou 'It find 

The world as scornful as the wind. 
A stamp is set upon thy name, 

A blight clouds o'er thy early fame. 
There's nothing now thy fate can save: 

Live scorn'd — or hide thee in the grave ! 

And so, farewell ! once best-beloved 
Fiormonda." 



122 ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER X. 

The last sound of Condulmar's deep- 
toned mellow voice yet rung upon the 
ears of Fiormonda, as, leaning her head 
upon her hand, the clustering locks 
fell over her face, and entirely con- 
cealed her weeping eyes and the strug- 
gles of her countenance. Ada Reis 
entered, his air wild and terrified. 
" Didst hear nothing?" he cried. *'Hast 
seen nothing ?'* he said, darting by her. 
" Hark ! — Again ! — Look ! look from 
thy casement !" 

A lurid beam burst from the dense 
clouds ; a noise, loud and terrible, 
aroused every inhabitant of the house. 
Condulmar returned, calm and with a 
smile. The heat was intense ; the 
forked lightning fiaslied along the 



ADA REIS. 123 

skies; screams rent the air; the ter- 
rified slaves and menials rushed into 
the presence of their master, kneeling 
and quaking. The howling of dogs was 
then heard: strange and dismal sounds 
filled the air : a sulphurous smell in- 
fected the streets : the beasts of bur- 
then, as they passed along, seemed 
scarcely able to sustain themselves 
under the loads they bore. In the 
market-place, in the grand square, the 
gardens and plains, adjoining the town, 
the terrified inhabitants had assembled 
together, lamenting aloud, and saying 
the last day was at hand. The churches 
were suddenly filled ; and of whatever 
religion, — catholics, protestants, here- 
tics, and pagans, prostrated themselves 
before the altars, fearful of they knew 
not what menaced danger. 
. Condulmar addressed himself to Ada 
Reis, and proposed that before it was 



124 ADA REIS. 

too late, tlicy should fly from this state 
of horror and alarm, and remove, as 
quickly as possible, to Callao. There 
the fresh breeze would probably alle- 
viate the burning heat, and from thence 
they should be able to put to sea, and 
escape from the terrors which now sur- 
rounded them. With great difficulty 
they induced their attendants to exert 
themselves, so far as to take the mea- 
sures necessary for their departure : and 
when, at length, they did set out, the 
heat was so excessive, that the journey 
could not be accomplished under se- 
veral hours. 

Arrived at Callao, they found the 
«cene there, if possible, more terrific 
than at Lima. Never had the sun arisen 
upon greater calamity. The whole 
population of the place were assembled 
upon the beach ; parents clasping their 
children, and husbands their wives, and 



ADA RKIS. '125 

all invoking Heaven for mercy and 
compassion. 

The night proved more sultry and 
oppressive than the day had been ; — 
cattle and dogs traversed the country 
alone, in wild aiFright : children wept, 
they knew not why : strangers inquired 
of each other the meaning of these ter- 
rible portents ; many fled from the city 
and fort of Callao, and betook them- 
selves to sea; but Ada Reis was of 
opinion, that to attempt the sea in its 
present state were more dangerous than 
to remain on land, for the whole sky 
was of a purple tint, and the waves, 
with a still swell, seemed rising above 
the level of the shore. Subterraneous 
noises were heard the whole of the day, 
sometimes resembling the bellowing of 
oxen, and at others the discharge of 
artillery, or thunder rattling at a di- 
stance. 



126 • ADA REIS. 

At eight o'clock that evening, Fior- 
monda having been left alone in her 
chamber, arose to seek Condulmar : 
the floor rocked beneath her feet ; in 
speechless terror she threw herself upon 
a couch. Condulmar entered, and she 
reposed her head helplessly upon his 
arm. 

In a short time Ada Reis joined 
them ; and even at such a moment 
they could not abstain from impious 
raillery and profane jesting. " Should 
the earth quake, I will not," said Ada 
Reis. — At that instant a tremendous 
shock threw Fiormonda forward, and 
in the next, a concussion so violent en- 
sued, that the building broke asunder 
into ruins. Ada Reis heard a voice — 
a shriek as of a dying woman sounded 
near him ; he saw a mist, a cloud, and 
heard a convulsive laugh ; an eye ter- 
rible and fiery glared upon him — the 



ADA REIS. 127 

wordKabkarrall! was pronounced. The 
concussion was repeated : sulphurous 
flames broke forth from the bosom of 
the earth ; then at once were heard, on 
all sides, the screams of the dying, the 
roaring of thunder, the wild howling 
of animals, the crash of churches, pa- 
laces, buildings, toppling one upon an- 
other, all in a moment destroyed, and 
burying under them their miserable in- 
habitants. 

The fort of Callao sunk into ruins ; 
the ocean, receding to a considerable 
distance, returned in mountainous 
weaves, foaming with the violence of 
the convulsion, and the whole country 
became as a sea — the multitudinous 
waters covering all that had so lately 
been fair streets and stately buildings. 

Cavallos andGuanape, and the towns 
of Chancay and Guaura, and the val- 



r28 ADA IlEIS. 

leys Delia Branca, Sape, and Pativilca, 
all underwent the same fate. 

At that hour the fair and beautiful 
city of Lima 7, with its cathedral, its 
edifices, and all its grandeur, was over- 
whelmed and annihilated. The labour 
of architects, the master-pieces of 
painting, the pride, the wonder, the 
glory of men returned to the dust, from 
which it had been raised : thus show- 
ing the little worth and durability of 
all human possessions, and the vanity 
and folly of fixing our affections and 
interests upon any thing in this transi- 
tory and fleeting world. 

Ada Reis was struck to the earth, 
amidst the fragments of the mansion, 
in the which he had sought for refuge ; 
yet a preternatural power seemed to 
support him. As soon as he could 
again rise, he rushed forward, and was 



ADA REIS. 129 

carried by the whirlwind far out into [ 
the sea. When he opened his eyes, 
he found himself floating upon its bo- 
som. He raised his head and gazed 
around him. The angry heavens ap- 
peared like one vast sheet of fire. 
Of the strong fort of Santa Cruz 
one huge and massive fragment had 
resisted the general ruin, and stood 
erect and unbroken amidst the rolling 
of the waves and the conflict of the 
elements. So was it with the mind of 
Ada Reis in that vast struggle and ge- 
neral confusion ; for he retained the full 
possession of his senses, whilst his eyes 
gazed upon the fearful scene. And 
now suddenly he beheld before him 
the gaunt figure of an Indian, support- 
ing himself upon a broken buttress, 
holding an arrow; and he heard him 
thus address himself to the sun : — 
" Oh, sun ! thou father of oui* king, 

VOL. II. K 



130 ADA REIS. 

covered as thou art with the veil of un- 
natural night, and warred upon even 
to destruction by the rebellious ele- 
ments, I, thus cast to the disposal of 
the powerful and pitiless waters, still 
call upon thee to hear my vow. By 
the poison of the herb which anoints 
the steel of my arrow — by the bones 
of my dead father — I swear I will yet 
seek and destroy my country's foe : — 
not the horrors of the ocean — not the 
fury of thy intense heat — not the crash 
of cities, nor the dissolution of nations 
around me can diminish or divert my 
wrath. I must slay him, even at the 
feast of Vitziliputzly. For me there 
is tranquil existence neither here nor 
hereafter, if Ciulactly escape my venge- 
ance J and if he fall in the course of 
nature or by any other hand than mine, 
I shall not be revenged, for he will 
have escaped me. Oh, mightiest! spare 



ADA REIS. 131 

him, spare him, that I may dye my 
hands red in the blood of his heart." 

Scarce had the Indian spoken these 
words, when a shock, more violent than 
the former, forced him from his hold, 
and plunged him again into the waves. 
Ada Reis clung to him in the effort ; 
and clasped together, as is usual with 
drowning men, they were, with the re- 
turning ocean, forced onwards to the 
shore. The convulsion, stronger than 
any of the preceding, which let loose 
the sea from its natural bounds, and 
drove one of the vessels in the port 
many miles forward upon the land^, 
threw, in the same direction, the bo- 
dies of Ada Reis and the Indian ; where 
they remained stunned and senseless. 
Ada Reis had continued longer in a 
state of insensibility had he not been 
aroused by a shout of triumph from 
his companion, over the desolation 

K 2 



IS2 ADA REIS. 

which had been spread around. He 
was exulting in the attainment of his 
wishes ; boasting that the sun had heard 
his prayer, and that at his request Lima 
had been destroyed. 

" Christians they were," he exclaim- 
ed ; *' and merciless tyrants. The 
blood of the natives of his own fair 
country was on their heads. Him 
they had chained, until liberated by 
nature herself, because he disdained to 
submit to their domination, as he had 
disdained to bow even to the power of 
the Incas9. Months upon months had 
he suffocated in the prisons of their 
inquisition ; but his secret curses, he 
boasted, had now taken effect ; his 
prayers had been heard ; his gods had 
listened to him, because he had been 
wronged. The world was convulsed 
to give him liberty, and assist him to* 
liis revenge." 



ADA REIS. 133 

Thus reasoned the infatuated savage, 
and Ada Reis, desolate and solitary, 
almost envied him the blindness of his 
violence, and regretted that he, too, 
had not some master passion to stimu- 
late and hurry him on, for now all ap- 
peared gloom and apathy before him. 
What to him now were the long list of 
sciences he had learned — what his 
riches, power, former strength — what 
even the remembrance of his child, 
for whom all his love now revived, 
and whose form, like that of an angel, 
arose in his fancy as he had seen her 
last. Vain was it that he had dived 
into the depths of philosophy, meta- 
physics, morals, hydrostatics, pneuma- 
tics, optics, astronomy, meteorology, 
psychology, painting, music, sculpture, 
architecture, agriculture, and political 
economy ; commerce, manufactures, 



134 ADA REIS. 

crystallography, zoology, anatomy, sur- 
gery, pharmacy, and medicine. He 
was now at the end of his career. 
" Blood will have blood," he cried ; 
** the evil predominates; I am lost, and 
my child, my Fiormonda, my innocent, 
my tender, my white-bosomed, blue- 
eyed comforter, — where, where art 
thou ?" 

Some poor Indians who heard the 
distant sound of his lamentations, to- 
wards evening approached the sufferers, 
and attended thenri with kindness and 
hospitality. They restored them by 
their care, and shared with them their 
meal, matalotage and maize ^^. They 
expressed no terror at the earthquake ; 
— it was past now; — cities, and towns, 
and forts, had been destroyed, witliout 
its occasioning in them either regret or 
surprise ; their humble huts had re- 



ADA REIS. 135 

mained secure, their dog still lived, 
and they were perfectly indifferent as 
to what others had suffered beyond 
the narrow circle of their native village. 
Ada Reis wished to partake of their 
ignorance — of their philosophy ; but 
the recollection of his wealth and his 
grandeur, of his menials, his com- 
panions, and his daughter, disquieted 
him : and he was anxious to return to 
the spot upon which Lima had stood, 
that he might seek for all that he had 
lost. 

The Indian proposed a contrary 
course. This strange and stern being 
exercised over him an influence which 
he could not resist. Ada Reis felt the 
passions of his companion communi- 
cated to himself, and almost sympa- 
thised with his thirst for revenge. 
The dark eyes of the Indian rolled 



1S6 ADA REIS. 

restlessly, and his large muscular arms 
worked with agitation until they began 
their journey: but when they set forth, 
he yelled with triumph, and laughed 
with exulting joy. 



ADA REIS. 137 



CHAPTER XI. 

For many days Ada Reis and the 
Indian traversed vast savannahs, and 
deep woods of plantain. The natives, 
as soon as they beheld them, brought 
the vi-jahua^^ leaves, and erected huts 
for their reception ; so pleased were 
they to see and to show courtesy to 
those whom they believed to be supe- 
rior to themselves. 

The beauties and wonders of nature 
met Ada Reis and his companion at 
every step of their journey. At one 
time a beautiful cascade opened upon 
their delighted view ; at another there 
yawned beneath their feet a deep pre- 
cipice, over which they had to pass 
by a bridge, formed of a single tree, 
so narrow and so unsteady that they 



138 ADA REIS. 

could scarcely maintain their footing 
upon it ; then on a sudden the land 
teemed with all the rich beauty of cul- 
tivation; whilst fields of wheat, barley, 
and maize, diversified the scene. The 
climate, too, was as various as the view : 
at times they suffered from the piercing 
cold and drenching mist, and at others 
from the burning heat. Hundreds of 
wild peacocks, bustards, pheasants, 
resting upon the tops of trees of enor- 
mous height, now attracted their at- 
tention ; whilst tall marimondas, erect 
upon their hind legs, with visages like 
ugly men, seemed a satire upon the 
human race. There also the snake 
folded and twisted itself amidst the 
branches of the trees; the vi-jahua and 
the bejuco abounded ; the canas, of 
which the huts were built, grew plenti- 
fully; and amidst the forest the mata- 
palo and tlie manzanillo shot above all 



ADA REIS. 139 

other trees, withering them, by im- 
bibing all the moisture and nutriment 
of the earth. 

The Indian paused upon the top of 
a mountain to show his companion the 
lightning flashing from the clouds be- 
neath them, and hear the thunder 
roll from below ; (for even the savage 
admired the wonders his feeble reason 
could not comprehend;) the earth ap- 
pearing involved in tempests, whilst 
they rested upon the mountain's head 
in sunshine and security. 

** It is fine,'* thought Ada Reis, "to 
contemplate thus the bustle of the world 
from such a height. So gazes the philo- 
sopher at a distance upon all the busy 
scenes and conflicts which distract 
mankind. — And so, perchance, at this 
moment, must be the feelings of that 
Being, who takes no share in the un- 
important quarrels and petty interests 



140 ADA REIS. 

of mankind. Here I feel a calm, which 
I never knew whilst I dwelt in cities, 
and amongst those whose narrow views 
clashed with my own. However, I 
must descend from these heights, and 
follow, as others do, a leader whom I 
heartily wish (were it not that I have 
no better) at the devil." 

Ada Reis and his companion, if 
they laboured hard, at all events lived 
well during their progress, eating rice 
boiled with flesh of fowl, and drinking 
strong spirit whenever they could meet 
with it. They slept at the little cabins 
of the Indians, or in the stables pre- 
pared for their cattle, which w^ere 
scattered up and down on the skirts 
of the mountains. In the course of 
their long journey they passed through 
and conversed with many different na- 
tions, who all differed in their customs, 
beliefs, and dialects. 



ADA REIS. 141 

Ada Reis had no knowledge of the 
latitude in which he was, or of the di- 
rection he was pursuing. Were they 
now upon the banks of the great Ma- 
ranon^2? who might say? Many of the 
natives were half converts to Christiani- 
ty; some w^ere white, others copper- 
coloured, and others entirely black. In 
some of these countries the Spaniards 
had established settlements, and a brisk 
traffic was kept up between them and 
the people : in others all was barbarous, 
ignorance and superstition. The In- 
dians who lived in villages were under 
some kind of government, obeying their 
Guraca chiefs, or caciques, and these 
were less turbulent and corrupt than- 
the rest : a proof, if belief be given to 
Ada Reis, that any government is pre- 
ferable to the following of simple na- 
ture. Some flattened the fore and hind 
parts of their children's heads y some 



142 ADA REIS. 

made holes in their upper and under 
lips, and in both sides of the cartilage 
of the nose ; others stuck into their 
chins and jaws feathers or little arrows 
eight or nine inches long; others prided 
themselves on their long ears, extend- 
ing them by various arts until they 
reached the shoulders ; many thought 
it a crime not to paint their bodies with 
great nicety, and a virtue to sacrifice 
their children to idols ; and, as if the 
quadrupeds were as singular as the 
men, caymans, alligators, tortoises, and 
pexe bueys, swarmed upon the shores 
and islands. The Indian assured Ada 
Reis that these pexe bueys (or sea- 
calves) were Spanish seamen who had 
been wrecked upon an island, and trans- 
formed into that shape. " The mari- 
mondas or apes,'* he said, " were the 
descendants of the indigenous natives, 
who had been so terrified that they had 



ADA REIS. 143 

lost their intellects when the great 
waters of the flood had descended upon 
the earth." 

Ada Reis saw, in the midst of a river, 
an island, which was said to be en- 
chanted ; all was white in it, the rocks, 
the trees, the eagles, the cattle. He 
found Indians fishing with inebriating 
herbs or poisoned arrows; the quality 
of which poison is so frigorific as to 
repel all the blood immediately to the 
heart. Wherever he turned, he found 
new cause to wonder. Here also he 
marked the strange varieties of lofty 
trees, the wood of which, some white, 
some red, some beautifully variegated, 
distilled balsams of an exquisite fra- 
grance, rare medicinal gums, or poisons, 
terrible and sudden in their effects. 
Passing along the banks of the river he 
met with the jacumana, a serpent of a 
frightful magnitude, which irresistibly 



141i ADA REIS. 

draws, by its breath, the unwary ani- 
mals who approach it, swallowing them 
whole. At one time, if we may believe 
him, he met with a people, male and 
female, who all had tails, which they 
wagged when pleased, and turned dow n 
when frightened ^^. This people showed 
greater marks of sagacity, and were 
more courteous in their manners, he 
affirms, than any of the others, albeit 
far inferior to us christians. The In- 
dians appeared every where to Ada 
Reis slow, as he describes them, but 
persevering, and possessed of an im- 
mutable calm, undisturbed by either 
fortunate or unfortunate events ; in 
their mean apparel or nakedness they 
were as contented as a Prince, a Bey, 
or Pacha, in all his splendid jewels and 
attire ; nothingappearingto move them, 
or discompose their minds : interest 
seemed to have lost its power ; fear 



ADA RETS. 145 

could not stimulate, respect could not 
induce, punishment could not compel. 
They cooked their matalotage, they 
ground their barley to make machea, 
their maize for the camcha, and brewed 
their chicha, regardless of every other 
care ; and moved as little as possible 
from the side of the fire, at which they 
sat watching in idleness their food. 

One evening Ada Reis found a num- 
ber of Indians near what they termed 
a village, celebrating a great festival. 
A table, covered with a Tucujo car- 
pet^'*, was placed before the door of the 
inn, or public-house, where a quantity 
of camcha and some wild herbs were 
prepared. Each guest held a jug, from 
which he ate his frugal meal in haste ; 
then the women appeared with cala- 
bashes, or round tutumos, full of chicha; 
some played upon the pipe and tabor, 
others sung and danced in slow un- 

VOL. ir. L 



146 ADA REIS. 

graceful measures, whilst the rest sate 
upon the ground. They welcomed 
Ada Reis and his guide, without in- 
quiring who they were, or whence they 
came, or whither they were going, and 
pressed them to accept their hospita- 
lity. Intemperance, and excess, and 
noise followed this feast to such a de- 
gree, that women, men, husbands, fa- 
thers, mothers, and children fell down 
together, their feeble sense extinguish- 
ed by strong drink, a miserable and 
disgraceful picture of human brutality. 

The extremes of barbarism and civili- 
sation, thought Ada Reis, are then 
similar in the excess, though not in 
the modes of vice and self-indulgence. 
What is man when he has forsaken the 
restraint of reason and of law? Alas! 
what am I next to witness, with whom 
am I condemned to associate ? 

Thev now left the inhabited countrv. 



ADA llEIS. 147 

and traversed the wildest mountains 
and the most lonely deserts, the Indian 
continually assuring Ada Reis that 
they should soon be at their journey's 
end^^ 

How different, thought Ada Reis, 
in idea, is distance and time to differ- 
ent individuals. 

The thirst of revenge, which en- 
tirely possessed the bosom of the In- 
dian, lightened to him every fatigue 
and privation; but the luxurious habits 
of Ada Reis rendered the sufferings he 
had to endure almost intolerable ; and 
he felt in mind even more than in 
body, from the recollection of his 
wealth and his child, the overthrow of 
his ambitious hopes, and the prospect 
which lay before him of beginning life 
anew, certainly under no very auspi- 
cious circumstances, nor in a very eli- 
gible situation ; yet he desired not to 

L 2 



148 ADA REIS. 

die, for neither his own disbelief, nor 
the jests of infidels, had hardened him 
to that degree of insensibility, that he 
could feel calm upon this point ; he 
feared death — he feared that beyond 
the grave " dreams might come ;"— he 
thought, as some of a better mind 
have thought, that it was better to en- 
dure any thing than ** not to be ;" he, 
therefore, bore his present evil destiny, 
but not without repining or complaint. 
In this temper they journeyed on, 
with few other adventures than such 
as have been before related ; until as 
they were travelling by night, having 
lain by during the heat of the sun, Ada 
Reis beheld, by the clear light of the 
moon, the appearance of the country 
around him change, from a level and 
fertile plain to a mountainous and 
rocky desert. He had scarce observed 
the alteration before his cruide uttered 



ADA REIS. 149 

three terrific yells, and leaping exult- 
ingly from rock to rock, exclaimed, 
that he could see his own land before 
him, and that his heart felt lighter from 
the certainty of vengeance. Dipping 
his arrow again in the mortal poison, 
which he ever carried with him, " Woe 
be to thee, Ciulactly," he said, " proud 
cacique, thou shalt feel my power." 

A whizzing in the air startled Ada 
Reis ; he beheld in the moonlight a 
white line, passing with such celerity 
that, but for its noise, he had not 
known it was the Zumbadore ^^. " And 
where, in the wide world, are we 
now ?" he cried. " Are these the soli- 
tudes of Atur^e? Are the rushing 
waters I hear from afar, those of the 
cataract of Maypur6 ? Is this superb 
river the Orinoco, or is it the famed 
river of the Amazons ?'* 

The guide answered not ; perhaps, 



150 ADA REIS. 

indeed, knew not liow to answer these 
inquiries : his heaving breast, his eager 
eye, his convulsive gestures, only 
shewed the agitation of his mind. 

The vast tract of land before them 
appeared as if it never before had been 
trodden by the foot of civilised man. 
There dwelt in it vast flights of wild- 
fowl of every species ; every kind that 
shun the haunts of man were there in 
numbers, tame and unapprehensive of 
danger ; the golden crested pheasants 
dwelt in the thickets, and over the 
wide-extended plains the vultures ho- 
vered, casting their shadows across its 
barren surface as they took their heavy 
flight ; whilst eagles, and the condor 
of the rock, soared above them to the 
very heavens. All around the country 
appeared wild, abrupt, extended, and 
yet beautiful. 

Ada Reis now beheld a large moun- 



ADA REIS. 151 

tain, around the foot of which wound 
a majestic river. The cocoa and the 
almond abounded upon the banks, and 
the air was scented with the fragrance 
of pines and aromatic shrubs. He 
thought he was in sight of the island of 
Pumacena, or the silver mountain of 
Parim6, of which so many fables are re- 
lated; or it might be he was approach- 
ing the Calitamani^7^ so bright appear- 
ed the shining sides of that extraordi- 
nary and impassable rock. 

When they drew nearer to the 
stream, the Indian again stopped and 
yelled loudly, after the manner of his 
country. A thousand voices answered 
him from the heights, and swarms of 
the natives instantly poured down to 
the side of the river, crowding its 
banks, and putting forth their pirogues 
and coracles, in order to meet and 
welcome their countryman and his 
companion. 



152 ADA IlEIS. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Upon passing the river, Ada Reis 
found himself in the midst of a vast 
multitude of people. The natives, 
assembling around him, knelt before 
him in wonder, seeming to consider 
him as a being of a superior order. 
The Indian, who had so long con- 
ducted him, perceived now that he w^as 
much fatigued, and desired his coun- 
trymen to remit their attentions for a 
while; he then led Ada Reis to a cabin, 
where maize, and milk, and fruits were 
set before him. Once more he there 
informed him, that this was his own 
country; that these were the men who 
had never been subdued ; that their 
hearts were warm and pure ; that they 



ADA REIS. 153 

A\orshipped the god who arose every 
day to warm them with his beams ; 
that from the lips of an image, placed 
upon a hill, in the form of a dog, they 
received daily notice of his wishes ; 
and that Ciulactly, their cacique, was 
descended from the sun j that he, Papo 
Taguacan (for that, he said, was his 
name), was a kinsman of the caciques ; 
that he had been absent one year, 
having been taken in battle, and im- 
prisoned at Lima ; but neither that, 
nor any other event, had diverted him 
from his intention of slaying the enemy 
of his country, the tyrant who had 
wronged him; and, when Ciulactly was 
slain, the people, he said, would make 
Ada lleis king ; for the priests had told 
the people that a stranger, a white 
man, who could speak their language, 
a descendant of the great Manco Paca, 
would come into their country and 



154 ADA KEIS. 

reign over tliem, and drink the blood 
of their enemies. 

As he spoke these last words, Ada 
Reis began to see the drift of all that 
had been taking place, and acknow- 
ledged at once the probable fulfilment 
of the promises held out to him by 
Kabkarra. He had not time, however, 
for much reflection, for the impatient 
savages began again to flock around 
him, bringing their tambours and pipes, 
and dancing before him with wild and 
extravagant gestures. He took this 
opportunity of observing a little the 
manners and appearance of those who 
were to be his future subjects. They 
were nearly black in their complexion, 
tall in their stature, ungainly in their 
manners, and wore no other clothes 
than feathers and hides, no other orna- 
ments than pieces of tin and glass, either 
stuck into their flesh, or hung about 



ADA RE IS. 155 

their limbs. The women, with their 
coarse black hair hanging straight upon 
their shoulders, carried their infants 
upon their backs, and stared in stupid 
astonishment. Their understandings 
appeared to be utterly contemptible ; 
their habits slothful, dirty, and their 
characteristic features indolence and 
low cunning. Upon the whole, nothing 
could be more unfavourable than the 
opinion which Ada Reis conceived of 
them. " I see now," he said to him- 
self, " how the Spirit of Evil has de- 
ceived me : the wish, for which I have 
bartered my soul, may be fulfilled, I 
may become a monarch and wear a 
crown, but over whom am I doomed 
to reign ? None here will ever sym- 
pathise with my feelings. My wisdom, 
knowledge, and experience will become 
a curse to me. Is it for this I have 



156 ADA RKIS. 

learned the customs, manners, and laws 
of distant nations ? Is it for this I have 
traversed seas, waded through crimes, 
and rejected the happiness within my 
grasp ? I must begin again as with 
mothers' milk, but without the sim- 
plicity of taste, w^hich alone could ena- 
ble me to endure it. The dream of 
ambition is at an end, even now that 
the first prayer of my heart is about to 
be accomplished." 

These reflections, however, disquiet- 
ing as they were, were not sufficiently 
so to prevent the fatigue which he had 
undergone, and the food which he had 
taken, from throwing him into a deep 
sleep ; nor did he awaken until Papo 
Taguacan, who had taken that oppor- 
tunity of going forward to the great 
city, to prepare for his reception, re- 
turned with a concourse of the natives. 



ADA REIS. 157 

assembled for the purpose of conduct- 
ing the stranger to the residence of the 
cacique. 

Ada Reis had often had opportunities 
of contemplating the earliest state of 
civilisation, he was not therefore sur- 
prised at beholding the assemblage of 
rude and ill-constructed huts, into 
which he was led with so much pride 
and exultation. He could not, how- 
ever, repress a smile at the vanity and 
impotence of man, when he recollected 
that what he now saw was the capital 
of a great country, and the palace of 
its sovereign. *' If those," he said to 
himself, " who are repining amidst 
the conveniences and enjoyments of 
European society, could come hither 
for a short time and then return. Hea- 
ven help them! how satisfied would they 
be with their condition." 

They now approached, Papo Ta- 



158 ADA IlEIS. 

giiacan leading the way, to the palace 
of the cacique ; a wretched mud-built 
hovel, somewhat higher and larger 
indeed than the rest, and surrounded 
with all the form, all the difficulty of 
access, and all the circumstances of 
ceremony and respect, which belong 
to and distinguish the most splendid 
courts of the mightiest monarchs. To 
such a length was this carried, that Ada 
Reis was informed that many prostra- 
tions and other demonstrations of re- 
spect were to be shown before he could 
be presented to Ciulactly ; and that 
with the customary tardiness of the 
rois fen^ans, he was not at present at 
leisure to go through the long so- 
lemnity of giving audience. 

To beguile the time until his majesty 
should be disengaged, Ada Reis ac- 
cepted the offer made by Papo Taguacan 
of accompanying him around the city, 



ADA REIS. 159 

and showing him its principal objects of . 
curiosity. In the main street the first 
building which struck him, and that 
with no great pleasure, was a temple, 
much like the one at Mexico ^^ built 
entirely of death's heads, set with lime 
and stone, all ranged in rows ; the whole 
adorned vv ith poles, to which were fixed 
bones placed in the forms of crosses, with 
skulls betv;een the intervals, made fast 
to each otlter. This temple was the 
residence of the god of providence and 
the god of war ; besides which deities, 
he was informed that this nation wor- 
shipped two thousand other gods ; but 
the chiefest were undoubtedly these 
two, Vitzilipuztli, the god of provi- 
dence, and Tezcatliputli, the god of 
war, together with the Urmulas, the 
god of grain and harvest. These idols 
were of gigantic size, entirely covered- 



IGO 



ADA REIS. 



with mother-of-pearl, set with emeralds, 
chalcedonies, and amethysts, and other 
rich jewels. Their eyes, formed of some 
transparent and glittering material, 
shone from afar in the night, by means 
of lights placed within. 

The temple was called Teutcalli, 
from teutt, which is a deity, and calli, a 
house. When Ada Reis was conducted 
within its portals, the terror he expe- 
rienced showed him of mortal mind. It 
was not on account of the opening be- 
ing fashioned in the shape of a serpent's 
mouth, that he started back, neither 
did he mind the tusks and grinders, 
which adorned the work in relievo, nor 
the darkness, although that was not 
much to his taste ; but it was the blood 
of those who had been sacrificed the 
day before, at which his spirit revolted, 
although to do him honour a band of 



ADA REIS. 161 

music played from without, and the 
Indians danced in token of their re- 
spect. 

Whilst Ada Reis was yet contem- 
plating this horrid abode of mortality 
and superstition, the king, who had 
with savage pride declined to receive 
him, now hastened after him with all 
the childishness of savage curiosity ; and 
the prostrations and other ceremonies 
being gone through with less form than 
had been at first insisted upon, he 
began to converse with him in a fa- 
miUar manner. He wore around his 
neck a gold chain, of some inches 
thick, adorned with nine gold hearts, 
and the remnant of the skull of one 
of his enemies, with a lock of black 
hair hanging to it. His manners were 
very graceful, but Papo Taguacan 
hardly returned his greeting; and Ada 
Reis thought he observed something of 

VOL. II. M 



162 ADA REIS. 

coldness and jealousy in the demeanour 
of the priests towards their sovereign. 
He treated Ada Reis with great cour- 
tesy, and ordered his attendants to 
bring him presents, which consisted 
of two of his wives, many fine fea- 
thers, a bushel of cocoa, and a gold 
collar set with jewels : he then desired 
him to play at bowls with him, or a 
game somewhat similar, which required 
strength rather than skill, and which 
Papo Taguacan detested the more as 
the Spaniards had taught ittoCiulactly. 
Ada Reis was surprised to find that, 
after all his menaced vengeance, his 
Indian guide, neither at the game nor 
at the banquet, times at which naturally 
the king was most unguarded, had even 
attempted to execute his threats ; but 
he found himself suddenly in consider- 
able danger, for he had sat with Ciu- 
lactly with sandals on his fect^^ which 



ADA REIS. 163 

was not customary; and he had been 
desired to cause it to rain, which it was 
supposed by the priests he had power 
to do, it having rained, it was said, 
when some great Spaniard, who had 
entered their country many years be- 
fore, had commanded it. 

The king, however, pleaded for him, 
being impatient to show him his palace, 
which was entirely full of curiosities 2^. 
Fowls, cuyas, and guinea-pigs wan- 
dered loose and tame about the apart- 
ments. He delighted in stuffed animals 
and preserved insects. Creatures of 
every description were kept in cages ; 
and the noisy chattering of birds, hissing 
of serpents, roaring of lions, howling 
of wolves, smell of foxes, and cries of 
leopards, would have distracted any 
other sovereign, notwithstanding the 
order in which, to do Ciulactly justice, 
they were kept. The king then showed 

M 2 



11)4 ADA REIS. 

Ada Reis his plumes, fans, and carpets; 
-—dwarfs, crooked and mis-shapen per- 
sons, women and children ; after which 
he sat down upon the floor and grinned. 
Ada Reis did the same, upon which 
Ciulactly, seeing he had so merry a 
companion, sent for his buffoons, and 
made them sing songs, crack jests, and 
throw themselves into every sort of 
ridiculous contortion, which, being in- 
tended to produce laughter, did not 
make Ada Reis laugh so much as cer- 
tain serious ceremonials, which took 
place in the course of the day. Indeed, 
his composure was tried to the utmost, 
when, to the sound of a sort of fife, and 
of the teponaztle, or kettle-drum, the 
grandees of the court, with great gra- 
vity, danced, what they called, the ne- 
totiliztle; many of them, for the pur- 
pose of improving their appearance, 
having thrust their own heads into the 



ADA REIS. 165 

skins of the heads of tigers, aUigators, 
and other wild beasts^^ During this 
performance, Ciulactly and his ladies 
were dressed in coloured feathers, with 
gold and jewels, mostly worn in their 
rough state, although the art of cutting 
and polishing stones was known here. 
The king seemed so much delighted 
with Ada Reis, that he knew not how 
to show him enough honour; and, in 
return, Ada Reis wished much to inform 
him that his cousin, Papo Taguacan, 
intended to kill him ; but it was im- 
possible ; for at whatever he said, 
Ciulactly laughed with delight, ex- 
hibiting some new rarity of which he 
was vain, pressing him to sleep in his 
palace, a particular mark of distinction, 
but one which, knowing what was to 
befall him, perhaps, that very night, 
Ada Reis would have wished to de- 
<:line, had it been possible. In the 



166 ADA REIS. 

night, Papo Taguacan entered the 
apartment, standing up before the 
matted bed of his sovereign, and gazing 
upon him with silent hatred, and eager 
vengeance ; he was armed with his 
poisoned arrow, and a knife made of a 
sharp shell. Ada Reis turned away, 
that he might not see the murder com- 
mitted, for he thought it best not to 
interfere in an affair of honour, lest he 
should himself get into a scrape ; and 
some painful passages in his own life 
recurred at that moment to his me- 
mory. But the morning dawned upon 
the unconscious Ciulactly as safe as 
Ada Reis ; Papo Taguacan alone ap- 
peared perturbed and unrefreshed. 

At an early hour some hundreds of 
Ciulactly's subjects came before his pa- 
lace, to offer him roses, flowers, bread, 
fowls, and, what may seem singular, 
bags of vermin 22, a tribute levied by 



ADA REIS. 167 

the cacique, in order to keep his people 
clean. That day a dreadful sacrifice 
was to be offered to the god of harvest. 
The unhappy victims were husbands, 
wives, mothers, and children, all, by a 
refinement in barbarity, carefully se- 
lected from different families, so as to 
deprive the wretches of the consolation 
of dying with those whom they loved, 
and to spread the misery as widely as 
possible through the whole of the na- 
tion. All were led in procession, or- 
namented with flowers, and accom- 
panied with music to the steps of the 
temple. 

Beside the victims and the priests, 
Ciulactly and Ada Reis were alone per- 
mitted to enter and behold the specta- 
cle within. The crowd, singing and 
dancing in triumph and exultation, 
awaited before the steps of the temple 



168 ADA REIS. 

for the signal, which told them that all 
was over. 

Cloths or pieces of carpet were spread 
under the king's feet wherever he went. 
He wore gold zagles or sandals, in form 
much like those of the ancients — his 
subjects being all barefoot, particularly 
in his presence ; no one might touch 
him upon pain of instant punishment ; 
to raise the eyes to look upon him was 
a high offence ; but whilst he paused 
upon each step, his subjects, and even 
the priests, to honour him, laid their 
hands on their noses, and passed them 
along their forehead to the nape of 
their necks. The cacique turned his 
head towards his left shoulder in return, 
to show that he accepted their homage. 

All persons danced in this country, 
slow or quick, according to their rank; 
the king, the nobles, and the priests, 



ADA REIS. 160 

forming a solemn ring, scarcely moved, 
whilst the plebeians danced with an ex- 
cess of gesticulation. 

The dance of death now began, the 
flourish of wild music sounded at in- 
tervals. Before the altar was a pyra- 
midal green stone, ending in a point, 
about five spans high, on which the 
victims were laid, one after the other, 
on their backs to be sacrificed. During 
the whole time perfumes from the in- 
cense tree, and other fragrant plants, 
were burning ;— and the groans of the 
infants, for the older persons seldom 
suffered a sigh even to escape them, 
were suppressed by a sort of low chant 
from persons appointed, who all the 
while spinning round, wounded their 
flesh with lancets made of shells, and 
spurted the blood upon the king's 
feet^^. The chief priest, or topzlm, 
held in one hand an idol with green 



170 ADA REIS. 

eyes, saying to the purport, " This is 
your god." He wore upon his head 
a crown of green and yellow feathers ; 
he had his office by inheritance ; he 
had gold rings with green stones in his 
ears, and under his lip, about the middle 
of his chin, a Uttle pipe made of blue 
stone, his face daubed black. The 
other five priests w^ore wigs very much 
curled, with leathern thongs wound 
about them, girt in the middle of the 
head, and small paper targets on the 
forehead. The hearts of the sacrificed 
were presented to the idol. This con- 
clusion of the ceremony was signified 
to the people without, who bowed and 
shouted, taking up earth and strewing 
it on their heads, whilst holy maidens 
brought cakes of wheat, and danced 
around the temple with garlands. 

The dignified priests then came fojth 
from the temple one by one, according 



ADA REIS. 171 

to their rank, followed by a procession 
bearing out the gods and goddesses, 
whom they worshipped in several 
shapes, singing and dancing to the 
sound of the pipe and kettle-drum. 

" So much," said Ada Reis, ** for 
idolators : why, I have heard men in 
my country regret that paganism was 
put an end to ; in the name of the 
prophet, Ciulactly, why suffer these 
horrors to be perpetrated under pre- 
tence of virtue and religion ?" 

" It has always been so," said the 
king mildly j " I know not how to 
change what was : I walk in the steps 
of my fathers and grandfathers, who 
are awaiting me in the grave." 

The whole assembly now broke up. 
Many great people ate a little earth, 
and then went to celebrate the solemnity 
at a feast given by Ciulactly, after which 
the courtiers disguised themselves like 



17^ ADA REIS. 

birds ^'*, butterflies, frogs, beetles, deer, 
lame, blind, or maimed persons, act- 
ing every sort of buffoonery in the 
public streets ; and the whole of the 
ceremonials ended with dancing and 
complete intoxication. 

During all these circumstances many 
opportunities of effecting his purpose 
had presented themselves to Papo Ta- 
guacan, of which Ada Reis was much 
surprised that he had not availed him- 
self. But it was not amidst the tumult 
of the multitude, nor in the abandon- 
ment of festivity, nor when overwhelm- 
ed with the insensibility of drunken- 
ness and sleep, that the blow^ was struck. 
At mid-day, when all was tranquil and 
composed, in the presence of his priests 
and attendants, Ciulactly suddenly fell 
dead, without a groan. It had been 
urged with such fatal dexterity, that 
the wound was instantly mortal, and 



ADA REIS. 1(73 

no one even gnessed the hand which 
had given it. A howl of despair was 
immediately heard. The news spread 
with the utmost rapidity, and thou- 
sands upon thousands of the inhabit- 
ants crowded into the streets and 
courts around the palace. 

Ada Reis trembled not, although he 
saw all eyes fixed with suspicion upon 
him. His circumstances were so despe^ 
rate, that his care for himself, which 
had ever been his predominant passion, 
was somewhat diminished ; yet still he 
disliked both death and pain : when 
suddenly Papo Taguacan came for- 
ward, proclaimed himself the mur- 
derer, declared his motives to his fel- 
low-citizens, and delivered himself up, 
without a murmur, to the punishment, 
which he was well aware immediately 
awaited him. 



174 ADA REIS. 

The priests paid every customary 
honour to their lost cacique, the rites 
of whose funeral are described by Ada 
Reis with as much minuteness as the 
sacrifice in the temple. He was laid in 
state, and mourned for, twelve days. 
Each brought and placed upon his 
grave that which he loved and esteemed 
the most. His trinkets and his trea- 
sures were buried with him, but not his 
wives; after which there was no torture 
they did not practise upon Papo Tagua- 
can, who smiled at the agonies they 
inflicted, singing in triumph whilst his 
breath and strength continued, with 
the satisfaction of having gratified his 
revenge ; one hundred dogs were sa- 
crificed with him. The priest then 
proclaimed, from the mouth of an idol, 
that a descendant of the sun was 
amongst them ; and Ada Reis was 



ADA REIS. 175 

proclaimed cacique, and borne away 
to the temple to be crowned, with all 
the usual solemnities, and amidst the 
congratulating shouts of the people. 



lyG ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Upon his return, Ada Reis threw 
down in disgust the sceptre, which liad 
just been placed within his grasp. *' By 
the prophet," he said, " can man con- 
descend to become the instrument thus 
of deception and superstition ? I am 
neither good enough to give up my 
own passions and love of independence 
for the benefit of others, nor weak 
enough to conceive myself great, be- 
cause I am considered so by such as 
these. Praise, to gratify my vanity, 
must come from beings, if not supe- 
rior, at least equal to me; and distinc- 
tion must be an acknowledged supe- 
riority over creatures like myself, and 
not over those blinded by bigotry and 
ignorance. But, alas! of what can man 



ADA REIS. 177 

on earth be proud ; if even he be mon- 
arch of an enHghtened nation ; is it 
not by accident ? — is it by superiority? 
Yet grant that I were chosen an ab- 
solute king, by a free and enHghtened 
nation, what then were the reward 
of exertion, — and what, after a Hfe 
of toil and fatigue, would be my 
fate ? Alas ! life itself is, I find, after 
all, but an illusion ; — the gratification 
of every passion, every feeling, every 
sentiment, leaves, as the wisest of 
men has said, nothing but vanity and 
vexation of spirit ; and the whole pil- 
grimage, though adorned for a time by 
hope, and rendered tolerable by vanity, 
is as a vain dream. Would 1 had never 
existed ! but it is of little moment. I 
have lived and enjoyed all that it is 
possible. I have seen from pole to pole 
all that there is to possess ; every wish 
of my soul has been gratified as it 

VOL. II. N 



IJS ADA REIS. 

sprung up within me ! Now, then, let 
me die. Nothing in me is immortal ; 
the vain presumptuous hopes of man 
affect me not ; and if there is no hea- 
ven for the frail sons of dust, Ada Reis, 
at least, fears no hell." 



ADA REIS. 179 



CHAPTER XIV. 

It was in vain that Ada Reis thus 
reasoned ; he was not only made king, 
but obliged to witness the most cruel 
sacrifices which celebrated his acces- 
sion. Cruel as he was, the sight of 
so much severity disgusted, though it 
did not touch him. He had been for 
a time entertained with the knavery, 
the theft, the sluggishness, the gross 
superstition of his new subjects ; but 
all his desire now was to escape from 
them. He resolved to leave these 
wretched creatures and his palace, or 
rather his hut, and to return, if possi- 
ble, to civilised society : but he was so 
watched in all his motions by his priests 
and adherents, that, without making 
use of a stratagem, he found it difficult 

N 2 • 



180 ADA REIS. 

to make his escape. He therefore pre- 
tended sickness, and shut himself up 
entirely in his palace for several months : 
during which time he amused himself 
in writing, with the juice of a fruit, 
the remainder of his journal, venting 
his rage, and execrating Kabkarra for 
having deceived him in the very fulfil- 
ment of his promise. 

But, unfortunately for him, the 
lower his subjects fell in the opinion 
of their sovereign, the higher he arose 
in theirs. His obstinate retirement 
was considered as an act of the most 
kingly dignity. He became the most 
popular monarch that had ever reign- 
ed in the country; and when he pro- 
ceeded to have his wives suffocated, 
to squander his treasures, to burn the 
uncouth figures which his predecessors 
had venerated, to have the priests sa- 
crificed upon their own altars, and to 



ADA REIS. 181 

issue edicts for numerous sanguinary 
executions, the people set no bounds 
to their enthusiastic attachment and 
devotion. They kept perpetual watch 
around his palace in order to obtain a 
glimpse of him, and he saw, with deep 
regret, that the more he tried to alienate 
the more he attached them ; and that 
their affectionate vigilance was such as 
to preclude every hope of escaping from 
his palace and his empire. 

In this melancholy state he was sit- 
ting one evening in his singular apart- 
ment, when he saw a large spider 
making a web ; and, strange as it might 
seem, the ingenuity of the reptile, for 
a moment, diverted his mind from his 
own miserable situation. The spider's 
eager diligence and dexterity struck 
him forcibly. The web grew and the 
insect grew. Its motions were so rapid, 
its perseverance so great, that now it 



182 ADA REIS. 

had drawn its threads from one corner 
of the room to the spot near which Ada 
Reis stood; and now growing larger 
and larger, its shining eyes and grin- 
ning mouth became terrible to look 
upon : it spun its threads round and 
round Ada Reis ; it moved from side 
to side ; at length he found himself 
caught like a lion in its toils, and the 
monstrous spider stopped, staring at 
him in triumph. 

A laugh and a yell now sounded ; the 
word Kabkarra was pronounced. Ada 
Reis started back through the silken 
web ; then rushed forward ; nothing 
impeded his course, — nor palace, nor 
people. He found himself in a moun- 
tainous desert, once more at liberty to 
pursue his own course. " Not without 
danger he climbed up the rocks of gra- 
nite, perpendicular and impracticable, 
were it not for the large rock-crystals 



ADA REIS. 183 

and feldspars jutting out, upon which 
he could rest his foot: then broke upon 
his delighted gaze the vast deserts of 
Rhiana. Upon one side the mountain 
of Nuraama, losing itself in the clouds, 
whilst a part of the valley, covered by 
an immense forest, appeared upon the 
other ; there it was that he first beheld 
the mouth of a cavern, like the famed 
cavern of Ataruipe^^: near which it 
seemed was the cemetery of a whole na- 
tion. Skeletons were carefully pre- 
served in baskets and urns, adorned 
with the spiral leaves of the palm, laid 
side by side, from the age of infancy 
upwards, along a solitary valley, by the 
banks of the river; all perfect, all tran- 
quil : no names recorded. It was one 
of those nights, serene and fresh, so 
common beneath the torrid zone ; the 
moon, surrounded with coloured haloes, 
shone in her fulness, and brightened 



184 ADA REIS. 

the borders of the thick fog^^'; the aro- 
matic smell from plants; the phosphoric 
light from the millions of flies; the palm 
and sycamore shaking their spiral leaves 
to the breeze, and the roar of waters at 
a distance. 

As he journeyed on, he beheld be- 
fore him, at some distance, past all 
belief, Papo Taguacan, whom he had, 
with his own eyes, seen cut to pieces 
and burnt. He appeared lost in con- 
templation and the deepest melancholy. 
Upon approaching (stranger still) he 
found not the Indian, but one who ap- 
peared the exact image of Condulmar, 
only very pale and exhausted. " Who 
are you?" said Ada Reis. 

" I stand alone upon earth," replied 
Condulmar. ** I have caused the death 
of every thing dear to me ; and thou, 
lovely flower of this fair world, — Fior- 
monda!" 



ADA REIS. 185 

" Is it possible?" exclaimed Ada 
Reis ; " do I see Condulmar before 
me!" 

As he approached to embrace his 
friend, the stranger grew taller and 
taller, and every moment more and 
more terrific in appearance. A voice, 
hoarse and terrible, pronounced the 
name of Ada Reis ; whilst eddying 
waters rushing round, stunned him 
with their noise. And now Ada Reis 
scarcely saw any thing, when again 
suddenly he beheld upon the summit 
of that vast pile of granite, laughing 
wildly, Kabkarra. " Ha ! Is it you ?" 
said he, advancing fiercely, to destroy 
him. 

But Kabkarra, waving him off, hailed 
him as a monarch ; and taunted him, 
one by one, with the long catalogue of 
his iniquities, saying, at the mention 



186 ADA REIS. 

of each new crime, ** And for this dost 
thou not deserve a reward ?" 

" Where is my child?" said Ada 
Reis eagerly, " say, at least, where is 
my innocent child ?" 

" Innocent 1" said Kabkarra, scorn- 
fully: " she is the mistress of a king, 
nay, holds an empire, and wears like 
thee a crown.*' 

Ada Reis, whose impatience knew 
no bounds, and whose curiosity was 
painfully excited, now gave vent to the 
violence of his temper, uttering impre- 
cations upon the whole visible and in- 
visible race, ending his rage by kneel- 
ing down and saying, ** Restore me to 
my child, and I will be your slave." 

" You are my slave already," said 
Kabkarra, taking from Ada Reis's head 
the golden crown and high black 
plumes with which his new subjects 



ADA REIS. 187 

had adorned it, and laughing wildly as 
he leaned back against one of the vast 
piles of granite above the roaring ca- 
taracts, " Know you the name of this 
cave? Bocca Inferno, the Spaniard 
calls it ; and here we will remain, rash 
mortal, whilst I inform you who and 
what I am ; for you knpw me not, 
although from a child you have sought 
me, conversed with me, and seen me 
every day." 

Ada Reis threw himself at Kab- 
karra's feet, and, all eagerness to hear, 
leant forward in a still and thoughtful 
attitude. Kabkarra's eyes glared upon 
the wild scene before him, and clapping 
his hands when he began, he bade the 
marimondas and the birds cease their 
clatter, and like the grey crocodile ^^, 
whose dim eyes were fixed upon him, 
be silent whilst he spoke. 



NOTES. 



Note 1, page 4. 
With their mules and runa llamas. 
In the parts of this country, which are neither 
taken up by mountains or forests, only tame 
animals are met with ; whence it is probable, 
that formerly the native species were but very 
few ; most of these having been introduced by 
the Spaniards, except the llamas, to which the 
Indians added the name of runa, to denote an 
Indian sheep, that beast being now under- 
stood by the runa llama; though, properly, 
llama is a general name, importing beast, in 
opposition to the human species. This ani- 
mal, in several particulars, resembles the ca- 
mel, as in the shape of its neck, head, and 
some other parts ; but has no bunch, and is 
much smaller ; cloven-footed, and different in 
colour ; for though most of them are brown. 



190 NOTES. 

some are white, others black, and others of 
different colours : its pace resembles that of a 
camel, and its height equal to that of an ass 
betwixt a year and two years old. The In- 
dians use them as beasts of carriage ; and they 
answer very well for any load under a hundred 
weight. They chiefly abound in the juris- 
diction of Riobamba, there being scarce an 
Indian who has not one for carrying on his 
little traffic from one village to another. 

Anciently the Indians used to eat the flesh 
of them, and still continue to make that use 
of those who are past labour. They say there 
is no difference between it and mutton, except 
that the former is something sweeter. It is a 
very docile creature, and easily kept. Its 
whole defence is to eject from its nostrils some 
viscosities, which are said to give the itch to 
any on which they fall ; so that the Indians, 
who firmly believe this, are very cautious of 
provoking the llama. — Don Antonio de 
Ulloa"'s Voyage to South America, vol. i. 
p. 478. 



NOTES. 191 

Note 2, page 7. 
She was called at times the Jcehhiera. 
" Kebbiera'** means greatest, grandest ; as, 
" Lilla Kebbiera," the greatest lady, or prin- 
cess. — Tully's Tripoly. 

Note 3, page 9. 
The most valued and precious of plants, the 

chirimoya. 
The chirimoya is universally allowed to be 
the most delicious of any known fruit, either 
of India or Europe. Its dimensions are va- 
rious, being from one to five inches in dia- 
meter. Its figure is imperfectly round, being 
flatted towards the stalk, where it forms a 
kind of navel ; but all the other part is nearly 
circular. It is covered with a thin soft shell, 
but adhering so closely to the pulp, as not to 
be separated without a knife. The outward 
coat, during its growth, is of a dark green, 
but on attaining its full maturity, becomes 
somewhat lighter. This coat is variegated 
with prominent veins, forming a kind of net- 
work all over it. The pulp is white, inter- 
mixed with several almost imperceptible fibres, 



192 NOTES. 

concentrating in the core, which extends from 
the hollow of the excrescence to the opposite 
side. As they have their origin near the 
former, so in that part they are larger and 
more distinct. The flesh contains a large 
quantity of juice resembling honey, and its 
taste sweet, mixed with gentle acid, but of a 
most exquisite flavour. The seeds are formed 
in several parts of the flesh, and are about 
seven lines in length, and three or four in 
breadth. They are also somewhat flat, and 
situated longitudinally. 

The tree is high and tufted, the stem large 
and round, but with some inequalities ; full of 
elHptic leaves, terminating in a point. The 
length is about three inches and a half, and 
the breadth two, or two and a half. But what 
is very remarkable in this tree is, that it every 
year sheds and renews its leaves. The blossom, 
in which is the embryo of the fruit, diff*ers 
very little from the leaves in colour, which is 
a darkish green. It resembles a caper in 
figure, but somewhat larger, and composed of 
four petals. It is far from being beautiful, 
but this deficiency is abundantly supphed by 



NOTES. 193 

its incomparable fragrancy. This tree is ob- 
served to be very parsimonious in its blossoms, 
producing only such as would ripen into fruits, 
did not the extravagant passion of the ladies 
for the excellence of the odour induce them to 
purchase the blossoms at any rate. — Ulloa's 
Voyage, p. 298. 

Note 4, page IS. 
At Callao. 
Being at length arrived at Lima, the vice- 
roy proceeds, as it were incognito, to Callao, 
about two leagues and a half distant. In this 
place he is received and acknowledged by one 
of the ordinary alcaldes of Lima, appointed 
for that purpose, and also by the military 
officers. He is lodged in the viceroy's palace 
at that place, which, on this occasion, is stored 
with astonishing magnificence. The next day 
all the courts, secular and ecclesiastical, wait 
on him from Lima, and he receives them 
under a canopy, in the following order: — 
The audiencia, the chamber of accounts, the 
cathedral chapter, the magistracy, the con- 
sulado, the inquisition, the tribunal de Cru- 

VOL. II. o 



194 NOTES. 

zada, the superiors of the religious orders, the 
colleges, and other persons of eminence. On 
this day the judges attend the viceroy to an 
entertainment, given by the alcalde ; and all 
persons of note take a pride in doing the hke 
to his attendants. — Ulloa's Voyage^ vol. ii. 
p. 48. 

Note 5, page 14. 
Accompanying him that eve7ii?ig to the theatre. 
At Callao, at night, there is a play, to 
which the ladies and others are admitted 
veiled, and in their usual dress, to see the 
new viceroy. — Ulloa's Voyage, vol. ii. p. 48. 

Note 6, page 16. 
Monastery of Mont-seirat, 
See Ulloa"'s Voyage to South America, 
vol. ii. p. 49. 

Note 7, page 17. 

7\co ordinary alcaldes. 

The corporation of Lima consists of re- 

gidores or aldermen, an alfcroz real or sheriff, 

and two alcaldes or royal judges; all being 



NOTES. 195 

noblemen of the first distinction in the city. 
These have the direction of the police, and 
the ordinary administration of justice. The 
alcaldes preside alternately every month ; for 
by a particular privilege of this city, the juris- 
diction of its corrigidor extends only to the 
Indians. — Ulloa's Voyage, vol. ii. p. 44. 

Note 8, page 17. 

His Jiorse, a magnificent steed from Chili. 

C'est du Royaume de Chili que sont venus 
ces fameux cheveaux, et ces mules, qui courent 
si bien. Tous ces animaux doivent leur origine 
aux premiers qu*'on transporta d'Espagna en 
Amerique; mais il faut avouer, qu*'aujour- 
d'hui ceux de Chili sont superieurs, non seule- 
ment a tous ceux des Indes, mais meme a ceux 
d"*Espagne. II se peut bien que les premiers, 
qu''on apporta en Amerique, fussent coureurs, 
puis qu'on en voit encore beaucoup en Espagne 
qui le sont; mais je suis persuade qu'on a eu 
plus de soin de conserver les races en Amerique 
que chez nous, et qu'on n'a point mele les 
coureurs avec les troteurs, puis qu'ils sont in- 
finimcnt plus parfaits, et que marchant k cote 

o2 



196 NOTES. 

d'une autre cbeval, ils ont rambition de ne 
vouloir jamais etre devance, et galoppent 
d'une telle vitesse, que le cavalier ne sent pas 

la moindre agitation les plus Ijeaux sont 

envoyes a Lima, pour les personnes les plus 
distinguees de cette ville. — Voyage au Perou, 
par Don George Juan, liv. ii. chap. v. p. 41. 

Note 9, page 51. 
And little feet adoimed with diamonds. 
One particular on which the women here 
extremely value themselves, is the size of tbeir 
feet, — a small foot being esteemed one of the 
chief beauties ; and this is the principal fault 
they generally find with the Spanish ladies, 
who have much larger feet than those of Lima. 
From their infancy they are accustomed to 
wear straight shoes, that their feet may not be 
suffered to grow beyond the size they esteem 
beautiful ; some of them do not exceed five 
inches and a half, or six inches in Icncjth, and 
in women of a small stature they are still less. 
Their shoes have little or no sole, one piece of 
cordovan serving both for that and the upper 
leather, and of an equal breadth and roundness 



NOTES. 1 97 

at the toe and heel, so as to form a sort of long 
figure of eight; but the foot not complying 
with this figure, brings it to a greater regu- 
larity. These shoes are always fastened with 
diamond buckles, or something very brilliant, 
in proportion to the ability of the wearer, 
being worn less perhaps for use than orna- 
ment ; for the shoes are made in such a manner 
that they never loosen of themselves, nor do 
the buckles hinder their being taken off. It 
is unusual to set these buckles with pearls ; a 
particular to be accounted for, only from their 
being so lavish of them, in the other ornaments 
of dress, as to consider them as of too little 
value. — Ulloa's Voyage ^ vol. ii. p. 60. 

Note 10, page 101. 
In the chase. 
Hunting is the only diversion of the country; 
a stranger at first would consider their extreme 
ardour as rashness, till he sees persons of the 
greatest prudence joining in them, trusting 
entirely to their horses. The horses do not 
wait for the riders to animate them ; they set 
forward full speed at the shouts of the hunts- 
men, and cries of the dogs. Then it will be 



198 NOTES. 

prudent in the rider to give him his way, and 
at the same time to let him feel the spur to 
carry him over the precipices. These horses 
are called parameros ; their usual pace is trot- 
ting. There is another species equally re- 
markable for their swiftness and security, 
called aquilillas ; though they only pace, they 
equal the longest trot of others, and some of 
them are so fleet that no other horse can equal 
them at full gallop. I once was master of one 
of this kind, and which often carried me in 
twenty minutes from Callao to Lima, which 
is two measured leagues and a h£df, and in 
twenty-eight minutes brought me back, with- 
out ever taking off the bridle. The pace of 
the aquilillas is by lifting up the fore and hind 
leg of the same side at once, but instead of 
putting the hinder foot in the place where the 
forefoot was, as is the usual way of pacing 
horses, they advance it fartlier, equal to that 
on the contrary side, or beyond it; thus in 
each motion they advance t^nce the space of 
the common horses. — See Voyage to South 
Ameiica, by Don George Ivan and Don 
Antonio de Ulloa, vol. i. p. 477. 



NOTES. 199 

Note 11, page 109. 

A rdile de pigeoji, 
A style of dress for the hair, once in fashion 
at Paris, as was the repentir, the desesperee ; 
and also the colours, gris de souris effrayee, 
ventre de la reine, &c. For these consult 
Hypolite, Le Page, and Rigolet. 

As for the French — Coup de Vent was born 
in Paris. — The translator of the MS. and the 
printer are alone guilty of the numberless 
little en*ors made as to gender, terminations, 
&C-. &c. 

Note 12, page 128. 
At that hour the fair and beautiful city of 

Lima. 
On the 28th of October, 1746, at half an 
hour after ten at night, five hours and three 
quarters before the full of the moon, the con- 
cussions began with such violence, that in little 
more than three minutes, the greatest part, if not 
all the buildings, great and small, in the whole 
city were destroyed, burying under their ruins 
those inhabitants who had not made sufficient 
haste into the streets and squares ; the only 



200 NOTES. 

places of safety in these terrible convulsions of 
nature. 

At length the horrible effects of this first 
shock ceased ; but the tranquilUty was of short 
duration, concussions returning with such fre- 
quent repetitions, that the inhabitants, accord- 
ing to the account sent of it, computed 200 in 
the first twenty-four hours. 

The fort of Callao, at the very same hour 
sunk into ruins ; but what it suffered from the 
earthquake in its buildings was inconsiderable, 
when compared to the terrible catastrophe that 
followed ; for the sea, as is usual on such oc- 
casions, receding to a considerable distance, 
returned in mountainous waves, foaming with 
agitation, and suddenly turned Callao and the 
neighbouring country into a sea. This was 
not, however, totally performed by the first 
swell of the waves, for the sea retiring further, 
returned with still more impetuosity, the stu- 
pendous water covering both the walls and 
other buildings of the place ; so that whatever 
had escaped the first, was now totally over- 
whelmed by those terrible mountains of waves, 
and nothing remained except a piece of the 



NOTES. 201 

wall of the fort of Santa Cruz, as a memorial 
of this terrible devastation. There were then 
2S ships and vessels, great and smaU, in the 
harbour, of which 19 were absolutely sunk; 
and the other four, amongst which was a fri- 
gate called St. Firmin, carried by the force of 
the waves to a considerable distance up the 
country. 

This terrible inundation extended to other 
ports on the coast, as Cavallas and Guanape ; 
and the towns of Chancay, Guara, and the 
valleys Delia Baranca, Sape, and Pativilca, 
underwent the same fate as the city of Lima. 
The number of persons who perished in the 
ruin of that city, before the 31st of the same 
month of October, according to the bodies 
found, amounted to 1300, besides the maimed 
and wounded, many of whom only lived a short 
time in torture. — Ulloa's Vot/age, vol. i. 
p. 84. 

Note 13, page 131. 
Many miles fons^ard upon the land. 
Sec Ulloa's Voyage, vol. ii. p. 85. 



202 NOTES. 

Note 14, page IS2. 
Even to tJie pois^er of the Jjicas. 
All the Indians of Auraca, Tucapel, and 
others inhabiting the more southern parts of 
the banks of the river Biobio, and also those 
who live near the Cordillera, have hitherto 
eluded all attempts made for reducing them 
under the Spanish government. For in this 
boundless country, as it may be called, when 
strongly pushed, they abandon their huts, and 
retire into the more distant part of the king- 
dom, where being joined by other nations, 
they return in such numbers, that all resist- 
ance would be temerity, and again take pos- 
session of their former habitations. — Ulloa's 
Voyage^ vol. ii. p. 282. 

Note 15, page 134. 
Their meal, matalotagc and maize. 
The common food of the Indians, as we 
have before observed, is maize, made into 
camcha or mote, and macha : the manner of 
preparing the latter is to roast the maize, and 
then reduce it to a flour, and this without any 
other apparatus or ingredient, they eat by 



NOTES. 203 

spoonfuls; two or three of which, and a 
draught of chica, or, when that is wanting, of 
water, completes their repast. When they set 
out on a journey, their whole viaticum is a 
little bag, which they call gueri-ta, full of this 
meal, and a spoon : this suffices for a journey 
of fifty or a hundred leagues. When hungry, 
they stop at some place were chica is to be 
had, or at some water ; where, after taking a 
spoonful of their meal into their mouth, they 
keep it some time, in order more easily to 
swallow it, and with two or three such spoon- 
fuls, well diluted with chica, or, if that is not 
to be had, with water, they set forward as 
cheerfully as if risen from a feast. — Ulloa's 
Voyage, vol. i. p. 424. 

Note 16, page 137. 
Brought the xi-jahua. 
The vijahua is a leaf generally five feet in 
length, and two and a half in breadth. They 
grow wild, and without any stem. The prin- 
cipal rib in the middle is between four and five 
lines in breadth, but all the other parts of the 
leaf are perfectly soft and smooth, with a very 
fine white and viscid down. Besides the com- 



^04 NOTES. 

mon use of it in covering houses, it also serves 
for packing up salt, fish, and other goods sent 
to the mountains, as it secures them from the 
rain. They are also, in these desert places, 
of singular use for running up huts on any 
exigency. — Ulloa's VoyagCy vol. i. p. 2^4. 

Note 17, page 141. 
Of the great Mar anon. 
See Ulloa, vol. i. 379. 

i 

Note 18, page 144. 

All had tails^ \xihich they "wagged "ji'hen pleased, 

and turned down when frightened. 

Copied from p. 31 of Mceurs des Satwages, 
by Le P. Lafitau. 

Ada Reis might possibly have met with 
such a race as is described bv Euphemius. 
Pausanias says, that anxious to know whether 
there were really any satyrs, and of what na- 
ture they were, he had interrogated several 
travellers upon that head, although liitherto 
in vain ; but, at length, a certain Euphemus, 
a carrier, had assured him, that when sailing 
towards the coast of Italv, a violent storm liad 
sent his vessel far away to the extremities of 



NOTES. 205 

the ocean, where, he said, they found islands 
inhabited by savages. " Dont la chair est 
fort rougeatre et qui ont des queues, les 
quelles ne sont pas moindres que celles des 
chevaux."" This account, continues the Pere 
Lafitau, appears to me to be assez vraisem- 
blable, and the description of these islanders 
agrees entirely w-ith the description of the 
Caraibes, who were masters of the Antilles, 
from whence the greatest part have, in later 
times, been driven by the Europeans. The 
flesh of this people is red. " Et c'est moins un 
effet du cHmat que Pimagination, des meres 
qui trouvant de la beaute dans cette couleur 
la transmettent a leur fruit." It is also, which 
the Pere mentions, red by art, as they are 
painted every day with the rocou, and thus 
appear of the colour of blood ; as to the tails, 
which the sailors maintained that they beheld, 
it was the effect of terror, which made them 
take 

Des queues postiches, pour des queues reelles. 

And almost all the uncivilized nations of Ame- 
rica give themselves that ornament; in par- 
ticular, when they are going to war. 



20G NOTES. 

Note 19, page 149. 
It was the Zumbadore, 
The zumbadore, or hummer, is a night-bird 
peculiar to the mountainous deserts, and they 
are seldom seen, though frequently heard, 
both by their singing and a strange humming 
made in the air by the rapidity of their flight, 
and which may be heard at the distance of 
fifty toises ; and when near is louder than that 
of a rocket. Their singing may indeed be 
called a kind of cry, resembling that of night- 
birds. In moonlight nights, when they more 
frequently make their appearance, we have 
often watched to see their size and the celerity 
of their motion, and though they passed very 
near us, we were never able to form any idea 
of their magnitude, all which we could see was 
a white line formed in the air, and this was 
plainly perceivable when at no great distance. 
This being a very particular bii'd, in order 
to gratify our curiosity, we promised the In- 
dians a reward if they would procure us one ; 
but all they could do was to get a young one, 
scarce fledged, though it was then of tlie size 
of a partridge, and all over speckled with dark 



NOTES. ^07 

and light brown; the bill was proportionate 
and straight ; the aperture of the nostrils much 
larger than usual, the tail small, and the wings 
of a proper size for the body. According to 
the Indians, it is with the nostiils that it makes 
such a loud humming. This may, in some 
measure, contribute to it ; but the effect seems 
much too great for such an instrument, espe- 
cially as at the time of the humming it also 
uses its voice. — Ulloa's Voyage, vol. i. p. 476. 

Note 20, page 151. 
Calitamani. 
Le dernier chainon de ces montagnes auquel 
les naturels donnent le nom de Calitamini, nous 
parut au coucher du soleil comme une masse 
rougeatre ardente. Cette apparence est chaque 
jour la meme. Personne ne s'est jamais ap- 
proche de cette montagne, son ecliit singulier 
nait peut-etre du jeu des reflets produits par 
le talc ou le schiste micace. — Tablemi de la 
Nature. 



208 NOTES. 

Note 21, page 159. 
Like the one at Mexico. 
The Mexicans being so very exact in all re- 
ligious observances beyond all others in that 
new world, either to show the multitude of 
sacrifices they offered to their gods, or to keep 
in their minds the remembrance of death, to 
which all men are subject; they had a chamel 
of the skulls of men taken in war, and sacri- 
ficed, which was without the temple, and oj>- 
posite to the great gate, above a stone"'s throw 
from it, in shape like a theatre, longer than it 
was broad, strong, and built with lime and 
stone, with steps, on which the heads were set 
between the stones, the teeth outwards. At the 
head and foot of the theatre were two towers, 
made only of hme and skulls, and having no 
stone or other material, at least not to be seen ; 
they were very strange to behold, being dread- 
ful, and at the same time a good rnemoriiil, 
death appearing which way soever a man 
turned his eyes. At the top of the tlieatre, 
which much adorned the charncl, there were 
sixty or more long poles, about four or five 
spans asunder, to which were fixed, from the 



NOTES. 209 

top to the bottom, as many sticks as the height 
could contain, in the form of St. Andrew's 
crosses, with heads or skulls placed between 
all those intervals, and made fast at the tem- 
ples. The number was so great, that Gomara, 
who had it from Andrew de Tapia and Gon- 
zalo de Umbria, two persons that took the 
pains to count them, tells us, they amounted 
to above one hundred and thirty thousand 
skulls, besides those that were in the towers, 
which they could not count; and the said 
Gomara condemns this practice, in regard that 
they were the heads of men sacrificed, as being 
the effect of so cruel a cause, as was the killing 
so many innocent persons ; and he is in the 
right, for, had they been the heads of men that 
had died a natural death, it was commendable 
to expose them to public view, to put the 
living in mind of their end. They were so 
careful to keep them continually ranged in 
their proper order, that there were persons 
appointed to set up others, whensoever any 
happened to drop out, which, according to 
their superstition, they looked upon as a re- 

VOL. II. P 



i210 NOTES. 

ligious affair. — Hekeeea's Voyage to Ame* 
rictty vol. ii. p. 380, 381. 

Note 22, page 162. 
With sandals on his feet. 
The two lords that led him were barefoot, 
for the respect they paid him was so great, 
that no man durst come into his presence 
without taking off his shoes. — Herreea's 
History of America, vol. ii. p. 328. 

Note 23, page 163. 
Entirely full of curiosities. 
An apartment, which was also called the 
bird-ho\>se, not because it contained more than 
the o^er, but that they were larger, nobler, 
and of another sort, being birds of prey, for 
game, and they were looked after by skilful 
men, with the greatest care imaginable. Mo- 
tezuma went oftener to this house than to any 
others, to see the birds, because they were 
more noble than the others, and was wont to 
ask many questions of their keepers, being 
very curious in that sort of knowledge ; and 



NOTES. ^11 

he was in the right, for there are still here- 
abouts more and better birds than in any 
other part of the world. In this house there 
were many upper rooms, and in them men, 
women, and children, all with white eyes and 
hair, as has been seen in Spain ; and, what is 
most admired, in a town called Pocol, in New 
GaHcia, a child was born, being the son of a 
black man and woman, all of him as white as 
snow. They said that there were some so 
white in Guinea, that their children were black 
like their grandfathers. It was very extraor- 
dinary to have any such born in New Spain, 
because all the other natives are of th§ colour 
of boiled quinces. In another apartm^j^ there 
were dwarfs, crooked people, some of whom it 
is reported were purposely so deformed in 
their infancy, alleging that it became a great 
monarch to have such things as were not to 
be found elsewhere. Every sort of dwarfs or 
other monsters, were kept apart, with people 
to look after them. In the low^ rooms there 
were many strong cages or pens; in some there 
were lions, in others tigers, in others bears, in 
others leopards, and in others wolves. In 

¥2 



212 NOTES. 

short, all sorts of four-footed beasts, only that 
Motezuma might be said to be so great, that 
he had all sorts of wild beasts shut up in his 
house. In other rooms there were vast great 
jars of water, in which they fed and kept 
snakes, alligators, vipers, lizards, and serpents 
of several sorts, so fierce and venomous that 
the very sight was frightful. The birds of 
prey were in another apartment about the 
court, and in strong cages, upon perches; being 
of all sorts, as hobbies, sparrow-hawks, kites, 
vultures, goshawks, ten or twelve sorts of fal- 
cons, several sorts of eagles, and among them 
fifty much bigger than the largest in Spain, 
each of which would eat a cock -with a crop, 
which are very large birds. These eagles were 
asunder, and all of these birds were every day 
allowed five hundi'ed of these cocks, ha\'ing 
three hundred men to attend them. There 
were many birds in this apartment which the 
Spaniards knew nothing of. They gave the 
snakes the blood of persons sacrificed, which 
they licked; they had likewise part of the 
flesh, which was also eaten by the alligators. 
The Spaniards were very well pleased to see 



NOTES. 21 



o 



such variety of birds, so many fierce wild 
beasts and serpents ; though they did not Uke 
to hear their hissing, the horrid roaring of the 
Hons, the dismal howlmg of the wolves, the 
disagreeable cries of the leopards and tigers, 
and the dreadful noise of the other creatures, 
which they made either through hunger, or 
because they were not at liberty to practise 
their savage tempers. — History of America, by 
A. DE Herrera, p. 348, 349, 350. 

Note 24, page 165. 

Tigei'S, alligators, and other wild beasts. 

Many of them, by way of gallantry, or to look 
fierce, had their heads thrust into heads of 
tigers, lions, alligators, or other wild creatures ; 
and on their right arm or shoulders they wore 
some badge of gold, silver, or feathers. — 
Herrera's Voyage to America, vol. ii. p. 343. 

Note 25; page 1 (^Q. 

Bags of vermin. 

The house the Spaniards were quartered in 

being extraordinary large, Alonzo de Ojeda 

walking about several rooms, found in one of 



214 NOTES. 

them many sacks, about half a yard long, full 
and tied up very close. He took one of them, 
which he carried out, and opening it before 
several of his comrades, saw it was full of lice, 
which he affirms is certainly true; so they 
quickly tied it up again, much admiring at 
the meaning of it. They told Cortes, who 
asked Marina and Aguilar about it. They 
answered, that all persons were so submissive 
to the king, that those who through extreme 
poverty or sickness could not pay taxes to the 
king, were obliged to keep lice (to pay them) 
as an acknowledgment, and that the poor sort 
being very numerous, there were several bags 
of lice; the most remarkable thing that ever 
was heard of, and which sufficiently shows the 
wonderful subjection of these people. — Her- 
rera's History of Ameiica^ vol. ii. p. 397. 

Note 26, page 169. 

l]]pon the kings feet. 

After them came out the retired youths and 

maidens of the temple, and taking their places 

opposite to one another, played and danced to 

the beat of the drum, in praise of the solemnity 



NOTES. Q15 

and of the idol, the prime men and persons of 
note dancing about them. — Herrera's Hi^ 
story of America, vol. ii. p. 215. 

Note 27, page 172. 
Disguised themselves like birds. 

Having bid the idol good morning, they 
feasted, and then went to the temple, in the 
court whereof they acted very entertaining 
farces, with much dancing and joy; they all 
afterwards appearing disguised after several 
manners, like birds, butterflies, frogs, beetles, 
and other vermin, and others like lame persons 
and cripples, giving a comical account of their 
misfortunes, which provoked to laughter ; and 
the solemnity ended with dancing. — Her- 
rera's History of America, vol. ii. p. 219. 

At the feast of Beiram, and during the car- 
nivals, do they not much the same ? And in 
England what were the mummers. 

Note 28, page 183. 
The famed cavern of Autaripe. 
La partie la plus reculee de cette vallee est 
couverte d'une epaisse foret. Cest dans cet 



216 NOTES. 

endroit ombrage que s'ouvre la cavcrnc d'^Ata- 
7'uipe; c'*est moins un autre qu''un rocher tres- 
saillant ou les eaux ont creuse un enfoncement 
lorsqu''elles atteignoient a cette hauteur. La 
est le tombeau d'une peuplade eteinte. Nous 
y comptames environ six-cents squelettes bien 
conservees; chacun repose dans une corbeille 
faite avee les petioles des feuilles de palmier. 
Cette corbeille, que les naturels nomment ma- 
pires, a la forme d\me espece de sac carre ; 
elle est d'une grandeur proportionnee a Tage 
des morts, meme pour les enfans moissonnes a 
rinstant de leur naissance. — Tableau de la 
Nature, p. 225. — Humboldt. 

Note 29, page 184. 
Brightened the borders of the thick fog. 
C'etoit par une de ces nuits sereines ct 
fraiches qui sont si ordinaires sous la zone tor- 
ride. La lune, entouree d'^anneaux colorees, 
brilloit au zenith ; elle eclairoit la lisiere du 
brouillard, qui, comme un nuage a contours 
fortement prononces, voiloit Ic flcuve ecumeux. 
Une multitude innombrablc d'insectes repan- 
doient une lumiere phosphorique rougeatre 



NOTES. 217 

sur la terrc couverte de plantes. Le sol re- 
splendissoit d''uii feu vivant, comme si les 
astres du firmament etoient venus s'abbatre 
sur la savanne. Des Bignonias grimpans, des 
vanilles odorantes, et des Banisterias aux 
fleurs d''un jaune dore, decoroient Tentree de 
la caverne. Au dessus, les cimes de palmiers 
se balan9oient en fremissant. — Tablemt de la 
Nature^ p. 232. — Humboldt. 

Note 30, page 187. 
Grey crocodiles. 
Les petits singes, que depuis plusieurs mois 
nous portions avec nous dans des cages tres- 
sees, attiroient par leurs oris plaintifs, des 
crocodiles dont la grosseur et la couleur d''un 
gris plombe annon9oient le grand age, Je ne 
ferois pas mention de cette apparition tres- 
commune dans POrenoque, si les naturels ne 
nous avoient pas assure, que jamais on n'avoit 
vu de crocodiles dans les cataractes. Pleins 
de confiance dans leur assertion, nous avions 
plus d'une fois ose nous baigner dans cette 
partie du fleuve. — Tableau de la Nature^ 
p. 221. — Humboldt. 

END of vol. II. 
