Nous serons par NOS LOIX les juges des ouvrages!

Par NOS LOIX, prose et vers, tout nous sera soumis;

Nul n'aura de l'esprit hors NOUS et NOS AMIS!

Nous chercherons par tout a trouver a redire;

Et ne verrons que NOUS, qui SCACHENT BIEN ECRIRE!

MOLIERE.



A SCENE IN LOW LIFE, OR THÇ REVIEWERS! BE» ING A NARRATIVE OF AN ARCH CONSTABLE^ JOINING A CREW OF JOVIAL BEGGARS!



U NFORTUNATE CONSTELLATION! My

Uncle's over-anxiety to give a permanent brilliancy to your stars, with his great charity, as will appear in his hospitable recep

VOL. III. B





tion of a Constable with his vagrants, put us all out, one by one!

Caco-nous, when in town, would often take me to Bow-street, there to shew what is " a political justice," and to study the science of " political justice" itself. In his melancholy manner he persuaded me that the Constable ought to be put to the bar, as well as the criminals he brought; for often the Constable had. gone snacks with the vogues!

This discovery in " political justice" did we all in the Constellation live to verify!

Not long ago, an Arch Constable found under a hedge, in the vicinity of Edinburgh, a crew of mumpers, tatterdemallions, roysters, numms-wearers, and a prigger of prancers*, and other (what they formerly called) witty extravagants.





* Tliis passage in the text some have considered to be pregnant with the most important truths. It has been conjectured that this crew alludes to a certain literary cabal of Scotchmen, who published a quarterly work, which, however, at first to no one would give quarter, and for which they ought to have been quartered! It was published by Arch Constable. Now I cannot think our author alludes to this party; because the allusion would depend on a beggarly putt, unworthy of the classical purity of the composition and the dignified genius of the writer.

Besides, can the reader imagine that the EdinBurgh Reviewers formed a society resembling the present crew? No, indeed, Gentlemen! with all the wanderings of your hearts, \ do not believe you are half us bad!

A mumper is an impostor, or hermaphrodite-beggar of the genteel kind, sometimes personating a disbanded Veteran, at others a widow of a Welsh curate, and advertising in the style of Mr. Pratt's Sympathy, by





The constable, at the first impulse was honest enough to take out his staff, and bid the vagrants follow him to the Tolbooth.



appeals " to the heart," or "to a Christian!!" A numnu-teearer is another impostor, who wears sham collars to dirty shirts; and while be lounges all Jay in St. JamcsVstrm, growls over his gruel in a garret. A prigger of prancers carries a bridle in his pocket and 3 small pad in his breeches—in a word, a horse-stealer! It seems Aristotle had his acromatical and his cxoterical doctrines. The latter were on the superficial parts of learning, and any one might hear him lecture, as at the Royal Institution I But the former was kept for his particular friends; abstruse flim-flams! Now Bobtail pretends, that in respect to the acromatical doctrines of our author, no man in this age knows any thing about them hut himself! yet Dr. Gillies is called in the Imperial Review, the first philosophical Greek! so that the language of this panegyric makes .doctor Gillies a very old gentleman ; indeed his faculties were ever very infirm! A terrific controversy rages between Dr. Gillies and Mr. Taylor, tht translator of Plato—the Doctor pretends he has translated Aristotle, Sense for Sense; Mr.Taylar Word for Word—and between them both Aristotle sits between two stools, and the natural consequences are clear enough.





But, some men's honesty will not last them ten minutes! This constable was a.printer, and the numms-wearers were some of those vagrant literati who in that part of the country abound

Every one of this gang had been reviewed, and did not care to undergo any more the like punishment. They had not sixpence— in their souls; but they made the water come into the mouth of the constable, by presenting the prospectus of a new Review— to be conducted on Principles—not of morality—but of criticism! They only wanted a clean shirt and a guinea!



Bo Utah. considers that our author, with his accustomed reienue, insinuates, that These Reviewers have acted on the Principles of this vagabond crew—but how can we in plain narrathe admit of such mystical allegories? Bobtail has explained aeromatically, Silk Stockings. See Vol. I. p. 105.

Tac.





This constable did not take them to the Tolbooth; instead of exhibiting articles against these mumpers; he assisted them in drawing up their articles; and became what Blackstone defines an accessory before and after the fact to be—printer and publisher! Should he not have brought them forwards for breaking the peace with many of his Majesty's liege subjects and (to continue the language of their indictment) spreading false news to make discord between the King and Nobility, or concerning any Great Man of the realm*—for giving out



* Perhaps Bobtail may be right in his acromatical discovery; and all this appears in their critiques on Lord Lauderdale, to whom they say " they are





false and pretended prophecies tending to terrify the people with imaginary fears, and

obliged to limit their praises!" When they confess " he is ingenious," they add, he " greatly misapplies his talents and rank." On Lord Woodhouselee (a Scotch lord too!) on his discovery of a new mixed species of evidence in history," which they laugh at I On Lor D jincram's description of " improvements in the arms of light cavalry," inserted too in the Transactions of the Royal Society at Edinburgh—the amount of their criticism is, that they will not review a regiment of horse!

In this manner they treat their I.ords! Now for a Bishop!

Bish o p fforsley, in his complete edition of Newton's works, does not furnish a hint to make us suppose that he was at all acquainted with his subject!!! In his Euclid, when the forlorn meek Bishop is left entirely to himself, without Euclid by his side, his demonstra* tion amounts to nothing! that the Bishop needed not have thanked with such prelatical pomp, Dr. Jackson for drawing up his prefaces ! Better for the Doctor, no doubt, that the Bishop had said nothing about him!





As for their Baronets, and Majors, and eve* Colonels, you may conceive how they herald them, when even a Count is splashed by their unquiet ink, at a handsome rate. They accuse Count Rumford of being much too fond of self-idolatry, bestowing the most luxuriant epithets, on himself and his experiments, invoking them by most interesting! and highly instructive! All his enquiries are extremely important!

How do they use the Great Men of the realm! Dr. Kennel cannot reason, and has nothing but obvious truths in vehement language, but he must moderate h!s insolence !—Mr. John Bowles is a political quack !— Mr. Pratt't poetry exhibits every symptom of frenzy unaccompanied by genius I—Mr. Adolphuis History of England is nothing but a Magazine (not a sixpenny one!) of facts for the future historian, who can write with some ideas!—They impudently assert that Mr. Godwins style is " uncommonly depraved."—Mr. Fuseli, who maddened his young auditors with his lec4ures, lias nothing but "taffeta-phrases, silken terms, and three-piled hyperboles!"

Here I must pause! alas! I am wasting my tears in my ink, to have transcribed all this, of the " Great

M En of the realm!"

Rag.





raise enthusiastic jealousies*, publishing &'«• bettifamosi, full of the mala an'ima, and having a tendency to the mala fama of any person!

They resolved, though they published every person's name, not to publish their own!—Our constable, like Adam among his brutes, stood up and nick-named his animals. They all would have classical names. The numms-wearer, who writes down Mr. Pitt and the sugar colonies, wished to be Lucius Junius Brutus! The crotchet-brained minstrel, who sneers at the delicate poetry of the age, bawled out, I am Maro! But the statesman, who so deeply speculates on national finance, (and is nowconfined in the Fleet) could not find a name in all the heroic ages suitable to his talent!



* As in their alarming prophecies respecting stonef falling from the moon !—the serious danger to which the Bank of England is exposed !—the insurrection about to take place among the slaves, and the crisis of the sugar colonies!—How all English sermons are nothing but " tedious essays," and their characteristic "decent debility," and that such they must remain! —How Mr. Pitt's "fairest intentions hive been continually blasted in the bud'" and they prophesy, by incontrovertible inspiration, that so they must ever be! for if our premier buds, he always takes great care never to suffer himself to flower II See that alarming discovery, in Ed. Rev. Vol. V. p. 154.





An idea of their plan!

The constable and his jovial beggars had like to have splintered at their first sitting. He had treated them at a retired alehouse with a smoking fillet of veal for supper— they riotously vociferated Lemons! LeMons!





The niggardly constable conceived they had genius and appetite enough, and might pass without the relish! But one of their great critics, a ludicrous genius of a parson, started up, with his cassock in tatters, and flinging his pantaloon cap in the air, he exclaimed—Without a squeeze of the lemon t how the devil could the constable expect to make the Review sell! After supper this critic got up, with a broad grin on his face, while the critical sneer gave a rough dimple to his dark cheek, and delivered the plan of the Review to his confederates.

Gentlemen!!!

You must accustom yourselves to this title, and you must not omit the imperial pronoun We! Pshaw! blockheads! why do you grin at the plurality of a solitary devil of a Reviewer?





Existing Reviews are solid enough; but tasteless as our constable's fillet! Worming at Aristotle and Quintillian, as tame as old Serjeants drivelling over their dried rolls, quoting cases and allowing precedents! They will not brain the brainless, not badger a blockhead! no personal invective, no ludicrous exposition, no petulant triumph over unresisting imbecility!

We will revolutionise! each of us is a legislator! we will pike an author by military execution, and shew there is martial law in our republic.

Of all readers the most indiscreet and the most ignorant are the readers of Reviews. You may catch them in shoals; make your net but strong to retain them! A few volatile pages and they are caught! Before we tell them how the book is written, they shall first know how I, and you, and you, think proper it ought to be written. We shall be giving an opinion to thousands, who never would have acquired one but for us! what a. public charity we are instituting!





Select the most valuable passages, that we may insure some good things for our own book; but these will require no commendation!

Make a noble use of invective; invective

will give many life-touches to your piece!

•

Equivocal panegyric will make a reader laugh outright; and malicious innuendo shall make the haughtiest author bend down to a rejoinder*; pointed assertion gives a strange pleasure to an innocent reader; and has not ridicule its brilliant point, and irony its



* These fin« spirited recruit* have been attacked by





some grave veterans, and very serious charges are laid to their account!

But Lord Lauderdale has just published areply to them !—behold how they get rid of the whole controversy! They inform their readers that they cannot reply to this work, because their colleague is no more in this country!!!

My Lord, this is exactly what I would have apprised your Lordship of, had you communicated to me, the small volume of your Observations on their Critique. Your Lordship may perceive what a set of vagrants your Lordship has put yourself among!

"Literature acquaints a man with Strange

FELLOWS."

From Shakespeare! "Misery acquaints us with strange bed-fellows!"

TEMPEST.

• They attack your. Lordship in one quarter I Ah I did your Lordship think to find them at the following quarter-day I Your Lordship does not know that the great test of literary genius is, the secret of remaining





burning caustic? Let them cry out murder! What great harm is done? Who will have the temerity to attack us? None!—but the man who can bear burning sealing-wax drop after drop on his tongue, or can bathe his hands in boiling oil *! Who will keep mumbling at the tough gristle of their arguments, while our criminal leaves will be licked up, covered with poignant salt and acid pleasantry!



two quarter days in one place! But I should perfectly agree with your Lordship, that We Authors have a right to enquire why their colleague so suddenly quitted the kingdom f There is a tenderness in the expression which looks suspicious; no more in this country! it looks like transportation in a periphrasis! He writes in one of their quarterly Reviews, and presto! in the next he is off! The ball is not to be found under the cup! He has been conjured away! Aristotle and Longinus never ran away after their critiques; but they were actuated by different principles!

But though none of the fraternity, it seems, are capable of answering my Lord, they (says the sarcastical editor) "would be delighted to make some reply; but this is a gratification of which no one is entitled to deprive the author of the article which called forth my Lord's book!"—Heaven defend us, what a cannibalcritic, he evidently reserves my Lord Lauderdale as a bonne bouche fur a favourite Polyphemus!





The constable interrupted the orator— would not some books appear too good, or too bad, to suit the plan of their Review?

In this lies the grand secret of our Art I We are to hit the vulnerable heel of each literary Achilles. No work of genius can unite opposite characters of excellence ; massive grandeur is without the grace of lightness, and what is beautiful and airy, attains not the sublime. The merits of the finest



* Such a philosophic conjurer, a Spaniard lately appeared at Paris. See Phil. Mag.





writers may be compressed in one impressive sentence; the qualities adverse to their genius will afford us pages! Here we open a perpetual fountain of criticism, whence "the waters of bitterness" can never cease to well!—

A critic started up, and wiping away a little curd of foam, slavering his lips, cried— On this principle I have framed articles on Pope, on Richardson, and on Young—as specimens for the use of the society! These were all men of genius; but I defy any one to discover this by my account of their works. I have hinted at their real merits with great caution and obscurity—

Bravo !—cried the Constable—away with these precious models to the archives of the society !•—saying this, he crammed them in

VOL. III. C





to a small cupboard with their hard crusts and coldhaggess. My friend!—he continued, while he cut the rind of a lemon, and presented it to the ingenious critic—your eyes are disordered! rub them well with this lemon-rind; its bitterness will discharge their unwholesome rheum!

The arch-critic resumed—we hold a curiously constructed magnifier, a cylindrical mirror; 'tis concave and convex; 'tis rough and curved, and cannot fail to shew very amusing distorted figures. Beneath it, the beautiful arm of the loveliest of the Graces would exhibit a skin rough and uneven, full of hairy excrescences and gaping apertures'. distil the freshest roses through an alembic tinged with gall, and the rose water shall lose its sweetness! A work, solid and instructive, rate with vivacity for not exhilarating us with pleasantry and wit; or if pleasantry and wit freshen it, damn it for not being solid and instructive. In a labour of painful erudition, exclaim how heavily it moves! If it displays the charm of composition, lament over the superficial graces! throw into your articles an artful prodigality of the pour and the contre, you will madden the author, and tickle a thousand readers! what odds in our favour! my lads! I beg pardon—Gentlemen! they will be astonished at being shewn the possibility of the same author uniting in one work the extremes of talent and imbecility, as we shall pretend to discover in our first writers.





Select, at least, three works to banter,

though the authors be obscurej and the

•works unimportant! We have declared in

our preface, that we shall only notice "works that have attained or deserve celebrity!" No matter what an author says in a preface, we must give our reader many a good joke for his crown-pieces', if we have any epigram among us we must club our wit I





Finally, for the last exquisite stroke of your pencil, after having asserted that the author did not know how to write his book, favour the world with this desideratum. In a dozen volatile pages of your own, persuade the reader they contain all that is requisite to be known ; and you may add, when your fancy is sportive, and your dinner for that day secured, some theory of your own, of which the merit will consist in the eccentricity of your opinion, the confidence of your assertion, and the brilliancy of your style 1





. Such was the plan, and such the principles of these libellifamosi!

As for these unhappy young men themselves, they were all born of poor, but honest parents; yet all Must come to an untimely end! Their lives, behaviour, confession, and dying words I propose shortly to indite; examples will they be to all the apprentices and journeymen of literature; tragical histories of Pride, Egotism, and Scotticism!

Learn to do well by other's harm,

And ye shall be full wise f



The following Biographiana will, I hope, till then satisfy the curious reader.

Their ludicrous parson was put into the ecclesiastical court for two volumes of sernions, in which he committed drollery in a quaint preface, and was convicted of having made his readers laugh!—for this spiritual sin he performed penance pro salute animte, which he did with more pride than contrition.





The colonial and financial writer has suffered for the obstinacy of his opinions la peineforte etdure, that is, had his own works pressed upon his stomach, which had nearly proved the death of him—they were so heavy!

Maro, the mumper, was convicted on the vagrant act, as a minstrel going about with an ancient scrannel rebeck, twinging twanging old lays and ballads, all about cattlestealcrs, outlaws, and big-bellied girls! clashing modern and ancient rhyme, to the great annoyance of the ears of poetical pas





The Editor was tried for being at the head of this gang. At the bar this prisoner was asked, why lie had committed so many enormities? shrugging up his shoulders, he replied, that he must live! The Recorder said, (as on a former occasion) that he did not see any necessity for this!—and turning to the jury, observed that the prisoner at the bar was a most daring, obdurate, and desperate offender; that he had formerly been convicted of a conspiracy in a lecture-room, laughing at the lecturer!—that he smiled too often!

Such was the crew into whose company my Uncle fell—he received them charitably under his own roof—our fattened turkeypoults, our finest fruits, and my old grandfather's hock, were entirely surrendered to the critics!





Good easy man! he knew the plan of their Review, and opened his heart to them; he only wished to secure a seat of honour in their tremendous journal. The ConstellaTion too offered to make them corresponding members!—As soon as the jovial beggars received this notice, they went off like so many hey-go-mad devils, scampering and scouring straight down to Edinburgh, and extinguished our star-light in their following Eeview*!



* I must add a note respecting this jovial crew — After having undergone the course of the law, as I have above faithfully detailed, they all set off for London '. two never got here safe, nothing was safe near them! "There was originally but a shirt and a half in all the





company;" they found " linen enough on every hedge!" Since they have settled in this town, I hope the police are not in want of necessary information!

But these runaways, have occasioned a considerable falling off in the spirit and the critical investigation of the libettifamosi—we see articles now "flat and unprofitable," The Horatian roguishness tickles no more!

Constable! be chary of dull Scotchmen! obstinate as my Uncle, they will empty their whole inkhorn to the very sediment!





CHAPTER XXXV.



lurpissimum est nobis LATRONES el LENONES majore inter K consensione vivcre, quam eruditas.

LUDOVICUS VIVES.

It is most shameful that THIEVES and PANDERS should live more friendly together than the LEARNED I



LITERARY QUARRELS!



W Hen the Review arrived, it was my fate to open that awful dispatch. I soon perceived they denounced an exterminating war to our small phalanx! At the preluding flourish I was in a stupor! Awakened by a small, low, sibillant noise, I beheld the memhers hissing at one another! Red eyes, sneering noses, and acid tongues! Who could have imagined this f Every soul was bursting with a secret — that not one hitherto but had masked his real sentiments; they had stifled themselves with roses, which had been thrown away with mutual prodigality; each, merely to insure his own papers being inserted in the "Memoirs of the Constellation," had humoured and applauded the whiffle-scribble of his brother!





But against my Uncle, as President of the Cat and Fiddle, the members seemed more bitterly enraged—they petrified his genius, they iced his tongue! they all swore that his Essays were the maggots that had flyblown their literary venison!

Then the no-sale of our book, and the increasing demand of the Review, which had so entertained the world with us all, set the village-laughers at us—insomuch that not a member of the Cat and Fiddle cared to meet one another—or any living person!





Instead of fraternal consolation, they recriminated. Dick pricked my Uncle with a dozen of epigrams, (blunt and pointed) till the tears started in his eyes! Contour gibed and bantered the good man! Bulbo once set his bull to toss my honoured Uncle! Caco-nous and Swartenzach were the only rational Philos—for in all their adversities, they kept metaphysicking it in their usual way, sitting as gravely a.s a couple of chimney-pieces by my Uncle's fire-side. Caconous was constantly with us, for my Uncle liked to keep a tame philosopher in the house.





Is this, then, I cried, a sublime brotherhood of Literature? Are writers in prose as little to be trusted as writers in verse? What! all cocks in a battle-royal! Can a philosopher, soaring into a system of his awn creation, cringe and back-bite? Whether our authors empty a nip of Burton ale, or quaff the soul-kindling Burgundy, are they all hewed out of the same block? Are The Literati (always meaning such as constellated at the Cat and Fiddle,) men, who when they are our friends, we ought to live with as if they were one day to be our enemies?

What in this unfortunate affair particularly galled my Uncle, was a most inhuman and unheard-of attack by The Reviewers on his Wig *!!! My Uncle modestly wore one proportionate to his head.

* The Edinburgh Reviewers, to begin the





In all literary history (exclaimed my Uncle) was ever such a fact chronicled? What!

world, and try their luck at the ludicrous, in their first number, p. 18, slipped on a Harlequin's jacket, and with their pantomimic sword knocked off Dr. Parr's wig! Saluting it in magic Greek, they expatiate on its boundless convexity of frizz, scorning all episcopal limits, and with all due solemnity draw a parallel, in the manner of Plutarch, between the Doctor and hit Wig, shewing that he had constructed his Sermon after the manner of his wig! All this was considered exquisite humour, fine taste, and grave criticism! They close their article by a sentimental whine, that the Doctor " should languish on a little paltry curacy in Warwickshire." They can at once banter and sympathize, tweak a grave man's nose, and shed a tear at his afflictions; they have such acute heads and such tender hearts!

But all this is not so ludicrous as it may appear, for such is the potent witchery of these Harlequin-aristoTles, that they inform us Sir Francis Burdett has " presented Dr. Parr with a living, since the writing of their article!!" By this intelligence they most eridently insinuate that they possess «n influence over





is Punchinello to be Lord-Chief-Justice? 'Tis such a personal attack! A Wig, Sir, is one of the most tender parts of a man's character. Much may depend on a man's wig; ridicule his wig, and you make a man the burthen of a song!

The Reviewers said my Uncle's Essay might be measured by the scale of his own scanty Wig. It was as much entitled to be considered an Essay, as the thin hairs so loosely tacked together on his head might be deemed, by courtesy, a wig. But it was



the aforesaid Sir Francis.—I have little doubt they have, by the Principles of their Ars Critica! They are All Harlequins! Sir Francis hasjust exhibited himself in a Roman costume—I would as lieve have seen him fantastically naked, like an ancient Pict! at least he would" then have reminded us, that he was, or meant to be, an honest Briton !—without the trick of a tuga i





really no wig at all! It had neither powder to colour it, nor pomatum to soften it; rough and uncombed, it was clapt on his head without a moment's reflection. Every crooked hair stood opposite its neighbour, without order or connection; and many parts were put together in so bungling a manner, that its beggarly caul popped out at every turn of the head—the rude workmanship of a village barber!

Now my Uncle got himself insulted at every hour.

When Contour had prepared for the press his " Contemplations on Outline," he requested my Uncle to write the preface.

Jacob, flattered by the request, politely insinuated to Contour, that no one could

VOL. III. D





write it better than himself. True, replied the insolent Raphael, but I do not like too attractive a preface; I ask you to write it, because I wish to under-write myself!

Bulbo called my Uncle an Ass !—Cicero called Piso an ass. What an affair this was for Piso and Jacob!

And yet my poor Uncle took it from the placability of his subdued temper, trode on, as he was then, by the hoof of the public— not as a man—but as a grammarian! He defied Bulbo to shew that he had more of the ass in him than Bulbo himself had !— and civilly requested him for the future not to use terms, or even words, which evidently, if considered in a strict grammatical sense, had no meaning attached to them *.

* Paracelsus treated the physiciansof hif time





O that every literary invective were thus analyzed and syntaxed! O that every lite

with the most sottish vanity and illiberal insolence; telling them, that the very down of his bald pate had more knowledge than all their writers; the buckles of his shoes more learning than Galen or Avicenna; and his beard more experience than all their universities— and the physicians took this in high dudgeon; but had they taken these words according to their pronouns relative, they are 'nonsense!

Mr. Shepherd, in his Life of Poggius, has given a curious and copious collection of Invectives; literary libels which passed between Poggius and PhiLelphus.

Athenjeus compares the museum, or university of Alexandria, to a cage for wild beasts. In Egypt (he writes) they feed a number of wiId scribblers, who are continually squabbling with each other in the cage of the Mitses! and heaven knows when they will be cured of this mouth-flux! Deip. Lib. I. c. 18.

It is remarkable, that the language of the Poissardes has always been adopted by writers on controversial topics; a class more tenacious of their flim-flams than any other, although they ought to be more modest and liberal than other writers. Mr. Kirwan, a gen





rato, when he is thus named and nick-named, would consider himself as a grammarian



tleman as well as a philosopher, feelingly alludes to the illiberal conduct of two adversaries, who seem to be strictly so, and, fortunately for him, are only armed with two goose-quills worn to their stumps! Mr. KirWan writes," I little imagined I should have called forth such indignation and illiberal personalities from , Dr. Hutton, and I had still less reason to foresee that the same style of hostility should be persisted in by Mr. Plavfair! Heattempts to justify the asperities, as he calls them, of the Doctor, but aggravates them by new invectives!"

And pray, Messieurs Hutton and Playfair, what is all this about ?—We are both speculating on the origin of this earth; we agree that it has neither beginning nor end !—Well, we are all little interested about the origin of this earth; but much that Professor Playfair should turn out a gentleman! Ah, in these matters a man's family name may be at stake!

RutJuveualian, not Juvenal GIF F o Rd , has thrown a bomb in a Grub-street garret! —but, indeed, his bomb is composed of combustibles scarcely allowable by the laws of nations. See his "Supplement to an Exa





as well as a man! So should they see all the fulminating powder without ball, of literary blunderbusses, smoke but not wound!



mination on the Strictures of the Critical Reviewers, on the translation of Juvenal." He may be, for aught I know, perfectly correct in informing us of iheir incredible stupidity—malicious trash—and stupid frenzy! —and that, to get through his Chaste version, abusing all the while Mr. Gifford, was doing—" A

FILTHY JOB."

. -The Critical Reviewer says of our Juvenal, that "his teeth in vain attempt to corrode a File!"

Juvenal, with gloomy merriment, replies, " If by the File he means the Critical Reviewer, his vanity is unsufferable! Were I inclined to mouth such a morsel, I should probably find that I had Panada between my teeth, instead of Steel!!'"

I have ready for the press a very curious treatise of my honoured Uncle's, entitled—on Terms of Abuse, in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin ; illustrated by some curious theologisms of the same kind in our vulgar tongue, with their authorities selected carefully from the works of several amiable living writers.





I must say this for Caco-nous, he was never affected like the volatile geniuses at the Cat and Fiddle. After the Review had damned him, he reasoned about Reviewers—and with his usual sophistry remarked, after all, a Reviewer is not Hobbes's Leviathan; one man composed of a thousand men; he is but one man such as we see each of those thousand is!—not worth noticing! Besides, I neither fatten by their commendation, nor grow lean by their censure—the truth is, he had a notion, according to an adage, that "a ram may kill a butcher" and an author write down his Reviewer! Caco-nous proceeded with his studies, humdrumming it with his metaphysics, and speculating on "spirits black, white, and grey*."



* I cannot suffer any one to turn such a man as CacoNous into ridicule—or affect a sorrow which I am sure was never felt at the time. Mr. Karamsin, a senti





mental Harlequin, here and there, never opens his eyes without a tear, or his mouth without a sigh, has made a covert attack at my Uncle's favourite Philo. He pretends to say that the whole affair passed at a madhouse in Lyons; but a man must be dull-eyed indeed, who cannot immediately detect the malicious attack. Mr. Karamsin says, that in the gallery at a mad-house he saw one of those unhappy beings at a small table, with paper, pen, and ink before him. Immersed in profound thought, he leaned his elbow on the table. That is a philosopher! said our conductor, smiling—paper and ink are dearer to him than bread.—But what does he write? — God knows I Probably nonsense! but why should he be deprived of so harmless a pleasure ?—You are right, answered I, sighing.—





CHAPTER XXXVI.



There is one who will undertake to kill all fleas in all the families of England, provided he hath a patent, that none may kill fleas but himself!

SHADWELfs Slack Jobbers, Act II. Scene last



Some Of My Uncle S Projects Of Mr. TopSy-turvy, Member Of The Society For The Encouragement Of Gimlets And Gimlet-holes!



IVlY Uncle at this time was busied with certain inventions, which he had laid before the Committees of the Adelphi Society—but his important discoveries, being rather of a metaphysical character, connecting mind with matter, he puzzled those laborious mechanics





with two ideas at a time! Those who had eyes and hands to decide on a gimlet, or a gimlet-hole, in five minutes were fatigued to death by his close reasoning about some invention, which they conceived to be no invention at all!

My Uncle had nearly discovered "the perpetual motion," only losing two seconds in 3700—but the aforementioned Society, who are precise and obstinate, maliciously asserted, that for a perpetual motion one indispensable thing is required—materials which will never wear out! Now my Uncle, after all his pains, was vexed to be so flouted! so he affirmed that he knew of such materials! and what seemed wonderful, they were carefully preserved in the Society itself! He told them that he did not choose openly to reveal this precious secret,





but would deliver it down to posterity in the same guarded manner the illustrious Roger Bacon did, -when he discovered gunpowder, by forming a kind of anagram of the composition. My Uncle, therefore, deposited the following letters in their archives, which they, have carefully preserved:

BLCKHDS!

These he declares to be materials which will never wear out among them, and which, therefore, are what is required by the said Society, with which to construct a perpetual motion!

That Society, for the encouragement of art and science, have offered a handsome premium for' catching porpoises in our river I —to extract oil from them; that is, from the porpoises, not from the Society! They insist, at least, on having thirty! My Uncle employed a man ten years to watch for porpoises; the man said, he once saw One in a storm! so that I do not think the encouragement they pompously boast is so great as some imagine. My Uncle, too, liked to get a name at a cheap rate, and offered a handsome premium for catching a whale in a kind of net.





But certainly one of the most useful projects of my Uncle's, in what has been called popular philosophy for the common uses of life, and which, in my humble opinion, excels any of Count Rumford's, was that of driving an obstinate pig! It was laid before the Committee of the present Society, but little comprehended by their mechanical genius, who have never attended to the stu





dies of platonic metaphysics. It is a mode which ought to be generally known and practised in all families. It consists simply in driving the Pig the contrary way you wish him to go! a principle which, had the great philosopher Herder been acquainted with, would have been advantageously introduced into his " Philosophy of Man!"

My Uncle had been one day expecting Mr. Topsy-turvy for three hours—he had intreated to have the honour of sweeping one of our chimnies by a new mode ! It was keen frosty weather—when a violent ringing was heard at the gate, and Caesar exclaimed, a post-chaise has come up, all of itself, neither post-boy, nor post-horse!—We looked out, and beheld Mr. Topsy-turvy wiping his face, and, in such frosty weather, was reeking with perspiration. He bounced into the parlour—our eyes had not deceived us—he seemed to have just leapt out of a hot-bath.





You are in a very comfortable state, observed my Uncle—my philosophical fireplace can't heat us to-day—nor, indeed, my Uncle might have added, any day in cold weather.

I must give up the invention—cried TopSy-turvy, visibly agitated. I am parboiled; and, if you speak much, I shall simmer into a passion!

This is, observed my Uncle, some unfortunate conclusion of some happy invention!

Certainly it is a happy one—continued the philosophical post-chaise driver—for the last mile I have been travelling these three hours in my self-moving post-chaise, worked by a steam engine I Could I but have borne it! but every piece of me drops with humidity! see how my head steams with vapour!





You smell just like a steamed potatoe, observed my Uncle; but take my advice, and the post>chaise, worked by steam, may yet succeed. Consider yourself as a piece of meat to be cooked. Take away the lid from your pot, that is, remove the head of the post-chaise; the steam-boiler being in the body of the chaise, you will only feel your extremities undergo the process of stewing, and in a keen frosty day this will be very tolerable.

I can't tell, my friend, (observed TopsyTurvy,) what part of me may not be dissipated by evaporation. A pneumatic postchaise is a very ingenious invention, but the inventor shall never ride in it!





We told Mr. Topsy-turvy that the chimney was ready to be swept—but he declined chimney-sweeping that day, as it was necessary for him to climb a little up the chimney to fix his apparatus—and besides, he was still steaming, and by no means in a state favourable to chimney-sweeping.

Mr. Topsy-turvy curiously amused us with various inventions. He took out of his pocket a pair of tongs, shovel, and poker, which he always carried about him! they folded up very neatly, and were completely a pocket poker, pocket tongs, and a pocket shovel! I wondered what could have led this great genius to this great discovery.





He described his new scavenger's cart, to clean the streets. It had brooms on one side to brush up the mud in a heap, and then turning the cart, it had self-rising shovels on the other to scoop the mud into the cart.

He had also, what he called a complete umbrella, built upon the principle of a light moveable sentry-box, with two small windows for the eyes.



He had a scheme for tanning certain human hides, which, if properly beaten, would make excellent leather.



VOL. III.





I





CHAPTER XXXVII.



Verily, verily, quoth Panurge, brave are the allegations which you bring me, and testimonies of two-footed calves! these men were dotards as they were philosophers, and as full of folly as they were of philosophy.

RABELAIS, Book III. Ch. 18.



AN END TO OVER-FLOWING BOXES, AND HANOVER-SQUARE Concerts! My Uncle PuzZled TO KNOW WHETHER HE OUGHT TO

Laugh His Notion Of Quiet By Taking

A Wife! Caco-nous Deems It Too Trifling

An Occupation.





JMv Uncle did not dislike a concert or a play, but when he became so intimate with Caco-nous, he threw away his violin, and never went to the theatre! This great Philo, (whom I have seen both at plays and concerts himself, and wondered that he should be allowed to go alone,) expressed himself in this prophetic manner.





"In an age of universal illumination shall we have Concerts of music? Shall we have

THEATRICAL EXHIBITIONS? Will it not be

practicable hereafter for One Man To PerForm The Whole? Will any musical performer habitually execute the compositions of others? Will men formally repeat other men's ideas? In our present state, all this borders on a breach of sincerity, which requires that we should give immediate utterance to every useful and valuable idea that occurs*."



* See Political Justice, at the close,whence this is transcribed.





I understand, replied Jacob, — in that age every man will be a Shakspeare or a Handel—and so we shall have nothing but private theatricals! Who will go to his neighbour to hear him play, or to see him act, when he can do just as well himself? Adieu to your overflowing boxes, and your Hanover-square concerts!

But when Caco-nous introduced to Jacob his particular and brainsick friend, Mr. Kill-joy,—I thought my honoured Uncle would have gone melancholy mad. Mr. Kill-joy always wore a sable suit; he rode upon a black horse, accompanied by a black dog, and a black servant in a black livery. I forgot to mention he wore a gigantic hat to preserve his decency before the girls *.



* " I am mistaken if Female Decency, nay, if





I believe no man of such profound erudition as my Uncle, ever so keenly enjoyed a good hearty crack; a loud burst of honest laughter; he and the Swede would sit opposite to one another in the library, holding their sides with both hands, and laughing till the dome re-echoed with the heart-beating merriment.

Kill-joy and Caco-nous were in the midst of an argument respecting the period

Chastity be not injured by the Disuse Of Hats, which has so long prevailed in France!"

HoLCROPT'iTravels, Vol. II. p. 117.

This is truly a very profound observation; but the fact is much more! Heavens have mercy on all French women! Howis this, Master Pangloss? So the women in France have No Hats!!! or, as you say, they make no use of them! The monsters! See Hat, Old Hat!—in the Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue.





of " the age of universal illumination." Kill-joy gravely and gloomily asserted that one thousand, or ten thousand years, might elapse before it could take place.

Here my Uncle gave one of his cracks!

Kill-joy stamped in agony—he said he was more than astonished to observe a true philosopher indulge in any kind of risibility! Was this.an age to laugh in? Ought a man to laugh? Ought a man to be laughed at *?



* Mr. Holcroft has given us a piece of philosophy, enough to make an incision into the johbernole of a Kantian!

"I suppose it was virtue in us that we concealed our J. Auchter from the objects of it—though I leave it to better casuists to decide how far this kind of laughter, or Any Kind Of Laughter, is.a mark of sound sense! Town I Wish I Could Laugh OftenER !! I —Yet I am very wrong if I wish for folly ; and





Does not the very language of the vulgar, which sometimes happens to be accurately

I do not very well know how pure wisdom should excite laughter. Bless us! we have many doubts to solve, and,as I fear, Much Rubbish to remove."

HoLCRoFT'i Travels to Paris, Vol. I. p. 42.

Bless us! how naturally is all this written!—Ay! but a little deep mayhap. Prithee! Tush! alack a day! Pray, Sir, have you ever seen Mr. Holcroft standing half an hour by himself in a monologue, closely arguing himself out of his own natural feelings?

Mr. Holcroft does not know whether he may laugh—he balances between the pros and the cons— and after all I can make nothing of it! He reminds me of Gargantua, at the birth of his son Pantagruel, and the death of his wife Badebec. "Shall I cry for the death of my wife, or laugh for the joy of my son?—He was on either side Choked With SoPhistical Arguments! for he framed them very well in modo et figura, but he could not resolve them! remaining like a mouse catched in a trap I"

Rabelais, Book II. phap. iii.

These are mine author's authentic words ; the reader philosophical,(said Caco-nous, pursuing the argument,) describe the painful state of Laughter ? Sensible persons frequently declare that they are convulsed with laughter— ready to burst with laughter—splitting their sides with laughter—and, finally, dying with laughter?





My Uncle was more alarmed at the anatomical knowledge of Caco-nous, than at the metaphysics of Kill-joy—however, heventured to say, that he thought laughter, with him, was always occasioned by a certain tickling in the aspera arteria, a glow in his pericardium, and a twitching at his diaphragm, which, if resisted, might occasion a suffocation! He declared that since he had known Caco-nous and Kill-joy, he had frequently crammed his handkerchief into his mouth; bit his nails to the quick, and even when threatened with an explosion of laughter, he has willingly stamped upon his own toes; but some of your arguments act on me (said he) like a feather in my throat! There is a certain corporeal movement which takes place with all our thoughts; some thoughts affect the stomach and provoke nausea: others the eyes, which make them redden and kindle; others .(such as yours) seem to communicate with the diaphragm, and were we not to throw out the air by sudden jerks, I consider that it would be unhealthy to retain oneself.



inight otherwise imagine Rabelais to have written after Mr. Holcroft'sprofound difficulties and painful situation respecting whether he should laugh!

GARGANTUA.at length, comes toa determination, which I hope Mr. Holcroft will, for he seems inclined to it by that honest sentiment of his, " / wish I could laugh of tetter !! .'" G A R G A N T u A first " cried like a cow, but on a sudden fell a laughing like a calf." May this great philosopher prove as fortunate!





All my Uncle said respecting laughter was sensible and pertinent. — Nature at times peeped out of the window at my Uncle's heart, but philosophy soon came driving her away and closing it in darkness! Kill-joy passed a month with us, and my Uncle was observed never to smile afterwards!

But when Jacob afterwards led so dismal a life, neither playing on his fiddle, nor caring for a play, nor recreated by one hearty crack, it occurred to him that he was a batchelor—and imagined that there yet remained some hopes of quiet.—

Not, however, by taking a woman—said Caco-nous.—





A woman! exclaimed Jacob, I mean a wife!

Well, and is not that a woman f significantly asked the unnatural metaphysician.

That is, said the natural philosopher, as it turns out—for I have among my natural curiosities an hermaphrodite fowl, which lays an egg occasionally, but has the comb of a cock!

Pshaw! exclaimed, testily, Caco-nous— you naturalists are for ever dwelling on particulars and particularities—your science is contemptible. We metaphysicians delight in generals. Is this an age for marriage? Look at the puny two-footed calves about us! In an age of universal emancipation "Men will then cease to propagate, and the whole will be a people of men, and not of ChilDren *!"





So my Uncle for a long while resolved not to marry, because he considered it as too trifling an occupation for a Philo to generate only children!

* Literally transcribed from Political Justice!





CHAPTER XXXVIII.



Tis not her birth, her friends, nor yet her treasure,

Nor do I coret her for my pleasure,

Nor for that old morality

Do I love her, 'cause she loves me!

Sure he that loves his lady, 'cause she's fair,

Delights his eye ;—so loves himself, not her!

Something there is moves me to love: and I

Do know I love—but know not HOW, nor WHY.



ALEXANDER BROME.



A Love Secret!



, if you are a lover, this perchance will be a favourite chapter. It really contains a love secret I

My Uncle resolved on marriage; but 'twas done with discretion, with erudition, and with philosophy—he fixed on the principle of Contrast—as his friend Mr. De Saint Pierre advises. This is the whole secret!—you have it at once—for I don't care to keep the doors of a man's ears wide open, till the wind getting into his cerebellum chills it—so that a secret kept too long in the telling is received so coldly!





i

Mr. De Saint Pierre illustrates his system by a pretty story, and as I am persuaded that Mr. De Saint Pierre is no liar, but only a conjurer, I believe it!

"The influence of Contrasts in Love is so certain, (says our Philo,) that merely by seeing the lover, one may trace the portrait of the object loved, without having ever seen the latter, provided that the lover is smitten by a strong passion. I have experienced this





many times. One day a friend, in a foreign country, introduced me to his sister, a virtuous woman, and deeply enamoured. When our conversation turned on love, I told her that / knew the laws which impel us to love; and that I would undertake to draw the portrait of her lover, which she defied me to do. Then, taking the opposite qualities of her own tall energetic figure, of her disposition and her character, which I had heard, I depicted her lover, a little man, not over plump, with blue eyes, light hair, a little capricious, but fond of instruction.—Every word made her blush to her eyes, and she seriously quarrelled with her brother for having revealed her secret. This, however, was not the fact, and he was as highly astonished as herself*."

* See his "Etudes de la Nature," literally transcribed.

VOL. III. F





The story, you observe, is wonderful, but true—otherwise it would not be found among my flim-flams.

This theory of Contrast In Love, I am clear I could confirm by historical facts. How many Tom Thumbs are smitten with a strong passion for a Hunca-munca! It was this principle that induced Cleopatra, the most vivacious, the smallest, and the most graceful beauty of antiquity, to hoyden after Mark Anthony, the heaviest, brutallest copper captain of the Romans? Did you ever know a fat couple, grease rubbing against grease, or a meagre couple, dried bones rattling against each other, equally enamoured of dried bones? Have you not observed a sinuous elegant Grace fly to the ponderous arms of some material being; and the sighing sentimental boy winding the circular graces of some orbicular beauty?





Jacob having resolved to marry, filtered the whole system through the small crevices of his brain. Resolved on marriage, he thought proper to take the. opinions of his friends.

He opened the affair with all due solemnity to us—he told us he was resolved to marry, because, added he, it is doing things decently!

Decently (exclaimed Bulbo, eyeing him from head to foot) how can you imagine that marriage with you can be decent—a mere philosophical stock-fish!

Caco-nous said—cohabitation is the bane of life; a man to live a whole year with the same woman! Marriage is the poor apology of a mind without energies, and as I have proved, you know, is a. fraud and a monopoly I





There's one thing against marriage—observed Contour, both for artist and amateur! the artist is always painting his wife! we have no variety in his works; it was so with Rubens! and even the amateur loses that quick feeling when his eye pores on one eternal sameness, and which, perhaps, after all, is a miserably defective body! Marriage must narrow his taste!

Marriage—resumed the naturalist, smiling on all his friends, for he was resolved on it—marriage has its foundation in nature. All animals couple! It is useful, it is pleasant!





Resolve me one question before you proceed, said the pompous Gaco-nous. 1 ask, then, if a man should marry, or not?

If the question comes from a married man —calmly replied my Uncle, animated by a finer spirit than usual, and resolving all their quid pro quos—it shews that the nuptial state has certain inconveniencies; there may be a nettle in a bunch of roses! but it infers it must also have its enjoyments, otherwise he would not put the matter interrogatively, but give it the form of an affirmative or a negative.

But if the question comes from a batchelor? proceeded Caco-nous.

By heavens I exclaimed my Uncle with warmth, which shewed he was not only resolved, but resolute—





A being exiled in solitude, cold and sour, that hangs like unripened fruit in the shade, with its white deadly look! It dies ungathered, without sunshine, without colour, without sweetness!

He told us how Lycurgus, and Plato, and Augustus, punished celibacy; and how the oracle attempted to puzzle Socrates, by declaring that, whether he married or not, he would repent either resolution.

Well, then, marry!—exclaimed Bulbo, and be as tender all thy days as a cockle-snail with his horns.

Caco-nous pursued the attack in a volley of interrogations, in his alarming way—Can you deny that marriage has a thousand cares, inconveniencies, and mortifications? Will not a woman dress? will she not play? will she not ruin? Or, on the other side, will she not be slatternly, penurious, and teasing?





If she has any taste, she will ruin—interrupted Contour—as they say at Rome, Sposa di spesa, noce che nuoce!

Is this a moment, exclaimed my Uncle, rubbing his forehead, and ruminating on Bulbo's cockle-snail—to pun abominably in Italian! on a subject the modern Romans seldom trouble themselves about.

Did not Mothe le Vayer (caco-nous went on) who took a third wife at ninety, declare, all three were like a certain fountain, which was cold by day and boiled up at night? When a woman once has a system of her own in her head, will she give it up to her husband's hypothesis? When Bentley was courting his lady, he had like to have lost her by starting an objection against the book of Daniel! Have you not written a treatise on learned men who had Shrews?





I take marriage—said Contour—to resemble the Diontea Musdptda, or Venus's flytrap; the surfaces of the leaves are covered with a sweet liquor, and allure the flies; but as soon as they are caught, the leaves lock up together, and the unwary creature is fixed for life!

Jacob started, worried and dissatisfied, and placing his hack against the chimney-piece, he went on for a considerable time with the following memoranda. *





I own it is an agreed point that a woman is not a rational being! 'Tis so declared in the laws of the Romans. By the Mosaic code they were not received as witnesses in court. The Athenians prohibited them from striking any bargain more important than for a bushel of barley. And Aristotle, who was so fooled by them, pretends to say, that a woman is only an imperfect man. Does not Laberius say, "Mulier qua sola cogitat, male cogitat" The woman who is alone and thinks, thinks of mischief. Thucydides says, that the best praise of a woman consists in having neither good nor evil spoken of her; and Xenophon, that a wife should enter her husband's house without having seen or heard many things she necessarily must. All this the Greeks and Romans thought concerning a wife—no wonder, therefore, there were but few wives among them! They clasped a Phryne for a Grace! Their agueish love was a fit that lasted an hour! they madly bought a tender caress, which has no price. Their passion usually closed in venting itself in gross satires and biting epigrams. We, more polished and humanized, claim the mutual affection that expires not even in old age, and, at ninety, can write sonnets!





Nature for a moment seemed playing about the heart of my Uncle, but soon, alas! his head was worked by its unhappy theories!

I shall fix on a wife on the principle of Contrast recommended by my friend St. Pierre. I will seek for one on whose velvet bosom I may pillow my studious head; whose passive quietness may not interrupt my philosophical experiments ; I have therefore fixed on importing a short, plump, black woman.





.

A black! I exclaimed, shuddering at the idea of my aunt.

A black! cried Bulbo—The notion is no bad one; for if a man would have a woman adore him, it must be an ugly one; they are naturally faithful and passionate.

A black!—said Caco-nous, with a sneer— 'tis an original hint; I could work it up into a system.

A black! ejaculated Contour, appealing to Jacob's heart, by laying his hand gently on it—as a man of taste!—he added.





I am sensible, said my Uncle, touched by this friendly gesture—that there are some amateurs, who, being too servilely attached to the Italian school, will censure my choice, incapable, Mr. Contour, as they are of more liberal views of human beauty, and insane with their conception of the ideal, and the nude. Every form with them must be Grecian, and the colouring as brilliant as that of the Venetian school. They look on a woman as coldly as if they were examining a picture, and on a picture as warmly as if it were a woman. I own, the face of a negress is not fortunate in respect to the chiaro oscuro; but some are gratified by silhouettes.

Woolly hair, a flat nose, thick lips!—Oh Jacob, Jacob!—exclaimed Contour.





My dear Uncle!—I could add no more; I was choked with inexpressible sorrow.

Nephew !—replied Jacob—and you, gentlemen! I did not request you to meet to give me your advice—but your approbation!





CHAPTER XXXIX.



BLACK as I am, an Ethiopian dame

Inspir'd young Perseus with a generous flame;

Turtles and doves of different hues unite,

And GLOSSY JET is paiPd with SHINING WHITE!

SAPPHO to PHAON.



A BLACK CHAPTER!



An this great consternation of mind lest I should have a black aunt, I opened myself first to Contour as a man of taste, and then to the honest Swede; and I must say that our family owes to the philosophical management of the latter our not having this blot in our escutcheon.





My Uncle kept stedfast to his design—and to accustom us to the abhorred colour, and as a compliment to his intended, talked of exchanging our satin-wood for black ebony chairs—reminding Contour that black was what the painters term a quiet colour!

I observed now, that whenever the flies got into his milk-pot, he would not suffer them to be removed. He said they looked very pretty there, and formed a fine contrast!

My Uncle seemed to torture-his invention to bring every thing to this colour. He was as chilly as a grasshopper, and resolved to have his rooms hung with black, that they might be warmer; and this was done on the principle of the most modern philosophy, which is a declared enemy to a silvery paper, because white imbibes scarcely any heat; while black retains it.





In this strange manner was my Uncle proceeding, when the honest Swede one day presented him with a few facts of natural. history, which seemed greatly to affect hinv

The Swede mentioned a person, the whole right side of whose body was white and the left black!—His father was white, and his mother black—another had half his body white from the navel upwards, and the other half black. His father was an African and his mother an Englishwoman *.



* From the Zoological Magazine, No. XII. quoted by Mr. White, in his account of the regular Gradation in Man, p. 123.

VOL. III. G





When you calmly reflect on these facts, continued the Swede, would you procreate more pye-balled, blotched, and party-coloured people? Have we not enough already of cows, pigs, and dogs of these colours?

My Uncle was struck with the facts.—He agreed that it was much wiser to purchase a monster than to live with one!





Brûler tout ce meuble inutile

Et hisser la science ailx docteurs delà ville;

Otes pour foire bien du grenier de cesna,

Cette longue lunette a faire peur aux gens,

Et cent brimborions dont l'aspect importune,

N'aller point chercher ce qu'on fait dans la lune;

Et mêlez vous un peu de ce qu'on fa!t chei vous

Ou nous voyons aller tout sans dessus dessous.



MÔtntftE lès Femmes SCAVAOTES.

Descend from heaven, URANIA, by that Mow

If rigttfy thou art called! MILTON.



A FIBST ASSIGNATION CHIEFLY CONCERNING THÉ SUN!



Uncfe, since his "resolution of not breeding pye-bald Philos, actively restimed his correspondence with Miss Eleanora concerning " the heaven* and1 th'é earth." G 2





As yet they had never come to an interview! But my Uncle, out of fondness and admiration, made her drop her vulgar name to assume the more hallowed appellative—of Urania!! Urania had for a month past been in a slow fever \ my Uncle was as inconsolable as he was curious, for Miss UraNia acknowledged it was no trifle that had fevered her! and in one of her rhapsodical postscripts mysteriously added—It is more than probable that your immortality is at my disposal!

My Uncle, likewise, was bursting with a secret! He was languishing for a tetea-tete, and a little chit-chat about the Sun! his soul, inflated with the oxygen of gallantry, felt its power of " accelerating combustion," and he boldly hinted at a " combination," which, in the vulgar language of love is termed an assignation. She blushed, at least she mentioned this in her letter— which, however, concluded, after all the difficulties she had raised, that " my Uncle knew whereto find her in any fine moonlight."





I have heard some ladies declare, that one must be a woman to catch the sentiments of a woman: there is something sexual in the soul! A woman's pencil only can paint those imperceptible touches, those bright yet melting tints, which few men can feel, and not one can describe!

But manners change! Hogarth and CalLot would now be a couple of Raphaels.— Now, when ladietare regularly brought up, educated and boarded, " entirely for the ser





vice of the heavens *," and all day long are ascertaining the nature of the gases, and talk

* "laiande'j daughter is educated entirely for the service of the heavens; she learns mathematics and astronomy, and he calls her in /oiehis Urania."

KARAMSiN'sTVarek, Vol. III. p. 68.

Poor girl! this is a very serious joke for her ! I hope Miss Urania, if she is a fine, plump, arch-eyed girl, occasionally flings her cap in Papa Lalande's face !—this would not be breaking one of the commandments, for he does not believe in any of the ten!

Then again, there is our Urania—poor Miss HeRSchel! She sits all forlorn every night in a room under the great astronomer; whenever he discovers a small star, he pulls a string (usually, I believe, tied as a bracelet round Miss HERSCHEL'sarm,)shethen opens a window, and at whatever information he want?, Miss Herschel, after consulting her tables, replies, Brother! search near the star Gamma, Orion! then, shutting the window, she returns to pricking stars in an atlas! These secret memoirs I glean from the Travels of Faujas St. Fond, who not only had a head as small as my Uncle's, but, what doubles the misfortune, it is a French head, all bavardagc and galimatias! He gives us





of the human heart as if they were swallow* ing a mouthful *!

Bright over the observatory rose the moon full orbed; the phantom form of my Uncle stole shadowy along—now gating on the moon, and now on the observatory; but more tickled by the latter.

friendly to his hopes, the door is a-jar;



many other curious particulars of a secret interview with Miss Herschel, how he stole upon her unawares !—then he exclaims—he is affected by " this delightful accord," and wishes the same harmony may reign among " all the brothers and sisters in EngLand !" I daresay! Gould our rivals once completely astronomize our great families, and madden our Premier with a star, they would soon see the fun of Britain Set f * L A~voissiEr?s celebrity has for some time past induced several of the Parisian ladies to become amateurc of chemistry; so that they analyze the sensibilities of the htart—according to chemical rules."

KArA.msinv Travels, Vol. III. p. 69.





entering a lower room in silent pleasure, hi eyes run over all the regalia of science—he turns an orrery, he rolls a sphere; but passed, tremblingly alive, an electrical battery. Cautiously ascending the narrow stairs, he gently pushes at a half-closed door. There, with ravished eyes, he beholds his Urania! Her senses absorbed in the tube of her telescope, while her mind was darting among Saturn's rings, how could she know that my Uncle, on tiptoe, was peeping over her shoulder?

This occupation, the hour of the night, the youth of the fair student—secrecy and silence—all that could inflame the senses violently affected Jacob; in rapture seizing

on his snuff-box, a violent sternutation

followed. .

Turning quick on him, with a coquetish poignancy, she faintly murmured at his abruptness *.





Hush! hush! she cried besides, you

might have stolen on me at one of my private experiments.—I have seen some of my discoveries actually published before I had finished them myself.



* As the reader may be curious to know how I obtained the particulars of this interview, I ought to inform him, that it was owing to the alarm which my Uncle spread in his rapture through the observatory. AnnaBella, the maid, procured me the whole. AnnaBella, good-natured soul! was a very different kind of a philosopher from her mistress. She studied the domestic Encyclopedia—many discoveries she effected therein. For instance, a key-hole she always considered as a window and an ear-trumpet—with that she performed many curious experiments in optics and acoustics.—These she would communicate to me, without pomp and parade; and she was so dextrous at these experiments, that she never suffered anything she heard or saw by this channel (the key-hole)

"To waste its sweetness in the desert air."





Tenderly pressing her hand, he exclaimed, An assignation of science ought not to disturb whatever is scientific.

•

True, true! she Cried, with a cracked hoarse. voice, (for this poor lady, in that observatory, caught cold a-nights,) one philosopher never disturbs another philosopher.— Hum!

After other formal compliments, my Uncle inquired if any news to-night?

Look up the milky way! said Urania.— Ha! he exclaimed—it makes my eyes ache! but (tenderly stretching out his hand) I see a milky way fairer in the heaven of your bosom! Hucp! said Miss Urania.—See the foot of the Goat! my dear Jacob, how brilliant! I observed to-night, in the most desert parts of the sky, a nebula, which has made me and my star-maid very busy—on these occasions I always ring a little bell!





For this, madam, I admire the family of the Lalandes—he and his nephew have undertaken to determine the position of more than 40,000 stars—What an uncle and a nephew*!

Hum! Lalande is a liar!—affirmed UraNia !—

He is a particular friend of mine, replied



* As I give every thing I know with the utmost impartiality, I could as some biographers have done, throw into shade whatever relates to myself, not very gratifying. This passage has cost me a sigh. What a nephew has Lalande! Ah! Master Lalande, junior, you, and a few other nephews, seem born only to mortify me!





my Uncle, chuckling at the thought he was a liar—I always thought he boasts of better luck than he really had. Then my friend Herschel is another lucky fellow!

Hum! Herschel is a fool—retorted UraNia, with eyes as red as a ferret's. Is there any doubt that they fatigue the world with accounts of stars they have never seen?

I thought 1 had discovered—said my Uncle —a volcano in the moon, and a mountain of i ice in the sun!

Well! if you have discovered them they must be there!

I sent my Memoir to the Royal Society; a set of unbelieving Jews! they crucify my genius, and circumcise my papers!





Hum! they will not even do me that favour! Don't you perceive it is all a party? said Urania.

Provoking! that the Royal Society should persuade one that one cannot trust one's eyes! As for the volcano in the moon, I saw it smoke with my naked eye—it looked just like a candle going out!

Hum ! I sent those fellows some hints on the last comet. I was very uneasy!

My Uncle calmly replied, And I too! but Professor Murhard of Gottingen assures me it was a fluid body; it will cool, dry, and become as solid as the earth. .

I am very glad to hear Professor Murhard's opinion, and I shall sleep the easier for it!





What do you think of the Sun? anxiously enquired my Uncle.

Hum! I do not know what to make of it!!! replied Urania. Herschel still persists, asserting it 'is not a flaming body; and LALande thinks it a solid one, frosted over with an incandescent fluid*! But Wilson asserts the spots in the sun are positively volcanoes! Now Von Hahn starts up, and actually describes landscape-gardens in the Sun! He seems, however, somewhat puzzled about shadows and half-shadows I a pretty affair this, truly, if all these solar landscapes should turn out a deception of whole and half shadows *! Then we do not positively



* Lai. And E says, in writing something concerning the sun, this does not agree with the idea of Dr. HerSchel! We materially differ—but this celebrated observer is more to be admired for his observations than his hypotheses'."—La La Dde then reduces HerSchel to a mere telescope I Where lies the great difference between them? One sees any thing; the other will rot/ any thing!





* Listen to this notable discovery I "With a Hersc Bel's telescope of seven feet, I beheld with astonishment, very distinctly, in those spots in the middle of the sun's orb, parts beset with little hills, separated by valteys, and single mountains of a proportional height, which project strong shadows. The fineness of the delineation, the scenic appearance, and the regularity of these objects induce me to believe that solar landscapes are here actually represented."

Mr. VoN Hahn concludes his paper with a very probable conjecture, which he refers to posterity to amuse themselves with verifying—It is nothing less than this —" By what circulation is the luminous matter, which diffuses light and heat throughout all nature, again conveyed back to infinite space f or whether destined and employed for the formation and maintenance of organic bodies?"

Mr. Von Halm is probably a member of one of the Italian academies, I have already honourably noticed —and he is not without many associates—" the chained

Madmen!"

Professor Bo D t's Astronomical Almanack far

1796—Phil. Mag. Vol.XL-39.





know whether the sun be hot or cold—HerSchel describes the sun as a magnificent habitable world, and the mountains 200 leagues high. I believe he will allow that the sun is a hot climate, and that the sun-men undoubtedly have a brisk volcanic genius. The cabbages in that country must be as hot as Cayenne, and their small domestic animals cannot be tamer than tigers—the high roads, at the coolest, must be red-hot iron! But, behold, Mr. Knight now has come with his petrifying system, that the sun-men (whose existence he does not deny) are probably suffering from extreme cold! and must be condemned to blow at their fingers all the days of their lives!

'My Uncle having patiently listened to all Urania had to deliver—shook his head. All flim-flams! he exclaimed. He looked full of awful sagacity—I will disclose, most confidentially, a grand secret concerning the





sun!

Hum! she ejaculated—her eyes, in torture, strained on the very tenter-hooks of curiosity.—

Don't you perceive—resumed my Uncle —that between the sun and the earth we are in a continued state of fermentation? Physical and moral? Hot and cold? Revolulution and counter-revolution? All these I account for on my system!

lam confident that the Sun is an Acid and the Earth an Alkali ! —and while the present system of nature lasts, they must inevitably produce between them, all this fuming and vapouring, this foaming and sputtering, this sharpness and bitterness which abound

VOL. III. H





in human nature and the very elements we breathe.

A new principle! cried our astronomical Sybil—which Herder would have wonderfully worked up in his " History of the Philosophy of Man!"

My Uncle was elated.—I natter myself that I can manage my own invention, madam! With this discovery, the greatest events in human nature are easily understood. I have observed that every two or three centuries the earth is in a terrible fermentation. 'Tis now an irruption from the north to the south—now a crusade—now a new religion—now a revolution in politics— of all these I think the cause is apparent enough!

How do you account, my dear Jacob, for the occasional tranquillity, or rather stupidity, which has prevailed through the globe?





You know an alkali combining with an acid produces neutral salts; mild and inactive! This characterizes these insipid ages! —My Uncle, in the height of his exultation, suddenly clapping his hand on his head, added, in a fainter tone—I do not offer this hypothesis to the world without diffidence! But, my dear madam, you look hagged!

Hum! I have had a hard time of it of late! I could speak to you concerning such a thing!

She leapt from the table, on which, I forgot to mention, she had been seated all the time—stared mysteriously, with such a wildness in her gestures, her night-gown awfully flapping about her—she stood like one of the witches in Macbeth—not as exhibited on the stage, but as described by the poet:





So withered and so wild in their attire,

That look not like th* inhabitants of the earth,

And yet are on it!



Wildly she exclaimed—I have such a telescope! I have a tube three feet in diameter! I assure you not twelve men at first could manage it!

/

My Uncle, astonished, exclaimed—A pretty companion-piece to Herschel's noble instrument!

Aye, but it has led me a terrible life! it has fevered me! I have brought it to great perfection, and can perform horizontal and vertical motions with it! How many secrets hang on the mouth of my tube! What anxieties, what watchings, what vexations it brings with it! These six weeks have I been languishing—and big with—My Uncle began to find Urania's language so rapturously ambiguous, that he was at a loss how to express himself—she, fortunately, proceeded—





With an important discovery indeed.—I have found A New Planet !—and let the Royal Society think what it will, I am resolved, my friend, to call it—a Jacob!

A mixed feeling of love and fame came over my Uncle's soul—like a mist!—Kneeling in silence, he grasped the hand of the fair astronomer. — But the dawn was rising, and she hurried her new planet down stairs.





He had scarcely got into the anti-chamber when Jacob uttered a tremendous shriek, exclaiming, A conductor! a conductor!

Hum! Who has been exciting my machine' cried Miss Urania. She flew to her friend—there she found her star-maid, Annabella, busied at the electrical machine, and at the same time making an apology for having electrified my Uncle.—She declared he looked a beautiful object of terror; flashing, snapping, and crackling; darting luminous points and pencils of light! Jacob's wig was electrified! The hairs, hanging loose, repelled one another in the most horrent manner.

His knotted and combined locks did part,

And each particular hair did stand on end

Like quills upon the fretful porcupine I





You have only received a shock, Sir—cried Annabella.

I am shocked, indeed, to see how science can harden the heart—cried my Uncle.—You are speculating at an experiment!

You are an electrified lover! replied Annabella. As my mistress can excite you, she may discharge you!

Dear Jacob, exclaimed Urania, you act more like a man frightened out of his wits than a philosopher.—But, sensible of the insolence of her star-maid, she resolved to rush on her fate, that is, on my Uncle!— Yes! tell all the village, she cried, that I love this man.—Her lips touched the lips of my Uncle—and he felt himself relieved, but their first warm kiss of love was warmer than the kiss St. Preux breathed on the lips of Julia — or Abelard on the voluptuous mouth of Eloisa !—'twas warmed by no metaphor !—it kindled by the agency of the electrical fire!





I wish their lips had never charged and discharged together—for what a Cousin did they give me *!



* As a kind of authority for this curious interview between my Uncle and Urania— I shall treat the reader with an authentic piece of convcrsation-philoism! I shall give it, as it is not exactly to be found in the Edinburgh Review Vol. III. p. 404.

This lady's extravagancies, have been extravagantly admired, by the Philos.

Do N N A A G N E s I, a fair Italian, aged eighteen, was a master of all the sciences; that is, got them all by rote, like questions and commands. This is what my Uncle's monkey could never arrive to, though my Uncle had some hopes of his great green parrot, the Psiftacus jEslivus of Li N N K. u s!





At twenty, had this young lady wedged into her cerebellum so many large ideas, that it actually split! this I am sorry for, but the crania of the ladies when overflowing with hot sciences, are like those delicate transparent but friable vases of Porcelain, that filled with hot water to the brim must inevitably crack and fly into pieces! Poor Donna Agnesi could not hold a drop more! And so she retired to a convent of Blue Nuns— (apparently a blue slocking club) there she passes her days muzzing over her hbmily, and perhaps CorneLius Agrippa on the vanity of the sciences!

The president De Brosse—a gibble-gabble French uncle of mine—has given one of her conversaziones. The reader shall partake in the gallimaufrey of all that literary feast.

Thirty persons assembled—to listen, to stare, and to clap, and finally to return home and growl at their unfortunate wives, who had not such long memories as Donna Agnesi!

First, Count Bellori—another Uncle of mine !—addressed the Donna in a fine Latin oration—but so tedious that even the French president candidly acknowledges that the Count was nothing but a starch formal fribble, bristled all over like a hedge-hog with his Latin.

This was answered in Latin by the Donna, who probably gave him as good as he brought. This so cajoled the old pedantic Count that he would not speak a word of his mother's tongue all that evening, but prosed in Latin into a disputation about—the Origin of Fountains!





The Donna, the president testifies, spoke on this subject and looked like an angel! Such I suppose as are sometimes carved and placed upon a fountain!

The Count, by this time found his tongue chapped, lolling it out with extreme heat, he could not wag it; he called for a cooling Sorbetto and for the president! —requesting he would begin—all at this poor angel!

The president wished the Count at the devil, for when called on, he was obliged to make a most awkward apology for his false concords; for it was a long while since he had declined all his declensions, and did not even know what a vocative was! He hit on a most pleasing topic—how the impressions made on the senses by corporeal objects are communicated to the brain,— then on the propagation of light, and then on the prismatic colours. During all this, the thirty puppets wereinecstacies exclaiming as at an opera, bravissimo! Encora!

At length the poor Donna herself, angel as she was, honestly confessed, that she did not like much either the count or the president! That the whole turn of their conversation had the formality of an academical disputation, and that if two gentlemen had been really amused, thirty very good kind of people must have been ennuyi a la mart!





On the whole, my French uncle, the President De Brasses account, with a liule management, seems to be as impartially drawn up as mine of my Uncle Jacob. Good man! with his heart upon his lips!—Oh! 'tis a rare virtue in this polished age!





CHAPTER XLI.



Charmante' ISSE Tous nous faites entendre

Dans ces beaux lieux les sons les plus flaleurs,



Ils vont droit a nos coeurs,

LEIBNITZ n 'a point de monade si tendre,

NEWTON n'a point A' X X plus enchanteur!;

A vos attraits on les eut vus se rendre;

Vous tourneries la tête a nos docteurs!



BERNOUILLI dans vos bras

Calculant vos apas

Briseroit son compas I

VOLTAIRE.



AMATORY GIFTS OF A NATURALIST PRISMATIC MILLENERY THE HYDRAULIC NYMPH

OPTICAL EXPERIMENTS WHAT A NEW

PLANET MAY TURN OUT TO BE!



Uncle now led "the life of a lover." He passed many a tender and solitary hour, musing by the side of a gfeeu spermatic pond! He contemplated on the planet which was shortly to inscribe his name in the heaTens, and in return, he brought to Urania fresh-bottled reptiles—and once, with a gallant air tossed about her petticoats three precious chinese fire-flies, brilliant as diamonds! He charmed a tear into her eye, by moralising on the transient existence of an ephemeron fly, which, if born at one o'clock, dies at four! to the great grief of its remaining companions, who are an hour 3'ounger! They both loved to blend a little moral with natural philosophy, which renders the dry paths of the latter much more entertaining.





With the amatory gifts of the naturalist she was bewitched; she would incline her ear to the cicada, and swear it was the Handel of insects! how in rapture would she gaze on the mantis, or camel-cricket, which is continually nodding at one! She declared it had an idea of civility, from its frequently resting on its hind legs, and elevating and folding its other pair on its breast. On this would she reason and theorize, and with a philanthropic pun, worked up my Uncle to fancy that the mantis was a little kind of a man!





My Uncle had in our house a grand favourite of a toad. He and the toad had now lived together going on for forty years! Never was toad so well fed, so comfortably holed, and so affectionately tended. It was a foundling, a Tom Jones, which my all-worthy Uncle had found constantly haunting " the steps before our hall-door." Its monstrous size had attracted his eye, and its quiet disposition soon fascinated his heart. He constantly paid it a visit every evening: my Uncle's affection enlarged as the toad increased in size. In a fit of enthusiasm he domesticated it, declaring, like uncle Toby, "the house was large enough for them both!" Whenever he had company, the toad was always seated on the table, I always fed it with the choicest insects, whenever I wanted a little pocket-money of my Uncle, and heartily joined in flattering this monstrous beauty *!





* See a minute detail respecting this toad in two letters from J. Arscott, Esq. to Dean Milles, written at the request of our late great naturalist, Pennant, inserted in his British Zoology, Vol. III. p. 323, &c. Some of the ideas may entertain the reader.— "It gives me the greatest pleasure to inform you of any particulars worthy Mr. Pennant's notice concerning the Toad, who lived so many years with us, and was so great a favourite!—It had been admired by my father for its size, who constantly paid it a visit every even





Urania wished to have this toad for a week on a visit! My Uncle, at first, politely refused the invitation. He assured her, he did not dread the change of air, or diet, or want of any proper attendance from her servants—thank heaven! his toad was a healthy toad! but there was something in her house he did not like! He would not explain, and wished not to set Urania against any of her domestic favourites; but Urania persisted in her request!—My Uncle parted from his toad with a melancholy presage! forty years had they known each other, and never had the toad before quitted its hole! Our great toad had not been three days in Urania's house when a tame black raven, that was suffered to hop about her Observatory, made one peck at its eye, and two at its head, and, alas! our toad had no " jewel in its head," as the poet falsely conceived! It came back to us with one eye, and a broken head—



ing!—I cannot say how long my father had been acquainted with the toad before I knew it—I can answer for thirty-six years—he used to mention it as "the old toad I have known so many years."—(What affectionate language! I begin to suspect he meant Mrs. Arscott, his beloved wife 1 I)

VOL. III. I





The unfortunate termination of this visit by no means tended to increase my Uncle's passion for Urania, and I seized on that occasion to inveigh bitterly against her—for I did not like a fantastic aunt! But who can resist the seduction of a woman's charms! no matter in what way a woman fascinates a lover; the most opposite methods are pursued in love j what would sicken one man of his mistress, maddens another to possess her.

Urania made an apology for the accident—but I observed to my Uncle, that it was by no means clear it was an accident— was there not malice prepense in it? And then, I added, what apology can be made for cracking the jobbernole of a family toad?





But what avail logic and sentiment, with a mad lover, when. a mistress sets her Cap at him!—Urania did this with the most astonishing effect I ever heard!

Urania had recourse to her milliner, whom, however, she assisted with her own physical principles—she took into her head to cover it, with a great variety of ribands, mingling their colours harmoniously to the eye, as my Uncle conceived, according to the prismaticscale; and bending the ribands, more or less, to give an idea of the refrangibility of the rays of light. This head-dress, formed on such philosophical principles, was as fine as a rainbow! The refrangible ribands, red, orange, yellow, &c. bewitched my Uncle's eye; who, it must be confessed, though he was a great philosopher, was but a small critic by the side of Madame Lancaster.' He exclaimed, (as Mr. Pictet does on a similar occasion,) " The discoveries of NewTon may be applied to the choice of a riband, as well as to the system of the world* /"





* Mr. Pictet, in his Voyage de troisMois, passed some time at Count Rumpord's house at Brompton. Among other miracles he saw there, is one of taste, respecting the Count's assortment of his colours in his furniture, which the Count has arranged by scientific principles. "His taste has been assisted by the principles of philosophy in the mixture of the tints, which, as the Count has discovered, form always harmony to the eye, when they are respectively the complement of the colours exhibited by the whole prismatic spectrum. The discovery of Newton," &c. Page 244.





One day, in the warm month of May, suddenly, without a moment's consideration, he hurried to Urania, and resolutely went to offer himself not as a lover—but a husband! He was like a Pigeon in the pairing season— and from being querulous and timid, he strutted in majestic pride, and assumed a bold and important air. I believe that at this moment, in the language of the naturalist, my Uncle was a perfect animal!

She was occupied at an optical experiment, but was willing to receive him, provided he did not interrupt it. He paused, when he found the room darkened—yet he entered, conceiving that no great mischief could result from the optics of Urania!





My dear philosophical friend, she cried, I am making a single experiment with two rays of light—I am throwing two lights on

one subject!

Jacob perceiving that a great deal of business was to be got through before he could seize on a golden moment auspicious to his hopes, plumbed himself down, instantly exclaiming, Where the devil am I a going?

Gone! you mean—she exclaimed—you have sunk, no doubt, into my philosophical self-supplying cistern !—keep yourself steady, for the great tube in the middle—

By heavens, madam! the more I press on it!—

The greater will be the volume of water— I know it, sir, and I am proud of it!—replied the hydraulic nymph. It is the most multiplying jets deaux ever contrived. The water thrown up acquires sufficient velocity to return by a lateral aperture. I thought I had discovered, when I invented this fountain, the perpetual motion!





Jacob intreated to have only one corner of the shutter opened.

Would you disturb the experiment?

Really, madam, to make a water-rat of a philosopher, is no part that I know of philosophy—

Is this the language of a philosopher, who has walked on the sulphureous crust of a volcano, and peeped into a crater? I warn you to remain steady. My oxygen is beside my nitrous acid, if the red pungent vapours are once freed—





I shall sneeze my brains through my nostrils—groaned my Uncle.

Truth, they say, lies buried in a well; to you then, dear Jacob, as Truth personified, I address myself. The experiment I am performing I owe to one of your divine hints—

My Uncle attempted to listen, while the water rustled in his ears—for panegyric is delightful, even to a philosopher in a cistern.

Shall we not be enabled to see in the dark? continued Urania.





I never went such lengths—interrupted the astonished Jacob.

0 cecas haminem—Oh! blind men! as Lucretius sings—and philosophers! who understand not your own philosophy! Have you forgotten our experiment on the Flies? Did we not collect five hundred, and, standing at the distance of three or four feet, wherever we could catch a small party, we struck two books smartly against each other, and away they flew! This shewed that they must have a sense of hearing, though we are ignorant where that sense lies. You can't have forgotten we were the whole day attempting to find where the ears of Flies lie?

1 perfectly remember that laborious experiment, cried my Uncle, who now quite forgot he was in a cistern, as he assured me. That day we discovered nine kinds of movement in Flies! What charming droll creatures they are when in high health! conveying their legs and thighs around their head to rub and polish it! hooking their middle with their fore legs! kicking out the hind legs for a long time, or twisting their fore legs in the form of a wheel! But the most truly astonishing fact, madam! was, when we decapitated a fly—if performed eight of these nine movements without a head*! Hence we concluded that we had discovered a new sense in flies; for since they can perform their functions so accurately without a head, it must be from their peculiar feeling in the dark!





Feeling in the dark may be brought to great nicety—she observed, stretching out her hand, and laying it on Jacob's



* This is a painful and laborious discovery of a living Italian naturalist.





My Uncle vociferated—it was impossible to stand out in the midst of the cistern—but the lady persisted in her experiment—

I admit into this darkened chamber two rays; now by comparing the size of my two holes, I estimate the quantity of light lost by reflexion—

Done to a nicety! exclaimed Jacob—

Mr. Bouguer contrived to read almost in the dark: he had the candles placed in one room, and brought himself to read in the other !—to be sure, the poor man must have strained his eyes till his head cracked*!

* See Priestley's Hist. of Optics. Par. VI. S. 7.





Mr. Bouguer was an old fool to read in the dark!—exclaimed my Uncle, bolting upright—when, lo! the apartment flashed with the softest and most brilliant blaze, and which only the light of the sun can exceed! It ached their -delighted eye, and terrified the chymical lovers!

You have inverted my jar!—she exclaimed.

Give me broad vulgar day-light!—exclaimed my Uncle, hurrying to the windowshutter—I am so wet! what will follow if the gas catches me?

You will then be in a state of combination I

Urania! Urania! sorrowfully he cried, you always are contriving to produce the reverse!





Recovered from their fright, at length he put a simple question—on what day? she replied, not on a Tuesday, because that is eclipse-night!

He now tenderly thanked her for the honour she had proposed to confer on him, and added, if she would but publish her account of the planet Jacob, dating it on their marriage-day, it would have a pretty effect throughout Europe, and vex the Royal Society, and shew they could do without their good wishes.

Ah !—oh !—ha !—thrice she exclaimed! in a twitter of confusion.—One gets nothing but disappointments in science now-a-days*! What do you think, after all my watching, and the pains bestowed on a folio description, in a style that would have astonished Dr. Olbers himself, with his new planet! your planet turns out to be? Nothing more, positively, than a monstrous blue-bottle fly, which had stuck on the glass!!



* I observe, at a time when comets have become so common, and planets are hardly worth chit-chat, that there is a reason for all this confusion in the heavens.





My Uncle groaned—Urania said, in a tone of tender querulousness, taking off his wig, and fondly playing with it in her hand —I thought I had it safe enough! but I can't help it, Jacob! Had I a Georgium Sidus in

"Astronomers of late, discover by the unfortunate perfection to which their instruments are carried, new Comets and netu Planets for every new almanack!" But the writer (as cautious as myself) thinks these are not always comets and planets—and shews how the Astronomers are continually squabbling about them.

Philo. Mag. Vol. XIII. p. 296.





my hand, as I have your wig, you, and you alone should have had it!—clapping the wig on his head.

My Uncle, sensible of her affection, considered that " all for love and the world was well lost." The world, he cried, has lost another world; but I have found a planet still, and I will be the inhabitant of my own planet!





CHAPTER XLII.



If' Fate, reluctant to complete my joy,

Denied the blessing: of a sprightly boy;

Some EMBRIO SEMBLANCE of thy form divine,

At lean has floated in the glassy shrine.



SCRIBLERIAD, B. III.' V. 335.



OF MT COUSIN! MY AUNT*S LONGINGS AND

THE CONSEQUENCES THEREOF.



JVlY Aunt, after her marriage, became skittish and playful—full of those odd whims that a lady in her situation sometimes is foolishly allowed to indulge—but it was hoped that the wife of a modern philosopher would not have turned out a mere rantipole. She made my Uncle uneasy, for he was very Vol. in. K





curious and critical respecting the organization of his future heir, and implored her, during the time of gestation, to dine on salads, and keep her temper*. You do not know, he would say to my Aunt, what is going forwards in you. Your child is agitated by your own passions. Every frown on your face * - •



* " Is it not natural to think that an infant in the womb may be affected by the temper of its mother? Its tender parts make it susceptible of the slightest impressions. When a woman is breeding, she ought to be doublytareful of her temper, and not indulge in any ideas but what are cheerful, and sentiments but what are kindly."

K. Aim Kb' Sketches of the History of Mas,

Vol. II. p. 92.



There are some Philos who are much more curious respecting their child in the teiomb, than out of it. There is an anecdote of Lo R D K A i M £ s, that when he reproached his daughter for acting with a certain freedom she ought not, she replied, that she had been taught there was no great harm in it, according to the principles of his modern philosophy!





probably tweaks my heir; the blood of the

child is the blood of the mother; the body is the same body; and, I do not say it for the sake of the antithesis, but for the sake of the child—the child is not only the mother, but is a finer kind of mother! a mother of pearl, or the pearl of a mother!—The truth is, he had always feared that my Aunt, from her scientific propensities, and particularly from her late ardent attachment to natural history, might lie-in of some monster! Yet Dr. Munro, who has written so much on the nervous system, comforts the father of any monster, that though their brains are very small, their limbs are wonderfully plump; though they may want even a head, their other parts may be very perfect, and after all they may have two heads instead of one*!

* Smellie's Philosophy of Nat. Hist. Vol. L p.2>0.





The reader has often heard of the strange effects of the unhappy imaginations of pregnant ladies; if you do not immediately put before them what they wish, they threaten they will Long For It! Then such is the exquisite delicacy of the fibres of their brain, that whenever the animal spirits do not go on in their regular traces, lacqueying, as it were, the ideas with due sobriety, they are apt to fly off" in a flurry, dashing pell-mell, helter-skelter, along all the cross roads of their brain! Terrible must those vagaries turn out; and hence are creatures produced, whom it would be libelling nature to affirm are produced in a natural way.—These ladies may deem themselves fortunate when their offspring are only marked either by a rabbit's head or a mouse's tail, a plate of strawberries and cream or a pinch of snuff*;



* These gentler kinds of longings are humorously





in a word, by something, which has looked like anything !—

He has heard too, concerning the more strange longings of that susceptible animal— a future mother!

One day my Aunt longed for my Uncle, and behold, when he came, she wanted to eat him up alive*!!!



alluded to by Sm o L L E T. Mrs.Trunnion longs for a hair from the beard of her husband, and what was worse, she must have the pleasure of pulling it out herself.

* I am informed that a wife who could eat up her husband, either for love or hatred, is by no means a case peculiar to our family!

Gaubius, a learned German, titling himself " A Professor on the Passions," in his inaugural discourse gives one case. "Why should I mention that women with child have by unnatural longings been driven to that pitch of inhumanity, that they have sought to feed





When my Aunt was advanced in pregnancy, in spite of all my Uncle could say,

on the flesh of their Husbands !"—This is to be understood without a metaphor. We often hear ladies declare that their stveet husbands are most natural to them ! the cause, no doubt, of their continually patting and pawing them.

But to return once more to the more terrific longers! Saint Mar The gives us a fact which occurred to his knowledge.

Once 1 beheld, to glut her ravenous maw,

A pregnant woman living chickens draw

Swift from beneath the crested mother's wing,

Fiercely she snatch'd them, fluttering as they stood

Devour'd the flesh, and drank the reeking blood;

Within her jaws theTirood were heard to cry,

One half was swallowed ere each bird could die.



Pjedotrophia, B.I. v.387. I lament that I am compelled to bring forward such terrific evidences to authenticate my AunCs LongIngs! but a researcher into the secrets of nature ought not to have over-nice, or over-humane feelings— .or he will never be a Galvani, or a Si-allanZani—or even My Uncle!





she resolved, being fair time, to give sixpence to look at a rope-dancing ape. This animal did so enter into her imagination, and so titillate her animal spirits, ramping along her exquisite nervous system, dancing at all hours on the vibratory cords of her cerebellum—that, till her time came, she was observed to skip over every rope she met with, clapping her hands, and tittering like the ape! What Jacob observed at the time was only laughed at, though our curate did maliciously hope that such a philosophical pair might produce an offspring that could never be christened!

My Uncle persisted in saying—Rely on it, that I am cuckolded by an ape!

To the mortification of our family did my Aunt lie-in of a perfect ape, with the white cap, and the red waistcoat, just as the ape wore and my Uncle predicted *!





Another extraordinary thing—>she took eleven months for this pregnancy—such a time is necessary for the gestation of an ape—but had it been born beyond the eleventh of her widowhood, it would have been a legitimate ape*.



* I could give the reader a number of curious prodigies of this kind—medical writers abound in them! but I do not find one so positive, so clear, and so satisfactory as my cousin! M Allebr Anche tells us of a pious woman looking with too intense a pleasure on the picture of Saint Pius—-and laying-in of a child bearing his perfect resemblance. It had the wrinkled face of the old saint, came into the world with its arms across its breast, with a low forehead and a hanging lip I TTie little saint, when preserved in spirits of wine, was examined by all Paris 1—And supposing Pere Mali i BR Anche, for the sake of his system of the animal spirits, does not flim-flam, is it clear that the infant saint did not look as much like a withered pippin as Saint Pius?





My unlucky cousin was immediately put into spirits of wine by my Uncle, who acted more like a naturalist on this occasion than a man. Wilmot barbarously insisted that my cousin was only fit to be thrown to the dogs, or sent to Mr. Heavvside, whose parental affection for such orphans is so well

known.





* Citizen Tessier is so kind as to discover that a woman may take eleven months for her pregnancy, which he proves thus:—The parliament of Paris decreed that a prince of Conde, born eleven months after the death of his father, was legitimate!—no doubt, the parliament of Paris was as obliging as this citizen would himself have been on the occasion. I am sure I would not impeach the chastity of this princess of Conde—or injure a. fact so very useful when philosophising in this

manner t

Phil. Mag. Vol. II. p. 424.





There may be some who will not credit this authentic history of my cousin, and who might care nothing about him, though they even held my cousin in their own hands! but I am addressing a certain part of the philosophical world; those naturalists who would conceive it fortunate to have such an addition to their family—they know the value of such a precious lusus natura. After all that can be urged in favour of christianity, an ordinary christian is no curious monster, nor can materially add to a gentleman's collection, except by dissection !—but for this purpose, the biggest blockhead, Jew or Turk, is fully competent.





CHAPTER XLIII.



Lo the good man still dreams of HORNS—appears

To his own fancy,

OX at the least, who was an ASS before'

RANDOLPH.



CUCKOLDOM AND PUBLIC UTILITY1. MV AUNT

AND CONTOUR ARE MUTUALLY SMITTEN

WITH A VIOLENT PASSION FOR THE FINE

ARTS!



After my Aunt's unlucky lying-in of an ape, Jacob became affected by all the terror of cuckoldom. I thought something like a phrenzy was working on his spirits by his incessant discussions on the same eternal topic with Caco-nous—Whether cuckoldom in society was to be tolerated? They agreed it was!—but when my Uncle examined whether it was tolerable at home? he would not allow this! Jealousy makes a philosopher so inconsequent in his nice reasonings! Caco-nous argued much in favour of " public utility." Jacob rested on Blackstone for " private wrongs." They went to it ding-dong, day after day. My Uncle declared that Caco-nous argued as if a man's horns were a corona civica! while CacoNous replied, that if my Uncle persisted in his absurd prejudices, he would come in time to wish his most intimate friends were castrati!—Would not that be a violation of "public utility?" But my Uncle was bit by a mad dog—Caco-nous's arguments were all so much water to him, who was in a state of hydrophobia.





A familiar intercourse existed between my Aunt and Contour.—Doubtless it sprung out of a congenial passion—for the fine arts! But all your enthusiasts in the fine arts, whose heads and tongues are less judicious than their eyes, make use, like the Methodists, of strange indecent language — and gestures too! Such " words that burn," accompanied by such attitudes! such simpering! such glances !—that to a mere experimental philosopher, with my Uncle's temperate blood—they appeared at least what I want delicate language to express. I attempted to soften his irritation by describing the quick feelings of delicate taste; he had no conception of them! But he was long restrained from breaking out in the terrific manner he afterwards did, by recollecting the place he occupied in the eye of the publie.—Jacob was one of the Presidents of PoLite Arts in the Adelphi!





In favour of my Aunt, I must say, that she had of late been sensible of Jacob's coolness towards her since the affair of the ape—and whether she proposed to inflame him, either by way of revenge, oroMt of the thoughtless vanity of the sex, or to reclaim his lost affections, she and Contour were eternally disserting about the Nude—ideal grace— susceptibility, &c.—which generally closed with a mutual attack on some part of their bodies—before the enquiring eyes of the experimental philosopher!

There was a circumstance which greatly tended to inflame the ardours of Contour for my Aunt, and was the source of a hundred of those enamouring attentions, those sweet civilities, which my Uncle beheld with a pair of magnifying eyes, that made them most horrible to look on.





Contour, touched with the tenderest passion for my Aunt, broke her arm for her!—and this, of course, was a trial for them both; she still doated on him with a more tender enthusiasm, he with perpetual gratitude!

'Twas done when she sat to him as a model, in attempting to adjust my Aunt's arms and legs to one of the figures of Michael Angelo, or Fuse Li—her arm could not bear the twist, and snapped!





CHAPTER XLIV.



Whoe'er he be, that to a TASTE aspires,

Let him read this, and be what he desires!



BRAMSTON'/ Man of Tattt.



PROGRESS OF THE LOVE OF TWO AMATEURS! MY

AUNT IS CHARMED BY EXQUISITE HARMONY

HER EAR COMPARED TO ANOTHER EAR

SYMPTOMS OF JEALOUSY RESPECTING EYES,

WIGS, AND SHOES MY UNCLE'S DISTRESSED

SITUATION, BEING GORED BY THE HORNS OF

BACCHUS.





Sometimes would our modern Raphael, nestling close to my Aunt, (to use his language,) sigh for that deliquium of pleasure which is best expressed by tones and inflexions, so gentle that they are almost imperceptible to hearing!

VOL. III. L





I have heard her say to Contour, Indulge me, dear Nightingale! (so she used to nickname him,) by whispering so softly that I can't hear you!—He invited my Aunt to hear the sweet soft tones of the jEolian harp, which so admirably agree with the still softness of moon-light. —And actually one morning my Aunt left my Uncle in bed, to join Contour at the earliest break of morn, to listen to the song of the lark, so suitably cheerful to the rising of the sun!

Will the reader credit me, that my Aunt had no better an Ear for music, than a pitcher has?

Contour, with all these picturesque attitudes, expressive gesticulations, and fervid ejaculations, peculiar to the enthusiasm of art, would put himself in the most indecent postures before my Aunt; squeeze her white hands, for they were white when they were not inky; measure her neck, which he said had the exact dimensions of the Venus de Medicis, and pinch her ear, which he swore was as fine an ear, particularly at the tip, as his Minerva's on his chimney-piece. He had really more the manners of a young satyr than a young gentleman. My Uncle, with a wry face, wondered how my Aunt could suffer so much fumbling. She replied, that Contour was a man of great feeling!





Sometimes would Contour, running volubly on, make a hundred over-refined strictures on the Hair of women. He had all the ideas of an artist in hair — I mean a painter! He declared how " by its comparative roughness and partial concealments, it relieves the clearness and smoothness of a beautiful face." He preferred crisped hair, notwithstanding the Greeks were enamoured ofthefloating tresses, silky soft, or when " the hyacinthian locks hung clustering like the growth of grapes," as in gems and statues.





At such a moment would my Aunt, observing my Uncle twitching himself at the edge of his chair, ask Contour, with a malicious grin, what kind of hair he thought she had? To which he would reply by laughing and playing with her locks, and twirling her tresses, and fancifully arranging them into pendulous folds, like the headdress of Aspasia, or frizzing them into a pyramid of curls, like Plotina's—-or, taking off her riband, he would bind it round her forehead, to imitate the ancient fillet worn by





the Vestals, swearing my Aunt had a sweet low forehead, like Sappho's, and such as the Greeks maddened after.



Insignia Tenui Fronte Lycoris."

Horace.



My Uncle insisted on my Aunt's wearing a crop!



Our Raphael was so partial to Greek taste, that he could not patiently look on a woman dressed with a little comfort and modesty. He made my Aunt draw her sleeves above her shoulders, and her tucker under her stomach, and this, too, at Christmas! At length matters rose to such a height, that he actually persuaded her to be habillee d la Grec in flesh-coloured silk I





What a bluster was kept up in our family all that day when she came down to dinner! The servants leering, and swearing they were positive their mistress had not a shift to her back; Contour squalling and gesticulating in rapture; Jacob spilling his wine on the clean table-cloth in agony!

My Uncle made her dye the flesh-coloured silk a rich Mazarine blue; put sleeves to it, and, in fact, converted the Grecian tunic into a plain round gown. My Aunt looked, as Contour declared, as monstrous as the Indian god Brahma!

Contour was then about her Eyes! He was in raptures with black eyes, such as the Orientalists adored; then for green eyes, the eyes of cats, which were the eyes of





Madam Fayel, the unhappy mistress of De

Coucy—or for purple eyes,



Violets dim,

But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes.



When my Aunt asked what he thought of her eyes—he said they were described by Petronius,

Oculorum quoguo mobitts pelulantia.

My Uncle marvelled at his impudence! One day my Aunt lolling fantastically on her Etruscan sopha, Contour actually took off my Aunt's shoe, exclaiming, Oh, that I could be used by you but as your sandal, to be pressed by your delicate feet!—Jacob started up; his hot heart seemed devilling on a gridiron: he furiously asked what he meant ?— Contour, with his peculiar sweetness of manner and equable mildness, gracefully turning to him, replied,—Only a quotation from Anacreon, at the dose of his two-and-twentieth Ode.—True ! true! replied my Uncle, striking his burning forehead, and, as in all violent passions, with an action extremely angular.—You will run mad, Jacob! exclaimed my Aunt, holding up her foot to Contour, who declared it was a foot fit for an ancient Buskin!





At length matters came to such a pass, that once, when Contour was haranguing about the beauty of the human form, and particularly that of woman—Jacob surlily, and more like an anatomist than an amateur, declared, looking at my shuddering Aunt— that the true beauty of it lies in the inside, and not the out!

Of all the provoking circumstances and odd vexatious coincidencies, which accident





and malice played on my unfortunate Uncle, stinging the open wounds of his honour— the following was the most remarkable.

Contour, having remarked a curious passage in Spence's Polymetis, was so struck by it, that his wits rambled in the form of an Essay, to be presented to the Adelphi Committee of Polite Arts, and with the work in his hand he consulted my Uncle, who was the President. The passage in Spence runs thus: "There is one thing which the poets generally attribute to Bacchus, which I am surprized not to find commonly in his statues—and that is—his Horns! Even these were little and pretty, and Ariadne, in Ovid, mentions them as one reason why she loved this god *."



* Spence'i Polymetis, p. 129.





My Uncle scarcely had heard the passage read, than it occurred to him that Contour designed to expose him to the laughter of his Committee! He rose from his chair'. he perambulated the apartment—he run over the horns " little and pretty," a reason too for his wife's loving him! The whole was, he thought, too pointed !—the horns of Bacchus gored him.

I shall also notice—continued Contour— these horns were sometimes gilded *.

And you have paid for the gilding! when you were at Rome? my Uncle grinned a ghastly smile.

Contour, whose attention was absorbed in his Essay, continued—I have drawn up a list of all those that have horns, which I myself have known.



* Horace, lib. II. O. xix. v.30. Statius, Lib. III. Sylv. iii. v. 62.





Can you, with tranquil feelings, look over this list? said Jacob.—How, Contour, have you escaped the stiletto of the bravo ?—But —(here he swore!)—you shall not send this Essay on Horns to my Committee, without first fighting me!

Contour was alarmed, then astonished, and afterwards explained! He with sweet urbanity tore the list of his horned friends, to appease the disturbed fancy of the jealous President of the Polite Arts!

O Jealousy! thou jaundiced-eyed pas-' sion ! to what a state didst thou reduce my





Uncle! when even a dry nomenclature, a catalogue raisonnee, a frigid disquisition in Vertu—could fever the temperate blood of an experimental philosopher!!





CHAPTER XLV.



Would not an old Italian trust liii wife with a young Fainter, and leare her with him to draw her naked f •

Sir W. DAVENANTV Tht Man's tit Uasttr.



PHILOSOPHY TRIUMPHS OVER TASTK BA

FHAEL GETS KICKED.



1 Am now to describe one of those terrible explosions of jealousy, which cannot fail, in due course of time, to break out into some terrific and pathetic incident—to the great satisfaction of the novelist—whether writer or reader.





It was in the dog-days—a time, perhaps, not inauspicious to love, but presumed to be unfavourable to lunacy — and, indeed, my Uncle was always alarmed at extreme heat or extreme cold—such weather producing great crimes*!!

My Uncle and Aunt were seated as closely together, as a kind of returning affection in Jacob's breast induced him. Tenderly he pressed his Urania's hand; her eyes were as tenderly fixed on Jacob's snipish physiognomy — the nearly horizontal line from the crown of his head to the tip of his nose! One of his small eyes sparkled— like the first cinder kindling in a cold fireplace; the promise of that agreeable conflagration about taking place.



* " Great Heat and great Cold have an influence over the Passions. I have ever observed that the hottest days of Summer, and the coldest in Winter, Were those days in the year when the greatest number of crimes were committed!! The dog-days, cry the vulgar, is a season of misfortune. They may say the same of the month of January .'.'.'"

St. Pierre Etudes de la Nature, Eng.

French edit. Vol.1, p. 169.





At that moment—when love had waved his fluttering pinions, Hymen suddenly inverted his torch, and the bright flame was suffused by smoke—Contour bounced into the apartment, and with that French legcrete and Italian morbiclezza of his, drew a chair, dashed between my Uncle and my Aunt—and fairly divided them!

It was at a moment, too, when my Uncle felt himself a man! Even meditating on a rupture, for which he had hitherto only wanted courage and choler!





The volatile Contour then run on glibly. Carissimo amico! (turning to Jacob,) I have come to ask a thing of you which will evince our exalted friendship, and which, perhaps, is incumbent on you as the President of the Polite Arts at the Adelphi, to allow me, as an amateur and an artist, to execute. I want a model—a woman!

Well, well! replied my Uncle, sneeringly, take to your Layman!

A Layman will not do for me! 'tis so stiff and woody! I want a model for sculpture.

Go to the Academy!

The Academy is but ill provided with liring models. Can we expect from squalid starved forms picked up in the streets, and hired by the hour, the naked simplicity of a grace, which Raphael would have copied? I want a woman, to give the world—a woman !—an Eve; and I have been thinking that I can procure no such model as your lady.— , .





Mr. Contour, are you serious ?—frowned my Uncle.

How shall I mould a statue to "enchant the world?" Can plaster of Paris warm, and exalt my conceptions? I must have a living Eve!

With a fig-leaf ?—asked Jacob, pertly.

By heavens! I would not have so IndeCent a thing as a fig-leaf7—The more naked Vol. in. M





a figure is, the more modest*! I would as well sculpture your wife with a petticoat on

* "Let our travelled ladies who have walked without harm with gentlemen through every museum in Europe, and beheld all that Grecian art, even when playful, could shew, teach their countrywomen that true modesty disdains not to examine, with a steady eye, the masculine parts of the antique statues, conscious that they are as chastely represented as those of children by the hand of nature, which Innocence may, and does daily, behold unblushing; which, when mutilated, or clumsily concealed, shews a narrow mind .'"

George Cumberland's Thoughts on

Outline, SCc. p. 44.



This refined writer's notion of delicacy accords with that of the wild Africans of Mr. Parke! The Moors "could not reconcile themselves to the appearance of Mr. Parke's tight nankeen breeches! which they considered very indecent;" and insisted on wrapping him in a cloke before he was conducted to the ladies! p. 201. 8vo.

In respect to the cloke, which is not very favourable to outline, Mr. Cumberland would have violently dif





as with a fig-leaf? Have you a narrow mind? Alexander lent Apelleshisbeloved Campaspe. True! in drawing her naked the artist fell in love with her—but a philosopher cannot be jealous!

This is such impudence! exclaimed Jacob, rising—but I can trace no outline of his figure!

Turning on this occasion to" The Art of Acting," for I know of no " Art of Nature!" —I find the matter made to my hands.—In jealousy, says that great delineator of the human passions, a man stares — then he hangs his arms down, perhaps in his pocketholes—then he takes them out—then, laying hold of the button of his dreaded rival, -and lifting up one of his legs, (usually the right,) he makes a rotatory motion, in which he applies it with all the energy of a lawful husband—to the miserable adulterer I



fered; he certainly would not have thought a cloke necessary for any thing of the kind! Pray, Mr. CumBerland,how would you have managed the affair of the light nankeen breeches?





My Uncle did all this and looked a hero!

Contour was astonished and nervous— Urania screamed and was pathetic.—Delicious Contour! is he to be massacred by this dry bamboo of a philosopher! cried my Aunt.

A bamboo! exclaimed Contour—not half so yielding! by Guido!

Delicious Contour!—repeated Jacob — What then, (my Uncle, like some other beroes, could even make a simile in a passion, now he only made, however, a quotation,) as Othello cries, "thou hast tasted his sweet body?"





Monster! exclaimed my Aunt, shedding a pathetic shower. Goth! exclaimed ConTour, are you not ashamed to draw tears from that excellent woman?

Tears, tears!—replied the enraged chemist—Tears are nothing more than secretions by the lachrymal glands, mucilage and common salt!

Contour, rubbing himself upwards and downwards—Are you worthy to be a President of the Polite Arts? to kick an amateur because he offered to cut your wife in stone!





My Uncle strutted across the room.—He strode as wide, and looked as tall, as one of Homer's heroes!—Plunged in thought, he muttered—I will resign the Polite Arts in the Adelphi!





CHAPTER XLVI.



Seel

Onward with loftier step APOLLOtpring,

And launch the unerring arrow from the string!



DARWIN.



THE DOWNFALL Ofr THE APOLLO BELVIDERE INCLUDING ANOTHER TRAGICAL SCENE!



At the moment Contour was attacked by Jacob, he was also attacked by his nerves-^ and likewise by his sympathy for the distressful condition of my Aunt. Our amateur was not in a state to return the kicking, if he had, my Uncle could not have continued so long on the wing; for the sudden impulse which had converted Contour in to a poltroon, had been the sole cause of turning my Uncle into a hero; but Contour's cowardice, luckily, outlasted my Uncle's intrepidity.





Ah! but what is this conflict.compared with that series of conjugal chastisement my Uncle now prepared for my Aunt! He maliciously had a covering put on the Apollo Belvedere !—What indecehcy! My Aunt revenged herself by nick-naming my Uncle the breeches-maker!

. My Uncle confined my Aunt to her bedchamber—swearing she was too fat and too gross in her blood; declaring he would treat her as a woman in her unhappy situation ought to be treated; for there was but one cure for such characters!





Putting the Apollo Belvedere into breeches •was so rancorous an act, that I remonstrated with my Uncle. I confessed my Aunt's gestures appeared loose and dissolute, and her language somewhat obscene; but was not this usual with those amateurs, who have no other means, nor other language, to convey their feelingly-alive shades of taste? I boldly accused him with a natural frigidity, in respect to the fine arts; for he had acknowledged to me that the divine gratification he pretended to have felt in grasping the ample rotundity of the Venus aux bettesfesses, was a pure flim-flam!

But he only called me a snivelling prig of a sentimental connoisseur!

Alarmed at my inexorable Uncle, I watched for some tragical event—at length the direful vengeance took place, and terrified my poor Aunt out of her senses!





One morning early, just before breakfast, did my Uncle enter my Aunt's bedchamber! In one hand he held a bowl, and in the other a sharp and shining blade!

Already at her work, she was amusing herself by calculating the proportions of the Apollo; the fine cast was standing before her, but the indecent breeches were sewed on! At the appearance of my Uncle, she shrieked! Ha! he cried, is it even so ? then to mortify her, he looked with a sneer on that faultless form, and coldly asked, what there was to admire so much in his head ?— Oh—that the Apollo could have spoken! but that was no fault in his head! besides, my Aunt spoke enough for a dozen.





Is your soul, she cried, not penetrated by this fine illusion? Does not the spring of youth warm that celestial countenance? Are you not awe-struck by the majesty of the divinity, in the calm turn of that head! in those luxuriant tresses waving as the golden hair of the god of light should flow? Does he not seem to walk along the air? He does not touch the earth! What a Contour!

Here she strutted towards the Apollo, with one foot in the air!

Devil!—exclaimed my Uncle, in a furor of Vandalism, then with .a cool malignant push at the fine cast, he repeated her beautiful language to flout her—not touch the earth! oh yes!—heavily fell the light-footed Apollo, and that inimitable head, rumbling, was dashed into pieces!





My Aunt shrieked! but her Apollo was



no more!



Madam!—cried my Uncle—take your choice! Your fate is before you. A draught from this—pointing to the bowl! or a stroke from that—pointing to the steel!

Barbarian! exclaimed my Aunt—looking on the headless Apollo—unfeeling tyrant!— looking on the bowl and steel—poison or blood! Can nothing less assuage the inhumanity of science? Ah! had you but an atom of taste in your heavy soul, you might now act with the most graceful dignity! These, these are the trials of sentimental Vertu!

And the triumph of the severer sciences, madam!—replied my Uncle—Swallow this! or receive that!—Physic it! or Bleed it!—





Heavens! exclaimed my Aunt—all has smashed!—snatching in an agony of vexation her loved Apollo's breeches, she violently shook them, crying—there's nothing left! give me! give me the Bowl!

If you still cherish criminal wishes, this will purge away the peccant humour, purify the loose thoughts, and cool the unnatural heat of your body. But if the bowl will not do this, depend on it the lancet shall.

In a word, my Aunt was confined to her apartment during the fall of the leaf, and after having undergone a severe course of autumnal physic, combined with a free use of the lancet, she was perfectly cured of her disordered affection*. She returned once more to the pursuits of the exact sciences, and the chaste embraces of my Uncle. She lost her plumpness, and her passion—for the fine arts; looked with the most guarded reserve on the amiable Contour—and now could





* The learned Gaubius, M. D. and also bearing the title of " Professor on the Passions," was fully aware of the efficacy of my Uncle's mode of treatment. He says, " It has been a long established point that plenitude disposes to anger, ferocity, and lust; and that by venesection all Ihese passions cool. Wherefore the advice of a physician, as Naude relates it, was very salutary. The wife of this physician, hankering after illicit venery, he, under colour of being afraid that some dangerous illness was stealing upon her, advised her to submit to repeated phlebotomy, and other remedies of that kind. By these means he so weakened her, that when she was thus enfeebled and cooled, he found no difficulty to restrain her from her unlawful habits, &c." C Aubius on the Disorders of the Mind, translated by J. Taprcll, M.D.





stand three hours answering conjectures why two and two made four?

My Uncle was so sensible of the perfect recovery of his Urania's senses, and so proud of it too—that he made a handsome apology to Contour for kicking him—ConTour received the apology with all that suavity of manners which charms us in the polished amateur, and the polite artist—There was a liberality in their proceedings which did equal honour to Science, and to T Aste!





CHAPTER XLVII.



From SUCH the world will judge of MEN and BOOKS I

POPE.



A TRIFLING EVENT HAVING TAKEN PLACE, MY UNCLE IN TOWN BECOMES A TOWN-CRITIC - CRITICAL TRICKS.'



After this perfect cure performed on my Aunt, a trifling event occurred which brought my Uncle to town; the event, perhaps, was connected with my Aunt's cure— it was my Aunt's death! Yes, poor woman!

VOL- III. N





she died! and received Christian burial!—But as soon as the stone was laid flat upon her, there was an end of her! Her immortality, her obstinate appeals to posterity, her persisting to expose the Royal Society, all came to nothing! We found, piled up in one of our garrets, three complete editions of three works, which, unknown to us all, she had printed; but my Uncle, who began to have a taste for the Belles-lettres, was now astonished what a weak, crazy, affected being his Urania had been; and went upon his knees before me, that I might never disclose her having been the author of such confounding theories and whims.—We burnt her works in the most private manner, a little every day; but we so heated our chimnies, that I thought my Aunt (though all the world had entirely forgotten her and her works,)—would have set fire to the house.





My Uncle in town became a Town-criTic! A great portion of The Critical Art is acquired by one's Legs! pleasantly coursing from one bookseller's shop to another, the bookseller tells you his morning anecdote. You encounter some learned critic, who hits upon a new reading; another communicates a notice respecting some work going to press; or, perhaps, has held in his own hand a wet sheet! What you hear in one quarter is new in another; provided you time your literary communications, and not grow tedious about a flim-flam at five o'clock, which might have been curious and important from twelve to two!

Yet even all this industrious bustle, joined, too, with a sedulous attendance on all BookSales, and some cajoling of Printers, to' get a glance at their Mss. to give a guess at the hand-writing—will not constitute an accomplished critic! My Uncle founded his reputation on more refined and subtile M chiavelism.





In respect, for instance, to Modern Poems. I pitied my Uncle's situation. He in his heart abominated them all, and confidentially declared to me that modern poetry, to any man of common sense, must always be unintelligible. Yet, notwithstanding all this, was my Uncle a formidable critic; and it was even conjectured, as luckily for him, he had never written a verse, and never blundered in a criticism, that he himself might be, if he chose to take the trouble, a great poet.

He extricated himself amidst this delicate distress, in the following manner. Taking a Modern Poem in his band, with a due composure of features, he would ejaculate in the dignified language of science,





MECONIUM!

When once the age of the poet was ascertained, how did his friends open their eyes at his sagacity! If the work of a Veteran, it was Meconium, which signifies expressed juice of poppy! If some juvenile production, it was Meconium, because that word also signifies the frst excrement of children in coming into the world I

When my Uncle became a [belles-lettres man, he composed for the press, in a manner equally curious and critical. He regularly observed the breadth of four fingers laid flat upon his page, as a proper distance to be kept between his lines, that this admirable space might hereafter be filled up " with interstitial words, and delicacies of diction, that occur at intervals of leisure, or lucky moments of composition," as Johnson expresses it! It was my Uncle's opinion that so far from most of our writers being wasters of paper, (a long-reproached crime!) that, on the contrary they were much too penurious; for if they would leave the breadth of four fingers between their lines, a great deal of good matter might have been inserted, and their works wonderfully improved thereby. On this principle he, with facetious felicity, adopted the phrase usually employed when an author compels us to be favoured with a perusal of his Ms. prepared for the press.





An author solicited my Uncle's corrections.—Now my Uncle hated to be a literary veneerer.—Having kept the Ms. for a certain decent time, he handed it to the author, complimenting him that he had left





NO ROOM FOR CORRECTION!

The author smirked and published, but such an outcry was raised against the work! The author appealed to my Uncle's positive decision ; but my Uncle explained, with a malicious grin—the principle of his criticism!

My Uncle was a great admirer of this kind of ambidextrous criticism — often had it saved his honour, but surely not his conscience ! 'twas the pious fraud of Arius, saying one thing and thinking of two!

According to Socrates the historian, Con





stantine the Great commanded Arius to subscribe to the opinion of the Council of Nice, which was a final condemnation of Arius.

The signature of Arius was brought to the Emperor. The Emperor could not credit it! He summoned the arch Heresiarch to swear before him that he had subscribed!

Arius Swore!!!

He had concealed under his arm his own particular opinions, written by himself, and when he swore, as he held the condemnation of the Council, that lie held what he had written—by these words he alluded to his own opinions Under His Arm, and not the decision of the Council In His Hand!





But really, as my Uncle once said to console an unfortunate author, you should not be surprized that your Readers and You do not think alike! My project of introducing the science of Chemistry into LiteraTure, by analyzing, compounding, and decompounding Words, too evidently will shew how many chances there are against us all, that we shall not be understood in the manner we wish *.



* Citizen Roederer, in a work entitled, L'Art de Savoir ce qrfon dit en Politique et en Morale, proposes to apply Analysis to a great number of questions. He made the first trial of his method on that proposed by the class as the subject of a prize, viz. What are the institutions best calculated to lay the foundation of morals in a nation!

By examining and distinguishing the different acceptations of each of the words, Cit. Roederer found, by

DECOMPOSITION,

that it is susceptible of 120 different meanings!! I

He afterwards determined, bjr





RECOMI'OSITION,

that meaning in which it ought to be understood."

Phil. Mag. Vol. H. p. 208.

This application of the science of Chemistry to moral philosophy, I cannot sufficiently admire; it evidently proves that a Philo's words may be misunderstood 119 times before he is perfectly comprehended f I know not that this is a discovery, but am convinced it is a truth!

Cit. Roederer merits one of the titles of the schoolmen. Shall he be saluted, like Raymond Lully, as the illuminated Doctor? or like John of Salisbury, the Doctor of Doctors? I wish from my soul I could say this Senator was like a very obscure doctor, who was called Doctor illibatus; the Doctot without a blemish!

Beyond them all,

Lo! he a rope of sand could twist —

As tough as learned Sorbonisl;

And weave fine cobwebs, fit for skull

That's empty when the moon is fall:

Such as take lodgings in a head

That's to be let unfurnished.





EDITIONS various, at high prices bought,

Inform the world what CODRUS would be thought!

He TITLES knows, and INDEXES has seen,

But leaves to Atticus -what lies beta/ten 1



YOUNG.



Bibliography Martial Preferred To Vir-

Gil! Book-sales A Joke Of Shak-



Speare's Not Yet Found Out!—Print

Collecting!





When my Uncle became what is emphatically termed a Collector, a virtuoso in rare and curious books, in all his feats of BibLiomania, touched by the hallowed fire of the departed spirits of Pinelli, De Missy, and Cracherode, still breathing in their priced catalogues*, the emptiness of his "purse conld not satiate the ardour of his soul.





Any vulgar person would have imagined that the ancient printers were our intimate neighbours, from the daily conversations he held about them—the Aldini, the Stephenses, the Elzevirs! Ah! little did these honest souls imagine what future plagues they were inflicting on families with small incomes! A true collector, though all his family stand before him shivering without a shirt or a shift, will deem his table well covered, if he sees on it an editio princeps—a Greek Psalter illuminated—or, oh ! too great a treasure!— at least to pay the money doom for it, as my Uncle did!—a Biblia Sacra Poly glottal—Ah! (cried I) I wish the Polyglots had been all sent up to heaven in vellum rockets*! A five .shilling bible is bible enough for any honest Christian! Do you (said I to my Uncle) believe a chapter more, for all this gigantic plaything with which the old proud Cardinal



* Cataloguef of book-sales from the last century, with the prices at which they sold affixed, are excessively precious—they- form the chronological value of book. and are necessary to every bibliographer.





* The first polyglot was projected by CardinalXiMEN Es, who at sixty began to study the Hebrew, and paid 50,000 ducats for MSS. and for learned men. The MSS. from which this much-famed Polyglot was composed, were sold to a dealer in fire-works, eomo membranas inutiles! Tis a provoking circumstance, I acknowledge—but still the librarian or waste-paper merchant, in this instance, who sold them, might have been as ignorant as the rocket-maker who fired them off—and neither might intend any mischief.—The learned Michaelis is in a rage to immortalize him 1 declaring he was the greatest barbarian of the 18th century! Another professor flew from Germany to Spain just in time to snatch a Jew scattered leaves which are luckily preserved at the. University of Alcala I and shewn, I conceive, at a great distance, to the virtuosi on saints-days, with the great thumb-nail of St. James.

But an important controversy is now going forwards m the learned world whether these MSS. were paper or vellum! Mr. Marsh, a profound biblical critic,





would console us for the loss of these MSS. by supposing them to have been only paper! But he encounters a formidable adversary in Mr. Dib Din, who laboriously investigating the membranas inutiles, infers that possibly they might have been vellum!! Mr. Marsh says, they never make fire-rockets of vellum—Mr. Dibdin says, that " a delicate sort of vellum might, in his own opinion, make a squib, cracker, or a rocket! Nay, adds he, with an argument like a clap of thunder, "I have seen parchment on the exterior of a rocket !!—Then, gentlemen ! I imagine the whole affair is 'at length gravely decided, whether the MSS. Cardinal Ximenes used for his polyglot were paper or vellumNo' says Mr. Dib Din, after all this close examination, de rerum nalura—" If I could obtain a sight of the few scattered leaves, preserved in the University at Alcala, then I think I should be able to decide whether they are paper or vellum.'"—I believe not! For if such a genius as Mr. D Buin were to inspect those





Ximenes diverted his melancholy fits when twitted by the Spanish grandees? Do you believe at the rate of the fifty guineas, at which they nailed you for your Polyglot?

I trembled whenever he talked of an unique copy, and once, particularly, had a fit of sickness occasioned by " the most magnificent, and largest book ever printed on VelLum!!!" It cost two hundred guineas!! large paper, lovely type, and sumptuous ornaments; all these, he said, rejoiced the eye, and gave a new pleasure to the reader. So they do; but I never like to pay for pleasure more than the pleasure is worth; I wished to the devil thefamouseditionofthe Latin Vulgate, by PopeSixtusVth! What do you think, dear reader, it is famous for ?—because it is full of errors!!! His holiness blundered through the Latin Vulgate, and my Uncle gave sixty guineas for what he called a veryjine copy*.



few scattered leaves at the University of Alcala, he would set the whole University in a flame, and madden the Spaniards by conjecturing the/ea? scattered haves were neither paper nor vellum !.'

See T. F. Dibdin's Greek and

Latin Classics, p. 111.





Day following day, he and his perpetual rival, Dr. Glum, were measuring, and comparing, and quarrelling about their margins I The Doctor had bought a most curious thing; it was an uncut Martial on vellum, an Aldus! With more honesty than wisdom, he paid forty pounds for it; observe, every leaf was uncut, so the value of that book consisted in not being read!



* This book emphatically called " The famous Edition of the Vulgate, by Pope Sixtus Vth." was published in 1590. The Pope superintended the work both before and after it was committed to the press. It was no sooner published than it was discovered to be full of errors!!! Every copy was called in and destroyed; a very few escaped! and when these are to be met with on large paper, the collector will cover this Book of Blunders with new guineas to be suffered to become a purchaser .' I





Now my Uncle had an editio princeps of Virgil! but, sir, it had a margin that maddened the collectors! It certainly was one of those interesting singularities that stupify one with astonishment; a thing one is more likely to hear of, than so fortunate as to behold! My Uncle fairly offered to measure margins with Dr. Glum's Martial; but the Doctor would have cut off the margins of his fingers rather than those of his Martial—yet still he went running about the town, asserting (oh the provoking animal!) that his were the broadest!! This was extremely uncan

VOL. III. O





did, and as far as I know, if I may be allowed the expression, it was a lie! My Uncle hit him a sly stroke! Jacob gave out that the Doctor preferred Martial to Virgil; •which did the latter no credit among his classical friends at Oxford.

However, the Doctor and my Uncle were like the two kings of Brentford, smelling at one nosegay; they were all day long gratuitously taxing catalogues, telling titles, collating books, and settling with " an infinite deal of nothing" the respective merits of the editions of 1640 and 1650! and 1610! They were sure of finding ready at the shops of our great Bibliopolist, a clean chair in summer, and a bright fire in winter. Who, to see them so busied together, could imagine they were watching one another's downfall!





My Uncle often spoilt the Doctor's dinner by his severe roystering! The Doctor vaunted he had 20,000 volumes—yes, sir, replied my Uncle, your Library is learned! When the Doctor talked he was lost in his library, by the immense variety of human knowledge, my Uncle compared him to a dwarf dragging a giant's shoe—When the Doctor exulted in his knowledge respecting editions, my Uncle would say, the edition does not make the scholar, but the scholar the edition—When the Doctor said, he knew this author, and that author—yes, the place in which they stand on your shelves—when, after collating an author, the Doctor, in the bibliographical phrase, pronounced he was perfect!—my Uncle declared, that that was the only idea of perfection in an author the Doctor could conceive!





Often at a Book-sale, when my Uncle caught in an auspicious moment the mild and polished eye of Mr. Leigh, the Raphael of book-auctioneers, or the stern grandeur of Mr. King, the Michael Angelo, those nice adjusters of the scale of literary fame, just as their relenting hearts melted at my Uncle's bidding, and the shadow of their hammer glanced over the desk—pop screamed out the Doctor, Very cheap! Very cheap! A fresh sigh breathed in the panting heart of some blunderer of a collector, and another and another crown resounded! In this cruel manner was my Uncle compelled to raise the price of all literary lumber. A sign, a squeak, and a wriggle of the Doctor's was a pound out of our pockets!

Often have I observed my Uncle writhing in agony at the prices he bid; moaning over the possession of those things for which he would have bit his lips off had he suffered them to have gone by! But when he bought a book cheap, it mortified him! One day, I heard him bid twelve pounds for the first edition of Thirty Sonnets of Spenser !—I started, and clapt both my hands to my ears! I heard him congratulated on his bargain! My Uncle sorrowfully shook his head acknowledging, they were, indeed, Too Cheap! I fear such bargains too evidently shew the rage of collecting is on the decline! Oh, gentlemen! pray pray, keep up keep up, the prices! the prices!





Ah! that my Uncle had never given two hundred pounds a morning for half a dozen old plays! persisting in keeping a head of a certain sublime tragic actor. A great commentator on Shakspeare ferretted him at old jest-books. "A full Groats-worth of Wif the commentator would have, and so would my Uncle! They got it up to twenty pounds! By mere accident it was knocked down to the commentator. He had not had it half an hour when he offered it to my Uncle for a fourth of its price. He had bought it merely to find out a joke of Shakspeare's, which was not there! My Uncle, with a grin, told him to keep the "full groat's-worth of wit;" and the joke about Shakspeare he might Yet find out— but the commentator never did!





Though my Uncle was a ruined man, he was often pleasant on his own infirmity. Once when an old black-letter folio was put on the table, entitled " The Hospital For Incurable Fools," with a smiling countenance he turned to the auctioneer—Are you going to put up your room ?—However, the more grave and sober Collectors did not relish my Uncle's humour—their heads were hanging over one another's shoulders, with their eyes rolling at the auctioneer's hammer, their tongues lolling out of their mouth, breathlessly bidding, and outbidding !—Ah they relish no jests, but Scooin's!





But in Print-collecting, though the ruin was pleasant, it was not less ruin! at least, he gratified his eyes, and that was a more positive good than gratifying his understanding; for any collector may have a pair of eyes: but as for their nous, that is not always so evident!

My Uncle collected all the foreigners who had been, in England, and all the Englishmen who had been abroad; this costs a gentleman prettily; but was there a variation in the wig, or in a bit of lace, &c. of course the price varied. My Uncle had formed a collection of what Granger calls "persons remarkable only for one circumstance in their lives," that is, by being Black-guards !— An old bawd, a young whore, or a quack of two centuries ago, made my Uncle Smart even to this day I





In vain I intreated him, with tears in my eyes, not to proceed any further with his Complete Granger!! Sir Thomas Chaloner cost my Uncle fifty guineas! a very good kind of a man was Sir Thomas in the reign of Elizabeth; but his head, was not so precious as the collectors make it; they consider it a rarity! Little did our family imagine that Sir Thomas, with whom it never had any connection, was to have been the cause to us of so much mischief*.





"Why must I add a flim-flam respecting fine prints! My Uncle would have All the works of All the masters I so that in his collection ofjine prints, he had every execrable one he could get! Marc Antonio, Rembranch, and P. Testa, are names revered »by every artist, but not by one of our family! Callot, was so proud of a favourite performance, that when the plate was nearly worn out, he bored a hole, and suspended it by a riband on his breast. Boring that hole was exactly making one in my Uncle's purse! The impressions after the hole, though so much the worse, fetch exorbitant prices !— Once, half-drunk, Hollar sportively etched a set of muff's; but honest Hollar would never have consented that my Uncle should have paid for them the mad price he did! The hairs on Hollar's muff's are so finely executed, that they seem to stand on end— as they made mine!



* "The Great Men of the realm" are frequently taxed with enormous vanity, for exposing their head* in the literary pillory of a magazine ! Would SocraTes, or Pliny, submit to the Universal Magazine! Still however, being all moral men, it is not their vanity which induces them to expose themselves to the laughter of those who are intimately acquainted with their extraordinary virtues and talents. No, (poor things !) it is not their vanity! they feel uneasy compunctions lest posterity should pay too high a price for their heads, from their future scarcity!—And as we are all so deeply interested for most of these " public characters," unlucky must that Head be which is not worth eighteen pence!!





At length, when my Uncle, at PrintSales, could not any longer face his inimical friends, they whispered that he wanted to make a trade of an elegant pursuit! But





all his family will depose, that he had

bought till he had not wherewithal to buy;

and never could be persuaded to part with

any scarce print or fine impression—till his

creditors laid hold of them all! The only

thing he appeared to get a trifle by, was by

Smoking some, to make copies look like

originals!





CHAPTER XLIX.



«One might point out LIGHT-FINGERED ANTIftUARIES in the present agel"

GOUGHV BRITISH TOPOGRAPHY, VoL H. p. 123.

1T.B. This most be considered as good as KING'S EVIDENCE—for a nameless person, at the opening of the grave of Edward I. flched a fngtr from the helpless monarch—It was discovered on the spot, and extracted from a concealed pocket in a watchman's coat, borrowed for the occasion.



OF ILLUSTRIOUS THIEVES THIEVERY, ITS MORALITY AND NECESSITY TO COLLECTORS

HOW MY UNCLE HAS AN EMPEROR UNDER

HIS THUMB! HOW SICK MY UNCLE WAS OF

MICHAEL ANGELO'S RING! AND HOW HE

SLEPT WITH AN ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE!



1 Do not mean to conceal, that when my Uncle had exhausted two landed estates and all his personal property in his various col





lections, that then he thought he might supply himself by another way than by that of purchase!

My Uncle distinguished literary thievery into two kinds, and objected to neither! In the Republic of Letters my Uncle was a Lycurgus, allowing his Spartans to steal from one another, and only punishing the BungLers!

But of that other kind of Popular Thievery, respecting which the world do not differ in opinion — provided that the goods and chattels stolen were literary, Jacob unreservedly defended the practice.

As I had some weak prejudices, he tranquillized my conscience—proving it was for the benefit of our family.





He said the civilians, in their definition of Larceny, observe that the goods must be taken cum studio lucri—with a love of lucre! On this principle they, therefore, do not include the common instance of a hungry person stealing meat. Now, of collectors, who purloin a book—a medal—or a print—their pilfering is not an act of lucre; they do not steal to sell; nor for the intrinsic value -, and in no wise cum studio lucri! They are poor men stealing meal! Such a criminal at the bar would only excite our compassion!

He would shew the Morality of this theory. It is meritorious to steal a brass medal, or an old play—not worth a groat, to save a man from purchasing them at fifty guineas! In justice to his family, in these things it is honester to Steal than to Purchase! That " better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof," is an ancient axiom ; and if you begin a pickpocket, and end a philosopher, 'tis Ethical! Such filehings I call, as St. Austin does the virtues of the heathens—Splendida peccata!





Some young collector exclaims—Are the Virtuosi to enter my cabinet, and filch my medals, my books, and my prints, as those inferior virtuosi, who steal at a rout canes, gloves, and hats?

Yes! I reply.—Are there not several illustrious thieves, who exult in their art? Have we not several respectable thieves, well known to reside at both our learned Universities? Have not the most celebrated collectors been thieves?





I remarked that my Uncle, latterly suffered his nails to grow so long, that his hand looked like the talons of an eagle.

All the world knows that the copper of the Emperor Otho is worth more than the gold of George III. As this Emperor only reigned three months, his coins are so scarce, that a brass halfpenny of his, is worth—about 5O guineas! But this price is rather low.

Now Dr. Glum possessed an Otho !—my Uncle did not! In the course of time it so happened that my Uncle possessed an Otho and Dr. Glum did not!—This made Dr. Glum ever afterwards suspicious.

I believe the Doctor had his conjecture how the Emperor was got over by my Uncle. It was done cavalierly. Jacob kept feeling

VOL. III. P





at the Emperor, till he got him, just as his Premier would have wished, under his thumh—he then took him up as carelessly as a pinch of snuff, and strangled the Emperor in his pocket handkerchief.

But when Dr. Glum departed this life, he left a cruel clause in his last will. He pointedly declared, that whenever his old rival, Mr. Jacob, was desirous of examining his coins, he should be closely watched by a person on each side of him, and not suffered to blow his nose—at least with his handkerchief.

Yet, after all, Dr. Glum was as great a thief as my Uncle, and that clause in his will came ungracefully from him. Once my Uncle and the Doctor met at an inn in the country; my Uncle had in his pocket a sixpence of Alfred; but so rude was art in Alfred's age and country, that his face does not look human—however, it is well worth twenty guineas! This Saxon jewel my Uncle could not refrain exultingly to shew to Dr. Glum. The Doctor was as envious at my Uncle and Alfred, as the Devil at the sight of the loves of Adam and Eve.—In the height of his rancour he wondered how collectors could pay down their money for a face that had no nose and mouth!—I understand you, replied my Uncle; you have not an Alfred in your collection! Your battered Canute has no head at all, and yet you value it, as no one ever did. When my Uncle heard that he and his brother in antiquity could only sleep in a two-bedded room, he at first betrayed considerable agitation—however, he seemed to get over it, and soon fell asleep; but sleepless was Dr. Glum! He rose, " smooth-sliding without step," and breathlessly slid his hand under my Uncle's pillow, into his pockets, and even ripped a seam; but AlFred did not appear! Next day the baffled antiquary hinted to my Uncle that whenever he travelled he always concealed his medals.—So do I, said Jacob, with a sarcastic grin—And when I sleep in a two-bedded room with a brother, I always sleep with AlFred in my mouth!





But our heroic medallist was not always so fortunate; and in one of his tricks, this light-fingered collector was detected!

This affair occurred at Paris, between my Uncle and the Abbe Barthelemi, Keeper of the (then) Royal Cabinet of Medals.

Jacob sighed to possess the celebrated gem called Michael Angela's Ring. The subject is a festival in a vineyard, but the grouping is divine! 'Twas a flim-flam of that great genius, who gave the design to one Peschiera to engrave on a cornelian ; and the Cognoscenti admired the ring as a miracle of ancient art, and Michael exultingly wore it on his finger as a perpetual triumph*.





I



* Such impositions have been frequently practised by great artists, on the most knowing dilettanti, and the most keen-eyed dealers, who first planned the deception, and were afterwards caught in their own web. Pickler and Amastlni both exulted in their deceptions. Their copies are equal to the original antiques ; but had they sold them under their own names, they would have obtained no price. The writer of Pickler's Life observes, that many of his deceptions, having been long deposited in the cabinets of the curious, they may be said to be no longer Pickler's, because the Intendenti having adjudged them to be antiques, it would be cruel to lift up the veil, and restore them to their author! The Giocatore di Troio, an engraved gem of Plckler's, passed as such with Winkelman, who, in his Monumenti Inediti, exclaims—Une dells piu eleganti e delle piu belle figure che siano mai state scolpite nelle gemme!





After the drawer had been very cautiously opened, and very closely shut by the Abb&— he insisted once more to point out to my Uncle's observation the ingenious contrivance of Peschiera, the engraver, who, to substantiate his claim to the work, had punned on his own name, by placing a boy fishing in the corner.—My Uncle intreated the AbbS not to give himself that trouble—he had enough of it!

But the Abbe was never wearied by politeness and erudition—he has singularly united both! Opening the drawer, he declared it was gone! My Uncle wished also to be gone! No, Sir! exclaimed the Abbtl —were Michael Angelo himself here, he should not go with his own ring! My reputation, my place, and my pension, all lie in the circle of that ring !—The Abba quickly rung the bell; two herculean gardes de corps stripped my Uncle, who appeared in the best humour. possible!





The AbbS, looking him in the face—Ah! he cried, what it is to have to do with a Collector and a Briton! one cannot daunt them!

The AbbS was vexed, and, worse, was puzzled; but he, too, had been a collector—and those who have read his Anacharsis, may judge of his light-fingered erudition.

Another trial! he exclaimed, or I shall be outwitted!





He ordered the two gardes de corps to bring the Barberini vase—he placed the antique vase on an antique tripod—and before it fixed my Uncle in an antique chair from Hcrculaneum. I will treat you, learned Sir, (politely observed the Abbe,) as an amateur, an antiquary, and a collector—but you must take an emetic!

In vain my Uncle looked on either side, shaking his head, he piteously poured down the ipecacuana!

Unequalled emetic! Soon something was heard tinkling in the Barberini vase!

La Voila!—exclaimed the exulting Abbe. —My Uncle had actually brought up

Michael Angela's Ring!





Well,'well, said Jacob—sipping some mulled wine the Abbe, with polished humanity, had presented him with—Since you so well know the theory of the fine arts, I have no doubt you have been an expert practitioner! I thought it safe enough, and meant to have taken the chance of a digestion!

But there was one reason my Uncle alledged for thievery, which may quiet the conscience of the most cold and scrupulous collector. What is to be done with an inexorable and ferocious brother, who will not part with a thing, for any price, for any cajoling, or even for any abuse, which are in your power to bestow on him? I knew two amateurs who broke an uninterrupted friendship of many years, because one would neither exchange nor sell his collection of Goltzius, to gratify the insatiable soul of his brother; nor barter a fine Guido and an antique bronze which he possesses, for a baked Titian and a cracked Etruscan vase. In these cases there is no choice—we must Steal*!





* These collectors are wonderfully hard-hearted to each other I I shall give some of their humours in the following extracts from the Abbe BARTHELhMy's Letters, when he was travelling to collect fragments of vertu.

"We searched through the collections 'of Baron Stosch; they are immense! He has despoiled Italy, and still keeps it submissive to his power, by his numerous correspondents ; he shewed every thing, but would relinquish nothing. I submitted to the most humiliating supplications; they only hardened a heart which naturally is not tender."—

"I have triumphed over the biutal resistance of the Abbate Boule, and a few dealers, who were more pliant."

Nowhe lays a conspiracy !—" I cannot exult of my success over the most powerful of all the collectors. I am mortified, but I will not despair. I have been just surround





ing him by a net, which will entangle him during my absence; and, perhaps, I shall have the double pleasure to have what I wish, and to have it in spite of him!"

Of the ferocious Abbate Boule he lays—" This man has many fragments of antiquity, but it is impossible to get a sight of them. I saw some Egyptian figures on the ground. This fellow has all the collection of M. Gravier, all packed up in cases! It is hopeless to offer him any price for them; he would sooner part with his life, which I dare say, his miserable manner of living, and his insatiable appetite for collecting, will shortly put an end to I"





CHAPTER L.



Ah I what avails il, when his dinner's lost,

That his triumphant name adorns a postf

Or that his shining page (provoking fate !)

Defends sirloins, which sens of dulness eat I



YOUNG.



Literary Dinners Authors Discovered To

Be A Species Op Voracious Animals By

Professor Camper And Myself The

Cause Of Their. Madness In Eating, DeRived From The Abominable Practice Of The Booksellers!



In the history of literature, ancient and modern, one of its most important provinces has ever been the quality and variety of those Dinners, which the lovers of literature give to literary men.





Athen.eus, in his Deipnosophists, or Banquet of the Learned, has, with his accustomed detail, loaded and unloaded all his authors—on this occasion. Cookery appears to have been one of the most refined arts, and cooks the most adored artists of the Philos of his day. We acquire more information from him than is always necessary, and he is so great a master too of his subject, that he makes our stomachs turn, or our mouths water at every page*!

When my Uncle resolved to give dinners in this literary city, his ostensible motive was, the attic entertainment of having livf authors at his table:



* lie opens his fourth book by informing us, how two great philosophers commenced a regular correspondence, merely for the purpose of journalizing the splendid dinners to which they were invited.





"The feast of reason, and the flow of soul."

But whether influenced by love, by hatred, or by fear, which in this country are frequently the occasion of very good dinners, I will not determine.

It is certain, that some of our Literati will exchange a dedication—for the smoke of a kitchen chimney; and Reviewers become amiable at a well-covered table, and feel a tenderness for the author of—a good dinner! Every thing melts like sugar under their tooth; they are wonderfully lighthanded at a dish, and mingle mangle with their throats till they risk a strangulation, provided it be with unbought wine. These guests never open their mouths but at the cost of other persons—by an epigram, or a dinner! I heard one of these Literati querulous because his gullet was not a yard long—that he might take—according to Count Rumford's plan, a longer time for deglutition!





It was at my Uncle's table, I discovered that an Author is a voracious animal/

I could not, at first, resist the evidence of my senses, and, at length, I attained to what I may call the philosophy—of Literary Gulosity.

The seminal hint of this discovery is CamPer's. That scientific physiologist, in his curious experiments on Skulls, says, that after having " sawed several heads, both of Men and Animals, perpendicularly through the middle, I was convinced (observe that strong expression!) that the cavity destined to contain the Brains, was in general very uniform—but that the position of the upper and lower Jaws was the manifest cause of the most striking differences!!!"





This is one of the most interesting discoveries in that profound treatise; it proves that men of genius do not so much differ from other men in the quantity of Brains, but merely in their Jaws!

Now my own practical observations confirmed the entire system with an additional discovery! Our authors eat so voraciously, not only from the " position of their Jaws," but also out of provocation and Madness

Vol. in. a





for not having sufficient opportunities to make a due use of them. A writer shall have two or three thousand readers, in a year, and walk about this town in great solemnity and pomp, without a dinner!

Should the reader imagine I have not clearly demonstrated that the voracity of our Literati is an act of madness—surely, the abominable practice existing among booksellers, which I am now to disclose, will most evidently shew the cause of that kind of Madness to which I have alluded.

Be it known then, that in the course of every year the Trade*, make among themselves slock sales, and that on those literary festivals, they jovially assemble to dine at the Bedford or the Shakspeare! Men the dust of whose shelves is tickling their throats, cool them in bumpers of Burgundy !" unwashed artificers" lay their hands on the snow-white blanc-mange and grimly grin! They gorge on turtle and title-page, and sturgeon and copy-right.



* The booksellers call themselves the Trade:





At such a moment I have seen one of their unfortunate authors parading in the piazzas beneath them; with no other dinner than what he can get by snuffing up the rich odours of a turtle, which he himself has contributed to fish out of Indian seas!

Is this fact not sufficient then, considering "the position of his jaws," at that moment, to produce that kind of madness I have observed in the voracity of Authors?

a 2





CHAPTER LI.



Meetings kept up too long, and dinners too frequently given, occasion great freedom of raillery) but raillery gives more pain to some than it affords amusement to others. Raillery is the hot-bed of sarcasms, and when once these get into play, causticity repulses causticity, and inflames recrimination. We then are easily provoked to blows and the most extravagant conduct—so these things naturally conclude!

From tit Poet ALEXIS, i* ATHEN.SUS, Lib. X.



A LITERARY DINNER!



1 Present the reader with a veracious description of one of my Uncle's dinners—it was a gala day, in which we had the honour of satiating the craving stomachs of several great geniuses.





My Uncle sat between two Grecians—Professor Pours-on (so nick-named from the quantity of Greek and Port he can throw off at a sitting)—and his great rival, Dr. Gr.eCulus!

My Uncle, whose chemical experiments had much decomposed my Uncle's little Greek —now made a bold attempt to display his critical acumen in Greek philology—and it had like to have cost him dear!

My Uncle was preparing to carve a goose. Pray, (said he, turning negligently with a chit-chat air to the Professor on his righthand,)—what do you make of that odd word in Athen.eus, in his fourth book, I mentioned the other morning, Kaukizomenos?



Pshaw! there are five hundred such words disfigured by the copyists! You don't pretend to make any thing of it yourself! said the surly Professor.





And you, doctor ? — proceeded Jacob, perking up his face triumphantly in the doctor's, and then casting a long glance all down the table. We were all at this moment watching the goose, and the three philologers!

I understand you have a new reading! replied the doctor, solemnly shaking his tremendous wig—that wig, which aspires to an universal monarchy among modern wigs.

I reject Kaukizomenos, and read Kaukizomexous'. I know Casaubon is not for me! exclaimed the exulting Jacob, fearless of the wig.





Where's your authority, Sir, for this extraordinary temerity; this deep and rank pollution of the text; this alarming revolution of ous for os ?—cried the doctor, pulling his wig closer to his brows.

I do it, a meo periculo !—firmly replied my Uncle. Are we to allow nothing any more to "happy conjecture?" Have we not allowed it to Bent Ley? do we not to you ?—bowing to both; my Uncle goodnaturedly meant to dole out his compliment equally between them—but this displeased both the Professor and the Doctor! My Uncle wished not to persevere in his critical acumen; the table had heard sufficient for his purpose, and he would have given ten pounds to have heard nothing more about his new reading!





But the Professor and the Doctor were two inhuman Greeks, who thirsted for the blood of a harmless Trojan.

Nugte! Nugal exclaimed the Professor —What do you get by your new reading?

My Uncle was still not disheartened.— Why, if you look over Athen.eus carefully, and take the whole context with you, viz. the apple-sauce and the sage and onions, and his complaint that the bird was too much browned, by the inattention of the cook, I say, (sticking his fork into the Goose, and looking around him,) I am cutting the Gordian knot — the whole refers to a roasted goose!

Impudence! growled the ghastly-grinning Professor — Cobwebs to catch flies! —The Professor shot such a steady look of contempt through and through my Uncle, that Jacob, conscious he was standing on ground shaken by an earthquake, turned pale, while his lips quivered at the serious turn the affair was taking. His tongue cleaved to the roof of his mouth, as dry as a neat's!





With the utmost difficulty he collected voice enough to appeal, with the mild eyes of a dove, to the Doctor, with a humiliated, What do you think, Doctor?

Think, Sir! exclaimed Dr. Gr^eculus, shaking a cloud of powder from his wig, till my Uncle's eyes were blinded—I think, Sir, you ought to be ashamed of yourself to trifle so egregiously! A man ought to study Greek fifteen years before he ventures to give us Greek for a goose! muttering to himself, Fesanum! Insanum! Tiresiam! And so saying, he exhausted all his wrath on a great pigeon-pie!





All the table perceived how my Uncle stood jammed between the Professor and the Doctor.

Caco-nous, from the habit of constantly dining with my Uncle, notwithstanding that vile chapter of his against Gratitude, was grateful enough at all times for a good dinner. Perceiving how thunderstruck my Uncle sat before the goose, and no more caring for the two Greek Professors than for the two buttons on the waistband of his breeches, (for he had no decorum,) sonorously came to rescue my Uncle.

This is-not the concoction of a great mind; this is not defecating the grossness of the mind! You fetter the energies of the intellect by pedantic verbalities. I calmly enquire how are we interested about an overroasted goose in the time of Athen.eus? Only, surely by one way—that of a happy conjecture. Mr. Jacob has conjectured, no matter whether right or wrong, it is better than making nothing out of nothing. The age of pedantry has past! Oh the inertness of a quiescent mind!





The Professor and the Doctor stared, and drank bumpers to one another. My Uncle nodded to Caco-nous.

A great moralist, whose chapter on Temperance is so beautifully composed, had been silently eating all down the table; now shovelling the green peas, he facetiously called





out for kaukisomenmis I and observed that he suspected Socrates never had green peas in January—'tis the moral result of our inimitable constitution. Every Briton is a free agent!

The high price of our green peas was tumultuously discussed, which brought in " the circulating medium," and led on to population, and the means of subsistence. Mr. Too-many observed, that population increased geometrically; but the means of subsistence, only arithmetically; so that in a given time, there would be hardly standing room in these kingdoms, and nothing to eat. Nothing less than the miracle of the loaves and fishes could procure a man his dinner three centuries hence!

Here he was violently opposed by CacoNous, who insisted on the perfectibility of man, and the fecundity of green peas, three centuries hence!—He concluded by sending up his plate for green peas, but they handed him the empty dish!





Mr. Too-many appealed to the empty dish as a proof of the geometrical force of population—Caco-nous affirmed it was the effect of Adam Smith's principle of the circulating medium, for had green peas not been suffered by Adam Smith to reach such a price, we should have had plenty; but this is the vexatious bondage of property! Realize my system of equality! Let every pea garden be thrown open to every citizen!

That would be the only way to have no green peas at all!—cried Too-many.





So we all laughed at Caco-nous with the empty dish before him.

Hardly had the cloth been removed, when Caco-nous expressed a desire to have " the humble vehicle through which an English or German rustic inhales the fumes of the Indian weed."

You allude to (said a Chinese traveller) "the custom of inhaling the vapour of tobacco*!"



* I have the satisfaction of announcing, that shortly will be published, an English Dictionary, which the world will find very different from Johnson's or Ash's. My authorities in this Neological dictionary will be the most curious of our modern classics. Mr. Godwin is a living source of the most beautiful novelties of natural science. His style is admired! He has employed

>he sublime language in the text.

Bobtail.





You both mean, I presume, (observed the grave Dr. Creekory, the admirable compiler of complications)—to smoke a pipe!

We do, replied Caco-nous—but we have no spitting-pots in this house!

I answered—I am sure my Uncle considers

you as his! friend, I would have added,

alluding to his kind interference between Jacob and the Greeks ; but the literati never let a sarcastic touch fall under the tableso they stopped me! and Caco-nous frowned!

Who could have thought, that smoking a pipe was first to be turned into a sarcastic allusion, and afterwards have set the Sentimentalist a whining! he who wrote the





"Peregrinations of the Heart, performed on foot"—

You make me shed a tear! he cried—You remind me of a broken tobacco pipe !—and it was I who broke it! Walking from Amsterdam to Maarsa, the wind was up, and the rain down !—In that dense shower, pacing the eternal flatness of that land, a boor came jogging on an ass. There's humanity every where, and even in Holland!—The old boor—generous being!—offered me the hinder part of his ass—I mounted—desiring me to cling closer to him—I smashed the pipe he held between his teeth—I covered my face with my hands!—A pearl trembled in the boor's eye—Why do you weep? I cried—the canaster is so acrid! he replied, in a manly tone—Ah me! I have broken your pipe! I cried.—As it was smoked out it matters not,

VOL. III. R





he replied, with a generosity of feeling that more keenly agonized my heart!—We arrived at his cottage—and when I thanked him, he thanked me!—observing in his artless language, you have been as good as a great coat to me; you have kept my back dry!—Can I forget the Hollander? I still preserve the broken pipe; 'tis a fragment of sensibility! 'tis diamonded by the boor's tear. Oh, that I could crystallize the Dutchman's drop!

Hum! a mumper! muttered Dr. CreeKory, whose travels wear an opposite complexion—for in his, through Holland, he has given a history of the Seven Provinces, a dissertation on the Agio of the Bank, and how ranch solid tobacco the Dutch convert into vapour, with the duties thereon, &c.





In the revolution of empires—said the historian of France, waving his arm— a bottle stood by him, but suddenly rumbling between two rattling plates, cracking and crashing, it divided between the sentimentalist and the compiler I The former shrieking, displayed a white cambric handkerchief, well lavendered, but the compiler simply applied to the Doyley, declared he was not so easily cut—and after a grave grin at the sentimentalist, requested the historian of France to proceed with his revolution of empires.

Dr. Cr.eekory pretended, in literature, to an interior and mystical feeling respectingsTYLE—he declared that Style was sauce and pickle, and it signified little what was dressed, provided the sauce was rich and the pickle poignant. When he brought one of

R2





his articles to market, he insisted on being paid in proportion to his style, and which no one knew to value but himself. He was a gold and silver lace-maker in The now!

Dr. Creekory insinuated to the historian of France, that he wrote like Gibbon. The historian of France, with impudent modesty, assured us that he did not consider himself equal to Gibbon !—though he was sensible that no man could decide so nicely as Dr. Creekory between Him and Gibbon!

Dr. Creekory did not compliment the sentimentalist that he wrote like Sterne, which vexed the latter, who hated like " the thickest Tewkesbury mustard*," the ponderosity of the traveller in quarto.



* He a good wit! hang him, a baboon I his wit is xs thick as Tewkesbury mustard! Falst Aff.





Here Caco-nous noisily renewed his controversy with his inexorable rival, TooMany.

Caco-nous affirmed, if there were no laws in society, every thing would then be lawful! All the misery and all the vices prevalent in civil society originate in our institutions! Let us have no wars, no marriagemonopolies, no tax-gathering! Population would then proceed without restraint; myriad would swarm on myriad!

Too-many denied every thing CacoNous asserted. Such a society of bastards as Caco-nous's could not last thirty years.— We should be overstocked! By a curious and a nice calculation of the mouths of men and the tails of animals, (the former taking so much more ui, than the others can give out,)





be demonstrated we should soon want dressing .for the land, and fall short of manure!

I have a preventive, for over population, you know, cried Caco-nous, pressing his fore-finger on his nose, and looking askew*.

Oh, barbarian of metaphysics! cried TooMany! 'Tis by exposing new-born infants, and by a worse method still! I am astonished that such a metaphysical Orpheus is not already torn into fragments, by those mothers who meet you musing on the annihilation of the unborn generation, every morning at Islington Spa. 'Tis most inhuman! But a sharp war of seven years, is an useful operation in this weedy world; it prunes away the incumbering and unproductive

» See a Pamphlet published after " Political Justice."





branches of society; which we convert into soldiers.—We get 1 or 200,000 burtheusome fellows knocked on the head ; sing Te Deum, and write our philosophical treatises quietly by our fire-sides!

Pray, Sir—asked Caco-nous—what right have you to share in the good dinner of this day more than the slaves who dine on your leavings?

I have a right, replied Mr. Too-many— because there was room at the table! I encroached on no neighbour's dish, nor edged him off his cliair, as your equalizers of property would. Pray, Sir, in an age of universal illumination and equality, what right have you to get drunk, and then philosophize?





Caco-nous appealed to those near him whether he was drunk? They all agreed he was, except a Dramatist, celebrated for his manual humour, and who had all along been filling Caco-nous's glass with bumpers —calling himself between the two Philos, Caco-nous's bottle-holder.

Caco-nous, in his usual manner, caught at this solitary evidence, and bolstered up a paradox to prove that he was not drunk; that in no wise he resembled a drunken fellow; that he had neither lost his chair nor his speech; How, then, am I drunk?

The comic genius observed, this was no bad scene for his next new play.

Pshaw! (crustily exclaimed a beetle-brow





ed Reviewer,) your new play is anew moon; that is, the old one in a new shape!

The modern Terence replied—Your instrument is a tomahawk of satire!

Tomahawk! (retorted the acrid ReViewer)—You little whip-cord I You pocket cork-screw! You tiny gimlet! You powder without ball! You paper fly-trap!

Gentlemen ! — exclaimed an Oriental Bard — Let me place myself between you, and read my Ode to Visthnu! it will calm you both! — So he drew out his formidable ode, while the Dramatist placed four waxlights before him—To persevere, said the Orientalist, in a continuity of sublime imagery, through 300 stanzas—





Here the whole table interfered—To a man we agreed not to listen to Visthnu, I

But the Dramatist, intent on mischief, clapped the Oriental hard on the back, told him to lay his ode flat (not his /to ode) on the mahogany (as he wittily miscalled the table,) and called out for half a dozen of sour-. (ingeniously meaning lemons,) which he squeezed into the libations of the OrienTalist, that he might gargle, and clear his voice through the 300 stanzas; and while his eye-balls rolled in a phrenzy, make a wry face in the midst of his infuriate strophes.

Fortunately for us, at this moment, the Grecians at the head of the table renewed their bickerings—not with my Uncle, but among themselves.





My Uncle having paid them an equal compliment, he had exasperated both.

The Doctor still labouringon Athen.sus, acknowledged that he was an author who put the Commentators to the torture. I am inclined to retain the passage we talked about (addressing the Professor) — Periphoreina, and I read afterwards Kramboosas for Kromb—and this will make sense—a roasted pig wrapt up in a sward of bacon!

You would make a silk purse out of a sow's ear! testily replied the Professor. Do you still persist in reading Phasianikos for Phasianos—I say a pheasant, you say a horse I

I will read Phasianikos—replied the Doctor.





Here the Professor inveighed against the temerity of modern sciolists!

The Doctor shook his wig, and curled his nose at the Professor—Phasianikos is a pheasant. The pheasant came from Phasia, a river in the Colchis, brought by the Argonauts in their return to Greece.

All this is a gross blunder!—replied the Professor. You ought to retain Phasianosi a horse of Phasia marked with the figure of a pheasant! The scholiast whom you so liberally abuse, and to whom you stand always so much indebted, like the blind man abusing his dog, gives some curious information. It was usual to distinguish horses by using different marks. We call, says he, certain horses Bucephalus, not because their head is like that of a Bull, but because they are





marked by the figure of a butt's head; hence was Alexander's horse denominated, and had not a buWs head as some sillily imagine.

The Doctor still sturdily persisted in favour of the pheasant versus the horse; and copiously quoted numerous passages,all making for the bird.

The Professor, who saw nothing was to be gained by quotation, for the Doctor had as long a memory as the Professor, briskly caught a word with a shrill whew!—You dare not tell us that Tatyras is the true word for pheasant; Ptolomy Evergetus reads tetarton, others tatyron.

You lie, and you know you lie! asseverated the Doctor.





The Professor instantly threw his wine at the Doctor; but the wig proved a spongy shield and drank up the liquid enemy; the Doctor grasped in eager anger his own wig, and, throwing it at the Professor, fixed the reeking tresses on his head,

Dropping odours, dropping wine!

How this battle would have terminated, the gods of Homer only know. The delighted table slowly interfered—the Professor challenged the Doctor—to drink brandy with him in a pair of shoes! The Doctor insolently offered to drink with him brandy in a pair of boots! a new pair of boots was immediately sent for, and the operation begun!

A small, short, meagre man, who was a Translator, could not help moralizing on this terrific combat respecting a mistranslation! All of ye, gentlemen! treat a translator so lightly, valuing his genius by the sheet, and his sheet by its cheapness 1 As for myself, I have been a translator these ten years, and I never yet made a good translation !—I am now resolved to be an orignal writer—I will not die in harness!





Here we laughed!

You will grow fatter—said Dr. CreekoRy, eying him, on compilation.

I am heartily sick of translation—resumed the meagre gentleman—If you translate literally, you do not write English; if paraphrastically, you do not write your author. You thus sit between two slippery stools, and a man's nose is apt to come dash on





the ground!

The brandy-duel between the two learned Grecians began to assume a most serious aspect; each had his boot beside him—and the Professor was singing Greek epigrams, while the Doctor was declaiming passages from the Orations of Lysias—my Uncle holding both his hands to his ears—but the GreCians felt themselves annoyed by the OriEntal Poet, who rumbling on through his Ode to Visthnu, invoking the Sun! he suddenly leaped upon his chair—there he called for lights! lights! The comic DramaTist and the Sentimentalist, the one laughing, and the other in rapture, were on their knees before him, each holding a candle! Caco-nous and Too-many were both under the table, asleep .beside each other. The rival of Gibbon was balancing a period with Dr. Creekory; at which the Translator was modestly listening.





There was no one sober in the room but myself and the Reviewer, who was really as cold-blooded as a frog. Tapping me on ray shoulder, as he snatched up his hat, he whispered in my ear—You wonder that my patience is exhausted! See what a set of drunken dogs come before me every month!

Such usually were the literary dinners of my Uncle!



VOL. III.





CHAPTER LII.



Locus csl, et pluribus UMBRIS.

HOR. EPIS. V. Lib. 1.

Pray write me word how MANY you desire I

FRANCIS.



A Dinner-guest Actjeon And His Hounds

—My Uncle's Literary Fame Compared To A Pyramid!



-M.Y Uncle's plan of dinner parties—did not sufficiently answer his purpose—What is the morality of A. Reviewer! He will frequently dine with you all through January, and damn you all through February!

Then, as my Uncle, in plain English, kept open house, he was worried by the Shades and the Flies *! before the winter or dinner season expired, he became prim, pert, and pettisli—I thought he could not have held out patiently w,ith his usual good sense. But I was resolved that he should not give up his dinners; for the honour of the





* Whenever the Romans invited a friend, it was an usual civility to inform him, that there were places at table for as many persons as he thought proper to accompany him; so that he might at least find himself among some company he liked. These persons were called Umbrage or Shades, from their accompanying another person. Another kind of guests were called Muscje, or Flies ; these were uninvited guests ; parasites who hovered around well-covered tables. We have our Flies slill; we have only to stretch out our hands, any day, in Bond-street, or St. James's-street, and they are willingly caught. They are flies who like to buz round every table but their own! they have silvery tones, and doves eyes ; lodge in garrets— but are to be heard of at their coffee-house!





family, and the easy triumph he would afford Dr. Babble, with his tepidarians, or cool gentlemen sipping their cold tea.

My Uncle's umbra were the oddest kind of mortals, and the most surprising sensualists this whole town can produce. But this was naturally to be expected; for the shade of a crooked thing can never be otherwise than crooked.

Among my Uncle's friends, residing in The Row, was the celebrated Mr. GraveStone—a great biographer indeed! since he wrote the lives of the living I He was a dead hand at a life, and might be said to bury his best friends alive. Whenever he entered the room, my Uncle would exclaim—here comes the undertaker of Fame!





Mr. Grave-stone could not, like Milo, indeed, carry an ox on his shoulders; yet I verily believe he would have matched Milo by devouring a whole one. Yet Mr. GraveStone was nothing compared to the Shades and Flies!

Mr. Grave-stone once brought a tremendous umbra, who had obtained some celebrity for having projected the philosophical soups at the Royal Institution—to feed all the Lecturers (it was scandalously meant, in my opinion, to depreciate their Genius !) —at a penny a head! The leaden-headed geniuses who are there all day, philosophising over the newspapers, were to be served at half-price! All this I take to have been done in the dark spirit of the acromatical philosophy, where every thing is to be explained in an occult way; so that what is said, is not to be understood; but what is to be understood, is not said!





This skilful experimentalist in "the science of nutrition," philosophised very ambiguously, after the intense silence and fervid occupation he underwent during our two courses—perhaps nothing was meant; but I did not like his allusions to white meat and the breasts of women; that the flesh of woman was a greater delicacy than that of man, (how came he to know this?) That in Europe we suffered our fathers and mothers to live till they became so old that their flesh must be very hard and unpalatable. What could he mean*?



* Mr. J. De Loubeiro has composed a copious Essay " on the Inducements to the eating of Human





When my Uncle solemnly remonstrated with Mr. Grave-stone on his Shade, that great biographer observed, that introducing so uncommon an eater into the house of a philosopher, was a tribute paid to philosophy.

Then was it that my Uncle opened his mind without reserve to Mr. Grave-stone, and some of his Flies!

Flesh." He alarms one with having discovered so many. At Cochin China, he describes a scene at which he was present—about dipping a small piece in the juice of an unripe lemon!!!"

Phil. Mag. Vol. IV. p. 265. See accounts of recent Anthropophagi, in Medical and Physical Journal for June, 1800, and Monthly Magazine, April, 1800. I believe Mr. De Saint Pierre received the honour of citizenship from the Jacobins for having been present at a festival of Anthropophagists!!!





Those who frequent the entertainments of Plato, sir, found themselves perfectly well the following day—and the wiser too! But I am sorry to say that little knowledge comes out of that mouth, which seems more curious concerning what it has put into it. Sir, I would rather be an epicurean in the science and the wit of another man, than in his bottles and his dishes. A literary man ought to make the wine agreeable to him on the next day, and not rise as if he had four heads on his shoulders. The "Nodes canasqwe divum," are not, I believe, the sober feasts you delight in. I have witnessed orgies at my own house; I who abhor wine! I have seen, what I am resolved no more to see, stoical philosophers, and platonic politicians, dead drunk under the table. I have listened to hear something concerning a successful writer, and I heard nothing but back-biting; I watched for wit, and catched nothing but puns; and, in a word, I am ashamed of my literary parties. I know, too, that when you are all fairly out of my doors, you amuse yourselves with flouting me; my own goose is not more cut up, nor my own ragouts more peppered. You are all a set of hungry hounds, and I will not share the fate of Actaeon—to be eaten up by my own dogs! I have, however, no objection to a Pic-nic*.





* A society where every one contributes his own portion. Such entertainments were not unknown to the ancients; for Athenjeus observes, in noticing them, "that the guests who partook of their own collation, were usually more sparing than when they dined at a friend's cost—that these entertainments were of a more sober cast—no man there getting drunk, or in danger of being seized by apoplexy.— Minerva, at the sight of Penelope's princes, concludes that their entertainment was provided by her good man, and not by themselves!"





Such was the tenor of my Uncle's conversation when he broke up his dinner parties. His parsimony (poor man !) was freely censured—but his sensibilities as an author were, in consequence, most woefully worked on— Grave-stone struck his life out of his book, and my Uncle ceased to be " a public character"—he was bandied about, and bit, and scratched, and flead through all the Reviews. He was daily paragraphed by all his Flies, and he was calumniated by being said to be confined in a private madhouse, when he was only confined in the Fleet!

My Uncle's literary reputation was, as the poets say, a Pyramid !—it began on a broad basis, and spread at first considerably; till, by degrees, it was diminished, and was quite lost to the eye!





CHAPTER LIU.



SOCRATES did not amuse himself as most other philosophers, with reasoning on the secrets of nature, or searching into the manner of the creation of the earth, or the causes of the motions of the heavens. On the contrary, he exposed the folly of such as give themselves up to these contemplations. He asked them, if they thought themselves very wise in neglecting what immediately concerned them, to busy themselves in things above them < He was astonished they did not perceive the impossibility of comprehending these wonders, seeing that the most celebrated among them treat each other as FOOLS and MADMEN !—He said he should be glad to know of these persons if they were in hopes one day to put in practice what they learnt, as men who knew an art may practise it when they please, either for their own advantage or for the service of their friends; or if they did imagine that after they had found out the causes of all things that happen, they should be able to give winds and rains, and to dispose of the times and seasons as they had occasion for them, or if they contented themselves with the bare knowledge without expecting any further profit?

XENOPHON'S .Mwioraijtoa of SOCRATES, Book I.



A Blue Flame!



1 Confess when my Uncle latterly was confined in a very small angular apartment in the Fleet, I felt my sense of duty diminish in proportion to that chamber, and spoke out my mind; believing him now to be at least as crazy as he was philosophical.





As we sat crowded together in this nook, under a slanting ceiling, I told him freely my opinion, that his Head had evidently been too srnatt for modern philosophies—he shrugged his shoulders; so that I think he silently agreed with my notion. Then I asked him what benefit so much philosophy produced to the possessor, or to his heir at law?

My creditors have done their worst!—he exclaimed—they have seized on all my collections! but they cannot issne a statute of bankruptcy against my concealed treasure!

Treasure! I exclaimed, charmed at the idea! treasure! My dear Uncle, you have still a dutiful nephew! what is this concealed treasure?





My Mind!—replied my Uncle, fixing his eyes gravely on me.

Your Mind !—I replied, looking on him in all the horror of vacancy!

Yes, my dear nephew! I might have lived in a quiet state of vegetation among the other vegetables of my neighbours ; have fed heartily, digested smoothly, and slept soundly; and have left my family the family estates.

Mere I groaned.

But then I had not enriched botany with near 3000 species of unknown plants!





"Without a kitchen garden left to console you for all this great time and trouble!

Nor described one hundred fishes which the world has never tasted!

And your ichthyology will not give us a pod's head!

Neither had I ascertained the height of the mountains in the moon, by comparing them with those on the earth!

Those mountains in the moon only frightened you, when, afterwards you took it into your head they were volcanic!

Have I not profoundly investigated bow the earth was made? Have I not pushed my researches beyond even antediluvian ages i





And in all this earth you have so easily disposed of, you have not an acre of your own!

Have I not pursued La Lande, star by star, and detected his celestial flim-flams?

And these " celestial notices" have contributed to crowd you into a nook where you can neither see the sun nor moon, and never more will walk in the streets!

Have I not published eight quartos, and three dozen of octavos ?—they have not yet sold! but posterity shall have them whether they will or not. Your Aunt's works I burnt, for the honour of the family. Mine I have preserved—acting on the same principle.

Fortunately for your works, you out

VOL. III. T





lived my Aunt—but your metaphysics are empty as the Scotch, and obscure as the German!

I know, said my Uncle, I have written above this age; but you will not pretend to assert—he added, rising in a fit of enthusiasm—that the next age will not comprehend me? And exclaiming,

Sublimiferiam sidera vertice.

Hor.

My head shall touch the stars!



he bounced his head so violently against the low slanting ceiling, that my Uncle was literally struck dumb on the ground.

See, I cried, turning my head cautiously towards the ceiling, what a situation your works have placed you in!





Short now is the eventful history of my philosophical Uncle. He daily inhaled, to keep up his spirits, the gaseous oxyd, or philosophical brandy—and, as I predicted, it acted on him just like that of the most vulgar quality.

His face became red and fiery, and shone like a lighted coal; his eyes were phosphorescent, and his nose glimmered in the dark like the tail of a glow-worm. I did not care to approach him lest he should set fire to me; and once or twice, though he violently opposed my well-meant endeavours, I threw over him two or three pailfuls of water, for I wished to prevent that " combustion of the human body," or otherwise "spontaneous decomposition," of which I had lately read so much.





Calling on him one morning, he told me mournfully, that having taken off his old pair of black silk stockings, and thrown them on the ground, in the morning he observed "a spontaneous decomposition" had taken place, and he had found, instead of his old black silk stockings, nothing but a heap of carbonic matter *!

Then, said I, you must have a most alarming surcharge of caloric about you!



* See a very curious Essay "on the Combustion of the Human Body, produced by the immoderate use of Spirituous Liquors, by Pierre-Aime Lair." Phil. Mag. Vol. VI. p.-132. It abounds with numerous well-attested instances of the fact. We have had several. Dr. Thornton, in his Medical Extracts, and Wesley in his Primitive Physic, give others.—For the story of the black silk stockings, see Phil. Mag. Vol. XVI. p. 92. They belonged to an American Senator.





I begin to think, replied my unhappy Uncle, that your conjecture respecting the gaseous oxyd, that it is nothing more than philosophical brandy, is perfectly accurate. If you are still a dutiful nephew and a zealous chemist, I entreat you to watch me more sedulously than you have of late! the hellflames of brandy are in my body! I may go off either by detonation or decomposition, or by a bright combustion! Then may you certify to the world your favourite discovery, and add that brandy is not eau devie!

On the morning of the 21st of December, 1804, I entered his apartment—My Uncle was not a-bed! there was a strong smell in the gaseous apartment. I hastened to the Warden to announce the escape of his prisoner—and that he must pay all his.debts! The Warden swore, and stampt, and rushed into my Uncle's apartment—we could not see him, but we perceived a dancing blue flame, which for above a quarter of an hour bore the perfect resemblance of my Uncle's small head and miniature features; his snipish nose, his grinning lips, and his gimlethole eyes—I then suspected how matters stood—and, looking in his bed, we found nothing but the cinerous remains of this great chemist; like an ancient body in a state of decomposition in the Herculaneum, we traced every part except his head perfect; but when you touched my unfortunate Uncle, he crumbled into mere carbon, black smut!





The Warden was as terrified at my explanation of the effects of brandy-drinking, as he had been at first at the probability of his having to pay all my Uncle's debts! If this true story should recover one unhappy bibber, tottering on the precipice of that bottomless gulph his bottle, I shall not have written in vain—but this is only one moral I while the Life and Errors of my Uncle contain a hundred, if the patient Reader is so fortunate as to be able to discover them.





FINIS.





1





AN



ILLUMINATING INDEX;



INDICATING



THE SPIRIT AS WELL AS THE MATTER



OF



THE WORK.





The Roman letters signify the VOLUME; the Arabia cyfhsn the

rAGE j the letter « the NOTES.



Academies, their utility suggested to coun-

try physicians i. 96



Acromatical philosophy, what, occasion-

ally used in our Commentary iii. 4n



further explained iii. 262



Ad Am, probably a negro and a monkey! ii. 192



Anthropophagist dines with my Uncle iii. 263

Age of universal illumination, will have no



plays nor concerts! iii. 51



Agnksi, Donna, a young lady, master of all





sciences, outmonkies my Uncle's educated

monkey, and ouiparrots his green parrot., iii. 104n



Agriculturist, an i. 108



Alfred, my Uncle sleeps with iii. 212



Amateurs use indecent language and



strange gestures „ iii* 141



Amazons, efFects of a course of philosophy on



them ii. 1



Anatomist declares the beauty of a woman



lies in the inside, and not the out iii. 152



Anatomy, terrors of ii. 184



, the study of, injures a lady's re-

putation .' ii. 20n



Antoninus, Marcus, not an emperor

among philosophers, being only a philoso-

phical emperor; analysis of his character... ii. 86n

Antediluvian World not so comforta-

ble as the present ii. 105n



. Furniture not yet found





out ii- 105n



Apollo, Belvedere, indecently put into



breeches iii. 168



__ , a fine address to,



and his fall iii. 170



Apples, alarming revolutions among i. ISO



Arts, Fine, how very early the passion begins



with the Amateurs i. 112n



Aunt, My, see My Uncle!



Author, our.andPERsius, easily frighten-

ed, which has spoilt many of their jokes... i. 105a





Author, an, how tricked by my Uncle's



criticism iii. 182



Authors, Modern, are ancients in dis-

guise.... ii. 223



the cause of their madness in



eating iii. 224



BLCKHDS, materials for a perpetual mo-

tion iii. 42



Baltimore, Lord, an amateur with an in-

come of 30,000, does not know what to

do with himself. i. 112n



Batchelor, a, described....... iii. 70



Battledore and Shuttlecock,class-

ed among the pursuits of literature i. 157



Bard, a modern i. 109



Blackamoor, white-washed ii. 190



Black and White, danger of breeding



pye-bald philosophers iii. 79



Bleeding, cures some ladies of their unlaw-

ful habits iii. I74n



Books, vide Literary Ware!



bought too cheap! iii. 197



Bowl and Dagger Scene, or my Aunt



cured of her passion for Vertu! iii. 172



Booksellers' Chairs, how ill-natured



they are!.., i. 169



Brandy, Philosophical, effects de-

scribed ii. 202n





Brandy, Philosophical, against drink-

ing, the great moral of this work iii. 278



Breeches, Cardinal VVolsey's, apology for ii. 20



Browns, the, and God Almighties' i. I28n



Bramin, a, over-done by a " moral motion" ii. 224

Bucephalus, why Alexander's horse was so



called iii. 252



Buffon, describes the earth to be like his



lava snuff-box . ii. 109



Burnet, short of water to cover his earth... ii. 99

Butterfly Hunters, their heroic suf-

ferings ii. 70n



Hunt, a ii. 119



Butterflies, the origin of their names... ii. 76n



Cabbages, in the dark, exquisite sensibili-

ties of ii. 60



Caco-nous, his character i. 103



————— specimen of his conjectures,

and imaginations, and notions, shew-

ing how a life of Milton, Junior,



may be written i. 12n



. modest about antenatal impres-





sions i. 30n



• attempts to prove that he is not





drunk iii. 248



his plan of a new system of





metaphysics on that of cheap silk

stockings i. 105





Caco-nous.how to invent a bullying one... i. HI

- • how stoically he behaves when



twitted by the Reviewers iii. 38



• makes my Uncle give up play-





ing on the violin, &c iii.



• frightens my Uncle by his ac-





count of anti-philosophical laughter... iii. 56

asserts that marriage in this





age is too trifling an occupation iii. 60



declares a wife will not give





up her system to her husband's hy-



pothesij iii. 71



• argues in favour of cuckoldom





and "public utility" iii. 139



• sits with an empty dish before





him! iii. 237



Camper, Professor, plunges into the fcctus



of a female negro i. 37n



— splits people's heads i. 44



invents a machine to measure a



man's head and genius i. 45



Cap, Lady's chemical, the better for burning ii. 14



a prismatic, on Newton's principles... iii. 115



Carter, Miss, studying Greek, admitted

every night into her bed—a great Dutch



clock i. 181



Chaptal, declares he resembles the Su-

preme Being! i. 87n



Children Unborn, how educated, and



why they know fluxions . i. 28n





Children to be wise, we must Endea-

Vour that they be born male i. 32n



————— described in the womb iii. 130



Chicken, hatched in the breast of a house-

maid ii. 42



Christian, a, no curious monster iii. 138



Chemists, how they threaten I i. 199n



Chemical Experiments frighten my Uncle i. 81



Chemistry introduced into Literature iii. 185n



Clapping, an Athenian custom ii. 145



Clouds shot dead, and their short-hand i. 148n



Constable, Arch, an, joins a crew of jo-

vial beggars iii. 1



Coals nothing but antediluvian timber ii. 106n



Commentator on Shakspeare cannot find



a joke of Shakspeare's iii. 197



Commentators, modern, some of their



discoveries, &c i. 10u



Constellation, the, how they received



theREviEWs! iii. 27



Contour indecently ogles Minerva i. 114



makes small presents to his



friends, and then maddens them to



buy at peppering prices i. 140



's Villa and Landscape Garden... i. 119



———— diets himself to paint devils i. 217



—— his eyes as tender as an owl's ii. 23



——— his objection against marriage ... iii. 68

————— loves my Aunt, and tenderly



breaks her arm iii. 143





Contour, his Greek feelings with my Aunt iii. 145



his Essay on Horns, refuses to



fight for it iii. 158



he gets kicked iii. 164



wants my Aunt to stand to him





as a model for Eve iii. 160



Cook, a chemist's preventive against her ani-

mal jelly , ii. 141



, a, fetched a higher price than a do-

zen of philosophers '. ii. 148



Collectors of Books, prefer an editio

princeps to their family without shirts and



shifts iii. 188



————— of Antiques, how hard-hearted



and ferocious to one another iii. 218n



Cousin, My, born with a white cap and a



red waistcoat iii. 135



Conscience, where it is placed i. 21



Critic, Town, A iii. 179



Critics, our Cook's opinion of ii. 150



Dead Man, attempts on the life of a ii. 205



Dedication, an Arcadian, aspecimenof



literary Cryptology i. 95ir



, a Bishop's, of a Welsh bible... i. 8



Del La-lena, Dr. interesting anecdote of



this rival to modern philosophers ii. 123



Digestion, the actof, very humiliating ... i.215 , how performed in linen bags. ii. 43

Digestion on, experiments humane ii. 50





Dinner, Literary, a iii. 229



Dinners, Booksellers'Sale iii. 226



Dramatist, Modern a, specimen of his



manualhumour iii. 248



, his wit and style ... iii. 250



Dresses, a short catalogue of antiquarian... ii. 21n

Dunghill a picturesque object i. 192n



Ear, for music, which some people have!... iii. 146

Earth-eating, its affinities to the sto-

mach, and best way to eat it ii. 134n



Earth-makers ii. 98



Earth-quake, a chemical, neither dear



nor tremendous i. 198n



Edinbro' Review, the, compared to



Vespasian's tax-money on urine i- 17n



their moon-stones, and



how they mean to gripe the moon by



their teeth ii. 4n



their new plan anatomized iii. 10

attack my Uncle's wig ... iii. 32





Electricity, at a route and a thunder-

storm i. 88n



Emetic, an, not yet discovered ii. 187



, the use of discovered by an anti-

quary iii. 216



Emperors, Purple, their manners from



twelve o'clock to four in the afternoon ii. 78n



Epigrams, would fetch no price by Adam



Smith's system .. i. J65





Erasmus, why he covered his head cannot



be accounted for. i. 187



Erudition, often consists of a knowledge of



the ignorance of former times i. 55



, curious, bantered by Cer-

vantes i. 208n



Eye, a painter's, cannot bear blue skies and



green lawns ii. 25



Faggots, bundle of, how to be explained . i. 92

Fame, Literary, my Uncle's, compared



to a pyramid iii. 267



Fichte, Professor, lucid analysis of the let-

ter I ii. 169



Flavour of ancient brass ii. 36



Flesh-colour Silk, my Aunt's, made a



bustle once with a Bishop iii. 152



Flies, inquiry respecting their ears iii. 121



, have nine kinds of movements iii. 122



, those who haunt well-covered tables iii. 260n



, my Uncle's address to his iii. 265



Flint-stone, Apostrophe to, by a vexed



and over-curious mineralogist ii. 108n



Freezing mercury, the same as heating it;

the bustle it made in the London Philo-

sophical Society i. 85n



Frogs,experiments on their respiration,and



how my Uncle put them into breeches ii. 45



Furniture, classical i. 121



Gall's craniognomy i. 47



VOL. III. V





Gall, Dr. how to discover pride/ in a man i. 48

Gaseous Oxyd, what it really is, and the



promises made on the occasion ii. 202



,—its effects minutely described ii. 202n



Geology, in, the Indians are no fools 2.116



German substitutes, and economical philo-

sophy ii. 130



Gimlets and Gimlet-holes, society for



the encouragement of iii. 41



Glum, Dr. prefers Martial to Virgil! iii. 193



Gold, kitchen utensils ought to be made of ii. 130n



in large masses, how it delights Mr.



Bepton i. 124n



Grecian Dress, at Christmas , iii. 149



Great Coat Old my, as good as a gift



to the three kingdoms! ii. 235



Greek Feeling, respecting eyes, wigs,



and shoes iii. H"



Grave-stone, Mr.buries his friends alive iii. 261



Gunpowder, incombustible, its use i. 159



Grjeculus, Dr. shakes the powder from

\ . his wig into my Uncle's eyes and ex-

hausts his wrath on a great pigeon-pie iii. 234

——— throws his own wig at Professor



Pours-on iii. 254



Hail, to prevent gathering in the clouds, a



premium offered ii. l8n



Heads, Camper's machine to measure i. 4£n



Herder, how my Uncle relished i. 213n

House, classical, a i. 119





Hieroglyphics, Egyptian, what they



contain i. 107n.



I, my Uncle metaphysics a Kantian with this



letter ii. 165



—, glossary for glossary ii. 172



Jews, how modest and pious at their evacua-

tions i. 215n



Jealousy, sharp discussion about "public



utility" and " private wrongs" iii. 139



Improver, an, shews a gentleman that he



didnot know the way to his own house i. 123n



, the clean circle of his ambition... i. 127



, compared to a crawling snail by

a dilettante i. 129n



Idea, my Uncle does not know what it is... ii. 157



Ink-horn, a literary, its use i. 161



Institution, Royal, the Lecturers



shamefully served at a penny a head iii. 262



Irritation, the source of the picturesque,

and the character of the picturesquists

themselves i. 132n



Kant drunk and sober at the same time ... ii. 172n writes de modo cacandi, but never



could cure a smoky head ii. 174n



Kantian, a, how to smoke adevil, and ii. 176n



Kaukizomenous, anecdote of three Greeks



and a goose iii. 230





Key-hole, experiments on in Optics and



Acoustics iii. 89n



Kill-joy, in a passion that my Uncle



laughed iii. 55



, his discovery that French women



have no hats ! I I iii. 53n



Kirwan, Mr. discovers an old world, and



is only granted a lease of three short years ii. 98n

Kitchen philosophy, disputes of my Uncle



with our Cook ii. 135



Ladies boarded and educated for the service



of the heavens iii. 86



, travelled, examine naked statues ... iii. 162n



Lan Dsc A PR-garden, a i. 127



Lauderdale, Lord, placed in a cruel si-

tuation by replying to the Ed. Beviewers... iii. 14n



Laughter, how my Uncle liked it iii. 54



, of its dangers iii. 56



, a modern Philo does not know



whether he may laugh iii. 55n



Lavaterist-anti, an ii. 218



Letter, Miss Eleanora's, with postscripts... ii. 15

Life, Laws Of, may be discovered yet, by

new experiments and new modes of re-

search ii. 131n



Light and Heat, how conveyed back to



infinite space! iii. 95n



Li Nnjeus's primitive world ii. 112n



Literary Tortures described by an an-

cient writer i. 168n





Literary Tortures of my Uncle and



. the Swede i. 172



__ Ware first measured and af-

terwards weighed! i. 164



Longings of pregnant ladies iii. 132



Love-secret, a iii. 63



Literati certain, what kind offriends they



are iii- 30



———— will exchange a dedication for the



smoke of a kitchen chimney iii. 223



, one of them complains his gul-

let is not a yard long iii. 224



Man discovered to be only an alimentary



canal i. 213



Marriage, the subject debated by various



dramatis personie of science and taste iii. 67



Matter, on tbefigure of the first parti-

cles of ii. 115



Mineralogist, a, flim-flammed ii. 108n



Milton's maid mistakes a week in her

reckoning ; the consequences and discove-

ries thereof i. 12n



Milton, Junior, a proposed life of i. J2n



Monkey, may be a gentleman, but cannot



be converted into a Christian ii. 160



Monsters, fathers of, comforted by Dr.



Munro iii. 131



Moon, the, alarming conjecture concerning ii. 7



Moral Motion, ina Bramin ii.l!24





Mountains, those who study them carry



their heads very high ii. 113a



Murders of naturalists ii. 48



Naturalist, amatory gifts of a iii. 109



Neptunists and Plutonists, placed

between fire and water, lead a disputatious



life ii. 93



Non-existences frighten a sentimentalist ii. 221

Nutrition, science of, consists in eating



little, and fatiguing the jaws a great deal... ii. 133



Oriental Bard, an, his ode to Visthnu iii. 219

Otho, the emperor, my Uncle gets him



just as his premier would have wished iii. 209



Oven, a heated, a pair of philosophers walk



into i. 78n



to bake pictures ii. 29



Outline, chaste, is something which ought



never to be seen i. 116n



Pic Nigs, sober entertainments known to



the ancients iii. 266n



Pedestrian, a sublime, in search of the



"moral motion" ii. 220



a minor, inquiries about his



sweet linen, cobbled shoes, &c iL 228



Pen, a hindrance to a man's thinking and



writing at the same time i. 183



Picture Of A Thing, is the thing itself! ii. 27





Picturesqueness, too sesquipedalian, a



violin i. 192n



PiCTUREsauisTS, their vexation at trees



growing i. 135



t heir weak eyes ii. 24n



—— a, sees in Wales a sun no



Welshman ever saw ii. 231



Pig, how to drive an obstinate iii. 44



Pin, metaphysical, a, can never prick ii. 158



Polyglot, whether written on paper or



vellum, solemnly discussed iii. 189n



Planet, what a, may turn out to be iii. 125



Pours-on, Professor, his brandy duel iii. 256



Plants are Cousins toman ii. 62n



Poems, Modern, how my Uncle decides on iii. 180



Post-chaise driven by a steam-engine iii. 45



PoRTRAiTSof modern public characters iii. 204n



'pourquoi of the PouRftuoi i. 33n



Pregnancy, how awoman may go eleven



months iii. 137n



Pudding, hot hasty, how to take by siege... i. 77

Print-collecting, anecdotes of iii. 199



Quack! Quack! Quack! see Dr.

Delia Lena and his rivals.



Quarrels, literary, how my Uncle re-

duced them to grammatical construction ... iii. 34



, recent, some, noticed iii. 34n



Ray spoils the second edition of his Proverbs



by his cleanliness i. 216n





Readers should have their temperaments



suited to the work i. 7



Hi,in, Dr. left alone in the world by Bishop

Berkeley, without father, brother, or wife,



only with bundles of ideas ii. 155n



Review, New, A, plan of iii. 10



Reviewer, a, morality of iii. 259



Row, The, their hollow instrument, &c. ... i. 20



, their morality i. 21



, their intrepidity i. 22



, how they drudge at low wages.. L 22



Saturn, Herder consoles himself with not



having been born in that planet H. 183



Scriblerus, Martinus, the moderns





stand indebted to that great man i. 53n



Sea, depth of the, a quarrel about ii. lOn



Sentimentalist, a, frightened at non-en-

tities, weeps whenever he arrives at a city,

and sees Shakspeare on the banks of the

Avon ii. 227



, affecting anecdote of a iii. 241



Sentimentalists, a society of, how they



behave , ii. 233n



Shades at dinner, see Flies!



Sleep, Caco-nous would banish this pheno-

menon, but unluckily persists writing i. 181



, Dr. Beddoes also thinks it may be

wholly dispensed with bytisgas ii. 201





Skulls, a dissertation on, containing thesys-



temsof Lav Ater,Camper, and Gall i. 41



Solitude, portable, its great benefits i. 204



Spain, Queen Of, hunted by my Uncle in



a postchaise ii. 77



Spiders, eating, why and wherefore ii. 48n



Statues, feats of gallantry, performed with,



by the amateurs i. 115n



Steevens, Mr. writes bawdy notes to

Shakspeare, under the noms de guerre of



Collins and Amner „ i. lln



Stones falling from the Moon ii. 4n



- vegetate, and have been very lively



and animated ii. 65



Sun, chit-chat about the iii. 94



, landscapes in the iii. 95n



and the Earth, what produces their



constant fermentation , iii. 97



Sons, a couple of, or a Parhelia, how a philo-

sopher may happen to see them ii. 16



Swearing, reasonable, ventilates the soul... ii. 87



, natural, more innocent than



psalm-singing ii. 159



Tailor, a poet who is anxiousnot to be con-

sidered as a ii. 147n



Tailors, blown up by a chemical earth-

quake without any injury i. 194



Temple-bar designed as an approach to a



Banker's landscape garden i. 134a

Theory, what that thing is ii. 96





Thievery, Literary, its morality iii. 206



Thinking, A Pit Of i. 162n



Toad, A Family, conjectured to be the na-

turalist's lady iii. 112n



Toads in stones, their eggs a thousand years



older than the toads! ii. 17n



Too-many, Mr. his alarm respecting popu-

lation iii. 237



, calculates the mouths of men and



the tails of animals iii. 245



Topsy-turvy, Mr. some of his projects ... iii. 45

Translator, a, who will not die in harness iii. 254

Travelling, hints for learned ii. 209



Vaili.ant, travels through Africa to disco-

ver black-beetles; Madame's private opi-

nion of him ii. 52n



Valchiusa, Dick's • i. 144



Vases, Etrubcan ii. 33





Vegetables, very feeling kinds of animals ii. 58n

Vulgate, the, by Pope Sixtus V. valuable



for its numerous blunders iii. 192n



Uncle, My, conjectured to have been an



old woman with a diminutive head ... i. 33



his erudition and philology i. 55



similied on by his neighbours i. 63



———— excels in the anti-sublime i. 74



———— as a chemist has a duel with nature i. 81





U N c L E , M Y , of the »se of an absurdity for his



premises, and of his brain i. 153



. desires Camper to pick out a large

head among three hundred Dutch



students.. i. 158



• . converts the Swede into an ink-horn

and a makeweight... i. 160



——— his literary tortures "to awaken



the mind," as Caco-nous said i. 173



—— invents a portable solitude L 205



he and Herder want man to



have been created without a stomach



and a belly „.. .i. 214



. invents a ventilator in his hat, to



keep a continual freshness about his



head ii. 13



. apology for a pair of breeches . ... ii. 20



his relish for brass ii. 38



. his murders, &c. in natural history ii. 39



his exquisite feelings in the same ii. 57



—— becomes an aurelian, and sends to



India butterfly-flappers ii. 80



in a ditch disserts on our geological



systems ii. 97



caught in his own net ii. 120.



——— promises gold in the kitchen, but



gives us only bone soups ii. 129



. his " science of nutrition" laughed



at by our cook ii. 132





Uxci /t, MY, affects to beaMecznas, and how

his protegee, our cook, served him in

hei second edition ii. 151



metaphysics disturb his digestions ii. 155



'out-kantians professor Fichte... ii. 167



——— consults the apothecary ii. 180



• gets ana'hematised, as an atheist for

washing a blackamoor white ii. 195



bis gas, procures much false swear-

ing about ii. 199



moves in a lively manner the ears



of a dead ass! ii. 205



attempts to feed the Edinbro' Be-



viewers iii. 24



^——— his wig attacked ! the consequences

thereof; gets himself perpetually

flouted! iii. 33



some of his projects submitted to



the society for the encouragement of

gimlets and gimlet-holes iii. 41



his honest crack of laughter spoilt



by Kill-joy iii. 54



——— consults his friends on marriage... iii. 67



—^—— frightened from his principle of



conjugal union iii. 99



his first assignation with Urania... iii. 83



•' — is an electrified lover! iii. 102



———. plumbs down into a philosophical



self-supplying cistern iii. llg





Uncle, My, disappointed at not being a



planet iii. 125



jealous of an ape iii. 134



allows cuckoldom is to be tolerated



in society, but will not allow it in his



own house iii. 139



———— alarmed at Contour's ardours and



raptures iii. 145



is gored by the horns of Bacchus... iii. 153



— kicks our Raphael iii. 163



. turns out a mere Goth; demolishes



the Apollo Belvedere, with his tragi-

cal attack of my Aunt iii. 167



becomes a town-critic iii. 179



. _— a collector of rare books,





and a rival of Dr. Glum iii. 187



——— a print collector iii. 199



——— from a collector turns out to be a



thief iii. 209



. attacks his shades and his //<«, with



reasons why he gives no more literary



dinners iii. 265



final conversation with his dutiful



nephew iii. 269



, . how he escapes from the Fleet, by



inhaling too much of the gaseous



oxyd!!! iii. 277



Understanding, the, probably liable to



humps, boils, and chilblains ii. 186





Weather, extreme hot or cold, produces

great crimes iii. 158n

Whiston drowns the world without carrying off the waters ii. 109

Wig, an attempt on my Uncle's iii. 30

, Dr. Parr's, likewise attempted iii. 29n

Winds, how to bridle the i. 146n

Wines, Prick Ed, and Scotch metaphysics,

atruecaseof ii. 181

Winkelman, his morbidezza in travelling respecting angular terminations and perpendicular sharpnesses i. 113n

Women, my Uncle delivers all the ancients

said against iii. 73

—— , what their tears are iii. 165

Woman, a handsome young, is more valuable than a statue, because she is continually exhibiting a great number of

outlines i. 116n

, an anatomist prefers her inside to

her outside I iii. 152

Woodward makes the- globe a piece of

shell-work ii. 101

World, the present, a mere breaking-up of

the preceding world ii. 103n

Words without meaning, Dr. Reid confesses, are made use of by philosophers ... ii. 157n Writing-hand, indicative of the moral

character i. 186n

FINIS.





C. WHII T1NGHAM, Printer, Dr-m Street.
