MODERN BRITISH 



AUTHORS. 



THE PRINCESS. 

BY LADY MORGAN. 



IN ONE VOLUME. 



rrnf)niw 



BRUSSELS : 

AD. WAHLEN, PRINTER TO THE COURT. 

FRANKFORT O M : 

FRED. "WILMANS , MAGAZINE OF ARTS AND LITERATURE. 



1835. 













i 


Vv 




\ :■ 





THE PRINCESS. 



BRUSSELS : 

PRINTED BY AD. WAHLETV, PRINTER AND BOOKSELLER TO THE COURT. 



THE 



PRINCESS; 

OR 

THE BEGUINE. 

BY LADY MORGAN , 
AUTHOR OF "O'DONNEL," ETC. 



" She was one of those kind of nuns, an' please your honour, of which your 
honour knows there are a good many in Flanders, which they let go loose. "— " By 
thy description, Trim," said my Uncle Toby, "I dare say she was a young Beguine." 

Tristram Shandy. 



AD. WAHLEN, PRINTER TO THE COURT. 
FRANKFORT O/M : 

FRED. WILMANS, MAGAZINE OF ARTS AND LITERATURE. 
1838. 




I 



THE PRINCESS. 

CHAPTER I. 



THE OPERA. 

Croiriez-vous que je reviens de l'Opera ! La fete se faisait pour l'abbe" 
Arnauld. qui n'en a pas vu, depuis Urbain VIII, qu'il eHait a Rome. II en a 
e"te" fort content ; je suis chargee des complimens de toute sa loge. 

Lettres de Madame de Sevigne, vol. in. p. 10. 

A party at the Opera arranged for the special entertainment of 
the bishop of Angers, one of the most pious prelates of the Gallican 
church, and in the reign, too, of one of the most pious of the French 
kings! A strange trait of manners this, and yet one only in a 
myriad, proving that hostility to theatrical exhibitions formed no 
principle of the church's original system. 

By the introduction of ' mysteries,' the clergy laid the foundation 
for the revival of the drama— fallen into oblivion, with the other 
arts of civilization, on the destruction of the Roman empire. Dra- 
matic entertainments also were long the favourite festivities in the 
palaces of Roman cardinals ; and even popes did not disdain to pa- 
tronise the stage ; while the episcopal church of England, long after 
the restoration of the Stuarts, showed its abhorrence of puritanical 



i. 



6 



THE PRINCESS. 



republicanism by its indulgence to the drama, to which some of its 
members directly contributed. 

The private theatricals of Whitehall are on pleasant record. The 
duke's daughters, the ladies Mary and Anne (the future most ortho- 
dox queens of England), played in the same pieces with Mesdames 
Knight, Davis, and Butler, and " the cattel of that sort," as Evelyn 
phrases it; and the king's chaplains and the church's prelates assisted 
with as little reserve as the French bishop of Angers showed in 
visiting Madame de Sevigne's box at the Grand Opera. 

Down to the middle of the long reign of George the Third, the 
stage was considered as a subsidiary school for morals, and the Opera 
as a royal academy of arts. Both escaped alike the reprobation and 
the interference of spiritual legislation ; and it was not until the 
downfal of the French church, in the summit of its power, wealth, 
and abuses, had given the alarm to all other churches, that an 
ultra-rigorous observance of ceremonious forms, savouring more of 
Calvin than of Luther, decreed that, at the King's Theatre of London, 
the curtain should drop on Saturday nights precisely as the clock 
struck twelve. It mattered not what interests might be broken, 
what unities violated, what entrechats might be left uncut, what 
pirouettes suspended : the curfew-bell of the olden times tolled not 
with more effect than the prompter's bell knelled the parting Satur- 
day night, and ushered in the dawn of the coming Sabbath. 

Sin and sanctity thus brought into juxta-position even to an instant 
of time, the interdiction seems to have operated as an excitement; 
and Saturday night became a vogue, from the very anathema which 
sought to place it under the ban of public opinion. For nearly the 
quarter of a century afterwards, a box upon that night doubled its 
value ; and the lessees found an indemnity in this harvest for the 
losses incurred by those less productive representations which the 
church's censure had not rendered fashionable. 

In the summer of 1835, there were added to the charm of fashion 
the more intrinsic attractions of a rare combination of professional 
excellence. Genius of the highest order— Rossini, Mozart, and 
Bellini,— talents of the very first calibre— Pasta, Malibran, Ilubini, 
Tamburini, and Taglioni— ruled, each at the head of their several 
departments, over the passions and tastes of society. 

Illustrators of arts which none can profess but the highly-organized 



THE PRINCESS. 



7 



( the " exclusives" of nature's own selection), they would have re- 
ceived from poetical antiquity the highest honours : for what did 
antiquity possess — what have its sciences or its arts left, in poetry or 
marble, superior to the dramatic pathos of the ' Medea,' or the en- 
chanting graces of the ' Sylphide' ! 

It happened that the hottest Saturday night of the hot month of 
June, in the season alluded to, witnessed the closest-packed audience 
at the King's Theatre, that any King's Theatre at any season ever 
exhibited. Not a stall was vacant, not a seat in the pit was unoc- 
cupied; while the boxes, teeming with beauty and resplendent with 
dress, rendered the spectacle devant la scene as attractive as that 
upon it. Neither the sombre magnificence of the Scala, nor the 
fairy glories of San Carlos, are comparable, for general effect, to 
the spectacle presented on such a night in the Opera-house of Lon- 
don. The theatres of Italy are antique temples ; the theatres of 
Germany are dark dens ; but the London Opera-house, malgre its 
calico draperies and paltry decorations, is a Colosseum of living 
beauty and brilliancy unmatched in Europe. 

The cause of the unusual concourse, on this particular night, 
was the concentration of all the talents which had each separately 
filled the house on former representations — the brightest inspira- 
tions of Rossini and Bellini— the union of the high classical seria of 
Pasta, with the brilliant and pure buffa of Maiibran, and the poetry 
of Taglioni's epic dance ! 

Every corner therefore was crowded, save only that one box 
which, as in a microcosm, is wont to contain the very quintessen- 
tiality of the fashion and ton of London. This box, destined to be 
known to posterity by the style and title of " the Omnibus, " lies in 
the pit tier, on the left or king's side of the house, and so close to the 
stage, that the Marquis of Montressor, its doyen and founder, num- 
bered from it, for a wager, every spangle on the glittering slipper of 
Fanny Elsler, as she paused from her tiptoe pose, to curtsey her 
gratitude for applause to the house in general, and to his lordship in 
particular. 

In the seventeenth century, the bel air of Paris took their station 
on the stage, within view of the audience, some in ball-dresses, 
some " en bandit; " while those of the same class and rank, who 
happened to have been discovered in forgeries, or other frauds, then 



8 



THE PRINCESS. 



in vogue at the court, took refuge among the footmen. In the 
nineteenth century, the bel air of London resorted to the Omnibus 
—a joint-stock company assemblage of supreme ton and hypercri- 
tieism. 

The origin of this incorporation probably lay in a desire to judge 
of the points and steps of the priestesses of Terpsichore with the 
naked eye; but, like many other foundations, it soon derogated 
from its primeval character, and became the vogue, without refe- 
rence to any particular object. It was the fashion to be a member 
of the Omnibus, because the numbers were limited— because it 
enabled a man to cut his mother's family box, to get rid of his wife's 
set. or to have a house of refuge against the necessity of occupying 
his own high-paid place in the box of some autocratess of fashion, 
to which it is a distinction to subscribe and a bore to be confined. 

The subscription-list of the Omnibus was always complete in its 
numbers, vacancies being promptly filled, and transferable tickets, 
though not strictly forbidden, difficult to be had. Usually, however, 
it remained empty till the close of the Opera ; but it was de rigueur 
that it should have its complement of connoisseurship by the first 
act of the ballet. 

The ' Cenerentola ' and the ' Anna Bolena ' had exhausted the 
extremes of sensation, leaving no cool suspense between all that is 
exquisite in pleasure and in pain ; and the ' Sylphide ' had already 
winged her airy flight up the chimney, but the Omnibus was still 
unoccupied, except by the eternal Marquis 3Iontressor, who, true to 
the first bar of the overture of the ballet, sat with his elbows resting 
on the front of the box, his chin upon his hands, his soul {tale 
quale) in his eyes, and his eyes on the ' ; many-twinkling feet " of 
some favourite odalisque of the evening. Uttering his bravas, 
t4 deep but not loud, " he remained so absorbed, that even the 
opening of the box-door, its being shut with a violence that called 
forth the disapprobation of the pit, and the pouncing of a new-comer 
on the seat beside him, failed to withdraw his attention from a per- 
formance which he was seeing for the twenty-second time. 

Nothing in nature or in art could be more opposite than the mem- 
bers of this tete-d-tete. Lord Montressor was formed in the prodi- 
gality of nature as to the materiel. His corpulency resisted every 
restraint of art ( and none was spared) to shape it into symmetry. 



THE PROCESS. 



g 



His countenance resisted every attempt to mould it to any expression 
more decided than the languishing simper of a ci-devant jeune 
Ziomme, or the sneer of aristocratic morgue. High and hard living 
had alone left its trace and tint on a face which afforded a broad 
field for the display of both ; and " bewiggcd, though not t; rou- 
ged," at forty-six, his lordship exhibited one of the last remaining 
impersonations of the profligacy and ton which the then nearly- 
extinct court of Carlton-house had left behind it. 

The new-arrival, on the contrary, was a prime-of-life man, and 
of a totally different appearance. His tall, slight, undulating figure 
still retained an air of youthful elasticity ; but high temples, and a 
brow indented with the impressions of thought, denoted a longer 
acquaintance with the realities of life. Clusters of light chestnut 
curls were thrown off the forehead almost to the back of a finely- 
formed head. A complexion pale to sickliness, fine but deep-set 
eyes, a restless and unquiet glance, a brow in perpetual movement, 
and an expression of malaise, clouding — almost distorting — a very 
intellectual countenance, — assigned Sir Frederick Mottram ( in a 
moral sense at least) to the " uneasy classes " of society. 

He was altogether a fine specimen of the Saxon race, of which a 
few only, in right of their wealth, sometimes find their way among 
the Norman gentry of the land. Though well dressed, he still wanted 
something of the air of fashion which was spread over the naturally 
vulgar form of the highly-descended Marquis,— something of that 
conventional mystery, so difficult to define, and so unworthy of the 
effort to analyse it : but he supplied the deficiency by a characteristic 
nonchalance , the result, perhaps, of apathy, or of ill health. He 
was near-sighted also, and looked as if he only saw the world through 
the medium of a clearing-glass. 

On entering the Omnibus, he flung himself on a seat, with his 
back against the partition of the neighbouring box, and turned from 
the audience; but his eyes were not directed to the stage — they were 
closed against its brilliancy. After a few minutes, however, he took 
up an opera-glass, reconnoitred the house, and throwing up a look 
malign askance 99 at the opposite tier, he again suddenly withdrew 
his eyes, opened the libretto of the "Norma, " and commenced read- 
ing that ode to the living Norma, whose poetry is so far beyond 
the usual strain of such compositions. 



10 



THE PRINCESS. 



It was not till Lord Montressor (whose brother, Lord John, was 
the husband of Sir Frederick Mottram's only sister ) had bravoed off 
his Cynthia of the minute, " and thrown himself back in his chair 
to repose his hands and eyes during the performance of the figu- 
rantes, that he perceived the presence of the new spectator. The 
discovery gave to his vacant face a slight expression of astonish- 
ment. 

•• Hollo ! Mottram," he said, wi you here ! cosa vara ! To think 
of you being anywhere but at St. Stephen's ! Have you got a 
subscription, or did my brother John leave you his ticket? Poor 
fellow! I know it is in the market. " (Lord John had recently 
lcva?ited to Paris. ) 

His lordship's question was negatived in a tone expressive of as 
much disgust and contempt as a monosyllable could convey. 

" You very rarely honour the Opera with your presence now. 
continued Lord Montressor, yawning. 

" Very rarely," was the sulky reply. 

4 - Do you really never go to your own box, —that is. to Lady 
Frances's?" 
- Never. " 

" You, too. who are such a fanatico for music!" 
That perhaps is the reason. : ' 

" Why, they do keep up an infernal noise there. Since they have 
thrown Lady Frances's and the Princess of Schaffenhausen's boxes 
into one ; they have always a set of noisy boys about them— sucking 
senators, dandy guardsmen, and pert attaches. Devilish bad taste 
that— it would have sunk a woman in the good old times of the 
Regency ! No man was qualified for service then under forty— just as 
in the French Chambers. " 

Lord Montressor raised his glass, and fixing it at Lady Frances's 
box, he asked. Who is that beau blondin peeping over your wife's 
shoulder? " 

• Don't know in the least. ,: 

" Why. how the devil should you, with your back turned, and your 
eyes shut ! Oh. Isee ; it is cousin Claude Campbell— petit page d'a- 
ftttmr, as the Princess calls him. Lady Frances has more of his ser- 
vices than their Royal Highnesses— I suppose she gives him more 
sugar-plums! Look at the little villain, nestling between Lady 



THE PRINCESS. 



11 



Frances and the Princess ! He is in waiting, too, this week ; but 
the Duke, perhaps, is in the House.— I say, Mottram, will you dine 
with me on the twentieth ? I must have him— I mean the Duke: 
shall I send your name in the list? " 
" No. " 

" What, not meet the Duke! Par cxemplel You are not going to 
take office under the Whigs, are you?" 
" No!" 

" Why won't you meet his Royal Highness, then?" 
" Because I am engaged. " 

" Engaged! Nonsense — that goes for nothing when one is invited 
to meet the royalties— Brava, brava, bravissima ! " 

The return of the dancing deity, at whose shrine Lord Montressor 
worshipped, cut short his comment on the etiquette of royal invita- 
tions ; for she was cutting a pirouette immediately under his eye. 
He saw he was danced at; and his idle garrulity gave place to the 
gratification of a vanity which was never idle. He nodded his con- 
sciousness of her implied homage to his judgment, and gave free 
scope to his rapturous connoisseurship. 

" Brava, bi~ava, la petite Mimmie I pas mat, la belle enfant! 
That girl improves rapidly; she wants only muscle— nothing but 
that. It may easily be acquired. Do you know, you may train a 
figure to anything! — may indeed— quite a science. I'll tell you how 
I manage with Mimmie : I tie up her ankles in bootikins like a race- 
horse, make her steep her feet in arrow-root when she comes off the 
stage, and never allow her to sup on anything heavier than the wing 
of a gelinotte, which I import for her from Brussels. — Apropos to 
gelinottes and to Brussels — we had the Belgian business on in our 
House last night, so I bolted early. I have had enough of c the happy 
effects' of the protocol system; they are abundantly exemplified in 
national bankruptcy and a standing army— don't you think so?" 

64 No. " 

" Why, you spoke the other night as if you did: you ridiculed 
Palmerston's ' early settlement of the Belgico-Dutch question. 1 " 

Sir Frederick either did not, or would not hear this remark. 

" By the bye, " continued Lord Montressor, " what have you been 
doing in your House to-night ; for it seems you sat this evening par 
extraordinaire, Aubrey told me you got a mauling from one of 



12 



THE PRLNCESS. 



the Irish Jlimbers, one of your ' honourable friends in the dirty 
shirt.' Ha! ha! ha! You took nothing from the Paddies, you 
see, by your Relief vote ! We told you half-and-half men that long 
ago, but you would not believe us.— Brava, dirty Sal ! How she 
flounders and flounces about, poor fat thing ! 

'"Do you know why she is called dirty Sal? for, parparenthese, 
she's as fresh as a rose. It's because she's put off with all the cast 
dresses of the wardrobe — C'est une si bomie pdte! I remember 
her quite beautiful. She was a mere child in D'Egville's time, and 
fit fortune in fc La Belle Laitiere. ' She was then very near ma- 
king head against Parisot— she was indeed ! but she fell early into 
fat. It was your wife, above all persons in the world, told me she 
was called dirty Sal. Claude Campbell told her. You know, I 
suppose, that he is a little prince de coulisse? I never miss him at 
a repetition of a new ballet. A promising boy that— nothing like 
a year's diplomacy at Vienna, to finish a Westminster boy. They 
say it was you got him made an attache, and sent him away to get 
rid of him, because he was such a nuisance! Always stumbling 
over him, like a French poodle or a footstool. " 

" Then they say a confounded lie ! " burst forth Sir Frederick 
jlottram vehemently, and throwing down the libretto. " 1 have no 
interest with the ministry; and if I had, I should not exert it for 
such a whelp as that." 

"Yes,— he's just that— spoiled by the women. I hear he was 
recalled for riding at the public races in a tri-coloured jacket, while 
the Excellency, his chef actually rode his own famous Principessa 
in orange silk— no joke that. But you're not going, are you, before 
Taglioni has danced her pas seul?" 

Sir Frederick had risen unconsciously ; every muscle was in move- 
ment, his whole frame tremulous with irascibility. 

" Oh! so, if you are going to your wife's box, I'll go with you. 
I want to make my excuses to the Princess for not supping with her 
to night;" and he added significantly, " Je donne a souper, my- 
self. There is such a rage for suppers on Saturday nights after 
the Opera! I wonder Sir Andrew does not attack it. Shall we 
go? " 

Sir Frederick resumed his seat, and throwing his arm on the box, 
and directing his attention to the divine dancing of Taglioni, replied, 



THE PROCESS. 



13 



" I am not going to my wife's box ; but pray dont 't let me interfere 
with you." 

"1 see you are out of sorts to-night, Mottram — all ajar. Aubrey 
told me that they had badgered you in the House into one of your 
fits of humour. You broke loose, he said, in a fine style— quite 
Demosthenic— and were left on your legs in your second hour, 
when he came away. " 

"Which makes silence and a seat a great luxury, " said Sir Frede- 
rick languidly, and resuming his old position. 

" Yes, you have the air of being devilishly bored , just now. " 

" Just now, I am, " was the sharp reply. 

"A pleasant bear-garden your House of Commons. — the 6 Reformed 
Deformed, ' as Lord Allington calls them! and, what's worse, such a 
set of vulgarians, whose acquaintance you are obliged to admit out, 
as well as in the House ! You must be continually exposed to com- 
ing in contact with some talking blockhead. " 

" I am, " said Sir Frederick, " very much exposed. " 

" Were I you, " said lord Montressor, pointing his glass at the 
opposite side, " I would cut dead—" 

" I should like it much," said Sir Frederick, with irrepressible 
petulance. 

" Well, 1 must go to the Belgian Princess, and make my excuse. 
Her German etiquette is so susceptible, you have no idea. " 

Lord Montressor then rose, hurried on his fool's cap without its 
bells, and left the box as the curtain dropt on the first act of the 
ballet. 

Sir Frederick settled himself into a corner, in the full luxury of 
that solitude which it is possible to enjoy even in an opera box. 
Bringing his glass to the proper focus and to a permanent position, 
he rivetted his entire attention on the interior of his wife's box ; for 
he had come to the Opera that night from the House of Commons, 
for the purpose of watching the movements of some of its occupants. 

Lady Frances Mottram, an epitome of English female fashion, 
resembled in her look and air the beauties of the Whitehall galaxy 
of Charles the Second's court. Fair, fade, and languishing, her 
dress, and full blonde tresses frisees au naturel, gave her the 
character of one of Sir Peter Lely's portraits, " stepped from out 
its "—frame. Her type was La belle Jennings; and as far as 



14 



THE PRINCESS. 



depended upon her historical costume, her success was perfect. 
Still extremely handsome, if she had ceased to be extremely young, 
she wore the appearance of one in perpetual ambuscade, pour sur- 
p?*endre les coeurs, with all that coquetry which, on the verge of 
middle life, seeks to catch the lingering charm of youth, and to fix 
by art the influence which nature once commanded without an 
effort. 

In a dress which, in less fantastic times, would have rendered her 
the object of the night, — and which, even in the actual era ofpictorial 
effect, infringed on the licence of fashion beyond all example, save 
that of her eccentric foreign friend and inseparable companion, the 
Princess of Schaffenhausen— Lady Frances Mottram sat in evidence 
before two thousand spectators with the same ease and indifference 
as she would have done in her own drawing-room ; her head thrown 
back, her fine arm stretched to its utmost length in the front of the 
box, and her full sleeve of white brocade falling over it with an 
effect which tempted an Irish artist, * on the opposite side of the 
house, to sketch her for a figure in his admirable collection of an- 
tique costumes. She was listening with downcast eyes to some 
observation of the Princess of Schaffenhausen, who stood in profile 
to the audience, as if in the act of departure, and, as it seemed to 
the intense gaze of Sir Frederick, of dictation. 

The appearance of the Princess was, indeed, that of one to whom 
the consciousness of some special supremacy gave a right to dictate. 
Her figure was erect, her outline severe, her hand raised, and her 
forefinger pointed, as if in warning or reproof. She was dressed 
in a costume of other times, and of a country and society more 
remote than that adopted by Lady Frances. The widow of a Belgian 
Prince, of a Count of the Empire and a Grand d'Espagne, she 
had assumed the singular habiliments in which a former Princess of 
Schaffenhausen {camerara mayor to the Queen of Philip the Fifth) 
was painted by Velasquez, in a picture still extant in her collection 
abroad, and of which a copy, by the Princess's own pencil, orna- 
mented her house in London. 

The dress was black, rich in its texture, and voluminous in its 
folds; but it fitted closely to the long waist and well-defined bust, 



* Probably Mr. Franklin. 



THE PRINCESS. 



15 



which was covered by the sabingas (a chemise of old point lace), 
gathered round the throat. From her girdle, which was composed 
of gems and medals, hung a cordon of some ecclesiastical order, ter- 
minated by a cross of rubies. From a knot of brilliants, at the head 
of her stomacher, fell several chains of pearls, each holding an Agnus 
Dei. Her hair, of a dark gold colour ( whether false or her own ). 
was parted above her dark brows, and fell on either side in wavy 
tresses. Her forehead was bound by a small black band ; and the 
whole most singular figure was set off, rather than concealed, by the 
Spanish mantilla of rich black lace which dropped round her, from 
the top of her fine-formed head, to the extreme edge of her long and 
flowing drapery. As she thus stood erect and commanding, con- 
trasted with the recumbent figure and fair face of her English friend, 
and in the strong relief of the crimson drapery of the back-ground, 
the picture was perfect. It was a Leonardo da Vinci, and recalled 
that most beautiful of painted allegories, (the treasure of the palace 
Sciara,) " Modesty rebuking Vanity; " it was Reason dictating to 
Folly. 

Sir Frederick Mottram breathed thick and short as he gazed. He 
then lowered his glass, as if to relieve his strained eyes, and then 
again he resumed it, till the combination which had attracted him was 
dissolved. The Belgian Princess had departed; and in her place, 
vis-a-vis to his wife, and playing with her large fan, appeared a 
creature as fair and as frivolous as herself. It was the young ex- 
attache of the British embassy at Vienna — the gentleman of the bed- 
chamber of a Royal Duke — the petit page cV amour of the Princess 
of Schaffenhausen, and the handsome little cousin and godson of Lady 
Frances,— Claude Campbell. 

Sir Frederick laid aside his glass, resumed his seat with his back 
to the audience , folded his arms, closed his eyes, and waited for 
the conclusion of the ballet, with the strange intention of joining 
his wife in the Round-room, and, for the first time for many years, 
of accompanying her home. 

He had scarcely taken up his position, when a flush of young 
men ( the regular occupants of the Omnibus ), who had returned 
from a white-bait dinner at Greenwich, burst in. Sir Frederick 
immediately burst out, and entered the first box which lay open 
and empty. It still breathed of the ether which its blasee and 



16 



THE PROCESS. 



hysterical mistress, the Duchess of , always left behind her. 

Originally part of a double box. it had. on some sudden disso- 
lution of a capricious partnership, been separated by a thin, ill- 
constructed partition, hastily throw n up ; and its counterpart was 
then occupied (to judge by the variety of jargons spoken among its 
inmates.) by a foreign congress. The company were, in fact, the 
representatives of the haut ton of the season, foreign and 
domestic. 

Of its fluctuating society there remained, at the moment when 
Sir Frederick came into such close contiguity, but few. Of these 
Lord Allington ( the wit tit re of the day ) was the most distin- 
guished. 

Lord Allington. who. like his great prototype. " never said a 
foolish thing, nor ever did a wise one. " was one of those who 
bring talent into disrepute by indiscretions which, in the dull, 
pass unnoticed. His fashion, however, had survived his dilapidated 
fortunes ; and he said so many pleasant things on his own ruin, 
that it seemed as if he had sacrificed his wealth to his wit. 
His epigrams still passed current, when his notes did not : and he 
got credit for his bons-mots. though he had lost it at his tailor's. 
He had borrowed the box for the evening from an old amateur 
Duke. who. having become deaf, now went only to the German 
opera ; and he had devoted it to the especial service of the Honour- 
able Mr. and Mrs. St. Leger. recent arrivals from the Conti- 
nent : with the latter he was au:c petit s soins— and with the 
former, a subject of that timid aversion which " dulness ever 
bears to wit. upon instinct. 

3Ir. and Mrs. St. Leger were a rather popular couple ; for 
she was a flirt, and he was a fool. Each therefore, by represent- 
ing a very large class in the world of fashion, obtained a consi- 
derable portion of its suffrages. Mr. St. Leger had ruined his 
own private affairs in the outset of life ; and for that reason, 
probably. ( no other being ostensible, ) he had been selected to 
manage those of the nation. 

Among other diplomatic offices, he had recently enjoyed the ho- 
nour of representing the majesty of England in a German court of the 
third or fourth class; where, as envoy extraordinary, he had been 
sent by the then ministry, to dance the Polonaise \x\\\\ dowager Mar- 



THE PRINCESS. 



17 



gravines, play dearth, and truckle to legitimacy. For these services, 
he had enjoyed an income which exceeded that of the American pre- 
sident, and might have salaried the whole frugal cabinet of Belgium. 

Bentham would have said, that Mr. St. Leger had maximized his 
wages, and minimized his services; but how could the grandson of 
two dukes represent without an adequate income? and in a German 
court, where qualities are estimated by quarterings, high birth was 
indispensable. It was all, therefore, selon les regies of legitimate 
diplomacy. 

Reform, however, came; and, regardless of vested rights, had, 
among other things, recently reformed this '•'•petit bout de minis- 
tre:" and the Honourable Mr. St. Leger, being no longer permitted 
to hang on the public purse, had returned with his wife to England, 
to hang on their own noble relations; to get a seat in the House if 
they could,— a seat at a dinner-table where they could,— a box at 
the Opera when they could,— and to join in the full cry of conserva- 
tism against a system which, whatever it may prove to the nation, 
was to them ruin in its fullest development. 

Mrs. Montague St. Leger had rubbed against foreign courts and fo- 
reign notabilities till she had acquired a sort of European lingua 
Franca, which was a source of endless amusement to Lord Ailing- 
ton; and her pretty little chiffonne face and figure, her French toi- 
let, Italian gestures, and German forms, had actually awakened him 
to a sort of fancy, which he mistook for a sentiment. 

To one so satiated as Lord Allington, an emotion was a benefaction ; 
and he exerted his gratitude in favour of his benefactress by foraging 
for opera-boxes on Saturday nights, and for tickets for the Zoologi- 
cal Gardens on Sunday mornings ; advantages which neither the Du- 
chess her grandmother, nor the Marquis her uncle, could obtain her. 
For fashion, like the Romish church, is an open republic; and the 
spirit of the one, as of the other, passes all understanding and defies 
all definition. 

Lord Alfred Montressor, who had taken the place of an Italian 
Count, (vacated on the Italian preference always given to the newest 
arrival,) had come to announce the intention of the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen to look in on Mrs. St. Leger before she went home ; 
and he seemed to consider himself distinguished by the commission. 
Lord Alfred was the third brother of the Marquis of Montressor ; and 



13 



THE PRINCESS. 



his second brother having married a roturiere for her wealth, he 
was ready to follow the example, and to marry the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen for her Rhenish vineyards and Belgian forests. The 
position of the two brothers had alike tempted them to dependance, 
as the preferable alternative to beggary. The plebeian birth of 
Miss Mottram had not stood in the way of Lord John ; and a reputa- 
tion of no equivocal character was not an impediment to the specula- 
tions of Lord Alfred. In both instances, institutions were, perhaps, 
more in fault than they. 

There was also present in the box, Colonel Winterbottam, the 
model of all fashionable gossips, past, present, and to come;— a 
gentle and genteel representative of the led captains of less civilized 
times, and the devoted cratfoofLord Aubrey, (a top-sawyer of 
fashion, whose dulness he amused and whose corks he drew.) For 
the rest, Colonel Winterbottam was one whoni everybody knew and 
nobody cared for ; and he conscientiously paid back society in the 
coin he received from it ; for he knew everybody and cared for— 
nobody. 

Nextto the Colonelsat Captain Levison, a light-hearted, light-headed, 
handsome young guardsman, who got rid of his burthensome vitality 
and unproductive activity as he best could ; and who now only 
dropped in to the Opera from a breakfast at Norwood, in the hopes 
of an invitation to a supper at the Princess of Schalfenhausens. 

The descent of Lord Alfred from Lady Frances's box was the topic 
of discourse, as the eyes of the party were turned up to observe the 
transit of the Princess herself. 

" There is my brother Montressor, " said Lord Alfred, offering 
his arm to the Burchlauchtigste. " It is a great honour, I can 
teli you, her coming to see you, Mrs. St. Leger. She says you were 
civil to her at Frankfort, somewhere." 

" Oh, yes !" said Mrs. St. Leger, in an affected foreign accent ; 
" so I was. La Biete ! there is nothing so collet monte as the 
Diet at Frankfort ; and when the Princess of Schaffenhausen 
pounced upon it, ( nobody knew whence , car elle tomba des 
cieux, ) there was a doubt which of the princesses it was ; for 
the Schaffenhausens are like the Gallitzins, ' comme s'il en pteu- 
vait. ' So there was a question how she should be received in the 
society of la Biete; and the Austrian ambassador, as president, 



THE PRINCESS. 



19 



wrote home for instruction, before he would let her into the 
Palais Taxis, or give her the honours of VAltesse. 

" Well, you know how slow the poor dear Aulic council 
moves ! and, before their answer came, the Princess was off for 
England, and so was I. But I took such an engouement for her ! 
She lent me one of her nice carriages all the time she stayed, and 
was so good-natured ! In fact, I know her to be a grande et puis- 
sante dame. The Prince, her late husband, was one of those rich 
Belgic, German, Spanish princes, you know, like the De Lignes and 
the D'Arembergs.; and the on dit goes that he left her all his 
wealth not entailed : — his vineyards touch dear Metternich's. " 

" By Jove!" said Lord Alfred, rubbing his hands, " that makes 
one's mouth water. How I should like to drink her health in her 
own Johannisberg, in her castle on the Rhine. Besides, she 
really is quite charming." 

" Yes, " lisped Mrs. St. Leger, " I knew she would far furore 
in London — she is so rich, and so odd, and dresses beyond 
everything ; and then so very clever, — she speaks five languages, 
and paints like a professional artist. " 

" Still there is something louche about her, " said Mr. St. Le- 
ger. " She made a great sensation at Frankfort, visited all the 
hospitals, left money for the Hospice des Alienes, and for la 
Maison des Orphelines ; and pottered about the town with a 
Beguine, a sort of sister of charity; se fourrant pa?*tout, as 
the bourguemestre said — for she not only visited the prisons, but 
the prisoners of state who had got up the revolution manquee 
of last year, la canaille! People thought that odd. " 

" ' Charity covereth a multitude of sins,' " said colonel Winter- 
bottam; " and the Princess has a tolerable list to clothe, if report 
here speaks truth. " 

" What sins? venial or venal?" asked Lord Alfred. 

" German morals are not strait-laced," replied the Colonel. 

" As ours are, " added Lord Allington, drily. 

" Oh ! for facility of divorce and left-hand marriages— passe. But 
when it comes to a trifle of murder,— " continued Colonel Winter- 
bottam, shaking his head and looking through his glass. 

" You don't mean that?" said Lord Alfred, anxiously. 

" St. Leger might tell you, if he pleased," said the Colonel. 



20 



THE PRINCESS. 



St. Leger placed his finger on his lips with a mysterious air. 

" So, you are too diplomatic? — Well, then, the story goes, 
that she contrived to get rid of her first husband in order to marry 
the second. " 

" BagatellaV exclaimed Lord Allington. 

" Poignard, or prussic acid?" asked Captain Levison, drawing up 
his cravat. 

" She stopped his mouth with a handkerchief, after a smoking- 
bout, " said the Colonel. 

" She had better have stopped it with damages, as we do in moral 
England, " said Lord Allington. 

" But, after all," added Captain Levison, " there may not be a 
word of truth in the story, which may be all got up by radical papers 
and whig journals. Her suppers are so very good ! " 

" And if there were truth in it," said Lord Alfred, " these things 
depend so much upon circumstance !— A fine woman energized by 
passion!— jealousy, for instance — Eh! Allington? your duchess at 
Rome and her courier, to wit ! " 

" Yes, hers was meridian blood: but a cold phlegmatic German ! 
a vrow killing her overfed graf, and with a halter for a stiletto- 
Pah! there's no poetry in that." 

" It was not a halter, " said the Colonel ; " it was a fichu brode, 
which led to the discovery. " 

" Un assassinat a la petite maitresse^ said Mrs. St. Leger, 
tittering: " but, somehow, I don't think those things are so very 
much minded abroad. " 

"No matter," said Lord Alfred. " She is a personage— an 
aristocrat, and will therefore be exposed to all sorts of calumnies 
here; but she has had the most rapid and complete success of any 
foreigner since the beautiful Gallitzin, who turned our fathers' heads 
some thirty years ago. " 

" Succes de vogue, " said Lord Allington, with whom it was 
notorious the Princess was no favourite. " I have seen so many of 
those £ complete successes' die out before the season was over!" 

' ' You will find the Princess of Schaffenhausen won't wait for 
that," said Mr. St. Leger. "Before you can telegraph her arrival 
in one place, she is off to another; which makes it doubted by some 
whether she is the Princess— I mean, her Highness of " 



THE PRINCESS. 



21 



At that moment the Princess entered the box with the Marquis 
Montressor. She saluted on both her creamy cheeks the little chif- 
fon of diplomacy, gave the ex-minister her hand to kiss, took her seat 
in the front, but with her back to the scene, and placed her elbow 
nearly in contact with the arm of her neighbour in the adjoining 
box, Sir Frederick Mottram. All present were known to her, or 
desirous of being so ; and she received their recognitions and pre- 
sentations rather with German formality than foreign courtesy; but. 
after the first introduction, she fell into that ease and decision of 
manner which characterize women of the world all over the world. 
Her accent, when she spoke English, was foreign: her voice, clear as 
the tinkling of a silver bell ; and her quick, restless eye, unassisted 
by a glass, reconnoitred with rapidity the whole side of the house 
which she had left. 

44 Vr hat a good box you have got, Madame St. Leger ! I like to 
see you ex-excellences so well provided for. " 

44 We happen not to be provided for at all, thanks to our reform- 
ing ministry,"" said Mr. St. Leger. 

44 Mauvaise politique /" said the Princess. 44 You English fight 
and pay better than any nation in the world ; but when you come 
to diplomatize, you are, ma foil de / ranches ganaches! In 
your England, you spend all in what you call secret service ; but an 
opera-box is worth all the police espiormage in the world. " 

44 Explain us that, belle Princesse, " said Lord Allington. sneer- 
ingly. 

" Ah, mon Bieul I explain nothing, I understand nothing; but 
man esprit observateur has long discovered that there is 

4 Ouelques rapports secrets 
Entre le corps diplomatique 
Et celui des ballets." 

N'est-ce pas, Milord Montressor ? 93 

Every one laughed at the reference : Lord Montressor looked 
pleased at the allusion. 

44 The Princess is quite right, " he said. " An ambassador may do 
more business in his opera-box than in his cabinet. A conversation 
symphonized by the notes of Meyerbeer is worth all the official notes 
in the world. " 



2 



22 



THE PRINCESS. 



" It was found so at Milan, in 1820," observed the Princess, 
' ; where words dropped in a box at the Scala led to the dungeons 
of Spielsberg. Only make people talk, no matter about what, the 
dominant idea will come out. The old fmoteries du Conclave, — 
the language being given to conceal thought — the volto sciolto, 
pensieri stretti, and other old political axioms, are worth nothing 
now. ZJne causerie cle sofa vaut bien la question ordinaire ct 
extraordinaire ; and an opera-box is the best of all secular con- 
fessionals—for those who know how to use it. " 

" The true secret tribunal !— eh, Princess?" said the Ex-envoy.— 
" Have many of the foreign ministers boxes this season, Colonel?" 

u All, I believe, except perhaps him of Belgium." 

" And why ' perhaps'?" 

4t Because I suspect the whole salary allowed him by the revolu- 
tionary government of les braves Beiges would scarce pay for a 
box on the third tier. " 

The Princess shrugged her shoulders, and observed, " But what 
would you have of a gouverncment de circonslance ?" 

" Or rather d 'occasion, " said Lord Allington : " for the four 
days at Brussels were but the three days of Paris at second-hand. " 

" Yes, the brand came lighted from France," said Lord Alfred. 

" But the train was well laid to receive it in Belgium," said the 
Princess. " Ah! those hard-headed Flemings! You don't know 
them. " 

" No matter," said Mr. St. Leger, " the thing won't work— can't 
go on at all." 

" The miracle is that it has gone on so long," said the Princess : 
u three years bien Sonne's! je n'en reviens pas. " 

" Nor I," said Mr. St. Leger. " Do you know anything of the 
new people, Princess? " 

" Do you?" asked the Princess, significantly. 

" How should I ! " he replied, contemptuously. 

" Eh, comment," said the Princess, with a supercilious curl upon 
her lip — " comment voulez-vous queje les connaisse ? A govern- 
ment of lawyers, professors, doctors of law, and, for aught I know, 
of medicine — au moins, des Doctrinaires. " 

There was a general smile at the warmth of this explosion. 

"And yet, Princess," said Lord Allington, " these lawyers, 



THE PROCESS. 



11 



professors, and doctors have made head against the most consum- 
mate statesmen in Europe. They have taken their stand with the 
Talleyrands, the Metternichs, the Falcks, the Pahnerstons, and the 
Bulows." 

" Incroyable /" said the Princess; " these creatures of yester- 
day, just dug up, with all the fresh clay about them, to compete 
with such men was out of all ordinary calculation. " 

" I remember, " said Mr. St. Leger," when I was in the Foreign 
Office in 1830, the Protocol No.' 1. was despatched to the first pro- 
visional government, by Cartwright and Bresson. We thought the 
whole farce would have been over before our charges could arrive 
at Brussels, or that the roturier cabinet would have taken an age 
to learn the rudiments of their art. Not at all. In the rapport 
which came back immediately, it was said that 6 La reponse ne se 
fit pas attendre^ and Tielemans met our men with an aplomb that 
was inconceivable. " 

"What is the secret, Princess, " said Lord Allington, "that 
men so new should have proved themselves so equal to cabinets so 
old?" 

" Because they are new," said the Princess with a smile difficult 
to interpret. 

" The thing won't hold another year," said Mr. St. Leger, dogma- 
tically. 

" It ought not to hold," said the Princess; "for, by its new code, 
no woman can reign. " 

" That is nothing to the purpose," said Lord Allington; " women 
always reign— by influence , if not by right . Every cabinet in Europe , ' ' 
he added, fixing his eyes on the Princess till she lowered hers be- 
neath his glance, " has an ambassadrice de poche, though some are 
not so openly avowed as others." 

" Women are good missionaries, " said the Princess, " and wor- 
thy to preach la religion des rois. " 

" They are the best of adventurers, because the boldest," said Lord 
Allington, pointedly; " and they always succeed in — " 

.... " blinding le trop clair-voyant, " interrupted the Princess, 
carelessly. 

" Not always, " said Lord Allington. 

" Who is the Belgian minister here?" asked Mrs. St. Leger. 



24 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Don't know at all, " said the little Ex-envoy. 
"Haven't the least idea," said the hereditary legislator, Lord 
Montressor. 

" A very able and spirituel person," said Lord Allington. 

" Do you remember the Prince's mot last year, when a change 
was expected?" asked Colonel Winterboltam, eagerly. 

" Let's have it, " said the Guardsman. " He is such a famous 
old fellow!" 

" Why, some quidnunc at the Travellers' asked him whether 
Monsieur Van B or Monsieur Van C were the person ex- 
pected from Brussels. ' I hope it is Monsieur Van G he 

said, ' car je ne le connais pas.' " 

" Imp ay able /" said the Princess. u That prince was a great 
man for his day, but not for ours. JEcoutez, messieurs ! you 
must not put new wine into old bottles.— But, Milord Montressor, 
whose is that great box you occupied to-night? I should like to 
have it next season, if I should be here. " 

" Impossible, Princess! It is reserved in perpetuity for the 
select— the elite. " 

" What do you call the elite? " 

" In the present instance, it means some certain men, of a certain 
party, patrons of the Opera ; but, generally, the term is applicable 
to the exclusives of London society, the flower of the aristocracy, or 
privileged classes . For instance 

" Privilege ! why, all who have money are privileged here, n'est- 
ce pas? " 

" It should seem so, " said Lord Allington, in a low lone, not 
caught by the insolent foreigner. 

" Is thatSare Chose— my friend Lady Frances's husband, of the 
privileged class? for I saw him in the box pointing his glass at us. 
I thought he had been roturier. " 

" And so he is, " replied the Marquis, " if, by Sir Chose, you 
mean Sir Frederick Mottram ; and, as such, he is not exactly entitled 
to a place in our Omnibus ; but he is allied to two noble families by 
marriage. " 

" Ah, c'est vrail he is brother-in-law to ce pauvre Lord John, 
who has bolted, what you call— like that escroc Pomenars, qui ne 
voulaitpas se laisser pendrc. He is a duke's brother, I think. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



2o 



" He is inine, " said Lord Montressor, coolly; while the naivete, 
or the ignorance, of the Princess caused a general titter. 

" Poor John, " said Lord Alfred, " has been hardly used by the 
newspapers ! That little adventure or misadventure of his at New- 
market is a thing of frequent occurrence in the sporting world, — 
of royal precedent, in fact— only he happens to have been a little 
pushed for payment, before he had time to look about him. " 

"Well, " said the Princess, " he has both time and space now; 
fori see by the papers that he is at Brussels. That city is the mai- 
son de refuge de vous autres Anglais, — of the elite — entendez- 
vous?" 

" Not now," said Mr. St. Leger. " No English of respectability 
will stay at Brussels till the House of Nassau return." 

" And if that doesn't soon occur, the Belgian commerce will be 
ruined — there will at least be an end of Antwerp," said Lord Mon- 
tressor. 

" Your ministers do not seem to know their own mind," said the 
Princess : " the truth, indeed, is, that, all things considered, Belgium 
has the best of the bargain in this delay. But Lord Palmerston 
should remember that, in the mean while, the poor English have 
nowhere to hide their heads; and at the rate you are going'on, ma foi, 
you will all want refuge somewhere, — at least you elite, who must 
soon work for your pain quotidien, tout co??ime les autres " 

" What can you do for your bread, Colonel?" said Mrs. St. Leger. 

" My Lord Aubrey says I make punch excellently. " 

" And play it too," said Lord Ailing ton, in an under tone. 

"I shall set up a coffee-house," said Lord Montressor; "and I'll 
take you, Allington, for my waiter." 

" Why not mattre du ballet, milord ?" said the Princess : " on 
a toujour s du gout pour son premier metier. 33 

" 1 might do worse, " replied the peer, conceitedly: " and so, 
Allington, you must be content to be my call-boy. " 

u Thank you, " said Lord Allington, leaning his chin on his cane; 
"but I have taken my vocation already. 1 have a famous crossing 
in my eye; I won't tell where, though — some of you will take it 
else." 

" From Crocky's to Jermyn-street ? " asked the Guardsman 
eagerly. 



26 THE PRIjNCESS. 

"No, no, "said the Princess ; " you must not cscamoter his gut- 
ter; there will always be dirty work enough for you all." 

"What shall we make of— —there?" said Mrs. St. Leger, 
pointing with her glass to an ex-official in the pit, who had been 
instrumental in getting her husband his appointment. 

" A climbing-boy ; and let his motto be ' High and dirty,' " said 
the Princess. 

" Princess!" said Lord Allington, evidently displeased with the 
sarcastic foreigner, " I often wonder how it is, that, being as 
you are but two months in London, you know everything about 
every one." 

" Mediocre et rampant" said the Princess, making at the same 
time a sign to Lady Frances, who was in close colloquy wilh her 
little cousin in the opposite box — " Mediocre et rampant, et Von 
arrive a tout" 

" You," said Lord Allington, pointedly, "are notoriously neither 
one nor the other." 

" Well, then, I am rich and insolent," she added carelessly— 
" II y a tant de moyens pour parvenir." 

" There is something in that," said Lord Allington. 

" Pray," said the Colonel, as he followed the direction of the 
Princess's eyes, " what does the great commoner think of that little 
cousin always fluttering about his wife?" 

" Ma foi" said the Princess, " it is an affair of life and death. 
Miladi Frances must either die of ennui) or dissipate it with le petit 
page que voild." 

" You may see him with her in the Park as regularly as her 
poodle," said Colonel Winterbottam. 

? " Yes, they always remind one of Rubens's great picture of Lady 
Arundel," said Lord Allington, " catalogued c Lady, dwarf, and 
dog.' " 

" Que voulez-vous? elle meurt d' ennui" added the Princess, 
yawning. " It is a case of felony; her husband ought to be tried 
for his life. Ah ! you laugh, but a tnari grognard is worse than 
a tertian ague." 

" Worse indeed," said Lord Allington, " for it is a quotidian. 
Only think of uxoricide being brought home to the most moral man 
in England, and a coroner's inquest sitting on the beautiful body of 



THE PRINCESS. 



27 



Lady Frances Mottram, and bringing in a verdict of—' Died by the 
visitation of her husband's ill-humour.' " 

" Well," said Colonel Winterbottam, " I thought the great com- 
moner too much occupied with the affairs of the nation, to find 
leisure for minding his own." 

" A man has always time to ennuyer his wife," said the Princess. 

" And a wife has not always the means of getting rid of a hus- 
band," said Lord Allington— " at least, in this country. " 

Every one remained silent, stunned by the hardihood of the re- 
mark. The Princess, however, did not acknowledge the epigram, 
and was occupied in attending to the ballet, and applauding 
Taglioni, with exclamations evidently of rapturous admiration. 

" What studies," she said, " for painting and poetry! Greek 
sculpture wanted these subjects of grace in movement. " 

" Yes," said Lord Allington, " movement, in all its power, is a 
modern discovery. " 

" Not altogether," said the Princess; " it is a modern discovery 
for the mass, but was always known to the few. When things 
come to be executed, ' no secrecy comparable to celerity, ' says one 
of your few philosophical statesmen : the ' celerity ' of Bacon, in 
the sixteenth century, was the movement of the nineteenth. " 

" Talking of statesmen," said Colonel Winterbottam, who al- 
ways kept up a running fire of words upon system (the conversa- 
tion Sharp of his own world of gossiping)—" Talking of great 
statesmen, I do assure you there are very odd reports afloat about 
Mottram : some think all is not right in the upper story — Lord 
Aubrey says, that all half-and-half-men must be half mad ! " 

" It appears that Aubrey keeps all his bright things for you, " 
said Lord Allington. 

" Be that as it may," continued the Colonel, " there are really 
all sorts of reports abroad. Some say, Mottram is going to join the 
Whigs— and his speech the other night looks like it; others , that he 
is disgusted with all parties, and intends to retire from public life, 
and write the history of his own times; — you know he has a taste 
for literature, and the arts, and all that kind of thing. But all 
agree that, in spite of his coal-mines and his steam-engines, he is 
cleared out. Some say, Mottram Hall must come to the hammer ; 
others, that the new house on Carlton-terrace is to be let for three 



28 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



years ; and that the family goes to the Continent, to join the forlorn- 
hope at Rome and Naples, and try to pull up. " 

" That comes of men frittering away their fortunes, " said Lord 
Allington, " in paying their tradesmen's bills. " 

At that moment there was heard a rustling in the adjoining box, 
and the door clapped with violence. The Princess now arose, and 
threw round a glance at the splendid circle. Beauty and brilliancy, 
sounds to intoxicate, and sights to dazzle, combined and con- 
centrated all that nature and art, wealth and taste, can produce as the 
last result of refined civilization. The scene was the fairy forest of 
the ' Sylphide ; ' the moment, when the whole co?*ps de ballet, the 
attendant nymphs, rush down the stage, in the flush of youth, grace, 
and movement, realizing so much poetry by means so mecha- 
nical. 

What a scene of enchantment to the spectator ! What an arena of 
labour, pain, privation, and effort to the actor ! What an infinity of 
social evil, unseen, unthought of, forms the basis of the overgrown 
wealth necessary to purchase such a combination— a combination 
too, of which a few, even among the favoured children of chance and 
fortune, can really appreciate the unquestioned excellence. And is 
this all that money can bestow, or the magic of art produce for the 
gratification of sense? Alas for humanity! in all aspects little; in 
none so little as in that of its pleasures ! 

While thoughts passed, or, from the expression of her countenance, 
might be supposed to pass, through the Princess's mind, a tiny 
repeater, set in her bracelet, struck twelve ; and the curtain fell, 
with the wings of the Sylphide.— Everybody started up. 

" Are you orthodox, you English? " she said, the expression of her 
face again changing to a look of sarcastic pleasantry, as she observed 
the audience thinning rapidly. " But it seems your orthodoxy does 
not meddle with your suppers after the Opera. Will you all there- 
fore come to my media -noche, in St. James's Square?" 

" It would be heterodox indeed," said Lord Alfred, " to refuse 
that : one of the good results of shortening the Opera on Saturdays, 
is the revival of suppers." 

Lord Allington now secured the arm of Mrs. St. Leger, who drew 
back to give precedence to the Princess. Madame Schaffenhausen 
took that of Lord Montressor; and flanked by Lord Alfred, 



THE PROCESS. 



29 



and pioneered by Colonel Winterbottam, they advanced through 
the dense and brilliant crowd to the Round-room. Captain Levison, 
who led the van, gave the order for the Princess's carriage by her 
high-sounding title, and fixed the attention of the multitude upon 
her distinguished person. 

" The Princess of Schaffenhausen's carriage! " roared out the at- 
tendant at the head of the stairs. There was a rush and a press. 

" Is she a raal princess, Lady Dogherty?" asked a strange voice, 
proceeding from a strange group which followed close in the Princess's 
wake. 

The question was overheard by Madame Schaffenhausen. " Dans 
ce mot-Id j'e reconnais mon sang" she quoted laughingly, " for 
I have some drops of Irish blood in my veins! " 

" Yes," said Lord Allington, " the siege of Limerick did the state 
of Austria some service; and Dick Talbot's reply to Louis XIV. might 
bear a pretty general application." * 

At that moment the Princess was fixed to the spot by the pressure 
of a foot treading on the end of her mantilla. She looked round with 
something more than curiosity. The sceptical inquirer as to the 
authenticity of her rank bowed low : he was to all appearance a dis- 
tressed gentleman, or at least a gentleman in distress, to the utter- 
most infliction of heat, weariness, and a false position. 

For the last ten minutes he had been dragged, pinched, nudged, 
and forced forward by two fair companions, in spite of a bulk of 
person ill suited to thread the mazes of the Round-room. Some- 
times yielding, sometimes resisting the impetus of their movements, 
he vainly exclaimed, " Aisy now, Lady Dixon, dear! the more haste 
the worse speed. Let go my arrum, Lady Dogherty, honey ! till I 
get at my hankercher; musha! but it's horrid hot; I'm choking alive 
with the drowth." 

The Lady Dixon thus apostrophized on his right, was long, lean, and 
loaded with the mourning drapery of widowhood. The Lady Dog- 
herty thus solicited on his left, was stout, broad, and protuberant; 
in dress, an illustration of Shakspeare's c sun in flame-coloured 

* Louis XIV. observing the Duke of Tyrconnel to resemble himself, re- 
marked conceitedly, " Madame voire mere a ete a notre cour, Monsieur 
le Due ? " " Non, Sire,'''' he replied ; u mais mon pere y a tie." 

3. 



30 



THE PRINCESS. 



taffeta "; and in undress, an outrage on the minor morals of the decent 
strait-laced toilet of the revived Gothic mode. 

Her release of the Princess's mantilla was followed by an emphatic 
apology, which was listened to with an intensity of stare so protracted 
as to verge on the very confines of ill-breeding or ridicule; until the 
supercilious foreigner, hurried on by Colonel Winterbottam. relaxed 
her gaze, and left the eloquent apologist in the midst of her unfinished 
sentence. 

AVhat originals !" said Lord Montressor, laughing. 

" Ouelles horreurs!" said Mrs. St. Leger. 

" "What very odd people come to the Opera since the Reform Bill 
passed ! observed Lord Alfred. 

' ' Very," said Colonel TAinterbottam. ' 1 But that is a well-known 
Irish group from Brighton. The Princess's friend (for it must 
come to that ) was called Lady Toe Dogherty, and gets on in society 
by treading upon people's feet, and by calling the next day to make 
her apologies, and to obtain perhaps a bowing acquaintance by 
the same movement. Her intrigues to get to the Pavilion were very 
amusing."' 

u TA interbottam. you know everybody and everything : 'tis a pri- 
vilege to be piloted by you," " said Lord 3Iontressor, sneeringly. 

Ueelaireur du beau mondef* said the Princess, laughing, but 
still looking back at the Doghertys with renewed curiosity. 

ci Oh ! but that woman is no joke," said the Colonel : " she puts 
me in a fever; I thought 1 had left her plantee at Brighton, and here 
she is." 

" The Princess of SchafFenhausen's carriage stops the way." was 
now re-echoed from below ; and every head turned round at the 
announcement. The Princess passed on, and every eye followed her 
transit. Brighter forms and younger beauties squeezed and glided 
past unheeded ; but the Princess was the queen of the season ; and 
the eye of fashion followed her meteor course with the same ardour 
of interest as that with which science gazes on the uncalculated move- 
ments of some newly-discovered planet. 

The sudden and brilliant appearance of the Princess of Schaffen- 
hausen in the high circles of London, in the very heart of a season, 
in which social pleasure and political party had assumed an intensity 
and a development hitherto unknown in the domestic history of the 



THE PRINCESS. 



31 



country, had excited a considerable sensation in all its coteries, and 
a considerable interest in its highest and most exclusive cliques. At 
the moment of her arrival, a memorable revolution had been effected, 
which, in changing the character of the government, had overthrown 
the routine systems of the " old political post-horses; '! and by ren- 
dering their customary agenciesinapplicable, had thrown parties upon 
a course of experiments and expedients in search of new points 
d'appui, for the conservation of aristocratic power, and for success- 
fully resisting the encroachments of popular claims. 

Among these, the subtilty and finesse of female agency, and its 
corrupting influence at once over the passions and the mind, had 
been largely called on ; and the system which marked the decline of 
absolute monarchy in France, and hastened the ruin of the restored 
dynasty of the Stuarts in England, was again revived, to avert the 
downfal of a discomfited oligarchy. Different as were the states of 
society, and the objects to which intrigue was directed, still a parallel 
might be drawn between the cabinets of Versailles and of Whitehall, 
and the political coteries of present times ; in each of which, pleasure 
and intrigue, frolic and faction, were so intimately blended as to 
blind the most observing, and serve the purposes of the most wily. 

The threatened loss of one eminent femme d'etat, which had 
been considered as a political calamity by the party for whom she 
laboured, seemed to be anticipated and indemnified by the arrival of 
another ; and though the Princess of Schaffenhausen had not yet 
presented her note verbale, nor made communication of any pro- 
tocole de conference — though she had delivered no credentials as 
one of the many plenipotentiaries de quenouille from the five great 
powers— still the idea gained ground that she was destined to succeed 
to the vacated appointment, and awaited her own good time for an- 
nouncing her mission. 

Younger, handsomer, more original, and, above all, more awa- 
kened to the changes impressed upon European society, she threw 
her dull but zealous colleagues into shade. She took the tone of 
the times with an open boldness unknown to her astute predecessor; 
and gave out lights that bewildered the councils of the set, who 
sometimes doubted whether she was in jest or earnest, or whether 
the priestess of absolute power was not the agent of ultra-liberalism. 

She laughed at the old method of ciphers and insinuation, of tak- 



THE PRINCESS. 



ing thought by surprise, and mystifying the plainest transactions— 
the threadbare usages of the worn-out cabinets of Europe ! She 
spoke out that which others only whispered, and, keeping no terms 
with innovation, sometimes rendered her outrees doctrines fearful 
even to those most inclined to propagate and to practise them. Her 
mots had already passed into maxims, her aphorisms into proverbs ; 
and though some were startled by her declarations, that " la meil- 
leure diplomatie est & alter droit son chemin, " and that 
iC Vhomme le plus franc est le plus fin, " still she was adopted 
by the high party, as the child and champion of ultra-legitimacy ; 
while the prestige of her fashion rendered her suspected mission 
palatable even to the moderate. 

The supposed disciple of the school of Metternich was the more 
readily forgiven for the sake of her cook, who was of the school of 
Careme. Dinners of the most exquisite science on Mondays ; sup- 
pers on Saturdays after the Opera, like those of Louis XIV. after his 
jours maigres, from which she named them; and fantastic bals 
costumes, which she whimsically called her Kermess, (after the 
Dutch Ramadan of that name,) confirmed her vogue beyond the in- 
fluence of rumour to shake it. 

The Princess, too, if not a woman of genius, was of great and 
versatile talent,— a fine musician, an able linguist, and an artist of 
sufficient eminence to turn an accomplishment into a profession, 
should the rapid changes of the times, and the loss of her Belgian 
estates, ever drive her upon living by the exertion of her own high 
endowments. In a word, she was one to take the world unawares ; 
and she had already made herself mistress of the season's vogue, 
before its patrons were conscious of her attack. The candidates for 
ton at any price, had canvassed her suffrage, and submitted to any 
humiliation to be enrolled among her guests. Her political admirers 
pinned their faith on her letters of presentation from foreign minis- 
ters (chiefly German), written in the usual style, in which more was 
insinuated than expressed; and report had assigned her a position, 
before caution had instituted an inquiry, or prudence suggested a 
doubt as to her claims. 

Wealth, which in England purchases the smile of insolent rank 
for coarse vulgarity, and places royalty itself at the table of the 
ambitious plebeian— wealth, judiciously distributed, had procured 



THE PRINCESS. 



33 



golden opinions for the patroness of arts, the contributor to public 
charities, and the hospitable Amphitryon of the most scientific table 
in London ; and the swords of half the younger brotherhood of the 
English aristocracy were ready " to start from their scabbards, " to 
defend the eccentricities of one who was possessed of the means of 
converting their high-born pauperism into princely independence. 

It was rumoured that she had written a Commentary on Faust, a 
perfect system of metaphysical transcendentals and of religious 
mysticism. An earl assiduously courted her for the honour of 
translating it ; a duchess canvassed the privilege of illustrating its 
pages; and a countess looked forward to a literary reputation, to 
be founded on her gracious permission to undertake the functions 
of her English editor ; while many of the fashionable party and 
publishers of the day laid their power of puffing and parade of 
criticism at her feet; solicited her portrait for their " books of 
beauty," and " magazines of ton;" announced her " contribu- 
tions " to their rival albums and annuals with self-gratulations, and 
asserted the supremacy of her talents and her revenues over those 
of all other female writers of the age. 

Still the Princess, with all her accessories, was rather a meteor 
than a fixed star; more dazzling than appreciated, more imagined 
than understood. What she appeared was known even to the editors 
of newspapers, and to the reporters for second-rate fashionable 
journals ; what she really might be, had hardly yet been questioned 
by her most intimate associates. 

From her first arrival in England, the Princess had formed part 
of a coterie, of which Lady Frances Mottram was a distinguished 
member. A sudden and very German friendship had been struck 
up between these two persons ; the last, by their respective charac- 
ters, to be suspected of assimilation. The incongruity was too star- 
tling not to be assigned by the world to some arriere-pensee of the 
clever, meddling foreigner; and the motive attributed was the 
bringing back Sir Frederick Mottram to a fold, from which his 
enemies and his friends equally supposed him to be straying. 

Sir Frederick was well worth preserving. The arduous states- 
man and brilliant senator was gifted with talents which made him 
an object of consideration with all parties. He, however, whom 
Pitt had admired in his boyhood, and Canning praised while he was 

3.. 



30 



THE PRINCESS. 



taffeta and in undress, an outrage on the minor morals of the decent 
strait-laced toilet of the revived Gothic mode. 

Her release of the Princess's mantilla was followed by an emphatic 
apology, which was listened to with an intensity of stare so protracted 
as to verge on the very confines of ill-breeding or ridicule ; until the 
supercilious foreigner, hurried on by Colonel Winterbottam, relaxed 
her gaze, and left the eloquent apologist in the midst of her unfinished 
sentence. 

" What originals !" said Lord Montressor, laughing. 

" Quelles horreurs /" said Mrs. St. Leger. 

" What very odd people come to the Opera since the Reform Bill 
passed ! " observed Lord Alfred. 

" Very," said Colonel Winterbottam. " But that is a well-known 
Irish group from Brighton. The Princess's friend (for it must 
come to that) was called Lady Toe Dogherty, and gets on in society 
by treading upon people's feet, and by calling the next day to make 
her apologies, and to obtain perhaps a bowing acquaintance by 
the same movement. Her intrigues to get to the Pavilion were very 
amusing." 

" Winterbottam, you know everybody and everything : 'tis a pri- 
vilege to be piloted by you," said Lord Montressor, sneeringly. 

" Ueclaireur du beau monde^ said the Princess, laughing, but 
still looking back at the Doghertys with renewed curiosity. 

" Oh ! but that woman is no joke," said the Colonel : " she puts 
me in a fever; I thought I had left her plantee at Brighton, and here 
she is." 

" The Princess of Schaffenhausen's carriage stops the way," was 
now re-echoed from below ; and every head turned round at the 
announcement. The Princess passed on, and every eye followed her 
transit. Brighter forms and younger beauties squeezed and glided 
past unheeded ; but the Princess was the queen of the season ; and 
the eye of fashion followed her meteor course with the same ardour 
of interest as that with which science gazes on the uncalculated move- 
ments of some newly-discovered planet. 

The sudden and brilliant appearance of the Princess of Schaffen- 
hausen in the high circles of London, in the very heart of a season, 
in which social pleasure and political party had assumed an intensity 
and a development hitherto unknown in the domestic history of the 



THE PRINCESS. 



31 



country, had excited a considerable sensation in all its coteries, and 
a considerable interest in its highest and most exclusive cliques. At 
the moment of her arrival, a memorable revolution had been effected, 
which, in changing the character of the government, had overthrown 
the routine systems of the " old political post-horses; ,1 and by ren- 
dering their customary agenciesinapplicable, had thrown parties upon 
a course of experiments and expedients in search of new points 
d'appui, for the conservation of aristocratic power, and for success- 
fully resisting the encroachments of popular claims. 

Among these, the subtilty and finesse of female agency, and its 
corrupting influence at once over the passions and the mind, had 
been largely called on ; and the system which marked the decline of 
absolute monarchy in France, and hastened the ruin of the restored 
dynasty of the Stuarts in England, was again revived, lo avert the 
downfal of a discomfited oligarchy. Different as were the states of 
society, and the objects to which intrigue was directed, still a parallel 
might be drawn between the cabinets of Versailles and of Whitehall, 
and the political coteries of present times ; in each of which, pleasure 
and intrigue, frolic and faction, were so intimately blended as to 
blind the most observing, and serve the purposes of the most wily. 

The threatened loss of one eminent femme d'etat, which had 
been considered as a political calamity by the party for whom she 
laboured, seemed to be anticipated and indemnified by the arrival of 
another ; and though the Princess of Schaffenhausen had not yet 
presented her note verbale, nor made communication of any pro- 
tocol de conference—though she had delivered no credentials as 
one of the many plenipotentiaries de quenouille from the five great 
powers— still the idea gained ground that she was destined to succeed 
to the vacated appointment, and awaited her own good time for an- 
nouncing her mission. 

Younger, handsomer, more original, and, above all, more awa- 
kened to the changes impressed upon European society, she threw 
her dull but zealous colleagues into shade. She took the tone of 
the times with an open boldness unknown to her astute predecessor; 
and gave out lights that bewildered the councils of the set, who 
sometimes doubted whether she was in jest or earnest, or whether 
the priestess of absolute power was not the agent of ultra-liberalism. 

She laughed at the old method of ciphers and insinuation, of tak- 



33 



THE PRINCESS. 



ing thought by. surprise, and mystifying the plainest transactions— 
the threadbare usages of the worn-out cabinets of Europe! She 
spoke out that which others only whispered, and, keeping no terms 
with innovation, sometimes rendered her outrees doctrines fearful 
even to those most inclined to propagate and to practise them. Her 
mots had already passed into maxims, her aphorisms into proverbs ; 
and though some were startled by her declarations, that " la meil- 
leure diplomatie est d'aller droit son chemin," and that 
" Vhomme le plus franc est le plus fin, " still she was adopted 
by the high party, as the child and champion of ultra-legitimacy ; 
while the prestige of her fashion rendered her suspected mission 
palatable even to the moderate. 

The supposed disciple of the school of Metternich was the more 
readily forgiven for the sake of her cook, who was of the school of 
Careme. Dinners of the most exquisite science on Mondays ; sup- 
pers on Saturdays after the Opera, like those of Louis XIV. after his 
jours maigres, from which she named them ; and fantastic bals 
costume's, which she whimsically called her Kermess, (after the 
Dutch Ramadan of that name,) confirmed her vogue beyond the in- 
fluence of rumour to shake it. 

The Princess, too, if not a woman of genius, was of great and 
versatile talent,— a fine musician, an able linguist, and an artist of 
sufficient eminence to turn an accomplishment into a profession, 
should the rapid changes of the times, and the loss of her Belgian 
estates, ever drive her upon living by the exertion of her own high 
endowments. In a word, she was one to take the world unawares ; 
and she had already made herself mistress of the season's vogue, 
before its patrons were conscious of her attack. The candidates for 
ton at any price, had canvassed her suffrage, and submitted to any 
humiliation to be enrolled among her guests. Her political admirers 
pinned their faith on her letters of presentation from foreign minis- 
ters (chiefly German), written in the usual style, in which more was 
insinuated than expressed; and report had assigned her a position, 
before caution had instituted an inquiry, or prudence suggested a 
doubt as to her claims. 

Wealth, which in England purchases the smile of insolent rank 
for coarse vulgarity, and places royalty itself at the table of the 
ambitious plebeian— wealth, judiciously distributed, had procured 



THE PRINCESS. 



33 



golden opinions for the patroness of arts, the contributor to public 
charities, and the hospitable Amphitryon of the most scientific table 
in London ; and the swords of half the younger brotherhood of the 
English aristocracy were ready " to start from their scabbards, " to 
defend the eccentricities of one who was possessed of the means of 
converting their high-born pauperism into princely independence. 

It was rumoured that she had written a Commentary on Faust, a 
perfect system of metaphysical transcendentals and of religious 
mysticism. An earl assiduously courted her for the honour of 
translating it ; a duchess canvassed the privilege of illustrating its 
pages ; and a countess looked forward to a literary reputation, to 
be founded on her gracious permission to undertake the functions 
of her English editor ; while many of the fashionable party and 
publishers of the day laid their power of puffing and parade of 
criticism at her feet; solicited her portrait for their " books of 
beauty," and " magazines of ton;" announced her " contribu- 
tions " to their rival albums and annuals with self-gratulations, and 
asserted the supremacy of her talents and her revenues over those 
of all other female writers of the age. 

Still the Princess, with all her accessories, was rather a meteor 
than a fixed star; more dazzling than appreciated, more imagined 
than understood. What she appeared was known even to the editors 
of newspapers, and to the reporters for second-rate fashionable 
journals ; what she really might be, had hardly yet been questioned 
by her most intimate associates. 

From her first arrival in England, the Princess had formed part 
of a coterie, of which Lady Frances Mottram was a distinguished 
member. A sudden and very German friendship had been struck 
up between these two persons ; the last, by their respective charac- 
ters, to be suspected of assimilation. The incongruity was too star- 
tling not to be assigned by the world to some arriere-pensee of the 
clever, meddling foreigner; and the motive attributed was the 
bringing back Sir Frederick Mottram to a fold, from which his 
enemies and his friends equally supposed him to be straying. 

Sir Frederick was well worth preserving. The arduous states- 
man and brilliant senator was gifted with talents which made him 
an object of consideration with all parties. He, however, whom 
Pitt had admired in his boyhood, and Canning praised while he was 

3.. 



34 



THE PRINCESS. 



yet winning prizes in the schools of Oxford, was still wanting in 
that fixity of principle, that political aplomb, which, though often 
the result of an opacity of mind placing it beyond the reach of 
change, or a hardness of feeling inaccessible to the beauty of moral 
truth, is still indispensable to political consideration. 

Sir Frederick Mottram's intellects were of too high an order to 
resist altogether the influence of new lights, and to push persever- 
ance into obstinacy in error. But the great master-mover of mind, 
volition, was wanting ; and placed by circumstances in the training 
of a particular party, he oscillated between temperament and opi- 
nion. The disciple of conservatism voted for Catholic emancipation ; 
and was accused of giving a blow to the constitution, even while he 
advocated its inviolability. 

Sir Frederick Mottram was also a nervous and sensitive man, at 
once shy and impassioned. There were peculiarities in his position, 
which tended to render him the victim of a look, the martyr of a 
sneer ; and when the gossiping of the Carlton Club had bruited the 
imputed designs of the Princess in his behalf, his pride and princi- 
ples alike took the alarm. Even before he had seen her, he had 
learned to hale, with all the energy of wounded and implacable self- 
love, this fashionable and diplomatic sibyl ; and her sudden intimacy 
with his wife was therefore at once suspicious and distasteful to 
him ; although it by no means followed that this intimacy could di- 
rectly influence himself. 

The life he had led with Lady Frances during six months of the 
year, seldom permitted their association. Lady Frances lived with 
a coterie of ultra-fashion and ultra-politics : Sir Frederick lived in 
parliament and in the clubs : and those whom God had joined, and 
no man was to put asunder, seldom met, except by particular ap- 
pointment ; and never from any desire to meet more frequently 
than the exigencies of society absolutely required. Their mariage 
de convenance, the barter of rank for wealth, had in twelve years' 
union produced no reciprocal feelings. Her morgue and insensi- 
bility, and his passionate sensitiveness and imaginative tastes, ren- 
dered compatibility impossible ; and never coming together but to 
disagree, nor parting but in dispute, she had possibly sought the 
Princess's acquaintance purposely to annoy him. 

On the evening already noted, a singular chance had placed the 



THE PRINCESS. 35 

Princess almost in personal contact with Sir Frederick Mottram, by 
the contiguity of the boxes they respectively occupied, during the 
performance of the ' Sylphide ' ; and the sarcasms levelled by the 
foreign aristocrat against the birth and principles of the English par- 
venu, confirmed an aversion which hitherto had been more a preju- 
dice, than a sentiment sanctioned by reflection and avowed by reason. 



CHAPTER II. 

CARLTON-TERRACE. 

A sultry summer's day, which had called forth the brilliant but- 
terflies of fashion to swarm over the glittering waters of the Thames, 
had been followed by a heavy breathless evening, which had not 
prevented the same showy insects from swarming to the heated 
circles of the Opera-house. A deluge of rain, the usual concomitant 
of this state of the London atmosphere, had commenced towards 
the close of the performance, and incommoded the beau monde at 
their departure, by falling between the carriages " and their no- 
bility;" while it detained the more plebeian portion of the audience 
under the arcades, in long and patient observance of the large, 
frequent, and pattering drops. The deep rolling thunder, min- 
gling with the shrill calls of link-boys, for numbered vehicles, 
and " coach to the city !" outroared the more aristocratic demands 
for carriages decorated with half the ancient names of English his- 
tory, and wholly overpowered the distant responses of drenched 
lackies and sulky coachmen. 

" Lady Frances Mottram's carriage stops the way ! " had been 
several times repeated in impatient and remonstrating vociferation, 
before a faded dowager of rank had descended the stairs, supported 
by a muffled member of an old regime of fashion, which had once 
made such duties imperative. She was followed by Lady Frances 
Mottram, who dashed forward upon the arm of an elegant boy 



36 THE PRINCESS. 

( her vis-a-vis in the box). A ; - by-by and an * ; a rivederla. " 
hastily exchanged, the young cavalier returned to the Round-room; 
and the footman gave the word to " Lady Di Campbell's, Berkeley- 
square. " 

As the carriage drove off, a person capped and cloaked beyond 
the reach of recognition, burst through the crowd, and rushing over 
the gutters, and dodging through the maze of hurrying carriages 
(in utter neglect of bas-a-jou r, and shoes almost as thin), strided 
along Pall-AIall. and rang at the fashionably unknockered door of 
one of the most magnificent mansions of Carlton-terrace. 

The architectural vestibule of the patrician edifice, though wrapt 
in silence, was brilliantly illuminated. The master, Sir Frederick 
Mottram, passed rapidly through it, to a room equally silent, which 
was lighted by a Grecian lamp of purest alabaster, suspended from 
its gilt and sculptured ceiling. A pair of dim wax-candles had 
evidently shed their " pale and ineffectual lights" for some time 
over a marble table covered with piles of parliamentary papers, books 
and manuscripts — the lumber of public business and of private study. 

This room was the working cabinet of the legislator; the sole 
domestic retreat of the private man ; the sanctum of the man of 
letters and of art. Books, busts, pictures, the relics of the two great 
epochs of human history (the antique and middle ages), were here 
collected in unsparing profusion ; and, with the more serviceable 
details of luxury and magnificence dedicated to the ease and comfort 
of the body, presented to the imagination a strange contrast with the 
homely-wainscoted parlour, in which Swift sought the Premier of 
the Augustan age of England, and ( as he wrote to Stella ) hung up 
his hat on a peg in the wall on entering : the contrast between the 
minds of the men was still more striking. 

The perturbation of spirit and petulance of step of the lord of this 
beautiful apartment, as he entered, were strangely at odds with the 
tranquil genius of the spot. He flung his drenched cloak on a divan 
of purple velvet worthy of a Turkish seraglio ; and his cap on a 
bronze tripod that might have stood in the villa of Cicero. He slipped 
his feet into silken slippers worked in the looms of Persia ; and fling- 
ing himself into an arm-chair devised by luxury and executed by 
taste, he cjpened a book, which he had marked on the night before, 
for some interest in its pages, and some desire to return to them. 



THE PRINCESS. 



37 



But he brought no mind to its perusal ; no power of attention to 
its subject. Laying down again the volume, he listened as if in 
impatient expectation ; all however was silent, and he again resumed 
his reading. The buhl pendule on the chimney-piece struck one, 
chiming forth the quaint old air of " Charmante Gabrielle" the 
melody of times when men made love to psalm-tunes. Sir Frederick 
cast a glance at the time-piece, and flinging down for a second time 
the book, walked to the window of the veranda, which opened on 
the park. 

The rain had called forth the thousand odours of the exotics 
which filled it. The refreshed but genial air acting on his fevered 
brow like the soft warmth of a tepid bath on the wearied limbs of 
the traveller, he stepped forth and threw his arms over the balus- 
trade upon the terrace. It occupied the precise site where the 
Duchess of Cleveland had flirted from her balcony with Charles the 
Second, while De Grammont and St. Evremond paired off, as men 
who knew the world —the one to feed his subjects in the ponds', the 
other to read his last Madrigal to Mademoiselle Temple. The moon, 
shining forth on the retreat of the heavy and massive clouds which 
had obscured the night, illuminated the towers of Westminster 
Abbey, the architectural miracles of the fifteenth century, as they 
rose over the dense masses of foliage which mimicked the broad 
outline of forest scenery. In front, and partially seen through the 
trees, the broken waters of the rippling lake reflected the moon- 
beams in a thousand scattered and sparkling rays. The whole was 
an illusion, recalling distant times and distant regions ; but what an 
illusion ! in the heart of a great city, and at that hour and season, 
—the carnival of English fashion, the vigil of English pleasures and 
dissipation ! 

The scene was one to have charmed the coldest imagination ; but 
it now failed to touch the warmest. Sir Frederick dragged forward 
the curtains with an impetuous hand, and shut it out, as he uttered 
an audible expression of disgust. There is a certain irritability of 
feeling, a disease of humour, that renders the calm of nature and the 
tranquillity of externals a personal insult. 

He again took up his book — read — strided across his room — 
listened, — but heard only the distant roll of carriages, »and the 
ticking of the pendule. Le bon Roi Bagobert chimed the second 



38 



THE PRINCESS. 



hour after midnight ; and he now sat down to his writing-desk, and 
threw off the following hot-proof impression of his agitated mind:— 

"TO THE LADY FRANCES MOTTRAM. 

" Two o'clock A. M. 

" You left me at the Opera this evening under the impression 
that, after you had set down your aunt in Berkeley-square, you were 
to return immediately to your own house, — observe, for the first 
time, foj' many weeks, before daylight. Your promise was an 
evasion; and you have added deception to disobedience. I take it 
for granted you counted on my indifference to your movements, 
founded on your own carelessness to my feelings and wishes; but 
that indifference must stop short of dishonour. You are now 
sharing in the orgies of a woman who has been characterized in her 
political career, as an " Intrigante par gout, par metier, et par 
besoin; "and who is as notorious for her vices, as distinguished by 
the misuse of talents, which render her a female Mephistopheles. 

" But why should I write this to you? In a word, and to the 
point; (for I am too ill and too weary to wait up any longer ; and I 
set off by appointment at seven, to my poor sister Lady John's cot- 
tage, and shall not return till Monday: ) I command you to break off 
this absurd and disgraceful alliance without further equivocation or 
delay. 1 know the Princess dines here to-day; for I see her name, 
accompanied by others whom I despise and detest, on the list left on 
my table by Wilson. I will not outrage the usages, nor even the 
abuses of hospitality, by forcing you to put her off; but, remember, 
she enters my house for the last time, or I never enter it again as 
long as you remain its mistress. 

" Frederick Mottram." 

" P.-S. I insist on Emilius being sent back early to-morrow morn- 
ing to Dr. Morrison's. The injury done to that unfortunate boy by 
bringing him home is incalculable, both to his mind and to his 
health. He shall not be the victim of an indulgence which has more 
of folly in it than of fondness. I shall write to Dr. M. to forbid his 



THE PRINCESS. 



39 



sending him here any more without my express and written per- 
mission. 

" Once more, with respect to this Madame Schaffenhausen, I am 
utterly free from all personal prejudice ; for I have never met her ; 
and should scarcely know her, were it not for the affectation of her 
dress and gesture : but that suffices. " F. M." 

The writing of this angry and indignant letter removed a weight 
of hitter and choking sensation : but it alluded only to one among 
many causes of deep-seated irritation; and he folded, directed, and 
sealed it, with the same petulance with which it was written. He 
then rang the bell to send it to his wife's dressing-room, but rang in 
vain. He rang a second time with increasing violence; and no one 
answered. The third time, the silken rope remained in his hand. 
The door then opened ; and he was on the point of bursting forth in 
a fit of angry inquiry, when the figure that appeared in the opening 
checked his utterance, and gave a change to the whole course of his 
humour. 

In all the range of possibilities, no form less appropriate could have 
presented itself, at such an hour, in such a place, and to such a person. 
It was that of a man tall and gaunt, ragged and grotesque in his dress. 
A purple jacket, once splendid, (the Mottram livery, ) was dragged 
upon shoulders of such disproportionate dimensions, that the tight 
and torn sleeves terminated but a little below the elbow. The nether- 
dress, of buckskin, left a space between the old Wellington boot and 
the brawny knee, which a worsted stocking scarcely covered. A 
black stock, dandily put on, gave a military cast to a broad, florid 
face, as expressive of self-conceit as a passing emotion of timidity 
would allow. A rough, shock head was drawn up to serve as an 
attempt at an attitude ; and while one hand held firmly by the lock of 
the door, the other less firmly grasped a postilion's cap, which pre- 
sently fell with weight upon the floor, and lay without an attempt 
being made to pick it up. A deprecating smile played upon the 
uncouth, laughable face; and the whole man stood an epitome of 
self-possession, dashed with an agitating desire to produce an effect, 
which, to one acquainted with the true physiognomic indications of 
the unadulterated Milesian race, would have led at once to the con- 
viction that the personage was an Irishman. 



40 



THE PRINCESS. 



After the stare, the silence, and the amazement of a fully elapsed 
minute, Sir Frederick, in a sharp and startling voice, asked— 
" AVho are you, pray?" 

He was answered in a subdued brogue, and Anglo-Irish mincing 
tone— 

" Is it me, plaze your honor? It's what I bees, the boy about the 
pleece, Sir Frederick— of coorse, sir—" 
"What place?" 

" The coort-yard, Sir Frederick; that is, the steebles, and your 
honor's offices. You know yourself, sir." 
" Oh ! a helper in the stables? " 

" Not at all, axing your honor's pardon," he replied conceitedly, 
and drawing up his stock ; " but does a turn by way of interteen- 
ment, till I gets into pleece, and to oblige your honor ; and hopes 
you're well, Sir Frederick— long life to you, and to Colonel Vere. 
and the Couldstrames ! " 

" What brings you here? " said Sir Frederick, with some amaze- 
ment and a little suspicion. 

" What brings me here, plaze your honor? Why, what but to 
obligate Mr. Watkins, the porther, and sleep in his aisy chair; and 
minds the dure, till it's what he comes in, which soon he will, plaze 
God— of coorse, Sir Frederick—" 

" Ho ! the porter is out, then, and has left you in care of the house?" 1 

" He has; and I'd do more nor thatforMr. Watkins without fee or 
reward, and for yourself too, Sir Frederick : can I do anything for 
your honor now, sir? " And he advanced with an easy and gradu- 
ally disengaged air towards the divan, shaking out and folding up the 
cloak, which he threw over his arm; and then drew up, as if for 
farther orders. 

" Send the house-steward to me, and lay down that cloak ! " 

"Heis gone to bed, your honor. Andin respect of the cloak " 

( laying it down. ) 

" Then send me the groom of the chambers, " said Sir Frederick, 
impatiently. 

" Mr. Ellison isoutat a party, with her ladyship's lady's-maid, Sir 
Frederick— but of coorse will be soon in." 

"Humph! So. Then send me the footmen,— Lady Frances's 
page,— the butler,— any one. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



41 



•• The two footmen, sir, bees out with her leedyship's carridge ; 
and the butler's at his country-house ; and th'under butler is gone 
with a coach for Ma'm'selle; and 3Iaster Francis is in bed. with a 
could in his hid. poor little cratur ! ? ' 

Sir Frederick thus learned that his house was abandoned by all his 
numerous train of servants, and actually left, at that advanced hour 
of the night, in the keeping of a ragged varlet. to all appearance the 
helper of the helper in the stables. After a minute's silence, he 
nodded off the whimsical intruder, whose countenance and gesticula- 
tions, during the ill-assorted dialogue, would have amused any other 
than one so little within the range of amusability. 

The 1 boy about the place." who seemed to have fully reached 
his majority, after some farther fidgeting, closed the door, with a 
fantastical bow. and a solemn — " I shawl. Sir Frederick — of 
coorse. " 

" This is the sum-up of all. " said the master of the deserted man- 
sion, hastily recalling the man he had dismissed. 

" Stay ! come back. What is your name? " 
Lawrence Fegan. Sir Frederick : and I wonders, axing your ho- 
nor's pardon, but you remimbers me. '" 

• ■ Remember you ! " " 

" Ay, in troth ! Sure I'm Larry Fegan. your ould little tiger, that 
was give you with the brown cab and cob by Colonel Tere. long 
ago. Sir Frederick, when he left the Couldstrames. and came over 
from Dublin, with th' other baste. " 

•• Are you the boy that fell from behind my carriage, in the Park, 
and broke his arm ?" " 

Why. then, sorrow one else, plaze your honor, but just my 
own self. It's what I've but little use of it iver since, to this blessed 
time. " 

"• I ordered you to be taken care of. " 

" Long life to your honor ! was the vague reply, uttered with 
downcast eyes, and a sigh peculiarly Irish. 

I will see you again."" said Sir Frederick; " you may go 
now. "" 

Sir Frederick endeavoured to stifle some compunctious feelings 
for his own neglect of the sufferer, by apostrophizing the profligacy 
of his servants. 1 1 So much for the high life below stairs of London I 

4. 



4 2 



THE PRINCESS. 



Good heavens ! what disorder ! But is it wonderful, with such ex- 
amples before them? or can one be surprised if the English aristo- 
cracy should hurry forward revolution by the heartless dissipation 
of their time and fortunes, or undermine the very foundations of 
society by their wanton profligacy? " 

He paused, sighed deeply, and then lighted his taper to go to bed : 
but in doing the office of his absent lamp-man, and extinguishing 
the lamp and candles, a glare of red light crimsoned the whole room. 
It was the morning sun, shining through the scarlet drapery of the 
windows. Sir Frederick drew the curtains for a moment aside; 
then turned away, with a feeling which the most wretched might 
compassionate. 

Having deposited his letter on his wife's toilet in her dressing- 
room, he was hurrying to his own apartment on the other side of 
the house, when he recollected that he had left his watch on the 
study-table. On returning, he perceived that the porter's chair was 
still occupied by Lawrence Fegan, who was already fast asleep. 
On the desk, beside him, lay a letter with a black seal. Sir Fre- 
derick took it. It was addressed to himself. The seal was suffi- 
ciently large to attract his attention, and its device caused a revul- 
sion of his whole frame. He hurried back to his study, and read— 

" TO THE RIGHT HON. SIR F. MOTTRxYM, BART. 

" The writer of these lines takes the liberty of making the fol- 
lowing inquiries :— Has Sir F. M. any recollection of a young female 
having been received into the family of the late Sir Walter and 
Lady M., about fourteen years ago, under circumstances singular, 
if not romantic? Was this person, at the expiration of a year, driven 
from Mottram Hall in a way not altogether creditable? Was it 
afterwards understood, that being reduced to a destitute condition, 
she fell into sickness ; and that she was conveyed in a state of deli- 
rium to a parish workhouse, by the miserable and sordid wretches 
with whom she lodged, in the neighbourhood of Holborn, and that 
she died there ? 

" If all this statement be true, would the humanity of Sir Frede- 
rick lead him to visit that workhouse, on receipt of this letter, and 
perform an act of charity, which may reflect with a blessed influence 



THE PRINCESS. 



43 



on his after life?— videlicet, to see that person, whose former 
wretchedness may have caused him some remorse; hut who did not, 
as was supposed, then die. In her delirium, she escaped from the 
spot— to which, after many years of strange vicissitude, she has 
again been brought by misery and the fatality of circumstances. 

" The writer is commissioned to express this poor woman's desire 
to see Sir Frederick once more ; and has yielded to the weakness of 
a creature, still perhaps but too devoted to earthly ties, in forward- 
ing her request, and enclosing the accompanying packet. The 
subjoined order will admit Sir F., without delay, to ward C of the 
parish workhouse of . " 

The letter dropped from Sir Frederick's hands, and with it the 
enclosure, which remained for a moment on the ground, where it 
had fallen ; at length he took it up, opened and found within it a 
ring, bearing on its enamel the flower called in French " la mar- 
guerite, " and a motto in ancient and quaint language, 

" FORTUNE I> FORTUNE FORT UNE. " 

It was wrapped in a paper, which contained a memorandum in these 
words : — 

" I, Frederick Mottram, do of my free and uninfluenced will de- 
clare, that I will never marry any other woman than , as 

long as she remains single, and deems me worthy of her choice. 

(Copy.) ''Mottram Hall, Jan. — , 18—. " 

With the paper was another, thus inscribed: 

"I release Frederick Mottram from his engagement — an idle 
form, if the feeling that dictated it continue ; — an useless one, if it 
do not. " M. 

a >? 

The emotions produced by the perusal of these documents, acting 
upon a mind already shaken by strong passion, had all the wildness 
and confusion of insanity. A rush of recollections awakened a long- 
subdued compunction, exciting a struggle between pride and feeling 
—between all that is worst and all that is best in humanity. Sir 



44 



THE PRINCESS. 



Frederick, however, felt what ought to be done; and he resolved on 
doing it. Putting up the papers, therefore, in his pocket, he resumed 
his shoes and cloak, took his hat and gloves, and went forth. 

Larry Fegan was still sleeping in the porter's chair : neither Lady 
Frances nor the servants had yet returned ; the lamps in the hall 
burned dimly before the morning's light. Sir Frederick shook the 
sleeper, who started from, his slumber with a ludicrous*attempt at 
self-possession. 

" This letter with a black seal that I found here; did you 
receive it?" 

" The letter, sir ? " said Larry, roughing up his hair and winking 
his eyes ; " of coorse, sir ! What letter, plaze your honor?" 

" This letter , it was on the desk. Did you take it in ? when did 
it come? who brought it?" 

■•'It was myself took it in, and nobody else knows a screed of it," 
said Fegan, with an expression of countenance inimitable in its hu- 
mour, intelligence, and arch significance. 

"Who brought it?" reiterated Sir Frederick, raising his voice 
angrily. 

" Why thin, Sir Frederick, it was a faymale— a leedy in a hackney- 
coach. " 

" A lady ! What sort of a lady ? " 

u Axing your pardon, Sir Frederick, did iver you see one of the 
leedies of the House of Mercy, in Baggot-street, Dublin? Well, 
sorrow a bit but it was just that same sort, sir — a kind of a blessed 
and holy woman. The like I niver saw in London, before or since ; 
and wishes myself back in Dublin oncet more. " 

After a moment's pause, Sir Frederick looked around him, and, 
lowering his voice, asked, " Is there a possibility of getting a hackney- 
coach at this hour?" 

"Of coorse there is — every possibility in life, your honor. A 
crony of mine, one Darby Doolan, from Dublin, bees keeping one 
up all night, in St. James's-street. I'll just run and bring Darby 
round in a moment to the door, sir." 

He had put on his black cap, and was darting forward, when his 
master, laying his hand on his arm, exclaimed — 

" Not here— not at this door— stop in Pall-mall, near the Travel- 
lers' Club." 



THE PRINCESS. 



45 



The contrast between his white-gloved hand and the ragged dirty 
sleeve of the locum tenens of the porter of Mottram House, was not 
more strange than that of the two persons thus accidentally brought 
into conference, each at the extreme degree of social separation. 

"Is it near the Thravellers'?— Oh ! very well, sir— I see— I'll be 
there and back in a jiffy. " 

Feganflew forth, and Sir Frederick, drawing his hat over his eyes, 
and his cloak round his shoulders, looked for a moment cautiously 
around; and, with an almost unconscious self-congratulation that 
neither his wife nor servants had yet returned, he went forth. 

As he crossed the plank which formed a temporary passage from 
Carlton-terrace into Pall-mall, he encountered his own hall-porter, 
who, being too drunk to recognise his master, disputed the pass 
with him. He was hurrying home from a public-house near St. 
JamesVsquare, (where he had been carousing,) to resume his post 
before his lady's arrival. 

The carriages were still rolling from clubs, soirees, thes, opera- 
suppers, and gambling-houses of various descriptions, public and pri- 
vate ; many of them filled by the orthodox and consistent voters for 
the permanence of tithes, and for Sir Andrew Agnew's Bills for the 
due observance of the Sabbath. One among the splendid equipages 
bore the Mottram arms. The two sleepy footmen, in Sir Frederick's 
rich livery, swung behind; and the pale, faded face of Lady Frances 
(white as the pearl that glistened in her fair, uncurled tresses) was 
visible within. A broken exclamation rose upon her husband's lips; 
but he felt that, at that moment, he had no right to accuse. 

He hurried on. The bottom of St. James's-square was still choked 
with the carriages of the company at the Princess Schaffenhausen's. 
Apprehensive of being seen, and impatient for the arrival of Fegan's 
coach, he continued to walk backward and forward near the Palace, 
until, seeing a carriage approaching half-way down St. James's- 
street, he crossed to meet it. The next moment he found himself 
surrounded by a group of men issuing from King-street; among 
whom were the Marquis of Montressor, Lord Alfred, Lord Allington, 
Captain Levison, and two young noblemen, the husbands of two of 
the handsomest women in England. His incognito air had drawn, 
the attention of the revellers ; but they soon made him out, and 
found a resistless source of fun in detecting the great commoner, 



THE PRINCESS. 



the most moral man in Europe, in apparent bonne fortune— for in 
such set phrases was he saluted by each alternately, with many 
profligate inuendoes, and loud shouts of laughter-loving frolic. 

" Pray let me pass! " he exclaimed, in uncontrollable annoyance ; 

I have been called upon to visit a dying friend. " 

" Male or female?" said Lord Montressor. 

tc How delighted I am," said Lord Alfred, " to see some touch 
of humanity about the frozen man dug out of the glaciers of St. Ber- 
nard, as the Princess calls you ! " 

" Nay, nay, we must not discourage a young beginner : let him 
pass," said the Marquis, laughing. 

" Lady Frances is still at the Princess's," cried Captain Levison ; 
" so you may as well turn into Crocky's, as you are out for a 
lark." 

With a look and manner not to be mistaken, Sir Frederick shook 
the young Guardsman off. 

" Gentlemen, you must allow me to pass, " he said ; and striding 
off, he left the party, to proceed up the street. 

" He is growing serious," said Lord Alfred; " and is going to 
early prayers. " 

" I don't think that," said Lord Allington, "for he voted against 
Sir Andrew's Sunday Bill. " 

" A man may do that, and be very serious too ; as, for instance, " 
—said Lord Alfred, and he nodded at the Marquis. 

The party laughed loudly, and turned in to finish their Saturday 
night, or Sunday morning, with c the Fishmonger. ' 

Sir Frederick had reached the top of St. James's-street, when he 
was met by a hackney-coach, with Larry Fegan's ragged elbow and 
important face thrust through the open window. The carriage 
drew up ; Fegan popped out, and, with the readiness of an ac- 
complished footman, let down the step, closed the door, and, 
touching his postilion's cap, asked, 

" Where to, Sir Frederick?" 

" To Holborn, " was the reply. 

Fegan looked amazed, repeated the order, Sprung up behind the 
carriage, and, swinging his tall figure by two dirty straps, assumed 
an air which a royal lackey might be proud to imitate on a draw- 
ing-room day. 



THE PRINCESS. 



47 



The coach stopped at the foot of Holborn-hill, and Larry presented 
himself at the carriage-side. 

f< I did not want you, " said Sir Frederick, somewhat surprised ; 
- l you may return. " 

Fegan looked mortified ; Sir Frederick took out his purse and 
gave him a sovereign, adding, " I do not wish what has passed to- 
night to be talked over in my stables. " 

" Oh! of coorse— intirely not," said Fegan, archly. 

Desiring the coachman to wait his return, Sir Frederick proceeded 
with a hurried step, and his glass to his eye, on his devious and uncer- 
tain way, through many obscure lanes and dirty allies, and occasion- 
ally directed by a loiterer,— when he happened to find one. Misery 
and degradation met him at every step. He paused in disgust and 
horror, uncertain how to proceed, and almost inclined to turn back. 

" If you want Mr. Johnson's, you must turn to the left," said a 
suspicious-looking man, pointing towards a low house, or " finish," 
the last resort of subaltern debauchees, and the nocturnal haunt of 
those profligates of both sexes who dare not encounter ' the garish 
eye of day. ' — " Stay, sir," he continued, " I '11 call a comrade; " 
and he turned into one of those frightfully splendid gin-palaces, to 
which philosophy assigns the ruin of the infatuated and miserable 
classes who support them. The blaze of light emitted from its 
highly ornamented gas-burners, as the opening door disclosed the 
scene within, triumphed over the brightness of the rising sun. The 
• comrade' came forth, smoking a cigar. He was all skin and bone, 
rags, filth, and stench. He approached Sir Frederick with familiar- 
ity, in the supposed community of vice, saying, 

" Mr. Johnson's house !— this way, sir, please. " 

" No ! I want to go to the workhouse of parish. " 

" Oh! very well, you are quite close to it. I'll show you,— to 
the right, sir,— take care of that loose stone. You're come to look 
for a 'prentice among the younkers, I suppose ? Plenty to be had 
there, warranted sound, wind and limb." 

He pointed to a placard over the gates in the centre of a high wall, 
on which was written, " Strong, healthy boys and girls, with the 
usual fee. Apply within. " 

" You'll be paid for taking them, you see, " hiccuped the 
wretched creature. 



48 



THE PRINCESS. 



Sir Frederick pulled violently the bell ; the gate opened, and he 
passed in. The cicerone receiving triple what he expected for his 
brief services, winked, as he withdrew, at the sulky porter— sulky 
from being called from his lair at so early an hour. Sir Frederick 
followed across the yard. A few wretched children, a fragment of 
the hundred and fifty thousand houseless orphans who prowl about 
the streets of London, to beg or steal, were already assembled. 
Vice lowered on their young brows, and want sat on their ghastly 
cheeks. An idiot woman seized his. arm. 

" You shan't beat me!" she said with a loud laugh ; and, jerking 
him from her with violence, she reeled and fell. 

" Never mind her, sir," said the porter, who had taken the order 
of admittance, and was reading it. "Never mind her; she will 
recover of herself. " 

Sir Frederick sickened. He raised the maniac from the ground, 
and placing her on a seat, followed his conductor into the house. 
At the entrance stood a plain dark chariot, apparently that of a 
physician. Its appearance was a relief to the unnerved, unmanned 
visiter. 

" The hospital ward, letter C," muttered the man, as he gave the 
order to an old nurse whom he met at the door. 

kt Oh ! the gentleman as was to see the poor governess, mayhap. 
It 's all over with her now ! Howsomdever, this way, sir." 

They proceeded along a dark passage, which admitted them into 
a long narrow room, dimly lighted by a few dusky windows on one 
side. A fire-place at either end was surrounded by a few withered 
old women engaged in some culinary process, and pushing each 
other away, in the true unaccommodating selfishness of solitary 
misery. Each had her little tin vessel, preparing some sup- 
plemental friandise furnished by the charitable to eke out the 
insipid, if not scanty, nutriment provided by the institution. They 
were all marked by mutilation, infirmity, or that ' great disease,' 
old age. The narrow and uncurtained beds on either side were te- 
nanted by the sick and the dying. One only showed a young and 
a blooming countenance. It was a girl of about eighteen, who 
had occupied that bed for twelve years, as the nurse who accom- 
panied the visiter declared. 

" She has lost the use of her limbs, sir, and having no friend on 



THE PRINCESS. 



49 



earth to move her, she remains constantly bedridden ; and has 
seen many a neighbour conveyed to her last home, poor thing ! 
There, sir, is the bed you inquire for, No. 14." 

She then hurried off to obey the pressing call of some impatient 
patient at the farther end of the room. The bed No. 14 was cover- 
ed from head to foot with a clean white sheet, on which shone 
a ray of sun-light from the opposite window. Under this simple 
covering appeared the outline of a human figure. Beside it, knelt 
a female in a black mantle and hood. An ejaculation of horror 
burst from the lips of the visiter, wholly unused to such scenes, 
and now so agitated and shaken. He stood for a moment at the 
foot of the bed, covering his face with his handkerchief, and arti- 
culated with difficulty, tc I am come, then, too late !" 

"Too late!" muttered emphatically the woman, rising slowly 
from her knees, and remaining motionless beside the bed of death. 
There was a silence of more than a minute. 

" Is there anything to be done which may testify " The 

scarcely articulate voice of the speaker could not, or did not, pro- 
ceed. 

" Nothing," was the low but stern reply. 
" Money maybe deposited for . . . ." 

" The parish finds a coffin," interrupted one who seemed to be- 
long as little to this world as the inanimate remains which she hung 
over. 

A cold shudder crept through Sir Frederick's veins at the abrupt 
answer. There was another pause, awkwardly protracted. 

" Were you her friend? " at length inquired Sir Frederick. 

" Charity and duty brought me to this asylum of misery two days 
back. The poor have no friends, save Heaven," she added, lowering 
her eyes and crossing herself. " The story of this wretched person, 
her sufferings, and her wrongs (for she was of a class of sufferers 
and used to wrongs), moved me much. They are now over in 
this world ! " And she clasped her hands and bent her head. 

" And for ever, be it hoped ! " said Sir Frederick, with a burst of 
uncontrollable and solemn emotion. 

" Her sins be forgiven her ! for she loved, as she suffered, much," 
slowly murmured the pious woman, who was evidently one of a 
peculiar religious order, which, though not recognised by the laws 



so 



THE PRINCESS. 



of England, exists there, as throughout the rest of the Christian 
world, doing good by stealth, and fearing, probably, as much as 
' blushing to find it fame.' 

The infected atmosphere, the images of misery, sickness and death, 
were becoming too much for the heart and the imagination of a visi- 
tant so unpractised in haunts like this. He had felt and suffered more, 
perhaps, in the petty space of time he had passed in this chamber of 
woe, than he had ever done in his life. His breathing, too, was 
becoming oppressed, and his strength was failing him : but, aware of 
his situation, he made an effort to rouse himself, and said, 

" I trust, madam, you will not allow an acquaintance, begun under 
such affecting circumstances, to drop here. You have probably been 
put into the confidence of my late unfortunate friend, and " 

" Was she your friend?" asked the woman, in a tone of almost 
contempt. 

" Will you allow me to call on you?" was the evasive answer. 
tL You were, of course, the writer of the letter which . . . ." 

" Yes, I wrote, and brought it, when this poor woman was at her 
agony." 

" Will you allow me, then, an opportunity of thanking you for 
your humanity ? Where shall I call on you ?" 

" 1 have no home ! I was once like her," (pointing to the 
corpse,) " homeless from necessity : I am now so from choice. But 
you have a splendid and a happy home. I will call on you. " 

Sir Frederick started, unconscious alike why he had made his 
own proposition, or why he was disturbed by hers. " I am leaving 
town, " he said faintly. 

" I will wait your return, " said the female ; and she knelt down 
and buried her face in her hands, as if to cut short the interview. 

Sir Frederick, after a short pause, retired. The old nurse, with 
sordid hopes and watchful eyes, accompanied him to the door. 
In passing by the bed of the youthful invalid, he involuntarily paused, 
and asked if there was anything she wished for. She replied, with 
a hectic flush and sparkling eye—" Tea. " 

He threw a sovereign on the bed, gave another to the nurse, and 
hurried, almost without knowing how, to the street where he had 
left the carriage. Larry Fegan was still there, standing with the 
door in one hand, and his cap in the other. 



THE PRINCESS. 51 

" 1 desired you to go away ! " said Sir Frederick, in a tone of 
displeasure. 

" Sure, your honor, would I lave you to be murthered in that 
thieving-place, axing your honor's pardon ?" 

" Shut the door, and stop in Charing-cross, " said Sir Frederick, 
in a subdued voice. 

He threw himself back in the carriage, and it drove on, 



CHAPTER III. 

THE DRESSING-ROOM. 

Whoever would search into by-gone ages for the most undeniable 
evidences of what the French call " les mceurs, " will find them 
better preserved in material monuments than in written records. 
Domestic habits escape the historian; and when time, by tinting them 
with its own picturesque hues, commends them to the curiosity of 
the antiquary, their remembrance has already become vague and 
evanescent. But tangible objects, escaping from the wreck of the 
past, are pregnant with inference ; and they illustrate the progress 
of society on points which the historiographer neglects, and the poet 
despises. 

The wants of man are, in fact, his great teachers; and the modes 
he may have adopted for meeting them are infallible indices of his 
real position in the scale of civilization: for his last point of social 
refinement is but a more perfect development of some physical re- 
source, and his highest flight of science only a better application of 
his power in administering to his necessities. 

But if annalists have done little for the domestic history of man- 
kind, (so pleasant to read in the preserves of antique chateaux and 
Gothic mansions,) posterity is the more indebted to the garrulous 
memoir-writers and quaint diarists, whose naive and simple vanity 
has found an interest in the minutest details. The charming gossip 



THE PRINCESS. 



of Dame Alienoure de Poictiers, the Sieur Branlome, Evelyn, and 
Pepys, in throwing open the domestic interior of other ages, has ena- 
bled ns to judge better of the superiority of our own; and they have, 
by their unsuspecting testimony, destroyed the prestige which time 
had thrown over the morals, the manners, the accommodations, and 
the wisdom of our ancestors. 

The charming pages of writers of this class teem with illustrations 
of the monuments of domestic art; and the monuments, in turn, be- 
come the best commentaries upon their texts. It is thus that much 
philosophy may be deduced from furniture, and that rooms may be 
read like records. The dressoir, in one age the highest mark of 
rank in the chambers of aristocracy, but now found only in the kit- 
chen — and the chaise-a-dos, once exclusively reserved for royalty, 
but now rejected as an uneasy seat even by a second-rate tradesman, 
are sensible and convincing images of the progressive destiny of the 
species; of the necessity of Innovation; and of the hopelessness and 
the folly of all attempts to throw chains round the mind of man. 

Neither the marble palaces of Rome, nor the stately hotels of 
Paris, radiant in the golden rococo of the most gorgeous of all 
epochs, will stand a moment's comparison with the domiciles of the 
simplest gentleman of the present times, for light, air, cleanliness or 
comfort; and the wondrous contrivances for convenience, for safety, 
and for health, which mark this world of difference, (supplied by 
the mechanical arts at the call of utility and under the guidance of 
science,) are but the material and tangible results of that much- 
dreaded political liberty, which is, in truth and in fact, synonymous 
for civilization and for happiness. 

Of this verity, the manor-house of Mottram in the county of 
Northampton, and the mansion of Sir Frederick Mottram on Carlton- 
terrace, were notable illustrations. The manor of Mottram ( a Saxon 
appellative preserved by the Norman adventurers, who at the 
Conquest obtained the fief) had been brought to the hammer by the 
representative of fourteen barons and of thirty-two quarterings ; 
and being purchased by a Birmingham manufacturer, reverted to a 
descendant of the Saxon family, its original founders, whose succes- 
sive representatives, deprived of their ancient possessions, had fallen 
from their high estate, and become an obscure and unnoted portion 
of the plebeian population of the country. 



THE PRINCESS. 



53 



Sir Walter Mottram, baronet, had started in life the porter of a 
mercantile and manufacturing house in Birmingham, of which he 
died the opulent and sole head ; and having added to the commoner 
virtues of industry and prudence, so necessary to advancement in 
trading life, a high combining faculty, a genius for commerce, a 
cool courage, and a sound judgment, he had raised one of those 
colossal fortunes, which, scarcely perhaps equalled in Tyre, Car- 
thage, or the commercial republics of the middle ages, form one of 
the most distinguishing characters of the passing century in England. 

The old baronial edifice, of which Sir Walter became the pro- 
prietor, had been preserved with religious care ; and the refitted 
interior, though in strict keeping with the genius of the place, exhi- 
bited every species of improvement derivable from modern taste and 
science. The wealth of Sir Walter, the fanciful taste of his wife, 
and the acquired virtii of their only son, had rendered Mot- 
tram Hall another Houghton. The gallery was scarcely less rich 
in precious pictures; and its library was already noted, in the 
catalogues deraisonnes of bibliomaniacs , as among the choicest 
and rarest in the kingdom. 

The house on Garlton-terrace, on the contrary, was altogether 
as new as the honours of its classical master. The ground on 
which it stood had been acquired in acquittal of a debt due to 
the father ; and the house ( built under the immediate direction 
of the son ) was an illustration of a system of his own, which 
combined the maximum of splendour with the greatest possible 
enjoyment. For Sir Frederick Mottram, nature and education 
had done much, though birth ( in the conventional sense of so- 
ciety) had done nothing. A purer judgment never presided 
over that most delightful of enterprises ( the pride of Pliny and 
the boast of Cicero ), the construction of a home suited to the 
' elegant desires' of early manhood, and to the enjoyment of re- 
posing age. Youth, in its first outburst of life, indulges no such 
views : its passions are all abroad ; with curiosity, like an avant- 
courrier galloping in the van, it bivouacks in the desert, or revels 
in the kiosk ; while experience lags slowly in the rear, but finally 
and inevitably lures back, through ways which satiety tracks and 
disenchantment roughens. 

Sir Frederick Mottram had passed through this fitful and capri- 

5. 



54 



THE PRINCESS. 



cious stage of existence, and he believed himself now fitted to live i 
and to enjoy. He had, in his early youth, been a literary enthu- I 
siast, a devotee at the shrine of art ; in a word, the true son of a 
woman of genius, from whom he had received an organization 
which led to illusions he almost regretted, as being well worth the 
soberer realities of a too calculating philosophy. On the breaking 
up of the temple of royal profligacy and extravagance in Pall- 
mall, he had chosen that site for his town-mansion , as much on 
account of its thousand historical associations , as of the conve- 
niences of the locality. St. James's Palace and Park, Westminster 
Abbey and Westminster Hall, Whitehall, its gardens and river 
scenery, recalled to his glowing fancy the poetry, the history, 
the gallantry, and the beauty of England, — the shrine of the 
Church's power — the cradle of a race of kings — the scaffold of 
one despot, and the harem of another,— the scene where the 
greatest energies enacted the greatest drama that ever was repre- 
sented in the cause of civil and religious freedom ! 

In the mansion of this rich commoner and staunch stickler for 
high English morality, there was one irregularity; namely— that the 
apartments of his wife were mounted upon the same style of luxury 
and voluptuousness as those of the mistress of Charles the Second, 
the too-celebrated Duchess of Portsmouth. The dressing-room of 
Lady Frances was indeed a fac-simile of ' the glorious apartment ' 
recorded by Evelyn, whose words are well worth substituting for a 
modern description; and they are equally suited to the purpose, ex- 
cepting only the presence of the royal lover. 

" Following his Majesty this morning through the gallerie, I went, 
with the few who attended him, into the Dutchesse of Portsmouth's 
dressing-roome, within her bed-chamber; where she was in her 
morning loose garment, her maids combing her, newly out of bed, 
his Majesty and the gallants standing about her. But that which 
engaged my curiosity, was the rich and splendid furniture of this wo- 
man's apartment, now twice or thrice pulled down and rebuilt to 
satisfie her prodigal and expensive pleasures, while her Majesty's 
does not exceede some gentlemen's ladies, in furniture and accom- 
modation. Here I saw the new fabriq of French tapissry, for designe, 
tendernesse of worke, and incomparable imitation of the best paint- 
ings, beyond anything I ever beheld. Some pieces had Versailles, 



THE PRINCESS. 



55 



St. German's, and other palaces of the French King, with huntings, 
figures, and landskips, exotiq fowls ; and all to the life, rarely don. 
Then for Japan cabinets, screenes, pendule clocks, greate vases of 
wrought plate, tables, stands, chimney furniture, sconces, branches, 
braseras, etc. all of massive silver and out of number, besides some 
of her Majesty's best paintings." 

In such a room, a few hours after Sir Frederick Mottram had re- 
turned from the ward of St. 's workhouse, sat his wife Lady 

Frances, sunk in the depths of her cushioned gondola. A dejeune 
of French vermeil stood on a gue'ridon beside her ; and her hus- 
band's letter ( not opened till a few moments before ) was in her 
hands. Low, languid, in all the depression incidental to the 
excitement of the previous evening, and scarcely able to decipher 
the petulantly scrawled characters, she threw it carelessly and 
contemptuously down, with a yawn, and a muttered "Oh! a 
jobation— tiresome !" A beautiful paroquet, perched on the back 
of her chair, solicited her attention by the reiterated demand of, 
" Aimes-tu Coco?" to which she replied, in tones almost pas- 
sionate, " Oui, Je t'aime, mon petit Coco!" 

" C'est a s'y t romper," said Felicite (who was in waiting ), 
with a significant smile. 

Lady Frances smiled too ; and then drawing her peignoir 
round her swan-like neck , and wrapping her fine form in a robe- 
de-chanibre, which the Duchess of Abrantes would have described 
with truth to be ' mousseline d'Inde, brodee a jours, double 
rose de Mai, ' she closed her heavy eyes, and resigned her aching 
head to the hands of one as exhausted, languid, and nerveless as 
herself : Mademoiselle Felicite having only returned from her ball 
in time to light the tapers on the toilet of her lady, and to be 
ready for her reception at five in the morning. 

When Felicite complained of a £ crispation des net-fs,'' she 
was dismissed to her tisane at the steward's room breakfast-table ; 
and after the lapse of an hour , when green tea and dear St. John's 
revivifying drops had somewhat restored the animal spirits of 
Lady Frances, she again took up her husband's letter, and read it 
through, with a running commentary of " pishes !" — " pshaws! "— 
" bahs ! "—and " so very tiresomes. " It frightened her, however, 
into reflection. 



56 



THE PROCESS. 



She had lived with her husband for some years in utter estrange- 
ment—he for public, she for fashionable, life. Her extravagance 
and folly were rebuked only when long tradesmen's bills came in 
and were discharged. Their one whimsical, consumptive child was 
scarcely a tie between them. To Sir Frederick he was a source of 
deep mortification— to Lady Frances, a subject of sentimental fond- 
ness ; undisturbed, however, by any doubts of his rapid recovery, 
under the care of the infallible Esculapins of her coterie. Sir Fre- 
derick had hitherto but rarely interfered with her follies, nor she 
with his politics ; though her friends were ultra conservatives, and he 
had latterly approached somewhat towards liberalism, by his vole on 
the Relief Bill ; and had consequently in some degree lost caste with 
those who accuse Sir R. Peel of tergiversation, and ' the Duke ' of 
having given the first blow to ' our glorious constitution. ' 

But there was in this letter a tone of unprecedented severity, which 
alarmed, if it did not touch her. Her first thought was to send for 
the Princess of SchafTenhausen, from a recent habit of dependence 
created by the influence of the foreigner's energetic mind on her con- 
stitutional indolence ; but a moment's consideration convinced her of 
the danger of such a proceeding. She placed herself therefore 
before her secretaire, and drawing, from under the golden clasps 
of a splendid portfolio, a packet of tiny note paper breathing and 
blushing roses, she poured forth her fears and doubts to Georgina, 
Marchioness of Montressor — one whom the ' Age ' had that morn- 
ing characterized as a ' certain profligate and pious peeress of Bel- 
grave-Square ; ' and whom another Sunday paper,' The Christian 
Woman's Yade-Mecum, ' had named 6 the Fair Samaritan,' for 
some act performed under the dictation of The tartufe, its editor. 

The history of fashionable note-writing is a page in the history of 
the times, as highly illustrative of the manners of the great as any 
other of more seeming import. In the first go-cart steps of mind, to 
write a letter was no trifling occurrence : it was a task to undertake, 
a proof of learning to accomplish, a sign of high calling or eminent 
birth to desire. Kings and queens, peers, prelates, and ministers, 
indited letters as guarded as protocols, stiff as exercises, and ceremo- 
nious as a herald king-at-arms. But no one dreamed of the familiar 
intercourse of mind upon paper. 

The epistolary correspondence of private friends was revived in that 



y S 



THE PRINCESS. 



57 



most social of all regions, France; and it owed its origin, as most 
pleasant, if not wise things do, to woman. Letters, in their modern 
form, uses, and appliance, first became a fashion in the seventeenth 
century, and in the court of Louis XIV. ; and the first eminent pro- 
fessors of the charming art were Madame de Sevigne, and her con- 
temporaries, Mesdames La Fayette, de Coulanges, de 1'Enclos, de 
Maintenon, and others. 

When there was no periodical press, no public journals, no print- 
ed channels for political or social information, the correspondence 
of women of fashion, of " la cour et la ville, " supplied their 
place ; but, as yet, the necessity of daily, hourly note-writing, with 
its consequent eloquence du billet , was not surmised. It was re- 
served to England, in the nineteenth century, to strike out such a 
mystery ; * and the whole business of high society in London is now- 
carried on by the instrumentality of reams of the smallest paper, of 
every hue of the rainbow— sometimes the circulating medium 
of thought, feeling, fancy — but oftener of folly, falsehood, and idle- 
ness. 

The genius of note-writing is not inseparably connected with any 
other genius. Its merit is a facile narration of frivolous facts, re- 
quiring no ideas, and demanding no wit. The dullest dames are 
often the most voluminous note-writers ; and they get rid of their 
garrulity upon paper, with the same strenuous idleness with which 
they discharge it in verbal exuberance in society. Every coterie 
( and the society of London is divided into coteries, each with its 
autocrat, its politics, and its prejudices,) has its own style of billet, 
made up of conventional phrases, petits mots d'dnigme, sobri- 
quets , etc. —the dictionary of its daily, or rather nightly, inter- 
views. 

Among the most distinguished of these coteries was that of which 
the Marchioness of Montressor and Lady Frances Mottram were the 
heads ; and their morning correspondence on the subject of Sir Fre- 

* The gossiping intercourse of fine ladies was formerly conducted by ser- 
vants—a custom alluded to by Archer, in the c Beaux Stratagem,' where he 
details what he calls a ' How-do-ye to be delivered viva voce, from his 
mistress to her friend. The allusion will soon be lost in England, though in 
Italy the usage of long complimentary messages is still retained. 



58 



THE PRINCESS. 



derick's letter will furnish an appropriate illustration of an art 
which has reached the last finish of its frivolous perfection. 

" TO THE MARCHIONESS MONTRESSOR. 

" Dearest Georgy,— Dq come to me, if you can. If you are too 
delicate or too pious to dine out on Sundays, at least look in 
on me after church. I want you most particularly, and cannot 
go to Arlington-street, because I am regularly done up, after this 
last week. Besides, I have really no means of going out, or I would 
try and go to you to-night. Sir Frederick has taken the second 
coachman to Lady John's; and Saunders says he has got the influenza, 
from being out all night, and every night this week : but Felicite says 
he's sulky, because he lost five hundred to the Duke's coachman at 
Epsom. Servants are becoming really too bad. 

" But I have got into such a mess, dear ! — Sir Frederick is grown 
so tiresome and ill-tempered, you have no idea. If by chance you have 
seen your husband or Lord Aubrey to-day, they must have told you 
of the scene in the Bound-room last night. It was vulgar and bru- 
tal, and a great triumph to the Greenfells, the tiresome M'Querys, 
and other quizzes whom I have cut this season. Unluckily, I did not 
get home from the dear Princess's media-noche (which was beyond) 
till four this morning. Sir F. sat up till three, and then wrote me 
such a note, you have no idea ! In short, it is becoming no joke : 
he hinted at separation if I did not give up the Princess; and all sorts 
of nonsense about her bad reputation, as if she was worse than other 
foreign women of her rank and fortune. 

" Now I want you most particularly togive me your advice. You 
and Lord Aubrey are so very clever on such points, and he won't 
dine here if you don't. Most unluckily, Claude Campbell, too, who 
came up to the Opera last night without leave from the royalties, was 
obliged to scamper back to Kewfrom the princess's. So, dear, I have 
no one whose advice I can ask, or take, but yours. But I'm resolved 
not to give in : if I once do that, the game is up. Don't you think so ? 

" The worst of it is, I want money terribly. I'm up to my eyes in 
debt to Howell and James, to Carson, and to Storr and Mortimer, 
for all sorts of miseres ; and cousin Claude Campbell has settled for 



THE PRINCESS. 



59 



me, all this season, at the Dowager Dunstable's ecarte' table. Poor 
boy ! he is a delight of a cousin ! But we have hit on such a scheme— 
a racing-table ! 

" Observe, I don't want to provoke Sir F. too far ; but I won't 
give up the ' High Transparency, ' as Alfred Montressor calls her, 
for a thousand reasons. If our summer tour goes on, her castle on 
the Rhine, or somewhere, will be worth anything : so I must hu- 
mour the ( housc-meestre, ' as the Princess calls SirF., who, by the 
bye, has never seen her. He is so prejudiced ; and she hides so drolly 
when he comes into the house; for she either hates or fears him. 
Now, send Lord Aubrey to me, if he is with you, or write me a 
few lines; fori must make up my mind before to-morrow morning, 
as I am off at one o'clock for aunt Di Campbell's dejeune at Rich- 
mond, where the Duke and Duchess, and Claude, and all the world, 
are coming. 

" Day, day, dear! 

" Yours, Frances M. " 

" P.-S.— Will your the really go on to night ? They were saying at 
the Opera, that good Mrs. Medlicot was urging you to give up your 
Sunday the's, and to cut poor dear Aubrey into the bargain ; and the 
Princess said something in French about rouge and the president, * 
that was so droll it set them all laughing. 

" On consideration, I send you Sir Frederick's letter by Hip- 
polyte ( for, entre nous, I can trust no one else ) ; you will then be 
able to judge. " F. M. " 

Answer. 

" TO LADY FRANCES MOTTRAM. 

" I keep your page, dear child, to take this back, as I do not 
let my servants out on Sundays, except to church. I heard all 
about the scena in the Round-room— not from the inseparables, 

* "Pour ce qui est du rouge et du president , je ne leur ferai point 
Vhonneur de les quitter : " the observation of Madame du Deffand in her 
own attempt at reformation. 



60 



THE PRINCESS. 



for I have not seen my husband or Lord Aubrey to-day. I had 
not come from church, when they looked in. I did hear it though, 
in full, from Lady Anastatia M -Query, just as 1 was getting into 
my chair, in the porch of St. James's. ( like Clarissa. I am never 
too ill to go to church.) She thrust her long scraggy neck down 
into the chair, and smelt so of garlic, (you know all the ladies 
M -Query eat Bologna sausages for breakfast.) that I have been 
obliged to haTe the chair fumigated : and caught fresh cold by 
letting the window down coming across the square. She was 
full of the scene last night. She said, that Sir Frederick actually 
dragged you away by the arm : that cousin Claude came to the 
rescue, and that the Princess clapped you on the back, and cried 
1 Courage, mon enfant!' : and then, alluding to Sir Frederick's 
plebeian origin, she exclaimed. -Hey: mi Leddy Montressor.— but 
the Duke is weel servit : a pretty alliance for Lady Frances de 
Vere ! what would you ha fra" a cat but her skin ?' 

-• Well, my child, this is all very bad. I allow. Such things 
give a ridicule ineffaeablel but remember, no separation ! mind 
that. First, in a religious point of view, separation is sinful : as 
St. Paul says, in dear Mrs. iledlicot's - Tracts of Ton." * Let not 
the wife depart from the husband. " Besides, there is all the differ- 
ence in the world, dear, between a princely mansion in Carlton- 
terrace and a - box' in Cadogan-place. or a sweet little cottage at 
Tonbridge : and believe me. Fanny sweetest, it will come to that. 
Remember Lady Ascot, who parted from her husband, intact as 
to character, and from mere incompatibility of temper ; yet how 
she went down ! Who ever hears or speaks of her now. though 
she has a house at Brighton, and goes to the Queens balls' 
Nothing should induce you to part from Sir Frederick. Your 
conscience tells you. that you are innocent, and Sir F. wrong — 
I do not dispute it ; and there are many reasons to warrant your 
opposing his vulgar caprices and plebeian prejudice; the more 
extraordinary in the son of an actress, who. of course, was not 
over rigid. But remembtr. • all things that are lawful are not 
expedient." as Mrs. Medlicot says: and as the Princess is going 
away, and actually leaves London for the Continent at the end of 
the season. I would make a virtue of necessity, and offer to give 
her up at once. The Princess knows all the bitter things Sir 



THE PRINCESS. 



61 



Frederick says of her, and would be the first to laugh at your 
hesitating. Do anything rather than come to a separation, which 
is foolish, vulgar, and highly irreligious. 

" I shall give tea as usual ; it is now almost the only peep at the 
world my health, and indeed my way of thinking, allow me to 
take. You must come, child. Some of your dinner folk will 
bring you; and your brother, who will be here, will set you down. 
But remember, love, / do not receive till ten minutes after 
midnight. 

" I will not keep your pretty page any longer. What a nice 
boy ! I have had him up in my dressing-room, and talked to 
him of his catechism. He knows nothing ; so I have given him 
Mrs. Medlicot's c Tracts for the Domestics of Noble Houses. ' " 

" P. -S.— Don't talk of my the before the Princess. I really 
cannot ask her, en petit comite; she talks so freely on serious 
subjects, like all foreigners : and Mrs. Mediicot means to bring 
Kitty Conran, the Irish saint, as she is called. It is all the 
fashion to have her. I return your husband's jobation. By the 
bye, he was seen in a very equivocal situation, getting into a 
hackney-coach at three this morning. Make Alfred Montressor 
tell you all about it. ct G. M." 

Lady Frances was still reading the pale, blue pages of Lady 
Montressor's epistle, when the Princess of Schaffenhausen was 
announced. Lady Frances huddled up her letter ; but not before 
the Princess's quick eye detected the action. 

u I see I am de trop," she said, throwing herself into an 
arm-chair opposite to Lady Frances, after having kissed her cheek. 

" That letter interests you; and 1 don't — now.^ 

" Comment, ma belle! You always interest me." 

" No— no— finish your letter, ma petite, and then we'll talk. 
It is from Lady Montressor. Stay, you have dropped an enclo- 
sure— protocole de mari!" 

Lady Frances coloured, and opened her eyes. 
How do you know that ? " 

" I am just come from Arlington-street ; and the Marchesa has 
put me into your confidence. " 

She laughed, sunk back in her chair, laid her elbows on its arms. 

5.. 



62 



THE PRINCESS. 



clasped her fingers, and fixed her friend with eyes of no ordinary 
expression and penetration. 

" How very foolish !" said Lady Frances, much annoyed. 

k ' Not at all foolish, child— only false. You are all that, vous 
autres. You betray each other, for ever, in your idleness and gar- 
rulity. There is no point of honour in your coteries ; for, if rogues 
can sometimes be true to each other, roguesses never can. Your 
friendships are but masked rivalries . By the bye , why do you 
muffle yourself up in that chevaux-de-frise of lace and ribbon ? 
Such things only become the figures c/iiffbnnees of French petites- 
mattresses—lhey are not for true English beauty. " 

She arose, took off Madame Devy's ' last' from her friend's head, 
and drawing out the whole back of a tortoise in form of a comb, let 
fall that profusion of fair hair which gave to Lady Frances's languid 
beauty its true character and appropriate embellishment. 

" There, child— your connaisseur de main, in his collection of 
Grammont beauties in the salon la-bas, has nothing like that : you 
are precisely la belle Jennings. Why don't you receive hiin at 
breakfast just so ? A pretty woman is never so irresistible as in 
the freshness of the morning and of the morning toilet : you mistake 
it altogether. " 

" But, Princess, 1 ' said Lady Frances, glancing at an opposite 
mirror in conscious beauty, and ever charmed by flattery atall hours 
and from all persons, u I never see my husband at breakfast; and, 
at this season, but rarely at dinner— that is, at home. We sometimes 
do dine out together. " 

" Yes, I know. I've seen you perched up in the same chariot, 
like two sulky birds in a cage after a pecking-match. You are both 
to blame; you most, as being the superior animal. " 

Lady Frances smiled, and shook her head. 

" Yes, you are, by nature, if there was any nature about you ; 
but there is not. " 

Lady Frances laughed. 

tC How very odd you are ! " 

' 4 It is true, " said the Princess. " The state of what you call 
high society in England is so artificial, that there is not a trace of 
nature to be found among you. Your religion, your morality, your 
hours, your habits, even your follies— all are artificial and conven- 



WESTMINSTER-ABBEY j 
Or, Collegiate Church of St. Peter. 




This interesting edifice derives its name of West- 
minster-abbey from its situation in the western part 
of the town, and its original destination as the church 
of a monastery. 

It was founded by Sebcrt, king of the East Saxons, 



THE PRINCESS. 



63 



tional. But you are reaching that solstice, beyond which no society 
can go. " 

" I don't understand you. " 

" Well, then, the reign of fine-ladyism, the despotism of coteries, 
are crumbling away. Almack's, like Westminster Abbey, once 
destined to illustrate only the great, will be thrown open to all who 
can pay for their admission. Do you understand that ? " 

" There is something in it, " said Lady Frances, gravely. 
" Almack's is not what it was. What is to be done ? " 

" Now, that you are all nearly undone,— nothing. Stand aside, 
let the torrent pass. You cannot stop it, though you may be over- 
whelmed in the attempt. " 

" This is odd, from you ! said Lady Frances. 

t: One may act wrong, " replied the Princess, " yet think right ; 
and may sin, as you English call it, without being absolutely a fool. 
Lady Montressor has told me all. Your husband wants an excuse 
to part from you, and has hit upon me. What advice has your 
friend , the Marchesa , given y ou ? She told me that she had written . ' ' 

" Since you know all, " said Lady Frances, " there is her letter ; 
she deserves that I should show her up. " 

" To be sure she does. Voyons done. " 

The Princess threw off a large bonnet, flung aside a black cashmir 
shawl, and read the letter, so carelessly confided to her. It was 
the peculiar character of the Princess of Schaffenhausen's counte- 
nance and person, to make a picture, in whatever light or position 
she placed herself. Even the insipid, languid, unimaginative Lady 
Frances felt this as she gazed on her ; and she looked with a mix- 
ture of fear and admiration. Her head was enveloped in a black 
crape, so as wholly to conceal her hair, while it defined the form 
of her high, clear forehead, which was marked almost as with a 
straight line by her black and mobile eyebrows. Her large grey 
eyes were shaded, not concealed, by their dark projecting lids and 
silken lashes, which fell upon a cheek, of that deep rich tone of 
colouring, which, though not bloom, expresses the circulation of 
health in every vein : a dress of black crape, terminated at the neck 
and wrists with snow-white Vandyke, giving relief to a sombre 
habiliment, otherwise ill suited to the gaiety of the season. A crim- 
son breviary, clasped with gems, lay upon her knee, (for she came 



64 



THE PRINCESS. 



from the Bavarian Chapel, where Pasta and Malihran had been sing- 
ing, ) and a superb ivory cross hung from her neck by a rosary of 
antique form and materials : the ensemble gave her the air of a 
picture by Hals or Velasquez. 

While reading Lady Montressor's epistle, the concentrated ex- 
pression of her countenance yielded, more than once, to a smile of 
humour and finesse, which, in parting lips of the most delicate form 
and coral hue, displayed two rows of pearly teeth. Beautiful as 
was the smile, it had a very sinister expression ; and it might well 
have passed for that of a handsome imp. 

She laid the letter on the table. 

c£ Well," said Lady Frances, "what do you think?" 

" That your friend is a fool— as the false ever are; and that her 
letter is a tissue of cant and nonsense. Shall I answer your hus- 
band's letter for you ? " 

The incorrigible Lady Frances burst into a fit of laughter. 

" That would be too pleasant ! " 

" You must first let me see it. " 

Lady Frances put her husband's letter into the Princess's hands, 
who read it calmly and smilingly, as if her own vices had not formed 
its principal subject. 

" Give me. pen, ink, and paper, " she said. 

Lady Frances rung the golden bell on her table for the page, who 
was in the veranda tying flowers. The secretaire was placed be- 
fore the Princess, and the boy dismissed. After a silence of many 
minutes, Lady Frances, who had stretched herself in her easy chair, 
overcome by languor and exhaustion, fell fast asleep. The heat of 
the morning flushed her cheek, which her fair and flowing tresses 
shaded. Meantime, the paroquet, perched on the back of her chair, 
weary of the confinement, after sundry efforts broke the thread 
which confined it, and flew away. 

The Princess, after a moment's pause, threw down her pen, and 
seizing a pencil, with the aid of a little rouge borrowed from the 
adjoining toilet, produced a beautiful croquis of the beautiful 
subject. The resemblance, though flattering, was perfect. The 
bird was in the act of flying off ; and a motto was written beneath, 
" Qui me neglige, me perd." 

The Princess, having finished her sketch, touched the cheek of 



THE PRINCESS. 



65 



the fair sleeper with the feather of a pen : she started, rubbed her 
eyes — 

" I was dreaming," she said : and she paused, smiled, and 
blushed. 

" Of Claude Campbell," said the Princess, fixing her eyes on her. 

" How very odd ! Yes, I dreamed he was my paroquet, and that 
he had flown away. " 

" And so he will, " said the Princess : " you may chain an eagle, 
but you will never attach a parrot. " 

" You may be a sorceress, but you are no prophetess," said Lady 
Frances, taking the hit as it was intended. 

" Suppose I were both?" said the Princess. 

" Where is the answer to Sir Frederick's letter?" asked Lady 
Frances, with an expression of humour. 

" Here it is !" said the Princess, presenting the beautiful sketch, 
of which Lawrence, who thought much more of his drawings than 
of his paintings, might have been proud. 

"Gracious!" said Lady Frances, delighted; "why, it is a pic- 
ture! — it is ... . me! so very like ! and Coco flying away too ! — 
my very dream ! " 

66 Yes, your dream: awake, then; rouse yourself! Your bird 
and your boy, let them both go : they belong not to you, not to your 
position. Wife and mother, give up folly before it gives up you ; 
and let taste at least do what feeling may fail to suggest. " 

The Princess was standing with her hand spread upon the 
shoulder of the almost frightened Lady Frances, who looked up in 
her face with an expression of timidity and surprise. The sternness 
of Madame Schaffenhausen's countenance changed like a rainbow, 
and a smile the most playful came over her features. She drew her 
chair close to Lady Frances's, and taking both hands in hers, she 
said, with a half-laugh— 

" I have frightened, but I only want to warn, you. Hear me, and 
then— we have done, for ever ! That little cousin of yours is a little 
profligate— and a little fool, par-dessus le marc he : but he is the 
real cause of your husband's displeasure ; I am oniy the ostensible 
pretext." 

" No, no, he hates you," said Lady Frances, with naivete; 
" they have put horrible things into his head about you. " 



6S 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Yes, I know : they have told him I am a sort of a Madame de 

G , a political intrigante, one who carries a printing-press in 

her dressing-box. " 

"Oh! worse than that !" 

The Princess sunk back in an easy attitude, and continued : " An 
affaire de sentiment with Metternich, probably ? " 

" Encore pire, " said Lady Frances, smiling. 

" My being la famine a main gauche, then, of the Prince?" 

" Oh! worse, worse, worse!— Now, don't be angry, dearest 
Princess ! " 

"1?— not in the least.— Something about a husband missing, 
perhaps?" 

Lady Frances threw down her eyes and coloured. 

" But, belle enfant, if all this were true, do you think I should 
be received in the first society of England ! run after ! courted ! my 
house never empty ! and my porter's book always full?" 

" People are not so very particular about foreign princes and 
princesses," lisped Lady Frances. 

"No," said the Princess, significantly; " nor with domestic ones 
neither. A crime or a vice more or less, is easily forgiven or for- 
gotten here, provided rank or party give le mot d'ordre ! But, 
never mind me and my vices. Sir Frederick is not so prudish as to 
be shocked at the failings of a German princess ; but he hates me 
personally, because some of my dear, trust-worthy friends have 
repeated an epigram or two, which have touched his amour-propre 
where it is most susceptible. He hates me, too, for the influence 
he supposes I have over you, and by which they say I mean to get at 
him : that is, he has been told so by your dear friend the Marchion- 
ess : the world sets me down as a sort of political Mrs. Medlicot, or 
something worse. " 

" Oh ! par exemple, he is right as to your extraordinary influ- 
ence over me : Claude says it is a spell. " 

4 ' Yes; the spell of convenience. You like my house, and my 
parties ; and the freedom of foreign habits suits your purposes." 

" No, no," said Lady Frances, smiling and caressing her ; " I 
like yourself and your society for its own sake. " 

" You never missed it last night?" said the Princess. 

Lady Frances opened her eyes. " Missed you?" 



THE PRINCESS. 



7 



" All charming as I am, nobody missed me!" 
" What do you mean?" 

" Only that I was otherwise employed than presiding over orgies, 
of which I am, truth to tell, completely ennuyee ! But you had my 
house. And now to the point. Send this portrait to your husband; 
it is the best answer to his letter. There is no reasoning with man. 
He is the spoiled child of institutions and society. Woman never 
speaks to his sense, but only to his senses; one image, such as 
this, is worth all Lushington ever uttered in Doctors' Commons, 
of neglected duties, and the carelessness of husbands. 

" The motto, you see, is a common-place ! No matter. The 
application will supply the want of originality. The image is poet- 
ry, and will go home to his imagination, when all the prose in the 
world would fail to interest or move his feelings in your behalf. 
But mind, you must send an apology to auntDi. Those picnics are 
dangerous things : and when Sir Frederick arrives from Lady John 
Montressor's, you must receive him just as you are, entendez-vous? 
When you perfectly understand each other," she added archly, 
i4 why then you shall propose going a tour this summer ; and . . . . " 

" That," interrupted Lady Frances, eagerly, " is precisely what 
I was thinking about. We are planning a tour, and a visit to your 
castle on the Rhine. I must go somewhere ; I am so very shattered. 
The Montressors talk of Baden, when the House is up ; and we can 
take you on our way, you know." 

" And as Sir Frederick threatens separation if you do not give 
me up ... . " 

" Gracious ! I had forgot that : but that is only one of his fits of 
temper ; and when he sees this very pretty picture, he will admire 
it so very much, it will set all to rights. I have it at heart to bring 
you together : the ice once broken, I know he would fall in love 
with you." 

The Princess looked on her earnestly. An air of thoughtful abs- 
traction gradually replaced the glance of ridicule, which gave to 
her mobile countenance its most habitual expression. 

Some minutes elapsed before Lady Frances, who was engaged in 
admiring her own likeness, inquired — 

" What are you thinking about, ma belle?" 

u ' I am thinking," said the Princess, " that original conformation 



68 



THE PRINCESS. 



is superior to all impression ; and that, what is pedantically called 
the power of reason, is only the adaptability of certain truths to 
certain dispositions." 

" I do not understand you," said Lady Frances, caressing the 
bird, which had flown back to its perch on her chair. 

6 ■ If you could, the observation would not have been made : — 
vous n'etes pas impressionable, chere amieS* 

u There is one who does not think so," muttered Lady Frances, 
half aside. 

There was a pause. The princess took up the Red-book, and 
fluttered over the pages, till she came to the marriage of the Duke of 
Caithness with " Lady Frances iUicia Caroline, etc., daughter of 
Francis Marquis of Montressor, by whom he had, first, Frances, 
etc. etc." 

" I thought so," said the Princess ; " you have that foolish Mon- 
tressor blood in your veins ! Your mother was a Montressor. From 
such a horoscope it would be easy to cast your fortune." 

" Oh ! but don't !" said Lady Frances, starting. "I like to live au 
jour la journee : one never can answer for oneself. " 

" And, least of all," said the Princess, " when one is entre deux 
dges /—that twilight of the passions, when one gropes oneself into 
a scrape, which in youth one would have wanted the courage, and 
in age the desire, to encounter. 

" I see, by this book, you are just thirty-five; two years older 
than myself : a glorious age for a woman, (were she one who 
knows how to make use of it ; ) the prime of her beauty, of her 
genius, and her knowledge. But, if she resemble that bird that 
pecks from your hand ; if her head be small, her eyes wide apart , her 
nose aquiline, and her features rigid; if she be easy to flatter, and 
difficult to fix; thirty-five is a perilous age: look to that! 1 give 
you one year only to be saved or lost. Your beauty may do much 
now with your husband, but not all : 'the bending statue which 
delights the world,' is but the representation of what you English 
call a Becky ; and though you were Venus de Medicis stepped from 
off her pedestal, you will neither recover nor retain a passionate and 
intellectual man, such as your husband, if there is only that." 

Lady Frances tossed her head, and lowered, and then smiled, not 
quite sure whether she should be flattered or offended by this speech. 



THE PROCESS. 



89 



The Becky, weighed in the scales with the Venus deMedicis, almost 
kicked the beam. 

The Princess rose, and Lady Frances made no attempt to detain 
her; she only said, rather coldly— 

t4 Well, I will try the effect of your portrait. I am sure I don't 
want to quarrel with Sir Frederick just now— it would be particu- 
larly inconvenient. But, you have not told me what defence I am 
to make for you to Sir Frederick. He is so very prejudiced ! " 

" Prejudice is rarely to be argued with, " said the Princess, after 
a long silence. " The wounds of self-love, like those of some rep- 
tiles, have their best remedy in the source from which they derive 
their venom. " 

" But we really must go and see you this summer in your castle 
on the Rhine," said Lady Frances, returning to the point. 

" I fear my chateau on the Rhine will turn out a chdteau en 
Kspagne. The widow of my late husband's eldest brother, who is 
a German, held it in abhorrence, and suffered it to go out of order. 
But I have a pretty rendez-vous de chasse in the forest of Soignes. 
near Brussels. " 

" That sounds charming, " said Lady Frances, smilingly : " but 
I don't think any of our men would like to go to Brussels at 
present. " 

" I can conceive that," said the princess, drily. 

" And you, Princess, — 1 wonder, with your principles, you ever 
mean to return to that revolutionary country. " 

" I am not such a partisan, " said the Princess, 4i as to set prin- 
ciples at odds with property." 

a But you will not be so bete as to trust yourself there, " inter- 
rupted Lady Frances, impatiently, " before the Nassaus return?" 

u Pas si bete, " said the Princess. " I should not like to wait 
quite so long, for the enjoyment of my pretty Pavilion de Gronen- 
dael, where I have all sorts of workmen now employed. These are 
not times to dally with enjoyment: 'aujourd'huiDauphine, demain 
?nen." Whatever may be my opinion of the Belgian government, 1 
have but one of the country— that it is beautiful and prosperous. 
Besides, the Schaffenhausen estate, in the arrondissement of Soignes, is 
worth triple the old ruins and uncertain vineyards of the Rhyngau ; 
and now, wealth is my object ; for wealth is everything : it is what 



70 



THE PROCESS. 



knowledge was in one age, and numbers in another. But " She 

paused abruptly, and laughed. 

" You think I don't understand you, " said Lady Frances; " but 
I really do. I agree that wealth is everything. See what the V.'s 

have done this season, against the superior wealth of H House ! 

There was a hard struggle for it, though, I assure you ; but now they 
are reduced to eighteen thousand a-year, poor dears ! Supposing, 
however, we vanquished Sir Frederick's prejudices against you, I 
don't see how any friends of the poor dear Nassaus could go to Bel- 
gium. " 

" Is Sir Frederick Mottram the friend of the King of Holland?" 
interrupted the Princess. 

" Why, you know the Prince of Orange is a very old friend of 
mine ; and when we were in Brussels in Twenty-nine, they were so 
very civil ! I had the Prince's horses, and his box at the spectacle and 
at the race-course; and we dined at Laeken repeatedly. " 

" What brought you to Brussels?" asked the Princess, sitting 
down again, with a new interest in the conversation. 

" AVe were returning from a short trip to Italy, and so we came 
home by Brussels, where I knew such quantities of nice people ! the 
D'Arembergs, the De Lignes, the D'Ursels, and the De Trazignies; 
the Merodes, and Vilain Quatorze, and the D'Hoogvoorsts— and, 
above all, the dear Prince of Orange ! It was the most delightful 
month of my life ! It would break my heart to go there now ; and 
Mottram hates the Belgian revolution as much as I do. " 

" Why?" asked the Princess. 

" Why, you know our party say that his best speech, this 
sessions, was his quizzing the protocols, and his hit at Lord 
Palmerston and the ministers, and all that sort of thing. You 
know I hate politics, though I do belong to Georgina Montressor's 
set. But what a state of things, as she says, without a religion 
or a king! for Leopold the First will be Leopold the Last. It 
can never go on, as 'the Age' says." 

" Humph!" said the Princess; "that seems to be the general 
opinion — or wish, at least here : — among your set particularly." 

1,4 Oh! universally. It is such a bad example! it is quite 
ridiculous ! Lord Montressor says, they have not one advocate in 
the House; and Sir Frederick, I know, thinks Belgium must go 



THE PRINCESS. 



71 



to France: I'm sure I don't know how! But I hope the Prince 
of Orange will get back to Brussels, where he has such a delight 
of a palace!" 

" For one who knows nothing of politics, the Belgian revolution 
seems to have interested you, however?" observed the Princess. 

»" Oh! it did so, very much,— at the time : you have no idea 
how much it has bored me, and overturned all my plans. Lord 
Montressor was to have gone there as ambassador. I forget why 
he wished it ; something about a corps de ballet he was to get 
up, and the races with dear Prince Frederick. I was to have 
gone on a visit to the Montressors, without Sir Frederick, who 
was then so very deep in politics." 

" You were epris then with the Prince of Orange, and calcu- 
lated on passing a pleasant winter at Brussels, as dame dupalais, 
when that vulgar revolution interrupted all?" 

" Just that— as far as going to Brussels is concerned," said 
Lady Frances, laughing ; but I assure you, en tout Men et tout 
honneur." 

;i Oh! of course : and now, adieu! a long adieu!" said the 
Princess, rising and putting on her large bonnet. " You may, 
in perfect surety of conscience, tell your husband that you give 
me up; for I give you up, from henceforth. I will not dine 
with you to-day." 

" No! Why not?" 

tc Because I will no longer be a cause of uneasiness to that 
worthy man, your husband." 

" But he need know nothing about it. " 

" There must be no equivocation, " said the Princess, decidedly. 
Lady Frances shook her head. 

u I can never receive you under other circumstances," continued 
the Princess, coldly, " than that of your accompanying your husband, 
or coming with his consent. " 

" Then you will never receive me at all," said Lady Frances, 
peevishly, the tears gathering in her eyes : " so there is an end of 
our charming plans. " 

" We shall see," said the Princess, cheerfully; and then, taking 
up her sketch, and looking earnestly on it, she said, "Leave this 
on your husband's study-table, at all events. " 



72 



THE PRINCESS. 



" And when he asks me who drew it?" 
" Tell the truth." 

.." Then he must know all?" said Lady Frances. 
" And so he ought— and so he will! The world has done with 
mysteries, public and private : subterfuge is weakness, and conceal- 
ment but the first step to discovery. Write down then among the 
roses, the violets, and other flowery fadaises of your pretty album, 
and bear it constantly in your mind, that 

' Tot ou lard, tout est su ! ' 

Farewell!" 

The Princess glided out of the room ; and Lady Frances, mistak- 
ing exhaustion and annoyance for sensibility, and self-commiseration 
for the regrets of friendship, burst into tears ; and then rung for 
aether, and her maid. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE RACING-TABLE. 

The scene in the Round-room of the Opera, of which Sir Frede- 
rick and Lady Frances Mottram had been the protagonists, had 
furnished a rich feast of scandalous commentary to the frivolous, 
the curious, and the malignant. Lady Anastatia M'Query, a ways- 
and-means lady of quality, and one of the four unmarried, unpor- 
tioned daughters of a poor Scotch peer, had found the tale a sort of 
passport to many houses, where she had previously worn out her 
welcome, with her stock of toad-eating flattery, or stretched her 
intrusions beyond the patient forbearance of connexion or of hospi- 
tality. The good Mrs. Medlicot, too, had turned the matrimonial 
fracas to her own account, by making it the text for many a homily 
upon the darkness of a benighted and God-abandoned age. More 



THE PRINCESS. 



73 



than one noble substitute for the penny-a-line men of the party 
journals had served up the adventure in various forms; which were 
followed up by paragraphs, on ' the illness of Sir Frederick Mottram 
his ' absence from his seat in the House of Commons ; 5 ' unexpected 
embarrassments;' ' separation on the tapis ; 5 ' affair of jealousy ; ' 
; Chiltern Hundreds, ' etc. etc. : and a month passed away, before 
the public, and its ' best possible instructers, ' had worn the subject 
to rags, and abandoned it for newer game. 

Among the various annoyances thus pressed upon the sensitive 
feelings and nervous irritability of Sir Frederick Mottram, he found 
some consolation in the discovery to which they led, that he had 
yet a friend deeply interested in his happiness, and watchful over 
his career ; a friend of his early years, from whom time and chance 
had latterly estranged him. A letter from this friend, Horace Harvey, 
after a silence of some years, fell upon his blighted and hopeless 
spirit, like a refreshing dew on the scathed flowers of an arid plain. 
It ran as follows :— 

" TO THE RIGHT HON . SIR FREDERICK MOTTRAM, BART. , CARLTON- 
TERRAGE, LONDON. 

" Glen Druid, Northamptonshire. 

•'My dear Mottram,— These are strange times, when the public 
is placed in a man's confidence before his oldest friends, and when 
newspapers openly discuss what intimacy shrinks from touching. 
The conservative journals, I know not why, have lately been peck- 
ing at you with unusual virulence ; the Whigs, of course, have not 
spared you ; and there is a pertinacity in their references to certain 
points connected with your interior life, which (maugre the little 
regard due to such authorities) makes me anxious and uneasy. 

" The ■ Post' of this morning states that you are about to accept 
the Chiltern Hundreds; and hints that you are injured in your 
fortunes, and are going to reside abroad;— the 6 Standard, 1 after 
some coarse accusations of political tergiversation, has an obscure 
paragraph concerning domestic disquietudes;— the ' Globe' (more 
alarming ) talks of ill health ; and there is an anecdote in the * Age, ' 
full of dashes and asterisks, with an allusion to Lady Frances, to a 



74 



THE PROCESS. 



certain ■ petit cousin, ' and a German Princess ; ending with a plain 
assertion, that you are about to separate from your wife. Is it 
possible that there can be truth in any one of these statements ? or is 
it but the usual effort to supply the rage for party calumny and 
personal anecdote? 

" Aware, as I am, that causes will bring forth their appropriate 
effects; and fearing, as I have long done, that the position in which 
circumstances and family ambition had thrown you, would prove 
anything but favourable to health, fortune, or domestic peace; still 
I am shocked— grieved. It can be no ordinary event that would 
drive Frederick Mottram from a public career, in which he has been 
so successful ; and the Chiltern Hundreds' story ( which is in some 
measure confirmed to me from another source ) makes me fear for 
the accomplishment of my own prediction. I have long inferred, 
particularly since the change in Ministry and the Reform, that your 
opinions have not always been in unison with your position as a 
partisan : but, whatever disgusts or disagreements may have arisen, 
I cannot think they w ould drive you, by quitting Parliament, to 
abandon a career for which you have made so many sacrifices. 

"That your health should be giving way under the late hours of 
the House of Commons, and the dissipations of a London life, would 
not surprise me. When last we met, I noticed the inroads which 
too close an attendance on office had made on a constitution not 
formed to stand the wear and tear of vulgar contention. Even this, 
however, would be preferable to disappointment in a quarter, the 
more difficult to endure, because it is one in which, as you have so 
often lamented, you do not wholly feel yourself exempt from self- 
reproach. On that point I could never agree with you: sharing all 
your convictions on 6 incompatibility,' ' misplaced ambition, 1 etc. etc., 
I still thought that deference to a parent's wishes put you completely 
rectus in curid, respecting your marriage; and 1 am satisfied that, 
as far as respects yourself, no woman could have just cause to re- 
gret placing her happiness in your keeping. 

"I cannot, therefore, believe the separation story, in whole or in 
part ; and if there be any truth in your retirement from Parliament, 
if either your health or temper have been ruffled by recent events, 
let me prescribe for you a visit to Mottram Hall, where I can give 
you a meeting. I should propose going to London myself, but my 



THE PROCESS. 



76 



mother is just now in one of her paroxysms of suffering, and must 
not be left. 

• Write to me, then, I beseech you. I think I have claims on your 
confidence, and that I am not without sufficient feeling and expe- 
rience to be serviceable in any worldly emergency. Minds like 
yours are too apt to be put out of tune. by the jarring of some petty 
chord, and to be let down in the heated and unnatural atmosphere 
of the world of fashion. If this be your case, I am morally, intel- 
lectually, and personally your fittest physician ; and a good dose of 
my Pantagruelian pococuranteism will do more to set you right, 
than all the stoicism in Epictetus. 

"Time and the world, my dear Mottram, have rushed strangely 
between us, since, in our relation of tutor and pupil, (a relationship 
scarcely warranted by the slight difference of years,) we laid the 
foundation of a friendship which we then thought no circumstance 
could interrupt. The bankruptcy of my father, the extraordinary 
success of yours, have alike contributed to turn us both from the 
path of our hopes and expectations. Of you Fortune has made a 
statesman, and has wedded you into one of the proudest and most 
powerful families in our peerage : of me she has disposed in single 
blessedness, and in retirement from all serious affairs ; a philosophi- 
cal hermit, poor, but contented— a cynic, but not a Heraclitus. 

" Had I not, coxcomb as I was, aspired to your sister, and. still 
worse, preached liberalism to yourself, I might have risen to wealth 
and consideration ; and had you married that impersonation of 
Byron's c beautiful spirit, '—that most gifted and unfortunate of an 
unfortunate class, — how different might have been our lot ! You. 
at least, might have been more useful to your species, more elevated 
in your ambition, and, perhaps, more happy, than accident, or 
rather uncontrollable necessity, has left you. United to the woman 
of your choice, her restless energies would have roused your less 
active temperament ; her intense devotedness would have met your 
passionate feelings ; and her love and genius for the arts would have 
nourished that highest and purest source of human enjoyment, for 
which you were born. But I will not farther impose on your time 
and patience. I hear your apartments at Mottram Hall are getting 
ready for your reception : we shall soon meet there. In the mean 
while, satisfy my uneasiness at these voces ambiguas. 



70 



THE PRINCESS. 



" By the way, who is this German Princess? Can she be a Prin- 
cess of Schaffenhausen, who lately wrote to me to express her desire 
of possessing your mother's picture, in the character of Rosalind, 
by Romney ; for which she offered any price I might choose to put 
on it ? She says she wants it to complete a collection of English 
painters ; but her earnestness about a master whose works are not 
rare, is a good specimen of the peremptoriness of an aristocratic 
volition. She shan't have it at any price ! 

" Affectionately yours, 

"Horace Harvey." 

To this letter Sir Frederick Mottram promptly replied. His an- 
swer ran thus : — 

" TO HORACE HARVEY, ESQ., GLEN DRUID, NORTH HANTS. 

" Carl ton-terrace. 

" My dear Horace,—! thank you for your letter. I can un- 
derstand that you made an effort on yourself to write it; fori am 
aware that I have sailed in the north of your philosophical and 
political opinions, for the last few years ; and that, in spite of 
your professions, (you were not wont to make them,) I am more 
indebted to your compassion, or, perhaps, to the triumph of your 
pride of prophecy, than to any great sympathy you can have in 
my destinies. 

" Well, I have no split with my party ; though some of its out- 
and-out men totally disagree with me on one or two questions ; 
and affect to attribute this difference to the leven of my plebeian 
origin and early connexions. Neither have any articles of separation 
been drawn up between me and Lady Frances : we are pretty 
much where we have been for many years ; and ' the boy ' alluded 
to is my wife's godson and cousin. 

" You must remember, a few years back, the pretty imp that 
enacted Tom Thumb, when my wife got up her private theatricals 
at Mottram Hall. You may have seen her then kiss his peachy 
cheek, pat his head, and plat his fair and flaxen locks with flowers. 



THE PRINCESS. 



77 



His cheek is still as peachy, his locks as flaxen, and his head as 
empty, as ever. Jealous of such a thing as that!— Oh! no! 

" My wife is what the world calls virtuous : her vanity stands 
in the place of passion ; and her social habits, of all ties, feelings, 
and predilections. She lives with a set, and knows and sees nothing 
beyond it. Her intimates are false, foolish, and heartless ; but 
still persons of high consideration. I have entire confidence in her 
virtue, though none in her conduct. Her virtue — were it other- 
wise ! — Tut! the very idea is heart-sickening, maddening! As if 
any one with the spirit, nay, with the passions of a man, would 
await for the most degrading conviction ; would patiently pause for 
a 4 damning witness, ' and then show himself up as dupe and victim, 
in terms which the world's laugh has marked down for eternal 
ridicule ! 

" Every pulse in my body throbs to bursting at the bare idea. 
I have no melancholy and gentlemanly philosophy about me to 
bear me up under such circumstances. Such patient forbearance, 
with its good taste and good keeping, belongs only to the gentlemen 
by descent and alliance, whose fathers have endured the same 
infliction before them, and bequeathed to their sons their honours 
and their contempt for public opinion. I am not of these; I am a 
plebeian, the son of a man who was of the unwashed people— of 
a man, every inch a man, but no gentleman. The muscles that 
earned his daily bread would have crushed a gentleman to the 
earth. His pains-taking industry and sagacious calculations raised 
him up the wealth which bought from these high-minded and proud 
gentlemen a participation of their boasted honours. 

" It was gold (gold, honourable in the hands of the industry 
that acquired it, but base and infamous in those of the creatures 
who bartered for it their incommunicable birthrights,)— it was 
gold that placed us in the ranks of the aristocracy ; with them, 
not of them. For years I have been reproached with these things, 
and twitted with frequent allusions to my father's birth, my 
mother's profession. And what was that? an actress, — she was 
a woman of no common talents ; gifted, at least, with the talent 
of amusing the blockheads who could not amuse themselves. 
Well, I have shaken off my susceptibility to all this ; and I have 
learned, from the weakness, the inanity, the folly, the ignorance, 

6. 



76 



THE PRINCESS. 



and the corruption of the high allies I have made, to honour and 
respect the humble but useful race from which I have sprung. 

" As for the Princess, the heroine of the 6 Morning Post,' the 
fourth Grace and the tenth Muse of the ' Court Journal, ' that is 
another thing altogether! lam of La Bruyere's opinion, that '// 
vaut mieux aller a VOpera avec tel hommc, qu'au sermon 
avec telle fcmmef a maxim which strictly applies to this foreigner, 
who has attained to a considerable and a mischievous influence 
over my wife, and has, I think, through Lady Frances's means, 
wormed herself into the exclusive society of London, where, with 
her lost character, not even her letters from the chefs of foreign 
cabinets would have placed her. Her applying to you for my 
mother s picture is but one of her traits of intrigue, originating in 
a desire to mortify me, because I have refused to be introduced to 
her, or to give her admission into my house. I hate these femmes I 
affairees ; these Mesdames de Prie and De Grammont ; these 
petticoated ministers, the worst signs of the worst epochs. 

" My wife and I had a de'tnele, some time back, after the Opera, 
apropos to this Princess. I sent Lady Frances a letter, which, 
perhaps, I ought not to have written ; and, instead of defending 
herself, or giving up this person, she sent me her own picture ; 
a splendid drawing; just what she was when 1 married her. It had 
also a little motto, full of fancy and of delicate reproach^ which 
brought me all but to her feet ; when, on entering her room, I ob- 
served on the back of her chair a bird, a paroquet, which I had never 
seen before. This led to an explanation, and it came out that the 
portrait had been done only the previous day ; and by whom, think 

you ? Why, by the Princess ! My wife was such a d Becky as 

to show her my letter ; of which, abuse of her was the foundation. 
Hers, then, was the drawing, hers the device, the idea ! 

" But enough of her ; and now for my pecuniary affairs. 

" I have meddled so much with those of the country, that I have 
neglected my own most foolishly. I am going down to-morrow 
with Harris to Mottram Hall, to muddle over accounts of twelve 
years' standing, and put things in a better train. As for my health, 
Horace, I am dying. I don't in the least mind what the physicians 
say, nor even what you think : I have that within, which passes their 
and your skill. The sources of life, I feel, are dried up within me : 



THE PRINCESS. 



79 



nothing touches, nothing interests, me. The cui bono of all follows 
me like a shadow. Music and painting, once the charm of my exis- 
tence, have lost their spell. I am inert, listless, dissatisfied ; with a 
perpetual weight on my spirits, and a prostration of will, that neither 
permits me to pursue any one object, nor to rest contented and tran- 
quil in my nullity. I am feverish and restless by night, and my appe- 
tite is as wholly gone as my relish for things more intellectual. My 
temper, too, is become irritable ; and I am annoyed by trifles, till 
I am vexed and mortified at my own susceptibility. This cannot 
long go on. 

w Your allusion to one now no more was, I am sure, well meant; 
so is the operation which strikes the knife into a deep-seated gangrene : 
but it requires considerable firmness of nerve to make the incision ! 

" It was, however, more ill (or well) timed than you had reason 
to suppose. The image of that creature has recently recurred to my 
imagination, as I saw her first at my father's, on my arrival from 
Oxford for my first vacation. She was singing at her easel, and 
copying my mother's picture by Romney. She was dressed in that 
fantastic Polish dress, which my mother's always theatrical taste 
compelled her to assume. What a perfect incarnation of all that is 
beautiful in form, with all that is bright in moral combination ! 
Then, her quick apprehension of external forms, and her mystic 
power of reproducing them ! her faculty of high resolve, under the 
government of high motives ! What a sublime, what a privileged 
specimen of humanity ! Well, it is scarcely five days since 1 saw 
this being, this once beautiful shrine of talents and acquirements so 
superior ; and where do you think ? On the bed of penurious, 
public charity; a corpse in a workhouse ; indebted to benevolent but 
mistaken piety for the last acts of compassionate sympathy ! 

" My mother and myself, as you well know, thought that this last 
scene of a heart-breaking tragedy had been completed fourteen years 
ago. We had been told so, and believed it. We had not time then 
to inquire very deeply, for it was my wedding-week. c Some natu- 
ral tears we shed, but dried them soon ;' and 1 went with my noble 

and beautiful bride to Italy. My mother died in my absence, and 

But why this to you ? The bitter recollections this event left behind 
it, were added to the higher causes which threw me into public 
life. But she whom we had driven to this destiny did not then 



so 



THE PRINCESS. 



die ; she lived to suffer and to struggle on , without making one 

application to her near and wealthy kindred, and to die at last, and 

almost in my presence, in the workhouse of ! I cannot go on. " 

******* 

Sir Frederick Mottram flung down his pen, and throwing him- 
self back in his chair, pressed his clenched hands on his aching 
brow, and yielded his whole being up to that torrent of uneasy 
sensation, to which disease of mind and of body alike contributed 
their evil influence. It was a splendid summer's evening, and the 
only silent hour which London knows at that season of pleasure 
and of bustle — the London dinner-hour. Lady Frances had not 
returned from a dejeund dtnatoire, announced three weeks before, 
and given by Lord Alfred in honour of the Princess of Schaffenhau- 
sen, whose arrival in London from a tour had that morning glit- 
tered in all the papers. 

Sir Frederick had himself left the House of Commons early, 
for the purpose of transacting some business preparatory to his 
leaving town the next day ; but he had employed the interval in 
answering his friend's letter, a task to which he brought an aggra- 
vated feeling of remorse conjured up by its allusions. He was still 
busied in the indulgence of bitter recollections, when the study-door 
slowly opened, and Larry Fegan again stood, as he had done some 
weeks before, in the opening. It was, however, no longer the helper 
of the helper — the rough, ragged, and forlorn creature, whose appear- 
ance was at once so farcical and so astounding : it was the head 
groom of Sir Frederick's establishment, a handsome, showy, and 
well-dressed palefrenier, as ever shared the admiration of the Sunday 
promenaders of the Park with the distinguished master he followed. 

"Well, sir!" said Sir Frederick, starting as from an uneasy 
dream. 

" I big your pardon, Sir Frederick, intirely, and didn't know 
your honor was in it, sir. I only came to take the liberty of laving 
a frank for my mother, to be freed at your honor's leisure. 1 Mistress 
Betty Burke,' sir, ' alias Fegan, Shanballymac, county Kerry— to 
be lift till called for— care of Mr. Owen Geraghty, Post Office.' " 

" I cannot remember all this," said Sir Frederick, impatiently; 
L - write the address, and leave your letter." 

" I shall, sir, of coorse," replied Fegan, retiring to the door, and 



THE PRINCESS. 



8!. 



yet pausing at the threshold with a look which indicated that his 
Irish ingenuity had made the avowed pretext of his intrusion but 
the avant-cou?*rier to something that remained behind. He paus- 
ed, picked up a book that had fallen from the shelves, and asked if 
he should order lights. A sharp u No" again drove him to the 
door, which he half closed ; but, advancing once more to the table, 
Sir Frederick drew up, and asked — 
" What is the matter ?" 

" Nothing in life, plaze your honor, " was the reply, " only a 
taste of a note, Sir Frederick, I left for you here on your teeble. 
I was mounted on the blood mare, after coming in with your honor 
from the Park to-day, and waiting for orders in regard of going to 
the House, sir, before I put up the mare, when she said to me, says 
she, ' The porter has refused to take my note to Sir Frederick,' 
says she." 

" Who? — what she?" was asked impatiently. 
" Th' ould Sister of Charity, Sir Frederick ; you know yourself, 
sir, of coorse." 

Larry Fegan paused ; but there was a humorous significance in 
his face which indicated that more was meant than spoken. 

" So, plaze your honor," he continued, " I tuck the liberty of 
bringing the note myself, for charity's sweet sake, and left it here, 
sir, under this bit of green marvel, sir, with the little dumb 
blackamoor on it." 

As he spoke, he raised a beautiful presse-papier with a bronze 
figure of Silence. Sir Frederick snatched up the note, and Fegan 
retreated to the door, fixing his eyes on his master with a gaze of 
intense curiosity. Sir Frederick read : 

" At the desire of Sir Frederick Mottram, the person who met 

him at the workhouse of has called twice in Carlton-terrace, 

but was not admitted. Should Sir Frederick have any inquiries to 
make of her, she will be happy to reply to the uttermost of her abi- 
lity ; but she leaves London at an early hour to-morrow, on profes- 
sional avocations. She will receive any order left before midnight 
with the porter of the chapel of the Embassy, directed to Ma- 
dame Mortier." 

During the rapid perusal of this note, Lawrence Fegan was slowly 
drawing the door after him. 



52 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Stay!" said Sir Frederick. 

Fegan shut the door with alacrity, and drew up. 

" Get your hat, and return. " 

Fegan was back before his master had concluded the following 
lines : — 

tc Madam,— I trust you will allow me to apologize de vive voiac, 
for the impertinence or mistake of my porter. I shall remain at 
home for the rest of this evening, and shall be flattered by the ho- 
nour of a visit. The person who will deliver this (an Irish Catholic) 
will be in attendance to admit you. 

" I have the honour to be, etc. etc. 

" F. MOTTBAM.' 1 

Fegan accepted his commission with an air of confidential import- 
ance, which showed that intrigue was an ingredient of his tempera- 
ment ; and Sir Frederick returned once more to the letter he had left 
unfinished, when interrupted by his groom : he added the following 
postscript :— 

" A little incident has occurred, which obliges me to conclude 
thus abruptly. I have much to say to you, dear Horace; but it 
must be under the old elms of Mottram Hall. Till then, and ever, 
vale et me ama ! " F. M. " 

Fegan, for whose return Sir Frederick had waited with impa- 
tience, at length arrived, bringing only a receipt for his own billet. 
He was desired to remain in waiting in the hall; where, with 
Mr. Jennings, the new porter's permission, he seated himself at the 
desk. Taking from his pocket the awkwardly-folded sheet pre- 
pared for his master's frank, he began to write that letter, which at 
first had only been thought of as an excuse for following up his 
effort to procure the Sister of Charity the means of applying to Sir 
Frederick. Whether her billet was one of love or of religion, 
Fegan knew not ; but he was equally ready for either mission. The 
results of his epistolary verve are subjoined. 



THE PRINCESS. 



83 



• TO MRS. ELIZABETH FEGAN, ALIAS BURKE, SHANBALLYMAC, 
COUNTY KERRY . 

" Onered Mother, — I writ ye a long letter by Jimmy Howlan, 
who was going to the leeks from Brissels, with his furrin master — and 
wouldn't care if myself was in it ; th' iday of ould Ireland just hanging 
about my neck like a milestone ; though the greatest of luck has come 
upon me since thin, mother dear ; and I no more thinking of it, surely, 
than the child unborn. And well, ma'am, what would yez be after 
thinking if it's own body groom I am to the lit. Hon. Sir Frederick 
Mottrum, barynite, and minister of steet, and privy-counsellor to the 
King— ! divil a less, ma'am : and I thought it the greatest of honors 
to be his own little boy behind the cab, and breaking my arrum— 
God bless the mark ! Och ! then, mother dear, I wishtyou were after 
seeing me, this blessed day, 'bove all the days o' the year, mounted on 
an elegent blood mare the Knight of Kerry might be proud to ride, 
and I in my bran new livery shuit, that is no livery at all, I'm proud 
to say 5 but just sich a coat as the first gintleman in the land needn't 
be ashamed to wear : to say nothing of a new carline, * and neither 
band nor bow, so that it's what I might pass for a raal gintleman 
bred and born all over th' universal world; which, mother dear, 
you know I am, if every one had his jew. And the masther, the 
lit. Hon. Sir Frederick, riding afore me, down to the House, and up 
the Park, to th'intire amazement of the out-of-dur servants, includ- 
ing Mr. Saunders, the head coachman, a raal buckeen, keeping 
company with the best in the land at the races and other resorts. 

" Mother dear, I'll send you a sovrin in gould, and an iligant 
shawl, by the first opportunity ; and was thinking that when I 'd be 
after taking my second quarter — and has twenty guineas a-year, 
ma'am, with clouths, boots, and buckskins— (for the first will go to 
pay my trifle of dits ;) and sure, it 's in regard of being so long out 
of pleece, and other raisons afore-mintioned in my last. Och hone ! 
but I was in a poor wey thin ; but don't be graving now, for it's all 
over, like the fair of Athy : and was advised by th' under coachman, 
a dacent Dublin boy, to presinta petition to Sir Frederick, and tell 
him how I had fell into throuble, and grew up big, bare, and nee- 



* Hat :— quaere, why so called in Ireland ? 



84 



THE PRINCESS. 



ked ; but had a spurrit above it, of coorse, as well becomed me : and 
manetime was doing a turn about the place, in th' offices and the 
steeble-yard ; and had my bit and my sup, and my rag; and Larry 
here, and Larry there, and doing a turn lor the housemaids one day, 
in regard of the dustings and the pope's-heads ; and helping the 
helper on another ; and hiding in the hay-loft, from Mr. Saunders, 
who hates the Hirish, bad luck to him ! worse nor pison : and 
th' hall porther, who isn't the boy to throw a drop over his shoulder, 
nor stand by looking at other people dhrinking ; and I put into his 
aisy-cheer, night afther night ; and not a christhian in the house, 
bad or good, only myself, and the maids, and the sick futman in the 
garret, and nobody to look after him nor wet his lips but myself. 

" Well, the divil sich ballyboraging and rollicking ever ye seed as 
is going on here from morning till night ; and my Leedy and Sir 
Frederick knowing no more about it nor the child unborn : and 
you'd be afther taking th' house-steward for a bishop, and the 
grooms of the cheembers for the protestant ministers of Shan- 
ballymac; they looking as stately, ma'am, and as high, as the rock 
of Gashel, in black clouths, and white cambrick pocket-handker- 
chiefs. And this is the way, mother dear, I got into place, opening 
the hall-door for the maisther in the middle of the night, and the 
blessed sun shining, and other things, which it doesn't behove me to 
be afther talking about; so mum's the word. 

" So now I'm his honor's own groom, and grown as fat as a fool, 
ma'am; having lots to ate, nothing to do, and plenty to help me. 
So, the place shooting me intirely, I have got my hair cut in the new 
London fashion, with an helper under me, and goes to Ashley's, and 
begs my duty to Father Murphy, for the great peins he tuck with 
my edication— and no thanks to Miss Grimly's Protestant Oxillery 
Bible Sunday-school : and till him, if ye plaze, that I means to take 
up, and look to my duty, and takes the liberty of sending him a 
snuff-box, which Jeemes Howlan tells me was blessed by the Pope 
of Room, with the other bastes, on St. Anthony's day ; and gave him 
a bran new Gulgee handkerchief for it ; with which, including the 
sovrin and the shawl, I remain, onered mother, 

" Your own dear and dutiful son, 
till further notice by post or otherwise, your affectionate 

44 La wrence Fegap*. " 



TEE PRINCESS. 



85 



While Fegan was thus amusing himself by the simple but not un- 
studied expression of his filial feelings, the grooms of the chamber 
were hurrying to their posts, lamps and lustres were lighting, and 
notes of various preparation were sounding in the hitherto silent 
mansion. A select party was expected to return with Lady 
Frances, to tea and a grille, from a fete at Norwood. 

Meantime, Sir Frederick was waiting in anxious impatience for the 
arrival of his invited guest : he considered his acceptance of her pro- 
posed visit as a species of tribute to the memory of one, whom 
conscience or vanity made him believe he had hurried to an untimely 
grave ; and he sought in vain to quell his perturbation and appease 
his restlessness by the details of business. 

The clock had struck eleven, when Lady Frances's return was 
announced by the roll of carriages, and by much noise and laugh- 
ing, as she passed with her party up stairs. Other carriages and 
other guests succeeded. Sir Frederick rang his bell ; but before the 
footman could appear, the officious Fegan was at the door. 

" She isn't come, plaze your honor, or I lets your honor know, of 
coorse, " he said, significantly. 

" Send William to me," was the answer, " and tell the second 
coachman to have horses at the door at five in the morning. You 
may then go to bed : I have no farther occasion for you. " 

Fegan retired, with his customary " Of coorse, sir;" which, 
however, was not in perfect keeping with the expression of mortified 
disappointment that sat upon his countenance. 

When William appeared, his answer to his master's inquiries was, 
that " her ladyship had a very small party at tea. " 

Midnight arrived, and Sir Frederick dismissed all expectation of 
his devout visitant. He was almost relieved by the disappointment. 
He had a few words to say to Lady Frances before leaving town, re- 
lative to his son ; and he resolved, after a slight struggle with his 
feelings, to join her party for a few minutes. He was just passing 
into the hall, with this intention, as a chair entered it. A lady in 
black, who had more the air of a Venetian mask, than of the guest 
of an English drawing-room, stepped out. The thought that this 
might be his expected visitant crossed him 5 and he would have re- 
turned to his study, but a line of servants cut off his retreat. The 
footmen in the inner hall gave her name to the groom of the cham- 

6.. 



36 



THE PRINCESS. 



bers on the landing-place; and the title of the Princess of Schaffen- 
hausen resounded from chamber to chamber, as she passed through 
the suite of rooms to Lady Frances's boudoir. 

Sir Frederick stood for a moment in angry astonishment. Lady 
Frances had solemnly promised not to see the Princess again, during 
her stay in England; had assured him that she had taken her final 
leave of Carlton-terrace; and yet she was now again under his roof; 
admitted into his wife's most intimate society; and, to judge by her 
appearance, entering his doors, if not incognito, at least with the 
view of escaping identification, should chance throw him, where 
choice never could, into his wife's society. 

His feelings were outraged, his pride wounded, his humour goad- 
ed to its uttermost bitterness ; and he resolved on holding no fur- 
ther terms with one whose duplicity, contempt for his wishes, and 
indifference to his injunctions and opinion, had passed the bounds 
of all sufferance. Yet she was in the midst of her kindred, and 
surrounded by admirers ; while he, an alien in his own adopted 
circle, in his own house, amidst a host of acquaintance, had not one 
friend. A sense of this desolation aggravated every other emotion, 
and he advanced, through the beautiful and half-lighted rooms, with 
a haggard look and disturbed air, that aroused the tete-a-tete lan- 
guor of the occupants of Lady Frances's boudoir. 

These were Lord Allington and Mrs. St. Leger. The former 
stared, but coolly kept his seat: the latter sprang forward to an inner 
room, plainly to anticipate his arrival. There was an attempt to 
shut the door; but he burst in. His appearance was momentary, 
but of strange effect. Between his entrance at one door, and his 
departure through another, scarcely a minute elapsed ; though it had 
sufficed to embarrass and disconcert the idle and inconsiderate group 
which occupied the apartment. 

The company were gathered round a species of gambling-table, 
fitted up in a chamber dedicated exclusively to the arts. The 
gamesters were already worn out by the long pursuit of their 
morning's amusements ; and even the excitements of a novel species 
of dissipation failed to engage them. But Sir Frederick's transit put 
an abrupt termination to the amusements: carriages were ordered, 
the guests departed, the lights were extinguished, and silence again 
reigned in the gorgeous but dreary mansion. 



T1IE PRINCESS. 



81 



The scene which had occurred had been so rapidly enacted, that 
none but the principal actress was capable of calculating its conse- 
quences or appreciating its details. Foolish, frivolous, and incon- 
sequent as Lady Frances might be, she trembled for the results as 
they affected her own plans and pleasures ; though less alive to their 
influence on her character and her position with her husband : and 
in her habit of relying upon others, or the consciousness of her 
own want of resource, she threw off one of those wordy epistles, 
the fac-similes of her own incoherent and disorderly mind. 

" TO THE MARCHIONESS OF MONTRESSOR. 

" Carlton-terrace. 

''Dearest Georgina, — Come to me, or send me Lord Montressor, 
as soon as possible. 1 have had another blow-up with Sir Frede- 
rick, worse than the Opera scene. I really think he is mad. Good 
Heavens! how happy you are! Aubrey adoring you as a woman, 
and revering you as a saint : your husband confiding in you, and 
nobody finding fault with you. 

" I told you, Sir Frederick wanted me to set off with him to 
Mottram Hall ; but my cards were out for a dejeune at the Willows. 
Besides, once away, and adieu to the confederation of the Rhine ! 
After much discussion, we came to a compromise : he to start im- 
mediately ; and I to follow as soon as 1 could , trusting to what 
might turn up in the meantime. 

" Last night, however,— he being engaged, as I thought, at the 
House, as usual,— I returned from Alfred Montressor's dejeune, 
where I scarcely spoke to the Princess, who only showed herself 
for half an hour, and would not allow her horses to put up ! Well, 
they all came back to tea at Carlton-terrace. It was the first night 
I opened the little tribune for the racing table ; having ventured to 
move back Sir Frederick's Venus, on the suggestion of Lord Al- 
lington, who said such odd things : for the Venus was covered with 
dust, poor dear ! In short, the whole thing reminded me of 1829, 
before you grew sick and saintly, as Lord A. says. 

"Well, just as I had betted on the Jersey colours, and flung down 
my handful of balls, (and lost my money, par parent hese,) who 



88 



THE PRINCESS. 



should appear at the door but Sir Frederick ! For the last six 
years, I never knew him join my parties after coming from the 
House. The worst of it was (and, by all that's sacred, accidentally) 
the Princess had dropped in ; and 1 must say, not more unexpectedly 
than unwished for, and quite contrary to our agreement : for, only 
that 1 want her for the service of the Confederation this summer, I 
should certainly have cut her; she is so very severe and despotic. 
However, she drew her lace mantilla over her face (you know her 
way ) as soon as ever the ghost of Banquo appeared. 

" The first thing that struck my husband, was the displaced Venus 
(his Canova). In moving her out of the way, Alfred Montressor had 
broken her nose, which he had fastened on with sealing-wax. Little 
Levison of the Guards had put his cap upon her head, Claude had 
corked moustaches, and Mrs. St. Leger rolled her black cashmir 
over the bust. You never saw such a wounded hussar ! It was 
a mourir! We shouted laughing ; and this brought on a romping 
match ; and then, the causeuse was upset, and the cushions were 
all about the floor ; when, lo ! Sir Frederick started in, overthrew 
the racing-table, and, seizing Claude's arm, asked him in a voice half 
suffocated with rage— 

" Is this one of your mischievous pranks, young sir?" 
" At this moment Mrs. St. Leger was pushed forward by the 
Princess (by whom she was soufflee with miraculous quickness), and 
passing her arm through Sir Frederick's, with one of her pretty mi- 
nauderies , looked in his face and said, ' No, I am the criminal ; ' 
and pointing to the Venus, she added—' Qui nous negligent nous 
perdenty '—for you know the picture scene has got into the carica- 
ture shops. The effect was instantaneous. Sir Frederick disen- 
gaged himself, and rushed out of the room by the draped door, 
behind the alcove, which opens into his own apartments. 

'< Of course you understand the mot d'tinigme? You remember 
his infatuation of three years back, before Mrs. St. Leger's departure 
for Germany ; the diamond agraffe sent to me by Storr and Mortimer, 
by mistake; his (Mottram's) capricious cut, after showing her up by 
his devotion in a way quite unpardonable : when once a woman is 
affichee as the favourite of a public man, there is no retreat. Private 
flirtations pass unnoticed; but I never yet knew a woman completely 
get out of the scrape, if inscribed in the pension-list— did you? 



THE PRINCESS. 



89 



Ct The Princess's conduct was unpayable ; but the quickness with 
which the little St. Leger seized on the idea was still more clever. 
Lord Allington says she is, out and out, the most adroit woman in 
London ; and that people will find out, some day, (as they did Lady 
Jane Trevor's beauty,) that she is anything but a fool. 

" Well, dear, I sent them all away (the Princess had glided ofF 
before I could thank her) ; but I had a horrid night, and I now write 
to you from bed, not having yet rung for Felicite. I shall wait my 
sentence patiently. Men are too unreasonable ! Mottram has nothing 
really to reproach me with; for, as for my engouement for my 
godson, that is too ridiculous ! Good b'ye ! I send this by Hippo- 
lyte— don't keep him — et aime-moi, commeje t'aime! " 

" F. Mottram. " 

M P.-S. Gracious Heaven ! What do you think? Sir Frederick is 
off for the Continent [—Sailed this morning, at seven o'clock, from 
Tower-stairs ! Je n'en reviens pas. Not a word, not a line ! 
I had sent Felicite to tell Saunders that I wanted a groom to ride to 
my aunt Campbell's, when she returned with word that the second 
groom was ill, and that the first ( some strange Irish creature that 
Mottram has taken into special favour) had gone with his master. 
The travelling-chaise, packed up for Mottram Hall, as was supposed, 
had taken them to the Tower-stairs at six; and the postilion had 
brought back the carriage with the doors locked up, and the key 
kept. So, whether the chaise-boxes had been removed, and the 
secret drawers emptied, is unknown. The whole is a mystery! 

■ : His own man knows nothing about it. He slept out of the 
house, as usual, (the profligate ! ) after he had laid out his master's 
things and heated the bath ; and he did not return till nine this 
morning (his master not intending to go till twelve). Nobody went 
with Sir Frederick but his new Irish groom ; a helper, observe, in 
the stables, the other day ! and the Figaro of the hackney-coach 
adventure on the Opera night, as Alfred Montressor called him. All 
sorts of things came into my head. Can he have gone off with any 
one? 

" W ell ! there is a reprieve, at all events. I shall, I suppose, get a 
protocole de mari, as the Princess calls it, before long. In the 
mean time, I breathe, dear; and the breakfast at the Willows goes 



90 THE PRINCESS. 

on. I shall expect you : a dejeune by daylight comes within your 
law ; and I am to let good Mrs. Medlicot hold a bazaar in the garden, 
for the benefit of her Timbuctoo Tract Society.— A ddio I Once 
more, come to me. " 



CHAPTER V. 

TOWER-STAIRS. 

From the scene, which Lady Frances had so inconsistently des- 
cribed, Sir Frederick Mottram had found his way to his own room, 
in a state of irritation, to which the antecedents of its immediate cause 
had powerfully contributed. A life, habitually harassing and un- 
healthy, had unstrung his nerves; and the agitations, public and 
domestic, of the last three weeks, were now summed up in a per- 
sonal insult. Annoyed, therefore, to the uttermost pitch of endur- 
ance, he flung his full length on the sofa. The atmosphere of the 
close-curtained room was stifling ; a lamp which burned in the 
adjoining bath-room, sent its rays dimly through the dense vapour 
of the heated water. 

He lay with his face pressed on his burning hands ; and his position, 
like the local, was favourable to a painful indulgence in uneasy 
sensations. Dark thoughts, like stormy clouds, flitted across the 
surface of his mind, which, already disposed to magnify and distort 
every incident that had passed, was torn with regrets, self-reproach, 
remorse, and indignation. Its morbid functions, multiplying erro- 
neous conceptions, exaggerated the absurd occurrences respecting the 
statue into premeditated ridicule, contempt, and scorn. The ruin 
of his hopes, his character, his affairs, swept through his distem- 
pered imagination in frightful forms, with a rush and confusion of 
ideas that approached the very confines of insanity. 

While lying thus steeped in misery, he heard, or fancied he heard, 
someone stirring in his bath-room. He sprang upon his feet, and 



THE PRINCESS. 



91 



immediately a door clapped sharply from within, as if some one had 
gone hastily forth. But there was still something moving and 
fluttering about ; and on entering the inner room, he saw his wife's 
favourite paroquet perched above the bath. The bird, alarmed at 
his impatient efforts to take it prisoner, eluded for some time his 
grasp, and fled, repeating its silly habitual phrase of " Aimes-tu 
Coco? " At length, however, he seized it, and, in his impatient 
spleen, crushed, and flung it into the water. " Aimes-tu . . . . " 
gurgled once more in its throat, and then was heard no more. 

Had Sir Frederick strangled the donor of the unlucky favourite , 
whose tones it had caught, he could not have been more confused or 
shocked. He felt as if he had sunk to the last point of degradation. 
The violence of his emotions, his gloomy imagination, led him to 
consider this act as little short of a crime. A revulsion took place 
in his whole frame; his ears tingled, the sight left his eyes, and, 
utterly worn out and exhausted, he sunk senseless to the ground. 

How long consciousness had been suspended by physical debility, 
he knew not; but on recovering recollection, the daylight was 
already pouring through the crevices of the shutters. He arose, and 
threw open the windows. The morning air brought with it refresh- 
ment and restoration ; and, with a mind gradually cooled down, he 
turned to seek his bed; when a paper caught his eye. It lay in the 
middle of the floor, nearly opposite to the door of the adjoining bath- 
room. Mechanically, and without purpose, he stooped and took it 
from the ground. It was addressed to himself, and written with a 
pencil. The contents at once seized his whole attention :— 

" Up and away ! You think yourself miserable ; you are but ill. 
You think yourself aggrieved ; you are but dispirited. You blame 
others for the results of your own conduct. Your springs of life 
want new tempering; your mind needs refreshment, but you will 
And none at Moltram Hall : you will find there old associations, and 
you need new impressions. Leave England, then ; leave it imme- 
diately : why not to-day ? Could you start with Parry to the Pole, 
or with Lander to the burning plains of Africa ; could you plunge 
into the unexplored forests of America, to tread the tangled woods 
of the Oswega, or slumber in the branches of the hemlock-tree; it 
were well and best. But if you cannot visit new regions, you can 
seek the old ones under new circumstances. Look to regenerated 



THE PRINCESS. 



Europe; throw away the spectacles of faction, cleanse off the film 
of party, break the thraldom of fashion; learn to unlearn, — to feel, 
think, judge for yourself. Go forth to the world a man ; and not 
that mass of habits, prejudices, morbid refinements, and factitious 
wants, an English aristocrat, the pupil of old schools, the support 
of gone-by institutions. 

" 1 told you I would obey your call; I have done so, but your 
petulance brooked no delay, and 1 missed you in your study. I have 
passed through your dissipated house as a public robber might, 
unobserved, unmolested. My vocation is to seek the wretched, to 
alleviate suffering wherever I find it ; in the golden saloons of the 
wealthy, as in the homely wards of the parish workhouse : you are 
miserable, and I am at my post. 

" Up then and away ! The morning breaks, the wind is fair, 
sails are unfurling, steam is rising. There is a tricoloured flag 
floating on the Thames ; it is the flag of a regenerated people. Try 
the effect of transition. Give to the winds the frivolous vexations 
which prey on your noble mind. The word of the age is, En 
avant ! he who lingers last is lost." 

Sir Frederick read and re-read this singular fragment : the iden- 
tity of its author could not be mistaken. Disgusted as he was, even 
beyond satiety, with all that belonged to the world in which he was 
moving , the spirit, vagueness and mystery of the communication, the 
romance and enthusiasm which appeared to animate the writer, had 
the power of a spell. It was gracious to reflect, that some one did 
exist sufficiently interested in him to exert even so strange an inter- 
ference ; and the advice offered was in perfect accordance with the 
tone and temper of the moment. To embrace that advice, was at 
least a resolve; it was doing something : it removed the vacillation 
of purpose ; it strengthened the helplessness of broken-down voli- 
tion ; it brightened the gloom of hopeless despondency. 

The clock of the Horse-guards had now struck five ; and a wild 
and warbling whistle, resembling the silver tones of a mountain fla- 
geolet, was rising from beneath the windows of the apartment. 
Some one, then, was up in the establishment. Sir Frederick listened 
with emotion and interest to the air, for it was one to which his 
mother's memory was attached. It was by the singing of that air, 



THE PRINCESS. 



93 



that she had first won his father's affections. It was the beautiful 
Irish melody of c Allein a Roon.' 

To his inquiry, in a low but distinct voice, of " Who is there? 
who is whistling ?" he was answered by Fegan. 

" It 's me, plaise your honor, of coorse, Sir Frederick, gitting 
riddy to attind your honor, to Mottram Hall, according to orders 
from Mounseer last night, sir !" 

" Is there none up but you ?" 

" Sorrow christhian, Sir Frederick, only the house-dog, poor 
ould Naro here !" 

" Order the post-horses immediately, and awake no one." 

" I shawl, Sir Frederick. But, axing your pardon, sir, in re- 
gard of the walley, who is not at home in respect of being out . . . ." 

" 1 shall take no one with me but you," was the answer. 

The brush with which Larry Fegan was giving the last polish to 
his own boots, fell from his hands. 

" Is it nobody but myself! to dress and undress your honor, 
and . . . ." 

Sir Frederick had already left the window ; and Larry's modest 
interrogatory was left unanswered. There was a rush of ambition 
from the heart to every pore of his extremities. The words died 
away on his lips as he half repeated his inquiry ; and he flew to 
execute 1 his commission, repeating, "Nobody but myself— confi- 
dintial, servant and own man to the Right Honorable ! Well, well, 
the devil's in you (Lord pardon me ! ) Larry Fegan, for luck ! And 
wouldn't wonder to see myself house-steward, and gentleman at 
large, before the year's out ! " 

Sir Frederick Mottram had changed his dress, and was seated in 
his carriage as the clock struck six. He stopped but for a moment, 
at the packet-office in the Haymarket 5 and then gave his orders 
to the astonished Fegan, who, perched on the box in front, driving 
clouds of yellow dust from his gloves, his cravat pulled up to his 
ears, and his hat perched upon three hairs, repeated in a tone he 
meant to be important, his master's order, " Do you hear, my lad? 
Tower-steers, if you plaze, and drive aisy !" 

The postilion touched his cap, flourished his whip, and galloped 
off. The transition was magical. The west end of the town, at 
that early hour, was silent and deserted, as a city swept by the 



94 



THE PRINCESS. 



plague, or sacked by war. The mansions were barred up, the 
club-houses closed : even porters slept ; while ladies ceased from 
troubling, and pages were at rest. The worshippers in the high 
mosques of profligacy had made their nightly offerings of vice and 
folly at its altars— (health, time, fortune, peace). As the carriage 
passed Northumberland House, Sir Frederick sighed and closed his 
eyes. It was the last frontier of that world, for which he had lived ; 
for whose opinion he now suffered. It was the barrier of the west. 

As the carriage rolled on towards the east of London, what life 
and activity presented themselves to view ! There, every house was 
open, every window bright. Every inhabitant was awake and stir- 
ring ; and industry was on the tiptoe of exertion ! Market-carts, 
almost poetical in their lading of fruit, herbs, and flowers, were led, 
some haply by the fathers of future peers, others possibly by embryo 
peeresses, destined to change the roses and lilies bestowed by Na- 
ture's ' sweet and cunning hand,' for the fleurons of heraldry and 
the jewelled cap of rank : for such things have been, and must be, 
as long as youth and beauty have their price in the great market of 
passion or of profligacy. 

But, in this bustling field of industry and of wealth, all was not 
equally bright. If ' in the midst of life we are in death ' by the 
doom and sentence of Nature, the workings of society contribute 
also their share to the horrible and startling contrast. The gallows 
erected in front of the debtor's door of Newgate, met the eye and 
sickened the heart of the morbid and melancholy observer, as he 
passed along. One of the great tragedies of human existence— cool, 
dispassionate, legal murder — was about to be performed ! Crowds 
thickened ; avenues were densely peopled with eager spectators ; 
some anxious to try conclusions with fate, and to learn by experience 
what may be that crowning mystery which terminates the long vista 
of all our hopes and all our fears ; the greater number, intent only 
on a spectacle and a sensation. 

The inhabitants of the neighbourhood, alone, took no notice of a 
scene, of too frequent occurrence to awaken curiosity, or to point 
a moral. Shopboys were cleaning windows ; fishmongers and but- 
chers were busily occupied unloading their carts for the adjoining 
market ; and servant-maids were hurrying home with the comfort- 
able and abundant breakfast of the tradesman's hungry, healthy 




Anciently the city of London was encompassed by 
a -wall, in which, at proportionate distances, were se- 1 
veral gates with posterns, resembling Temple-bar; 
through these gates, of which Newgate was one, peo- 
ple passed to the env irons of the City. A goal is re- 
. corded to have stood here as far back as 1218: it 
I was re-edified in 1422, and afterwards rebuilt with t 
I greater strength and more convenience for prisoners I 

than before, and with a gate and postern for pas- 
ysengers. ^ * ,■ 



THE PRIiNCESS. 



95 



family. Behind this exterior, was the cell of the condemned cri- 
minal, where, stretched on the rack of unrest, he listened to the 
dreadful toll of the bell which anticipated, while it announced, the 
fate that awaited him : — there was but a wall between ! 

Sir Frederick Mottram, the privy-counsellor who had so often 
witnessed the royal ratification of such sentences, the legislator who 
had so often by his vote checked the step of humanity and of civi- 
lization in their march towards a purified and enlightened justice, 
sunk back in his carriage, overcome aud dispirited. An image had 
i effected what argument had vainly attempted ; he felt, what he never 
yet could understand , the vanity and the weakness of those wise 
saws and ancient instances which legalized barbarity, and sane- 
tified selfishness with the borrowed attributes of a righteous judg- 
ment. 

" There is, I fear, something wrong in this ! " he muttered with 
a sigh of deep suffering. " This is a dreadful price to pay, even 
for the maintenance of order! Life for life, was the stern law of 
Moses ; but life for a purse, for a toy, is hard to understand ! " 

The deep red colour of Lawrence Fegan, the flush of joy and of 
hope, faded to a deadly hue as he passed this scene of suffering. It 
brought him back to Ireland, to the drop of the gaol at Cork, where 
a near and dear friend of his own had, years ago, met his fate : such 
too might possibly have been his own destiny, had not want and 
hunger driven him to enlist as a fifer in an English regiment. His 
talent for whistling had probably saved him from a like ignominious 
death. He put the corner of his cravat to his eyes. 

" I say, master!" cried the postboy, addressing the dicky-box; 
" if we had been a little later, we should have seen the fun. I seed 
that 'ere fellow at the Fives Court, many a time; and as fine a chap 
he was, as you would clap your eyes on ! " 

" So was Pat Macdermot, " said Larry to himself with a suffocat- 
ing sob. 

The carriage now rolled on through the intricacies of that grand 
mart of enterprise, for which the whole world presents no parallel, 
—the city of London properly so called. The human tide was 
pouring along as full and strong as though it were noonday. Cars, 
carts, waggons, drays and stages, thronged and obstructed the narrow 
streets, almost impeding all approach to the Thames, which itself 



0.6 



THE PRINCESS. 



exhibits a spectacle of bustle and confusion still more imposing. 
The Thames, choked with its teeming vessels, floating to the me- 
tropolis the "wealth of Ormus and of Ind, " and distributing- to the 
remotest shores the endless comforts and commodities created by 
British industry, exerts a moral influence on society and civilization, 
greater than all the blessings of its physical benefactions. It bears 
abroad on its tide, to all the nations and tribes of man, the products 
of a free press, the lights of science, the catechisms of liberty ! 

To the distempered imagination of Sir Frederick, the impressive 
scene took another and a more sombre hue. He saw only laborious, 
toiling, suffering humanity, contending with nature for a miserable 
existence, tugging at the oar of sordid gain, and wasting the brief 
capability of sweet sensation which lies between the cradle and the 
grave, to provide, when most successful, for the vices of some 
spendthrift heir :— to perish in lonely penury and friendlessness, if 
it toils in vain. He put up his glass, and, among the grove of masts, 
the tricoloured flag of the new Belgian kingdom caught his eye. He 
accepted the omen as coincident with the counsels of the mysterious 
letter, and gave himself up to the packet agents, who were already 
at his side. 

When Sir Frederick descended from his carriage , he left every- 
thing, as had been the habit of his travelling life, to his servant ; and 
suffered himself to be led through the narrow descent of the Tower- 
stairs, by one of those who wait there to secure the confused and 
ignorant passenger. 

" This way, my lord— this way, sir ! Ostend, sir, isn't it? Sails 
in ten minutes. The Talbot, sir; the finest vessel on the station. 
Beautiful weather, sir ; wind fair. That is our boat coming up to 
the stairs. " 

"My servant and carriage," muttered Sir Frederick, almost led 
by the arm by the agent of the packet, yet shrinking from the coarse 
contact, and holding to his mouth his handkerchief breathing of eau 
de Cypre, which could not exclude the stench of other eaux of less 
agreeable perfume. 

" Ay, ay, sir— never mind : I'll see all safe ! We have several 
carriages on board already. I '11 just see you into the boat, and then 
be back to look after your servant. Excellent breakfasts on board, 
sir. What name, if you please, sir?" 



THE PRINCESS. 



97 



" Sir Frederick Motlram. " 
" Your servant's, sir?" 
" Lawrence Fegan. " 

" Sir Frederick Mottram and Lawrence Fegan— Ay, ay, that will 
do, sir ! Now, sir, if you please, give me your arm. Hope you 
won't forget the agent. " 

Sir Frederick mechanically put his hand in his pocket and gave 
the man half-a-crown. He seated himself in the boat; but the 
boatmen still waited, on seeing another coach drive up to the gate. 
Sir Frederick ordered them to put off, in a manner that convinced 
them that they would be well paid for neglecting the new arrival. 

He was already almost sea-sick. His imaginative recollection of 
never-failing suffering on all such previous occasions, the exhaustion 
incidental to want of rest and over-excitement, contributed to nau- 
seate him to the uttermost prostration of mind and volition. On 
reaching, therefore, the Talbot, his only desire was to obtain a sofa 
and escape from the deck, which resembled a Noah's ark, and was 
already encumbered with numerous vehicles. He was therefore 
forthwith conducted into the den called the gentlemen's cabin, and 
placed on one of those hard horse-hair seats, by courtesy dignified 
with the appellation of a sofa. 

Even before the steam-engine had given its preliminary shake to 
the vessel, or its paddles commenced their play, sounds and objects 
of disgust multiplied on every side, distressing to one whose most 
delicate and fastidious nerves had hitherto been spared such annoyan- 
ces. 

"Orribili favelle, 
Parole di dolore. accenli d'ira 
Alii e fiochi," 

echoed on every side; yet he soon ceased to hear them; for he 
slept, or rather fell into that agitated and disturbed doze which 
wearied nature forces from suffering sensation, without abating its 
I uneasiness. 

The vessel had been advertised to sail at seven, but it was now past 
1 eight, and yet the anchor was not heaved. Boat was chasing boat, 
filled with tardy passengers, till the deck was crowded like theblack- 
| hole of Calcutta ; but Lawrence Fegan and the carriage were not yet 



08 



THE PRINCESS. 



arrived. The latter was on its way back, under convoy of the posti- 
lion, to its station in the coach-house on Carlton-lerrace; while the 
former still stood, the stare and the amusement of the idle group 
gathered round the iron gates of the Custom-house. 

There are few heads that can stand a sudden revolution of For- 
tune, or gaze undazzled at the flash of the bright side of her wheel. 
Heads far sounder and Aviser than that of Lawrence Fegan have 
mounted and grown dizzy, under the influence of some sudden 
change w hich has raised struggling industry and hopeless and un- 
productive labour to places of high trust, to power, wealth, and 
distinction. Churchmen have never passed the ordeal unscathed. 
The Wolseys, the Lauds, and the Richelieus, w ere not proof against 
their dizzy elevation; and in Ireland there is a see, representing the 
power of the church of old times, with whose mitre a strait- waist- 
coal is almost proverbially associated. 

The change recently undergone by the redshanked Garlogh of 
Shanballymac, ( for he w as one whose brand of bastardy had never 
been effaced in the estimation of his native village )— by the boy w ho 
had been " up the mountain," the echappe of the police-station at 
Mallow ,— the fifer of the Coldstreams, — the maimed tiger of a ne- 
glectful master,— the patient of many hospitals,— the helper of the 
helpers of many stables, — was, to him, what the mitre of York was 
to the butcher's son, or the crow ning in the Capitol to Cola di Rienzi : 
it had upset him ! 

His morning's drive ; the parting stirrup-cup presented by the 
postilion at the door of the Thames-street porter-house, as he gave 
his orders with the pedantry of new inauguration to office, had 
assisted to confuse the head and bewilder the spirits of the Irish 
Sganarelle beyond all power of composure. 

" Take the carriage back quiet and aisy to Carlton-terrace, " he 
said, " with my respects to the under-coachman, and my love to the 
second house-maid, and tell her I will send her a pretty present 
from furren parts, if one can be had for love or money. " 

" Here, sir, ish a very pretty present any lady in the land might 
be proud to vear," said a long-bearded impersonation of the twelve 
tribes of Israel to Fegan, as the carriage drove off; and he dazzled 
his eyes with the display of a long and massive chain. 

14 It ish all pure gold, mishter— virgin gold. I declare to my God ! 



THE PRINCESS. 



90 



and only vone shovereign ! — it will sell for double the monish. " 

"Here ish what his honour wants more than a chain," said one of 
the children of Zion, and evidently the son of him of the golden 
chain—" Here ish the most beautifullest new travelling cloak and 
cap ; and here ish a real gentleman's dress-coat, fit for any noblemans 
in London : I bought it of the vally-de-sham of a great lord only 
lasht night. " 

Lawrence was taken all alive, with all his weaknesses and all his 
vanities, his new and high aspirations, full upon him! Reason, 
with her specious sophistry, furnished him with ready excuses for 
yielding to the temptations of folly. As groom, he was provided 
with a livery frock, it was true ; but, as valet-de-chambre, as ' tra- 
velling and confidential upper man, ' the rank in which his fertile 
imagination had placed him, he was deficient in all the necessary 
paraphernalia. The idea passed, with the rapidity with which thought 
ever passes in an Irish head, when mounted by vanity and upset by 
ambition. He saw himself riding in the morning in his groom's 
frock, and figuring in his own clothes in the evening, after he had 
dressed his master. The cloak also, with its black and silken braids 
and tassels, and the showy cap, with its foreign cut and its golden 
band, were temptations unutterable, irresistible. 

The struggle between vanity and prudence was but momentary. 
He had four sovereigns in his pocket, being nearly the whole of a 
sum advanced to him for the purchase of linen by the house-steward. 
He looked at the de/roque of the great lord ; he examined the cloak 
and cap; and then, with a glance of cool, sly distrust, and with that 
self-satisfied Irish shrewdness which made him believe he could out- 
jew a Jew, he exclaimed, 

" Ah ! be aisy now, Mr. Shedrech, Misheek, and Abednigo ! Have 
I time to stand bargaining about your ould clouths, and the Right 
Honourable Sir Frederick Mottram, my master, waiting there below, 
talking to the captain of the ship? Man alive ! ' time and tide stops 
for no man, ' as the saying is. " 

Fegan cast an eye where his master was still standing, and satisfied 
himself that, as the steam was not up, he might delay a little longer : 
he remained, therefore, with the coat in his hands, while his imagi- 
nation gloated upon the cloak and cap. 

41 Now, what would you be afther axing. " he said, i ' for the 



100 



THE PRINCESS. 



whole boiling, if a man was Judy enough to be willing to take it off 
your hands?" 

" Five guinish— and the gould band vill burn for more, " said 
the father. 

" You are giving it for nothing," cried the son, reprovingly. 

" Five guineas !— five devils !" said Larry ; " I think I see myself, 
you ould Judas Iscariot!" 

He did not, however, suit the action exactly to the word ; for he 
placed the cap on his head, with the air with which Napoleon seized 
the iron crown of Italy ; and turning to a little mirror in the basket 
of a pale-faced Italian boy, who was looking on, he arranged it to 
his fancy. Never did any mirror of dandy royalty, from Brighton 
to Petersburg, reflect a more self-sufficient or more self-satisfied 
form. Nor was the feeling altogether without foundation : his tall, 
well-framed figure became the cloak ; and his very Irish face well 
suited the gaillardise of his foreign cap. 

" Well, thin, what will you be afther taking for the cloak and 
cap, without any further jawing ? for the tay-kittle there will be 
soon boiling, and I must be off like a shot." 

" Veil, sir, as God is my shuge, three shovereigns is the lowest, 
farthing ; I vouldn't take lesh from my own fader, if I vash to die 
for it." 

" It a'nt worth the money," said Larry, doubtingly, his eye fix- 
ed on the looking-glass. 

" Here 's one von't think so," replied the Jew lad, pointing 
to a showy carriage that bowled up to the gate : " the Irish vally- 
de-sham^on that 'ere coach offered us more monish yesterday." 

" Here's your money," said Larry, in a hurried tone; " and 
let's have no more of your gosthering." 

Delighted with his bargain, he was hastening away to the packet, 
when the Jew boy ran after him with the coat, crying, 

" Misther ! misther ! the packetsh von't sail this half hour ; dere's 
plenty of time ; von't you buy dish beautiful coat? Look at it, 
sir ; itsh a lovely coat ! Try it ; and if it don't fit you, you shall 
have it for nothing." 

The alternative was too tempting. He looked at the coat, and 
then at the Jew boy : " Well, sir, I ivill thry it. just to plaze 
you." 



THE PRINCESS. 



101 



He gave the cloak to the boy to hold, and addressing a well- 
looking lounger who stood carelessly observing the transaction, he 
added, " Might I be afther throubling you to hould my coat, sir, 
for a minute ?" 

It was to little purpose that Larry laboured to invest himself 
with the toga of gentility; no effort could stretch it to the pro- 
portions of a far different stature from that for which it was made. 
Irritated by the fear of being too late in his attendance on his mas- 
ter, enraged at being mystified by the Jew boy ( whose mirth had got 
the better of his cupidity), and disappointed at missing the bargain 
his vanity had counted upon as concluded, he flung the coat at the 
owner's head, and, snatching the cloak out of his hands, he burst 
out, 

" Why, thin, ye grinning galoot ! is it a Leprahaun you 're think- 
ing I am, or one of the good people, that you would impose on me 
a screed of a jerkin, that was made for some midge of a cratur like 
your black-muzzled self? Give me my things, sir, if you ... . Why, 
what 's gone of the young gintleman that 's houlding my coat ?" 

A general laugh from the by-standers replied to the question. 
Fegan looked round with dismay ; the 6 young gentleman ' had 
disappeared. 

The bell from the vessel tolled forth its immediate departure. 
" Last boat for the Talbot, gentlemen !" cried the agent. " Now 
or never !" 

The boat was already thronged ; but Fegan still stood, the image 
of consternation and despair. He had neither hat nor coat. The 
boat put off. 

" Never mind, master," said a wherry-man, touching Larry's arm 
with his dripping oar ; " I '11 put you aboard before the other boat 
can get there. Here, give me your hand. Hot weather, sir ; but 
put on your cloak, all the same." 

The next moment, wrapped in his cloak, his head scarcely cover- 
ed by his cap, Fegan was seated in the boat. Misfortune had so- 
bered him : his position overwhelmed him. The vessel had cast 
loose ; the steam, which, a moment before, had poured forth in 
rushing volumes, suddenly ceased; and the paddles commenced 
their dinning rounds. Hurrying on board, he was obliged to dou- 
ble the waterman's ordinary fare; and, fearing to encounter his 

7. 



102 



THE PRINCESS. 



master, he skulked forward among- the servants and other tenants 
of what is called the second cabin. 

Never was there made a more unprosperous voyage between the 
Thames and Ostend than that now performed, save only the one in 
which the unseaworlhy Talbot was wrecked off the Flemish coast, 
a few weeks afterwards. The substitution of this boat for the re- 
gular packet of the station, was one of those risks to which the 
British public is subjected more than the people of any other nation 
in Europe. 

She had been the first vessel that ever had plied to Ostend on 
the commencement of steam navigation ; and the inferior construc- 
tion of her engine, no less than the wear and tear of the hulk 
itself, rendered her a slow and dangerous sailer. She was now, it 
was said, taken up to supply a sudden emergency ; and her crew 
and appointments were as occasional as herself. The cabin was 
crowded to suffocation ; the deck was choked with carriages ; and 
before the ship had cleared the river, the weather, which had been 
squally, became decidedly foul. 

Instead of fulfilling its promise of arriving that night, it was late 
in the following morning when the ship made its port, and gave 
up the ghosts of its wearied and sickened passengers, ( pale, com- 
fortless, but too happy to escape from their 6 prison with the risk 
of being drowned') to the gaze of the loungers on the quay of Ostend. 



CHAPTER VI. 

OSTEND. 

Letter 

ci TO MESSRS. HARRIS, WILLIAMS, AND CO. LINCOLN'S INN, LONDON. 

Hotel, Ostend. 

" Sir Frederick Mottram desires that a hundred-pound bank 
post-bill maybe forwarded to him, at the above address, instanter. 



THE PRINCESS. 



103 



" Should Mr. Harris have left town for Mottram Hall, the person 
who represents him in his office is requested to open the enclosed, 
and act upon it immediately. " 

{Enclosure.) 

" Ostend, Waterloo Hotel. 

" Dear Harris,— Send me, without loss of time, a letter of cre- 
dit for a thousand pounds upon some house in Brussels ; (the 
hundred-pound post-bill, without a moment's delay.) Take the trou- 
ble of going to Carlton-terrace, and seeing Saunders. Desire him to 
bring me my travelling-carriage, just as it is : 1 have the keys. If 
he does not find me here, he is to proceed with post-horses to the 
Bellevue, at Brussels. 

" I am in the most infernally awkward position here that man 
ever was ; but have not time for particulars, as I send this by a 
gentleman who is just starting for England by way of Calais. The 
post does not leave this most melancholy place till Saturday. 

" You will receive my letter on Thursday night or Friday morn- 
ing, andl hope before you start for Mottram Hall; that is, if you 
have not already heard that I had left London for the Continent, — 
to your great surprise, of course, as to my own. A sea-voyage was 
necessary to my health, and has already, I think, done me good : 
but the benefit derived is scarcely worth the purchase. 

" I need not urge your immediate attention to this importunate 
request for money. I am here without a shilling, without a change 
of linen, or even a razor; owing to the blunders, and perhaps 
drunkenness, of a new Irish servant, who sent back the carriage 
which took me to Tower-stairs, instead of putting it on board. 

" The fact is, I am in pledge (and so is my watch), under a sus- 
picion of belonging to the army of English scamps, who make this 
miserable place a refuge from bailiffs and policemen. My servant, 
too, to mend the matter, is before the juge de paix, accused of 
having stolen a cloak and a cap from a courier ; and being ( I know 
not how or why) without coat or hat, (which he lost at the moment 
of embarkation, ) is suspected of having escaped from the Hulks at 



104 



THE PRINCESS. 



Woolwich. The waiter is at my elbow, to take this to the gentle- 
man who bears it ; therefore I can only add, that I am, 

" Yours, etc. 
" Frederick Mottram. " 

Letter II. 

" TO HORACE HARVEY, ESQ. 

Hotel, Ostend. 

Dear Horace,— If you arc amazed at the date of this letter, 

so am I. Talk of free will and moral responsibility ! But, to 

the point and purpose. I wish I could have anticipated the espion- 
nage of the newspapers, (which throws every man's privacy open 
to the vulgar gaze of the meddling world, and which, by this time, 
has bruited to all Europe my departure from England, with all sorts 
of absurd and venomous additions ;) and that it had been possible 
to give you an earlier account of my unpremeditated escape from 
that modern Babylon, London. 

"I arrived here yesterday, just in time to scrawl a few lines to 
my man of business, for money ; being most strangely without a shil- 
ling, actually provided with the necessaries of life by the confiding 
charity of strangers, and obliged to wait till Harris sends me the 
means of departure. Here I am, therefore, at Ostend, till the 
packet of Saturday arrives — except Mr. Fauche, (the British Consul, 
and an old Vienna friend,) should return from Brussels in the inte- 
rim, where he most unfortunately is now absent. I have time 
enough, therefore, at my disposition, to detail all my movements and 
predicaments. 

"When I last wrote, it was in the hope of soon meeting you at 
Mottram Hall. Everything was prepared for departure on Tuesday 
morning; my carriage packed, my necessaire, money, books, etc. etc. 
all stowed in, and the horses bespoke ; and having indulged Lady 
Frances in her whim of giving a breakfast at the Willows, before it 
was sold or let, 1 arranged that she should follow me, and that poor 
Emilius should be wholly left in the hands of his doctors and pre- 
ceptor. I paired off with Winterbottam, and returned from the 



THE PRI5CISS. 



105 



House earlier than usual, that I might write to von. ami get t'm 
some other business : and I found my house a rendezvous of the 
elect, returning from a dejeune at Norwood. Romping, carried on 
to the very verge of licentiousness, aod high play, constituted the 
business of the night: and a new game, called a racing-table, which 
has been recently introduced to shorten the process of ruin.* was 
in full activity. 

••There is a pretty little apartment in the farther end of the suite, 
which, pedantically enough. I have called the Tribune: because it 
contains the two Titians. the Murillos. the Chandos Correggio. v i:h 
Canova's Venus, which he executed for me when I was in Rome. 
But I cannot go on ! Perhaps I should have treated the whole thing 
as an etifdntiUage : for this association of middle-aged matrons and 
foolish young men is the most puerile thing imaginable :— the men. 
from constant frequenting such coteries, being as trivial as the women 
and the women borrowing the free tone of the men. 

•• In aggravation of such a meeting in such a place. Master Claude 
Hamilton and his playfellows had mutilated and disfigured Canova's 
superb work: and that female Mephistopheles. the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen. stood presiding over the whole mischief, in her 
wizard dress and veiled face, notwithstanding Lady Frances's solemn 
promises to the contrary. I could not control myself. I was mad . 
acted like a madman : and. under the influence of I know not ^ hat 
spell— led by a sort of anonymous letter, counselling me ta :;: 
hasty step I have taken— ordered the horses to the Tower-stairs 
instead of the great north road, and embarked for Ostend. 

fe4 Here I am. then, and hope to hear from you at Brass-. Is. 
through which I must pass, go where I will: but where that will 
be. I neither know nor care. Make no allusion, however, to th^ 
incidents I have touched on solely for your information. I want 
total change and regeneration of body and mind. I have done with 
the past, and am without one view for the future. 

** My present situation. ( the last, one would think, reserved for 
a man with a rent-roll of twenty thousand a year. ) if it was not so 
very provoking, would be very amusing, from its extreme absurdity. 
I arrived here after the most dreadful passage I ever made, and was 
almost carried on shore by the steward of the packet, who delivered 
me into the hands of I know not who : but there was music in the 



106 



THE PRINCESS. 



man's voice, for it spoke of a bath and a bed. I plunged from one 
to the other, with a luxury of sensation dearly purchased, but still 
beyond price. I had desired the person who attended me to the 
hotel, to send my servant with dressing things, etc. etc. as soon as 
he had landed the carriage; and, waiting for him, I got from the 
bath to the bed, and so dropped asleep. Such a sleep ! I have 
enjoyed none to equal it for many years ; deep, dreamless, death in 
counterfeit ! I believe I should have slept on till now, but that I 
was awakened by the sharp voice of a pert English waiter, to know 
whether I meant to travel by the diligence or the treckschuyt. I 
was some time awakening to a perfect recollection of my situation, 
and almost unconsciously answered 'Neither.' 

" ' Then,' he replied rudely, ' you had better get up.' 

' ' I did get up ; started sur mon seant ; ordered him to send my 
servant, and leave the room instantly. 

" e Servant!' he replied; ' there is no servant in the house, but 
the servant of the Hon. Patrick O'Reiley, who had been left by his 
friends with their carriage, as security for an unpaid bill.' 

" 4 My servant,' 1 said, ' is, or should be, with the carriage, if it is 
not yet landed.' 

" The fellow grinned, and was making some impertinent reply, 
when a sailor-looking man bolted into the room, and asked c if I 
was the gentleman who called himself Sir Frederick Mottram ; be- 
cause, if so be, the Hirishman what was aboard the Talbot was 
tooked up for prigging a cloak and cap, and he had sent me that 
note. ' 

" It was a dirty piece of unfolded paper, which I copy for its 
curiosity :— 

" ' Sir Friderick,— There 's the greatest destruction going on, 
and sarious murthur, if you don't come to my pertection immai- 
diately. They have me up, plaze your honor, before a frinch justis 
of pace, that ha'n't a word of english in his mouth, no more nor a 
dog, and is swearing away the life o' me about a cloak I lawfully 
bought of a jew ; and if you don't come to my help and salvation, 
Sir Frederick— I'm innocent as the child unborn, who is 

' Your faithful servant till death, 

4 L. F.' 



THE PROCESS. 



" 1 desired the porter to say I would follow him immediately. 
He asked me for something for his trouble ; but I had given all the 
loose money about me to the steward of the packet, and actually 
had not a shilling on my person. The insolent waiter grinned and 
left the room, and I had to dress myself in the horrid clothes 1 had 
worn on board the packet. I never in my life was reduced to 
such personal inconvenience : you know that no man has ever 
roughed it less. I was still dressing, when the landlord entered 
the room, and civilly asked me for my passport. I had none : in 
my impatience to be off. I had never thought of it. The landlord 
looked suspiciously, which added not a little to my impatient anger: 
and I could not refrain from a boutade on the sort of liberty afford- 
ed by the new revolutionary government. The fellow was mut- 
tering something about the Alien act in England and necessary pre- 
caution ; but I cut him short, by desiring him to show me to the 
hotel of the British Consul. Mr. Fauche. As the devil would have 
it. he had gone that day to Brussels, and was not expected for a 
week. - TA'hat is to be done V I said. 

" 4 You must return. I fear, ; said the landlord. ; by the first op- 
portunity. Here is a little bill prepared by my clerk, as we unluckily 
want this room, which is bespoke for a gentleman from Ghent. ' 

" The bill for coffee, bed. bath. etc. was under a pound; and yet 
1 had not wherewith to discharge it. I told the man briefly the state of 
the case, and that 1 must remain in his cursed house, either till 1 got 
remittances from England, till the return of AJr. Fauche. or till some 
English family arrived whom I might know. The expression of the 
landlord's countenance provoked me so. that— but the whole thing is 
too absurd. — I observed. 

44 1 As such things must rarely happen here, you may be incredu- 
lous, and ? " 

44 4 Oh dear, no ! : he interrupted flippantly ; 1 nothing so common. 
Gentlemen very frequently arrive at Ostend in the same situation. 
We have now in the house, the Hon. Mr. O'Reiley. who was left with 
a carriage in bail for twenty pounds, by his father, when he was 
suddenly called home. There are two or three other gentlemen 
whom youll meet walking on the ramparts, and who landed here 
much in the same predicament. ' 

•• You see that I was at once put down on the list, with the Hon. 



108 



TIIE PROCESS. 



Mr. O'Reiley and the gentlemen that walk the ramparts, by Jove ! 
You can have no idea of my annoyance ! Only conceive a man thus 
circumstanced, when he really and truly is without means; and owes 
his distress, not to accident, but to his own folly — or, worse still, 
his unmerited misfortune! Good Heavens! The reflection passed 
rapidly through my mind, and calmed me : but I could not get over 
the mortification that there should be nothing in my appearance, or 
manner, to bear witness in my favour. Oh ! how small a part of 
life and its vicissitudes is known to the prosperous and the rich ! 

44 As the man ( who, after all, was perfectly justified in his caution, 
and was as civil as a man could be, who saw before him a scamp 
that had used his bed, bath, and breakfast, and had nothing to pay 
in return,) talked of a pledge, I pointed to my watch and seals, 
which lay on the table, and are worth a hundred guineas. 4 Per- 
haps, ' I said, 4 you will take charge of that for a day or two, until I 
can hear from London. I will write this moment, and send to 
Brussels to our ambassador for a passport. 5 

44 The man took up the watch and admired it ; looked at the seals, 
arms, crest, and cipher, — then at me, — but still doubtfully. It did 
not appear that his suspicions were removed ; and my indignation 
could hold no longer. I was in the very act of turning the man out 
of his own apartment, when my servant burst into it, followed by a 
fashionably-dressed but vulgarish young man. 

44 Of the handsome, smart ( rather too smart) groom, who left 
London with me the day before, there was not a trace. Fegan was 
in his shirt-sleeves ; his face smeared and smoked with the grime of 
the steam-den, where he had been thrust when suspected of the 
robbery — for he was found on board dressed in a cloak and cap 
belonging to a courier, both of which had been stolen from Thomas's 
Hotel a day or two before. All that could be seen of poor Fegan's 
complexion bore the green and yellow tint of sea-sickness. His 
features were distorted by rage, and his black head was powdered 
with ashes. He rushed abruptly into the room, pushing aside the 
landlord ; whose respect for the master could not have been much 
increased by the appearance of the man. 

4 4 4 1 ax your honor's pardon, Sir Frederick, ' he said, 4 for appear- 
ing before you, sir, like a poor Gonnaught spalpeen begging back his 
way home afther a bad harvest. But I just wish you to jidge, sir, 



THE PRINCESS. 



109 



the intire murthur and destruction those villians and Tories have 
brought on me ; robbing me on the quays of my hat and livery- 
coat, and making me a recaiver of stolen goods, and hanging me 
outright : to say nothing of the plunder, and the shame, and the 
intire disgreece : and if it warn't for a greet Irish nobleman and his 
Leedy and the Docther here — long life to them ! it's hung up I'd be. 
this day, in a furren land, like the poor boy that was stepping out 
on the gallows weleft behind us in London. And plaze your honor, 
in regard of the cloak and cap, if I was dying this day, before God 
and his blessed Mother, and the Docther here, I bought them ho- 
nestly,— and the pride of me who has nothing but character and my 
honor, Sir Frederick— oh musha, musha ! ' 

" Here poor Fegan's convulsive emotion absolutely stifled him; 
and the stranger, smiling, and putting him gently on one side, said 
—'There, that's my good fellow! go and wash yourself:' and 
turning to the landlord, he added — ' Let this poor man want no- 
thing; Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty, and myself, are answerable 
for him. I believe I have the honour of addressing Sir Frederick 
Mottram? I am Doctor Rodolf de Burgo, travelling with my friends 
Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty. The name cannot be unknown to 
you. Too happy if we can be of service ; — am desired to say so, on 
the part of my friends. Understand the whole thing, sir, from what 
your servant has said :— hurry of departure ; mistake of the carriage, 
and all that. Had the pleasure of hearing you speak in the House 
the night before we left London ; in great force. Went there with 
my friend Spring Rice. As to your servant, you must see the thing 
at once ; it was simply this : Jewed by a Jew ; bought stolen goods ; 
taken up. Fortunately I was passing at the time and heard the row. 
My compatriot was rather obstreperous. Three gendarmes could 
hardly keep him down. He recognized me, poor fellow ! I knew 
him when he lived with my friend Jack Aubrey de Yere. I was 
then surgeon of the regiment. But all is settled. The courier 
is off to Brussels, satisfied to get back his things. His name was 
embroidered in the inside of the cloak. I stepped forward in poor 
Paddy's behalf. And so there the matter ends. Can I be of further 
service ? ' 

" Although I did not altogether like the manner and abord of 
this flashy, but rather clever-looking person. I availed myself of the 

7.. 



110 



THE PRINCESS. 



accident, to explain to him my position. Nothing could surpass his 
civility. He and Sir Ignatius Dogherty, whom 1 have not yet seen, 
have answered for everything. The Doctor has given Fegan a coat 
of his own ; and, strange to say, now that he is dressed in it, he 
resembles the Doctor amazingly. I, for my part, am indebted for 
much accommodation to these good-natured people ; and I have since 
purchased a handsome necessaire de toilette, with money advanced 
by the landlord on my watch. Being now satisfied that I am a man 
of fortune, an M.P. etc. etc., he is covered with shame and remorse, 
and wanted to return the pledge, which I refused. 

" My new acquaintance have asked me to dine, and sent their 
cards and note of invitation in form; but I have declined. They 
remain here another day, on account of the lady's health, who is 
an invalid ; but I don't want to add to the weight of the obligation, 
or to make an intimacy which may turn out, in the long-run, to be 
excessively a charge. The landlord has undertaken to provide me 
linen, and procure Fegan a new livery. I must stay here for my 
remittance; and am just as well at Ostend as anywhere else. The 
tranquil solitude of these moss-grown streets, the sea, the air, the 
few simple Flemish faces passing my window, are all novelties. All 
the horrid English crew of the packet are off, in coach or boat, and 
have left the world of Ostend to silence and to me. 

" I shall write to you again from this, when I have made up my 
mind to something certain, so as to be able to give you an address. 
In the mean time, as ever, Yours, 

" F. MOTTRAM. " 

" P.-S. I fancy that no spark of the ' glorious four days ' has 
fallen upon the remote region of Ostend. I don't think that they 
have the least suspicion that they have changed kings and govern- 
ments. It is, very literally, the fable of the Frogs. How I nauseate 
the idea of Brussels ! — et pour cause. I shall merely await my 
carriage there. The route from this place by Bruges and Ghent is 
new to me. In returning from Brussels, in Twenty-nine, we took 
the Calais road, which, I remember, was dreary and monotonous. 
Most probably I shall push on to the north of Germany. I have a 
carriage building at Frankfort— suppose I go for it? I really have 
no more important object in view, go where I may. Once more 
farewell, u F. M. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



Ill 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE DOGHERTIES. 

The particular family of the human race from which the Milesian 
Irish derive their descent, and the period of their arrival in Ireland, 
are points which have been much and long disputed. The learning, 
the patriotism, the piety, and the pedantry of the country, have for 
a thousand years been employed unavailingiy on the subject ; and 
in that vast lapse of time, the Irish have suifered the indignity of 
seeing their penates shifted from Spain to France, to England — and, 
in spite of Sir Callaghan O'Brallaghan, to Scotland. If Giraldus Cam- 
brensis, Nennius, Keating, O'Halloran, and Vallancey, with their 
various disciples, have fought the battle on the bloodless but ob- 
stinate field of controversy with doubtful result, Sir William Betham, 
the most recent of Irish antiquaries, has not been deterred from the 
attempt to set the matter at rest ( if such questions can ever be set 
at rest) ; and the evidence he has brought to establish that the Mile- 
sians are part and parcel of the great Gallo-British hive, which was 
known to Caesar by the appellation of Celts, if not absolutely con- 
vincing, is of great weight and credibility. 

" The Celts, " says Caesar, " are handsome in their appearance, 
but their voices are disagreeable. " (So would the Irish accent of 
the present day, perhaps, appear to the refined Italian ear of some 
modern Caesar.) " In their conversation they are brief and enig- 
matical [ evasive], and they generally adopt mere allusion. They 
speak extravagantly when setting forth their own merits ; but with 
contempt when they touch on the merits of others. They are proud, 
vain, and fond of exaggeration ; but of acute understanding, and 
apt to learn. " 

Whoever has lived much in Ireland, must perceive in this ancient 
portraiture of the Celts a strong resemblance to some of her sons,— 
the living representatives of a race which, unchanged and unchan- 



IIS 



THE PRINCESS. 



geable, still flows through the general population, like a stream of 
fresh water through the briny sea. It is unnecessary for the modern 
historian to alter a trait, to add a tint, or to deface a lineament. 
The red Dane, the fair Anglo-Norman, the small-eyed, canny Scotch 
undertaker, the English adventurer, all distinctly marked by their 
own several physical peculiarities, make way for the impetuous 
course of the Celt, who, in the battle-field abroad, in the row at 
home, in the cell of monkish learning, or in the cabinet of astute 
politics, ( subtile but bold, sly but daring,) is still the same as when 
he first issued from the c great foundery of creation. ' There he is, 
as Caesar has depicted his ancestors in Gaul, and as Henry the Second 
found them in Ireland. 

To the foreign student of the physiological antiquities of man, to 
a Cuvier or a Humboldt, it might have been a treat of the highest 
order, had they encountered a fragment of the Celtic race, which 
fate or folly, necessity or 6 a truant disposition, ' had conducted to 
the shores of Belgium contemporaneously with the arrival of Sir Fre- 
derick Mottram. 

The family of the Dogherties, like so many other of the primeval 
tanists of Ireland, had, in the process of time, of native anarchy, and 
of foreign oppression, fallen from their high estate ; and while some 
remained at home to submit in subtile servility to the intruders who 
had displaced them, others, of a more unbending spirit, had emigrat- 
ed to foreign lands in search of independence, of adventure, or of 
bread. 

The latter had been the fortune of General Sir Shane O'Dogherty, 
a favourite in the court of the Empress Maria Theresa. He had fought 
the battles of despotism, wherever liberty had raised its standard, 
during the course of sixty years ; and having recently died in a garret 
at Vienna, covered with scars and decorated with orders, was buried 
by the charity of an Irish priest, and was forgotten by all save a 
second cousin twice removed, who claimed the reversion of the title, 
and had long watched, by every attainable means, the decline of its 
venerable and valiant possessor. This cousin was Sir Ignatius 
Dogherty, now of Shanballymac House, in the county of Kerry. 

Among the mouldering ruins of the once bustling port of Ostend, 
rises a beautiful structure, called the Pavilion des Bains, erected 
by enterprise and taste on those ancient ramparts, so often covered 



THE PRINCESS. 



113 



with hostile phalanxes, but at present exhibiting on summer even- 
ings a scene of as much peace and loveliness as ever was set off by 
the cloudless sunshine of a summer's sky. 

Within this pavilion, poring over the news of Europe, or dipping 
into its periodical literature, sat some of the native quidnuncs of the 
town, and one or two Englishmen who had not altogether consulted 
their own choice in making Ostend their residence. Some took 
coffee, others tea, and others contented themselves with enjoying 
the place and weather from the windows. Without, upon the espla- 
nade, moved a bevy of English nursery-maids with their noisy char- 
ges; for, alas ! noisy children will be found wherever there are 
pleasant walks and sunshine. Their happy mothers, dressed in 
Manchester muslins and Dunstable bonnets, gloated on the promis- 
ing offspring ; and the bathing-women looked up from their bathing- 
boxes upon the new arrivals with the sordid calculation of antici- 
pated gain. 

Distinct from all these, sat Sir Ignatius Dogherty and his party, 
betraying, amidst some diversity of feature, a general and common 
outline and character which marked them the descendants of a 
common stock. There was indeed an indescribable similitude of 
expression in the countenance of Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty. 
their travelling physician Dr. de Burgo, and their self-instituted 
attendant -for the nonce,' Lawrence Fegan, which might have 
puzzled a physiognomist ; though the craniologist, perhaps, would 
have detected the organ of self-esteem in equally full development 
in all. 

The Lady Dogherty, or (as she pronounced the name of the ancient 
chiefs of Enis Owen) Lady Dorty, sat pre-eminent in the group which 
graced the facade of the pavilion, full of the poetry of nationality. 
She was dressed in the prevailing hue of the ' first gem of the sea ; ' 
and in the produce of its looms. Her emerald-green tabinet pelisse, 
trimmed knee-deep with ermine, contrasted its faded winter glories 
with a summer hat, set off by a bunch of field flowers that were not 
precisely from the carton of a French emballeur. The costume, 
both in its solidity and flauntiness, was illustrative of the person and 
character of the wearer. 

To the right of Lady Dogherty sat Sir Ignatius. If not the last of 
c the rakes of Mallow, ' (those jolly sporting Irishmen who gave 



114 



THE PRINCESS. 



their name to the merriest melody in Irish music, ) he might have 
served for a tolerable type of that now extinct order, llis jacket 
was bottle-green ; his buttons of the brightest brass ; his vest was 
variegated as the garment of Benjamin. His truis, (to use an old 
Irish name for an habiliment which delights in no more recent 
appellation at all suited to the molles auriculce of modern ton,) his 
truis were buckskin, and his boots lopped. Ilis hat, if not too 
small for his head, was so worn as scarcely to cover it ; and his 
cravat, by its voluminous folds, rivalled that of Banagher,— an Irish 
beau of proverbial celebrity, of whom it is traditionally reported, 
that his band contained " nine stone of starch ! " 

Sir Ignatius leaned as he sat on a very curiously knotted stick, a 
middle term between the English club and the Irish shilelagh ; and 
rested a very rubicund cheek upon a still redder hand. Lawrence 
Fegan stood in waiting behind Sir Ignatius with a look of deference 
and pride ; and all were listening to the discourse of an eloquent 
narrator, who was holding forth undisturbed and uninterrupted, 
except by the occasional commentaries of his admiring auditors. 

This orator was Doctor Rodolf de Burgo. He stood with his 
finger inserted between the pages of a Guide-book ; and was giving a 
rather detailed account of the geography, topography, and history of 
the town of Ostend, with the conscious air of unborrowed know- 
ledge, and the tone and attitude of an improvisatore . 

w You now occupy, I may say, " declaimed the Doctor, *' the most 
westerly point of Europe. " 

" The most westerly, " he repeated doubtingly to himself; " that 
is, leplus oriental. 91 

" See that! " said Sir Ignatius. * Well, 'pon my daisy! I 
always thought that West Port, in county Mayo, was the most 
westerly point of the Uropian world : where the Marquis of Sligo 
lives, you know yourself, Doctor. " 

" I said, easterly, " said the Doctor, referring to his book. 

" Troth, ye didn't ! 99 said Sir Ignatius, winking at Fegan ; " but 
ria boclish! niver mind— a slip of the tongue's no fault of the heart, 
as we say in Ireland. " 

" And fine sayings there is in it, Sir Ignatius!" said Fegan, 
touching his hat. 

" Sorrow finer ! " said the Baronet, for thim that has good 



THE PRINCESS. 



115 



Irish, and isn't too concaited intirely to spake it like a man. " 

" Of coorse, plaze your honor, " said Fegan, reddening, on the 
supposition that the Baronet had made a hit at what he deemed his 
own superlative English accent and phraseology. 

" Sir Ignatius!" said his lady, angrily, "pray let the Doctor 
continue : no book could give you half the very valuable informa- 
tion you are now getting for nothing. " 

" For nothing!" sighed Sir Ignatius, {aside;) "two hundred 
a-year and travelling expinses ; and she calls that nothing ! Oh ! 
marciful Moses!" 

Lady Dogherty deposited her coffee-cup on a salver, which was 
presented to her by Lawrence Fegan, who had constituted himself 
on service since he had obtained her protection. 

" Mr. Fegan, " said Sir Ignatius, " might I trouble you, at the 
same time, to get me a little drop of ... . what do you call spurits 
in German, Doctor?" 

" Schnaps ! " replied the Doctor , snappishly. " But we are now 
standing, as I observed, Lady D., on the extreme eastern point of 
Europe. For the rest, Ostend is four leagues from Bruges, three 
leagues from Nieuport, and twenty-two leagues from Brussels. " 

" I'll trouble you for small change for that, " said Sir Ignatius. 

" For what, pray?" asked the Doctor impatiently and peevishly. 

' ' Why, for lagues ; divel such a word iver 1 met in the Universal* ! I ' 

"A league means three English miles, Sir Ignatius," said the 
Doctor, smiling at Lady D. " The sea washes these ramparts in all 
seasons. Nothing can be more sublime or picturesque than the 
ocean-view from them ! " 

" Och murther ! " groaned Sir Ignatius, looking up for sympathy 
to Fegan ; "and the view from the Cove of Cork and the top of Man- 
gerton ! " 

" The ecluses are also very fine," continued the Doctor : " they 
serve to discharge the waters of the canal of Bruges, and to resist 
the incursions of the ocean. " 

" Why thin, 'pon my daisy ! " said Sir Ignatius, " they're no great 
things, no more nor the mare that ran for the whisky, compared to 
the locks of the Grand Canal, or the Royal, of Dublin. If you seed 

* Id est, " Universal Spelling-book. " 



116 



THE PRINCESS. 



the thirteenth lock, for instance, or Hazel Hatch, or Puckstown in 
the county Kildare, it 's little you'd think of thim make believes, 
with their Frinch name. " 

" I suppose they are of modern invention? " said Lady Dogherty. 

"No," said the Doctor ; " they were built so far back as 1660." 

" When was that? " asked Sir Ignatius, yawning. 

" This port as you now see it," continued the Doctor with the 
emphasis of a cicerone, and overlooking or disregarding the embar- 
rassing question of his patron, " is a monument of Joseph the Second." 

" Who was Joseph?" asked the persevering Sir Ignatius, perti- 
naciously. 

" The Emperor of Germany, " said the Doctor, petulantly. 

M Are we in Germany now, Doctor? " asked Sir Ignatius. 

" If you will stand where I am, Lady Dogherty," continued the 
Doctor, " and make use of this telescope, you will perceive that the 
coast of Ostend forms a straight line. The entrance of the basin is 
difficult, and the vessels are obliged to pass between two jetties by 
an opening so narrow, that the attempt is dangerous when the wind 
is contrary. " 

" May the divel fly away w ith them for jetties !" said Sir Ignatius 
with ill humour; "for it is to tliim we owe that bumping and 
thumping, and throwing up the lives out of us— saving your prisince, 
my lady!— with that stfy-sickness that's left me as wake as a 
child." 

"Oh musha ! no wonder, " exclaimed Fegan, with a deep sigh. 

" Where you see the flag, Lady D., is the point of embarkation for 
England," observed Doctor de Burgo. 

" I wouldnt' care, thin, if I was embarking back this blessed 
evining," said Sir Ignatius, under the peevish reaction of his rum 
punch and glass of schnaps, addressing himself to Fegan : "and if 1 
thought I could get by long say from this to Shannon harbour, I 
wouldn't desire better than to lave this ould raggamuffin place with 
the first fair wind ! " 

" It would be great luck, Sir Ignatius ; for Ostend is a poor 
pleece surely, sir," said Larry, touching his hat, and making a 
grimace of contempt; " and of coorse no ways compayrable to the 
Bee of Dublin." 

" There is something mighty touching in the ruined greatness 



THE PRINCESS. 



117 



of this fine ancient old Flemish town, " said Lady Dogherty. 

" I wish the Doctor would give us a Flemish account of it, " said 
Sir Ignatius ; " for I am sick of having nothing to do in it, and nobody 
to help me. " 

" It is a town of great historical interest, " said the Doctor. " It 
was long a place of great importance. In 1583, it was regularly 
fortified by the Prince of Orange. " 

" The Prince of Orange ! " repeated Sir Ignatius, starting. "See 
that!— Well, the world is not wide enough for ould Nosey, any 
way ! What the divel brought him here ! " 

" But Ostend is most celebrated for the famous siege which the 
Dutch sustained in it against the Archduke Albert. It lasted three 
years and three months. The Duke, who fought gallantly, was ac- 
companied by Isabella, the Infant of Spain. " 

" Poor little dear ! " yawned drowsily Sir Ignatius : " they had 
better have left her in her cradle— poor child ! " 

" When the Princess advanced to the spot most exposed to the 
fire," continued the Doctor, too much occupied in showing off to 
hear what was said, " she wore a cuirass." 

" She did right, " muttered Sir Ignatius ; u and queer enough it 
must have been to see her in it— poor babby ! " 

"But when we get to Brussels, Lady D., you must read the 
history of Ostend. I will draw you up a little abridgment of the 
Low Countries. Suffice it for the present to say, that the Spanish 
general Spinola took the town in 1604; that the Dutch lost, by fire, 
sword, and pestilence, thirty thousand men; that the besiegers fired 
150,000 coups de canon; and that the city did not capitulate till it 
was reduced to a heap of ruins." 

" Divel mend it ! " exclaimed Sir Ignatius, as he dropped off into 
a doze, heartily sick of the history of Ostend ; while Lawrence Fegan 
listened with increasing attention : the Doctor proceeded — 

" The Emperor Charles the Sixth established at Ostend the famous 
Company for trading with India, which excited so much jealousy in 
the Dutch and English merchants. In consequence of this rivalry, 

it was regulated at Ostend in 1751, no, at Vienna," (here the 

Doctor flung an eye on his book,) " that the Company should cease 
their operations ; and, in one year, two thousand five hundred inha- 
bitants quitted the city for ever ! " 



118 



THE PRINCESS. 



A loud snore from Sir Ignatius accused his indifference to the 
narration, and suspended its progress. 

"What a miraculous memory you have, Doctor!" said Lady 
Dogherty. " Nothing escapes you ! Your friend Lady Dixon used 
to say that you were a walking lihrary. How often have we talked 
of you in our walks by moonlight ! She calls you the most talented 
creature the world ever saw, not excepting her friend Byron, or 
Tommy Moore ; for she knew them both intimately, and can show 
their writing in her album. " 

" Poor Lady Dixon was partial," said the doctor, with a conceited 
and satisfied smile, — " too, too partial. " 

Lady Dogherty looked down, and sighed; after a short pause, she 
added, " She was not insensible to genius. The day I left Brighton 
she showed me your beautiful lines on the orange-tree ( as good as 
anything Byron ever wrote), with the happy allusion to that tree 
bearing at once fruit and flowers. Did you see the lines she wrote 
underneath ?— 

' Oh ! woman's heart was made for minstrel's hands alone ; 
By other hands when louch'd, it yields not half its tone.' " 

"And are you of that opinion, Lady Dogherty?" asked the doctor, 
in a low insinuating tone. 

' Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes, ' filled up the pause ; 
which was shortly after interrupted by Fegan, who aroused Sir 
Ignatius, by gently touching his shoulder, and observing, 

" I ax your pardon, Sir Ignatius; but here's my master, the Right 
Hon. Sir Frederick, coming up towards us." 

Sir Ignatius started and rubbed his eyes. The doctor opened the 
book he held in his hands, and fell to peruse it with intense abs- 
traction; while Lady Dogherty settled her frills and her flowers 
with a minute attention to effect. 

The elegant form, the easy laisser aller air, and peculiar cha- 
racter of countenance of Sir Frederick Mottram, would, all over 
travelled Europe, have stamped him a member of the English aristo- 
cratic caste ; while the deep melancholy and languid look spread over 
his face, would, by foreign prejudice, have been ascribed to English 
morgue: by romance, (such romance as Lady Dogherty's, ) it was 



THE PRINCESS. 119 

translated into the highest touch of sentimental refinement. One only 
incongruity disturbed the perfection and unity of his appearance, 
and that was the disproportionate height of his shirt-collar, which 
rose above his ears, and the profusion of linen that descended even 
to the extremity of his fingers. He passed on, with a loitering step 
and folded arms, the observed of all observers,— himself observing 
nothing, and apparently lost in deep abstraction and moody thoughts. 

" Who is he at all? what is he?" asked Sir Ignatius, roused into 
a perfect ' waking consciousness' by his lady's nudges. 

"It is Sir Frederick Mottram, " said Lady Dogherty, " our new 
friend. " 

" "Why, thin, a concaited-looking chap he is, " returned Sir Igna- 
tius, looking after him. " Sorrow know I'd know him again; and 
it would be hard for me, since I never saw him before, though I lint 
him my shirt, to oblige the doctor — my dress shirt. " 

" He is an elegant-looking creature," said Lady Dogherty. " When 
he turns again, the doctor must introduce us. " 

In the mean time Fegan had run after his master, and having 
followed him for some paces bareheaded, at last ventured to 
address him:—" Them's the Irish gintry, Sir Frederick, if youplaze." 

"The who?" interrupted Sir Frederick, turning sharply round. 

" Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty, Sir Frederick, and Doctor de 
Burgo, who—" 

" Oh, so ! where are they ? " 

" Them is they, sir, sitting on the binch forenent the tay-house, 
hard by convanient, Sir Frederick." 

The next moment Sir Frederick stood before the party, and 
drawing off his hat in a straight line with his head, addressed them 
in a few words of courtesy and gratitude. Sir Ignatius stood bare- 
headed, with a look of great deference, notwithstanding Lady Dog- 
herty's nudges, and the example of the doctor, whose sang-froid 
was evinced by his remaining buried in his book, and ( of course ) 
unconscious of the approach of the stranger. When forced, how- 
ever, to take cognizance of the fact, the doctor's start, look, and 
close of the volume were a perfect rehearsal of the scene of Joseph 
Surface's surprise on the appearance of Sir Peter. 

Sir Frederick Mottram's thanks, brief and pithy, were soon made ; 
his apologies soon offered ; and he was already taking up his first 



120 



THE PRINCESS. 



position, for escape, when a movement of Lady Dogherty's rendered 
it impossible. She insisted that he should take Sir Ignatius's place, 
between herself and Dr. deBurgo : " It is some time, Sir Frederick," 
she said, " since I had the honour of meeting you. " 

Sir Frederick, not aware of the circumstance, made a slight in- 
clination of the head to this unexpected recognition. 

" Oh then, no wonder if you should not remember it," continued 
her ladyship with a deep sigh ; " you must think me greatly changed 
since then. It was at the Castle, Sir Frederick, on Patrick's night. 
It was my first saison in Dublin. l t was then Miss Kearney, of Fort 
Kearney, county Kerry. The poor Duke always called me Kate 
Kearney. You knew the Duke of Richmond, Sir Frederick : one of 
the best lord-lieutenants, and a talented creture. " 

" I had that honour; but I was then quite a boy, and went to 
Ireland merely for a holiday recreation, with my tutor. " 

" There niver was such a viceroy, nor niver will, past, present, 
or to come ! " said Sir Ignatius. " He was at our house during the 
whole of his visit to Kiilarney, with his shute, and the young A. B. 
C.'s. as they signed themselves in the book in our bar. " 

" Hem! an album !" said Lady Dogherty, nudging Sir Ignatius; 
" an album, in which we enter the names of all illustrious travellers 
who visit us. " 

" Call it what you plaze, Lady D. " said Sir Ignatius, with a wry 
face, and withdrawing his foot from the pressure of hers. 

u Well, Sir Frederick, as I am after telling you, the divel of such 
rollicking times ever we seen in Kerry since :— and it wasn't ould 
Sneyd the wine-merchant that was the worse of it, any how ! Would 
you believe it, Sir Frederick, I paid Sneyd, that year, fifteen hun- 
dred pounds for port and claret ; to say nothing of the whishkey 
( parliament and poteen ) ! Well, God be with the times, when a 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland was not ashamed to prefer a sup of hot, 
the true native mountain-dew, 'bove all the wishwash that ever 
came across says!" 

" Do you know the Duncannons, or the Dorsets, or the Devon- 
shires, Sir Frederick?' ' interrupted Lady Dogherty in great confusion, 
and with much abruptness. " I hope they are all well ? I had the 
honour of dancing with the Duke at a bail at Lismore ; and he did 
me the honour of calling on me the day after. " 



THE PROCESS. 



121 



Tell Sir Frederick, Kitty dear, " said Sir Ignatius, chuckling, 
" about your mother's tumbling down stairs to recaive his Grace; 
and her broken nose ! and the brown paper steeped in spurrits, 
and she smelling of whishkey like blazes ! She'll make you die 
laughing, Sir Frederick ; 'pon my daffy she will ! " 

Fegan thrust his handkerchief into his mouth. Lady Dogherty 
was ready to sink. 

" Sir Ignatius, how can you suppose that Sir Frederick would 
be amused with such nonsense ! " 

" Nonsense, woman ! why it was the fun of the world, and was 
fit to put in a book ! " replied Sir Ignatius : " and I 'm sure ! " 

u I hope you are fond of reading," interrupted the Lady Dog- 
herty, endeavouring to draw off Sir Frederick's attention from her 
husband. " If we can be of any use to you in that way, pray 
command us. Sir Ignatius has bought a very pretty ambulating 
bibliotheque cle voyage. It was selected by our friend the Doctor 
here, who, as you see, Sir Frederick, is a very book-worm." 

The Doctor rose, closed his book, and replied laughingly — "Not 
a worm, Lady Dogherty ; anything but that. The fact is, I read 
running." 

" And galloping too," said Sir Ignatius. " I'll ride and read the 
Doctor gainst any man in England, be he who he may." 

" Life is short, and art long," said Doctor de Burgo, shrugging. 

" And time," said Sir Frederick dryly, " is the capital of talent, 
and should not be suffered to lie idle a moment." 

The Doctor bowed ; Lady Dogherty flirted her large green fan, 
and smiled ; and Sir Ignatius yawned with all the sonorous vocifera- 
tion of a voice from St. Helena;' while Fegan, touching his hat, 
made the sign of the cross over Sir Ignatius's ' capacious mouth' — a 
manoeuvre of devotion against the entrance of the unclean spirit, 
usual on such occasions among the lower Irish. 

At that moment a lady, accompanied by a female attendant, and 
followed by a foreign chasseur, passed before the party, and attracted 
their attention : they too caught her's ; for she held her glass to her 
eye with a pertinacity of notice more marked than well-bred ; which 
drew from Lady Dogherty the observation that " it was certainly 
some one who knew them." 

The lady was simply and gravely dressed in a black pelisse and 



122 



THE PRINCESS. 



bonnet; yet her air was distinguished, and her walk perfection. 

" Devilish nice foot and ankle!" said the Doctor, looking after 
her; " steps out like a race-horse! She certainly does know us, 
Lady D." 

" Can it be our friend of Brighton, the Ambassadress?" asked 
Lady Dogherty; or dear Lady Anastasia's cousin, the Duchess?" 

" Why, thin, don't you know who it is?" asked Sir Ignatius. 
" Don't you remimber the Don Whiskerandos there, that follies her? 
Sure, isn't it the Princess,— the German Princess we met at the Opera, 
who sat in one of her own carriages all night, on board the packet? 
What's this they call her ?" 

" The Princess of Schaffenhausen ! to be sure, so it is !" said the 
Doctor; " the least dumpy German woman, by the bye, lever saw. 
That's a capital idea of Byron's ; I hate a dumpy woman ! Do you 
know the Princess, Sir Frederick ? If so, may I beg an introduction?" 

Sir Frederick replied in the negative, and then abruptly bowed 
and took his leave ; while Fegan, touching his hat to his new pro- 
tectors and compatriots as he passed them, followed his master. 

The party looked surprised at the suddenness of Sir Frederick's 
adieu ; and Sir Ignatius exclaimed— 

" I say, Doctor, did ever you see such a Don as that, with his 
snuff-lhe-moon look ? Would any one think, now, that it was my 
shirt he's gallivanting away in— my fine new, baby-linen-warehouse 
best shirt, never worn since washed ; or that it's your new black 
silk stiff ner he's philandering off with, and my lady's white French 
tamboored cambric pocket-handkerchief peeping out of his pockut? — 
and not as much as c Thank ye,' or c I'll see you by and by,' or 4 Will 
you take a glass of anything?' nor even an illusion to it! Well, 
'pon my daisy! that's a cool chap; like the rest of them English qua- 
lity, who'll take all from we Irish, and divel a word of thanks 
after ! What did 1 ever get for the shell-work grotto, framed and 
glazed, and made by the Ladies of the Ascension, that I gave the 
Marchioness when she put up at my house ? or for the picture of 
£ Maria and her goat,' worked on white satin by the Ladies of Mercy 
at Cork convent, that I won at a raffle, and gave to Lady Mary, in 
regard of the place I expected ?— or what will ever ye get, Kitty 
Dogherty, by your great friend, Lady Anny Statius Mac Queery, 
that wore the wheels off our bran new carriage at Brighton, and 



THE PRINCESS. 



123 



stifled the life out of me by stuffing herself into our little fly every 
night ; who made you ask all her fine frinds to your party ; who 
laughed at Lady Dixon, and thin rifused to prisint you at Coorte ! 
or get you invited, like the Connors and Smiths, to the Queen's balls?" 

" She did the next thing to it," said Lady Dogherty ; " she got us 
her cousin's the Duchess's box at the Opera, on that famous Saturday 
night." 

"And if she did, divil thank her! didn't you pay six guineas to 
What-d'ye-call-'um the bookseller for it? and wouldn't wonder if 
she went snacks." 

"There were those, Sir Ignatius, who would have paid fifty 
guineas for such a distinction ! " 

"Why, then, greater omadauns they; and I appale to the Doctor 
here. Why, then, blood alive ! what's gone with the Doctor?" 

Sir Ignatius, during this dialogue, had been watching a lugger 
through his telescope, as it entered the harbour ; and he had not no- 
ticed the Doctor's departure, nor the significant whisper of the lady 
which had instigated it. 

Passing her arm through her husband's, Lady Dogherty now led 
the way towards their hotel ; giving him, on the road, one of those 
lectures on vulgarity, foolish allusions to past times, and similar 
offences against her notions of propriety, to which the Baronet was 
more accustomed than submissive. 

Sir Ignatius was a gentleman 'upon compulsion, ' though a baro- 
net by descent ; and while his * new honours' had not yet clung to him 
'by the aid of use,' the habits of his past life and the exigencies of 
the present frequently placed him in what, in modern political par- 
lance, is called a false position ; from which the tact of Lady Dogherty, 
her admonitions and reprehensions, in vain endeavoured to extricate 
him. Lady Dogherty was 'a real gentlewoman bred and born.' 
As Miss Kearney, she had flirted through the garrisons of Cork and 
Kerry during the last twenty years, and having become a charge to 
her nephew Phineas Kearney, of Fort Kearney, Esq., and finding 
the officers less flirtable than formerly, she had submitted to sacri- 
ficing her refinement, talents, and gentility, to become Lady Dogherty 
of Shanballymac House ( the name of a new unfinished lantern-built 
square edifice, which stood ' alone in its glory,' in the midst of a black 
bog, near the village of Shanballymac). 



124 



THE PRINCESS. 



This mansion had been intended by Sir Ignatius as the Tusculum 
of his learned leisure, where he meant to pass the residue of his 
days in sauntering to the town of Shanballymac, drinking whisky- 
punch, attending the Mallow races, and occasionally, ' in the glimp- 
ses of the moon, ' revisiting the Stag's Horns,— a firm in which, if he 
was not a sleeping partner, he was at least an interested admirer 
and habitual frequenter. 

But if man proposes, woman disposes. The second year of their 
marriage had already commenced, and Sir Ignatius had not yet seated 
himself in his mansion. He had passed a month in Dublin during 
'the Castle season,' two at Kingstown, three at Bath, four at Chel- 
tenham, and three at Brighton, where Lady Dogherty had been sent 
by the physicians for her health, which, in spite of appearances, was 
decreed to be eminently delicate. In this last place she had become 
acquainted with Dr. de Burgo ; and at his suggestion she was now 
going to try the waters of Baden : having first secured his medical 
services on the journey, for a remuneration, of course, utterly inade- 
quate to the value of his immense talents, and the extensive list of 
patients he was kind enough to abandon for her sake ! 

Lady Dogherty had hoped much for Sir Ignatius's improvement, 
from the society, conversation, and accomplishments of their 
clever medical attendant. As yet, however, Dr. de Burgo had 
treated him with silent indifference; or only noticed his blunders 
to laugh, and his vulgarities to sneer at him. He had, at once, 
discovered that Lady Dogherty was chef en second; and that Sir 
Ignatius was accessible, if need were, through his love of a e sup 
of hot,' and his fear of the cholera. These motives were sufficient 
levers for the Doctor to act upon ; and with the power of indul- 
gence, privation, and terror which they gave him over his patient, 
they enabled him to see his way, without giving himself any farther 
trouble in managing, for his own purposes, his employer— so long 
as it might be necessary to take the trouble of managing him at all. 

To abbreviate this interval and hasten his future rise in profes- 
sional life, he had now left his party, and followed and sought 
Sir F. Mottram with the design of doing away, as he best might, 
the impressions which he felt the low breeding and coarse vulgarity 
of his Irish patient must have produced on the English gentleman. 
Doctor de Burgo was a specimen of a peculiar genus not rare 



THE PRINCESS. 



125 



among the medical tribe. His savoir faire far exceeded his savoir. 
He was, in fact, a mere impersonation of charlatanism in its most 
striking, though not in its coarsest, characteristics. Rapid in per- 
ception, quick in adaptation ; seeing at a glance the weaknesses of 
others, skilful in concealing his own ; gifted to amuse, but prompt 
to injure; he was morally, as professionally, more bent upon 
watching the effect he was producing, than delicate as to the means 
by which it was produced. Urged by the restless energies of an 
implacable vanity to seek, and even to ' command success, ' his 
vengeance against all that crossed him, even accidentally, in his 
path, was enduring and implacable. Without any ofj'those sterner 
principles which might have impeded the march of one of more 
elevated sentiments, he found no difficulty in mastering the feeble- 
nesses of all classes : but while, with seeming frankness, he blinded 
his dupes, he employed them perseveringly to serve himself and to 
crush his rivals. In the pursuit of eminence, he counted more 
upon mental than bodily infirmities ; and taking in turn the colour 
of every prejudice, he was amusing with the idle, canting with the 
pious, politic with the factious, and sentimental with the imaginative. 
By an adroit display, also, of professional technicalities, that rarely 
committed itself to a fact or an opinion, and by a ready complaisance 
to wishes intuitively divined, he passed on the superficial for su- 
perskilful, and on the feeble for more than kind. 

Thus gifted, had his lot been cast in a great metropolis, he might 
have early become the oracle of a court, the dispenser of ether and 
opium, gossip and scandal, to dowager royalties and gentlewomen 
in waiting ; and would have reached that envied round in the pro- 
fessional ladder, which gives in substantial profit all that it refuses 
in personal respectability and professional esteem. As yet, how- 
ever, fortune had not been favourable to the exploitation of these 
qualities ; and wanting the opportunity for introduction into the 
higher walks of society, he considered himself fortunate in having 
captivated the attention and confidence of Lady Dogherty, whose 
landau and livery-servants had established to his perfect satisfaction 
the fact of her command of wealth. 

Sir Frederick Mottram had gained the strand beneath the ram- 
parts, and was pursuing his way with a slow, measured pace, so 
absorbed as to be almost unconscious that the evening tide was 

8. 



126 



THE PRINCESS. 



advancing on his path and breaking at his feet, when Dr. de Bnrgo 
overtook him ( it might have been thought ) more by chance than 
by predetermination. He touched his hat to one whose reception 
was anything but encouraging, and addressed him with a careless 
familiarity, founded possibly on a previous resolve not to be re- 
butted. 

" A charming retreat this, Sir Frederick, from the ramparts; 
that type of Margate, and all such horrors, with its tea-and-muffin- 
shop. Good fun though, sometimes, with its snobs and originals ; 
but there is no escaping the felicity-hunting and most obtrusive 
subjects of his Britannic Majesty, anywhere, 6 from Indus to the 
Pole, ' as the poet says. " 

" It is difficult, " said Sir Frederick coldly, and looking on his 
watch. 

" Oh, impossible ! " said the Doctor, either not feeling or not noti- 
cing the retort. " But I am glad to see you, sir, consulting the 
oracle, keeping your eye on the enemy. To a constitution like 
yours, Sir Frederick, time is everything. Had I the honour of 
prescribing for you, I should be more anxious to regulate your 
hours than your diet ; and to prescribe regular periods for air and 
exercise, rather than drugs. " 

Sir Frederick smiled, and threw his eyes upon the speaker, whose 
countenance had the sharpness, the quickness, and the malice of a 
monkey's. The Doctor was, as usual, looking for a weakness, an 
absurdity, an opening, in short, through which to attack the great 
man with whom he had become accidentally acquainted, and whom 
he had already foredoomed to be a stepping-stone on which he 
should mount to professional, social, or any other supremacy ; for 
his vanity had no predilections, and his ductility was applicable to 
everything. 

" You think I am an invalid? 71 said Sir Frederick, almost di- 
verted from the disagreeable thoughts of the last ten minutes, con- 
jured up through the irritating associations connected with the 
appearance of the travelling Princess. 

"No, " said the Doctor, " not that; not a valetudinarian; but 
you have the true intellectual temperament. You pay the penalty 
of a superior organization, in common with the Romillies, the 
Byrons, and all that are wisest, wittiest, and best. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



127 



Sir Frederick stifled a sigh, and slightly bowed. 

" It is curious enough to consider the human reptile— or god — in 
all its varieties, from its earliest organization to its most perfect 
development ! You are aware, I suppose, that man is originally a 
tadpole? " 

" No, indeed ! " said Sir Frederick, smiling : " I was not aware 
of that humiliating fact. " 

" 'Tis all true, though. We are all reptiles at our origin. " 

" And some continue so to the end, ,, said Sir Frederick, laugh- 
ingly. 

" Just that, by Jove ! The whole is a pretty humbug; and yet 
— ahem !" 

He turned his sharp eyes to search for an expression in his com- 
panion's face, by which he might discover whether his cue was to 
be the dogged orthodoxy of the church-and-state tory, the philoso- 
phy of the materialist, or the scepticism of the man of the world. 
Sir Frederick looked grave, as one of the Oxford school, and more- 
over a considerable lay-impropriator, should do. 

" And yet," continued the Doctor, " 6 a mighty maze, but not 
without a plan,' as Pope says : while it bewilders the philosopher, 
it teaches the Christian a mistrust of his own blindness. In short, 
as the infidel Voltaire observes, this best of all possible worlds is 

However, one cannot doubt, that ' whatever is, is right;' 

call it fate, necessity, or Providence. Your opinion, I dare say, Sir 
Frederick?" 

" Not exactly," said Sir Frederick, with whom, at that moment, 
all that was, was wrong. 

u At all events, it is unavailing, and sometimes perilous, to drop 
the lead too deeply. The fools will always have the best of it." 

" Not always," replied Sir Frederick; " the rogues come in fcr 
their share." 

" Humph! Why, yes!— Oh! by the bye, Sir Frederick, you 
must have been amused by that specimen of a wild Irishman, my 
very new friend ( for I only saw him for the first time a day or two 
back) , Sir Ignatius Dorty, or Dogherty, or Dogberry. Circumstances of 
a very delicate nature, entrenous — in short, a foolish, but devilish 
pretty girl, mistook my professional interest for— you may conceive : 
but let that pass, as Scott has it. The girl must die all the same ; but. 



128 



THE PRINCESS. 



in the mean time, you know, I thought it a good plan to travel, 
that is, till my friends the Tories come in : for I have the solemn 
promise of a friend to do something for me in the King's medical 
household, as soon as the, blow-up comes; and things cannot goon 
much longer on thepresent Whig tack. So I accepted Lady Dogherty's 
proposal to accompany her abroad ; not, indeed, so much in consi- 
deration of the very liberal sum I am to receive, as because her 
case is singular and important. I am writing on the subject. She is 
really an interesting person, and as celebrated as the Biondina 
in gondolctta of "V enice ; for she is the Biondina of the lakes of 
Killarney, the original of the Kate Kearney, sung by Mrs. Waylett 
— charming little creature, Mrs. Waylett ! But, with a thousand 
good and amiable qualities, poor Lady Dogherty is a Utile quiz- 
zical, a little too blue." 

" A little too red, I should say," observed Sir Frederick. " She 
looks like a moving plethora." 

" She is dying," said the Doctor,- gravely ; " but not of that." 

" Dying !" said Sir Frederick, smiling like Gassius, as one who 
* mocked himself, and scorned his spirit, that could be moved to 
smile at anything.' " 

" Yes, actually dying— though slowly. She has lost a lung." 

" A what!" asked Sir Frederick. 

" A lung," replied the Doctor. " She was poitrinaire from her 
cradle ; neglected, or improperly treated ; fell into the hands of 
a Dublin doctor, or rather surgeon, of the old school ; a dogged 
operator, a fellow with the physiology of a butcher. The truth 
stared me in the face. I saw it, as if she lay before me on a 
dissecting table. Well, she was given over ; sent to Cheltenham, 
to die out of the way ; came to Brighton ; fell into my hands ; 
and here she is. I can't give her a lung ; but if I can get her 
to live on and enjoy life without one . . . ."' 

Li It will be a miracle ; though, really she seems, as it is, to enjoy 
life and its good things to admiration." 

" Yes, yes; I see; the redness in her face. It brightens her 
eyes, and whitens her teeth : all disease, all symptomatic. You 
are going to drink the waters at Aix-la-Chapelle, I presume, Sir 
Frederick ? But, if I might obtrude a travelling opinion, I should 
say, ' Try Baden.' Allow me : just turn your eyes to the light. 



THE PRINCESS. 



129 



Ay, I see; overworked,— that malady of minds, that ' o'erinform 
their tenement of clay.' So try Baden ; but don't try the German 
physicians : German metaphysics, as much as you will. You have 
read Kant, of course— a floorer to the materialists. I admire 
Kant, as much as that divine woman, Madame de Stael. I am 
for the spiritual, to the very verge of illusion." 
Sir Frederick stifled a sigh. 

" If you will allow me, I'll send you a little analysis of Kant's 
system, when we get to Brussels. You stop at Brussels ?" 
• " Yes, merely to await my carriage." 

" The only thing you will now find worth staying for there. 
The revolution is a regular humbug ; but what can you expect from 
the ' canauXj canards, canailles, ' as Rousseau calls the braves 
Beiges:' 

" I thought it had been Voltaire, who said it of the Dutch?" 

" Oh, ay ! — all the same, you know ; the same population, all 
Dutch-land. I go by physiology. There is a link between man and 
the monkey ; that is too curious ! I speak as an anatomist ! I 
don't mean as to the soul ! 

' The vital spark of heavenly flame ! ' 

A noble line that, worthy of a Christian writer ! But Adrian, like 
Seneca, almost anticipated the moral of Revelation." 

By this time the interlocutors had arrived in the town, and were 
traversing the Place d'Armes, when the chasseur of the Princess 
of Schaffenhausen came forth from a little book-shop. Doctor de 
Burgo looked earnestly after the man ; and Sir Frederick, whether 
he was desirous of getting rid of his intrusive companion, or really 
w 7 anted to make some purchase, touched his hat, and entered the 
library. 

After turning over several of the provoking but pleasant contra- 
factions of the Meline press, he asked for a Guide-book — " some- 
thing—anything—he didn't care what— about the country." The 
man of the shop had nothing of the kind left. The immense flocks 
of English that had arrived by the last few packets had carried off 
all the Guides. He had sold the last of them to that English gen- 
tleman who was walking there with the chasseur of the Princess of 

8.. 



130 



THE PRINCESS. 



Schaffenhausen. She had just sent her chasseur to procure one; 
but he had it not to give him. It was unlucky, for the Princess 
started early the next morning : at least, so the chasseur thought. 

Sir Frederick gave out that full and deep respiration which pro- 
ceeds from the bosom which is suddenly relieved from some heavy 
weight. Still he continued to pore over the books on the counter, 
till he lighted on a c History of the Low Countries' by Mr. Grattan, 
and some other local works, which he bought and ordered to his hotel. 

This he thought would be pdture for the time which he should 
have to remain at Ostend ; and after spending some additional time 
in wandering about the silent and empty streets of this once stirring 
and populous town, he returned, not to take ' his ease at his inn,' 
but to indulge in the solitude of its dreary and old-fashioned apart- 
ment. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE ELESSE. 

Among the many metaphysical refinements for which philosophy 
stands indebted to the Germans, there is none more luminous, and 
at the same time more sound, than their distinction between sub- 
jective and objective reality. The aspect of external nature borrows 
so much of its character, not only from the temperament and dispo- 
sition, but from the caprices of feeling and passion, of the beholder, 
that the evidence of the senses scarcely suffices to convince us of the 
identity of certain objects, when revisited under a change of fortunes 
or of moods. It is thus that Paris may be rendered joyless and 
melancholy as its own Place de Greve; and that Ostend, of ill-omen- 
ed notoriety for its monotony and dullness, may become enjoyable 
to those to whom it proves an abrupt and refreshing transition. 

In all the changes and chances of human life, there were few more 
striking and sudden than that which Sir Frederick Mottram had 



THE PRINCESS. 



131 



passed in arriving at the Belgian shores. The spoiled child of fortune, 
the 'English epicure,' the man made up of party views, local habits, 
and conventional principles, was now paying the penalty of his 
ignorance of all that constitutes the sad reality of a 4 work-a-day 
world; ' and was suffering some of the more painful consequences 
to which vice, folly, misfortune, or poverty, habitually expose the 
great mass of society's less-favoured children. Flying from evils 
which had worn out his patience, he had fallen upon others which 
hitherto ' he knew not of ; ' and in escaping from the vexations and 
annoyances incidental to the highest positions in the social sphere, 
he tasted, though but for the moment, of those incidental almost to 
the lowest. 

Deprived of conveniences which were to him a second nature, of 
luxuries which he deemed necessaries ; without money or credit ; 
unknown, suspected, distrusted, he had escaped by a mere accident 
from the ridicule of being sent back to England as a branded run- 
away, the victim of illiberal international laws which he had himself 
contributed to perpetuate : and for this escape he was indebted, in 
unredeemable obligation, to persons whose vulgarity shocked him, 
and whose probable future acquaintance might be troublesome, 
obtrusive, and ridiculous. 

Still, ( the greater embarrassments of his new position having been 
overcome,) it was not without its charm. To have merely escaped 
from the scenes of disquietude which he had fled,— to have exchanged 
the turmoil of political dissension and domestic jars for the solitude 
and tranquillity of Ostend,— would have done less to tranquillize his 
irritability, and restore the tone of his distempered mind, than this 
sudden plunge into pecuniary and personal difficulties, so new and 
so whimsical. His attention had been distracted : a new train of 
ideas had been forced upon him ; he had been occupied, thrown 
upon the ways and means of chance ; the past had been violently 
and abruptly dissociated from the present ; and under this revulsion 
of ideas and habits, the old Flemish and once prosperous sea-port 
afforded objects of curiosity and interest, that gradually seized upon 
his imagination, and rendered him even cheerfully submissive to a 
species of exile and detention, to which so many English voluptuaries 
are condemned, in the small retired towns of the French and 
Flemish coasts. 



132 



THE PRINCESS. 



The ascertainment of his rank and fortune, in procuring him that 
attention and credit which are never refused to the possessors of such 
distinctions, left few recollections of the recent misadventure beyond 
Uiose which belonged to its whimsicality and exciting novelty. The 
energy of his intellect, too, was something restored by the rallying 
of his bodily health ; and in giving himself up to his new situation, 
and exploring the resources of the place, he had stumbled upon one 
of those obscure, neglected curiosity shops, so frequent in the 
Flemish towns, where he purchased some old chronicles relating to 
the early history of the Low Countries, which, smelling of the ter- 
rain, awakened a new and deep interest for its stormy story. 

While waiting for letters from England, he had nothing to do but 
to read and write ; and he did both on the sea-shore, enjoying the 
breath and beams of heaven to a luxurious excess. He almost 
constantly occupied the Pavilion des Bains, and was occasionally 
amused at the novel combinations that local afforded. 

It was under feelings so new ( though not unconnected with the 
earliest associations of his life), that he resumed his correspondence 
with Horace Harvey, between whom and himself, though the world 
had rushed, nature had woven links never to be wholly dissevered. 
The same intellectual temperaments, differently directed ; the same 
sensibility to all that is beautiful in nature and in art, prevailing in 
both, had produced, between the moderate tory and the epicurean 
liberal, a sympathy in sentiment and taste, which no divergence of 
political or abstract opinions could diminish, or wholly interrupt. 
In the existing isolation of his heart and circumstances, the desire to 
communicate the impressions he was receiving, and to seek for sym- 
pathy in his new views, was becoming almost a physical want ; and 
the necessity of disposing of a certain quantity of surplus leisure , 
not improbably improved this feeling into an impulse to again address 
his friend, after the lapse of four days from his previous letter. 

"TO HORACE HARVEY, ESQ. 

" Pavilion des Bains, O&tend. 

"Dear Horace,— I write principally to relieve you from the ap- 
prehension of my being taken up for a vagabond, and sent back to 



THE PRINCESS. 



133 



England. Well! I am restored to the ranks of the honest and the 
trust-worthy, owing to the interference of the Irish family I men- 
tioned in my last. Such originals ! and yet persons of rank, wealth, 
and boundless hospitality. From their own showing, at least, they 
have received half the aristocracy of England at their old castle, 
somewhere on the road to Killarney. Imagine their having expend- 
ed fifteen hundred pounds on wine in one year, when they enter- 
tained the Lord Lieutenant of the time being ! The old Milesian is 
vulgar to the extremest verge of Irish vulgarity. His lady, all pre- 
tension and bleu; and then the travelling physician, who is Irish 
too \ He, however, puzzles me. He is obtrusive, familiar, and of 
true Irish assurance ; but he is a devilish clever fellow, very amus- 
ing, and extremely quick in his professional views. In a short 
walk, he threw out some very odd observations; and made a bet- 
ter guess at my disease, than any of the big-wigs I consulted in 
London. 

"I was very near having the honour of the whole party's society; 
but that they have joined the travelling suite, of— who, for a 
ducat? Why, my bete noire, the Princess of Schaffenhausen. 

"On the evening of my arrival here, as I sat on the ramparts, 
enclave between Sir Ignatius and my lady, the identical Princess 
passed us, veiled and muffled as usual, and pointing her imperti- 
nent glass full upon us. 

"Can you imagine the absurd coincidence of our sailing in the 
same packet ! Her apparition at my house in London had been among 
the causes of drawing me from it; and here she is, or rather was; 
since she left Ostend the next morning, with the Dogherties in her 
train. What an inexplicable creature ! what energies ! what physi- 
cal as well as moral force ! There are traits in her character, or 
rather her conduct, which sometimes remind me of Christine of 
Sweden — a great creature, though a perverted one ! But what is 
her object— what her pursuit ! Yet, of what consequence is this to 
me? Her association with such creatures as the Dogherties, however, 
is very amusing. 

" I have had a note from the Doctor, by the bye, to apologize for 
not offering me a seat in their carriage to Brussels. c We have been 
suddenly induced to join the party of her Highness the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen, and start early to-morrow,' he says; c but we shall 



134 



THE PRINCESS. 



be happy to renew our acquaintance, and receive the honour of 
your commands at the ' H6tel de Bellevue; etc. etc. ' 

" So I am quitte pour la peur. What a people these Irish are ! 
While I was writing the last line, I overheard a fine-looking fellow, 
standing at the door of the Pavilion, say to a pretty Flemish fruit- 
girl, ' Vous etes belle, Ma'm'selle V— Non Monsieur, je ne suis 
que joliel ' was the reply. But the compliment was so often re- 
peated, that I rose to see who was the pertinacious cavalier. To 
my infinite surprise, I discovered it to be Lawrence Fegan, my Irish 
Jocrisse, whose blunders have plunged me into so many difficulties, 
from which I am not yet quite extricated. 

" His actual appearance, compared with the impression he had 
made upon me at Carlton-terrace, set identity at defiance. He had 
ayailed himself of the order I had given for a suit of livery, to banish 
all that was tigrish in his groom's frock ; and the first French tailor 
of Ostend has produced a dress on the dandy model of the Doctor's 
defroque, so that little more than the colour of my livery remained. 

" To my exclamation of ' Fegan, is that you ? ' he answered, with 
a flourishing Flemish bow, c It is, of coorse, Sir Frederick. ' He 
coloured deeply as I threw my eye over his clothes, and added, ' I 
ax your pardon, sir; if my new coat isn't intirely of the livery cut, 
it is the fault of Mounseer the tailleur. And in regard of being 
your honor's own groom and vally, I have sworn upon the holy and 
blessed altar of the eglise of Nother Dame, not to let a drop of naked 
spirits pass my lips till I get back to Ireland, be that same short or 
long : and am after endeavouring to pick up a word Of Frinch, to 
make myself useful, by buying strawberries from the young 
Ma'm'selles of the pleece, and reading the signs over the shop-doors, 
sir.' I give you this speech verbatim; but bis look and accent are 
beyond the reach of art. 

u AU this time the fair vrow stood smiling and curtseying; while 
Fegan, with the strawberries in one hand and his hat in the other, 
was really not at all unlike his patron the Doctor. His quickness, 
unprovability, and humour, have vanquished me ! I ordered him to 
pay the young woman for her fruit ; and left him counting out the 
change for a franc, and murmuring his ' Vous etes belief which, I 
suspect, constitutes the whole of his present vocabulary. He appears 
to be honest, willing, alert, and an excellent groom ; and though I 



THE PRTNCESS. 



135 



shall probably want but little of his services in that capacity, I shall 
bear with him, and pickup at Brussels something between a courier 
and a valet, to complete my travelling suite. 

" But whither am I to travel? I dare not yet turn my thoughts 
towards Carlton-terrace ; and 6 de die in diem ' must be my motto 
until some motive starts up to steer or fix me. Meantime, I read and 
saunter away my time, in your own poco-curante way ; and have 
already made an acquaintance with some of the natives that rather 
interests me in the Belgian Revolution : hitherto, I confess, the 
object of my indifference, at the least. I had been more than 
disgusted by its drawling and unsatisfactory details of inconclusive 
negotiations ; having watched its progress and protocols, through 
the spectacles of the Holy Alliance, and under some certain social 
prejudices, for which, perhaps, our London coteries are answer- 
able. 

"One of my approaches to the ramparts (where I actually live) is 
by a rope-walk, where an old maitre fabriquant de cordage pre- 
sents such a perfect figure of one of Tenier's droles, that I bought 
some pencils and drawing-card for the purpose of sketching him, 
(the first time I have taken up a pencil, by the bye, for eight years.) 
He saw what I was about, and lest he should be offended, I scratch- 
ed in a bit of a ruined building, and asked him the name of the place. 
He looked at it, and sighed. 4 Ah, Seigneur Dieu ! ' he observed in 
excellent French, c there is nothing now in this town worth making 
a picture of— it is a ruin. Some thirty years ago, there were still 
some fine things to be seen in it ; but the blocus continental of the 
Emperor Napoleon gave the coup de grdce to the prosperity of Os- 
tend ; and then, to make bad worse, we were given over to the king 
of the Dutch ; and it was his cursed Dutch gunpowder that exploded 
in 1826, and completed our misfortunes. The government maga- 
zine, to be sure, went up along with it; that was some comfort; but 
the town was nearly reduced to ruins. The earthquake was felt at 
Brussels. The explosion took its course along the shore. The 
Haze-g?~as 7 the finest place in Flanders, became a heap of rubbish ; 
and had not Notre Dame d'Ostende watched over us, our ancient 
city would have been the tomb of its inhabitants. ' 

" 6 Apparemment, 9 I said, as we walked on together towards 
the ramparts, ' monsieur n'est pas Orangiste? 5 



136 



THE PRINCESS. 



" ' Comment, monsieur / ' he replied, ' j'e suis Beige, moi, — 
Saquer! ' * 

" At that moment we overtook a young man, with death stamped 
on his pale but handsome face. He was leaning- on the arm of a 
young girl dressed in the Flemish costume, and was supported by a 
crutch. He wore a blue linen blouse, with red worsted epaulettes; 
and his little casquet was ornamented with the Belgian tri-coloured 
cockade (red, yellow, and black), worn with something of a mili- 
tary smartness. 

" ' It is one of our Blesses, ' said the old man, taking off his cap, 
and saluting him respectfully. ' Bo?? jour , mon brave I comment 
ra la sante ? ' 

" 1 Pas mal, ' said the young man, with a faint smile, as he 
seated himself on a stone bench. 

" The girl opened a little basket, presented him some biscuits and 
fruit, and laid a flask of wine and a horn cup beside him. After a 
short dialogue in Flemish, animated by a smile which could not be 
mistaken, she kissed her hand and turned away. I took my place 
beside the poor invalid, whose appearance affected me. I made 
some idle remarks on the sea air, and its salubrity to an invalid. 

" 'C'est un de nos Blesses,'' repeated the old man, folding his arms 
upon his breast, and looking with pride on the young sufferer. ' He is 
a hero of the 26th of September, our great and glorious revolution.' 

" ' Did the revolution of Brussels reach to Ostend? ' I asked. 

" ' Reach it! ' repeated the old man indignantly : 6 par exemple ! 
we did not wait for that ; we met it more than half-way — n'est-ce 
pas, mon brave ? ' 

u ' Jc crois Men ! ' said the Blesse, either restored by the wine 
he had supped, or kindling at recollections which had their influence 
over his life— nay, his death ! for his hectic cheek and flashing eye 
spoke of rapid dissolution. 

" - He can tell you something of our revolution, sir, ' said the 
old man. - You English gentlemen believe nothing, know nothing 
about us. I have talked to many of them on the ramparts, and 
they were all alike ignorant on the subject. Eh, mon Bieul that 
poor lad there, who was mitraille' by the Dutch, was the first to 



* The Flemish pronunciation of sacre. 



THE PRINCESS. 



137 



plant the Belgian flag- on our town. He can tell you better than I, 
whether we had a taste of the revolution of Brussels, or no. ' 

" I felt that I had shocked the self-love of the patriotism of 
Ostend, and hastened to acknowledge my ignorance and to desire 
information. The young patriot seemed flattered, and proud of 
i the reference. After a little hesitation, a clearing of the voice, and a 
summing up of spirits, he almost burst forth, 

" ' The cry of liberty, monsieur, had resounded through Belgium. 
It found no tardy echo in Flanders ; for if nous autres Flamands 
are less explosive than the brave Liegeois , we were not less sensible 
of our grievances. Our hatred of the Dutch was of long date. We 
had already had our political revolts, and blood had been spilt ; 
the people of Ostend and its arrondissements having been irritated 
by the conduct of the Dutch commandant de place. 

" ' Bien, monsieur; it was on the evening of the 26th of Sep- 
tember, about six o'clock, ( / ought to remember it, Monsieur Er- 
nest, for I had come to make preparations for my marriage, ) that 
the firing from Bruges was heard at Ostend. The people rose 
instantly ; ill-armed indeed, but with the Belgian colours at their 
head, and with the brave Jean de Bataille, an ex-officer of marine, 
to lead them. We directed our steps to the Grande Place, and the 
guard was disarmed in a moment. The troops flew to retake the 
post ; a feu de peloton killed nine of our bourgeois ; and I had the 
honour to receive wounds, of which I am yet not quite cured ! 

" ' On the 27th, the troops of Bruges retreated on Ostend ; and 
on the 28th, the popular movement recommenced, with more vio- 
lence than ever. It was then that the Belgian soldiers separated 
from the Dutch, and joined the bourgeois. On the 30th, the troops 
capitulated ; and surrendering the town to the Belgian military and 
the town-folk, sailed on the same day for Flushing. 

" ' Our example,' continued the young Blesse, 6 was not follow- 
ed, but met by the towns of the neighbourhood. Each made its own 
little revolution. Furnes, Nieuport, Ypres, Dixmude, Courtray, and 
the major part of the communes of the plat pays, had scarcely more 
than to disarm the marechaussee ■ and by the 3rd of October, in 
the space of eight days, the Belgian flag floated on the belfries of all 
our villages, to the very verge of Flanders. ' C'e'tait une belle re- 
volution que la notre ! ' 

9. 



138 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Nothing could be more animating than the countenance of the 
old man during this detail ; and his 5 Voila ! ' £ Pardie V ' Je le 
croisbienV ( Voyez done, monsieur!'' formed an amusing run- 
ning commentary upon the text. We were still at our ' belle revo- 
lution'' when the pretty fiancee returned, for she was evidently 
the bride of the interrupted espousals. She reproved the Blesse 
for having talked too much, and drew him away ; but not before I 
had apologized for a curiosity which might prove injurious to him, 
and obtained and taken down his address. — The young man slowly 
crawled away, supported by his mistress. 

tu The old rope-maker sighed, as he followed them, with eyes full 
of compassion. 

" ' She will soon be spared this trouble, pauvre petite! 5 he said. 
1 Every time I see him, Jean is a step nearer to his grave ! ' 
" 6 She is of course his mistress? ' I said. 

tc L She was his fiancee, monsieur ; and was to have been married, 
when the revolution broke out. Jean was a poor lad, but of res- 
pectable parentage, and one of the best workmen in the hat-manu- 
factory at Thourout. Marie is the daughter of a garde-champetre. 
His cottage stands in the forest of Wynendale. She was sent here to 
learn to make lace; and everything was settled for the nuptials, when 
the 26th of September arrived. He has told you the rest, except that 
her father is an Orangist, and will not now hear of their union.' 

"It is astonishing how much this little romance has interested 
me. 1 intend to look to these poor people, and try whether better 
medical advice cannot be procured to save the young patriot from 
his impending fate. 

" That / should become interested in the Belgian revolution, and 
at Ostend ! — a partisan, too, on the wrong side ! But the animated 
narrative of the unfortunate Jean, his youthful mistress, and her 
Orange father, have worked on my imagination ; and this domestic 
episode has really excited a feeling concerning the political drama 
itself, not quite consonant with my habitual views of the subject. It 
is strange how a phrase— a word giving a tint, a colour, to events 
— operates this species of enchantment on the coolest auditors. The 
forest of Wynendale! Ypres, Courtray, names associated with the 
glorious wars of our own revolution. Even the ' nous autres Fla- 
mands" of honest Jean, identifying the speaker with a national 



THE PRINCESS. 



139 



sentiment, wins one for a moment to an affection for his cause, and 
a belief in the possible permanency of its success, at variance with 
all preconceived opinion. 

" Modern story makes but little part of our school and university 
education ; and though one reads afterwards to a particular point, 
still there are few Englishmen sufficiently acquainted with the 
history of these countries, to feel their enthusiasm kindle at aught 
that concerns the present destinies of its people. Sometimes indeed, 
when one has ' to rise ' upon a question of Lord Palmerston's pro- 
tocols, or the treaty of 1815, and has to get up a hit for the debate, 
one sends to Murray for the newest and shortest book on the matter; 
but, the purpose served, the facts are forgotten. 

'< Since my arrival here I have been reading an old black-letter 
chronicle of the Low Countries, called La Chronique de Nangis, 
which I picked up here, and which, as well as Meyer's history of 
Flanders, has all the interest of a romance. To that circumstance, 
probably, the story of the young Blesse is indebted for a portion of 
the seduction it has exercised on me. You must first warm to a 
people by their antecedents, before you can interest yourself for 
their actual position. " 

" P.-S.— The packet is in. A letter from Harris's head clerk in- 
closes me the sum I wrote for ; but he waits the return of his chef 
from Mottram Hall, to proceed with the rest of my commission, 
instead of sending me my letter of credit at once. This is pleasant; 
for I have already expended a good part of the money he has sent 
me. Was there ever such an accumulation of bores ! The exigeante 
Princess, moreover, has carried off all the post-horses left by the 
travelling hordes of English ; so I start by the treckschuyt at two 
o'clock, where 1 shall be huddled in with other specimens of the 
animal creation, male and female, as in Noah's ark. But, at this 
moment, I really am so steeped in ' tender sympathies' for others, 
that my own annoyances sit lightly on me. 

" I went an hour ago to see my poor Blesse. I found his humble 
dwelling in the upper story of an old edifice which probably escaped 
the siege by Spinola ; for nothing was ever so antique or dilapi- 
dated. 

" The chamber, No. 5, au second, was easily found : no door 
was closed against the intruder. As I approached, a figure in black, 



140 



THE PRINCESS. 



who appeared just to have left the apartment, drew up in the narrow 
passage to let me pass. I think it was a female ; but the picture 
within occupied all my attention. On a sort of truckle bed lay the 
extenuated form of poor Jean. The few hours which had elapsed 
since we parted had made great ravages, and he was in the very 
agony of death, though scarcely paler than I had seen him the day 
before. His little cap with its tri-coloured cockade was placed 
beside him; and a priest was praying before a temporary altar at the 
head of the bed. Poor Marie, half prostrate on the floor, knelt, 
with her face buried in the counterpane ; while the bluff old rope- 
maker knelt too, and was in the act of prayer. He caught a glimpse, 
however, of my figure as I receded from the door, unwilling to 
disturb the solemn scene; and he followed me out. I had my purse 
in my hand ; and, as if in reply to my presumed intention, he 
said, 

" ' You are very kind, monsieur ; but a good religious woman, 
une bonne et charitable devote, has already provided for the wants 
of the invalid. But poor Jean has now no more wants ! ' 

64 'And Marie?' I said. 

" ' Marie has her parents and her own industry to support her; 
and though from a compatriot and a bonne Beige there is no degra- 
dation in the Blesses receiving assistance, yet from a stranger and 
the native of another land it is different. I thank you, however, in 
behalf of my countryman for your kindly intention— vous etes un 
brave monsieur I ' —and he shook my hand rather roughly. 

tc Mine host of the hotel has come for my English letters, to renew 
his apologies for having taken me for a suspicious character, and to 
announce the departure of the treckschuyt. 

" Let me hear from you at Brussels : and so farewell. U F. M." 



THE PRINCESS. 



141 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE TRECRSCHUYT. 

On board the treckschuyt which pursues its daily voyage between 
Ostend and Bruges, was assembled one of those travelling congresses 
of European nations, which are to be found in every public vehicle 
supplied by enterprise to the itinerant wants of the most itinerant 
generation that the world has yet produced. Sir Frederick Mottram, 
accustomed to select his own hours for travelling, and to make 
'panting time toil' after him, was now panting to overtake time, 
and was all but too late for the punctuality of the Flemish boat. 
Lawrence Fegan however had preceded his master, and was stand- 
ing, Colossus-like, with ' one foot at sea and t' other on shore, ' 
and swearing in good round Irish at the conducteur, for presuming 
to cast off 'the canal-boat,' or let the driver mount 'the garan, ' 
before the arrival of Sir Frederick, whose rank and titles he an- 
nounced with a pomposity by no means borne out by the two car- 
pet-bags which contained their united baggage. 

Every English eye was turned upon the ' Right Honourable, ' as 
he stepped in. The fuss that was made by Fegan excited amusement 
in some, and curiosity in all. Shy, near-sighted, and preoccupied, 
Sir Frederick stumbled into a seat on the first bench that presented 
itself; and putting up his glass, perceived that there was on board 
but one English carriage, and a small, dark, foreign calash, without 
arms. A group of Englishmen, collected at one end of the boat, 
had all directed their eyes to him ; and a party of genuine Flemish 
figures in the other were making observations in their native dialect, 
of which he was painfully conscious that he was the object. 

Equally irritated by the obvious absurdity of Fegan's flourishing 
manner, and by his own impatience, in not waiting another day at 
Ostend, when no princely demand on its posting capabilities would 

9,. 



142 



THE PRINCESS. 



have interfered with his own wishes of travelling in the indulgence 
of complete privacy ; his first impulse was to take up a book which 
lay beside him, and, by burying himself in its pages, to escape farther 
observation. The seat which he occupied had been recently left by 
a female, wrapped in the all-involving black cloak and hood of 
Flemish costume, so prevalent even to the gates of Brussels. Per- 
ceiving her place and book in the possession of the embarrassed 
stranger, she courteously left them at his discretion ; and joining a 
female companion, ( as muffled as herself, ) at the farther end of the 
boat, she entered into conversation with a young Italian exile, who 
was on his way to that asylum of the expatriated worth of all nations, 
the capital of Belgium. 

The book thus abandoned was the ' Prigioni ' of Silvio Pellico ; 
and in the fly-leaf was written, in pencil, the following apostrophe, 
the probable effusion of expatriated sympathy, for sufferings re- 
counted with deeper pathos than the Lament of Tasso, if not with 
all the bitter spirit of the indignant Dante. It caught the eye and 
interested the attention of Sir Frederick :— 

"Italy! magnificent Italy! region of splendid creations, where 
Nature reigns preeminent in the midst of her sublimity and her love- 
liness—where Art, by the supremacy of genius, moves proudly 
in her track, reproducing her forms, embodying her inspirations! 
Italy ! with all your physical attributes, with all your historical re- 
collections, why is it that a veil of sadness, like a film of crape, hangs 
for ever on your beauty? AYhy does insecurity press upon the heart 
of the stranger who comes to worship on your shores ? Why, in re- 
ferring to days passed in your elysian vales among your mighty mo- 
numents, is your name still breathed with sighs, still uttered with 
a tear ? 

" It is, that, buried in their living tombs, lie incarcerated the 
flower of your sons; that your blue skies brighten not their dun- 
geons; that your balmy airs bring no health to their withered 
breasts! It is, that Despotism and Bigotry stand watchful and 
suspicious to note the look, record the word, and denounce the 
spirit, that breathes of their iniquities : it is, that in Italy there is 
no personal security ; that images of fraud and violence multiply 
on every side ; that cells again open for their dupes, and scaffolds 
rise for their victims ! Nations of Europe, which of you have done 



THE PRINCESS. 



143 



this?— England! free England! You, who open charitable ba- 
zaars for distressed foreigners, from which you exclude the Italian 
exile and the Polish refugee ! — France ! revolutionizing, but not 
yet revolutionized, France " 

The fragment here broke off. Pellico, whose book now for the 
first time fell into the hands of Sir Frederick ( for party in England 
reads only its own literature)— Pellico was his old acquaintance. 
He had known him in Milan in 1820, in the house of his illustrious 
friend Count Porro. Both Pellico and himself were, then, in the 
prime of early youth. Frederick Mottram, not yet of age, was 
returning by the north of Italy from his diplomatic residence in the 
English embassy at Vienna; and he had joined a 'harlequin set' of 
Whig and Tory exclusives, the future autocrats of Crockford's 
and queens of Almack's, who then nightly congregated in the Scala, 
and lounged daily on the Corso, in the splendid capital of Lom- 
bardy. Such as they were, ' a mingled web of good and ill to- 
gether, ' they had, in the previous year, received into their magic 
circle of London fashion, a flush of young Italian nobles, of the 
liberal sect, and bred in the scientific schools of the iron-crowned 
King of Italy, on whom they bestowed all that attention which rank 
and wealth never fail to obtain from English society. Never did 
Italy send forth more splendid specimens of her superior popu- 
lation, than in the persons of the young Counts Confalonieri, 
Capponi, Velo, and others, whose historical names recall the great 
days of Italian grandeur and independence. In gratitude for this 
reception into the ' world of English ton,' then all-powerful, the 
noblesse of Milan, the most enlightened of Italy, opened their mar- 
ble palaces, their villas, their galleries, and their opera-boxes, to 
their English friends and quondam hosts. 

Amongst those who best did the honours of Lombardy, were the 
Counts Confalonieri and Porro ; and it was in a garden-room be- 
longing to the classical Casa Porro, that Frederick Mottram, the 
young English Tory of London, the Italian Liberal of Milan, was 
wont to seek the author of ' Francisca da Rimini,' the editor of the 
' Conciliatore,' the most accomplished and inspired of modern Ita- 
lian poets. The two young men were united by the common sym- 
pathy of taste, passion, and gentle natures. Frederick Mottram 
stood indebted to Pellico for his first taste for Italian literature ; 



144 



THE PRINCESS. 



and when he was recalled by his ambitious father to represent a 
rotten borough, on his reaching majority, and to marry the daughter 
of a pauper duke, he had proposed to his Italian friend that he 
should accompany him to the land of freedom ; for so he called the 
England of the Holy Alliance. 

Unfortunately, Pellico conceived that he had sacred duties to per- 
form by his own country, which prevented his visiting other lands ; 
and he deferred the promised visit till— Italy should be free ! From 
that moment when, hand clasped in hand, they stood at the edge of 
the gondola on the banks of the Lake of Como, whence Sir F. Mot- 
tram had taken his departure from Italy, thirteen years had elasped. 

In the eventful interval, Pellico had, like so many other of his 
countrymen, passed the golden prime of his youth in an Austrian 
dungeon. And how had the British statesman passed that interval, 
so big with misery to millions ? As a private man, he had passed 
it in all the c pomp and circumstance,' in all the ease and luxury, 
of English aristocratic habits ; as a public man, in riveting the chains 
and deepening the dungeon of his Italian friends, by truckling to 
foreign despotism, and guarding the avenues of domestic abuse from 
the innovations of timely, temperate, inevitable reform. 

It was in the treckschuyt of Ostend that this idea flashed on his 
imagination for the first time. He closed the book, and laying it 
down beside him, gave himself up to deep thoughts and sad recol- 
lections. He had passed his hand over his eyes, and his ears were 
shut to the jargon of many tongues which was uttering around him, 
when he was aroused from his reverie, the most profound and novel 
he had ever indulged in, by somebody plumping down on the seat 
beside him. 

" Beg pardon, sir," said a rough cockney voice, "but a seat 
is a seat here : crowded as a Margate hoy on a Saturday. Pretty 
rlattish country this here, sir ; just like the Hessex coast. Howsom- 
dever, anything's better than Hostend ! I paid as much for a pint 
of port- wine there as you'd get a bottle of mideirer for in Lonnon. 
Porter, too, a shilling a bottle ! pretty himposition ! A poor place 
that Hostend as ever I see in my voyage through life ;— nothing to 
Ramsgate, though I can't bring my younkers there to think so." 

He pointed to a flashy girl and gawky boy who were seated toge- 
ther on an opposite bench. The former was dressed after ' Acker- 



THE PRINCESS. 



145 



mann's Fashions for May,' and sat sentimentally, with a book open 
in her hand ; the latter was emptying a large cabbage-leaf of its 
load of currants, with which he had smeared his lubberly face, 
while a cargo of Ostend gingerbread peeped from his coat-pocket. 

fcfc La ! pa, you are so prejudiced," said the young lady, her eyes 
fully directed to the figure of the Englishman of fashion ; for such 
she had pronounced him to her brother, who had answered to the 
remark—" What's that to me?" 

" Margate," she continued, " is becoming so shocking vulgar, 
and there is something so very foreign in Hostend ! Pray, sir," 
addressing Sir Frederick, " how far may it be from Hostend to 
Haix-la-Chapelle ?" 

44 As far as from the first of Haugust to the foot of Westminster- 
bridge, " said the father. " Why, what does it signify, Susan? 
1 tell you I von't stop at that there place, by no means. I don't 
mean to stop no where till I leave Bill at school at Idleburgh. Are 
you going as far as Idleburgh, sir? " 

" No, sir, " said Sir Frederick, measuring the interlocutor with 
the look of one unused to such coarse contact. 

" Well, sir, by all accounts, you might do worser. I am a-going 
to put this here tall boy to school there ; where he will be Indicat- 
ed, fed, and clothed for two years, for less than I pay for six 
months at Charter-house for my son James. But James is the held- 
est; and his mother will have him sent to college, and made a 
gentleman of, and a lawyer. This here boy is a-going into a great 
Hinglish brewery at Lige, as is kept by a cousin of mine ; and he, 
you see, must get a parlez-vous Indication and learn Jarman ; and 
so he is going to Idleburgh. " 

" The young gentleman, " said Sir Frederick, insensibly amused, 
tc will, I dare say, have no objection. " 

" Not he, sir. All he wants is plenty to heat and drink, and 
time to play. My nevy, sir, Tom Tyler— my name is Tyler, sir ; you 
may have heard of our house, the Tylers of Milk-street, well known 
in the city : an old house now ! " 

" Very, " said Sir Frederick, irresistibly smiling, " and one not 
unknown to history. I take it for granted you are a descendant 
from Wat Tyler? " 

" No, sir, no ! My father's name, sir, was Job ; I'm not ashamed 



146 



THE PRLNCESS. 



to own it. sir : the first of our family. He began life an errand-boy 
to a draper in Holburn. and died head of the business. I am proud 
on't: though I dare say. sir. you know some would be ashamed to 
own their father was poor and industrious, and worked up their 
way in the world I "—Sir Frederick felt his blood mount to his 
face, and threw round a furtive glance at the English passengers. 

•• Well. sir. as I was saying, my nevy. who is rider to Mr. Cock- 
rell at Lige. ( I mean to stop a day at the iron-works as we comes 
back : but business fust, you know. )— my nevy wrote to me about 
a famous Spa ; and it's by Tom's advice that I'm a-going to look arter 
an highland in the Tihine. sir. the highland of Nun's Wart, which I 
have some idear of purchasing. " 

•• Nonnenswerth. pa. " interrupted the young lady. 

•• Tom. "" continued Mr. Tyler. •• recommends us to buy up the 
whole highland, and make a sort of a Beulah Spa of it ; — great 
speculation, that. Hire a gipsy in Norwood, if there a'nt none in 
these here foreign parts ; but them chaps are everywhere — vagrants, 
sir, vagrants. Still, sir. the public must be served, as my father 
used to say of blue printed linens, when the bird's-eye pattern came 
into fashion. A bad harticle. my father used to say ; but the public 
must be served in its own way. Now. sir. gipsies are bad harticles; 
but as I hear 'tis the Hinglish chiefly frequents the river Rhine, set 
in case I likes the thing, and completes the speculation, they shall 
have a gipsy and asses in plenty to suit their tastes. 

•• And what maybe the object of your speculation? you are going 
a great way for it. "' said Sir Frederick, beginning to enjoy Mr. 
Tyler's communicativeness. 

•'Why. sir. you see. money's a drug now-a-days. One can get 
ten thousand in the city now easier than our fathers could borrow a 
guinea ; and seeing that all our advertising papers are full of the 
Rhine, and that all our folk in the city are beginning to give up 
Margate for the Rhine. I writes to my nevy, he being in foreign 
parts, to find out what might be done there; and so. sir. he re- 
commends me to come and look arter this highland of Nunsworth. 
where there is a sort of a Hinglish hotel or boarding-ouse already. 
Besides, my nevy says, we may have a box of our hown on the 
highland, for half what my wife pays for a lodging for three weeks 
at Brighton when the royal family's there j and get from Lonnon 



THE PRINCESS. 



147 



more cheap and in half the time we goes to Arrowgate. Well, 1 
wish we were at— what d'ye call the highland, Susan ; for I'm sick 
of travelling already. " 

t4 The island of Nonnenswerth, pa— a most beautiful and roman- 
tic spot, ,1 recited Miss Susan, turning to Sir Frederick. " It is the 
subject of a sweet poem in a forthcoming work, as the journal of 
Ton says. " 

" Sweet my eye, " said Mr. Tyler, winking at Sir Frederick. 
" Poems ! nonsense ! Get a doctor to puff it for the wholesomes ; 
and that will fill the boarding-ouse, and get you a smart husband, 
mayhap ; and then, I suppose, I must come down ' with a slice of 
our own little highland. ' " 

u The island of Nonnenswerth, " continued Miss Tyler, addressing 
Sir Frederick, and blushing at her father's vulgarity, " is sitivated in 
the midst of the Rhine, close to the castle of Rolandseck. It was 
built by Roland, the nephew of Charlemagne, to be near his beautiful 
mistress, who was a nun in a convent in the island which pa is about 
to purchase. *' 

" Ay, ay ! never mind that : we'll give'em a Roland for their Oliver, 
and bring over a Lonnon harchitect to build the spa-ouse after the 
pattern of Reulah. A Hinglish hotel is worth all the old papist nun- 
neries in Christendom ! I hate the papists, sir — that's the truth on't ; 
would like to hexterminate them root and branch from the face of 
the world. See what the've been a-doing in Hireland! Why, sir, 
one of the reasons why I wouldn't vote for Obhouse, ( though the 
family deals at our ouse,) is because he was a catholic hemancipator/" 

During this confidential dialogue. Sir Frederick's attention had 
turned to a little band of musicians, consisting of a harp, violin, and 
violoncello, which usually accompanies the boat; and Miss Susan 
Tyler, with more observation than her father, perceiving the cir- 
cumstance, abruptly changed the conversation. 

M What a charming hoperer we have had this season, sir! You 
admire Italian music, l perceive. Do you remember Paster and 
Rubini in that charming duet 6 M'abbracciar Argyrior?'' " 

" It's all humbug!" said the father. "Costs the nation a 
power, and ruins the morals of our wives and darters. Nobody in 
the city went to hoperers in my young days ! Never was there in 
my life,— rather hear Hirish Johnson, or Charley Dignum. poor 



148 



THE PRINCESS. 



fellows! than all the Squalinis in the world. Charley always sung 
' Blow, blow, thou winter's wind, ' when his own night was 
a-eoming, because there was summutin it about ' benefits forgot," 
ha ! ha ! ha ! Droll chap that ! always took tickets and a front row 
in the second boxes for his benefit ; always sung his best song for 
our Company dinners." 

" La ! pa, how you do talk ! There was never no English music 
worth earing, except Miss Paton as was, in ' Hartaxerxes. ' Did you 
ever ear Miss Paton sing ' Fly, soft hidears, fly'?" 

Sir Frederick, w ith an irrepressible smile, answered in the nega- 
tive ; and, amused up to the point of possible amusability, in his 
actual state of temper, by the demonstrative communications of 
these stranger 'Pilgrims of the Rhine,' he left the daughter and 
father disputing on the respective merits of Charley Dignum and 
Miss Paton, and went forward to listen to the pleasant music of the 
little band, which recalled, in the airs they performed, some im- 
pressions of his early boyish travels. 

The woman was singing, with more taste than science, to the ac- 
companiment of her harp, the French melody ' Loin du chdlet. ' 
The Italian exile was murmuring a sotto voce second, and repeated 
with much energy the refrain ' Oh ! ma patrie. ' The cloaked and 
hooded Flamande was drawing, on a card which rested on the 
volume of Pellico's ' Prigioni ; ' and her companion was talking to 
Fegan in broken English. The group was picturesque, from the 
contrasted variety of the figures, faces, and costumes that com- 
posed it. 

Meantime, the swampy banks of the canal near Ostend had been 
gradually exchanged for scenes of more broken and woody outline ; 
the country rising into highly cultivated ridges on either side. As 
Bruges was approached, rural prosperity and beauty became more 
striking. Snug cottages and substantial farm-houses, deeply colour- 
ed, as in a Dutch picture, peeped through trees, and presented 
images of comfort and ease which, throughout even this, the flattest 
part of Belgium, amply compensate for the absence of the more 
striking features of mountain countries. On some spots the hay 
was still making, and sent forth its perfume on the air ; and wher- 
ever man appeared, his fresh colour and decent garb betokened the 
full suppliance of the first wants of life. 



THE PRINCESS. 



149 



A little further on, the treckschuyt drew up for a moment near 
a garden gate of an extremely neat campagne, and took in two 
gentlemen. They swept the decks with their hats; and their low 
bows were returned by salutes from the Flemish party in the boat 
with equal courtesy. One of the strangers took his place with his 
face turned towards the town, and his hat drawn down to shelter him 
from the oblique rays of the sun : he was of the middle age, Flemish- 
built, full and comely. His companion was a young man of a lively 
and interesting appearance, and might have belonged to any country. 
Their conversation was carried on in French, which, by its context, 
revealed that they were evidently inhabitants of Bruges or its neigh- 
bourhood, and were returning at that early hour from a dinner- 
party, at the villa of a friend, to the town. 

There was something in all this, that recalled the social habits 
and rational hours of the middle classes of England of older times, 
almost refreshing to one blase by the enfeebling and corrupting 
usages of his own class and day ; and Sir Frederick, after an effort 
in his own shyness and reserve, was tempted to seek an opening to 
intercourse by asking the period at which the canal from Bruges to 
Ostend had been cut. The two Flemish gentlemen turned round, 
and , bowing as Flemings only bow, seemed eager to reply. 

" It was constructed" said the elder of the two, "in 1615, and 
is a little monument of what even a transient peace of twelve years 
can effect,— a pause during that sanguinary period of European 
history, in the seventeenth century. You remember, doubtless, 
sir, the truce so long desired between Holland, Spain, England, and 
France?" 

Sir Frederick nodded an equivocal assent, and endeavoured to 
'rub up' his recent readings. 

" Yes, " said the young man ; "it was a treve de Bieu, to* give 
the despots of Europe time to breathe, and think of new modes 
of oppression and violence. A pretty set they were ! Your James 
the First, monsieur, false to his allies, like a true Stuart ! Louis 
the Thirteenth, or rather his minister Richelieu ; Maurice of Nassau, 
who was mystifying the Dutch, and planning the murder of that 
glorious patriot Olden Barneveldt ; and Philip the Third, of Spain, 
the worthy successor of the monster Philip the Second, who then 
ruled over the blood-steeped and smoking ruins of Flanders and 

10, 



150 



TDE PRINCESS. 



Brabant, in the person of his viceroys, the Archdukes (as they 
were called) Albert and Isabella;— glorious limes those!" A mur- 
mur of assent followed this speech. 

" It was a great epoch for us, " said the elder gentleman. 
"We were handed over, to be sure, from bloody Spain to leaden 
Austria : but Albert and Isabella were like the princes of fairy 
tales, c de bons princes ; ' so we began to labour in this pause of 
peace in repairing the ravages of war : agriculture revived, roads 
were opened, canals were constructed; and though our ancient 
city of Bruges had then no court, and had lost the early splendour 
of her commerce, still the minor operations of trade renewed their 
activity; and the reviving prosperity of the country is yet visible 
in many monuments of utility and civilization. " 

" Eh Men! monsieur, " said the younger patriot, " I trust the 
five great powers of the present day will let us breathe a little 
now, and give us time to recover. Nations are always for peace 
when left to themselves ; but kings, and those who minister to 
kings, seldom leave them the choice." 

Sir Frederick, interested in the conversation, observed, "I be- 
lieve England concurs fully in the wish for peace. All parties 
with us agree, that it is the interest of Europe to maintain it. " 

"To be sure," observed the young and animated Fleming. 
" Look around you, sir; look at those lovely orchards and beau- 
tiful gardens; they are the work of persevering Flemish industry, 
raised on artificial soils ! It would be a pity to see the labour of 
years ravaged by war, n'est-ce pas, monsieur? Yet, sooner 
than forfeit our national independence, which we have so hardly 
conquered, we are ready to fight the battle over again to-morrow. " 

" Jour de BieuV said another Flemish gentleman, "you are 
quite right ! If we are to be free, we must be prepared for the 
cost ; for right is too often with the strongest. Le bon Dieu est 
toujours pour les gros bataillons, as Spain and Austria found in 
our unfortunate country, in other times. " 

The setting sun now fell in showers of gold on the Gothic towers 
of Bruges, and they were reflected in bright points from their golden 
fanes and moulded casements. 

" What a splendid picture ! " said Sir Frederick. 

iC Yes," said the elder of the two last arrivals ; " it is well cal- 



THE PRINCESS. 



151 



ciliated to make an impression on those who are not, like myself, 
deprived of the organs of vision." 

Sir Frederick started : and looking under the broad hat of the 
last speaker, perceived that he was indeed deprived of sight. 

" That high belfry," continued the blind gentleman, " is the 
clocher de Notre Dame de Bruges, one of the loftiest in Flanders. 
We see it at sea, and it directs the vessels into the port of Ostend." 

" The view is indeed splendid," said Sir Frederick Mottram ; 
" but one always fears that the illusion will be dissipated, on enter- 
ing these ancient towns. It generally is so in Italy, where the 
towns are perfect disappointments." 

" Those of Flanders are the reverse," said the young Brugeois : 
" the domestic architecture of the middle ages in the Netherlands 
is the most perfect and picturesque of Europe. Flanders was the 
cradle of the arts ; but though our national rulers, our Comtes 
Grands Forestiers and Dukes of Burgundy, were magnificent pa- 
trons, it was the merchants and tradesmen of Bruges who raised 
those beautiful edifices which, if you have any taste for such pur- 
suits, you will be delighted to examine." 

" The arts are almost the only subject that interests me very 
much," said Sir Frederick, with some emphasis. 

" Monsieur est-il artiste de profession ?" said the black-hooded 
lady, putting the card on which she had been drawing into her 
book. 

" Only an amateur, madam," he replied, a little hurt at being 
taken for anything professional. 

" Eh bien V she continued ; " look before you ! There is one of 
those originals from which our Flemish painters might have taken 
their subject. There is the chiaro oscuro of Hobbima, in which 
he equals Ruysdael. There are his deep masses ; and there his set- 
ting sun, in which he rivalled Claude. Those trees have his fea- 
thery but firm touch ; and the whole distribution of light and shade 
is his ! Our Flemish painters all studied in the great school of Na- 
ture, and Hobbima most of all." 

" Madame a raison /" said the young Brugeois. "It is to that 
circumstance our school owes its immortal freshness. ..." 

" The absence of all mannerism," said the lady, " and the truth 
that belongs to all ages. " 



152 



THE PRINCESS. 



" To what, then," said Sir Frederick, " do you attribute the de- 
cline of your school ?" 

" To war, sir," replied the young man : "the restless wars of 
France, Austria, and Prussia stopped their progress in the seven- 
teenth and eighteenth century. For thirty years, music was thus 
stopped in Germany ; war rendered music stationary in France, till 
Rossini and the new Italian school were permitted to revive the art ; 
nor would Belgium have been compelled to borrow from other 
countries that divine art in which she once herself excelled, had she 
not been always involved in contentions in which she had no in- 
terest. " 

But you have had fifteen years of peace in Belgium, " said Sir 
Frederick. 

" Fifteen years of discontent and brooding vengeance," replied 
the young man, with fire. " The arts must have encouragement ; 
genius must have its recompense. Genius, qui marche a Vdgal 
des souverains, must still eat. But under the Dutch government, 
figurez-vous ! William considers the arts merely as an inferior 
branch of industry. Painting and music !— bah ! the Arcadia of 
William was a manufactory, and his Magnus Apollo un bon gros 
fabricant ; the clacking of looms was his music, and the work- 
shops of Ghent his Olympus." 

There was a general laugh among the auditors, among whom there 
was not, it appeared, a single Orangist or partisan of the Nassaus. 

"Yes," said the blind gentleman, " we Flemish are all born 
artists, I believe, if circumstances favoured our talents. When 
Guicciardini visited us in 1567, he observed, (I beg pardon for quo- 
ting our own translation,) 6 Les Beiges sont les maitres de la 
musique, qu'ils ontfait renaitre, etqu'ils out portee a un grand 
point de perfection. lis naissent avec un genie heureux pour 
la cultiver.^ " 

" Without that genie" said Sir Frederick, insensibly interested 
in the discussion, " a nation may buy artists, as England does, but 
she never will be musical. I am ashamed to Say, that, until now, 
I was ignorant that the Belgians were a musical people." 

" Comment, monsieur!" said the lady, brusquely. " Do you 
not know that the founder of the present musical system was a 
Belgian, who added the seventh note, and divided the scale into oc- 



THE PRINCESS. 



153 



taves — Henri de Put? And then there was our Rowland Lassus, of 
Mons : the Italians call him Orlando di Lasso. Then there was 
Tinturicr de Nivelles; besides Depres of Antwerp, who invented 
counterpoint, in the sixteenth century. And, in modern times, have 
we notMehul, Berriot, and the divine Gretry of Liege?" 

The Flemish lady then whispered something to the harpist, and 
she struck up ' Richard, 6 mon roi. ' 

" Bravo ! bravo ! " was echoed on every side. 

" La belle musique!" said the blind gentleman, humming the 
air to the harp. 

" Qui, out,'''' said the younger speaker. " You knew Gretry, 
Monsieur Rodenbach ; and the amateurs of the day preferred him to 
every one. Mais nous autres jeunes gens, we prefer the Bra- 
bancon.ne. Chantez-la, ma bonne amie. " 

The harpist struck a few chords, and then sung as follows : 

Qui Faurait cru ! de l'arbitraire 

Consacrant les affreux projets , 

Sur nous de l'airain militaire 

Un prince a lance" les boulels. 

C'en est fait ! Oui , Beiges , tout change : 

Avec Nassau plus d'indigne traite ! 

La mitraille a brise" l'Orange 

Sous l'arbre de la liberie. 

Et vous , objets de nobles larmes ! 
Braves , morts au feu des canons, 
Avant que la patrie en armes 
Ait pu connaitre , au moins , vos noms ! 
Sous Thumble terre oCi Ton vous range , 
Dormez , martyrs ! balaillon indompte" ! 
Dormez en paix , loin de l'Orange , 
Sous Tarbre de la liberie" ! 

The enthusiasm produced by this national hymn was a proof how 
far constitutional phlegm may yield to the excitement of circumstan- 
ces. In the plaudits which followed, there was more of the mercurial 
temperament of the French, than of the supposed sobriety of the 
Flemish, character. 

10.. 



154 



THE PRINCESS. 



It was remarkable that, during the performance, the Italian exile sat 
with his face buried in his hands, and alone gave no outward token 
of sympathy with the cause. He was haply comparing the revolution 
of Belgium with the fruitless struggles for Italian liberty of which he 
was a victim. He had a brother in the dungeons of St. Angelo, and 
he was himself dead in law, — in poverty and in banishment. For 
Belgium, circumstance had done much ; while every chance had 
turned against his own country. The blood of many of the best 
sons of Italy had stained her soil ; while others, dispersed and lonely, 
brooded, like himself, beneath the chilly skies of the north, over the 
disappointment of their patriot hopes. How then could he sympa- 
thize where all was triumph, activity, and hope, and success I 

The little bark was now passing through the Franc de Bruges, 
whose every inch of ground recalled the unsubdued spirit of the 
Flemings of the middle ages. 

" It was here, " said the young Belgian, " that the tree of liberty 
was planted and nourished in the fourteenth century. When the 
Comtes des Flandres endeavoured to extend an unmixed despotism 
over the people, the cities, to strengthen themselves, endeavoured to 
obtain a mastery over the surrounding country : but the population of 
the Franc de Bruges threw off the yoke of both, and obtained for 
it great privileges : it was ruled by its own magistrates, according to 
its own laws; and took a place among the Hi tats de Flandres as an 
independent power. " 

" Let us hope," said another passenger, " that the spirit of the 
ancient times is not extinct. " 

It was now very evident that the Flemings were desirous of impress- 
ing their English fellow-travellers with a conviction of the perfect 
success of their revolution and its consequences ; and Sir Frederick 
Mottram was slowly yielding himself to a cause for which he had 
hitherto felt no interest, through the medium of his imagination. 
The arts were mixing themselves with his political opinions : Hob- 
bima, and Gretry, and the Brabanconne, presented a neutral 
ground, where Fancy, like Archimedes, might fix her levers, to move 
the world of prejudice in which he had hitherto lived. He was be- 
ginning to feel for Belgium; and feeling is a powerful step to con- 
viction. 

On arriving at the port of Bruges, which is without the city, and a 



THE PRINCESS. 



155 



short distance from its gates, there was a general flutter and fuss. 
The acquaintanceship of the voyage was at an end ; and self resumed 
the influence which it usually exerts in such situations. Each was 
busied in pursuit of his own objects ; and boxes, bags, and carriages 
superseded every other consideration. Already had Fegan taken 
the command of a company of three barrows, engaged by him to 
take his two carpet-bags into the town ; and he was haranguing the 
porters*in his best English, respecting the rank and importance of 
his master, whose carriage, he said, was following him, when Sir 
Frederick prepared to use his own legs, and proceed on foot to his 
inn. He had, however, attracted the attention of the young Bru- 
geois, who now approached him with offers of service ; first recom- 
mending, and eventually conducting him to the Hotel de Commerce, 
one of the best, cheapest, and perhaps most ancient hotels of the 
Flemish territory. 

" You will surely remain a day or two in our city, monsieur? " 
he observed, as they walked forwards. 

l " Is there anything to see in it? " was the languid reply. 

" S'il y a quelque chose a voir I " said the young man, in an 
accent of surprise. " There is our superb H6tel-de-Ville ; and our 
Prinsenhof, the ancient palace of the Counts of Flanders. The 
room is still extant where Philip le Bel, the father of Charles the 
Fifth, was born. Then there are the church of Notre Dame, with 
the mausoleum of Charles le Temeraire and of Mary, Duchess of 
Burgundy ; the Musee ; the Botanic Garden ; the Academy of Sculp- 
ture and Painting ; and, above all, the house where your Charles 
the Second resided, when he was our Roi des Ai^baUtriers . But, 
with your permission, I shall have the honour of waiting on you 
to-morrow. Unfortunately, I am engaged to a concert d'harmonie, 
given by our young amateurs this evening ; ainsi, au plaisir. " 

He gave his card, on which was written—' Mons. , Docteur 

en Droit ; ' and then bowed off. 

It was not till after a solitary, but sumptuous eight-o'clock din- 
ner, to which the host of the Hotel de Commerce gave the name of 
supper, that the weary, but not unsatisfied, English traveller re- 
membered a card which he had picked up near the little port of the 
canal, and which he had thrown on the table of his room on arri- 
ving. It contained a slight but admirable sketch of the group on 



156 



THE PRINCESS. 



board, which had struck his own pictorial imagination;— the me- 
lancholy Italian, the joyous Flemings, the placid English, and, 
distinguishable above all, his own fine figure and handsome head ! 
Notwithstanding the miniature size of the drawing, the expression 
of his countenance was preserved with a characteristic fidelity al- 
most epigrammatic. The regular features were touched with 
morgue, and tinged with discontent ; and the figure was defined 
with a precision of symmetry and proportion, peculiar to the En- 
glish toilet, and illustrative of the minute observations of the artist. 

" What a splendid talent! " he said, his eyes riveted upon his 
own resemblance. Both the Italian exile and the Flemish lady had 
been occupied with drawing ; but the amour-propre of Sir Frede- 
rick at once assigned the sketch to the female artist. There was 
something of female tact in its attention to details ; in the wooden 
waist, buskined ankle, short petticoat, and sticking-out elbows of 
Miss Susan Tyler; which, with the father's back, the brother's 
chubby cheek and gingerbread, were touched into the back-ground 
in lines of humorous caricature. Sir Frederick was desirous not 
again to meet the fair artist, lest he should be obliged to restore a 
work that was so perfect an illustration of his pleasant and amusing 
passage from Ostend to Bruges, and which included the best like- 
ness of himself in miniature that ever was made, though he had sat 
to Isabey, and been enamelled by Bone. 



CHAPTER X. 

BRUGES. 

From a deep and healthful slumber, such as the over-worked 
man of office never knew, Sir Frederick Mottram was suddenly 
awakened , on the morning after his arrival at Bruges , by sounds 
of an unusual and an astounding effect. The great bell of the church 
of St. Jacques, close to the Hotel de Commerce, was tolling loud 



THE PRINCESS. 



157 



and perseveringly; while, within the walls of the court, shouts and 
peals of laughter were heard, mingled with what seemed a clashing 
of arms ; which rendered it doubtful whether the untimely tumult 
proceeded from a sudden revolutionary movement, or was only 
consequent on the celebration of some domestic festivity, such as 
the Flemish Kermess, that frequent bane of the traveller's repose 
throughout all parts of the Low Countries. 

Sir Frederick rose, threw open the window, and beheld a ghastly 
figure, larger than life, stretched on the cross; its head bent down, 
its hair dishevelled, and its face covered with drops of blood. 
Preoccupied , and only half awake , it was some moments before he 
convinced himself that the frightfully awful image was no reality ; 
that it was one only of those terrible representations, which a pros- 
trating system of superstition had multiplied throughout the Low 
Countries, and which still remain, to mark the lingering of Spanish 
bigotry, and to demonstrate the strange inconsistency of man, even 
in his greatest efforts for reformation. 

The spectacle, in his imagination, was profanely offensive. He 
turned away , and from another window, having a different aspect, 
he beheld a group of revellers advancing towards the house. It 
seemed a sort of bacchanalian rout, composed of both sexes, armed 
with every species of implement that a well-furnished batterie de 
cuisine could supply. A band of music followed in the train; 
while in front moved a tall, grotesque figure, bearing a gridiron, and 
crowned with gaudy flowers, whose grave but humorous counte- 
nance was the object of universal attention. This personage was 
Lawrence Fegan! For frolic or for row, Fegan, in virtue of his 
Irish temperament, was alike prepared ; and 4 equal to both and 
armed for either field,' he might either have engaged himself in the 
out-burst of another four days ; or only taken the lead of the Belgian 
mob, in the mere spirit of fun and festivity. Shouting and yelling, 
the party continued its march, and entered into the back part of the 
spacious and straggling hotel. 

Sir Frederick dressed himself with celerity; and, hastening down 
stairs, found that the large and handsome kitchen, which he had 
admired, en passant, on the previous evening for its order and 
cleanliness, was now the scene of festive confusion. The votarists, 
who had been thus ' thanking the gods amiss,' were in the act of 



158 



THE PRINCESS. 



arranging themselves round a profusely spread table, at the head of 
which sat Fegan, in his figure and costume a copy of the picture of 
St. Lawrence broiling on his own gridiron, which hung over the 
kitchen chimney. 

Fegan saw, and rising respectfully, approached his master, pull- 
ing the forelock of his laurel-crowned brow, and scraping a bow. 

" What does all this mean?" asked Sir Frederick. 

" It manes, plaze your honor," said Fegan, half tipsy and wholly 
confused, " that I am St. Lawrence on the gridiron. I hopes your 
honor is not displazed, sir, in regard of its being the faiste of ould 
St. Lawrence, glory be to his name ! And these are the raal 
Christhians, Sir Frederick ; and a fine people they are, — and the 
gridiron, sir, and it's being my own saint's day, and namesake! 
Mrs. Cook here, with the curish dress and the gold bobs in her ears, 
has had the puliteness, Sir Frederick, to make me the king of the 
faiste, and had an iligant ball out in the ramise ; and Mrs. Cook 
did me the honor to lade off with me, in regard of my name being 
Lawrence Fegan, like the saint's, your honor; and that's all, sir." 

Sir Frederick saw it was in vain to make any comment upon 
Fegan's new vocation; who was besides, just then, too full of the 
spirit, to resist his own happy Aristippean adaptation to the novel 
circumstances in which he was placed. Satisfied that he was himself 
in no immediate danger of fresh annoyances from his servant's genius 
for blunder, he returned to his chamber, leaving the happy Irishman 
en possession, to be pleased and to please, to the full bent of his 
festive propensities and saintly elevation. 

Availing himself of that unusual advantage in the day of an 
Englishman of fashion, a long morning, he ordered coffee, and sat 
down to write letters of business, with their tedious and wearisome, 
but necessary details. Such details, however, were a relief in the 
existing temper of his mind ; and the only themes to which his 
morbid feelings could bear to recur. They were mere matters of 
fact ; and, unconnected with passion, they revived no heart-sickening 
associations, they awakened no recollections pregnant with humilia- 
tion , and they refreshed no ' compunctious visitings of conscience.' 

Horace Harvey and Mr. Harris, (the man of science, and the man 
of business,) the early connexions of his youthful and better life, were 
at the moment the only persons in England with whom he wished, 



THE PROCESS. 



159 



or could bear, to correspond. It was a new indulgence to revive his 
almost forgotten habits of confidence with the former, to detail the 
progress of his returning health and reviving spirits : it was a neces- 
sary and peremptory duty to address to the latter his intentions relative 
to his property, to consult him on letting his house in London, on 
parting with his villa near Richmond, and to give orders for pre- 
paring Mottram Hall for his residence, whenever he might choose to 
return to England. It was necessary also to make arrangements for 
the immediate reception there of Lady Frances, while still doubtful 
as to the steps he should eventually take in relation to her conduct 
and future position. Too indifferent for separation, too much irrita- 
ted for reconciliation, he sought only for the present to mark his 
disapprobation, disgust, and contempt ; and a few cold lines, without 
date or place, were inclosed in his letter to his agent, to inform her 
of his decisions. 

Yet amidst this dreary series of cold and flat realities, there flutter- 
ed an ideal and phantomlike reminiscence, which flung its dreamy 
influence over his more serious preoccupations : this related to the 
immediate and impelling cause of his almost insane flight from Eng- 
land. Who was the writer of those spellful lines, whose command 
he had almost involuntarily obeyed; and what was the motive of her 
strange interference? 

Sir Frederick Mottram, like all of his temperament and cast, was 
a vain man : he was also a susceptible one. But political life, and a 
well-sustained ambition, that' grew with what it fed on,' had saved 
him from the penalties of gallantry, to which his passionate and ima- 
ginative character might have driven him. An engouement for his 
wife's friend, Lady Montressor, and a caprice for his friend's flirt, 
Mrs. St. Leger, had acquitted him however, in the world's eye, from 
the imputation of a cold and stoical insensibility. But the private 
frailties of public men, if not always of short endurance, are most 
frequently sunk in higher interests ; and the great political epic, more 
especially, of which Napoleon was the protagonist, admitted no pause 
for episodes of gallantry in the career of those whose lives were in 
any way bound in the last scenes of his declining power. Still, the 
elements of passion were latent in the temperament of the politician; 
and imagination lent all its colouring to the romantic and singular 
incidents which had led to his abrupt departure from England. 



160 



THE PRINCESS. 



The great movement of the age, the mighty struggle for conquest 
between past and present institutions, had produced in England, as 
elsewhere, an under-current of female agency, in which religion and 
politics, the church and the state, sought alike to sustain their power 
and to advance their interests. In a moment of such crisis, no instru- 
ment was so humble, no means so indirect, as to be considered 
unsusceptible of advantageous employment : and it is the peculiar 
advantage of woman's interference, that its sphere of action is all- 
pervading, and that its applicability commences there where all 
other agencies have no prise or lever to act upon. 

Women had, accordingly, again become the ' nursing mothers of 
the church ; 5 and had even assumed the singular appellation of 
c Churchwomen,* as in the ages of the Theresas and the Catharines. 
They had also become stateswomen, as in the times of the c Traitedes 
dames f and some, taking even a higher flight, had plunged into the 
depths of mathematical science, or brought their subtile minds and 
eloquent pens to the profoundest discussions of moral and political 
philosophy, and to the propagation of doctrines which they deemed 
essential to the happiness of their species. 

The restless and reacting spirit of priestcraft and sectarianism was 
not slow to avail itself of this new contingency ; and women were in 
various quarters actively encouraged to light up the dimmed fires of 
religious enthusiasm. The Jesuits had again their priestesses of the 
Sacre-Cceur ; the New-light Methodists, their female missionaries and 
class-leaders. English women were openly preaching, or privately 
proselytizing, all over the known world. They had their temples 
on the soil of Brama, and their congregations in the forests of Ame- 
rica ; while other Guyons and other Krudeners were influencing the 
imaginations and passions of the higher classes of society at home. 
Was the devote who had lured Sir Frederick Mottram to the work- 
house, and pursued him to his own chamber, a disciple of Ignatius 
Loyola, or a follower of ' the good Mrs. Medlicot,' the saint in fashion 
of the London circles, and theobject of his favourite aversion, no less 
than the Princess of Schaffenhausen ? The idea, sudden and absurd, 
provoked and irritated him ; and he arose to go forth and break 
through the chain of association, that was leading him back to 

* A name applied by the late Bishop of London, to Hannah More. 



THE PRINCESS. 



161 



scenes and persons which he had made such sacrifices to escape. 

The morning was still fresh and early. Sir Frederick had already 
got through a world of business and an age of reverie ; but he was 
still an hour in arrear of the rendezvous of his kind and self-ap- 
pointed cicerone. He wandered forth, therefore, from his hotel, 
as chance directed. 

The antique and sculptured character of Bruges ( the cradle of 
those arts and dynasties by which barbarous Europe was first 
civilized ) was well calculated to break through the workings of 
frivolous associations, and to replace the flutter of petty annoyan- 
ces, the fastidious disturbances of an artificial and ultra refinement, 
by a reflected calm, and a borrowed repose. The exterior aspect 
of this town, the most perfect and picturesque monument of the 
great and free citizens of ancient Flanders, is in that respect irre- 
sistible ; and in rambling on through the silent and solitary streets 
of the Flemish Florence, Sir Frederick felt his passion for the arts 
revive, and his mind resume something of the pleasurable and 
enthusiastic feeling with which he had, years ago, visited the long- 
buried glories of Pompeii. 

Bruges, which had once held counters for the commerce of all 
Europe, and had formed a central point for the Lombard and 
Hanseatic cities, ( where the Medici and the Strozzi met the merchants 
of England and Germany,) was now only trod by a few devotees, 
on their way to matins in the churches of St. Jacques and Notre 
Dame, or by two or three Beguines, in their singular habit, on the 
devious route of their multitudinous charities. As the English 
traveller stood in the Grande Place, admiring its magnificent and 
pictorial edifices, he rejoiced in the solitude which left him free to 
study the remains of an epoch so influential on the history of 
mankind. 

The domestic architecture of the Belgian cities is unique, resem- 
bling neither that of France nor of Italy; for the sturdy race of the 
Low Countries, living under other institutions, were actuated by 
other wants than those which governed the victims of despotism 
in the rest of Europe. The H6tel-de-Ville, that necessary depend- 
ence of a self-governed city, is, at Bruges, singularly attractive, 
as an evidence of the miraculous perfection to which the arts had 
been carried at so early a period as the fourteenth and fifteenth 

11. 



162 



THE PRINCESS. 



centuries. Its exquisite incrustations of sculptured figures, its 
profusion of ornaments, are valuable specimens of a branch of the 
arts, hitherto insufficiently studied by the antiquary. They form a 
series of bas-reliefs, presenting curious portraits of historical cha- 
racters, and preserving the costume of an almost forgotten po- 
pulation. 

As Sir Frederick was busied in examining the almost endless 
details of this singular monument, a living figure moved towards 
him, that by its picturesque outline harmonized with the antique 
scene, and drew to itself his suspended attention. It was clothed 
in the mantle and hood of the Brugeois toilet, which might serve 
alike the purposes of devotion or of concealment. But besides 
something peculiar in the bearing of the wearer, sufficiently distinct 
to identify her as the artist of the treckschuyt, the singular and 
dumpy figure and white coif of the female who followed close upon 
her steps would have betrayed the fact. She carried a large clasped 
volume, which might cither be the portfolio of the artist, or the 
breviary of the devotee. 

Sir Frederick could not resist the desire of addressing the ad- 
mirable designer of his own likeness. His graceful salutation, 
and gracious though reserved address, were scarcely acknow- 
ledged. 

" I beg a thousand pardons, " he said, " for this awkward manner 
of returning an object which I cannot in honesty retain, though it 
will be a sacrifice to resign it. " 

He took a card from his pocket. 

" I picked this up on leaving the boat last night, and I believe I 
am correct in now assigning it to you as the accomplished artist who 
produced it. " 

The lady took the card without unhooding her head, and, placing 
it in the book carried by her attendant, replied in French, " Such 
sketches serve to embody some passing form or incident, which, at 
a future time, may enter into combinations of art; or I should press 
on you its acceptance. " 

" They serve also to evince, " he said, " that true genius catches 
at a glance what study may labour in vain to master. " 

"They meet," said the lady, " more than their desert, when 
they succeed in pleasing the originals they represent; but, " she 



THE PRINCESS. 



163 



added, pleasantly, " Vamou?*-propre, qui aime les po? > traits, is 
easily pleased, if it be but sufficiently . . " 

" Flattered, " said Sir Frederick, filling up the momentary pause. 
" I frankly accept the application : I was flattered. " 

The lady was now moving on ; but he made an effort to detain 
her, by inquiring who were the originals of the sculptured heads on 
the H6tel-de-Ville, which presented so obvious an illustration of her 
remark. 

" The Counts of Flanders," she replied. " Princes have more 
a?nour-p?*opre than other men, and it is that which makes the arts 
their debtors. " 

" And satire too," said Sir Frederick, much amused by the 
original reflections and pleasant manner of his fair interlocutor. 
" If princes were more perfect than the rest of the species, the 
philosophy of liberalism would have nothing ' to prate about, ' nor 
ridicule to attack. " 

" Yes, it is some consolation," she said, "that absolute power 
should, like the sublime, border on the ridiculous. Look at these 
grim crowned heads, with their jewelled caps, their balls and scep- 
tres, and other tangible toys of royal vanity ; childish as they now 
appear, they were appropriate emblems of power when there was 
no public opinion to sway men's minds ; and these barbarous chiefs 
did right to adopt them. But fancy a living king, in these times of 
intellectual preeminence, with his crown and sceptre, perched on a 
high seat ; or moving, like a king in a puppet-show, under his 
ponderous trappings, at the head of a dramatic procession ! Can 
you imagine any pageant more absurd ? " 

" Humph ! I have seen solemn ceremonies, but not exactly in 
the point of view in which you have placed them, " he replied : " I 
have ever thought a coronation a most magnificent and imposing 
spectacle. " 

" I saw the coronation of Charles the Tenth at Rheims," said 
the lady; 41 but France will never see another such, nor Belgium 
neither. The 4 Bio me lo da, guai a chi lo tocca ' times are over; 
kings will no more be permitted to snatch their crowns from 
heaven, but must in future be contented to receive them from the 
people, as ours has done. You will however find, sir, in Belgium, 
images of another power, in our public edifices, (quite as well 



164 



THE PRINCESS. 



worthy of attention as that of royalty, ) the power of the nation. " 

" These barbarous ages, however," said Sir Frederick, accom- 
panying the lady as she moved slowly onwards, " produced splendid 
specimens of human genius. " 

" Yes; there were then omnipotent energies at work, of which 
this most ancient and interesting city is a monument. But those 
antique images have another interest, as marking an epoch in the 
history of sculpture. This edifice is of the early part of the fourteenth 
century, when the arts began to escape from the exclusive service of 
the Church, and when princes began to enlist them in their own : 
and so we come back again to V amour-propre qui aime les por- 
traits. Flanders, at the period when this edifice was reared, was 
the cradle of the arts ; she first opened schools for their cultivation. 
But the arts alone do not suffice to happiness ; and at that very 
period men were burned at the stake for dogmas, and tortured for 
opinions, which are now despised and forgotten. Yet the Flemings 
were not a cruel race. Even the domestic dwellings of our honest 
burghers bear evidence to their possession of physical sensibility. 
Here is one of the oldest houses in Europe. Look at its facade." 

They paused at the corner of the Rue St. Amand, which opens 
from the Great Square. The lady appeared all in the arts ; and Sir 
Frederick listened with equal enthusiasm. 

" Here lived your Charles the Second, in his proper vocation of a 
gay worthless profligate, amusing and amused. It was one of the 
happiest epochs of his unprofitable adversity. Our good burghers 
of Bruges created him ' Roidu Servient de VArbalete; ' the only 
serment, perhaps, he never broke." 

Sir Frederick stood ill apparent admiration before the curious 
old mansion ; but he was, in fact, more occupied with the cicerone 
than with the objects she illustrated. 

" If such things interest you, " she added—" if memorials of your 
ancient sovereigns are consecrated in your thoughts, you should 
visit the Groschen-hausen-hof y the palace of the Flemish Counts 
of that name, where one of them received your Edward the First. 
It joins the church of Notre Dame, where we are going, first to 
prayers, and then to finish a drawing of the tomb of the last Charles 
Duke of Burgundy." 

" To be conducted by such a guide, " said Sir Frederick, delight- 



THE PRINCESS. 



165 



ed by the offer, 44 is a great enhancement of the pleasure : none but 
an artist can well do the honours by the arts. " 

44 Yes," she replied ; " to understand the arts thoroughly, one 
must have lived by them. That has been my case. " 

44 It is a noble career," said Sir Frederick. 

44 That is according to the country in which it is pursued, or rather 
the state of society." She sighed— and there was a tone of deep 
melancholy in the accent in which she made the remark. — After a 
pause, she added—" These are not times in which power seeks as- 
sistance from the arts to seduce and deceive the senses. They are no 
longer instruments of church and state craft, and their encourage- 
ment depends only on individual taste. I am now going to work 
on a private order of a very liberal nature." 

44 And who," said Sir Frederick, eagerly, 44 is the privileged 
person who has the happiness to employ such original genius ? 
To reward it is impossible." 

44 For the genius, passe ; but the patroness is the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen. She has employed me to make sketches of some 
of the principal monuments of Bruges and Ghent for her magnifi- 
cent album." 

Sir Frederick remained silent, till they arrived in front of the 
church of Notre Dame, close to which stands the old hotel to which 
the lady had alluded. 

44 How very curious !" he exclaimed : 44 what a precious monu- 
ment of the domestic habits of Flemish antiquity !" 

44 Yes," said the artist, 44 the whole thing is a finely imaginative 
combination. But those marble steps, which English kings have 
trod, that threshold, where Flemish nobles received them, are at 
present passed only by the indigent and the humble. It is now the 
Mont-de-Piete. " 

She passed on to the porch of the church, and raising the curtain 
spread before its entrance, held it up for a moment, as if to give 
effect to the fine view disclosed within. There was a striking dis- 
tribution of light, as they entered, flashing down the vast nave from 
the lofty windows, which left the massy columns of the lateral aisles 
in depth of shadow, and produced that c/iia?*o oscuro, so favourable 
to the solemn perspective of a place of worship. A few dark figures 
spotted the checkered pavement, kneeling with arms outstretched 

il.. 



16G 



THE PRINCESS. 



before the high altar, or prostrate beneath the image of the Virgin, 
which is ascribed to the genius of Michael Angelo. The sun played 
brightly upon the magnificent tomb of the last of the sovereigns of 
Burgundy : it called forth the lustre of the rich gilt and silvered 
bronze, and the glowing tints of the enamel, with which this most 
superb monument is ornamented ; while it threw into stronger 
relief the florid sculpture with which it is overwrought ; contrasting 
it strikingly with the severe and imposing architecture of the church 
itself. 

"The tomb of Charles the Bold?" said the English virtuoso. 

fc ' No, monsieur— of Charles the Rash," she replied. " There is 
all the difference imaginable between those epithets. The bold found 
empires, the rash lose them. Between Charles le Hardi and Charles 
le Temeraire, there is the same difference as between Charles le Sage 
and Charles X." 

" I stand corrected," replied Sir Frederick, smiling. 

In a whispered voice she continued ( for silence and solemnity 
prevailed ) :— 

u This tomb is a monument of two great events, the degradation 
of art in Flanders, and the political r&rogradation of the people of 
the Low Countries. Between the architecture of the fifteenth, and 
the sculpture of the sixteenth, what a difference ! This gorgeous 
monument has nothing of the severe grandeur of the preceding age." 

" Itis, however," he replied, " full of rich variety and luxurious 
profusion of ornament ; and the effect of the whole is noble." 

" Yes, it is noble,— royal ! It marks a careless expenditure of 
the labour of the people, for purposes of mere ostentation. As a 
work of art, it is far less beautiful than that little tribune of purest 
Gothic sculpture, which lies to the right of the high altar. Still, it 
is an interesting monument. In this mausoleum are mingled the 
ashes of the father and daughter, the last native sovereigns of the 
Low Countries, the last of the great Burgundian stock, Charles le 
Temeraire, and Mary Duchess of Burgundy." 

" You call, then, the Burgundian princes, national ?" 

" They were so in fact : the marriage of Philip le Hardi with 
Margaret Countess of Flanders, domiciliated the Dukes of Burgundy 
in the country ; and founded the only national dynasty Belgium 
ever knew, with the exception of the present. They were a fine race, 



THE PRINCESS. 



167 



those Burgundians ! les Hardis ! les Bons ! les Bels ! and les 
Temeraires ; but it wore out, like other races; and the last of its 
representatives, the fair Mary Duchess of Burgundy, by her marriage 
with the Archduke Maximilian, brought the curse of Austrian and 
Spanish government upon the great commonwealth of the Low 
Countries. The son of this ill-fated match united in his person, as 
husband of the maniac Joan of Castile, the kingdom of Spain and 
the Empire ; and his successor, Charles the Fifth, dying mad and a 
monk, bequeathed the fate of Flanders and of Europe to the atro- 
cious monster Philip the Second." 

" What an inference may be drawn from this brief story ! " said 
Sir Frederick, thoughtfully. 

" Yes, " she replied; " a moral applicable to all ranks : in ple- 
beian, as in royal races, an infusion of mauvais sang is equally 
fatal. The philosophy of motherhood, sir, is not yet sufficiently de- 
veloped. Ambition, more powerful than even passion, directs the 
choice, where pride of alliance points. Old blood, old names, with 
what advantage are they endowed over other old things? " 

" Oh! none— none whatever, " was the vehement reply. 

"When the foolish and the fragile, " she continued, " are taken 
for the sake of the conventional influences connected with them, to 
the outraging of nature, and the sacrifice of the best interests of the 
remotest descendants. " 

Sir Frederick only noticed the observation by a deep sigh. If it 
had not fallen from an utter stranger, he would have deemed it a 
personal epigram. 

" That ' Crucifixion, ' " continued the artist, ** has the air of 
Vandyke's school, and is thought to be his : but it is a poor pic- 
ture. This ' Adoration of the Kings ' is ascribed to Rubens. " 

" They are both bad, " said Sir Frederick; " and when that is 
the case, of what consequence is it that the name of a great artist is 
affixed to the work ? " 

" Exactly, " said the lady. " If you have any time to see pictures 
at Bruges, where there are so few worth seeing, visit the Church 
and Hospital of St. John, and see the works of Hemlink. " 

" Hemlink! I scarcely know the name! " 

' ( So much of what one sees depends upon the person who serves 
as a guide ; and you English have a conventional catalogue of the 



168 



THE PRINCESS. 



arts, beyond which you rarely look. However, see Hemlink. Have 
you no one in Bruges to conduct you? " 

" Not one; I cannot always expect to stand so largely indebted 
to accident as on the present occasion. " 

" What ! have you not the young Brugeois, the Bocteur en Broit, 
who offered you his card last night? The Hospital is, however, 
open to strangers at one o'clock. " 

61 Yes, I had forgotten that, " said Sir Frederick, smiling; " and 
indeed everything else. " 

" I advise you to see the works of Hemlink, " was the vague 
answer : " one o'clock is the best hour; the lights are then per- 
fect. " 

At that moment, the organ pealed, the officiating priests entered; 
and the congregating of the devout, hurrying forward to the high 
altar, interrupted all further conversation. The artist and her 
companion were already kneeling on the steps; and the English 
protestant turned, as if unwilling to behold a mind so brilliant sub- 
mitting to forms so prostrating. Still he lingered behind, as if his 
sole motive was the examination of the various monuments of art 
with which the church abounds. A richly-carved pulpit, a sculp- 
tured Virgin and Child, a Nativity by Holbein, and a curious piece 
of very ancient tapestry, alternately arrested his steps. The last, 
with its golden arabesques, and bees, butterflies, and flowers, 
showed that the department of the arts of which it was a specimen 
had been brought to great perfection in the earliest ages of Flemish 
greatness : its date was 1430. When Sir Frederick found himself 
again near the high altar, the lady and her attendant had disap- 
peared. He was disappointed, he scarcely knew why. 

The Belgian artist occupied his thoughts as he returned to his 
hotel. He was displeased by the strong political colour, of her 
opinions ; and by a certain pedantry even in her own professional 
observations, which smacked of provincial notability. This was 
doubtless the Angelica Kauftman or the Rosalba of some Flemish 
town. Her very pronunciation, though she spoke French with 
great purity, was pre'cieuse, — an effort to keep down her guttural 
Flemish tones. He suspected, too, that her features did not keep 
the promise made by her conversation : for though he could not 
say that there was premeditated concealment, the Flemish hood was 



THE PRINCESS. 



169 



never thrown back, and her age could only be guessed by the erect 
position of her graceful figure, and the alertness and d-plomb of her 
firm step. Still, without leaving any very gracious impression 
behind it, (for the name of the Princess of Schaffenhausen had 
marred that, ) the adventure of la Grande Place de Bruges was 
a link in anew association; and the Belgian artiste was not Mrs. 
Medlicot. 



CHAPTER XI. 

BRUGES. 

Sir Frederick Mottram on arriving at his hotel, found, on inquiry, 
that Monsieur le Bocteur en Droit had been twice there to look 
for him. He had left a written memorandum with Lawrence Fegan ; 
but Fegan was not to be found. The courier of an English family, 
who was lounging in the court-yard, had seen * monsieur le valet- 
de-chambre de milord, turn into the church of St. Jacques a little 
before ; and there his master sought him. As he entered the fine old 
church, loud hosannas were rising to the glory of the Virgin, whose 
figure, in the full-dress toilet of Bruges, was borne under a canopy ; 
but the first object that caught Sir Frederick's eyes, conspicuous 
above the figures that surrounded him, and close to the gaudily- 
robed priests, was Fegan, bearing a lighted taper in his hand, like 
the other devotees, towards the shrine, where Notre Dame de Bruges 
was about to be replaced. 

Sir Frederick saw that it was in vain to contend with the powerful 
organ of veneration which had so suddenly and completely deve- 
loped itself since Fegan's arrival in a Catholic country, where every 
image struck on his national susceptibility to all fanciful impressions, 
and roused his latent reverence for his national church. It was not 
clear that he had slept off the excitements of his recent canonization; 
yet, with every habitual desire to be annoyed by the negligence of 



170 



THE PRINCESS. 



the servant, Sir Frederick found it impossible not to be amused by 
the absurd peculiarities of the man. 

It seemed the especial characteristic of Fegan to disarm reproof 
by the exhibition of some eccentricity, which, in the extravagance of 
its act, or in the excellence of its motive, brought its excuse along 
with it. For the first time in his life, the haughty master of many 
servants was led to acknowledge their possible individuality. 
Accustomed to regard his domestics as machines mounted upon 
certain principles for his service, he had overlooked their moral 
characters as men ; nor ever reflected that the inconveniences 
incidental to their administration, their follies, vices, and infidelities, 
were in part the consequences of that total absence of sympathy 
and communion with which English masters treat their domestics, 
— a trait unknown in the manners of other countries. The pecu- 
liarities and the humour of Fegan— his piety, vanity, gallantry, and 
blunders— had become too prominent, however, in his new and 
closer relation to his master, to be thus overlooked ; and in forcing 
themselves on the attention of the English aristocratic gentleman, 
they gave a new idea of social organization to the British statesman. 

When Fegan, therefore, had deposited his extinguished taper, 
bent his knee to the earth, blessed himself devoutly, and, dipping 
his finger in the vessel of holy water, sprinkled himself with its 
consecrated dew, he appeared in a different light, from that centaur, 
half man and half horse— an English groom ; such as he had followed 
his master, in those long, silent, and uncommunicative rides along 
the parks and environs of the metropolis. A gentle reproof was all 
that he received for being out of the way : his answer was, as usual, 
evasive, plausible, and amusing. 

" Plaze your honor," he said, following his master out of the 
church bareheaded, " I put the young Frinch gintleman's note into 
my pocket, in regard of being tould by a Sister of Charity (or, as 
they call them here, a Biggin) that there would be a rosary in honor 
of the Virgin ( long may she reign in glory, amen! ) she being an 
Irishwoman, Sir Frederick, from Dublin ; for there is a convent of 
English and Irish ladies in the town ; and a sermon will be preached 
by the abbess to-night— that is, the Abbe de Foere, who is at the 
head of them." 

Sir Frederick cut him short by taking the note, which Fegan had 



THE PRfflCESS. 



171 



been seeking all over his person, and by desiring him to be ready 
to depart for Ghent at two o'clock. The note gave Sir Frederick 
rendez-vous at twelve, in the shop of Monsieur Bogaert Dumortier, 
libraire, au coin de la Grande Place. He was pleased by the 
apropos : he wanted some books on local subjects ; and he had 
learned, on former occasions, what curious things are occasionally 
to be picked up in the provincial booksellers' shops. 

Nothing could less resemble the shop of a London bibliopole than 
this tranquil and studious magazine, where Monsieur Bogaert, 
though a bookseller, was, strange to say, reading behind his own 
counter. His son and daughter, with Flemish faces like his own, 
were severally employed in the shop ; the one at her embroidery , 
the other copying an engraving of Bembrandt's. A gentleman, of 
prepossessing appearance, was making some research in a folio 
volume at another counter. 

The appearance of the distinguished stranger exchanged the calm 
of their occupation for the bustle of business. The young Docteur 
entering almost at the same moment, assisted Sir Frederick in 
examining the contents of the counter. All the newest publica- 
tions, French, English, and German, were there— contrafactions 
from Brussels, * selling at a quarter of the English, and a half of the 
French, prices. He asked for some work relative to the country. 

" Some specimen of our national literature?" asked Monsieur 
Bogaert. 

The young Brugeois observed a smile which curled the English 
traveller's lip, at the idea. 

" We are beginning to have a national literature, " he said. 
" Here is ' Les Gueux des Bois,' and here L Les Gueux de Mer. ' 
Here is ''Herman, ou Civilisation et Barbaric^ and above all, 
''Philippine de FlandresS They are all national novels. " 

" But French productions, " said Sir Frederick. 

" Excuse me, they are Belgian; nay, more, written here in 

* Literary properly is deeply injured by the increase of this foreign piracy; 
and it has become vitally essential to put a stop to the practice. Unless, how- 
ever, those interested will press the subject on public attention, it is absurd 
to expect that any ministry will take the trouble to effect the necessary 
change in international law. 



172 



THE PRINCESS. 



Bruges. The author, Monsieur Moke, has not left the shop ten 
minutes," said the libraire; "he has stepped in next door, to 
attend a sitting of the Societd de la Litterature Nationale. " 

" And the subjects?" asked Sir Frederick. 

"All intimately connected with national history," replied the 
Brugeois. 

" You have not been long in starting this new career;— 1 never 
heard of Belgian literature before. " 

" The reason is obvious, " said the gentleman who had been 
reading, and who now came forward: "we have never been a 
nation since the European intellect took that direction to which 
the term literature has been applied. In the time of our greatness 
and prosperity in arts, commerce, manufacture,— a time when Eng- 
land was still dark, barbarous, and feudal,— Belgium had her 
master-minds, and her great names to cite in war, enterprise, 
statescraft, painting, music, and science; but just as literature was 
about to appear, we were overwhelmed by masses ; and our coun- 
try has been, ever since, merely a field on which the great powers 
of Europe have fought their battles. The days of complaint are 
now, however, over. We have recovered our independence ; and 
we hope to maintain it, intellectually as well as politically. Short 
as has been the new era, we have already many proofs both of the 
power and the will to make this effort. Monsieur Bogaert, pray 
show Monsieur Nothomb's work. " 

" Quel bel ouvrage V said the young Brugeois. 

" It is the work of one of our young statesmen," added the 
stranger : " there is nothing better calculated to enlighten a foreigner 
( whatever may be his intellectual calibre or opinions ) on the Belgian 
revolution, its grounds, its principles, its expectations, and its claims 
upon the approbation and support of civilized Europe." 

Sir Frederick bowed his thanks, and ordered the book to be put 
aside for him, as he fluttered over its leaves. 

" And ' Les Episodes de la Revolution dans les Flandres/ 
Monsieur leDocteur?" asked the bookseller, with a significant smile, 
as he presented a small volume to Sir Frederick, bearing the title of 
4 Episodes de la Revolution dans les Flandres , par Constantin 
Rodenbach , Membre de la C/iambre des Representans , ancien 
Depute an Congres National de la Belgique.'' " 



J 

THE PRINCESS. 173 



" This comes well authenticated at least," said Sir Frederick. 

" Oh! it is a mere local sketch," said the gentleman, slightly 
colouring : " besides, the work of Monsieur Nolhomb contains all 
that is worth knowing on the subject." 

" I must have this, for the sake of the title," said Sir Frederick. 
" I am just now very much interested for your province of Flanders. 
Are these the only works on the subject of the revolution?" 

" Pardon me; there are hundreds. Almost every province has 
its episodes. Here is a succinct but admirable " abrege^ of the Events 
of the Four Days—' La Revolution Beige, 1830;' and here is a 
more voluminous and most graphic production— The ' Esquisses 
Historiques de la Revolution de la Belgique.' '" The clever 
lithographic drawings, in which scenes the most picturesque were 
delineated by traits the most masterly, formed a remarkable feature 
in these volumes. " If," continued the stranger, " the Belgians are 
not thoroughly acquainted Avith the motives of the revolution, and 
satisfied with its results, the press, at least, is not to blame. When 
a nation has great events to record, it seldom is deficient in histo- 
rians." 

" And yet Europe, or (to'speak for myself) England, is very little 
acquainted with the causes of your revolution. When I was at Brus- 
sels, in the year Twenty-nine, it appeared to me that the Dutch King 
was popular." 

" With those with whom you lived, monsieur, he probably was so. 
In all communities there are castes whose interests are bound up 
with those of the ruling power, be that power what it may ; and it 
has been generally observed, that the aggregate of English travellers 
are drawn, by a sort of natural affinity, towards them. Brussels, 
sir, has its Faubourg St. Germain, as well as Paris." 

" I judge rather from my own observation," said Sir Frederick, 
dryly. " William of Nassau was at least calculated to be popular 
by his unceremonious and accessible manners. His exterior was that 
of a pere de famille ; and he moved through your streets like a 
private gentleman. In exterior, at least, he was the beauideal of a 
citizen king." 

" Nevertheless," said the gentleman, " he was an absolute king, 
after the most approved model of the Holy Alliance. Affecting to be 
his own minister, he set all the forms of constitutional government 

12. 



174 



THE PRINCESS. 



at nought. He made his will the sole law ; and that will was dictated 
by the local prejudices and narrow views of religious bigotry. 
Besides, he received Belgium as a dependency on Holland, as an in- 
crease of its territory; and he has governed exclusively in the Dutch 
interest. He has violated our consciences, enslaved our education, 
silenced the press, corrupted the law, imposed arbitrary and unequal 
taxes, and loaded us with debt. He has imposed his language on 
our tribunals ; he has promoted Dutchmen to all places of trust and 
emolument; and, in one word, has made us aliens in our own cities, 
and set a mark of reprobation upon every thing that is Belgian. 
How then could he be popular? " 

M We, in England, have been accustomed to regard these accusa- 
tions," said Sir Frederick, coldly, " as enormously exaggerated. 1 ' 

" That is a question of fact; and facts will speak for themselves," 
said the Belgian gentleman, with equal pertinacity of manner. " But 
as you have taken the trouble to come amongst us, and do us the 
honour to say you are interested in our cause, you will, I trust, 
inquire and judge for yourself. All w e ask of strangers is to throw 
off their own prejudices, and not to adopt those of 'any fraction, or 
category, which is not the nation. Something, too, of our story 
should be known. We have always been a restless people. Through 
all our records, it is obvious that a sentiment of public justice is 
deep-rooted in our hearts ; and that there is nothing so galling to 
the Belgian spirit as le jong de Vetranger. Centuries of suffering 
have not hardened us to its bitterness; for so strong is our feeling of 
national independence, that it has sometimes degenerated even into 
municipal jealousy." 

44 You think, then, that there is no chance of restoration for the 
House of Nassau?" asked Sir Frederick, interested by the warmth 
of the speaker. 

" None whatever," was the firm and simultaneous reply of the 
two ardent Belgians. " From the moment when its expulsion was 
voted in our national congress, its fate was decided. Even that in- 
deed w as but a form : the family had already been expelled by public 
opinion. " 

" The decision," said Sir Frederick, looking at a vignette in one 
of the works, must have been an extremely poetical incident. 
Who had the honour of proposing the question? " 



THE PRINCESS . 



175 



" The course of events had already rendered the conclusion (in- 
evitable; but the chance of the initiative fell on myself,' 1 replied 
the interlocutor, taking off his hat. 

Sir Frederick lowered his to the ground, surprised to find himself 
in the presence of one who belonged to posterity. He expressed his 
pleasure in the rencontre, with all the courtesy compatible with his 
own opinions concerning revolutionary men and revolutionary 
measures ; and requested to be favoured with a name so distinguished 
in the annals of the country. The stranger presented his card — 
' CoivsTAimN Rodeivbach, Membre de la ChamJbre des Deputes.' 
He was the author of the book Sir Frederick held in his hand. 

A carriage now drew up at the door; and Monsieur Rodenbach, 
after courteously expressing a wish to renew his accidental acquaint- 
ance on the arrival of the English statesman at Brussels, took his 
leave, and departed for the capital. Sir Frederick inquired with 
much interest concerning the person he had been talking to ; and he 
learned that Constantin Rodenbach was one of four brothers, the 
sons of a bon bourgeois of the little town of Routers, near Bruges, 
who had all dedicated themselves to the service of letters and the 
revolution ; that the proposer of the expulsion of the Nassaus and 
the author of the Episodes had been an eminent physician , the author 
of a scientific work, called ' Consultations Medico -Leg ales that 
another brother, Colonel of cuirassiers, and Commandant of Brussels, 
was among the first to organize a company of volunteers, and to 
engage in hostilities , by a sortie he made to obtain reinforcements 
from Louvain ; that another is now Commissary of the district of 
Ostend; and that Alexandre, the fourth brother, Was the blind 
Deputy on board the trekschuytj an ex-member of the Congress, an 
active debater, and author of an extremely agreeable and instructive 
volume, entitled ' Lettre sur les Aveugles? 

" I wish Monsieur Jullien, our witty and liberal member for 
Bruges, was here," continued the young Brugeois; " but you will 
see and hear him to more advantage in the Chambers at Brussels . 
We will now, if you please, proceed to our cathedral and our acade 
my of pictures. " 

t4 I have already seen your fine cathedral, and under favourable 
circumstances. A lady artist, whom I had the good fortune to meet 
in the boat ' ' 



176 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Oh! yes, I remember," interrupted the Doctor. 

" You know her, perhaps?" asked Sir Frederick, eagerly. 

" Not, at least, that I am aware of; for those cloaks in which our 
women muffle themselves, when they are no longer young or hand- 
some, render it difficult to say who is beneath them. But pray 
observe, monsieur, the grace and coquetry with which our young 
belles fling aside their envelope. It is a study ! There now, look 
at that lady ! That is a true Bruges beauty with her Spanish eyes 

and Flemish complexion and embonpoint. That is madame ; 

she is called la Venus de Bruges-, and she is very like Rubens's first 
wife. You perceive she does not muffle herself. Her hood only 
serves to set off her charms. She is going to her devotions : our 
ladies du bel air only wear their cloak when they are going to 
church. " 

Sir Frederick was not surprised that his artist was set down as 
being , from the manner of her dress , neither young nor pretty. 

" I have been," he said, " but some hours in your town ; and I 
have already encountered a beauty and a genius. Your women must 
be worth knowing. " 

" They will be by and bye ; some are so now. They are all 
patriots : I don't mean our old countesses of the Marie Therese 
school; but our women properly so called. The first rebuff which 
William got on his interference with our language, was from the 

witty and patriotic Madame de II -. It was on occasion of the 

King's visit to Bruges, just before the revolution ; when the order 
for substituting the Dutch language was rigorously enforced— ( one 
of our bitterest griefs, monsieur). She had just returned from 
St. Onier ; and the King asked her if the Flemish dialect was still 
spoken there. She replied in the affirmative. 4 C'est etonnantj 
said the King. ' Cela prouve, Sire, combien il est difficile de 
changer la langue d'un peuplef was her reply. The hit had 
a great success." 

1,4 It deserved one," said Sir Frederick. " But how long has 
French been the language of Belgium ?" 

u As long as we have been a branch of the Franc family. Since 
the fourteenth century, when the Dukes of Burgundy became our 
sovereigns, it has been the exclusive language of our educated so- 
ciety, of the arts, of literature, and of gallantry ; and the language 



THE PRINCESS. 



177 



in which a man makes love, monsieur, must always he a popular 
language. Jour de Bieu ! Fancy a man making love in Dutch!" 

They were now standing in front of the Prinsenhof, the ancient 
residence of the sovereign Counts of Flanders ; where the princes of 
the house of Burgundy held their splendid courts, and where Philip, 
the father of Charles the Fifth, and Margaret, his splendid aunt and 
guardian, were born. 

" This, sir," said the self-appointed cicerone, " is the most an- 
cient and curious quarter of our city. The Prinsenhof was, for a 
time, converted into an English convent. It is used at present as 
the Salle des Hypotheques, an apartment well worth being seen." 

They entered the singular and antique hall, the scene of so many 
courtly festivities during the middle ages. There, the knights of 
the Toison d'or were inaugurated, and the sovereigns of the Low 
Countries held their courts. The vast and sculptured chimney- 
piece, the massive buffet, and other monuments of by-gone splen- 
dour, which time had rendered poetical, were hurried over by the 
English virtuoso with less interest than he would have felt, had he 
not been impatient to reach the hospital of St. Jean at the appointed 
hour. 

" Observe," said his guide, " the beautiful alto relievo of this 
altar of ancient hospitality. The figures are executed in Italian ala- 
baster. That head, in the centre, is Charles the Fifth. On either 
side of it are profiles of his father Philippe le Bel, and his mother 
Jeanne la Folle. Fine times those, when qualities were thus fixed 
upon princes, for the benefit of those who had not leisure to study 
character ! Here too are effigies of Marie de Bourgogne, and her 
husband the pauper Archduke Maximilian. On the right, you see 
the features of Charles le Temeraire ; and on the left, of Margaret 
of England, the famous Margaret d'Anjou." 

" This is a chimney-piece to read like a book," said Sir Frederick, 
" and to study like a picture-gallery. It is magnificent and curious ; 
but my time is limited, and there are pictures which ..." 

" Ah ! Monsieur Imbert's collection, and the Van Eykes in our 
academy,— the immortal Van Eyke, from whom Italy borrowed the 
art of oil-painting !" 

Li I think," said Sir Frederick, " Hemlink is the painter whose 
works were recommended to my notice." 

12.. 



178 



THE PRINCESS. 



u Then, sir, we must go to the hospital of St. Jean, and see the 
shrine of St. Ursula in its church, and the great picture in the hall. 
We have no time to lose." 

They reached the gates of the hospital as its bell tolled one. 
The Englishman felt as if he were keeping an appointment ; but 
when he entered the small but antique chapel, it was empty, and 
silent. 

The shrine of St. Ursula was a small and elegant coffer of the 
most beautiful workmanship. Its compartments represented the 
martyrdom of the saint and her eleven thousand followers, in a series 
of the most exquisite miniatures. 

" Women," said the young Brugeois, " were the true founders 
of the Church ; and they are adored in their influence and their 
beauty by the remotest posterity. They have had the poetry of all 
ages with them." 

"Yes!" replied Sir Frederick, laughing; "and the passions 
too!" 

A voice in an unknown tongue, thick, guttural, and discordant, 
called the attention of the irreverent votarists to the gallery of the 
church. A Beguine, in the full habit of her order, addressed 
herself in angry vehemence to the Brugeois. He bowed to her re- 
prehension, and seemed to attempt an apology, in the same language, 
for disturbing her devotions and the sanctity of the place. 

" She is scolding us roundly, " he said to his companion, " for 
talking so loudly within hearing of the patients. Above all, your 
laugh has displeased her. She called you, c that English heretic, ' 
and thinks you were ridiculing the saint ; and all this in such a 
Flemish idiom ! avec des Flandrecismes, as untranslatable as they 
are naifs and epigrammatic. I have softened her anger, by telling 
her that you have come to Bruges expressly to see the pictures of 
Hemlink,— the Raphael and Michaed Angelo of the good Sisters of 
the hospital, which is taken care of by these Beguines or Sceurs 
Hospitalieres. " 

They now proceeded by an extremely picturesque court, whose 
Gothic buildings were covered by ivy and other creeping plants. 
Under the porticoes a few poor patients were enjoying the fresh air 
and sunshine; and several Beguines were moving about, enveloped 
in their large white coifs, and in the full folds of the voluminous 



THE PROCESS. 



179 



black serge, which confounds all symmetry, the young and the old, 
the bulky and the slender. 

One among them, more grotesque than the rest, came forward 
with a bunch of keys ; and was acknowledged by the reverential 
bow of the young man, as the devote whose idiomatic Flandrecisms 
had so much amused him. In the absence of the porter, she had 
taken upon herself to exhibit the pictures; and as she waddled on, 
she addressed a few words in French, with a strong Flemish accent, 
to both gentlemen, on the impropriety of laughing in a place of 
worship, and the inhumanity of disturbing the sick. While looking 
over her bunch of keys, she explained why she had taken upon 
herself to do the honours of the pictures. 

" L'huissier, " she said, " est en voie, voyez-vous ; un fier 
cadet, celui-la; un patriote, n'est-ce pas?—ca ne vaut rien : 
faites-nous une revolution, vous autres jeunesse ! " 

" And you, my good mother, are not you a patriot? M 

" Eh ! je suis Beguine ! allez. " 

She now threw open the door, after having fumbled for some 
minutes at the lock. She led them at once to the top of the room, 
and placed them, with respect to light, with a connoisseurship that 
was probably traditional. 

The subject of this magnificent picture ( by Hemlink ) was a Nati- 
vity. * The beauty and expression of the heads, painted with all 
the finesse of miniature, notwithstanding the remote and rude epoch 
of the art in which they were executed, recalled the portraits of 
Vandyke, and, in some particulars, perhaps, surpassed them. The 
English virtuoso was surprised at his own ignorance of this great 
Flemish master. 

" What sublimity! " he cried; "what high intellectual character, 
in those noble but melancholy countenances ! " 

" Oui-dd!" said the Beguine; " strangers think that we can 
paint nothing but drolls and brawlers— n'est-ce pas, monsieur? 
But these are saints, true saints, allez V 

* It is an unique specimen of fresco painting by a process which had 
ceased to be in vogue, even in Heralink's day. The colours were fixed with 
whites of eggs. His immediate predecessors, the Van Eykes, had invented 
the use of oil long before. 



180 



THE PRINCESS. 



" There was another picture, " said the young man, " by Hem- 
link, equally remarkable— St. Christopher carrying an infant Christ ; 
but the French carried it away. ,J 

" Laissez done ces coquins de France, " said the Beguine, 
" for finding out what is good : they go about rummaging every- 
where. Not so Milords Anglais. This is the first English gentle- 
man, in my time, that has visited our Hemlink or our Hospital. But 
our Hemlink was a great man. I call him ours, because he was 
un bon et brave Flamand of the Franc de Bruges, and lived in 
the village of Damme. He first took up a pencil, when he was a 
patient in our hospital. But monsieur is expecting somebody? " 

The observing old woman had caught the eyes of Sir Frederick, 
which were turned towards the door, as it creaked on its hinges. 

" I am all attention, mother, " he replied, smiling. 

" 1 thought Hemlink had been a pupil of the brothers Van Eyke," 
said the Brugeois, " who, with due submission to your great mas- 
ter, were the founders of the Flemish school. " 

"Well, then, you thought wrong, " said the Beguine, sulkily. 
" Hemlink was his own master, as the story goes. He had enrol- 
led himself a simple soldier in our troops, and fought hard, I war- 
rant, for the independence of Flanders, against the Philips and the 
Lewises, until, worn out with fatigue, wounds, and what not, he 
came, poor, sick, and suffering, to our gates. Belgium had always 
her blesses, voyez-vous ! Well, here he was : the Sisters of St. 
Augustin showed the very ward and bed where he lay ; for we Be- 
guines do duty here for sweet Jesus's sake. The hospital, by right, 
is served by the Soeurs Augustines; but they are now too few and 
scattered to do duty. John Hemlink, rest his soul ! recovered 
slowly, and was wont to sit under that portico where you passed 
the patients ; and he there began to draw little miniatures, and 
executed that shrine of St. Ursula, which people came far and near 
to see, till our little chapel became another Loretto. Who but 
John Hemlink now ! The town grew proud of him, and the ma- 
gistrates gave him his conge; and it was in gratitude for the charity 
he received here, that he painted this picture for our hall. And 
here, messieurs, he is himself— quel Joli garcon ! 71 She drew 
aside a curtain as she spoke, and the handsome head and figure of 
the painter, in the dress of the patients of the hospital, stood out 




Juglar (V. H.). Memling blesse est recueilli par les moines de V hospice de Saint-Jean 
a Bruges. — Memling wounded and succoured by the monks of St-John's hospital at Bruges. 

H. i»yo. — L- o m ,85. 



48 



THE PRINCESS. 



181 



from its back-ground, and appeared almost to meet the admiration 
it elicits from the spectator. Underneath was inscribed, ' Opus 
Johannis Hemliwk, 1379. ' 

" What an interval between this 1579 and 1833 ! " exclaimed Sir 
Frederick, as he stood gazing on the fresh and noble picture : " What 
immortality of genius ! " 

" Belle immortalite ! '" cried the Bdguine, contemptuously: 
and she turned away, and pointed to a series of most rum-looking 
portraits of doctors of the church, abbesses, and Beguines, which 
occupied the lateral walls. 

" There, " she said, "is the true immortality !— that of faith and 
charity. " 

There was one modern frame empty, and the Brugeois asked for 
whom it was intended. She replied, 

" For a liberal benefactress, and one who, like the blessed Mag- 
dalen, had qualified for canonization, by passing through the world's 
slough. She is a friend of this church and hospital, and has lately 
given us a new ward. Her picture is at present varnishing by the 
artist who painted it." 

" And who is the original so privileged?" asked Sir Frederick. 

" The Princess of Schaffenhausen. We expect her every moment, " 
replied the Beguine, " on her way to Brussels. " 

The clock of the hospital struck two. 

" You have not a moment to lose," said the young Brugeois; 
" our treckschuyt to Ghent is punctual. " 

" Is monsieur going to Ghent?" asked the Beguine, inquisi- 
tively. 

u Can I have the honour of executing any orders for you? " asked 
Sir Frederick. 

" I have just received an order to go there, myself," she re- 
plied. 

In half-an-hour after the receipt of this information, Sir Frederick 
Mottram, Lawrence Fegan, and their two carpet-bags, were on board 
the treckschuyt which plies between Bruges and Ghent. 



182 



THE PRINCESS. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE ORANGISTS. 

Distrust, that almost ever dogs the stranger's steps in strange 
lands, vanishes before the evidence of an elegant equipage. Post- 
horses and bustling couriers are sureties accredited in all countries ; 
and Goldsmith with his fiddle, Rousseau with his staff, or Homer 
himself with his lyre, would have a poor chance of welcome from 
any, the most hospitable Boniface in Europe, compared with that of 
the ' Milord Anglais, ' who finds everywhere the deference due to 
those, whose emblazoned pannels and numerous suite promise the 
sure and prompt payment of an overcharged bill. 

Per contra, however, what traits of character, what points of 
local history, what national peculiarities and provincial absurdities, 
solicit the attention, amuse the philosophy, and awaken the mirth 
of the traveller who ' roughs it' on the road, as the mass of human- 
kind are obliged to do ! What information may thus be obtained 
of the state of a country ( especially of a country still heaving with 
revolution), which books do not, newspapers will not, and tourists 
en poste cannot give ! 

Sir Frederick Mottram, who had never travelled but en grand 
seigneur, had retained the most wearisome impressions of his last 
journey to Brussels from Paris, when he had been shut up in a sulky 
tete-a-tete with the discontented Lady Frances, in one of Leader's 
luxurious travelling chariots. Arriving at their sleeping stations 
after dark, leaving before daylight, ( as if lesser towns were of no 
importance, or as if time to them was of any,) and halting only at 
capitals, they took their political impressions from their ambassa- 
dor's circles, and their glimpses of the arts and monuments from 
their valet-de-place. 

Such recollections would probably have prevented him from re- 



THE PR1IVCESS. 



183 



visiting the Continent : for if he had not now gone off at a tangent, 
it would have required something only short of a miracle to have 
induced him to return to it at all. Accident, however, had prevailed 
over prejudice ; and he was now thrown upon the Continent, under 
circumstances so different from those of his former journey, that 
Belgium might be considered by him as totally new. 

Sir Frederick had been compelled to quicken his movements, in 
order to overtake the treckschuyt. His agreeable companion, after 
seeing him fairly on board, took his leave; first, however, present- 
ing him to a heavy, but honest-looking gentleman, who, he said, 
had taken an active and valiant part in the four great days of 
Brussels. 

" Au reste, " he added, in a whisper, " the treckschuyt 
is freighted with Orangists ; many among them manufacturers of 
Ghent, returning with their families from sea-bathing excursions ; 
et, jour de Dieu ! il y ade quoi faire une contre-revolution. " 

The bell for the departure of the treckschuyt now rang ; and the 
adieus of the Brugeois and the grateful acknowledgments of the 
Englishman were cut short. 

After a brief exchange of courtesies with Sir Frederick, the 
Bruxellois who had been presented to him, threw round a recon- 
noitring look at the rest of the passengers ; and then, seeming to 
collect himself, took a packet of newspapers from his pocket, and 
buried himself in their perusal, as if to cut short all farther inter- 
course and conversation. 

The Ghent treckschuyt is a spacious, gay barge. It was filled 
with passengers, male and female. Under an awning, spread over 
the quarter-deck, sat a most formal and silent circle of well-dressed 
dames. They were each the double of the other ; and might have 
passed for the originals of those broad-faced, full-featured women, 
who figure in the conversation-pieces of the Flemish masters. The 
men occupied the centre of the deck in detached groups. They 
were generally fair, fat, florid, and well-fed ; some with gold ear- 
rings glittering on their ruddy cheeks, and all with casquets or 
leather caps; which, added to their jackets and trowsers, gave 
them the air of overgrown school-boys. 

The prevailing physiognomy was that of the Saxon Englishman ; 
and the parties returning from Bruges to Ghent might have passed 



184 



THE PRINCESS. 



for a cockney picnic, going from the Tower Hamlets to Greenwich 
Park. The Flemings are said to be of the same original stock as 
the English 5 and there is much in their appearance, habits, and 
language, to justify the belief. Even some of their phrases ( for 
they chiefly employed the local dialect of the country ) struck on 
Sir Frederick's ear as perfectly familiar ; though he could not follow 
the conversation, which the party were keeping up with great 
vivacity. They laughed loudly, smoked cigars freely, gave each 
other punches in their fat ribs, and pats on their protuberant re- 
dundancies, with other manifestations of a good-humoured fami- 
liarity, more cordial than refined. 

After a few abortive attempts to engage a conversation in French 
with the ladies, Sir Frederick took up a sketch-book which he had 
bought in Bruges; and endeavoured to amuse himself with tracing 
the likeness of a living, breathing Teniers, who occupied a place on 
a lurned-up basket, at the end of the boat. It was an old woman, 
bringing with her a cargo of fruit and vegetables. She sat with her 
elbow on her knee, and her head on her hands. She had a pipe in 
her mouth ; and her sharp eyes were fixed on the artist , in a full 
consciousness of what he was about, as one who had before served 
for a study. 

But he could do nothing that pleased him. He was mortified to 
feel how completely time and the world had dulled his once fine 
perception of forms, and power of reproducing them. He remem- 
bered too his successes in early life at Rome, when he worked with 
Pinelli ; and he contrasted in his memory the elegant and splendid 
impressions then received of the bright forms of Italy, with the 
hardier race that now surrounded him. 

The country through which he was so leisurely passing, its scenes, 
its riches, its apparent tranquil prosperity, harmonized in all its 
features with the joyous, well-fed, and rubicund passengers. They 
were both true and genuine models of the Flemish school ; and 
made at every step the panegyric of those great masters, who, 
beyond all others, were faithful to the nature presented to their 
study. The fertility and richness of the soil, increasing at every 
step, accounted for the robust appearance of its inhabitants. The 
tillage was admirable, the crops abundant. Farm-houses, neat 
cottages with their red tiles, green windows, and trellised vines and 



THE PRINCESS. 



185 



hops, started up on every side ; little villages were grouped along 
the banks of the canal, at short distances; and a peasantry, more 
grotesquely than picturesquely dressed, gave life to the home sce- 
nery, and afforded in their personal appearance a satisfactory indi- 
cation of the total absence of penury from the land. 

As the treckschuyt advanced towards Ghent, a succession of 
country-houses with pretty gardens presented themselves in all the 
lustre of evening sunshine. Here and there, the owners were 
leaning over their blossomed hedges, and saluted their friends on the 
deck ; while more than one master manufacturer stepped from his 
garden into the boat, to return to his factory in the town, after an 
hour or two of villeggiatura. His rural retreat, however, rarely 
assumed a higher appearance than that of the snug box of a London 
tradesman. 

Something more than half-way between Bruges and Ghent, a 
little chaise came toddling down a green lane, and drew up on the 
canal. A brisk young man bounded out of it, and took his place 
on board. He had a packet of papers, tied with red tape, under 
his arm. His toilet was more Parisian than Flemish ; and a slight 
expression, not absolutely of self-importance, but an indescribable 
something in demeanour, stamped him obviously a provincial 
employe^ a demi-official, or'government man. An universal sweep- 
ing of the deck with hats, indicated that he was known to all ; and 
he had a poignee de main from one, a punch in the side from 
another, and a tickle in the ribs from a third. His arrival seemed 
to animate the conversation : questions and answers flew about in 
quick succession : here and there, the more significant words were 
dropped in French; and by degrees that language was substituted 
for the Flemish, which had been hitherto preferably spoken. The 
conversation turned, as usual, on politics ; and the young Employe 
soon found himself exposed to the good-humoured railleries and 
epigrams of his interlocutors. 

A remark by Sir Frederick, on the peculiar fertility of the scenes 
through which they were gliding, drew the attention of the Em- 
ploye, who pointed out to his notice a farm to the left of the road, 
as an evidence of the fact ; and he entered into a disquisition on the 
general prosperity of the people. 

" No one, " he said, "can give you better information on 

13. 



136 



THE PRINCESS. 



such subjects than myself: it is in my special department." 

He took off his hat, and bowed to the ground ; and Sir Frederick 
returned his courtesy in kind. After this mutual introduction 
through the agency of their hats, he continued — 

" From my official position, I can speak to the flourishing state 
of the fertile province of Flanders : let the other provinces answer 
for themselves. From this spot to Antwerp, through the Waesland 
( once a rank and splashy marsh, ) it is all the same scene of abun- 
dance, the Canaan of the Netherlands : and when people have where- 
with to eat, drink, and make merry, they will surely be contented 
with the free order of things under which they thrive and enjoy ; 
though particular interests, under temporary disadvantages, may 
lead a few discontented individuals to propagate feelings of dislike 
among those who have no cause to complain. " 

This was a palpable hit, and was returned by the droll of the 
party, a fat, fair young man, the very type, in dress and figure, of 
' mon petit Charles quiaime les plats sucresj in the French farce 
of the ' Rendez-vous. ' 

" What is most miraculous in this state of prosperity, monsieur,'" 
observed mon petit Charles, addressing Sir Frederick, " is, that 
we are all starving in the midst of plenty. " 

" You must not cite yourself as an example, " said the Employe'; 
and the laugh was again with him. 

tC Ma foi" replied Charles, " 1 live upon my means ; and it is not 
under the present regime that I grew fat. Though our soil be fer- 
tile, (which it is, in spite of all government, good or bad,) our ma- 
nufactures and commerce are in ruin. The markets, open to us 
under the old regime, are now closed; our ports are inundated 
with British goods ; and the manufacturing interests are sacrificed to 
the agricultural; while our looms are silent, and our trade at a 
stand. " 

" So much for the materiel" said a sturdy-looking cotton manu- 
facturer, in whose firm the late King was supposed to have a large 
share ; M and now for the spirituel. The country is governed by 
the priests ; and there is not an aubergiste in all Flanders who will 
dare dress you to-morrow (being Friday) a mutton cutlet, or a cuisse 
de volaille, under penalty of excommunication. The black beetles 
are creeping back into our houses, and getting round our wives 



THE PRINCESS. 



187 



and daughters, just as in the old Spanish and Austrian times. *' 

w 'Oh ! as for the priests, I give them up, Monsieur Van B , to 

your eastigalion, " replied the government champion ; "but remem- 
ber, that their present influence is but a reaction on the intolerance 
and persecution of the late government ; which forced the clergy 
into the ranks of political opposition, and, in making them partakers 
in our glorious revolution, bestowed upon them a well-merited 
popularity. The present government, moreover, is not answerable 
for the bigotry of our villages. Liberty of conscience (liberty the 
fullest for every possible religious opinion ) is a fundamental condi- 
tion of the Belgian constitution ; and if the priests have power, it is 
the free gift of the people. The government do no more than admi- 
nister a liberal dispensation in a liberal spirit. " 

" Liberal enough, " reiterated Monsieur Van B , shaking his 

fat sides ; " for they leave us the liberty to beg or starve. " 

' Or even to attempt a counter-revolution, 1 ' said the man of 
office, dryly; " or accept of missions from the Hague. " 

Here the conversation was interrupted for a moment by the ascent, 
from the cabin below deck, of a tall, dry, Spanish-looking person, 
buttoned up from head to foot in a grey great-coat, with a casquet 
on his head and a cigar between his teeth. He was evidently a 
person d'importanza, and was in fact a great landholder, the des- 
cendant of a Spanish family ; as the Brussels merchant whispered 
Sir Frederick in broken English : interrupting for the first time his 
imperturbable silence. He was, he said, a great favourite with the 
hated Dutch minister Van Maanen ; an ex-burgomestre of * * * * ; 
and had held a handsome situation under the abdicated government. 

" Eh bienl monsieur, " said the Ghent manufacturer, address- 
ing the hidalgo, " you have come on deck to smell your own 
orchards and hop-grounds en passant : they are really teeming. " 

At this moment the boat was passing an extensive and very ele- 
gant villa, with ornamented grounds. 

"Yes, sir, "he replied, with Spanish gravity, "they are mine 
to-day, but whose to-morrow? Every month now, it seems, must 
have its revolution; and where there is no security, property has 
but few charms for its proprietor. Besides, when a population of 
four millions is compelled to support an army of more than a 
hundred thousand men, the hops and orchards teem in vain : they 



188 



THE PRINCESS. 



belong less to the nominal owners, than to the tax-gatherer. " 

" That comes of the vicious policy of the great European powers," 
muttered the Brussels merchant. 

" But who exposes us to them? The European powers were 
with us when the House of Nassau occupied the throne,'' replied 
the Ex-employe'. "We had then the Bourbons for friends, Prussia 
for a kinsman, and the sister of the Emperor of Russia for our 
future queen, living in our capital and walking in our streets. ' ' 

" Ah! parlez-moi de ca, " interrupted the Brussels wine- 
merchant, starting on his legs: "if we had no other reason for 
the Four Days, the getting rid of the Russians would be enough. 
What did we want with the barbarian Autocrat's sister? That 
Russian alliance was the bete noire of the Belgians. What liberty 
could be expected under a connexion which made Belgium a 
kitchen-garden to Petersburg, and brought Brussels within sound 
of the despot's knout? But, thank God ! we are c quittes pour la 
peur; ' and there is no danger now of hearing a Greek priest cele- 
brating mass in the palace of our hereditary prince ! " 

" L'un portant V autre," said mon petit Charles, while all 
seemed to smile at the Russian terrors of the good Bruxellois ; 
" I think a Greek priest saying mass in the chapel of the Princess 
of Orange, is not worse than a Roman priest governing the cabinet 
of the King of Belgium, and commanding a majority in the Cham- 
bers. " 

" And is that the case?" demanded Sir Frederick, amused by 
the discussion. 

"To be sure it is, monsieur, " said Monsieur Van B . " In 

the rural districts the franchise is so low, that the elections are in the 
hands of the peasantry ; who implicitly follow the directions of 
the priests, and return their nominees, to the exclusion of the in- 
formed and civilized part of the community. If things are to go on 
thus, we may expect a return to the awful times of the Philips and 
the Alvas ; and our children may live to see the Inquisition restored 
in the Grand Sablon of Brussels, and the fires of an Auto-da-fe 
blazing on the site of the Recollets in the Rue du Soleil at Ghent. " 

" Then," said the Bruxellois, " they will see restored what was 
never suffered to exist in Belgium ! for our priesthood never permit- 
ted either the one or the other to be established." 



THE PRINCESS. 



189 



" I should suppose that, with a protestant king," observed Sir 
Frederick, 44 you have little to fear on that ground." 

44 Cela ne fait rien, monsieur,'''' said Van B ; 44 the king 

may be a protestant, and his ministers esprits forts; but we shall 
not the less be the most priest-ridden people of Europe. We are all 
good catholics, sir, and we respect our priests at the altar; but we 
know that Ghent never flourished, since the middle ages, as it has 
done under a protestant king. William of Nassau never let an en- 
terprising merchant stand still for want of a round sum to forward 
his speculations." 

44 Eh! tant pis" said theBruxellois. 44 William was a sleeping 
partner in almost every concern that promised a profit ; and both as 
prince and merchant, he clung to the false system of what is called 
encouraging trade : that is, giving unfair advantages to particular 
individuals, at the expense of the community ; ruining the favoured, 
and forcing them into absurd speculations, by giving them a too 
facile command of capital. " 

44 I cannot understand," said the Ex-burgomestre, 44 what the 
democrats of Brussels would have in their king. William was the 
very model of themselves, a pattern of economy ; walking about the 
streets in a threadbare coat, and a weather-beaten umbrella under 
his arm.* Why, he sat for Monsieur Gobaud in an old pair of mili- 
tary boots under his royal robes, for want of a second pair to change 
them. Then he was always accessible : he talked and walked with 
his subjects, without form or etiquette. He listened to their com- 
plaints, entered into the details of grievances, and redressed them at 
once de vive voix, or by immediate interference with the minis- 
ters." 

* On this point, the testimony of an English aristocrat is somewhat dif- 
ferent. Speaking of William's reception at Ghent, the Duchess of Rutland, 
in her 4 Tour,,' observes— 

44 That popularity is scarcely worthy to be boasted of, the sum of which 
consists in not having been pelted with rotten eggs. The fact is, that the 
catholic city of Ghent was called upon to lake the oaths to the protestant 
king of the Pays-Bas. The bishop of Ghent preached against the measure, 
and the consequence has been the dismission of the bishop ; but the city has 
not yet taken the required oath."— A Tour through part of Belgium and 
the Rhenish Provinces, 1822. 

13.. 



190 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Woe to the nation where such things can be! 1 ' exclaimed the 
Bruxellois; " where the king's cabinet is turned into a monkish con- 
fessional! The substitution of one man's private judgment, for the 
determinations of responsible advisers, or for the established laws, 
smacks rather too strongly of the paternal despotism, as it is called, 
of Vienna. It is too clap-trap a virtue in royalty for less than a divine- 
righted autocrat; and shows either that William did not understand, 
or was not willing to perform, his duty, in the spirit of a representa- 
tive government." 

This boutade produced a momentary silence. 
" All this talks well," said the Ex-burgomestre sulkily; " but the 
king you have chosen, monsieur, is not a bit the more popular for 
being a roi constitutionnel. There is no getting at him; or, if 
one does, il ne cause pas, lui, comme Vautre—allczl" 

" The most popular of your princes," said Sir Frederick, smiling, 
" was Guillaume le Taciturne ! " 

u ' But who wants a talking king? " asked the Bruxellois, petu- 
lantly. " W e chose our king as an expediency ; and, as yet, he has 
not disappointed us. II a du tact, le Roi." 

" Eh I diantre ! oui—du tact ! But, with all his tact, his govern- 
ment has reduced the country to bankruptcy ; and the manufacturers 
of Ghent are about to enter into a resolution to close their looms, 
and to turn adrift some thousands of their unfortunate workmen.— 
Son tact, par die I " 

" That is a dangerous experiment," observed Sir Frederick. 
" The resistance thus raised against all government, by starving your 
dependants into riot, will fall heaviest on your own heads ; and the 
effects of combination will be ruinous to yourselves, long before it 
reaches the objects of your discontent and aversion." 

All further discussion was now cut off by the arrival of the treck- 
schuyt in port ; which was crowded with porters, wheel-barrows 
and trucks, and was noisy with family meetings and friendly wel- 
comes. The courtesy of the political partisans was superior to the 
influence of a difference in opinion. All offered their services to 
the English stranger. But his young official acquaintance, being 
the only garcon of the party, made that circumstance a claim 
for taking him under his especial guidance ; and they proceeded to 
the Hotel de la Poste, entering the faubourg of the ancient capital 



THE PRINCESS. 



191 



of Flanders in the last dim twilight of a sultry summer's evening. 

Nothing could be more imposing than the appearance of the 
mouldering massive ramparts, the long dark narrow streets, the 
antique o'ertopping edifices, high dreary orchard walls, and close 
intricate passages. Here and there, a taper lighted before the shrine 
of a saint, or a lampion flashing its red flickering flame over the 
architectural portico of some government office, made the general 
gloom more dreary by their momentary contrast. Many little bridges 
were crossed, and many glimpses caught of tiny streams and stag- 
nant canals ; while wastes and dead walls, as it seemed, in the very 
heart of the city, gave it a strange air of desolation, not altogether 
unlike that of a moonless midnight view of Venice ; for, like Venice, 
Ghent is a collection of islands,* connected by numerous small 
bridges. 

Sir Frederick, arm in arm with his communicative guide, fre- 
quently paused to admire or to point out particular spots which 
recalled to him the broad touches and deep chiaro oscuro of the 
school he most admired. 

" There," he observed, stopping shortonone of the little bridges, 
lt there is a picture at this moment, a very Cuyp ! The dark green 
waters, impending stone balcony, and massive ornaments sketched 
in strong relief below ; the distant broken arch, the boat fastened 
by a large iron ring to the ivy-draped ruin ; and the whole illumin- 
ed by the last western ray from the distant horizon, complete a 
picture, of which I could fancy I have a facsimile. There is no 
judging of a school of painting till one has studied the local, and 
lived among the originals which have supplied the subjects." 

" If monsieur is an amateur," said his guide, 4 ' he must see our 
Van Eykes and Rubenses, in the cathedral of St. Bevon." 

" Your whole city," replied Sir Frederick, "viewed by this light, 
appears to me to be one great picture. How much one loses by 
travelling post through this country !" 

The deep toll of a remarkably loud bell now broke on the general 
silence of the gloomy city ; and was followed by a quaint old ca- 
rillon playing an ancient Flemish air, which gained on the listeners 

* Formed by the confluence of the Scheldt and the Lys, the Liese and the 
Moere. 



192 



THE PRINCESS. 



as they advanced, till they stood beneath the loftiest belfry of Bel- 
gium. It was a Gothic square tower, just touched at its top by a 
single ray of light. They stopped to look and listen. 

■•'Our belfry," said the Employe, " is the most ancient and na- 
tional of our monuments. It was raised in 1183, to perpetuate the 
memory of the wealth, prosperity, and independence of the Gantois 
of the twelfth century. It is to us, what the Capitol was to the 
Roman citizen." 

" Quand notre cloche bat, 
L'incendie va ; 
Quand elle sonne, 
Rebellion bonne, " 

muttered a voice close behind them. They looked round ; but there 
was no form visible save that of a female, in the usual long cloak 
and hood, who passed on. 

" An old adage of the common people," said the Belgian, laugh- 
ing, "which they love to repeat. This bell has been the tocsin of 
sedition in all ages : it is, in fact, the organ of opinion, as it has been 
the subject of popular poetry." 

Cutting across a dark passage to arrive at the hotel, they once 
again overtook the hood and cloak. The chill air of this gloomy 
alley made Sir Frederick sneeze. 

66 ProficiatV said the woman, as they passed. 

"Ik bedanke /iet," replied the young Employe; while Sir 
Frederick was taxing his memory for a phrase from Erasmus, of 
familiar rejoinder. 

" Do your common people speak Latin ?" he asked. 

The Belgian laughed : " No, no; nor French neither, very gene- 
rally or correctly. But a few phrases from the ritual are sometimes 
used ; particularly by our religious women, like that Beguine who 
has just passed. There are at present eight hundred of these good 
ladies in Ghent. This is their hour for going out to their pious 
vigils in the chambers of the sick. Nobody here can be ill without 
a Beguine to nurse him : there would be neither recovering se- 
cundum artem, nor dying in odour of sanctity, without their as- 
sistance. 



THE PRINCESS. 



193 



" It is odd enough, " Sir Frederick remarked, u that this is the 
second time, in my short journey in Flanders, that 1 have encoun- 
tered one of these Sisters ! " 

" Oh! you will meet them everywhere. They form a privileged 
and very circulating order : but they are good creatures , and very 
safe, though in a position to be mischievous. " 

On quitting the dark alley, they stood upon the Place d'Armes 
of the Flemish capital. Sir Frederick paused in surprise, to gaze 
on its beauty and gaiety. 

The Place, called le Kantur, was a spacious square, planted 
with trees, and surrounded by noble edifices of the most picturesque 
architecture, interspersed with well-lighted cafes, fronted by awn- 
ings, like fantastic tents, spread before them into the street. In 
one corner was a theatre, with its usual accessories of light and 
bustle ; and adjoining to it, a handsome building, announced by an 
inscription over its stone balcony to be l'Hotel de la Poste. On 
the other side, was the Caserne of the Corps de Garde, red and 
smoky with lamps, and crowded with soldiers; while, under an 
awning in the street, a party of officers, in the handsome Belgian uni- 
form, were seated round a table, drinking, and singing patriotic songs . 
The whole formed a scene worthy the pencil of Franc Du Ghatel. 

" This is the foyer of the loyalty and liberalism of Ghent, " said 
Sir Frederick's new friend, as they entered the porte-cochere of 
the hotel ; c ' and the only part of the city that is well lighted. But 
here is your inn. I shall do myself the honour of calling in the 
morning, and hope that you will stay a few hours to see what is 
most worth observation in the Flemish capital. " 

The gentleman then took his leave ; and the English traveller, 
escorted by the hostess of La Poste, was shown, along an intermin- 
able corridor, into a lofty and spacious room. Fegan had arrived 
some minutes before his master, and was, as usual, flourishing 
away ; but the entire of the tourist with a single servant, and a 
truck laden with two carpet-bags, was anything but brilliant. 
There was, however, something in the appearance of the master, 
more than in the bustling insolence of his man, which convinced the 
proprietor of the hotel, of the policy of not inflicting upon his guest 
one of those ' diners inpromptu, ' pronounced by a gastronomic 
dictator to be c une noire trahison. 1 



194 



THE PRINCESS. 



The Flemings, like the Americans, do not love to be put out of 
their way ; and the traveller who does not accommodate himself to 
their early table d'hote, will often be disappointed in his fare. 
The English, however, who strive to bend everything to their own 
habits and usages, have somewhat accustomed the Flemish auber- 
gistes to their nine-o'clock dinners 5 and when a party of sufficient 
consequence appears to warrant the inconvenience, the furnaces are 
relighted, and the casseroles recalled into service. 

Sir Frederick was not therefore treated to the hard, mille fois 
rechauffe fricandeau, the exhausted bouilli, or burnt cotelette, 
eked out with a dozen unnameable and uneatable nastinesses, 
which usually form the supplements of such ill-timed refections ; 
and being refreshed and revived by an epicurean supper, he found 
himself in any disposition but that for sleep. 

Among the old books which he had picked up in Bruges and 
which he had directed Monsieur Bogaert to pack and send after him, 
there was one which he had kept out to read on board the treck- 
schuyt. Its title was 4 L' Anciennete de Gand,par un Chanoine 
de St. Bavon; ' and he soon discovered that it was one of those 
delightful old provincial works, which have such a gout de terroir, 
and breathe of the amour-propre of the place they describe. It 
was all middle-age lore, the glories of Flemish art, and Flemish 
manufacture ; and it brought into evidence forms and characters 
illustrative of the epoch, when Ghent was made the scene of some 
of the most important incidents in the great drama of the history of 
Europe. 

To imaginative readers, such a work has a charm which must be 
felt in order to be understood ; and Sir Frederick had already passed 
the midnight hour in its perusal, when his attention was called off 
by a musical voice under the balcony of his apartment, which gra- 
dually hummed itself away, and left again the ancient town to the 
silence it had momentarily interrupted. Every note and every word 
had fallen distinctly on the ear of the listener. The melody was 
new, but it resembled a polacca ; and the language was equally 
strange to the auditor, although to him so many European tongues 
were familiar. 

The song was still fading away, when Sir Frederick threw open 
the window and stepped into the balcony. The serenader was 



THE PRINCESS. 



195 



gone ; and the measured step of the sentinel before the corps de 
garde alone was audible. The scene, however, had its spell ; and 
the traveller, as he leaned over the balustrade, enjoyed the balmy 
freshness of the air, already scented with the breath of morning. 
He gazed with an artist's eye on the scene before him, which lay in 
a deep repose of lights and shadows, at once a picture and a moral. 
The rays of a declining moon were still tinging the chiselled 
' steppes ' of the gabled facades, and tipping the architectural chim- 
nies of the lofty edifices of the Kantur ; while the dim echappdes 
of the narrow angular streets which straggled from it, gave a play to 
the imagination, and led it back to the glorious ages which had 
witnessed their construction. The whole brought graphically to the 
memory, events, whose results are still influencing the destinies of 
mankind. 

The Kantur, the Forum of the capital of Flanders, now so 
peaceful and so picturesque, had doubtless been the site of many a 
tragic drama. Here might have passed incidents which had made 
epochs ; here had stood men who were themselves epochs.* 

If the Low Countries had supplied the sturdy race which gave 
dynasties to Europe in the persons of the Clovises, the Dagoberts, 
and the Pepins, Ghent had given birth to him who united in his own 
person, the dominions of them all. One dark, narrow alley, now 
pierced by a straggling moonbeam, led to the ancient tower where 
Charles the Fifth first saw the light, and founded the power of the 
fatal House of Hapsburg. Yet he who broke down the gallant 
bearing of the Castilian spirit, and held the chivalry of France 
captive, had found his ambition checked in its mad career by the 
unyielding manufacturers of his native city ; and those ' tetes dures 
de Flamandsf as the brilliant despot Philip le Bon of Burgundy 
had called them, had cost Charles more trouble to govern, than all 
his vast dominions in either hemisphere. 

It was in such a moonlight night as this, that Charlemagne, who 
so long resided in this ancient city, might have dictated to his 
secretary, Eginard, some pages of his capitularies. Here the 
barber-minister of Louis XL, Olivier le Diable, may have played off 

* The struggles of the Burghers for independence under the Heins and the 
Arteveldes. 



196 



THE PRINCESS. 



some of those buffooneries which made an essential part of his- cor- | 
rupting diplomacy. Here, too, Petrarch 6 touched his lyre when ij 
he sung the charms of his Laura to the smiling banks of the Scheldt I 
and the Lys.' 

Sir Frederick Mottram was yet passing the antiquarian remem- 
brances he had so lately acquired in review before his mental vision, 
when the voice he had before heard, again fell upon his ear. The 
book, which he held between his finger and thumb, dropped on the 
pavement as he stretched forward to catch the fading melody. A 
person of a tall and slight figure, setoff by a military costume, came 
forth at that moment from under the avenue of trees, picked up the 
volume, and was met by Sir Frederick on the lower steps of the balcony 
with thanks and apologies, and with a slight complimentary allusion 
to the cause of the accident. The next moment the two strangers 
were walking together under the moon-lighted branches of the limes 
of the Kantur ! 

The historical spot on which they moved, and the melody which ! 
had introduced them to each other, furnished keys to the freemasonry ; 
of the imagination. If the accomplished English gentleman, with | 
his innate love for the arts, so rare in Englishmen, was at once i 
announced in the manner and bearing of Sir Frederick, there was 
a poetical halo about the person of his chance companion, which 
would have marked him, throughout Europe, for one of those splen- ! 
did fragments of Polish heroism, now scattered over the world to 
glorify their own chivalrous nation, and to contrast their high and 
intelligent natures with that barbarous power whose brute masses 
had borne them down ;— a nation whose gallantry Kosciusko illus- 
trated, whose bravery Napoleon delighted to honour, and whose 
spirit the Russian Autocrat has found it impossible to bend, to break, 
or to extinguish, but with life. 

Sir Frederick Mottram soon discovered that he was conversing : 
with one of the most accomplished gentlemen of Europe. He was, ! 
in fact, one of the most distinguished exiles in the cause of Polish 
independence; and with others of his brave countrymen, had found 
an asylum in the capital of regenerated Belgium ; being honoured 
w ith a post of military trust by its people-elected king. 

Colonel *** had come to Ghent to visit an invalid comrade. He I 
had only arrived an hour or two before; and was waiting for his j 



THE PRINCESS. 



197 



horses lo return to Brussels that night. This restlessness in the 
physique of the Polish exiles, this morbid desire and capacity for 
fatigue and movement, is one of the surest marks of internal malaise, 
from whatever source it springs. 

An introduction so accidental, so divested of all the forms which 
chill and impede the feelings in the ordinary intercourse of stran- 
gers, was not without its charm to the shy conventional Englishman. 
The melodies of modern Europe ( a text derived from the Polish 
Hymn to Liberty, which the Colonel had been humming ) , Bellini's 
' Norma,' the new musical school of passion succeeding to Rossini's 
school of brilliant and rapid sensations, the state of the arts in Flan- 
ders, and modern French and English literature (with the former of 
which Colonel*** was much better acquainted than the British states- 
man ), formed the principal topics of a prolonged delightful conver- 
sation. Both parties seemed alike to avoid that fearful rock which 
makes shipwreck of all man's better sympathies — politics ; yet, in- 
voluntarily, the all-engrossing theme, mixed up as it now is with 
almost every subject, gradually mingled with pleasanter matter ; in- 
troducing Belgian prosperity, Polish misery, and the cause which 
had driven one as wealthy, and far more nobly born than the English 
parvenu, to poverty and exile. 

Sir Frederick Mottram had been guided, in many of his views of 
foreign policy, by the opinions of men who held a dinner at the 
Russian embassy of greater importance than the liberties of mankind. 
He had therefore driven the Polish, like the Italian cause, from his 
mind ; as the selfish throw off a subject which touches their sym- 
pathy at the expense of their interests and their pleasures. He had 
been the boon companion to the husband of the ambassadress of 
Russia ; he' had known many Russian nobles, had borrowed many 
Russian opinions, and deemed the conduct of the Poles, to say the 
best of it, indiscreet and romantic. Although he would not have 
refused to assist at a soiree because the illustrious Prince Czartoriski 
honoured it with his presence, he had yet declined his friend Horace 
Harvey's invitation to be introduced to him. Now, however, that he 
was thus brought accidentally in contact with another distinguished 
representative of Polish patriotism, gallantry, and intellectual refine- 
ment, he was fascinated, bewitched. 

There was nothing in the conversation of the stranger to shock 

14. 



198 



THE PRINCESS. 



his self-love, by argumentatively demonstrating how shallow was 
his knowledge, how deep his ignorance, of the wrongs of Poland ;but 
there were little details which wrung his heart, and traits that awoke 
all his indignation. The melancholy energy, the feeling eloquence 
of the sad narrative, went home to his bosom, in spite of his preju- 
dices, and awakened the latent charities of his nature,which the 
selfish habits, and the routine, unreflecting opinions of an arrogant, 
over-weening, and anti-national faction had failed to annihilate. 

In alluding to the cause of his visit to Ghent, Colonel *** was led 
to speak of its object, who had experienced more than his portion of 
the national misery, and contributed more than his share towards 
her yet unatlained redemption. His dying mother had given up her 
last sigh, when the agents of the imperial tyrant were searching her 
deathbed for proofs of what was impiously deemed her guilt — a 
mothers interest in a banished son. His female relations had been 
whipped in the streets of Warsaw, for not abandoning their bro- 
thers, or betraying their husbands ; and when the cause had become 
desperate, still hoping in spite of hope, he had returned to Poland 
with a small but trusty band of associates; he had maintained him- 
self against the pursuit of overwhelming numbers, skulking for 
weeks in swamps, all but famished in inhospitable forests, suffering 
the pangs of hunger and of thirst, and the burning agony of undressed 
wounds. He had taught the dull, laboured for the sordid, thrown 
away his brilliant accomplishments on the unawakened and the vul- 
gar. He had done all, suffered all, that humanity could perform or 
endure, for the sake of right, liberty, and national independence. 

" Still, you must not pity us too much," said Colonel ***, on 
some exclamation of compassion uttered by Sir Frederick at the 

sufferings of the family of the young, the gallant B ski; " nor 

mistake our misfortunes for our merits. We want, among ourselves, 
that unity which alone deserves the triumph of national redemption. 
Segur, in his account of la grande armee, when he gives us so 
honourable a place, says, ' les Polonais promettent plus quHls ne 
peuvent tenir- et Us tiennent plus qu'ils ne promettent, . , This 
gives the measure of our conduct. Our sensibility leads us too far 
in the first instance, and our restless energies go beyond the dreams 
even of our own imagination." 

It is easy, " said Sir Frederick, " to preach prudence to na- 



THE PRINCESS. 



199 



tions in adversity, as to individuals; but " He paused, surprised 

to find himself defending the indiscretions of the Poles, to whose 
virtues he had been hitherto as insensible as incredulous. 

The Colonel's horses now appeared from the gate of the hotel, 
and the strange associates parted under those favourable impres- 
sions which mutual admiration is so calculated to awaken. They 
exchanged cards ; and the English tory promised to seek the Polish 
liberal, on his arrival at Brussels. He was still something surpris- 
ed, by the intimation on the visiting card, to find that the Polish 
magnate was in the personal service of the King of the Belgians. It 
was a new light thrown on the state of the times, an evidence of the 
hopeless impracticability of the system of conservatism, in the face of 
a spirit of change and of innovation so universal and so penetrating. 
The little incident was a practical lesson, tending more to shake the 
stronghold of prejudice, than all Bentham had ever preached, or ra- 
dicalism asserted. Man is rarely taught through argument; and 
one personal conviction is worth a 4 bushel of reasons. ' 



CHAPTER XIII. 

GHENT. 

There is no capital in Europe where the stranger finds himself 
more a stranger than in London. The works of art and the monu- 
ments of antiquity are there only accessible at an expense of money 
and of labour far greater than the admission is worth. The egotism 
also of the people, and their contempt (real or affected) for foreign- 
ers, close every avenue to courtesy against the approach of the 
continental traveller, who comes not labelled by high titles, or that 
most powerful of all letters of recommendation — wealth. At every 
step, the mere unpretending scholar and gentleman, incapable of 
contending in expenditure with his equals among the natives, but 
approaching the greatest country of the world with enthusiasm and 



200 



THE PRINCESS. 



benevolence, is repelled by mortification and disappointment. On 
the Continent, the very reverse of this churlish exclusiveness is 
exhibited ; for national vanity does the honours, even when higher 
motives are wanting. 

Unknown, unannounced, Sir Frederick Mottram had hitherto 
found Belgian politeness the best cicerone to Belgian sight-seeing ; 
and the accidents which had procured him so much unpurchased 
information and amusement, were well worth the paid services of 
hireling ignorance, upon which the English traveller so generally 
throws himself. 

Sir Frederick was still at breakfast, at the Hotel de la Poste, and 
poring over a paragraph copied from the English papers into Gali- 
gnani, of which his own departure for the Continent was the theme, 
when his new friend the Employti made his appearance. No time 
was to be lost ; nor did the Englishman's taste for the arts permit 
him to lose any. The transition from the idle gossip of the news- 
paper to the noblest monuments of past ages was refreshing and 
energizing ; and he threw down with alacrity the narrative of Lady 
Frances Mottram's dejeune at the Willows, to visit the lime-worn 
tower in which Charles the Fifth was born,— the noble Cathedral of 
St. Bevon,— the Palace of the University,— the Gallery of Monsieur 
Scamp, and other objects of curiosity marked down by his new 
guide and courteous acquaintance. 

Ghent is one of the most ancient, perhaps, of the Belgian cities, as 
it is the site of some of the most notable incidents of Belgian history. 
Its existence is recorded as far back as the seventh century, the 
epoch when King Dagobert sent St. Amand to preach the gospel 
there. In the commencement of the ninth century, Charlemagne 
made it a temporary residence ; and towards its close, Baldwin 
Bras-de-Fe?\ the first Count of Flanders, fortified the town, and 
erected the stronghold called the Graven Kasteel. 

In the tenth century, Ghent was already celebrated for its looms 
and its dyers ; and the Gantois cultivated with success the surround- 
ing country, which they .had reclaimed. In 1297, the city was 
sufficiently powerful to repel an English army of twenty-four thou- 
sand men, headed by the gallant Edward the First ; and in 1381, it 
possessed within its walls eighty thousand fighting men. In all 
ages of its history, it was famous for its struggles for independence. 



THE PRINCESS. 



201 



The whole of the fourteenth century was passed in contests with its 
feudal chiefs ; but amidst the tumults of war and sedition, its manu- 
factures and commerce continued to thrive and multiply. 

Ghent is now but the melancholy monument of its past glories, the 
tomb of its own energies and prosperity. Its antique and noble 
belfry, raised in 1183, is perhaps one of the most remarkable remains 
of the middle ages. It was from the contemplation of its brazen 
dragon ( carried off from Bruges in the time of the Crusades ) that Sir 
Frederick, accompanied by his friend, proceeded to the Tour des 
Princes, the ancient tower where the mad Queen of Castile gave 
birth to the future Emperor, the master of the destinies of Europe. 

In a small dreary apartment, where the wheels of industry now 
turn merrily round, once stood the magnificent cradle of Charles, 
surrounded by the offerings of tributary princes. The young Gantois 
proudly alluded to the fact. "Here," he observed, "Charles de 
Croi, Prince deChimai, presented a golden casque, ornamented with 
a phoenix. Here the Marquis de Berg, then a powerful feudatory, 
offered a golden sword ; and Marguerite d'Autriche, the aunt of the 
imperial infant, presented a basin of pure gold, enriched with pre- 
cious stones. " 

" Eh! ben, oui, " said a female spinner, bending her coifed head 
over the work her nimble fingers were executing. " What are 
your Princes deChimai, and your Marquises de Berg, now? Notre 
filature de coton, voyez-vous, vaut Men tout cela — n'est-ce pas, 
Monsieur? 1 '' And she addressed the question to Sir Frederick. 

He started at the personality of the singular demand, which, 
simple as it was, bore at once upon the feudal past and the utilitarian 
present. 

" I should not wonder, " said Monsieur D , " if this brusque 

spinner was one of the patriotic heroines of the Four Days. The 
names of the Belgian nobles, (the Chimais, the De Lignes, and the 
D'Arembergs,) are in no very good odour with the lower classes of 
Ghent, w ho by no means make common cause with their Orangist 
masters. Comment Vappelles-tu, ma bonne a?nie?" he asked of 
the spinner, observing that the Englishman had been struck by her 
observation. 

" Je m'appelle Marguerite d- Artevelde, " she replied. 
" Two great names!" replied the interrogator. " Are you a 

14.. 



203 



TITE PRINCESS. 



descendant of the great Philip and Jacques d'Artevelde. the dictators 
of Flanders?" 

" What does that signify?' 1 she asked petulantly. "Who can 
answer such a question? My mother was called Marguerite , and I 
am called La Dulc Greite.* We should not go beyond the mothers ; 
one is always sure that far—tenez ! " 

The women of the factory laughed. 

" At all events," said Monsieur D , " the name is a good 

name." And turning to Sir Frederick , he added, "Marguerite de 
Gand, commonly called Marguerite of Austria, the aunt of Charles 
the Fifth, was a great woman. The wisdom and patriotism of her 
conduct, as gouve?mante dcs Pays-Bas for her nephew, has left 
an indelible impression. If Marie-Thirese is the idol of the noblesse, 
<- Mar got, la gente Demoiselle,' is that of the people; and she 
possesses a traditional interest with them which renders her name 
popular; — it is, in fact, a nom de bon augure.^ 

" Not always," muttered Sir Frederick, with a sigh ; and after a 
momentary abstraction he started, as one recovering from a painful 
reverie. " Where are we to proceed now ? " he asked carelessly. 

" We will, if you please, take the" most magnificent of our modern 
edifices, the Palace of the University, in our way to the most ancient, 
the Cathedral of St. Bevon." 

Sir Frederick offered some money to one of the women of the 
manufactory, who conducted them to the gate; and his companion 
inquired of her who was la vieille Flamande, that plied her wheel 
and her tongue with such dexterity. 

u Comment ! " said the woman. "Do you not know Soeur 
Greite, of the grand Beguinage? Darnel not so old, neither ; but 
huddled up in her habit comme un fagot. She does a deal of 
charity, and often visits the factory, and takes a turn at the spinning 
among us. She won't let our young ones work beyond their 
strength, and sees to the ventilation of the apartments — which is not 
so good for the work ; but they let her have her way. " 

It struck Sir Frederick, that this same Soeur Greite resembled 
exceedingly, in her clumsy figure and guttural accent, the Beguine 

* ' The wild Marguerite," the name given to an old piece of artillery, at 
Ghent. 



THE PRINCESS. 203 

of the hospital of St. Jean. If she were the same person, she had 
probably made one of a group of women, apparently of the lower 
class, who had occupied the fore part of the treckschuyt, on the 
preceding day. The subject was still in his head, when they arrived 
at the Palace of the University. But its cold imitation of the severe 
Greek architecture, and its emblematic statues of Orange Wisdom 
and Nassau Justice, were all too little connected with the genius of 
the place, with the Charlemagnes and the Dagoberts,* the Bras-de- 
ler and the Temeraires, to give it an interest in the mind of the 
spectator. To Sir Frederick's remark to this effect, the young cice- 
rone replied , laughing : 

" It has at least one merit, — it is built on the ruins of a Jesuit 
church." 

The cathedral, dedicated to St. Bevon, a noble specimen of the 
severest and best school of Gothic architecture, afforded a far finer 
object of contemplation. Its lofty elevation, simple distribution and 
chastity of ornaments, are all characteristic of the age in which it 
was raised. The effect, on entrance, is that of physical vastness 
united with moral grandeur. It is a monument of the perfection to 
which the arts were brought in a country of free manufacturers, 
who, like the republican merchants of Italy, proved themselves the 
best protectors of genius, and produced among themselves, and of 
themselves, some of the greatest artists the world had ever seen. 

In passing up the lofty and magnificent nave, which stands in such 
perfect harmony with the lateral aisles, where every chapel is a cabi- 
net, Sir Frederick paused over each separate object with an interest 
derived from his recent reading. The carved pulpit of Laurent del 
Vaux, the marble mausoleum of a bishop of Ghent, the chiselled stalls 
of the canons of the church, and the tall massy gilt bronze cande- 
labra, (which had lighted the court-masks of Charles the First, and 
were sold to the canons of St. Bevon, by one, to whom power was 
far more dear than its symbols, Oliver Cromwell,) alternately engaged 
and riveted all his attention. The famous altar-piece by Rubens — 
where he has painted himself as St. Hubert, as a mendicant at the 
gates of the convent, and followed by holy women, who personate 

* Id 656, Dagobert founded the first Christian church in Ghent, through 
the mission of St. Amand. 



204 



THE PRINCESS. 



his fat and florid wives — was, as Sir Frederick observed, " a picture 
to bend the knee before. " But his devotions were held in reserve 
for the more precious work of the two V an Eykes, which the sacristan 
approached with religious respect, disposing the lights of the chapel 
so as to exhibit it to the spectator with the happiest effect. 

As a monument of the state of art at the early period when the 
process of painting in oil was first discovered, this picture derives 
its greatest value. But though deficient in perspective, and exhi- 
biting the flowers on the remotest plants elaborate and distinct as 
those of the foreground, its heads are of exquisite beauty and ex- 
pression. God the Father, in a bishop's mitre, is seated on his 
throne, and holds a crystal sceptre in his left hand. On his right 
and left are the Virgin and St. John, each engaged in reading. 
The Lamb, standing on an altar, and surrounded by saints, angels, 
and other personages, amounting to three hundred figures, is re- 
presented pouring forth blood from its heart. Nothing can exceed 
the beauty and variety of these figures ; and they show, that in the 
rudest and simplest epochs of art, as in its most florid development, 
genius can make itself evident, and strike out, amidst general 
mediocrity, its own certain and unfailing path to immortality. 

" The exposition of this picture," said the sacristan in a tone 
off nasal psalmody, "which took place in 1431, in this chapel of 
the family of De Vyts, was a great festival for the ancient city of 
Ghent. Its painter was Hubert Van Eyke, the greatest that ever 
existed; and it was finished in 1452, by his brother John, the second 
of his art. It originally consisted of twelve pannels. It was com- 
manded by Josse De Vyts, and his wife Isabella, the daughter of 
the first magistrate of Ghent in that time. During the religious 
troubles of 1566, a band of deists and philosophers attacked our 
churches, broke the statues and pictures, and destroyed the golden 
shrines and silver reliquaries. But Notre Dame de Gand watched 
over the immortal works of the Van Eykes. They were replaced 
in 15815. Three of the pannels were taken to Paris in the French 
revolution, but were restored in 1815. Two years afterwards, the 
Canons sold four of them to Monsieur Van Nieuwenhuyse of Brus- 
sels, who sold them to Mr. Solly of London, who sold them to the 
King of Prussia. Six of them are in the Palais d Orange at 
Brussels; but nobody knows for certain what has become of the 



THE PRINCESS. 



20.5 



two others, though I have heard that they were sold to .... " 
He paused to recollect the name. 

" To whom?" asked Sir Frederick. " If they are still in the 
market, I would purchase them at any price. " 

" Ah! I remember now," said the sacristan. tu They were sold 
to the Princess of Schaffenhausen. " 

Sir Frederick paid the sacristan for his trouble ; and the obliging 
Employe, obliged to attend in another quarter of the city, conducted 
his protege to the collection of Monsieur Scamp, where he took his 
leave with an ' au revoir, a tantot^ but without even asking the 
name of the stranger he had so much obliged. 

The traveller whose knowledge of the treasures of art still exist- 
ing in Belgium leads him to the threshold of the Scamp Gallery, one 
of the richest private collections in the Low Countries, has only to 
knock at the old-fashioned hall-door, ( which, as well as the hall 
into which it opens, recalls the English mansions of Queen Anne's 
day.) and to make known his desire. A broad, good-humoured 
Flemish face smiles a welcome ; and the domestic cicerone of the 
liberal connoisseur conducts the stranger to a suite of rooms on the 
ground-floor, presents him with a catalogue, bows, and retires. 
The spectator, thus left to the full enjoyment of his own observa- 
tions, is neither bound to the cant of criticism, nor taxed to flatter, 
at the expense of candour, the master of the collection or his repre- 
sentative. 

Sir Frederick Mottram, thus turned loose into a pasture on which 
his long-repressed tastes were eager to banquet, paused with delight, 
to take breath, before the rich feast which presented itself. He 
found, with infinite pleasure, that in this temple, peopled w ith mimic 
forms, he alone lived and moved 5 and that all around him was 
silence and solitude. AVhat forms, what countenances, what genius, 
beauty, power, energies, thought, glanced on him from every side ! 
what expressions of passion, of intellect, the impress of mind upon 
muscle and fibre ! 

The history of the Low Countries lay before him, her tyrants and 
her patriots, her dukes and her demagogues, her statesmen and 
diplomatists, her magnificent women, and her splendid artists. In 
the first flush of his pleasure, he could not fix himself to any one 
specimen. The two great Vandykes at the very entrance of the 



206 



THE PRINCESS. 



gallery, the full-length figures of P. Gonsalvo di Cordova, ambas- 
sador from Spain to the republic of Venice, and of Alexandra Scaglia, 
the Spanish representative at the congress of Munster, seemed to 
start from their frames and canvass to detain him. The expression 
of the noble countenance of Gonsalvo was thoughtful and acute ; 
and the beautiful aristocratic hands, finished even to the nails, might 
have been the despair of Lord Byron or of Napoleon.* A fine 
sketch on paper lay on a seat before the latter ; he looked at it for 
a moment, and then walked through the suite of apartments. 

These apartments opened to the right into what are called 
chambrettes (small recesses terminated by a window), which were 
hung with the most precious of the cabinet pictures. There was 
one which for a moment arrested him in his pleasurable pursuit. 
The light of its window fell upon a female figure seated on a low 
crimson velvet cushion. Implements of art were strewed around 
her, and she was drawing upon a large portfolio spread upon her 
knees : its massive clasp caught a spark of silver light, and reflected 
it back upon as much of a broad, clear forehead, as the position of 
(he head, and the fall of two jetblack tresses on either brow, left 
visible. The bend of her long columned neck was in itself a study 
for a painter. The rounding of her statue-like shoulders was defined 
by a Vandyke of white cambric, like those observable in almost all 
the Flemish portraits ; and a voluminous dress, with loose long 
sleeves of black stuff, flung back from the elbow, completed a pic- 
ture, which the deep shade of the recess, and the light from its high 
window, rendered perfect. 

There was a moment of perfect illusion, which a breath might 
have dissipated. Sir Frederick Mottram did not breathe, but the 
artist did ; and there was a heaving of the bosom-drapery, which 
transferred the admiration of the beholder from what appeared at 
first a living picture, to the most picturesque of living forms. The 
fall of the catalogue from Sir Frederick's hands, noiseless as it was, 
sufficed to call off the artist's attention from her study. She turned 
round her head ; and her face, half concealed by her dark hair , 
transfixed the gaze of the spectator. Thought never ennobled, nor 

* This picture was painted at Genoa, where it remained till Lcbrun 
brought it to Paris In 1807. 



THE PROCESS. 



207 



passion energized, a finer countenance. The mobility of its expres- 
sion left no power to dwell upon the features ; and except the pe- 
culiar character of her eyes and mouth, nothing definite remained 
in his mind. 

The whole, however, was a spell. It operated as a spell on the 
nerves and imagination of one both nervous and imaginative. His 
surprise and admiration were mixed with some confused remem- 
brance, whose source he could not detect, that this face must, he 
thought, have been known to him before. Had he seen it in a 
dream, or in a picture ? and was the splendid original now before him 
a professional model for artists ? The first purple bloom of youth 
indeed had passed away from the countenance ; but it had left 
behind a clear glow of animated health, and a rounded fulness of 
form replacing the delicate symmetry of more juvenile outlines. 

The lady had again dropped her head over her work, scarcely 
returning the bow, or acknowledging the apology of the intruder. 
He withdrew, therefore, and turned his attention to the exhaustless 
riches of the Rubenses, the Rembrandts, the Gerard Dows, and the 
Hobbimas. Beautiful as were these immortal works, they did not 
fix his thoughts ; which were still in the c/iambrette, devoted to the 
living original of that great master of all masters — Nature. He was 
almost induced to think that the lady must be the person whose 
acquaintance he had made in the Grande Place of Bruges ; an ac- 
quaintance favoured by the flattery of his self-love, in her drawing 
on board the treckschuyt— for vanity will vanquish shyness, when 
reason fails. 

While yet hesitating, a movement, a light footfall, a figure issuing 
from the chambrette in a mantle and hood, determined him in the 
affirmative. He advanced, and expressed the hope that he was not 
mistaken in his supposition. Her answer was brief, careless, and 
acknowledging the identity. It was made while she was replacing 
in her portfolio the sketch which lay on the seat opposite Vandyke's 
magnificent pictures. Sir Frederick begged to see it, offered a cri- 
ticism, and threw out a hint that he would deem no sum exorbitant 
which would obtain him a copy of that unrivalled original. The 
lady's sketch was taken from the portrait of Scaglia ; and the finesse 
of that speaking countenance was admirably preserved. 

" A copy of this picture," she observed, "worthy of the original, 



208 



THE PRINCESS. 



ought to bring a great price. Vandyke is the master painter of the 
North, the Raphael of the Flemish school. If Rubens has had more 
than his meed of immortality, Vandyke has had less. The correct 
drawing and brilliant colouring of the former can be fully appre- 
ciated by the pedant critic and the vulgar multitude ; but the myste- 
rious divinity of expression caught and communicated by the far 
superior genius of Vandyke, escapes the dull, and beams not for the 
merely learned. There was that within the master's mind which 
met the intellectual supremacy of superior natures half-way, catching 
and giving inspiration to the object it embodied. In those two 
heads— nay, in the very fingers of that speaking hand, there is an 
indication of thought and an illustration of character." 

" A curious observation," said Sir Frederick* " The hand is 
exquisite!" 

" Yes ; but I should not like to come in contact with-the man to 
whom it belonged," she answered smilingly. " Those long fingers 
are to be distrusted. They denote an aptitude to legerdemain, both 
moral and physical, and go with a certain serpentine character. I 
have seen such men turn, and twist, and coil like a snake, in all 
their movements, moral and physical. As politicians, they are 
uncertain, and have as much cunning, at least, as wisdom in their 
conduct and composition. They are subtile, if not sinister ; and 
have, or imagine they have, much to conceal. Oue should beware 
of those over-long, flexible joints, always in motion." 

"I really do believe/' said Sir Frederick, much amused, " that 
I he firm of purpose and the frank of heart have them not." 

" Never," said the artist. " The idea of Satan's taking a snake's 
form is physiologically correct and poetically fine." 

y There is a fearful philosophy in that observation," said Sir 
Frederick : " one is almost awe-stricken, in coming in contact with 
a mind which holds the secret of reading characters even from the 
fingers' ends." 

" We artists," she replied, "must draw our inferences concern- 
ing qualities from external structure ; and the habit of examining 
the formal and visible expressions of mind, gives us great facility in 
the practice; when we are not absolutely fools : which, however, 
we often are." 

" You had a female painter among you, called ' the Sorceress,' " 



THE PRINCESS. 



209 



he observed, endeavouring to catch a view of the lady's face from 
beneath her hood. 

" Amongst us? — yes : but not of our school, in any sense ; 
Madame Rozee of Leyden. She was Dutch ; and the term 4 Sorce- 
ress' is applicable to the execution, and not to the conception, of 
her works. You must learn, sir, to distinguish between the Flemish 
and Dutch schools : they are too often confounded, though distinctly 
different." 

" I begin to perceive that they are. The heads of your early 
masters, the Van Eykes and the Hemlinks, give the clue to the intel- 
lectuality of the Flemish school." 

" To which Vandyke set the seal. Look," she added, " at this 
' Magdalen,' by Gerard Dow. You see his idea of the woman, whose 
! sins were forgiven her for her loving much,' was that of a fat vrow, 
as much in anger as in sorrow. This was the type, which existed in 
his mind, of the struggle between passion and grace. But look at 
the sensible objects; look at the light of that lamp, by which she 
does not weep, but blubber ! You must shade your eyes , the glare 
is so painful ; and every object in the scene reflects it. This is the 
great beauty of the Dutch school." 

" Yes, life in all its coarse forms represented to the life; nature, 
ill chosen, but never outraged. And yet," he added, fixing his eyes 
on her face, "these painters had splendid models. I have observed 
here a Spanish— I had almost said a Moorish, beauty, from the dark 
intensity of expression; heads such as inspired Murillo ! " 

" You are reverting to the Flemish school and its models," said 
the lady, interrupting him : "we were discussing the Dutch school. 
Take Paul Potter, for instance. The Venus de Medicis of Paul Potter 
was a beautiful cow ; as the Apollo of Rembrandt was his own gro- 
tesque person in gorgeous drapery. Look," and she led the way to 
the chambrette where she had been drawing, " what a miracle of 
art ! This is perhaps the finest portrait of Rembrandt in the world. 
It is known by the name of ' Le Petit Turc? from the gemmed 
turban and robe. It is painted in two colours only, and has none 
of the ' maniere strapassiere ' which is the cachet of his style." 

"Yes, I see. What an illusion ! But genius basso many re- 
sources ! How you people of genius must laugh at the world ! " 

" And how, in return, the world makes genius weep!" she 

15. 



210 



THE PROCESS. 



replied. " How many of the highly-organized creatures whose 
works now surround us have lived only to suffer : some died of 
want, and all submitted to the humiliating indignity of being patron- 
ised." 

" Yes; and patronised, too, by thedulness that understood them 
not, or by the malignity which converts patronage into an instru- 
ment of torture. Yet there are minds to whom the patronage and 
protection of genius would afford the highest, the purest source of 
pride and felicity; the only one, perhaps, they can know." 

" I have no great confidence in such protection," was the stern 
reply. " It is but another name for dependence; and who that are 
conscious of genius, who that feel the god within them, would submit 
to that ? No, sir ; the gifted must pay their penalty. To be supe- 
rior to our species, is a moral unfitness. It places its victim out of 
the ban of ordinary society; above it, perhaps, but still out of it. 
This is the alien-act of Nature. Time-serving and ductile mediocrity 
will aways have the best of it. Whoever ventures to enlighten the 
world by the discovery of truth, is the doomed martyr of contem- 
porary ignorance ; while the talents that delight it, realize the old 
fable of the ' Nightingale and the Thorn.' " 

Her voice fell to a melancholy cadence. The animation that had 
given the brilliant mobility of youth to her features had fled ; and an 
expression deeply meditative, as of one who held sad communion 
with the past, contracted her dark brows into a care-worn and 
desponding look. There was a momentary silence, from which she 
was the first to break. 

" But you, sir," she said, " you have always been prosperous 
and rich. It is for your smiles that artists work and live. You are, 
doubtless, one of the rich English milords" 

Then, turning abruptly away, and resuming her usual tone, she 
pointed to a picture painted by Gabriel Metz, and dated 1652. 

" This gem," she said, " is called 6 La Leconde MusiqueS " 

" I know of no peril," said Sir Frederick, " greater than that to 
which a man is exposed either in giving or taking lessons in the arts 
or philosophy from a beautiful woman : her voice sinks to the heart, 
while the sentiments it expresses rouse all the higher sympathies of 
our nature." 

" You speak with feeling, monsieur." 



THE PRINCESS. 



u With experience," he replied emphatically, and still gazing on 
her grave but beautiful face. 

" This woman's head," she continued, "is very ideal for a Flemish 
beauty. You see here the ideality communicated to the Flemish 
school by Vandyke, and copied by Murillo. Compare this head 
with the florid, fleshy solidity of Rubens's conjugal seraglio." 

" But all that is called ideality," replied Sir Frederick, " must 
be based in fact, and have an existence in nature. I have a type of' 
that very head in my own recollection, as if I had seen some living 
Murillo." 

" Such types, however, are rare : one seldom sees such a brow as 
that, or such a bend of the neck ; a grace not beyond the reach of 
art, but its perfection. " 

" I have seen very recently just such a brow and such a bend. " 

" Oh!" she said carelessly, " between pictures and individuals 
there will occasionally be found an accidental likeness. But, alas ! 
the grace, the beauty, the bright types of long-passed visions, leave 
nothing behind them but this canvass mimicry. Nature, exhausting 
as rapidly as she creates, soon brings the brightest original to this !" 
— She pointed to the head of an old woman, by Denner, painted 
with all that minute attention to decaying nature in which that Dutch 
master excels. 

" The Dutch school," she continued, " is in this respect divine- 
that it is the temple of old women, where their furrows are adored, 
and every dell has the charm of a dimple for admiring posterity. What 
a cheerful resignation to wrinkles is here ! This is not general, but 
particular nature. A Dutch temperament easily reconciles itself to 
a change, which is only felt deeply by that sensibility which has known 
how divine a thing it is to please, how bitter a pang to have ceased 
to do so. " 

" But there are beings," said Sir Frederick, warmly, " on whom 
the usual inflictions of time fall so lightly as not to be felt; who, 
bewitching in their youth, are still fascinating in . . ." 

" Their prime, " she interrupted, laughing : " that prime ! more 
evanescent than youth itself !— But the whole is a phantasm ! " 

She paused, and sighed. Then pointing to a picture by Rubens, 
she added : — 

" See here ! Look at this child ! Here is the rich, round mus- 



212 



THE PRINCESS. 



cle, that tells of unworn sensations. You see it is Rubens s own 
daughter; for it resembles his first wife, Isabella Brant. It is the 
beau iddal of Flemish children, and one of the finest portraits in the 
collection. *' 

" How highly finished ! " said Sir Frederick. " The figure is not 
starting from the picture, but actually standing out from it." 

" Yes; the child is walking forth from the portico of its father's 
garden, which you will doubtless see, monsieur, at Antwerp ; the all 
that remains of the gorgeous house of the ' Prince-Painter.' It is 
much better worth seeing than the ruins of the citadel. " 

ki Oh. yes," said Sir Frederick, " is is : but I have already seen 
Antwerp, some years back ; it is the Bologna of Belgium. I lingered 
some days in its rich gallery in 1829. " 

" Monsieur is now on his route to the German spas, perhaps?'' 
asked the lady, rather inquisitively. 

Li I have scarcely any plan for the future, " he replied. " I live 
but for the moment. The present is to me 'all in all,' and, too 
happy to secure a delicious sensation from objects perhaps but too 
fleeting, i have given the past to the winds, and leave the future to 
the chances : they have hitherto highly favoured my rather eccentric 
course thus far in Belgium. " — He bowed. 

" The arts are pregnant with such delicious sensations!" said 
the artist; "music above all others. But pray fix your attention 
on this charming portrait of Rubens' s daughter. It represents the 
characteristic sumptuousness of the ostentatious painter, who stood 
at the head of our numerous masters. Only see the magnificent 
costume' of this child ; her rich petticoat, striped with gold ! her 
point-lace apron ! her blue velvet mantle, and lilac velvet gown and 
hat!— and such a feather in that hat! fluttered by the wind ! A 
silver chain too, and a diamond cross: and all this magnificence of, 
dress contrasted with the rather vulgar look, and laughing, noisy, 
romping air of the spoiled young heiress, who seems to run, chirp- 
ing and chuckling, towards you ! " 

u You give it a life by your criticism, that enhances the miracle 
of its execution," said Sir Frederick. 

" If I gave out what I feel, it would be a great power; but en- 
thusiasm in the arts never does. This was the child for whom the 
Archduke Albert stood godfather ; for the Seigneur de Steens was a 



THE PRINCESS. 213 

frond seigneur, as well as a great painter and a distinguished 
statesman. " 

"What a splendid life was his!" said Sir Frederick; 14 the 
triumph of genius and of ambition : the first painter of his age ; the 
secretary of state to the powerful and charming Archduchess 
Isabelle; the minister from the astute Philip the Fourth of Spain to 
the picture-loving Charles of England; the friend of the wily and 
wicked Buckingham ; the favourite causeur of Marie de Medicis ; 
maintaining the independence of an artist, and displaying the spirit 
of a prince ! " 

" The spirit of a prince!" she replied : " you English love to 
talk of the spirit of a prince ; but, as applied to high-minded ge- 
nius, ' 'tis a poor comparison ! How did Rubens treat the prince 
who sent him fifty pistoles ? How did he answer your English 
alchymist who came to tempt him with the philosopher's stone? 
Pointing to the pictures in his study, he said, ' You are come too 
late; I have found the philosopher's stone without other science 
than lies in my palettes and brushes. ' Our Flemish masters were 
great creatures. They may march abreast with the Titians and 
the Raphaels, but they are less known, because European education 
is yet too circumscribed to open to the public the true history of 
the middle ages, north of the Tiber. The story of Vandyke is a 
romance. " 

" And where may it be found?" asked Sir Frederick, eagerly. 

The lady paused for a moment. 

" Do you proceed to Brussels, monsieur? " 

" I believe this evening ; at least, I had intended to do so. " 

" And how long do you remain there? " 

"That must depend on circumstances; on those whom I may 
meet there. I have hitherto travelled under a lucky star ! " 

" You wish to have a copy of Vandyke, " said the lady, evasively : 
" would you not prefer an original? " 

Sir Frederick smiled, and hesitated with the coolness of a con- 
noisseur. 

"Why, yes, " he said; " but there maybe circumstances to 
render a copy infinitely precious. " 

The artist took a card from her portfolio, and wrote with a 
pencil on the back :— " Monsieur Jans sens, fabricant de den- 

15.. 



214 



THE PRINCESS. 



telle, la Putter ie, No. 3, a Bruxelles. Presents par Mad. Mar- 
guerite. " 

" This card, " she said, "will give you admittance to the col- 
lection of a worthy tradesman, descended by the female line from 
Vandyke. You will see there a fine picture of the great master 
which is for sale ; and you will hear from the .Tansseris family more 
of Vandyke traditionally, than books have yet given. To know the 
Flemish masters, you must study them both pictorially, and morally 
on their own soil, among their posterity. " 

" And where are we to find, " he replied, as he read the card, 
uC the Flemish mistresses? " 

" Which of our female artists? " she asked with naivete. " We 
have produced many eminent women in the arts. To begin with 
Marguerite Van Eykc, the sister of Hubert artd John. She 
cultivated her art with such devotion, that she made a vow to St. 
Beghe, the patroness of the Be'gumes, never to marry. By the 
bye, you should see the Beguinage here ; it is one of the great 
features of Ghent. " 

" I intend to do so this evening :— But did Margaret keep her 
vow? " asked Sir Frederick, endeavouring to fix the evasion of the 
adroit artist. 

" Oh ! most religiously, though she had many offers of marriage. 
There are women, with whom a great cause supersedes all personal, 
all human weaknesses. " 

" Weaknesses ! " reiterated Sir Frederick. " Do you call the all 
we know or guess of happiness on earth, a weakness? " 

" Are not all first predilections that? " she asked, sharply. 
kt Do not women—nay, men, too, frequently mistake the vividness 
of their own young sensations for the perfection of the object that 
awakens them? and though they should not discover their mistake, 
do they not act as if they had? There are few men who do not blush 
for their first loves ; and fewer still, who have not cast them off 
heartlessly— recklessly. " 

Sir Frederick was astounded at the observation, but more at the 
manner in which it was uttered. He had been struck by many 
observations of the singular and original speaker, as having more 
than an accidental relation to his own personal circumstances. 
The suspicion that he was not wholly unknown to her, that he 



THE PRINCESS. 



215 



had met her somewhere before, came with irresistible force upon 
his mind. There was a peculiar seduction in the tone of her voice; 
a voice to which something- within him answered responsively ; a 
voice which, uniting with the snatches he had caught of her fea- 
tures, almost induced him to believe that the Belgian artist was the 
devout and charitable attendant at the death-bed of one, whom it 
was almost madness to remember. 

What a tide of inferences flowed from that supposition ! For a 
moment, they confused, overpowered him ; and they were followed 
by a rush, a revulsion of sensations, rarely experienced after the 
sunny freshness of youth; but which, once experienced, is worth 
all that remains of life, though that life were prolonged for a century. 

Under the impression of these feelings, which passed with the 
rapidity of lightning, leading him from doubt to certainty, and 
again back to utter incredulity, he had silently and nervously follow- 
ed Madame Marguerite to another part of the room, where hung 
a very singular and curious interior, painted by Peter Neess. She 
had begun its description, when Sir Frederick, seizing the white 
small hand that pointed to it, said, with abrupt vehemence — 

" I cannot suffer you to proceed, Madame Marguerite, till you 
answer me one fearful question, with which some of the deepest 
interests of my life are interwoven. Sit down for a moment. Your 
artist eloquence has lost its spell; and an incident — a hope— a fear 
—a doubt— a fancy, with which the arts have no connexion, (nay, I 
will be heard ! ) preoccupies my mind, to the exclusion of every 
other ! " 

She struggled to release her hand, which Sir Frederick held so 
firmly, while with her other she drew her hood across her face. 
Her emotion was evident, whether caused by surprise or by appre- 
hension. But at that moment a group of visiters entered the room, 
and her interlocutor found himself surrounded by Mr. Montague 
St. Leger, Lord Montressor, Lord Alfred, Mr. Tyler, his son and 
daughter, and not a few strangers, of all nations. 

The recognition of the Montressor party was announced by a 
laugh, and by various exclamations, which were not to be mistaken; 
while the Tyler family addressed their acquaintance of the treck- 
schuyt with a cordial and familiar recognition, and an attempt 
at shaking hands that amounted to a seizure. 



216 



THE PRINCESS. 



Almost stunned by the ridiculous embarrassment of his situation, 
Sir Frederick had dropped (as though it were a scorpion) the beauti- 
ful hand which he had clasped with such energy a moment before; 
but he had neither temper nor presence of mind to meet the raillery 
or rebut the suspicion with which he saw every eye and tongue pre- 
pared to assail him. 

" La colo?nbe retrouvee t " shouted Lord Montressor. 

u Et tres mal-a-propos, " said Lord Alfred, looking after the 
hooded figure, as she glided into the motley crowd now filling the 
room ( the overflowing of the trcckschuyt, and of those English 
posters by the sea and land who make Ghent their first halt to and 
from Brussels ). 

" I say, Mottram, " continued Lord Alfred, with a bantering look 
and a deliberate folding of his arms ; " is it true that you have aban- 
doned politics for the arts, as the 'Age' has it? and have we dis- 
turbed your studies here from the life?'''' 

u We are really not accountable for the intrusion, " said Mr. St. 
Leger ; "we should have passed on to Brussels without a surmise 
of your being here, only that very obliging person, your Irish valet- 
de-chambre, recognised Lord Montressor, and gave us some lights 
concerning your present pursuits." 

Sir Frederick only answered by a forced smile, and a few cold 
words and inquiries, pleading indisposition for his detention in Bel- 
gium. 

" Well, my eyes ! " said Mr. Tyler, advancing familiarly; " how 
you must be surprised, fellow-traveller, to see us, too, no further 
than Gong. A pretty business we have made on it ! Lost our 
places in the Hinglish diligence as plies between this old barrack of 
a town and Brussels; and our humbrellas too— all owing to that 
whelp there eating too much of the Hostend gingerbread, and get- 
ting a touch of the blue cholera ! Never so frightened in all my life ! 
Not a potticur in the whole place as can speak Hinglish ; and we 
couldn't muster as much French among us as would ask for Glauber's 
salts; after all it cost me, too, for my darter's hedication at a French 
boarding-school. " 

" La ! pa, how can you talk so ! " said Miss Tyler, pulling back 
her father, and saluting Sir Frederick. " I suppose, Sir Frederick, 
you have stopped to see thepicturs; they are so very fine ! an't they? 



THE PRINCESS. 



217 



Your own gentleman, Mr. Fegan, told us that you are such a lover 
of the harts ; and were all the morning looking at the halter-pieces 
and fine things in these old-fashioned churches. I'm sure, had we 
known you were going, we should have been so 'appy to have join- 
ed you." 

" To be sure," said the father; u and then we might have 
clubbed to pay them popish feilors in the sashes and halberts as 
shows the tombs. It's a great himposition : though, for that, 
I must say they're nothing to Westminster Habbey, or St. Paul's." 

" Are these your compagnons de voyage, " asked Lord Alfred, 
directing his laughing eyes alternately to the several members of the 
Tyler family. 

u What a splendid collection! said Lord Montressor, looking 
round with an ecpiivocal glance. Come, Mottram, do the honours ; 
you seem quite at home here. —By Jove ! Alfred, look at that Charles 
the First, star, ribbon, and all, by Lely. " 

" I doubt that much, " said Lord Alfred : " how the devil should 
a Lely get here? " 

" IIow very like the late Marquis of Abercorn!" said Mr. St. 
Leger. 

u All the Stuart pictures are, " said Lord Montressor. 

" Is that the man that walked and talked half-an-hour after his 
head was cut off?" asked Master Tyler of his sister. 

" Don't you see he has got his 'ead on his shoulders, you foolish 
boy?" said the father. " Well, we shall see what they'll do for 
you at Idleberg." 

" Look, I beseech you," said Lord Montressor ; " here is a Leo- 
nardo da Vinci : I'd swear to it ! What a picture ! Don't you agree 
with me, Mottram? " 

" I am quite sure you are wrong, " said Sir Frederick, peevishly, 
yet endeavouring to master his feelings. " There are not half-a- 
dozen Leonardos out of Italy. This is a Flemish picture. " 

t4 I'll bet fifty guineas it's a Leonardo, " said Lord Montressor, in 
all the doggedness of ignorant pretension. 

" It would be a bubble bet, " said Sir Frederick. " The picture 
is marked in the catalogue here, ' by Mabuse, a Hungarian. ' I 
know his manner ; and have two of his pictures at Mottram Hall. 
Mabuse studied in Italy, and copied Leonardo with such success, 



218 



THE PRINCESS. 



that in England ( where he resided some time as court-painter) his 
pictures frequently passed for the works of that master. His finest 
pictures, however, are at Amsterdam. He was much noticed by 
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who was amused by his buffoon- 
eries. " 

" Diavolo I " exclaimed Lord Alfred ; " Mottram has been study- 
ing the great masters to some purpose ;— or rather, perhaps, the 
great mistresses. " 

" If here ar'n't boys flying kites, as like Bill and TomWilkins 
of our street as two peas!— look, father!''' interrupted the victim 
of gingerbread, forcibly stricken by the truth of a beautiful Cuyp. 

" Ay, surely," said Mr. Tyler, " it's well worth coming all the 
way to Gong, to see them there chaps, that are the nuisance of our 
street, stuck against a wall here,— or, at all events, the likes of sich 
brats. " 

LL Have you a mind for a bet, sir, on this picture ?" said Lord 
Montressor, turning towards Mr. Tyler, with whom he was infinitely 
amused, as a specimen of some unknown species of the social genus 
— something he had only seen in a play, or read of in a novel or a 
magazine. 

Mr. Tyler drew back appalled, suspecting that he had fallen in 
with a party of blacklegs. Tucking a child under either arm, he 
replied : 

" I, sir, bet ! No, sir — not I. Never made a bet in my life ; off 
the Exchange, at least. Besides, sir, I see nothing purticlar in these 
here picturs. They're all black and dirty ; nothing to compare to 
Somerset-house picturs, where they are spick and span new, and 
dressed like gentlemen and ladies of quality. I saw King George 
the Fourth there, in his coronation robes : it was worth a shilling 
to look at alone. But these here are only Monmouth-street picturs, 
and look like men in a play." 

" Pray, Lord Alfred, " said Miss Tyler, who had kept her large 
languishing eyes fixed on the first lord she had ever approached, 
" what is your opinion of Somerset-house this year?" . 

Lord Alfred drew up, horror-struck at the familiar address. The 
father was good fun ; but the easy pertness of the daughter was 
% rather too good.' He looked at her for a moment, and then turned 
on his heel, 



THE PRINCESS. 



219 



" Glad of it! " said the father, chuckling, while Miss coloured and 
tossed her head : " AVhat husiness have you to make up to all the 
flashy fellors that fall in your way? I dare to say, though you take 
him for a lord, he's no such thing; some chap from the west hend. 
one of Howell and James's jackanapes. I've half a mind to ask him 
the price of cotton goods." 

" Why, he is a lord, " said the boy : " Fear'd'em call him 
at the inn ; and sister read their names in a book there — Lord 
somebody. " 

" Lord my eye! — no more a lord than I am; a poor, ill-fed 
looking creatur, as ever I seed, " muttered Mr. Tyler, secretly 
mortified at the contempt with which his daughter had been 
treated. 

Lord Montressor was now in ecstasy before the superb coloured 
drawing of Rubens. He piqued himself on his own collection of 
designs by the great masters. " If this, " he said, " were a get-at- 
able thing, I would bid handsomely for it. But who the devil does 
this collection belong to? we have been led here blindfold, by Mot- 
tram's Paddy. " 

" Don't know at all," said Mr. St. Leger. " Bites done, ami, a 
qui appartient cette collection?" 

The question was addressed to a young man, who, habited 
in a blouse, was recommending a Hobbima to Sir Frederick's 
notice. 

" Cest la collection de Monsieur Scamp , " he replied. 
" Un devos grands seigneurs?" 

" IS on , monsieur , un de nos dons bourgeois : Scamp est un 
nom tres connu en Angleterre." 

" A palpable hit," said Lord Alfred, laughing. 

*' The connoisseur looks like a peasant," said Lord Montressor. 

" And is one, probably," said Mr. St. Leger ; 66 you are now in 
a land of equality, where you must expect to be elbowed at every 
turn. I should like to see a fellow with a waggoner's frock in the 
Stafford gallery!" 

" 1 wish I knew the subject of the drawing, though, " continued 
Lord Montressor. 

" It is the miracle of St. Benoit," said the Blouse, in good En- 
glish, " a sketch drawn and coloured by Rubens. It was made in 



220 THE PRINCESS. 

the Abbey of Afflinghem, near Alost, after Rubens had painted the 
famous picture of St. Roch, for the cathedral of that town. He 
promised the monks to return, and paint the subject in grand for 
their refectory, but he never did; and the place for it on the walls 
was kept vacant ever since till the suppression of all monasteries by 
the French." 

Sir Frederick Mottram, meantime, had escaped. Arrived in the 
open air, he breathed freely, and walked rapidly he knew not whi- 
ther, anxious only to avoid the Kantur, and the Hotel de la poste, 
the place in Ghent ' where Britons most do congregate;' for he felt 
as little desirous to know where Lord Montressor and his party 
were going to, as he was to get involved in their movements. His 
rencontre with his English friends was unlucky : it took him in a 
moment least prepared to make head against the frivolous and 
vexatious impertinences of persons he despised, though he stood 
in check of their opinions. To get out of their way was now his 
object. 

It struck him for a moment, that, as the two gentlemen were with- 
out their wives, they might be in pursuit of a wife for the third ; 
and that the wealthy and odious Princess of Schaffenhausen was the 
game in view. If so, they were probably on their way to her castle 
on the Rhine, for which Galignani had announced her departure from 
London. But another subject occupied his mind to the exclusion of 
every thought less interesting — his passing conviction that Madame 
Marguerite, the Belgian artist, was the mysterious guide of his | 
wayward wanderings. Still the idea was but passing ; and a thou- 
sand improbabilities rose to crush it in its infancy. He believed he \ 
had taken the wish for the fact. Her eloquence and her beauty had 
bewitched, excited him. He blushed for the liberty he had taken, j 
for the emotion he had betrayed. 

He thought, therefore, that he would think no more about the 
adventure, or its heroine ; and he wandered on, thinking of nothing 
else, and least of all of the route he was taking. Thoroughly preoc- 
cupied, he continued his way through narrow streets, to which the 
lofty houses gave a sombre appearance, and their mossy pavements 
a desolate one. Stepped and architectural houses rose on either 
side, until the silent streets broke into straggling suburbs, which 
gradually opened into a noble avenue, shaded by long lines of lofty 



THE PRINCESS. 



£21 



trees. The scene became wholly changed. Tillage, gardens, and 
hop-grounds came thick upon the eye ; and a gay and beautiful 
landscape succeeded to a gloomy and dilapidated town. 

As Sir Frederick advanced, a cloud of dust involved all around 
him in its mists ; and the next instant a hritzka, drawn by five 
horses, passed on. Three gentlemen in the interior made signs to 
each other, and laughed; and then took off their hats. It was Lord 
Montressor and his party. Next came the diligence anglaise, ap- 
pointed, as if to start from Charing-cross. It was full, inside and 
out. Miss Susan's straw bonnet and cherry ribbons flaunted through 
the open window. The Tylers, pere et fils, were perched on the 
roof. They all saluted their " fellow-traveller ; " and Sir Frederick 
thought, that, however it may have fared with the age of chivalry, 
fhe age of incognito was gone for ever ! 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE BEGUINAGE. 

The English travellers had passed on ; the afternoon diligences had 
departed; the artificial life which is given to Ghent during the early 
part of the summer and autumnal days, by the ' entre'es and the 
exits 1 of English tourists (all treading the same track, directed and 
bear-led), had subsided. Sir Frederick Mottram, however, still re- 
mained at the Hotel de la Poste, the last man in the world who 
might have been expected so to linger, where few of his country find 
food for curiosity, beyond what a morning's course can fully satisfy. 
What, then, was the spell that ruled him? A new interest had 
fallen, like a charm, over Belgium and its cause. Was it the ro- 
mance of its ancient story, the splendour of its wondrous artists, 
the familiar names of its forests and fortresses, consecrated as they 
are by events connected with the heroism of Europe ? Or was it 
some other influence that had touched on the long-latent spring of 

10. 



222 



THE PRINCESS. 



excitement, and replaced the bitterness of irritated feelings by a series j 
of light and pleasant emotions? 

Returning to the Hotel de la Poste, he had dropped into a book- 
seller's shop, to purchase a map of the Low Countries ; and had 
picked up a little work, whose vignette had first attracted his eye, 
and whose pages engaged his attention. The title was, ' Precis 
Historique des Troubles de Bruxelles en 1718. ' The patriot 
hero of the tale was the venerable Anneessens, a citizen and a trades- 
man of Brussels, whose strange story and devoted constancy in the 
face of tyranny wanted only the high-sounding titles of Horn or 
d'Egmont, to have obtained a celebrity as wide-spread and enduring 
as theirs. So deep was the interest excited by the well-told tale, 
that Sir Frederick had placed the book beside him while he dined ; 
and he was still so occupied by the heart-rending narrative, that j 
Fegan had made several attempts to attract his notice without suc- 
cess. 

Li I humbly ax your pardon, Sir Frederick," he at length said, as 
he displaced the dessert and replaced the carafes and glasses he had i 
in his nervous restlessness just removed; — "1 humbly ax your ho- 
nor's pardon; but there is a great music after the salute, as they call) 
it here, sir, this evening, at the church of the Beguinage. " 

Sir Frederick appeared still preoccupied with his book : he was 
too much offended with Fegan's officious interference in bringing 
the Montressor party upon him in the morning, to yield himself with* 
complacency to his chattering. Too fine a gentleman to expostu- 
late with servants, he had ever found it easier and more dignified 
to part with them; and having made up his mind to discharge Fegan 
at Brussels, he had not paused to notify his anger in the interim. 
Fegan, therefore, who believed his involuntary fault forgiven, be*-* 
cause it had not been reproved, presumed on the supposition, andl 
indulged in his usual garrulity ; which Irish servants, even after a 
long experience of English reserve, always feel it so difficult to re- 
strain. 

Ci And so plaze your honor, " continued Fegan, drawing up,, 
61 if I was sure it's what we did not go to Brussels this evening, sir, 
I'd be after axing your lave, Sir Frederick, to go to the salute at the 
Baginage, in regard of the music, and the eight hundred faymales— 
a greet sight. And there is a young leedy's maid, who lives with an 



THE PRINCESS. 



223 



ould English gentlewoman down below on the promineed, called 
jtheConpnre, nigh to the Rue de Soleil, hard by, convainient to the 
canal, who offered to take me, if your honor hasn't any call for me. 
to see the Baginage, and hear the music, sir ? " 

w * You may go, " said sir Frederick, without taking his eye from 
his book ; but not a little amused at the topographical knowledge 
acquired by his servant during a single day. In half an hour after- 
wards he was himself on his way to the Grand Beguinage. 

The Grand Beguinage of Ghent is a curious fragment of the mo- 
nastic establishments of the Low Countries. The institution, 
unique in its kind, is altogether Belgian; having been founded by 
Beghe, the daughter of Pepin ofLanden, and the mother of Pepin- 
le-Gros, in the middle of the seventh century. Other orders rose 
and fell in the long interval of eleven hundred years ; but female 
sensibility preserved what female sensibility had created ; and the 
Biiguines of Brussels, Ghent, and Bruges, renowned through suc- 
cessive ages of warfare and civil commotion for the ministering cha- 
rily of the sisterhood, were suffered to exist even by that destruc- 
tive power which had suppressed all other monkish institutions,— 
the power of the French Revolution. They still, therefore, remain, 
in spirit and in form, curious monuments of times w hose barbarism 
i and social maladroitness called for and produced a superhuman 
enthusiasm, to repair its mischiefs, and to pour oil and wine into 
the festering wounds of outraged humanity. 

The sun was setting in cloudless glory, and its beams were caught 
by the vane of that historical belfry, of which the Gantois are so 
proud, and from which Charles the Fifth showed the Duke of Alva 
the extent of the magnificent city which the minister proposed to 
raze to the ground. * The ornamented gables of the ancient buil- 
dings were steeped in crimson light, and the Gothic casements shone 
like an artificial illumination. The brazen dragon, carried off from 
Bruges in the time of the crusades, was bright above all ; and the 
carillon of the square tower beneath pealed forth a quaint Flemish 
melody, to which the sober citizens seemed to move in just time and 

* " Quand le Due ful descendu, l'Empereur lui demanda combien il croyail 
qu'il fallait de peaux d'Espagne pour faire un gant de cetle grandeur ? 
The pun is untranslatable. 



THE PRINCESS. 



measure. It was still the Ghent of the Arleveldcs ; * and it ad- 
dressed itself to the imagination of one, whose views of soeiety had 
hitherto been directed to external forms, more than to the great 
movements of the social springs on which the happiness of masses 
depends. 

Sir Frederick had already reached the solitary quarter of the 
Beguinage before he was aware of his approach. He stood in the 
midst of the irregular space, which resembles the close of an En- 
glish cathedral. A Gothic and very ancient church formed its 
centre. One venerable tree threw out its far-spreading foliage. 
Numerous small and curious buildings rose irregularly on every 
side, each distinct from the other, and closed by a narrow door, 
having over it a niche fdled by the image of a saint, or the horrors 
of a crucifixion. From the casement was generally suspended a 
basket of shrubs and flowers, the cultivation of which formed the 
only enjoyment permitted to the servants of God and sisterhood of 
charity. All around was solitary and silent, save only the tolling 
of the bell which announced the coming ceremony. Sir Frederick 
paused for a moment, doubtful whether he might proceed to the 
church, into which the officiating priests, with their floating stoles, 
their broad sashes, and cocked hats under their arms, had already 
eutered. 

The bell ceased, and every door flew open. A strange rout of 
forms peopled the hitherto vacant court, which realised, by their 
phantom air, the opening of the tombs of some monastic cemetery, 
and the giving up of their buried vestals. Nearly seven hundred of 
the sisterhood, habited in the strange dress, which admits of no 
distinction of outline, hurried from the surrounding dwellings. 
Some hobbled, some glided, some tripped, as disparity of age and 
spirits inclined or compelled. A few, in more flowing drapery, 
were mantled and veiled by that coquettish remnant of the Spanish 
toilet, so universal in Brabant, the faille— the long pending black 
silk scarf which falls from the head to the feet, and is managed by 
the expert with an art early acquired, to conceal or to reveal, as the 
views of the wearer, may happen to direct. All passed on, all 

* A name now rendered familiar to the English reader by the beautiful 
dramatic poem of Mr. Taylor. 



THE PROCESS. 



225 



poured into the open portals of the church ; save some lagging' or 
ancient sister, infirm or over-cautious, stopping to take in her 
birdcage, to close her casement, or to turn the key in the door of 
her little menage. 

But, among the pious sisterhood, Sir Frederick did not discover 
any figure resembling that of the religieuse of the hospital of 
St Jean, la Soeur G?*eite of the Tour des Princes. 

Sir Frederick, with an arriere-pensee, scarcely acknowledged 
to himself, that Madame Marguerite, by naming the Beguinage, had 
given him a sort of indication that she too might be of the congre- 
gation, approached the entrance of the church at the moment when 
the Blouse of the Scamp gallery arrived at it. A slight bow of 
mutual recognition was exchanged; a certain air of the world, 
never to be mistaken under any disguise, convinced the fastidious 
English gentleman, that the supposed peasant in the waggoner's 
frock, who talked virtic with the decision of one well versed in his 
subject, was in fact himself a gentleman, and that it was perfectly 
safe to address him. 

'* I believe," he said, smiling, "it is permitted to strangers to 
join this fair congregation and offer up a prayer to St. Beghe." 

u Oh yes ! Allow me to conduct you. St. Beghe is a most liberal 
saint, and her sisterhood are as little cagotes as herself." 

14 What a multitude .'"said Sir Frederick, pausing at the threshold 
of the temple. 

" This is the etat-major of the order," said the Blouse. " The 
sisters are well lodged here, and live, you see, with open doors. 
They have never, in fact, been cloistered ; their vocation is with the 
world." 

" And do they take no vows?" asked Sir Frederick. 

ci Pardon, monsieur I they make one vow — that of chastity, for 
the time being. It happened shortly before our revolution, that a young 
gentleman of high family in Brussels fell in love with a young and 
beautiful artist. They were on the point of being married, when 
their friends interfered and separated them. The young man nearly 
lost his reason, and the girl threw herself into the order of the 
Beguines. The revolution arrived. They were not idle, the 
Beguines, during the Four Days ; and the young artist was among 
the most active in attending on the ambulances. Her lover was 

10.. 



226 



THE PRINCESS. 



among the wounded patriots ; and her skill and attention saved 
his life. They fled together from the hospital, were married, and 
enjoyed a few months of perfect felicity, and then were separated 
for ever ! His wound re-opened, and a consumption ensuing, he 
died, leaving her a small income. She has again retired to our 
Beguinage, and is now one of the sceurs cha?nbrees or semi-de- 
votes, to whom the coiffe is protection ; and who, adopting the 
habit of the order when they please, go about, of course doing 
works of faith and charily, for the love of Our Lady, and of St. Beghe." 

kt There is a Madame Marguerite," said Sir Frederick, with some 
hesitation, " whom I have accidentally met— an artist, —who, from 
her dress, may be one of these Barnes chambrees." 

" Perhaps," said the Blouse. u But she is gone to Brussels. 
She passed you in that caleche which' issued from the gates of le 
Petit Beguinage as you entered." 

Sir Frederick was something stunned by the information. It 
was not exactly the intelligence which his amour-propre was pre- 
pared for. 

They had now entered the church : some hundreds of white coifs 
and black habits tilled its vast nave; and groups of black-mantled 
females knelt in front of the altar. The greater number, with their 
faces buried in their hoods, seemed lost in perfect abstraction and 
intensity of prayer. But here and there, a pale and melancholy 
female, with her visage raised towards the altar-piece, seemed as if 
in personal colloquy with the protecting saint : her hands, at the 
same time, being extended above the level of the head, and preserved 
steadily without motion, gave to such figures the perfect resem- 
blance of a statue, as beautiful and as lifeless. In this mass of 
female devotion, one male head alone was visible beyond the altar 
rails where the officiating priest stood in his clerical habiliments : it 
was the Irish head of Lawrence Fegan. 

Notwithstanding an abstraction of mind that had carried his 
thoughts far from the Beguinage of Ghent, the music which fol- 
lowed the short and simple ceremony of the salut gradually en- 
grossed the attention of the English connoisseur. The contrast of 
the instrumental music with the not very harmonious voices of the 
sisterhood was marked. Sir Frederick was entranced. He asked 
the name of the composer. 



THE PRINCESS. 



227 



It is by our compatriot Gretry, " replied the Blouse, "his 
famous morceau the 4 Confitebor tibi Bomine, ' which he com- 
posed at Rome, and sent to his native city, Liege, to be played on 
some public occasion. It has been appropriately chosen by the 
lady who gives this fete to the sisterhood of St. Beghe : for the 
saint was, like Gretry, a native of that focus of Belgian genius and 
patriotism, the province of Liege. " 

" And what is the occasion of this fete?" 

" It is given by a lady who received her early education and shel- 
ter in some passing adversity, it is said, in a Belgian Beguinage. 
She is the widow of a Belgian Prince too, Madame SchafTenhausen." 

Sir Frederick started ; and the divine harmonies of Gretry breath- 
ed in vain. Without the courage to ask if the Princess was 
present, he resolved to depart for Brussels immediately ; and 
scarcely waiting for the conclusion of the Confiteor, he took leave 
of his friend in the Blouse, with many acknowledgments, and 
almost with regret. He had scarcely, however, issued from the 
gates of the chapel, when he was followed by his new acquaintance, 
who presented him a card which he had dropped in drawing out 
his handkerchief. It was the address of the lace-manufacturer of 
La Puterie. 

Sir Frederick, in acknowledging the civility, observed, that " he 
should have been sorry to have lost it ; it was the address of a 
person to whom he had been recommended to show him a fine pic- 
ture by Vandyke." 

"You will be much gratified," replied the Belgian. "The 
entrance to such houses in Brussels will lay open to you cabinets of 
living antiquity quite as curious as their own collections. Brussels 
contains two distinct worlds— two ages. Our salons in the Haute 
Ville affect the tone and manners of French society, and are alto- 
gether European ; but the Basse Ville is a chronicle of the old times, 
a monument of the Flemish manners of former ages. Its society 
is composed exclusively of those ancient and respectable families, 
who pride themselves on preserving unaltered the customs, habits, 
and language of their forefathers. It is really a pleasure to breathe 
the perfume of antiquity they exhale ; for with them alone is to be 
found the rude but frank simplicity, dignified with certain eti- 
quettes, as old as the time of Albert and Isabella. " 



228 



THE PRINCESS. 



" I fear," said Sir Frederick, as they walked along, " that my 
visit as a purchaser of pictures will not obtain me admission to view 
and study these originals. " 

f May I beg to know by whom you are recommended to M. Jans- 
sens? 1 ' 

" By Madame Marguerite. " 

' u Madame Marguerite gives us a picture herself for our exhibition 
this year, taken from an episode of the Four Days. " 
" Are you acquainted with her?" 

" Scarcely. She is one of those persons who are plus celebres 
que connues; bull have seen her works —e'est un pinceau hardi." 

They had now reached the Hotel de la poste. Horses were put- 
ting to a calash at the gate. Sir Frederick had already made up his 
mind to leave for Brussels instanter. He had two motives for the 
abruptness of his resolution : the Princess of Schaifenhausen was 
probably at Ghent, and Madame Marguerite was positively at Brus- 
sels. 

" Can I have horses? " he asked. 

" The only horses we have, we are putting to for this gentleman," 
replied the ostler. " We should have secured horses for you, sir; 
but your valet said you would remain at Ghent this evening. " 

At this moment Fegan appeared, crossing the Kantur, with a 
smart grisette hanging on each arm. They were upon the point of 
entering the theatre to the left of the hotel ; but Sir Frederick beck- 
oned to Fegan, who with a confused look obeyed the call, and his 
two protegees passed unescorted into the salle de spectacle. 

The gentleman in the blouse had made a proposition, to which 
Sir Frederick readily acceded, that they should proceed together in 
the calash as far as Alost, where the former was going to remain for 
a few days ; and that the latter should there take fresh horses for 
Brussels, which he might easily reach by midnight. 

In five minutes the carpet-bags of the English traveller were 
disposed of in the carriage, and he was seated tete-a-tete with his 
new friend ; while Fegan, who occupied the box, always delighted 
with change and ready for movement, scarcely gave a sigh to the 
ladies of his thoughts, then quietly awaiting his arrival in the par- 
terre of the theatre. 

Fegan's was the true Irish temperament, to which excitement is 



THE PRINCESS. 



229 



always welcome and change pleasant ; and to him might have been 
appropriated that motto of the ancient knights— " Dieu, le roi, et 
les dames, " which expresses no higher principle than the instinct 
by which Fegan was animated, to pray, to love, and to fight, when 
and wherever the occasion might offer. As yet the gentle and even 
disposition of the good Flemings had furnished him with no oppor- 
tunity for indulging the last of these propensities ; and the organ of 
roiving, that predominant organ in Irish phrenology, had remained 
in abeyance. 

The evening was as delicious and balmy as ever followed an Italian 
sunset. The noble road through which the travellers passed, exhi- 
bited on every side evidences of the prosperity of the people : hop- 
grounds, that looked lilie miniature forests ; red-tiled and white- 
washed cottages, draped with vines and surrounded by gardens 5 
w ith reposing groups seated at the doors in the enjoyment of their 
evening's carouse, that repeated in endless succession the groupings 
of Teniers and the compositions of Ostade. 

Sir Frederick was sunk for the first half hour in one of those 
pleasant reveries derived from health and the influence of new and 
pleasant objects on an excited imagination. He smiled to find him- 
self journeying in company with an utter stranger; and to find that 
stranger, though dressed like one of the peasantry of the country, 
of elegant manners, and full of intelligence and local information. 
On taking off his glove, the Belgian had displayed a very white hand ; 
an antique ring sparkled on his finger, and he had struck a tiny 
repeater as they left the barrier of Ghent. Could this be a specimen 
of the Belgian yeoman, or of the gentleman farmer of Brabant? A 
few r words which fell from him, leading to the inference that he had 
recently visited Italy, set conjecture again at work. 

" There is just now," he said, " in the horizon, that beautiful 
green tint, so prevalent in the sunset skies of Italy 5 and something 
in these fertile plains, that recalls the luxurious richness of the plains 
of Lombardy. " 

" It is astonishing," said Sir Frederick, " that, with such agri- 
cultural prosperity, the Belgians ever thought of trying the hazardous 
experiment of a revolution." 

" It is, at least, a proof that we had wants of a higher character 
than corn and hops can supply," was the spirited answer. 



230 



THE PRINCESS. 



" And yet there seems to be some discrepancy of opinion concern- 
ing the necessity of the revolution, even among the very few persons 
with whom I have had occasion to speak." 

" This ever must be the case, where particular interests are com- 
pelled to give place to a general impulse : but these local and per- 
sonal differences must eventually disappear. Even now, the bitterness 
of discussion is passing away ; and all classes are beginning to settle 
down in their new political position, like travellers in a diligence 
after the first stage. Should foreign intrigue or local inconveniences 
interfere with this coming unity, and again sound the tocsin of dis- 
content, they will only serve to mark how small and circumscribed 
are the exceptions to that unanimity which binds our several pro- 
vinces in one sentiment of national emulation and national inde- 
pendence. As far as we have hitherto gone, every measure of the 
government ( the most national government of Europe ) has been a 
positive advance in the march of improvement. Our ministers are 
men of business. We have no Alberonis, no Kaunitzes, no Talley- 
rands, none of the old school of diplomacy, of the finessing and 
Jesuitical school of the Italians, introduced by women and priests 
into the north and west of Europe. Our ministers must be of the 
people, and with the people, and for the people. Their views, their 
sympathies, must be popular and Belgian : and this is one of the 
causes of the vigilance of our opposition, who fear French influence, 
and dislike the returning power of the priesthood.'' 1 

" Have you then a liberal opposition in your Chambers? One 
might think the measures of your government sufficiently popular in 
themselves— republican, indeed, to satisfy the most exageres." 

tf Oh yes! we have an opposition, a very strenuous and a very 
honest one, standing on the frontiers of national opinion, and watch- 
ing the insidious advance of the insidious principle of the juste- 
milieu; which is suspected of influencing deeply even the most 
liberal cabinets of Europe." 

The travellers now reached Alost, the frontier town between Flan- 
ders and Brabant; whose ancient forms, and fine Gothic church, 
were rendered more striking by the dim light through which they 
were seen. The gentlemen left the carriage, and continued their 
conversation under the porch of the inn, to which the slow move- 
ments of the Brabancon ostler afforded sufficient time. A mounted 



THE PRINCESS. 



231 



groom with a led horse was waiting for the Blouse, who, in un- 
buckling the belt which bound his waist, and exchanging his casquet 
for a hat, observed— 

" I strongly recommend you to adopt the blouse, if you are tra- 
velling through the Low Countries. It is light, loose, and clean; 
and, above all, popular beyond expression." 

" Add, too, " said Sir Frederick, " that it is a most becoming- 
dress. Is it a revolutionary costume? it has an extremely liberty and 
equality air. " 

" Yes ; the Altesses Bruxelloises of Maria Theresa's epoch would 
rather stare to see even the ordre equestre, or petite noblesse, wear 
ing a blouse. But it bears on the great past, and greater present. It 
was, as we see by the illuminated portraits in the Bibliotheque de 
Bourgogne at Brussels, the prevailing dress of the Low Countries 
during the fifteenth century. Philippe-le-Bon wears it in one of his 
many pictures ; and, to go still further back, it is the Belgian dress 
described by the Roman writers under the name of the Sagnm. It 
was then probably made, as it now frequently is, of the toile de 
chanvre. The chemises were of serge ; for sheep were always 
abundant here, and the drap de Flandre, et de Brabant, before 
all record. But our belouse or blouse, which once made an item of 
the toilet of our native sovereigns, had fallen into desuetude under 
the Spanish and Austrian regime; and, since the sixteenth century, 
had been confined to the peasantry, or used, as the least encumbering 
of all possible dishabilles, by our young men of business, artisans, 
and artists, in their workshops, counting-houses, and studies. 
Thus dressed, the revolution found them, when the bells of the city 
tolled to arms : and habited as they were, they rushed to the combat 
with such weapons as chance offered. In the hands of the brave, 
every weapon becomes effective ; and so the blouse became the uni- 
form of the Garde Bourgeoise. When you see that corps drawn 
out in Brussels, you will say that their uniform is not only the best 
adapted to military enterprise, but the most picturesque costume 
which a soldier can adopt." 

" It is strange," said Sir Frederick, " that the blouse is still to 
be found among the peasantry of our agricultural counties ; and is 
worn upon the road, though in white linen, under the denomination 
of a waggoner's frock." 



233 



THE PRINCESS. 



" You, doubtless, received it from the Low Countries, with our 
art of making broad-cloth, our municipal institutions, the produce 
of our kitchen-gardens, and many other valuable adaptations. But 
I fear I have wearied you with antiquarian trifling. It is, however, 
my passion : and if in that particular I can be of any use to you 
at Brussels, which abounds in monuments of the middle ages, pray 
command me." 

Sir Frederick accepted gratefully what was offered so frankly. 
Cards were exchanged ; and on reading the name of the stranger, 

he found that he had made the acquaintance of Monsieur Van H , 

the accomplished author of that historical tract, which had so deeply 
interested him, the Precis Eistorique des Troubles de Bruxelles 
en 1718. 

Like the other accidental acquaintances he had made, Mons. Van 

H was a type of the character and national feelings of the 

Belgian youth of the day, and one among the many illustrations of 
the beneficial change in the character of a people effected by the 
removal of oppressive and anti-national institutions. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE BRUSSELS POST-BAG. 

If the popularity of the new Belgian government, or of the sove- 
reign whom the people had chosen for their king, were to be mea- 
sured by the public satisfaction at the birth and baptism of a national 
prince, as exhibited in the capital and leading towns, it might be 
thought that a monarchy in name, and a republic in substance, was 
the most popular form of government in Europe. 

The ceremony of the royal christening, celebrated with considerable 
dramatic effect in the noble cathedral of St. Gudule, was over; but 
the confusion, bustle, and temporary increase of population which 
it had occasioned, were still visible in the streets of Brussels. Some 



THE PRINCESS. 



233 



were detained by the pressure of business, others by the pursuits 
of pleasure, and many by the necessity of awaiting post-horses ; but 
all probably contributed to swell not a little the revenue of the 
Belgian post-office, and to cram ambassadors' bags to overflowing. 

While every hotel in Brussels contributed its quota, the letters of 
the guests of the Bellevue alone would have furnished a folio of 
evidence for future history ; and it would have been curious to 
compare the various views thus transmitted of the same scenes or 
facts by different individuals 5 and to note the vast divergences of 
truth, as refracted by intellects of various density. Among the epis- 
tles thus despatched to England, there might have been selected 
expressions of the feelings and prejudices of all classes in British 
society. Testimonies thus given upon foregone conclusions, may 
survive to puzzle future Dalrymples, to mislead a Robinson, or force 
a Thiers or Barante of another age to sigh for the simple chronicles 
of earlier times, when the positive fact was given without note or 
comment, and a date or a name supplied the place of an opinion. 

Of this diversity, the following letters may afford a not inadequate 
sample. 

Letter 

" TO THE HON. MRS. MONTAGUE ST. LEGER, AT THE DOWAGER 
DUCHESS OF LUDLOW'S, BROOK-STREET, LONDON. 

" Bellevue, Brussels. 

•* My dear Fan, — We arrived here last night, and were lodged 
with difficulty in the Bellevue : the town overflowing, in consequence 
of the royal christening ; car on singe les legitimes. Never saw 
anything like it : but, alas ! what a change ! I miss every one of our 
old set of Twenty-nine. The Duke D'Aremberg gone; the Prince ill, 
and sees no one ; De Ligne gone ; the De Trazigneys absent. The 
story of the Faubourg St. Germain over again. We have secured 
rooms au premier for the Marchioness, Lady Frances, and tutte 
quante; for they will be vacant when the Confederation arrives. 
Leopold is going on a royal progress, and there will be nobody here 
till the anniversary of the Four Days, when the braves Beiges are 

17. 



234 



THE PRINCESS. 



to do all manner of things in their own praise and glory. Observe, 
I have engaged the rooms by the day ; for I'm sure you'll be glad to 
be off as soon as you can. 

" The Place Royale, the Park, and all this quarter of the town, 
were the great scene of the Four Days ; and they still bear the marks 
of the fact. The Bellevue, which was riddled with bullets, has been 
put again into repair ; but the next house to it is a ruin ; and there 
is scarcely a tree in the noble avenue of the Park, which does not 
bear the marks of balls, while the statues fall far short of their due 
complement of noses and members. The tree of liberty, figurez- 
vous, and the tri-coloured flag, are planted before the King's Palace 
and in the Place Royale. The people meantime are plodding about, 
as if nothing had happened, and the whole country is a pays de co~ 
cagne, as far as we have come— a perfect paradise. 

" I strongly advise your pushing on for the Rhine now, and re- 
serving your visit to the Hague till your return. There are very 

few English at Brussels; but Lady D , who remained through 

the Four Days, has given such descriptions ! She was present when 
the poor dear Prince of Orange made his entree, when he marched 
at the head of his army from Vilvorde, with the intention of taking 
military possession of the city. Unluckily, instead of proceeding 
immediately, when he would have found the town unprepared for 
resistance, he lost considerable time in negotiations. A deputation 
of the citizens, with tri-coloured cockades, came out from the city 
and persuaded him to enter Brussels, accompanied only by his etat- 
major; which he did, leaving six thousand men and twenty pieces 
of cannon behind him. At the head of this deputation was, only 
think!— a Baron D'Hoogvorst, who belongs to one of the noblest 
families of Belgium. But he is a sort of Lafayette, in his way. 

"The Prince's entre'e was announced for midday, by his aide-de- 
camp, our pleasant friend De Cruykenbourg ; and about four thou- 
sand men of the Garde Bourgeoise were arranged in battle array 
near the Laeken gate, to receive him. Escorted by these soldats in- 
promptu, and accompanied by six generals and two domestics in 
livery, he entered the town. Several English ladies followed him, 
and got on the steps of the Hotel-de-Fille, to see the spectacle. The 
Prince rode on with his usual air ouvert, que vous lui connaissez. 
On arriving in front of the line, the air was filled with tri-coloured 



0> 



THE PRINCESS. 



235 



flags. Every post had its standard ; and those of the eight central 
posts were rich and remarkable. Every officer, too, was decorated 
with his scarf and sash ; and even the women and children had the 
national cockade. He looked round for the orange colours, and 
not one appeared. What a moment for the hero of Waterloo ! 
Surrounded by the blue blouses, he had more the air of a captive 
than of a sovereign. 

" Thus placed in a false position, the victim of circumstances over 
which he had no control, he was obliged to diplomatize. 

" ' Brave citizens of Brussels, ' he said, ' I thank you ; to you the 
city owes its tranquillity. You see my confidence in you, since I 
place myself under your guard — [the more fool he !] But why all 
this military preparation? Do you think I was coming to destroy 
the capital ? ' 

" And what do you think a fellow in the crowd had the insolence 
to say ? 6 We are no children ; we have had a long and severe expe- 
rience of you 5 and we know well enough what we are about ! ' It 
was deplorable to see his immense popularity gone. A strange man, 
armed to the teeth, rode close beside him; addressed him boldly, 
though in an under tone ; and even appeared to threaten him with 
his bayonet. * 

" At the Marche aux Herbes, the Prince had hoped to file off to 
his own palace, and cried out ' Chez moi, chez moiV but force 
lui fut to follow the line of march. The Regency received him on 
the steps of the H6tel-de-Ville ; when he became pale, and hesitated. 
c Do you think then, 1 he said, 5 gentlemen, that 1 am come to besiege 
your city ? The troops will not attack the King's subjects ; they fight 
only with his enemies. lis n'entreront pas ici ; je suis Beige 
avatit tout. ' 

* " Quand on reftechit a la situation des esprits dans ce jour d'agitation ; 
quand on pense que , du milieu d'un peuple exalte et arme" qui venait de bri- 
ser loutes les enseignes de la royaute" et de fouler aux pieds la cosarde 
orange , el qui faisait souvent entendre des cris sinistres, un coup malheu- 
reux pouvait partir ! on ne peut s 1 empe > cher d'admirer le noble courage du 
Prince d'Orange , se devouant ainsi pour son p£re , pour son roi ! Quel que 
soit l'avenir , ce sera une des belles pages de son histoire. "—Esquisses 
Historiques. 



236 



THE PRINCESS. 



" The fact is, that old Sir Francis Wronghead, le papa grognant, 
was in fault. But for him, our Prince adore would be King of the 
Belgians now : as it is, I fear the game is up for ever. Never was 
such a set of determined blockheads as these braves Beiges. 

Li Now this despatch is for the Confederation of the Rhine in coun- 
cil assembled, either in the blue drawing-room at Arlington-street, 
or in the boudoir couleur de rose on the Terrace. The English, 
with one or two exceptions, are all Orangists ; and so are the haute 
noblesse of the country, except the Vilain XIV., the Merodes, and 
one or two more who committed themselves in the Four Days, and 
so have accepted places under the new regime. The rest have cut 
and run, and the place is absolutely in the hands of the canaille : 
but this cannot last. 

" We went last night to Sir Robert's box at the theatre ; and Mon- 
tressor has fallen desperately in love with a little Belgian actress, 
who played in 6 La Fille de Dominique,^ a Mademoiselle Linsel. 
He says, she is quite as good as Madame Dejazet ; and wants to engage 
her for our French plays. C'est une passion, n'en deplaise d 
miladi. Lord Alfred bat la campagne for his Princess ; her glit- 
tering title sparkles before us in the books of the hotels. But, arri- 
ving here, we have lost the scent, and are fairly thrown out. Her 
servants and carriages are at the Groenendal, an old Brabancon 
auberge, a regular hostel in la Basse Ville. Alfred and I went to 
see it this morning ; but the Princess was not there. She is potter- 
ing about her Belgian terres in a calash. The chasseur thinks 
they will leave Brussels for the Rhine early in the week. Tanto 
meglio. A castle on the Rhine is the place on earth for softening a 
woman's heart. 

" And now for the cream of my letter. While we were waiting 
for post-horses at Ghent, a monstrous odd-looking, flashy Irishman, 
after watching us for some minutes, came flourishing up, hat in 
hand, and announced himself as own man and travelling courier to 
Sir Frederick Mottram. ' His master, ' he said, ' would be happy 
to see our lordships. He was looking at the pictures everywhere, 
and had just left the cathedral for the gallery of one Mr. Scamp. ' 
So to Mr. Scamp's we scampered ; and there we found Sir Frederick 
talking virtu in a niche, huddled up with a veiled lady. I never 
saw a poor fellow so confused or so bored ! 



THE PRINCESS. 



237 



- The lady disappeared on our entrance ; and the great commo- 
ner, evidently patronising the non-intervention principle, soon after 
slipped away himself. We saw no more of him, till, in driving 
along the road without the town, we overtook him in a melancholy- 
Jaques-like mood, walking under the shade of the trees. Can this 
be the stern statesman, the eloquent orator? It is time for Lady 
Frances to look to it ; and we are of opinion that she ought not to 
lose a moment in coming here. We are all impatient to be off from 
Brussels, where we are none of us amused except Montressor, who 
finds that la Fille de Dominique ' a d'assez beaux yeux pour des 
yeux de province. ' As yet, however, he has not gained admit- 
tance to the coulisse, nor been presented to the fair Catharine 
Biancolelli ; les mceurs here are severe. 

" Sans adieu, " B. M. St. Leger. " 

" P.-S. — 1 have pumped the confidential servant, who is a sieve 
of the very first order. His master, it seems, is to go forwards to 
Germany instanter. This have ' 1 thought good to deliver thee, ' 
that thou mayest lay it before the Congress for their information. 
You may add also, that, when there, he is to meet £ a peerty, ' as 
Paddy calls them, ' of Irish quality, ' and a Dr. de Burgo. The 
Doctor, I conclude, is a travelling physician ; but who the devil are 
4 the quality?' B. M. St. L. " 

Letter 

" TO CORNELIUS MACDERMOT, ESQ., ATTORNEY- AT-LAW , SHAN- 
BALLYMAC, KERRY, IRELAND. 

" Hotel de Bellview, Brussels. 

" My dear Corney,— You'll wonder greatly to hear from me 
from this outlandish place ; and it is to my own intire amazement 
surely that I find myself in it; and if I wasn't an ould fool, and the 
biggest breathing this day, sorrow step would I put my foot in it ; 
and may thank my lady and her new doctor, ( a great c/ie shin, sir, 
one Doctor Rodolf de Burgo, a third cousin, once removed, as he 
says, of the Clanrickards but naboclish,) for the way I am in, 

17.. 



238 



THE PRINCESS. 



after spending more money in the last six months than I'd have oc- 
casion for in as many years at Shanballymac, and live like an Irish 
king, and better. 

u This comes hoping that you are we'll, also Mrs. Macdermotand 
the little colleens ; and, secondly, to say that I must draw on you 
for another five hundred pounds to carry on the war; which I hope 
will pay our way to Spaw and back again to Kerry, where my Lady 
Dogherty has been ordered to drink the Spaw water ; she that made 
such wry faces at Ballyspellan, and had the offer of Mount Pleasant, 
near the salt water at Dunleary ( now Kingstown) ! And in regard 
of the five hundred pounds, my dear Macdermot, if there is not so 
much in the till, I'd drive them Morans without delay, and sell off 
the primises. You've been too aisy intirely with them, man alive ! 
Oh ! it's myself knows them well : always a sick child, or a bad 
potatoe saison, and the man a crock, and the woman a poor streal ; 
and they setting up for gentleman farmers, that were no better than 
cotters on Lord Kinmure's estate, till they came and flopped them- 
selves down upon my green acres, divel's luck to them ! offering 
over the heads of the ould tenants, which was the cause of all the 
murthurs, and brought three as fine boys to the gallows as ever 
was hanged, in or out of it. As to the hay harvest, I lave it to 
your own judgment; but sold it must be, with the stock of Clon- 
makillen ; for, my dear Mac, money I must have, cost what it may, 
to get out of this humbugging place, where there was no rebellion 
nor revolution at all ; but just as quiet as Shanballymac, the day 
after the fair. And you'll be wanting the worth of your postage, 
half of which I've to pay myself before they'll let a taste of this 
letter pass the post-office! There's liberality for yez, in the Frinch 
republicans. 

" Well, sir, it's all from bad to worse, from the blessed day I 
bid farewell to the Hill of Howth. I tould you of the ruination 
was going on at Brighton, and the junketting and the picnicking of 
my Lady, and Laura Lady Dickson — and it's prettily picked and 
nicked too we were ; and they tould me by way of a make-weight, 
that I'd get everything here, sir, for nothing at all at all, and thank 
me for taking. Oh ! yes, indeed ! Anyhow, I had my substantial 
rump-stake, and my glass of port, and my tumbler of punch, at 
Brighton, not all as one as here, where I dine at a grand tabledot, 



THE PRINCESS. 



239 



covered over with outlandish dishes, and nothing to ate but just a 
wish-wash of soup and a peck of sparrows, like what the boys after 
a birding roast fifty on a string in Ireland : and, outer new, as my 
Lady says, it a'n't with sparrows and tom-tits that we put off the 
people in th' ould times at the Stag's Horns ; but the best of rounds 
of beef and cabbage, and turkies and trimmings, and the sucking 
chickens and bacon, and greens. But it makes my Lady faint if I 
only hint at them times, trying to consale all from the doctor ; 
as if, sooner or later, the butter won't come out of the stir- 
about. 

" Well, sir, when I axed them here for parceley and buther to 
my boiled fowl, divel be if one of them throughout the whole hotel 
could make out what 1 meant at all at all ! — so judge, sir, whether 
it's an outlandish place or not : and such waiting at table I never 
seen, and am often tempted to snatch the napkin out of the waiter's 
hand, (who calls themselves gossoons, ) and show them the way we 
wait at table in Ireland. 

" Well, sir, it's bad enough for the ating; but, in regard of the 
drinking, if you'd give a thousand pounds for a naggin of whisky, 
you wouldn't get it ; and when I asked for a bottle of Guinness's 
porter, which you'd think was known all over the wide world, it's 
a bottle of crusty port they brought me ; and to this blessed hour 
I've not been able to make them understand me. And here's 
• more of the yarn. 1 It's up three pair of stairs backwards 
we're lodged, in the rare of the house, No. 144, (sorrow one less)— 
troyseme, they call it in French ; and the rooms not bigger than 
pidgeon-holes, for which I pay the murther and all of money ; for 
the Bellview is the fashionable place, and none of the great English 
will go nowhere else : although at first, sir, we got into a mighty 
nate little hotel, called the Tirelemont, for half the price. But my 
lady would go to the Bellview as soon as there was room,— room 
to whip a cat sorrow more ! 

" At Ostend, sir, we made acquaintance with a right honorable 
privy counsellor, and one of the richest and greatest men in Eng- 
land, as the Doctor says, and whose name you have read in the par- 
liament debates a hundred times and more, one Sir Frederick Mot- 
tram. Well, sir, I don't know how it was, but the Doctor and my 
Lady overpersuaded me that it would be the greatest of advantage 



240 



THE PRIISCESS. 



to us all to lind him my shirt— my best baby-linen-warehouse shirt, 
that I got made up expressively for Lady Dickson's party at Brigh- 
ton, and never was on my back but oncet. But to ^make a long 
story short, sorrow sight of the shirt ever 1 seen since, and my be- 
lief is, never will ; for my Lady and the Doctor have made me swear 
twenty oaths that I'd never mintion the linen to him; because, they 
say, it's a tie between us ; and that as long as he keeps my shirt, I've 
every right and title to axe him a favour, or a place, or something 
that way. But what the devil, says you, brought a great man like 
him to be without his linen to forren parts ! Why, thin, divel a 
know I know ! but this I know full well to my cost, that I never set 
eyes on him since, though we were to have travelled with him here 
in our own borouche, and he to pay a third of the horses, as we 
settled among ourselves. 

" But the divel be in the Doctor, sir, but when all was settled, off 
he skelps us after a great Princess that he put his camether upon ; 
and thinks she'll do the world and all for us in Germany, and ask 
us to her castle on the river Rine, which is quite close to Spaw ; for, 
would you believe it, Mac Dermot dear ! we're not in Germany yet, 
nor within two days of it, but has to pass through Prussia, sir, first. 

" Well, sir, we might as well have follyed a lepraghan, or a fairy, 
as this great Princess ; for no sooner we came upon her in one place, 
but pop she was off to another, travelling with five horses, and we 
with only a pair, that would sooner die than run ; and has carried 
off the Doctor's guide-books and maps, and divel mend him ! what 
business had he to go gosthering after a furrener that he knows 
nothing about, and I paying him at the rate of two hundred a year 
to attend me and my Lady?— for, Corney dear, we are both grown 
poor crocks ; my Lady has lost a lung, and in the mornings you 
wouldn't give a pin for me, with a sort of an all-over-ness, and the 
greatest thust on me ; which makes me drink their ale here, ( and 
good ale it is,) not by pints, but by quarts, in the staminays, which 
are a sort of taverns, where you get neither to ate or to drink, only a 
pipe and a pot ; so that I'm fur from well till after dinner, to say 
nothing of the chalera, which is raging everywhere ; as the Doctor 
tells uz. 

" And now, Mac Dermot dear, send me the money soon and 
safe, for sorrow much I've left ; and has a bill running up here as 



THE PRINCESS. 



241 



long as from this to Cork, though we left our Irish footman in 
Brighton, and have only my lady's own lady's maid, little Kitty 
Kelly : and hired a young furrenner they call a walley -de-place, 
whom we have for two franks a day. I'll trouble you for change 
for that ! Well, sir, a frank is a tin-pinny. But, I'm mighty slow 
at picking up a word of the furren lingo ; and mighty lonely, 
having no one to spake to me at the staminay, where I pass my 
mornings, thinking of oukl Ireland, while the Doctor and my 
Lady is making an inventory of all they see and hear. 

" But I'm expecting a young man every day that I cottoned to 
greetly, at Ostend, one Mr. Fegin, Irish by birth, but bred in 
England, as he tells me ; and iligent English he has, surely. He is 
a gentleman bred and born, it seems ; but his people got into 
trouble, and he was reduced to become own man and gentleman to 
Sir Frederick Mottram; and is as comely and genteel a looking 
lad as you'd wish to see ; and often, brings somebody you know 
yourself to my mind— and maybe we hav'n't plenty of Shanaos 
together, for he knows as much of county Kerry as if he'd never 
lost sight of Mangerton. Why, then, 'pon my daisy, I should'nt 
wonder, after all, if his name was OTegan. People often drop the 
vowel after they get to live in England, which brings to my mind 
something that I'll just spake to you about in the postscript. So 
tare it off, before you read it to the mistress : for I know she'll be 
curious for news from forren parts ; and so concluding. 

" I am, my dear Corney, 

" Your very affectionate and obedient 

"I. D. 

" P.-S. The first time you ride that way ? you'll do me the greatest 
of favours, if you'll call in upon Betty Burke and tell her there's no 
use in life in pestering me with letters, as she did in England. 
I know very well it's all that rake of an husband of hers, that 
drinks her substance, bates her black and blue, and was the raal 
cause why that brat of a boy went to walk the world. You are 
my witness I offered to take him in about the place, as soon as he 
could do anything. As for th' other, was it not her own will 
to walk off with him to the Foundling, when she was taking up 
Mary Brady's twins, saying that one might be done for, but two it 



242 THE PRINCESS. 

would be the ruin of her? So that, if I were on my bended knees 
before Father Murphy this day, I would swear to a clear con- 
science. After which, you may give her three pounds for me. 
Oh ! Cornelius Mac Dermot, how the sins of our youth rise up 
agen us ! and if we had life to begin over again, is it after the 
Betty Burkes, or the likes of them, I'd be trapesing? If any one 
had tould me that Natty Dogherty would turn out a rich man and 
a Bart., and marry Miss Kearney, of Fort Kearney, and drive his 
own coach, and be travelling in furren parts, and taking snaps 
instead of a drop of poteen— would I have believed them? No, 
troth ! And this often brings my poor sister and brother to mind ; 
and if he had not been hung in the rebellion, and she, poor cratur ! 
had not gone to the bad, though they always looked down upon 
me, I would be glad to serve them now, though they are gone to 
another and better world, to which, that we may all come, is the 
prayer of your assured friend, I. D. 

" TV. B. I am promised a frank from the great Mr. Hume's 
servant, who is in this house, and dines with the King. So you see 
1 have filled out my sheet. But mum about Betty Burke ; and whin 
you mintion her, as my Lady reads all my letters, mind you call her 
the black heifer. 

" N. B. There's a power of Irish here, and a fortune might be 
made by setting up a raal Irish Hibernian hotel — and it would be 
a fine thing to be after making money instead of spinding it ; but 
when I only just hinted it to my Lady, oh, sir ! it was mille mur- 
therl and wurrestroo !— and troth, you'd think I had brought 
ruination upon the Kearneys, of Fort Kearney, seed, breed, and 
generation! " 

" TO HORACE HARVEY, ESQ., STEVEN'S HOTEL, LONDON. 

" Brussels, Hotel de Tirlemont. 

" My Dear Horace, — Not to lose a moment, I write immediately 
on my arrival here, and while my cutlet is dressing, to say that I 
have received your letter, for which a thousand thanks. As you are 
in London, and Mr. Harris is not, I beg earnestly that on receipt of 



THE PRINCESS. 



243 



this you will go to Carlton-terrace, and make inquiries for my carriage 
and coachman. I had sent orders to have both despatched here 
instantly ; and I have been at the Bellevue, where I got your letter ; 
but no carriage is come, neither could I get a room to niche myself 
in. There is something wrong about this unlucky carriage; and I 
am much inconvenienced by the failure : Harris's people are always 
so punctual. On the whole, the chances of my wayward, and some- 
what inconsiderate journey, thus far, have been in my favour ; and I 
have seen and heard so much that would not have reached me in the 
ordinary course of travelling, as leaves me nothing to regret. It 
really does strike me, that the more closely the Belgian people and 
their revolution are viewed, the more worthy they appear of interest, 
and of a reflective and attentive consideration. 

" The routine of my own particular office, and the all-engrossing 
interests of the greater events at Paris, had very much distracted my 
attention, at the time, from what we considered a mere imitative 
appendix to the French revolt ; and you will not be surprised that I 
should have adopted the notion that the resistance against William 
was unprovoked. This opinion was strengthened by the reports of 
our diplomatic agents, whom, I begin to fear, we have too much 
chosen for their coincidence with our own political dogmas, rather 
than for the faculty of forming an independent opinion of their own. 
It was not the boy attache only who treated the affair as a mere 
mob triumph, unworthy of the notice and protection of a gentle- 
man; and you well know the force and influence of that term in 
England. The fashion was set, and the word had passed ; and I 
begin to suspect that we have been the dupes of our own sarcasms, 
and too hasty in our conclusions on the Belgian question. 

ct At every step I have taken since my arrival here, new proofs have 
forced themselves on my mind of the incompatibility of the Dutch 
and Belgian character and position, of the diversity of their interests, 
and the opposition of their sentiments. The antecedents of many 
centuries might have told us that force alone could amalgamate the 
two people under one government, and should have led us to fore- 
see that the first opportunity would be seized for breaking up the 
unnatural alliance. 

" The formation of the kingdom of the Netherlands, I am now 
satisfied, was no better than a mere coup d'e'tat; and whether such 



244 



THE PRINCESS. 



violences are nipped in the bud, or are allowed to drag on through 
years of impunity— whether they induce a prompt reaction, or await 
the maturity of a tardy revenge, the consequence is ultimately the 
same. 

" That, however, which the Holy Alliance commenced in force, 
the Stadtholder was compelled to continue in cunning. The fusion 
of the two'populations being a moral impossibility, nothing remain- 
ed but to subordinate one of them to the other ; to make one por- 
tion of the territory a kingdom, and the other a dependent province. 
But William was a Dutchman : accordingly, in framing a constitu- 
tion, he adopted the fundamental law of Holland as his basis; and 
such considerations only were offered to the Belgian notables as were 
rendered indispensably necessary by the addition of the new provin- 
ces to the Dutch territory. 

" The constitution, such as it was, was however necessarily pre- 
sented to a Belgian assembly, to go through the form of acceptance ; * 
and as the majority turned out to be against the government, the 
text of their vote was taken with a royal commentary, as sophistical 
as it was arbitrary, and their decision virtually set aside by an 
interpretation. Here, then, was a second coup d'etat; and as things 
ill begun make themselves strong by ill, all possibility of equal and 
constitutional government was overthrown. Injustice accordingly 
followed injustice in quick succession. The Dutch language was 
imposed on the Belgian tribunals, and the Belgian advocates stricken 
with an incapacity to pursue their business ; while the people could 
not follow their own law proceedings. 

" Then came the interference of the government with the public 
instruction ; an interference which we at home regarded as enlight- 
ened and philosophical, but which I now see clearly was fanatical 
and sectarian— a counterpart of what has been attempted by the 

* On this occasion 796 deputies voted against the constitution, 527 for it. 
It was, therefore, virtually rejected. But of the 796 opponents, 126 had, in 
voting, declared their opposition to have been founded on religious grounds; 
and about one sixth of the Belgian notables did not attend. William, ac- 
cordingly, declaring the motived votes to be in reality affirmative, and 
the absentees to have given a silent approval, pronounced by proclamation 
the constitution to have been accepted. 



THE PRINCESS. 



245 



Orange party in Ireland. That it was good policy to break 
down the power of the Catholic priesthood, may be true ; that a 
better education of the people was necessary than the priests 
would willingly concede, must be admitted : but the hasty and 
foolish manner in which these reforms were commenced, stamped 
William's government with a fatal character of violence and 
bigotry. 

" Another consequence of a proconsular government of Belgium 
was the exclusion of the Belgians from place and honours. * The 
proportions of the Dutch and Belgian representatives to the respec- 
tive populations, were stamped with a similar inequality ; and the 
fiscal and financial arrangements uniformly showed a consequent 
leaning to Dutch interests. The trial by jury was also arbitrarily 
abolished, to make way for a criminal procedure, which was a 
simple return to the ancient code of Holland. If, then, there was 
no one especial act to compare with the royal ordonnances of 
Charles the Tenth, there were fifteen years of galling tyranny, sub- 
jecting four millions of subjects to the sway of two ; and that mino- 
rity unsupported by superior instruction, and undignified by the 
prestiges of a military occupation. 

" It has been said, that the physical condition of Belgium being 
prosperous, the people were without excuse for separating from 
Holland. I confess I do not see the force of this consequence. The 
beast of the field is driven by hunger ; the civilized man is influenced 
by higher motives. Admitting the fact, prosperity could not have 
abided under a regime which submitted the agriculture** and manu- 
factures of the south to the commercial interests of the north. But 
were the long series of arbitrary proceedings against the press 
nothing? — the direct and scandalous evasions of the charter? — 
the illegalities in the dispensation of justice?— and the excitations of 

* There were 2377 Dutch officers in the military service, while 200 only 
were Belgians. To make this injustice more crying, it was arranged that 
in the colonies, where the service was fatal and the civil influence of the 
soldier nothing, the proportions should be directly reversed. 

** In point of fact, a tax on flour, and a tax on the slaughtering of cattle, 
which pressed with crushing severity on the lower classes, were among the 
immediate causes of that casual violence which caused the explosion. 

18. 



246 



THE PRINCESS. 



the religious feelings of the people ? These, if they do not excuse 
rebellion, will sufficiently explain it. 

u Still, nothing can be more unlucky than the separation of Hol- 
land and Belgium. The two countries, united, might have told for 
something in the balance of Europe-, separated, they too probably 
may — some say must — fall the prey of the conqueror on the first 
recurrence of a general war. 

" You will wonder at this sudden change in my opinions; but, 
since my arrival here, I have read much, and conversed with several 
men of very superior attainments, of all parties. Nothing is spoken 
or thought of but politics, and the very common people see and 
understand their own interests; so that information forces itself at 
every turn. Politics have not, however, been my only occupation : 
the arts in Belgium are not to be neglected ; and they have given me 
more pleasure than the conversation even of these clever Belgian 
radicals, for such they are. I have, however, been greatly surprised 
and amused by the general dissemination of sound political know- 
ledge, though applied to opinions 1 do not always exactly approve ; 
and I begin to find a man can be a tory in one country, and some- 
thing not quite a radical in another : things change their aspect so 
much in dilferent circumstances. 

" Apropos to the arts, I have picked up an artist of rare genius 
and abilities. She (for it is a lady that is in question) would be a 
dangerous acquaintance for your equanimity, as she might formerly 
have proved to mine ; but now ( I own it with a sigh ) ' man delights 
not me, nor woman either.' Still this woman interests me, and for 
reasons which I have not time, nor indeed inclination, now to detail. 

" Good night ! Direct to me poste restante, as I must change 
my quarters ; and write to me without loss of time. 

" Tours ever, 

" F. M." 

" P.-S. The town is overflowing; and I am lodged in an old- 
fashioned, but very comfortable, hotel (out of the gangway of 
fashion), which recalls the hostels of the divine middle ages. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



247 



CHAPTER XVI. 

BRUSSELS. 

Sir Frederick Mottram, on his arrival in Brussels, had vainly 
tried for admission at the hotels of the Place Royale. He had been 
obliged to descend to the Basse Ville ; but the entire ordre equestre 
or provincial gentry of the country, seemed to have congregated in 
the usually tranquil quarters of the Holland Hof and the Groenendal. 
As a mezzo temrine, he found himself seated in the salle a manger 
of the clean, modest, old-fashioned, and very Brabancon hotel of 
Tirlemont, which stands, as it were, half-way between the old town 
and the new. 

This sa lie formed one side of the court-yard, into which it opened; 
and as the lord of Mottram Hall, the master of the most luxurious 
mansion in London, threw himself on a high-backed oak chair, 
opposite a plain deal table, and wrote his letters by the flickering 
light of a pair of tallow candles before him, and the flare of a lamp 
that looked of the sixteenth century, he was more amused than an- 
noyed by his unwonted position. He looked around him : the floor 
was sanded ; an antique buffet filled the lower part of the apartment, 
and the walls were covered with a painting in oil, representing 
scenes and groups worthy of Watteau. The conversation parties, 
there depicted, were of the time of the Austrian archduchesses, and 
were evidently a century old ; showing how popular the arts had 
been in the Low Countries, and how extensive was the patronage 
given them, not by the great merely, but by the middle and lower 
classes. 

The Tirlemont had been an auberge time immemorial ; and some 
Canaletti of the parish of St. Gudule had probably executed this 
painting at a much less expense to the purchaser, than the gilt 
leather hangings would have cost with which the palaces and cha- 
teaux of the seigneurs were then adorned, who could have enriched 



248 



THE PRINCESS. 



their cabinets with the works of Rubens, Vandyke, Teniers, or 
Rembrandt. 

A frugal supper, tardily and with difficulty procured, ( for at that 
late hour the kitchen hearths of the sober Tirlemont were cold,) was 
attended by la fille de quartier, a light-footed little Brabanconne, 
whose services Fegan more than shared, and would fain have dis- 
pensed with altogether : a desire intimated by his frequent ' Now 
don't be after troubling yourself, mamizelle, s'il vous plait.' 1 Mean- 
time the hostess herself, la Veuve Boran, endeavoured to make 
amends for the inconveniences of her overthronged house and 
exhausted pantry, by those little courtesies and attentions which 
frequently supply the place of more substantial advantages. 

The expected departure of a baronial family from Namur on the 
following day (who occupied le bel appartement) was to furnish 
a more suitable lodging to the late and last arrived guest, who, in 
the interim, was niched in a little sleeping room, with a single 
easement which opened on the noble and antique towers of St. Gudule. 
The beautiful and Gothic tracery, silvered by the moon-light, fixed 
for a moment his sleepy eyes. He thought of her who could haply 
have given some moral interest to that superb object of art and 
monument of time ; and he indulged in a reverie, between hope and 
conjecture, as to the probability of another interview ; and then 
sank into a slumber unknown to the anxious minister, the worn- 
out legislator, the blase' man of fashion, and disappointed man of 
feeling, of less than a month back. 

It was the deep bell of St. Gudule, at nine the following morning, 
that disturbed his refreshing sleep. He descended to an excellent 
breakfast in the public room, already half filled with miscellaneous 
guests. 

" Plaze your honor," said Fegan, who was in waiting, " Mami- 
zelle tells me that there's a sermon at ten, and high mass at eleven, 
in the greet cathedral over forenent us ; and a celebraited preacher, 
Abby Surlycraw, Sir Frederick, that all the town's running mad after, 
speceally the Leedies,— and the greetest of favorites he is with thim, I 
hear. So I was thinking, Sir Frederick, that if you'd have no fur- 
ther occasion for me till dinner dressing time, I'd just step across to 
my duty, sir, and return after mass and the sermon to attind your 
honor." 



THE PRINCESS. 



249 



" But you will not understand a sermon preached in French. 
regan.' 1 

b ' Sure I'll understand it as well as the Latin, Sir Frederick." 

To this there was no reply ; and the next moment Fegan was seen 
giving his arm to " la fille de quartier, " with a large nosegay at 
his breast, and his hat set upon three hairs. Sir Frederick was 
confirmed in his own impulse to follow the example of his servant, 
and visit St. Gudule, by the remark of a young priest (who, in his 
clerical habit, sat at breakfast with one of the Garde Bourgeoise, ) 
that the mass to be performed was by Cherubini, and that it was to 
be executed by the first artists of Brussels, under the direction of 
Monsieur Fetis, maitre de chapelle to the king. 

Nothing can be more striking as a monument of architectural an- 
tiquity, than the noble church which ( dedicated to the patroness saint 
of Brussels ) is to the capital of Belgium what the Duomo is to Milan, 
an object of national pride and of pious veneration. Venerable and 
time-touched by the passage of eight hundred years, it rears its 
Gothic front on the declivity of a hill, between two lofty and massive 
square towers. The entrance is approached by a flight of steep steps ; 
and discloses the vast perspective of the body of the church, which 
is lighted by a double range of painted glass casements, miraculous 
evidences of the arts in the Low Countries during the earliest epochs 
of the middle ages. 

The subjects of many of these windows were historical facts still 
influencing the institutions of modern Europe. Their many-coloured 
lights fell in splendour upon the colossal statues which seem to guard 
on either side the noble nave ; and called out the radiance of the 
bronze and golden vessels of the grand choir, its antique altar and 
tabernacle. Under a mausoleum of black marble, repose the ashes 
of the bold, bustling Dukes of Brabant ; with the brazen lion of 
Belgium couchant above them. Beyond, on the windows of the 
transept, a remoter epoch was chronicled in the figure of the Em- 
peror Charlemagne prostrate before the church in the performance 
of a religious office. 

The artist eye, the kindling imagination of the English virtuoso, 
found full occupation in the spectacle that presented itself. Pausing 
for a while on the threshold of the great western portals, to take 
in the splendid and imposing effect of the whole structure, he pro- 

18.. 



250 



THE PRINCESS. 



ceeded along the thronged avenue of the lateral aisle, and placed 
himself against a column immediately opposite the preacher. 

The pulpit, celebrated as la chaire de Verbruggen, beautifully 
carved, told the story of the expulsion from Paradise of the first 
parents of mankind. It was occupied by a preacher, whose head, 
action, and manner were all picturesque and dramatic. He was 
addressing a multitudinous congregation composed chiefly of females. 
A few old gentlemen, and here and there a group of peasants in 
their blouses, standing with open mouths and eyes vacantly staring 
on the preacher, were the only males at the foot of the pulpit; while 
reposing upon velvet chairs sat the bel-air piety of Brussels, pre- 
senting as brilliant a parterre of bright colours, as the balcon of 
the theatre on a first representation. Beyond these privileged saints, 
on wooden chairs, were the petite bourgeoisie of the Basse Ville, 
who were again shaded off by the campagnards of the adjacent 
arrondissements, whose bronzed, broad faces, and antique costume, 
contrasted with the fair physiognomies and fashionable toilet of the 
interior circle. 

The preaching of the Abbe Souslagroix, le petit Bourdaloue 
of the season, was by turns vehement, impressive, familiar, and 
dramatic ; and while every bright eye was fixed on his animated 
countenance, he thundered forth his text at intervals, " Pray that ye 
enter not into temptation and every repetition was accompanied 
by a sarcasm of the inefficiency of oraisons whose source was no 
deeper drawn than from the lips of the suppliant. 

The sermon over, there was a rush of the whole congregation 
towards the choir. The beau monde hurried to the skreen on either 
side, and were admitted by the important Suisse, who threw open 
those gates of salvation to the brilliant hats and showy bonnets only \ 
while the Brabancon coif and blouse ranged themselves as they best 
might in front of the altar. The organ pealed, and the full orchestra 
gave forth the solemn strains of Cherubini, accompanying the most 
magnificent of all dramatic exhibitions, the ceremony of the mass. 
The choral voices filled the vaulted space with harmonies well cal- 
culated to ' take the prisoned soul, and rap it in elysium. ' 

The procession which precedes the celebration of the mystery 
commenced from the north side of the high altar. The acolytes, 
bearing tapers, and clothed in white cassocks and crimson sashes, 



THE PRINCESS. 



251 



were followed by the thurifers, tossing their silver censers in the 
perfumed air, and opening the procession of the priestly band, who, 
two by two, with folded hands and downcast eyes, robed in snowy 
surplices and rich stoles, moved slowly on. Then came the dignita- 
ries of the church, capped and mitred, in habits of rival magnificence 
of gold and silver tissue, and with crosses of gold or w r ands of ivory. 

The whole distributed themselves according to their rank and 
office. The high altar, whose gemmed tabernacle blazed with the 
light of many tapers, became the scene of those mystic movements 
and reiterated genuflections, each of which indicated some miracle 
or mystery preceding that greatest of all mysteries, which is an- 
nounced by the tinkling bell, and accompanied by a universal pros- 
tration. All were prostrate in form, as in mind. The English pro- 
testant alone stood erect, excited, not deceived; and smiling proudly 
in the conviction that he was not one of those who debased the 
judgment God had given him, by crediting a miracle, contradicted 
by the evidence of the senses, the great fountain of all positive know- 
ledge, and the oracles of God's first and most undeniable revelations 
to man. 

He stood with a curved lip, and a half-closed eye fixed upon the 
performance of that awful act which none but he dared gaze upon ; 
the act which, by a grace passing all understanding, converts the 
grosser elements of matter into the spiritual essence of the Godhead. 
The word " transubstantiation" escaped his contemptuous lips : — 
a single word in obvious and reproachful reply was muttered beside 
him ! He started : what a volume was in that word ! It seemed 
to reprove intolerance, and to demand indulgence for one mystery 
more than the many his reformed faith still retained. He was sur- 
rounded by women, whose brows pressed the marble pavement : 
whence, then, came the sound? Did it arise from his own imagi- 
nation? or did reason suggest the necessity of bearing with the lin- 
gering errors of humanity, which the progressive light of time and 
influence of knowledge had not yet universally dissipated ? 

When the elevation of heads, and the magnificent burst of har- 
mony, vocal and instrumental, at length confounded all ideas in one 
overwhelming flood of delicious sensations , Sir Frederick was re- 
lieved and transported. The objects he gazed on, the odours he 
breathed, the music he listened to, all was the enchantment of the 



252 



THE PRINCESS. 



imagination, the inebriety of the senses. He felt the grandeur of 
the system, and the deep knowledge of human nature that had foun- 
ded a church destined to subdue the barbarous energies of a ferocious 
race, and redeem society from the verge of utter dissolution. This 
church, at first the barrier protecting by its terrors the many from 
the violence of the few, and ultimately the tower of strength of the 
few against the many, had served both its purposes. It was now 
mouldering away before greater and subtiler combinations. So too 
was the church which had succeeded to it; the cold, inconsistent, 
powerful, but unimaginative church of the Reformation. What was 
to come next ? Never before had the church been in such danger, 
in the well-prejudiced mind of this Oxford-bred, orthodox lay-im- 
propriator, as at the moment when, under the excitement of such 
external impressions, that great and philosophical question suggested 
itself! There was more intellect even in the doubt it awakened, 
than in all the logical subtilties that had wasted the energies of his 
fresh young mind. 

As he gazed and listened, what a sweep of events rushed before 
him, from the first concretion of European society, to the revolution 
hardly yet consummated ! What errors , what illusions ! ( errors 
that were inevitable, illusions that were expediences!) once blindly 
received and passionately adored ; now laid bare, exposed, and 
trampled on, as the brute necessities of humanity were superseded 
by higher wants and more intellectual pursuits. All splendid as 
was the exhibition now witnessed, the magnificent ritual of the most 
ancient and powerful of christian churches, who were they that 
now stood around to wonder and to reverence it? — Women and 
children ! of the other sex*, a few of the old and feeble among the 
higher classes, and of the rude and ignorant among the lowest ! 
But where were the legislators of the land, the representatives of the 
people— where the people themselves, the intellectual reforming 
people, who fought the fight of the Four Days? Where was \hc 
royal successor of the Counts of Flanders, the Dukes of Brabant and 
Burgundy, the Austrian Archdukes? He, the king of the people, 
professed another faith,— a faith, for which, on that spot, men and 
women had been burned and buried alive ! What a contrast with 
the image pictured on those brilliant panes,— the Emperor of the 
West, the representative of the Caesars, grovelling on the earth before 



THE PRINCESS. 



253 



that power of which he was himself the founder, the champion, the 
agent, and the— dupe ! 

The ceremony was now concluding by the imposing procession 
of its retiring ministers. The vaulted roof rang with peals of the 
valedictory melody, which gradually faded away in sighing echoes. 
The congregation poured forth through the great portals and lateral 
issues ; the lights of the mattre-autel were extinguished ; and the 
church was rapidly left to solemn silence and picturesque solitude. 
Here and there, a lingering votarist still knelt before a lateral altar ; 
or muttered over her breviary, as she lolled on her chair in the 
nave. One , with bended knees, and upraised hands, and elevated 
head, endeavoured to expiate by a physical effort some moral frailty; 
and another strove to hang a votive offering on the statue of a saint, 
who seemed to reject the proffered homage. The offering was a 
waxen ear ; but the votarist was too short of stature to attain to the 
elevation on which the statue stood. 

After more than one effort witnessed by the English traveller, who 
was passing out at the moment, he advanced to tender his services. 
The devotee placed the well-formed ear into his hands, and he 
hung the red ribbon attached to it on the finger of the patron saint. 
He was then in the act of retreating, when the voice of the person 
he had served arrested his attention. 

' ' Ha ! ha ! Goeden dag, mynheer ; bon jour et grand merci, ' ' 
she said in a voice of welcome. " Vousvoild dans la capitate des 
Flamands de Flandres V 

" Ah! is it you, ma mere?" said Sir Frederick, much pleased to 
meet again la Mere Greite, whose white coif, veiled by a faille of 
black crape, had rendered her usual costume not immediately recog- 
nizable. 

" Yes, it is I," she said in a low voice, as they passed down the 
nave together, and issued out of the western gate. " I am at Brus- 
sels on a mission in waiting on the new hospital de la Vieillesse 
Malheureuse. I left Ghent after vespers last night, and passed you 
at Alost. You stopped to buy a basket of the couques d'Asche. — 
I suppose for some friend, probably at Brussels ? I saw your ser- 
vant driving a hard bargain for them." 

" I have no friend at Brussels," said Sir Frederick, except you 
will allow me to consider you as one." 



254 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Eh! mais volontiers. Besides, it is a good augury that we 
should have met under the protection of the blessed and holy St. Gu- 
dule, and that an offering has been made by your hands to our lady 
and patroness." 

" Oh ! the ear ?— And what does that mean, good mother?' 1 

" It means, that the person in whose name I made that offering 
has succeeded in her desires by means of the ear ; and so she makes 
this tribute to the glory of St. Gudule." 

" And you think such an offering can propitiate Heaven?" 

" And why not? — Do not you Reformed, as you call yourselves, 
try to propitiate Heaven?" 

" Not with waxen ears," said Sir Frederick, smiling. 

" Hein! Well, you pray to stop rain, or for the destruction of 
your enemies. If you can arrest the laws of nature and direct the 
will of Heaven by words, why may we not by the expression of our 
good intentions through the medium of an image? La difference est 
peu de chose. 1 '' 

Sir Frederick was struck both by the manner and the matter of 
this remark. The voice was less guttural than that of la Mere 
Greite ; and the ' gros bon sens flamand ' had taken a taint of 
reasoning not to be expected from one of her habit and calling. 

They had reached the last step of the flight leading from the 
church, w hen she paused, and said, 

" You call me ' your friend.' — Well, I accept the office : if you 
are ailing, I will attend on you, and I have great experience. I am 
a Sosur hospitaliere of old date. If you are going to remain here, 
and wish to see the hospitals, I will conduct you. If you stay to 
witness the grand anniversary, I will put you in the way of getting 
cheap, good lodging, in the Old Town ; for it strikes me, travelling 
as you do, you are not rich, though your servant ( whom I take to 
be a poor relation, for he is like you ) told one of our sisters, who is 
an Irishwoman, that you are very rich, and are only travelling to 
get rid of your wife. But c'est egal. If you remain here, I can 
place you in some of the old quarters of Brussels, in the Isle of 
St. Gery, or near the Place des Wallons, the heart of the old Flemish 
and Brabancon society. Bites done, que voutez-vous?" 

Sir Frederick started and coloured at all these allusions to his 
circumstances, and at the imputed possible resemblance between 



THE PRINCESS. 



255 



himself and his servant; but recovering hastily, he answered, 

" I thank you a thousand times. Were it my intention to remain 
in Brussels, I should avail myself gratefully of your offer : at present 
I have-no plans. I wait for my carriage, and am lodged in a modest 
little hotel, quite close to St. Gudule, the Tirlemont." 

" Ah ! so you are at the Tirlemont ! It is an historical place. It 
was the head quarters of the etat-major on the night before the 
Dutch evacuated Brussels. What an event! what a night! I re- 
member passing the etat-major at midnight. I was following a 
bier on which lay one of our wounded. It had another appearance 
then, the Tirlemont. Well, if you want me, I am always to be 
heard of at the Grand Beguinage." 

Sir Frederick reiterated his thanks, and added, 

" Should 1 be induced to protract my stay, I will avail myself of 
your kindness : at all events, I should be glad to visit your hospitals ; 
and as I have nothing to do to-day. ..." 

" Aujourdlmi? impossible! I have engagements that will 
occupy me; but I will make arrangements, and let you know. 
What can you do with yourself in the mean time?" 

He paused a moment, and then drawing a card from his pocket, 
he said, " I have got here the address of Monsieur Janssens of La 
Puterie, who has a picture by Vandyke on sale. It was given me by 
Madame Marguerite, the artist. Can you tell me, has she too arrived 
last night at Brussels?" 

" Ah cat I cannot positively answer for that. I told you that 
she was coming here about her great picture, and I saw her at Ghent 
yesterday; but her movements are uncertain. Cestune originate 
que Madame Marguerite ; d'ailleurs, assez bonne femme.'''' 

" That, " said Sir Frederick, "is just the epithet I should never 
think of applying to her." 

" Well, you are wrong; c'est une bonne pdte. But I have a 
consultation at our hospital to attend. Adieu, monsieur— au plai- 
sir, n'est-ce pas ?" 

" Whereabouts lies the Puterie?" asked Sir Frederick, detaining 
her. 

" Close at hand ; you will find no one at home there, just now. 
Sunday is a great festival with us. Follow the crowd, who are 
all going in one direction. After mass, every one goes to the Park. 



256 



THE PRINCESS. 



By and bye you will hear the great drum ; and then be sure to get 
near to the Ouinconce. You will hear our ' belle harmonie. ' " 

" And then?" asked Sir Frederick, much amused. 

" Why, you will dine at two at your table d'hote; and after 
the salut, go, by all means, to the AlUe Verte; and at the Pontde 
Laeken you will take a cruchon de Mere de Louvain, smoke a 
cigar, and see the young folks galloping their horses, — such a 
brouhaha ! You will amuse yourself well here on a Sunday, 
allez. " 

A dinner at two ! a tankard and pipe by way of recreation at 
four ! Sir Frederick laughed, and thought of a London Sunday, 
at the Zoological Gardens at seven, to stare at the monkeys, and 
invoke the air of the Regent's Park for an appetite for a nine 
o'clock dinner. 

" You see, " said the good Be'gume, as he continued to descend 
the hill, and again stopped under the balcony of the minister of 
the interior's hotel, at the corner of the Rue de la Montagne, "you 
see, mynheer, I am not a begueule, not one of the over-rigid. 
My prescription is amusez-vous Men. In my quality of garde- 
malade I prescribe it ; for I know the efficacy of amusing the 
morbid. " 

The word startled the patient for whom she was prescribing so 
pleasantly. 

" Books, flowers, and fresh air, " she continued, " are excellent 
remedies, mynheer. You have a suffering air, poor gentleman ! 
but you are better than when I saw you at the shrine of St. Ursula 
at Bruges. I said to myself, ' Le malheureux ! where is his 
mother, his wife?' ■' 

"In my country," said Sir Frederick peevishly, and slightly 
colouring, "women usually do more harm than good in such 
cases. " 

" Yes," said the Beguine, nodding her coifed head, "I hate 
to see our good lady duchesses and baronesses, our saints of many 
quarterings, coming to perform their Charlie's de parade in our 
hospitals, leaving their carriages at the gates, as if it were a theatre, 
and bringing the same vanity and feebleness to our wards that they 
show off in their boxes at the spectacle. They embarrass every- 
thing; for they are full of ignorance and pretension; and, above 



THE PRINCESS. 



257 



all," she added, laying her hand on Sir Frederick's arm, " elles 
monquent de ces habitudes qui viennent des idees. And now, 
gocden dag, mynheer ! ' ' 

She then scudded off, leaving her last words vibrating with a 
strange effect on the listener's ear. The sentiment was beyond her 
sphere, as the pure accent with which it was uttered was unlike her 
usual Flemish jargon. A thought, a doubt, a suspicion for a moment 
shot athwart his mind. He had never yet seen, except in passing 
and shadowed glimpses, the face of this good Bdguine; for who 
does, that only meets them in the streets and public places ? But 
her figure was cumbrous, her walk a waddle, her head stooped, and 
her step ponderous. Her exterior was that of a coarse middle-aged 
woman of the lower classes ; whose natural strong good sense was 
clouded by the bigotry of her profession, but rendered characteristic 
by that tough, frank manner, so peculiar to the Flemish popula- 
tion. Still there was a finesse in some of the sentiments which 
dropped from her on this occasion, and an accent of peculiar sweet 
acuteness, which struck him forcibly; and the grotesque, good- 
natured Be'gtiinewas almost mingled with the poetical apparition of 
the imaginative and philosophical artist, Madame Marguerite. The 
possibility of such an identity opened a field for conjecture, and for 
the reveries of an imagination always ready to escape from fact to 
romance. 

He was slowly ascending the Montague du Pare as the fanciful 
idea of such a transformation was passing through his mind ; and he 
found himself almost unintentionally obeying the orders of the Be- 
guine, by adopting the first item of her programme for his day's 
amusement. The scene that presented itself in that mimic forest, 
which rises majestically in the midst of its surrounding palaces, is not 
to be equalled in any other capital. The principal promenade was 
crowded to excess by groups of both sexes; some richly, and all well 
dressed, moving up and down in many -coloured masses, through 
the long, densely shaded walk. Every face was brightened by smiles, 
every lip bursting with gaiety, and cordial recognitions, French or 
Flemish, the bonjour and the goeden dag. 

Of those morose feelings with which the English ennuye' had left 
London, not one remained. Escaped from the scrutiny of that 
secret tribunal of bon ton, whose sneer is fate, whose ridicule is 

19. 



468 



THE PRINCESS. 



death, he permitted himself to he amused under the dictates of his 
own gracious sensations. Not one English face, not a symptom of 
the tight, elegant, simply-dressed London man (that gc?ire a part 
and unattainable model of European fashion,) came forth to ' shock 
his eye and grieve his heart.' He gave himself up to the popular 
torrent, composed of the bourgeoisie of the old and lower town. 
Physiological curiosities presented themselves on all sides, types of 
the originals immortalized in the conversation-pieces of Rombout 
and Du Chatel.* Here were the heads remarkable in the great pic- 
ture by the latter master, of the states of Flanders and Brabant taking 
the oath of fidelity to the King of Spain in 1666. Here were also 
the Brussels imitations of le badcau fashionable of Paris, (for 
the word is now naturalized in the vocabulary of the French 
language.) The Flemish cockney, imprisoned in a tight coat, his 
neck inclosed in a cravat stiff as the iron collier de force im- 
posed by Spanish tyranny on the revolting burghers of the olden 
times, was but the impersonation of vulgar pretension all over 
the world. Here and there was the fair, round, Brabancon face, 
complexions formed of both the roses ; and that demure and primi- 
tive air, long retreated from la Haute Ville, but still to be found 
among the female youth of St. Gery and la Place des Wallons. 
On either side of the promenade were seated, on wooden chairs, the 
aristocracy of la petite propriete, who alone preserved their seats 
and sedateness after the great drum gave the alarm to the rest of 
the crowd, who all precipitated themselves towards the orchestra. 

A piece d'ensemble was performed by la Societe d'Har?nonie 
{ a band of amateur artists of the town), with great precision. Sir 
Frederick Mottram had thrown himself on a bench at a short dis- 
tance from the promenade, and in the midst of one of those deli- 
cious tufts of trees where a mutilated figure of a heathen deity spoke 
of the great national contention, where liberty had been so recently 
purchased with the free-will sacrifice of Belgian blood. When the 
music had ceased, he moved on under the shadow of the chestnuts 

* Rombout of Antwerp, one of the Flemish masters most prized in Italy, 
where he resided some time at the Court of the Medicis. Francis Du Chatel 
became the pupil of Teniers, when he held his school at Brussels ; but his 
conversation-pieces are of a more elevated character than that of his master. 



THE PRINCESS. 



259 



and acacias which lead to that deep and umbrageous bas fond, 
where the fragments of a ruined fountain stiil disclose the following 
inscription : — 

f* Petrus Alexiowitz, Czar Moscovice, Magnus Dux, margini 
hujus [otitis insidens, illius aquam nobilitavit, libato vino, 
hard post meridiem tertid, die xvi Aprilis, anni 1717. " 

But the time was gone by, when such loyal futilities, such me- 
mentoes of brute despotism, might have possessed a classical charm 
for the English partisan of divine-righted sovereigns. This base 
and servile reminiscence of the imperial centaur, half man, half 
beast, Peter the Great, the murderer of his son, the victim of his 
own fierce passions, served only to recall Siberia and the knout, on 
the spot where the Dutch soldiers had retreated from the victorious 
arms of an outraged people. Sir Frederick turned upon his steps. 

The promenade now presented other groups, other physiogno- 
mies, another society. The burghers of St. Gery and the Place des 
W'allons had retired to their antique homes, and were succeeded 
by a European crowd. Young, fresh English girls, with their 
friends, parents, or chaperon, and men of fashion of all nations, 
passing through Brussels, and resting from their itinerant labours 
on the seventh day, now filled the avenues of the Park. The Fle- 
mish faces and the Flemish joyousness were no longer observable. 
French and English were equally spoken , and the whole scene 
resembled a Sunday promenade in the Tuileries or in Kensington 
Gardens. It had lost, therefore, its charm for Sir Frederick ; and 
he was just escaping from the chance of a rencontre with some of 
his eternal countrymen, by the iron gates opposite to the Chambre 
des Deputes, when he perceived Lords Montressor and Alfred, with 
Mr. St. Leger, walking down from the Rue Royale. He again 
plunged into the Park, and gliding under the thick shelter of the 
lime-trees, descended to his old hotel, where he found himself in 
actual want of that mid-day dinner which had so much amused him 
in the plans of the good Beguine. 

He was annoyed, on his entrance, to find cards on his dressing- 
table inscribed by English names : and such names ! — those of Sir 
Ignatius and Lady Dogherty ; Doctor de Burgo; Mr. Thomas Tyler, 
6on and daughter ; and one or two other insignificant obscurities, 
he never could have known. He called for Fegan ; but Fegan was 



260 THE PRINCESS. 

not to be found ; and he had taken the keys of his master's dressing 
and writing cases, and bed-room. His increasing carelessness, his j 
constant absences, were not considered as redeemed even by that 
honesty and simplicity for which his master gave him credit ; for 
absurdity is frequently mistaken for ingenuousness, as misfortune 
is for merit. Sir Frederick desired Mrs. Van Doran to seek for him j 
another servant : but Fegan had made himself friends in the esta- 
blishment, and the good-natured hostess, while she accepted the 
commission, assured Sir Frederick that it was the way with them I 
all, on their first arrival. 

" Brussels is so amusing, especially on a Sunday; and Monsieur 
Fegan was such a bon enfant I ' ' 

In taking orders for a dinner en particulier, she observed, that ! 
there was a kermess at Terveuren, to which Fegan had probably ! 
gone ; but if Milord wished to go to the theatre, Potier performed | 
in the Centenaire, and Mademoiselle Linsel in the Fille de Domi- 
nique. The bill of fare was tempting : but the fear of coming in 
contact with the Montressor party inclined him to forego the i 
enjoyment of witnessing the performance of the first comedian in 
the world, because the most natural. Had he seen Mademoiselle 
Linsel in her charming part, he might have thought that sacrifice 
equally great. 

He devoted his afternoon, then, to reading ; and by the time when 
he thought his English annoyances would be at dinner, he sallied 
forth, leaving it to chance to direct his steps to some of those beau- 
tiful environs, which, to use a term of Milton's, ' emparadise ' the 
capital of the Low Countries. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE ATELIER. 

Whoever have visited Brussels en grand seigneur, lived ex- 
clusively with the diplomatic society, been billeted on the Belgian 



THE PROCESS. 



261 



noblesse, or accepted only the invitations of the English residents 
congregated in the upper town, may leave the ancient capital of 
the Low Countries, after a few days' or weeks' sojourn, as ignorant 
of the treasures it contains in arts and antiquities, as if they had 
never left their mansions in the parish of St. James's, or their 
hotel in the Faubourg St. Honore. 

The old town, or Basse Ville, of Brussels, is a sort of moral, 
as well as mural, Pompeii, where habits, customs, and external 
forms of a long-past era are preserved in all the integrity of their 
first fresh existence. There, may still be found the sturdy spirit 
and firm nerve that resisted the splendid tyranny of the imperial 
Charles, the bloody persecutions of the bigot Philips, the numbing 
despotism and ill-judged innovations of the Austrian government, 
and that has finally, in the present day, sent back the House of 
Orange to its native region, to which the interests of European na- 
tions should induce them to confine it. It was the manufacturers 
and the artisans of the Basse Ville, that lent their masses to the 
impelling movement of reform and revolution, emanating from the 
intellectual energies of the nation; and showed that the spirit of 
old ' doyens de la nation,'' (who stood by their national rights, 
with 6 Lyster van Brabant ' in their hands , and effected by their 
steady adherence to principle, more than the chivalrous valour of 
their Horns and their D'Egmonts had been able to achieve,) still 
preserved its intense though long-latent vigour. 

During the week passed by Sir Frederick and Lady Frances 
Mottram in Brussels, they had lived principally in the society of 
the always gracious, courteous, and agreeable Prince of Orange, or 
of his court and its circle. Their mornings had been passed in 
the delightful salons of the venerable Prince D'Aremberg, admi- 
ring his fine collection of pictures, and listening to his amiable 
garrulity, of which the virtues and the sufferings of Marie Antoinette, 
the secret devotion of Mirabeau to her cause, and anecdotes of 
Voltaire's residence at Brussels, made the fond. They had accom- 
panied the Prince of Orange to the races ; and they had assisted at 
the evening circles of the Hotels de Trazigny, de Ligne, or d'Ursel, 
or in other autocratic sets, where the old courtiers of the Austrian 
archducal times secretly compared the homeliness of the amiable 
Dutch Queen and her family, with the Spanish etiquettes and 

19.. 



262 



T11E PRINCESS. 



German stateliness of the beloved gouvernante of their fathers. 

To days and evenings so spent, the present existence of Sir Fre- 
derick Mottram formed a strange contrast. His object for the mo- 
ment was, if not to preserve a perfect incognito, at least to avoid 
liis English friends, and their surfeiting associations; and when his 
carriage should arrive, (which he now concluded might come by 
Antwerp,) to proceed as the chances and his actual laissez-aller 
state of mind might direct. 

There was a spell hanging over him, which he feared to analyse : it 
was producing a new development of opinion. It was reviving all 
that had made youth delightful, and early manhood a dream : above 
all, it had removed him from the tyranny of fashion, in habits, in 
politics, in religion, and in the arts themselves. He felt within him 
a breadth of mind, an expansion of ideas, a boldness of inquiry, 
which he never before had time, independence or courage to in- 
dulge. The eyes of his coterie were removed from him ; the watch- 
words of his party no longer resounded in his ears. He was scarcely 
less a Tory, and by no means more a Whig, than when he broke off 
from the sets and circles in which these epithets are consecrated ; 
but he was already taking more European views; his mind was 
ascending from particulars to generals, and he was assigning to by- 
gone ages those by-gone terms and usages which are no longer 
applicable to the present, an epoch without an antecedent ! His j 
mind resembled a compressive spring set free; and he already 
admitted the maxim of Bacon—" first to watch, and then to 
speed. " 

Deep in thoughts, which had for their subject a change of views, 
that made him almost doubt of his own moral identity, Sir Frederick 
Mottram was descending from the Tirlemont towards that little- 
frequented part of the town which leads to the nucleus of its foun- 
dation, the Isle de St. Gery. The drums and trumpets of the corps- 
de-garde on the Place Royale, were announcing the sunset of a 
sultry and clouded evening, when he seated himself on one of those 
Gothic arches which are so frequently thrown over the windings of 
the Senne. The extremely picturesque antiquity of the place induced 
him to inquire from a sturdy-looking old gentleman, who was 
plodding along by the help of a gold-headed cane, and in a dress that 
might have figured in the reign of Maria Theresa, what was the name 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



263 



of the irregular square which he then occupied. The old gentleman 
drew up in amazement, as if he thought it scarcely possible that any 
one could be ignorant of so important a site. 

" Comment I monsieur,' 1 '' he said ; " you do not know the Isle de 
St. Gery and the Borgval ? Sacrement I " 

" I am a stranger," said Sir Frederick, taking off his hat ; for his 
informant, notwithstanding the abruptness of his_manner, had lower- 
ed his to the ground. 

" C'est ca," said the old gentleman. " Well, monsieur, you are 
now on the site of the ancient citadel, where stood the chateau or 
first fortress of Brussels, occupied by the Emperor Otho the Second, 
in the tenth century. All that remains of that old bulwark is a 
ruin within that old brewery there, before you." 

" An ancient site, indeed !" said Sir Frederick, perceiving he had 
fallen in with an original. 

' : The Isle de St. Gery," continued the former speaker, " belong- 
ed to seven seigneurs fonciers, each of whom had a chateau on 
the shores of this little river. They were called the seven patrician 
families, and they have always distinguished themselves by their 
devotion to their country. You now stand, monsieur, in the heart 
of the old city : it was not till the thirteenth century that we began 
to move a little up the hill, when our good Duke John de Brabant 
raised a fine palace on the verge of the Forest of Soignes, now our 
park. Other palaces have since been built by our foreign masters. 
German, Spanish, and Dutch; but here, on this spot, our own 
native sovereign, Duke John the Third, published the first constitu- 
tional laws known in Europe, which guaranteed personal liberty, 
and the secure exercise of the rights of property. You see, mon- 
sieur, we were always a little en avant, nous autres Brabancons, 
n'est-ce pas •?" 

" It appears so," said Sir Frederick, " through the whole history 
of your country." 

" Can I give you any further information?" asked the bluff old 
gentleman. 

" If I might ask the way to the Grand Beguinage. " 

"Ah, the good women ! I have just been inquiring for one of 
the order now. Voyez, monsieur. Give yourself the trouble, if 
you please, of crossing that little bridge, and go straight on; but 



264 



THE PRINCESS. 



lose no time if you intend to get there by their vespers. Any one 
will point out the way to the Grand Beguinage. " 

Sir Frederick bowed his thanks, and gladly resumed his hat, 
which a blast of wind, sweeping down the little river, made neces- 
sary. With his head full of Othos, Duke Johns, and the frank 
courtesy of his Brabancon informant, he proceeded along narrow 
streets flanked by high facades terminating en escalier. Lofty 
casements with little- panes of Bohemian glass, massive doors fortified 
with square-headed nails, and the rez-de-chaussee protected by iron 
grates, added their features to the gloomy, silent, solitary quarter. 
The antiquated inhabitants were either not returned from their Sun- 
day festivities in the environs, the kermesses of Anderlecht, or the 
merry-makings of Boisfort or les Trois Fontaines; or they were 
shut up in their family parties, where many generations assemble under 
the patriarchal roof, and from which strangers are always excluded. 

As he proceeded, however, he had lost his clue, and scarcely 
knew how to go on, or how to return on his steps. Heavy drops 
of rain were beginning to fall, and sudden squalls of wind foretold 
a coming storm. The rain soon fell heavily ; almost every door 
and casement was closed ; and he had reached the neighbourhood 
of the lonely quarter of the Beguinage ( a territory once without the 
walls of the town), when the increase of the shower obliged him to 
ask shelter from an aged woman, who sat within the threshold of 
an open door belonging to a large and gloomy edifice. From its 
appearance, the old ruin might have belonged to one of those patri- 
cian families, of which the antiquarian of St. Gery had spoken with 
such reverence. 

The porteress, in her best Flemish French, welcomed him in, and 
offered him the stool on which she had been sitting, and reading her 
breviary. When he persisted, however, in declining the offer, and 
the rain continued to beat in with gusts of wind, she pressed him to 
enter au parloir. The desire to see the interior of the ancient edifice 
induced him to accept the invitation. The old woman hobbled on 
before him through a long narrow stone passage, which, turning to 
the right, opened into a dark, oak-wainscoted, low-roofed room. It 
could scarcely be said to be furnished. One or two antique carved, 
high-backed chairs, and an alcove ( half skreened by a sombre serge 
curtain) containing a couch, with a few antique picture-frames 



THE PRINCESS. 



265 



heaped up in a corner, a bust, and a torso, were its whole contents. 
One high window of many panes lighted the desolate apartment, 
and looked into a little grass-grown court. The old woman dusted 
a chair (which Sir Frederick accepted) and opened the door of an 
adjoining room, presenting to his observation an easel, on which was 
mounted an oil-painting of some dimension, with various implements 
of art. He rose and approached the atelier, for such it seemed. 

" Entrez done, monsieur,'''' said the old woman; " it may 
amuse you to look at that picture while the rain lasts. It is in a 
terrible state, this apartment ! If I were mistress, it should be in 
another condition ; the walls white-washed and the floors scoured, 
the furniture rubbed till it shone again, and the things set to rights : 
but, " she added, as she opened a glass-door that led into the court, 
" I have not been allowed to touch anything. " 

The opening of the door let in the perfume of the honeysuckles and 
jasmine which clustered round the walls of the court, and gave their 
dripping freshness to the close and heated room. A ray of light 
thus admitted showed the interior in negligent confusion, and fell 
upon the picture on the easel. It was a bold outline, thrown in 
with the first colours, of a site full of interest and groups full of 
movement ; the small but countless heads were full of strong expres- 
sion, like those of Callot in his picture of Christ's entrance into 
Jerusalem. The time was night, and the picture represented the 
facade of that glorious H6tel-de-VilIe, every part of which is in 
itself a picture. In the balcony stood several figures in the imposing 
costume of the Garde bourgeoise. A conspicuous personage, in 
the centre of the group, was reading by torchlight from a paper, * 
with a look of intense anxiety, to an armed multitude beneath, 
which was shaded off by dense masses to the extremity of the Grande 
Place. 

" That was a frightful night !" said the old woman. " There 

* August 31 , 1830.— On the return of the first deputation to the Prince of 
Orange, the deputies were so dissalisfied with the result, that they felt them- 
selves called on to give an account of the transaction to the people. They 
accordingly distributed a proclamation through the town, narrating the 
circumstances : — " Elle fut lue en outre aux flambeaux, au balcon de l'H6- 
tel-de-Ville , au milieu d'une multitude avide el inquiete."— Esquisses, p. 74. 



866 



THE PRINCESS. 



we were, monsieur ; old and young, women and children— we all 
took a part in that night." 

u And here is your own portrait, my good dame," said Sir Fre- 
derick : " what an admirable likeness !" 

" Jele crois Men,'' she said proudly ; " I sat for it. And here 
is Madame herself, in the dress of a Beguine, you see. Ah ! mon- 
sieur, if you knew to what danger the good sisters exposed them- 
selves during the Four Days ! — Are they good patriots, the Be- 
guines? *— Well, just as Madame had got thus far with her picture, 
and finished the portrait of the Prince de Schaffenhausen, she was 
called away from Brussels to undertake some great work in Ger- 
many ; and she has never visited Brussels but once since, when ( the 
Virgin bless and protect her ! ) she settled a little fortune on me, 
with no other task but to live here, to air this apartment, and pre- 
serve everything just as she left it. ' Not a brush, Therese, pas un 
coup de balaij she said, the last night she closed the door of this 
room, and turned the key and gave it into my possession." 

In almost breathless accents Sir Frederick inquired, " And what 
is your mistress's name ?" 

"Ah! cela s'appelle Madame Marguerite," said the old woman ; 
" a good creature, if there is one on earth, and a fine painter, if she 
had taken a better line, and had worked for the church as she has 
worked for her country. Look, sir" — and she turned out several 
unfinished pictures which lay against the wall, done only in two co- 
lours, and little more than studies — " look, 1 beseech you : these 
are all taken from story-books about the Low Countries in the old 
times ; but not a crucifixion ! not a saint ! not a miracle ! not a mar- 
tyrdom ! as our cure' said the other day, when he was looking for 
something for an altar-piece for the chapel of a good brewer in the 
Low Town." 

Sir Frederick examined the various studies thus exposed to his 
inspection as long as he had light to see them by : there was ob- 
vious in all the same originality of conception, the same broad, bold, 
but unfinished touch. He assisted the old woman to replace them, 
and then asked, with affected carelessness— 

* " Le bel elablissement du Grand Bt^guinage Put dispose pour recevoir 
et secourir les victimes des combats. " Esquisses, p. 74. 



TI1E PROCESS. 



267 



" Have you Jived long in the service of Madame Marguerite ?" 

" Nearly eight years altogether. It has been a rather dreary life ; 
particularly when Madame went to Antwerp or to Ghent, to copy 
pictures, or take views of old buildings. This is a melancholy old 
place in the best of limes. It belonged to the corporation of the 
Poissonniers; you see there the remains of their fine painted glass 
windows, called chassis. But Madame liked it all the better for 
that : she wanted, also, a spacious work-room— not easy to get in 
this old quarter ; and then it is near the Grand Beguinage, where 
she has a little apartment." 

" Oh ! Madame is a Beguine ?" 

44 Ilein ! a sort of a Beguine, if you will, a dame chambrde. 
She was once a sister, but when she took to painting pictures she 
recalled her vows. She has now again attached herself to the 
chapter, and when here submits, like a true charitable woman as 
she is, to all the duties of the order, and attends the hospitals : she 
visited all the ambulances during the Four Days."* 

Sir Frederick thrilled with the pleasurable interest he took in 
this relation. He feared that the rain would stop, or the evening 
fall too darkly, before he could devour all the details of this most 
melancholy, but, to him, most interesting apartment, where strug- 
gling penury and unavailing industry had worn out years of labo- 
rious diligence and unrequited talent. A little gueridon contained 
a plain delf dejeune. A ponderous carved oak table loaded with 

* The conduct of the women of Brussels during the Four Days was heroic : 
— " Pendant la bataille, " says the author of the Esquisses Historiques, 
" un grand norabre de proprielaires de maisons, aides de leurs families, ar- 
rachaient le plomb de leurs toils pour en faire des balles, ettravaillaient sans 
relache a confeclionner des cartouches quandils pouvaient se procurer de la 
poudre. Les femmes, les dames memes, se trouvaient avec courage el perseV- 
verance a ces occupations, si nouvelles pour elles. Des le 28 septembre, 
un grand nomhre de ces dames se reunirenl en socieMi, sous la presidence 
du gcneral-en-chef, Van Halen, dans le but de secourir les blesses et leurs 
families. Des collectes furent faites par leurs soins dans loutes les eglises, 
et elles se partagerent la lache douloureuse de visiter chaque jour les ambu- 
lances, accompagnees d'un aide-de-camp. Le vin trouve" dans les caves des 
palais fut mis a leur disposition. ""—Supplement aux Esquisses Histori- 
ques de la Premiere Epoque de la Revolution de la Belgique en 1850. 



268 



THE PRINCESS. 



drawings and books in various languages, a harp covered with green 
baize, and some music-scores, open on the desk of a little instrument 
which looked like an ancient spinetle, were all objects of interest 
and curiosity. 

" Voyez, monsieur" said the old crone, pleased with the inte- 
rest he exhibited; " here is the grey linen blouse in which she 
worked the night before she went off with the Prince. " 

" Went off with the Prince! " reiterated Sir Frederick, with all 
the blood in his body rushing into his face. 

" Ah t je ne dis pas cela, " said the old woman, frightened; 
' 4 at least, 1 do not say it with any evil meaning. Madame is protected 
by the Princess, who has done some great charities by her hands to 
the poor Beguines of Brussels and to others; and I have orders to 
give this picture to the Princess whenever she comes or sends for it : 
it is the unfinished picture of the late Prince. ,5 

She drew from behind the easel the portrait, which Sir Frederick 
brought out into the court, to view it by the last rays of sunset that 
lingered in the horizon. 

It was the picture of an elderly man, who, to judge by the linea- 
ments of his still handsome face, had passed through the world's 
hands, and shared largely in its pleasures. A voluptuous indo- 
lence, mingled with an aristocratical hauteur, was the leading 
expression. His dress was the white uniform of Austria ; and his 
numerous orders were a proof of his rank and influence, if not of 
his prowess. 

Sir Frederick replaced it with a deep sigh, and presenting the old 
woman a napole'on, observed, " that as the rain had now ceased, he 
would not further intrude then ; but he begged permission to revisit 
the atelier, and to see by daylight what had appeared, even by that 
dim twilight, so indicative of a master talent. " Amazement at a 
donation so liberal, a recompense so far above the trouble she had 
taken, distended the eyes, and even silenced the tongue, of the 
garrulous old woman. Sir Frederick availed himself of her sur- 
prise, to escape the expression of her gratitude. He had scarcely 
however got a few paces, when, struck by a sudden thought, he 
turned back. The old woman was looking after him — 

" 1 had heard, V he said, " that Madame Marguerite had arrived 
in Brussels : do you know where she resides? " 



THE PRINCESS. 



269 



4i Oh ! you know her then, ?no?i bon seigneur? " said the old 
woman, in trepidation. 

L - Just enough, " he replied, " to entitle me to leave this card for 
her. You will not fail to give it? " 

" I shall not forget any command of yours," she said; " but 
Madame Marguerite is not arrived. She never fails to visit her 
atelier; and yet I have heard nothing of her these three months. 
Her old friend Monsieur Janssens has just been here to inquire for 
her : I sent him to the Beguinage la-bas ! 

" Oh ! an old gentleman with a broad hat and gold-headed 
cane? " 

" Ah! mon Dieu, oui—un brave homme! I think he wants to 
buy Madame's great picture. " 

" I should like to buy it myself, " interrupted Sir Frederick, 
hastily ; " I like it much, and the price would be no object. " 

" Bien, monsieur. Men ! " said the old woman, her countenance 
brightening into an expression of pleasure that her inadvertent 
courtesy excused itself by the sale of a picture which had remained 
so long on the artist's hands,—" I will tell Madame. " 

The heart of one who has ■ cleansed his bosom of that perilous 
stuff, ' which has weighed upon his spirits, and long impeded the 
flow of every better and more genial feeling, is like a dismantled 
fortress, open to all inroads, accessible to all invaders. The heart, 
or that disposition of the feelings to which the term is vulgarly given, 
' —the heart of Sir Frederick Mottram was precisely in this state, 
which most fitted it to receive a new impression from objects, that, 
under other excitements and associations, would have passed over 
its surface without leaving a trace behind. 

It had however one guard, whose slumbers were easily awakened, 
—the habit of distrust, the grand arch on which the education of the 
wealthy youth of England is principally founded. The false insti- 
tutes of British society, which make wealth and rank the primary 
points of parental speculation, which sink personal worth, throw 
the great and unpurchasable gifts of nature into contempt, and con- 
sider genius, intellect, grace, and beauty as matters of suspicion 
and avoidance, had placed the son of the plebeian Mottram as much 
within the go-carl of aristocratic prejudice, as if his veins had been 
filled with ' all the blood of all the Howards.' He had been guarded 

20. 



I: 



270 THE PRINCESS. 

by paternal maxims, and a mother's vigilance— by the precautionary 
saws of maiden cousins and widowed aunts ( whom his father's 
niggardly liberality had raised from indigence to dependent suffi- 
ciency ), against the allurements of youth, beauty, and talents, 
when unaccompanied by wealth, or unbacked by the world's consi- 
deration. 

He had been taught to believe that the motherhood of Great 
Britain was in a conspiracy to entrap, and the unportioned daugh- 
terhood to seduce, him, and the first lesson of his own consequence 
and self-importance was impressed on his young and too ductile 
mind, by the insinuating accents of female ambition, breathed in 
the tender tones of affectionate and anxious caution. 

But nature was powerful above all ! The artist's temperament, 
which he had derived from his Irish mother, had broken out, 
through the artificial associations of the over-educated, over-guarded 
parvenu; and the beauty of form, the grace of movement, and the 
universal genius of a poor orphan, received as a talking companion 
to his sister, to discourse with her in French and German, had, in 
one short month, nearly overturned the system of years; his after 
life had been the expiation of the imprudent impulse, as it had 
been the penalty of his heartless desertion of its object. Distrust 
of woman, the habit of considering her through her position in 
life, as a means, and never as an object, had clung to him, with 
that indissoluble adhesion which a mother's deep-sunk impressions 
are sure to create, and had survived other habits of mind of equal 
importance to his ambitious career. It had led to many an idle 
liaison with the flirting women of London sets, in which his senses 
took as little interest as his heart ; and it had precluded him from 
ever forming one of those deep and lasting attachments, only to be 
awakened by the sympathy of tastes and opinions, constituting that 
suitability which confounds two existences in one. He had been 
jealous of a wife whom he had never loved ; and he had believed him- 
self in love with women, who had tried in vain to make him jealous. 

The orthodox moralist, the pure and loyal church-and-state man, 
was a latitudinarian, where the passions, or vanity, which so often 
passes for passion, were concerned. He had written one of his best 
papers in the Quarterly Review, on the superior morals of England, 
while notoriously engaged in a liaison with the wife of his own 



THE PRINCESS. 



271 



friend, the Marquis of Montressor ; and had been succeeded in her 
Ladyship's good graces by his friend Lord Aubrey, in an interval 
devoted to writing an hypercritical article on some book of travels, 
in which the probity of Ninon de l'Enclos had been praised, at the 
expense of the trust-worthiness of a churchman. Foreign demora- 
lization was a frequent theme in his conversation, and in his literary 
i productions, when he dabbled, like other party notabilities, in 
reviews and newspapers. But the domestic gallantry of England, 
the libertinism of some of her highest aristocratic coteries, ( compa- 
1 rable only to the society which flourished under Louis XV. and 
hurried on a revolution as inevitable as it was morally necessary, ) 
had never yet come under the ban of his opinion. 

To amuse, therefore, his idleness, to dissipate his disgusts, and 
cheer his spirits, by the indulgence of a gout passage!" for a 
woman who had thrown herself in his way, whose talents enter- 
tained, or person pleased him, would have been an incident in his 
journey ; but would scarcely have weighed on the conscience of 
one who, among his own set and party, had obtained the name of 
the great moralist, because he paid his debts, and went, sometimes, 
to church on Sundays. 

That ' Voreille est le chemin du coeur, ' is a maxim in the code 
of gallantry, more especially applicable to that turn of life, when 
the wild energies of youth and passion are yielding to more sober 
and intellectual, but noi less dangerous influences. The ear of 
Sir Frederick Mottram had been charmed by the music of sweet 
sounds, and his mind had been infinitely amused by the subjects 
on which those sounds had dilated, during his accidental rencontres 
with the fair Belgian artist. Her prepossession in his favour was 
romantic and flattering, as it was obvious. She had followed him 
from England ( for he had no doubt that he had made his first 
impression at the bed of the parish workhouse), and she had crossed 
his path too frequently to attribute the circumstance to accident. 

Though no longer une jeune femme, she was, according to 
the delicate French definition, une femme encore jeune : she was 
fresh, agile, handsome, spiritual, and amusing ; he thought her, 
therefore, precisely the person whom a prudent, tasteful, and 
passionate man of prudence and pleasure might select for a com- 
pagne de voyage; whom he might induce, by a liberal allowance, 



272 



THE PRINCESS. 



to travel as an artist at the same time to the same place with him- 
self, and apparently with a view to the arts, and under the veil of 
great bienseance. Madame Marguerite was a companion such as 
the world ( if it ever knew aught of the matter ) might not wholly 
disapprove, a connexion which the slang of English fashion would 
call 'a fair thing and very decent,' and which no compunctious 
visitings of conscience would reprove : for the lady had come to 
years of discretion; and he, though a married man, would only 
do what half the married men of his acquaintance were daily doing, 
or had done at some epoch of their lives— with this exception, that 
the object of his selection was neither the wife of his friend, nor 
the friend of his wife. 

Such had been the summary of the reverie which had occupied 
his mind during his solitary moonlight drive from Alost to Brussels, 
and which, under new and still more agreeable impressions, had 
since preoccupied his thoughts ; for he had no doubt Madame Mar- 
guerite would again throw herself in his way. The chance, how- 
ever, which had led him to her melancholy home, in the ruined edi- 
fice in the old quartier de St. Gery, had caused some revulsion in 
his feelings, and the frost-work fabric of his selfish intentions, cold 
and shining as it had been, fell to pieces. The desolate work-room 
of struggling genius, with all its sublime but melancholy imagery, 
the eight years spent there in profitless labour, by one whose talents 
threw the mediocrity of all the female society he had ever mingled 
with into the shade, had cast over the character and position of this 
singular woman a halo of respect, and awakened a reverential ad- 
miration for her qualities, and a pity for her dreary position, which 
altered the whole nature of the sentiment she had hitherto inspired. 

Again, the fantastic creation thus raised was changed by an inci- 
dent, a phrase ! The portrait of the Prince of Schaffenhausen, and 
the naive communication of the old porteress, that the artist had 
gone off with the Prince, and was protected by the Princess, had 
roused the latent distrust awakened in his mind, while yet a boy at 
Harrow, by a caution against the wiles of his dame's artful niece ; 
and placed the charming artist, the hard-working woman of genius, 
in the light of an adroit adventuress, who had marked her quarry, 
and was eager in its pursuit. 

Even the accounts of her patriotism and her piety, her exertions 



THE PRINCESS. 273 

during the Four Days, and her belonging to the order of the Be- 
guines, served but to fill up the outline of his own views of her 
character ; as comprizing great energies, ready to devote themselves 
to any cause which excited her imagination or flattered her ambition ; 
and a love of intrigue, which the habits and licensed pursuits of that 
popular order might well serve and sanction. 

The Princess's protection also recalled those odious intimacies 
that had shocked him in Vienna and in London, between the wife 
and the mistress — intimacies founded in mutual necessities and equal 
profligacy ; governed by the exigencies of their position, and main- 
tained as the means by which they might aid, serve, and, in the end, 
betray each other. 

The quondam mistress of the old profligate Prince of Schaffen- 
hausen, the protegee of the worst bad woman ( if report spoke true ) 
in the annals of modern high life, whose very name was to him a 
talisman of evil potency, was for the moment an object of suspicion, 
and even of fear ; and almost wound up his wavering resolves to 
leave Brussels, as soon as his carriage arrived, without seeking to 
follow up an acquaintance of such dubious character. In the mean 
time he would confine himself to poking about the antiquities of the 
place, with his casual and accomplished acquaintance Monsieur 
Van H., who had given him his address; keep aloof from the upper 
town, and its English set ; get rid of Fegan, hire foreign servants, 
and then proceed to some pursuit of health, amusement and infor- 
mation, more accordant with his tastes, feelings and new-born 
determinations, political and domestic, and better suited to future 
years and new impressions. 

Such was the wind-up of his self-examination, as he slowly, and 
by a not very direct road, ascended from the lower town. He 
had already reached the Marche' aux Herbes, the barrier between 
the French and Flemish quarters, when he was struck by voices 
and words that startled him out of his deep abstraction 5 and he 
paused to listen and to see. 

A crowd of votarists at the shrine of pleasure were returning in 
various directions from the noisy guinguettes of the faubourgs. 
Some were singing their way back from the kermess at Etter- 
beek ; others, expending their exuberant vitality in loud hal- 
loos, joyous shouts, and tipsy laughter, on their return from their 

20.. 



274 



THE PRINCESS. 



recreations in the estaminets of La Porte Verte and Schaerbeek. I 

But loud above all the Flemish guttural expressions of rude but 
happy sensation, and the refrains of patriotic songs in which the j 
Orange flag was trampled under foot, two voices were heard singing j 
in unison. The words of the song were English, but they were j 
intonated with an Irish emphasis not to be mistaken. 

" 'Tis on the curragh of Kildare, 
Lord Edward will be there, 
And the pikes all in repair, 

Says the Shanvan vaugh ! Hoo ! " 

The vociferous singers cleared the way for themselves, by the 
irregular movements of their Herculean forms. They were tall, \ 
athletic ; and they rolled on, arm in arm, supporting each other like i 
two tired horses, toiling up the hill, shoulder to shoulder. Sir Fre- I 
derick, who drew back to let them pass, perceived that the riotous s 
choristers and fc ninety-eight ' men were Sir Ignatius Dogherty and j 
his compatriot Lawrence Fegan, quite as drunk with Faro or Alam- 
bique, as they ever had been with true poteen or parliament \ 
whisky. 

The revellers passed on, and Sir Frederick, a little surprised by j 
the saturnalian association of the wealthy Irish baronet with his J 
own servant, was still more amused than annoyed by the incident ; } 
for he had made up his mind to discharge the latter, and to cut the j 
former. The frequent pauses which the two pot-valiant sons of ! 
Erin made in their ascent, again brought Sir Frederick so closely in I 
contact with them on the Montague de la Cour, that it came into 
his recollection that he might as well notify his presence to Fegan, 
who had carried off the key of his sleeping-room, and might, by 
protracting his vigils, prevent his master from that rest of which he 
already felt the want. 

Fegan, with his usual quickness, drunk or sober (an instinct 
rather than a perception), stopped shorthand endeavoured with his 
disengaged hand to remove his hat; but it fell to the ground. In 
endeavouring to recover it, he lost his equilibrium, and dragged the 
Baronet after him. Their fall produced a shout of laughter from 
the bystanders, some of whom had followed the drunken Irishmen 



TUE PRINCESS. 275 

up the hill. The prostrate parties, enraged at the insult, and with 
the huffishness of drunkards, and the love of row of Irishmen, 
strove to make fight as they recovered their feet. 

Sir Frederick, who saw all the possible annoyance which might 
arise to himself from his servant's getting into a scrape, now came 
forward to order Fegan home, and leave Sir Ignatius to his fate; 
but at the first sound of his voice, and advance of his person, he was 
recognised by the latter personage, who, with his besetting passions 
all afloat, gave vent, in the honesty of drunkenness, to his long- 
stifled feelings. 

Seizing Sir Frederick by the collar, and clinging to him as much 
for support as to prevent his evasion, he roared out — " The divel a 
fut you '11 stir till you send me back my best shirt, though you were 
twenty times a greater dandy than you are." 

The dexterity of Sir Frederick, joined with the indignation that 
led him to shake off the insolent drunkard, who, he imagined, had 
mistaken him for some other, were utterly unequal to relieve him 
from the grasp of one who had often floored a stouter man. He 
writhed and struggled in vain, and Sir Ignatius continued in tipsy 
emotion—" 1 '11 have my shirt! You won't stir till you tell me 
where 1 '11 get my best baby-linen-warehouse shirt !" 

" Ce sont des boxeurs Anglais,'''' said one of the crowd, ad- 
dressing the gaping circle of curious faces around him ; while Fegan, 
sobered by apprehension and shame, stood aloof, wiping the mud 
from his face, which, in his fall, he had picked up from the still 
humid streets. 

" Soyez tranquilles," said the Belgian spokesman, " vousallez 
voir un grand box. Allez done, mon vieux brave /" clapping 
Sir Ignatius on the shoulder. 

" Get along out of that, you dirty spalpeen!" said Sir Ignatius, 
still holding the collar of Sir Frederick ; " what is it to you ? It's 
all I want is my shemie. Do you understand that— my shemie? I 
flather myself that's good Frinch. I want my shemie, monsieur." 

u Ah! c' est son camarade qui lui a vole sa chemise; faut 
dire un mot a la police,'" said the pertinacious interloper. 

" The police! " exclaimed Sir Ignatius. " Is it an Irish noble- 
man and a barinite you'd be sinding to the police, you platter-faced 
omadaun?" 



276 



THE PRINCESS. 



At that moment a carriage paused in its ascent up the hill, to 
avoid running over the still-gathering crowd ; a lady put out her 
head, and a voice from one of three gentlemen who were descending 
the hill at the same moment, inquired in English, " What is the 
matter ? Can we be of any service ?" 

M Och ! the mather is plain and aisy, gentlemen dear,' 1 hiccupped 
Sir Ignatius. " I am Sir Ignatius Dogherty, a nobleman and an 
ancient barinite, as Sir William Betham, Ulster king-at-arms, will 
tell yez, if he plaizes : and this English gentleman, as he calls himself , 
borrowed my shirt at Ostend ; and never heard more of it nor him 
from that blessed hour ; to say nothing of my lady's white cambric 
pocket-hankercher." 

Sir Frederick Mottram had now succeeded in disengaging his 
coat, but with a violence that almost flung him into the arms of 
the English gentleman who had come to the rescue. 

" Mottram ! by Jove, " cried one of the strangers ; an exclamation 
followed by a shout of recognition and amazement from the whole 
English party, in which the lady in the carriage joined with a frank 
hilarity such as fine ladies seldom indulge in. The gentlemen were 
Lords Montressor and Alfred, and Mr. St. Leger; the lady was the 
rrincess of Schaffenhausen, who, in spite of the darkness and a 
deep veil, was instantly recognised. 

" But what is it?" asked the Princess in her broken but sweet 
accent : " faites-vous done une petite contre-revolution a Veau 
rose?" 

" No, 1 ' said Lord Alfred; "it is, I suspect, a la Mere de 
Louvain. 99 

" And English influence," said the Princess, "seems more or 
less at the bottom of this, as of other movements. " 

" I leave my friend, here," said Lord Montressor, "whom we 
have found in the thick of the row, to answer for himself. Sir 
Frederick Mottram, Madame la Princesse de Schaffenhausen." And 
he pushed Sir Frederick, whom he held by the arm as tightly 
as Sir Ignatius had held his coat, towards the door of the britzka. 

Sir Frederick's first impulse at this strange, unlooked-for, and 
most unlucky rencontre with nearly all the persons he was most 
desirous to avoid, had been to make his escape : his next was to 
stand firm, and trust to the fact that Sir Ignatius Dogherty had, 



THE PROCESS. 



277 



in his drunkenness, mistaken him for another person : he had as 
much forgotten that there had been a moment in which he was in 
want of a shirt, as he was ignorant, through the silence of Fegan 
on that particular, that he had availed himself of the flower of 
Sir Ignatius's wardrobe. This dense twilight introduction to the 
Princess, in the narrowest and most dusky part of the Montague 
de la Cour, divested it of much of the awkwardness and confusion 
he could neither repress nor conceal, but which he felt in every 
nerve and fibre. 

" Lady Frances is here, I suppose?" said the Princess, " though 
she never mentioned her journey when I saw her the night before 
I left London. " 

The cool effrontery of this reminiscence astounded Sir Frederick. 

" No," said Lord Montressor ; " we husbands are only the avant- 
garde. Lady Frances joins you here, I suppose, Mottram?" 

Mottram answered ■ unwittingly— he knew not what. ' 

" When did you arrive, messieurs?" asked the Princess ; " and 
where are you going ?" 

" Here, St. Leger, come forward," said Lord Alfred : " he will 
tell you ; he is the sense-keeper of our party. " 

"Monsieur St. Leger did always like what you call the sinecure" 
said the Princess. 

" My present part is anything but that," he said ; " there is no 
charge so difficult as the taking care of a man who is running after 
his heart without the hope of his recovery." (And he clapped Lord 
Alfred on the shoulder.) " But, be that as it may, we arrived yes- 
terday at dinner, and have searched every hotel in the town for the 
Priucesse Fee." 

" And now you have found me, a quoi bon ?" 

" That is not a question to be answered here," said Lord Alfred, 
laying his hand on the door of the carriage : "Whence are you 
come ?" 

" From my campagne." 

" And where are you in Brussels ?" 

" The Hotel de Gronendael is my etat-major." 

" That suffices. We shall not so easily lose sight of you again. 
Your disappearance in London caused a sensation, as the ' Age' said, 
unrivalled since " 



278 



THE PRINCESS. 



" —Since the death of Lady Frances's parroquet," interrupted 
the Princess. 

There was an affected laugh and a short silence among the party. 

6< Are you going to the theatre, Princess ?" asked Lord Montres- 
sor; " and will you let us into your box ?" 

" Misericordia—\ go to a play on a Sunday ! What do you 
English take me for ?" 

" Will you allow me then," said Lord Alfred, " to join your 
head-quarters, and enter immediately on service?" 

u Nous verrons" said the Princess, yawning. " Bon soir, mes- 
sieurs" And then, addressing her servants, she pronounced the 
imperative " Allez." 

The carriage drove on. Meantime the dramatis personce had 
shifted their position. A something uttered in the ear of Sir Igna- 
tius by Fegan, had produced the same effect as the muttered magic 
of the celebrated Irish whisperer, who tamed horses by a word. 
Sir Ignatius shrunk off, supported by the arm of his companion ; 
and the crowd, disappointed in their hope of witnessing an English 
boxing-match, dispersed and disappeared. The gentlemen proceed- 
ed down the Montague de la Cour, on their way to the theatre ; 
and, either from malicious design or inadvertence, drew Sir Frede- 
rick along with them, who, pinioned on either side by Lord Mon- 
tressor and his brother, meditated the escape he had as yet not been 
able to effect without exciting some strange suspicion. 

" Whom had the Princess with her ? " asked Lord Alfred. 

"Her eternal dame de compagnie, I suppose," said Mr. St. 
Leger. 

u Her German etiquette thinks a lady in waiting an indispensable 
appendage. I could tell you stories of that arrangement at Vienna 
a mourir de rire. " 

" You shall tell them over an Ostend oyster and iced champaigne, 
after the theatre to-night," said Lord Montressor. " Mottram, you 
must sup with us at the Bellevue. " 

' ' Not to-night : I have written myself into the most confounded 
head-ache, and must home to bed. " 

" Not a bit of it," said Lord Montressor, still detaining him by the 
arm ; and he suddenly stopped at the corner of the Place de la Mon- 
naie, which now burst upon them in all its bustle and brilliancy. 



THE PRINCESS. 



279 



" You must come with us to our ambassador's box. We have a 
million of things to say, and to ask. Have you seen the English 
papers? What do you think of the glorious stand made by the two 
Dukes, and Lords Winchelsea and Eldon, the other night?" 

; ' I have seen no papers, and want to know nothing of English 
politics. I have left London for the express purpose of throwing 
over the whole concern and breaking free for a time. " 

" Oh! so. I suppose you know that all sorts of reasons have 
been assigned for your escapade, gallant, political, economical and 
salutary ?" 

" Provided you don't repeat them, it is quite indifferent to me 
what hirelings have written, or gossips of either sex invented in 
malice, or repeated in design. " 

" Design ! what design?" asked Lord Alfred : " I don't see how 
your movements can affect any one. " 

" Except his wife, " said Lord Montressor, laughing. " She 
really was in despair at your sudden and unannounced departure, 
until your letter to your man of business cleared up the mystery. 
But we cannot stand talking family business here. Do come and 
see la petite Linsel—c'est a croquer, celle-ld. " 

" Impossible, I am not dressed. " 

" Psha ! nobody dresses here. The braves Beiges of the present 
day have not got as far as the toilette habilUe, except for a court 
ball. By Jove ! how gay and splendid this place is ! quite a little 
Palais Royal. This is the proper entourage for a theatre. Our 
English theatres are buried in such horrid purlieus. " 

At that moment, the French and English secretaries of legation 
drew up in their cabs. They were known to all the parties, and 
the mutual recognitions under the peristyle permitted Sir Frederick 
to escape. His mood of mind had been wholly broken up by the 
unwished-for rencontre, connected as it was with associations it had 
cost him so much pain and trouble to get rid of. 

He was in the act of crossing the illuminated Place with eager 
haste, when he came full against a gentleman, whom, while he was 
making his apology, he recognised to be his agreeable travelling 
companion from Ghent to Alost. 

_ " You are surely not turning your back upon the ' Centenaire' 
and * La Fille de Dominique ? ' " said M. Van H. 



280 



THE PRINCESS. 



I have been forcibly brought here, " said Sir Frederick ; " and 
have just shaken off some free-hearted companions, who wanted me, 
bon gre mal gre', to bring my aching head into the heated atmo- 
sphere of the theatre. Besides, " he added, already relieved by the 
absence of his tormentors, " I doubt that there is anything within, 
finer than this splendid scene without. " 

" Yes ! whoever would give the stranger a favourable impression 
of the gaiety of Brussels, should drop him first here, at this hour, 
where we stand, in the centre of la Place de la Monnaie. On 
either side are the most modern and the most ancient public monu- 
ments—the theatre and the Hotel de la Monnaie : the one, with 
its cold Greek architecture, its peristyle of Ionic columns, and illu- 
minated arcades, was finished in 1819; the other, with its heavy 
masses now lying in their own deep shadows, was founded in 1291. 
Ages have passed over its venerable site ; great scenes have been 
enacted where it stands; dynasties have been overthrown, and 
governments displaced; but no event, in the course of the five 
hundred years which have passed since its foundation, has been 
more extraordinary, or more influential on Belgian interests, than 
that which it witnessed on the night of the 25th of August 1830. 
Here began our revolution, on such a night as this— at this hour— 
in this month— and amidst such images of brilliancy and pleasure 
as now present themselves, with the music of Auber ringing in every 
ear, and the representation of a popular revolution heating every 
imagination! 1 ' 

"Yes," said Sir Frederick, "you recall to my recollection that 
the outbreak of the disturbances at Brussels did commence at the 
theatre ; and that the mimic representation of a rebellion of Lazza- 
roni was the first link in the important chain of events, which may 
yet kindle another general and European war, if not prevented by 
the wisdom and firmness of the greater powers. Had the Muette de 
Portici, then, not been performed, William of Nassau might still 
have reigned in Brussels, and Leopold been living an accomplished 
private gentleman at Claremont. " 

" That," said M. Van H., " is a very rapid, and, permit me to 
add, a very English conclusion. Accidents, sir, may beget accidents ; 
but events which make the destinies of nations are never improvises." 

Sir Frederick Mottram felt that his already irritated temper was 



THE PRINCESS. 



281 



committing him on a point of courtesy, as well as of fact ; and 
checking his own impetuosity, he said — 

" The truth is, your Belgian revolution is not popular in England, 
or rather, not well known, and least of all with that large and in- 
fluential party who are endeavouring to uphold a constitution, threat- 
ened not only by internal impatience of necessary evils, but by 
external influence and example ; and when one hears of a dynasty 
overthrown under the excitement of a dramatic representation, and 
finds that event misrepresented as a great movement of a great peo- 
ple, and offered as a proof of the march of social improvement, a 
theme of popular rejoicing, and a type for popular imitation . . . ." 

"When that theatre was first opened in 1819," interrupted 
M. Van H., "the representation, chosen as the most national and 
exciting, was the Caravane du Caire, the chef-d'oeuvre of our own 
immortal Gretry ( for whose heart, bequeathed to his native city of 
Liege, two nations went to law); the musical susceptibility of the 
Belgians, second only to that of Italians, was roused to a frenzy of 
delight ; but no one thought of going to Cairo, or journeying in a 
caravan. If the example of Massaniello had more influence on the 
population of Brussels, than it had on the habitues of the Opera- 
house in the Hay market, it was because it fell like the spark on a 
well-prepared mine— because the explosive elements were already 
accumulated by an unjust and anti-national government. The acci- 
dental influence was confined to the square in which we are now 
conversing, but the shock vibrated to the remotest corner of Bel- 
gium. But pray give yourself up for awhile to Belgian ideas and 
to Belgian influences. Let us take a so?*bet under this veranda; you 
will find it more refreshing than the interior of the theatre ; and in 
witnessing the manners of our citizens in this their favourite haunt, 
you w ill be better qualified to judge of the great event which took 
place on it." 

The next moment the stranger-friends were seated under an 
awning in the front of one of the brilliant coffee-houses which 
occupy the Place de la Monnaie. Ices and punch a la Romaine 
were set before them, and the whole structure of mind and feeling 
which had been generated by the mal-d-propos appearance of Sir 
Frederick's English coterie gave way before an intense and awa- 
kened curiosity, 

31. 



282 



THE PRINCESS. 



" It is not to be expected," said Monsieur Van H., " that fo- 
reigners should be acquainted with the long details of grievance that 
prepared the way*for our revolution ; but from the universality of 
the effect, you must be prepared to infer the existence of an uni- 
versal cause. Without, however, pausing upon historical consi- 
derations, the event, as far as this locale is concerned, you may well 
imagine, was one singularly picturesque. It has afforded a fine 
subject to the pencil of one of our most distinguished female artists, 
Madame Marguerite ; for notwithstanding the imputed dulness and 
homespun materiality of our Belgian women, we have some fine 
painters and even agreeable writers among them." 

" Is that picture of Madame Marguerite's in the market?" asked 
Sir Frederick. 

" It was sold to a manufacturer of this city, before it was finished. 
In fact, it never has been finished. Madame Marguerite left Brussels 
a few weeks after the Four Days, and has never since been heard 
of here, till the other day, when a report had been spread of her 
intention of contributing a picture to our exhibition." 

But," said Sir Frederick, " the public mind having been so 
fearfully excited by the Parisian revolution of July, there surely 
was great want of foresight in the Government allowing the per- 
formance of the Muette. " 

" So the event has proved," said Monsieur Van H. : " and indeed 
had the thing been contrived on purpose by a band of conspirators, 
it could not have been more a-propos. Indeed there are not wanting 
persons to assert that the whole was a plot of the Government, to 
excite a scene, which might serve as a pretext for future severities. 
But the total absence of ail repressive means, to confine the possible 
outrage within safe limits, is the best defence of the authorities." 

" True," said Sir Frederick ; "such suppositions of ultra Machi- 
avelian refinements on the part of governments, are seldom well 
founded, though frequently employed, in the speculations of jour- 
nalists. They are common enough in English politics, and have 
been made in instances, in which I have had the best reasons for 
knowing their slanderous falsity." 

"In the present case," said M. Van H., " I totally discredit them, 
and believe that it had been in contemplation to prevent the exhi- 
bition. Considering the state of the public mind, more especially 



THE PRINCESS. 



283 



at thai particular moment, the folly of administering such a stimulus 
to the inflamed populace, was worthy of a Government predestined 
to destruction." 

" What," said Sir Frederick, " was the circumstance to which 
you more immediately allude?" 

" The public discontents had been for some time gathering head, 
and the aspect of affairs was becoming daily more threatening. 
The Government was alarmed ; but to conjure the coming storm, 
no better expedient suggested itself than an ostentatious rejoicing 
on occasion of the King's birthday, which fell on the twenty-fourth, 
precisely the day before that on which the revolution actually com- 
menced. For this festivity the greatest preparations had been made 
by the Government. Fireworks were to be given at the Porte de 
Namur, with public illuminations in the Park and city ; concerts, 
races, and exhibitions of every sort, calculated to intoxicate an un- 
reflecting populace. An immense sum was expended on the Park 
alone to render it a centre of especial attraction. With an unpo- 
pular Government such a rejoicing by command would have been 
sufficiently galling ; but it was rendered doubly disgusting, by the 
circumstance that the poverty of the exchequer had been made the 
plea for continuing an odious impost upon the grinding of corn, 
which fell especially heavy on the common people. The outcry was 
immense, and on every side was heard the epigram of 6 to-day an 
illumination, to-morrow a revolution I ' The expense, however, 
had been incurred, the preparations were made, but the authorities 
were discouraged ; and amidst the most glorious weather they put 
off the celebration sine die, a cause du mauvais temps I In point 
of fact, the military and civil authorities, and the public itself, were, 
for more than eight days, aware that some great event was at hand ; 
yet the drama of the Muette was allowed to be played !" 

" The conjuncture was strange," said Sir Frederick : " and what 
followed?" 

" The house was crowded at an early hour, and every allusion to 
liberty was received with an enthusiasm which was rapidly propa- 
gated to an assembled multitude collected in this square. 

" Warned by a sort of instinct, that the moment for action was 
come, the citizens flocked to the environs of the theatre in numbers 
unusually great. Other physiognomies and other dresses than are 



284 



THE PRINCESS. 



usually seen here, presented themselves. The blouse and the cas- 
quette were frequent ; but there were no rags, none of the squalid 
poverty, which looks to public disturbances for the opportunity for I 
plunder. Neither were there any ostentatiously armed. Surround- 
ing the theatre, and spread in the Cafe Suisse, and the Mille 
Colonnes, they awaited events ; but no one drank : ' Jene boisplus, 
il est dix heures, venez done, on nous attendra, ' was repeated 
on every side." 

" And the authorities permitted all this, and did not take the 
alarm?" 

" No force of any sort appeared to protect the peace. Towards 
the end of the play, the crowd began to move towards the Fosse'-aux- 
Loups, where was the printing-office of ' the National, ' a most 
anti-national and Dutch newspaper, an object of general execration 
and hatred. 

" At ten o'clock two lamps were broken, which was the first sig- 
nal for riot. In an instant, the street was unpaved, amidst cries of 
a bas le forcat liberel the editor Libry. The shop of this man, in 
Rue de Magdelaine, was attacked, and a scene of devastation com- 
menced, which lasted for more than thirty hours." 

" And the authorities? the magistrates?" 

" At eleven o'clock, the Procureur du Roi was quietly in bed ; 
and when roused by his deputy, he went to the scene of action, 
accompanied only by four individuals, who soon deserted him : it 
was already too late. The military and civil authorities had assem- 
bled at the Governor's, and to them the Procureur repaired, but 
found his apprehensions treated with contempt and mockery ; and 
when word was brought that the magnificent hotel of Van Maanen, 
the unpopular Minister of Justice, was attacked, the informant was 
told, ' It is false, you are an alarmist, if not something worse.' 1 

" At two o'clock, after having supped, the magistrates separated, 
and went home to bed. Van Maanen's hotel, which, strange to say, 
occupied the site of the palace of the atrocious Duke d'Alva, in the 
Petit Sablon, was attacked by a party utterly independent of the 
other rioters, and was promptly given to the flames. Nothing was 
stolen, not even to the amount of an ecu; but nothing was spared, j 

" The troops, left without a superior authority to direct their 
movements, paraded the town in small bodies, without effecting 



PAUL POTTER. 



TJ1E PRINCESS. 



285 



any salutary purpose. About sixty chasseurs arrived towards three 
o'clock on the spot, where the people were tranquilly enjoying the 
spectacle of the fire at Van Maanen's. An individual ill-dressed, 
with a dirty feather in his hat, and armed with a sabre and pistols, 
who was in advance of the crowd, cried out to the officer in com- 
mand, ' Bas les armes, ou vous etes tous mortsS The sombre 
and concentrated people turned their eyes from the flames, and 
beheld the troops advancing round the corner of the Rue Boden- 
broek. To the demand of bas les armes, the lieutenant replied by 
announcing his orders to disperse the crowd, and the necessity he 
should be under of firing, if they did not depart. But the indivi- 
dual, who acted on behalf of the people, and who was recognised as 
an old Serjeant of the first division, pushing back the officer, said, 
* You have nothing to do with this ; go about your business. Mais 
quant a nous, 31onsieur Damman, nous ne quitterons que 
quandcet kotel* sera brule jusqu'aux fondemensS " 

" Well, sir?" said Sir Frederick, much interested. 

" The people kept their word. This little anecdote gives a fair 
estimate of the extent to which the authorities were unprepared to 
meet an event which they could not but have foreseen ; and of the 
manner in which the people found leisure to become acquainted 
with their own strength. Some resistance was indeed made, and 
blood spilt in other quarters of the town ; but it cannot be said that 
any well-directed effort was made to check the progress of anarchy, 
and prevent the utter destruction of the city, ( had such been the 
good pleasure of the populace, ) till the garde bourgeoise sponta- 
neously formed, to protect their own property, and maintain 
order." 

" This is a graphic sketch you have given," said Sir Frederick, 
" of the outbreak of your Revolution. It must have supplied your 
artists with many stirring subjects. " 

" Few, however, have as yet occupied themselves upon it, though 
the History of the Low Countries is a favourite source with our 
historical painters. There is a magnificent picture of Dutch heroism, 
le Bourgmestre de Leyde, by Monsieur Wappers, at the King's 
palace. But the first painter probably of the day, the Paul Potter 

* So pronounced by the lower classes of Brussels. 

21.. 



286 



THE PRINCESS. 



of the nineteenth century, Verboeckhoven, confines himself strictly 
to safer subjects, and paints chiefly cattle pieces. " 

M I should be glad to visit the work-rooms of some of your mo- 
dern school. " 

" And in my national vanity, I shall be happy to accompany you, 
if you will appoint your day and hour. " 

" I shall be delighted, as soon as I can make up my mind whether 
I shall remain in Brussels, or push on for some of the German Spas, 
to return for your great Anniversary. " 

At that moment, the carriages of the French and English Ambas- 
sadors drew up in front of the theatre ; and the fear of being again 
caught by the English travellers, induced Sir Frederick to retire to 
his quiet gite at the Tirlemont. M. Van H. accompanied him to its 
gates. It was not yet eleven; but the city of Brussels was already 
sinking into quietude and repose. In that one day, how many inci- 
dents, how many novel impressions, had occupied and amused the 
awakened mind of the English desoeuvrel 

Fegan, sobered but stupified, was waiting in the porte-cochere, 
to light his master to his room , and was beginning an apology, 
when he was dismissed at the bed-chamber door : but, long after it 
had been closed, his Irish moan and broken exclamations might have 
been heard on the corridor. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE JANSSENS. 

A brilliant morning was ushered in by a packet of letters, 
brought from the post by Fegan, who was more than usually alert 
and attentive. They were letters of business, of politics, and of 
friendship. There was one, also, from Lady Frances, inclosed in 
that of Mr. Harris, his agent. It was reproachful, expostulatory, 
self-willed ; and it mentioned her having definitively arranged to 



THE PRINCESS. 



287 



follow her husband, as soon as it suited the convenience of some 
friends, with whom it would be prudent, she said, and proper to 
travel. 

There ran through the whole epistle such a mixture of art and 
heartlessness, such an obvious wish to keep to the letter of duty, 
in the absence of all sense of its spirit, such a substitution of decent 
forms for real anxiety, either for the recovery of his health, or for 
maintaining a place in his affections, that it awakened all his latent 
aversion to the writer. Still, seeing as he did through her ill- 
concealed purpose of throwing an air of propriety over an incon- 
siderate indulgence of her own fancies, while she fixed upon him 
the odium of negligence and indifference, the letter itself did not 
displease him. One word of true feeling, one sentence of lurking 
tenderness, or of mortified affection, would have left him utterly 
defenceless. But there was nothing of this ; and the perusal of 
the crafty phrases, dictated in possibility by some member of the 
Arlington-street coterie, and read to them all 'in council assem- 
bled, ' was in its result as unfavourable to the writer, as it was 
most favourable to her husband's own desire to escape her ren- 
contre. 

The physical improvement impressed on Sir Frederick Mottram's 
health and temperament by change of air, climate, circumstance, 
and scene, the new development given to native powers of thought 
by his new views and ideas, and above all, a delicious but doubtful 
consciousness that there were sources of sensibility within his 
heart, not absolutely dried up by the arid pursuits of his late cir- 
cumscribed position, had given to his new life a relish to which he 
had long been a stranger. He determined, therefore, to pursue its 
pleasant casualties till their novelty should wear out, or their 
sources become exhausted in the enjoyment ; and he made up his 
mind to write to Lady Frances, forbidding her to pursue her pro- 
jected journey to Brussels, to announce his own return to Mottram 
Hall for the shooting-season, and to request that she would fix her 
own residence, in the mean time, at the villa of her father, the 

Duke of , at Richmond. For a moment, a doubt had crossed 

him that her proposition being a mere pretext, she might, to pre- 
vent his interference with her views, have already left England, 
and by the same packet which brought out her letter. On reflec- 



285 



THE PRINCESS. 



tion, however, he thought it right to despatch his answer, and 
thus seal the hollow compact of mutual deception, the only tie 
that now existed between them. 

It was not till he had fulfilled this intention, that he visited his i 
English friends at the Bellevue, from whom he might expect infor- 
mation more precise concerning the movements of the travelling 
hrigata; and on reaching the hotel, he found that they had already 
ridden out with a party to visit the race-course of Mont Plaisir; 
whence they were not expected till seven in the evening, the hour 
when they had ordered dinner. 

As all hope of continuing his stealthy and incognito habits was for 
the present over, he secured handsome apartments at the Hotel de | 
Flandre, wrote his name at the English and French embassies, pre- 
sented his letter of credit to his banker, Monsieur Angler, received 
and accepted an invitation to dine at that gentleman's splendid and 
hospitable mansion, left cards on his accomplished acquaintance the ! 
Polish colonel, and for the courteous M. Van H.; and surrendered 
himself to the chances for the few successive days, even though the 
Princess of Schaffenhausen should continue in Brussels, and his in- j 
traduction to his 6 Donna odiosa ' bring with it the certainty of a 
meeting. 

The latter, indeed, was a contingency to which less bitterness was j 
now attached than he had hitherto experienced on the subject. The 
removal of his wife from the sphere of the Princess's unhallowed 
influence, had divested his feelings to her Highness of their sting. 
He disliked, it is true, her manners, and he despised her imputed 
immorality ; but how many of his daily associates, in public and in 
private life, stood precisely in the same category ! 

The only occasion on which he had particularly noticed her voice 
in England was, when her insolent and aristocratic sarcasms on his i 
own birth and character had reached his ear, in the box of the 
Opera : it had then jarred on his organ like a sharp, wiry, untunable ; 
instrument. Was his hearing at that time, like all his other sensa- 
tions, morbid?— or was the rich and sweet accent in which she had j 
lisped her Parisian French from her britzka, on the preceding evening, 
another of her affectations? Sir Frederick was a voice-fancier ; and 
that of the Princess, on the latter occasion, was so completely of the j 
timbre that accorded with his auditory idealism, that it seemed to 



THE PRINCESS. 



289 



be familiar to his imagination, as if he had heard such music in 
his dreams ; and the physical sensation was not without its moral 
effect. 

The Princess, too, was now associated in his mind with her pro- 
tegee, the artist. It was true, he had forsworn Madame Marguerite, 
cast her from his mind ; yet he found himself, at the moment when 
the English fashionables were thronging to the promenade in the 

1 park, descending to,the old town, and taking the direction to St. Gery. 
He stopped for a moment on his way, opposite the old house which 
had sheltered him on the preceding evening : it appeared to him in 
the bright daylight still more desolate and dilapidated than on the 
night before. Its one window, of many panes, was closed with a 
shutter ; so was the Gothic casement in its stepped gable. 

The narrow and nailed door was shut, but he could not resist 
pulling the bell. No one answered, though the summons was thrice 
repeated ; and he proceeded to the ancient head-quarters of the Be- 

, guines to inquire for La Sceur Greite. 

The Grand Beguinage of Brussels presented a very different appear- 
ance from that of Ghent. Its cloistral and narrow streets, twelve 
in number, were dreary and lonely, as if swept by a plague. The 
blast of opinion had passed over the institute in Brussels, which no 
longer belonged to the age. Here and there, however, a flower-pot 
at an open casement, or a birdcage at a door, with a lean and with- 

, ered sister sitting beneath a trellised shed, in front of her cell-like 
dwelling, indicated that a few lingering votarists of Notre Da?ne 

. de la Vigne still found shelter in the consecrated purlieus of the 
great church of St. Beghe : but there were none of the boudoir-like 
dwellings such as are occupied by the rich semi-devotes at Ghent. 

The habitation of this order at Brussels was a record of the 
changes of opinion and of the struggle of prejudices, religious and 
political, by which the capital of the Low Countries had for centu- 

i ries been agitated. At a period when the influence of women began 

| to assume the intensity of a religious worship, when the St. Beghes, 
the Ursulas, and the Gudules ( who preceded the great stateswomen 
of the middle ages, the Marguerites and the Jeannes ) made their 
appearance on the European stage, the Beguinage was founded. This 
event occurred in 1250, and, in 1254, Hugh, the apostolic prelate 
of Brabant, endowed the order with high privileges; and, as its rules 



290 



THE PRINCESS. 



were the least rigorous of all monastic codes, the number of the i 
sisterhood rapidly mounted to a thousand. 

In 1583, when the reforming spirit of the sixteenth century gave 
a shock to the stronghold of human error, which loosened some of 
its minor absurdities while it left the graver prejudices unmoved, I 
the movement penetrated even into the close and pleasant quarters 
of the Beguinage, and the ancient monastery and church were ! 
nearly demolished by a Calvinistical magistrate of Brussels. The 
sisterhood was dispersed, the shrines were overthrown, and the 
ruins of their once sumptuous cloisters were overgrown by the rank 1 
herbage of the neglected soil. But there is a pertinacity in error ! 
which truth rarely possesses, and in 1657 the church of St. Beghe \ 
again rose with additional splendour ; the cells were re-opened and 
filled, and the sauntering sisters were again gliding along the streets 
of the city. The pious gallantry of the citizens was pleased to ex- j 
pend upon this restoration no less a sum than 331,318 florins. 

Then came the grand European movement announced by the 
French revolution, and in 1796 the monastic orders were all I 
suppressed throughout Belgium ; but even then those true women, 
the Beguines, obtained, through that perseverance which is the i 
omnipotence of their sex, a restoration to their ancient and vene- t 
rated haunt; and a few of the order still linger on the spot to this 
day. 

Sir Frederick Mottram stood for a moment in the midst of the 
moral and material decay, and was preparing to turn down one of i 
the little alleys which radiate from the grass-grown space surround- j 
ing the church, for the purpose of inquiring from one of the sisters, | 
who sat knitting in the sun, for the lodging of the Soeur Greite, 
when the unwonted sound of a carriage rattling over the pavement 
drew off his attention. The carriage rolled up to the portals of 
the church, a Beguine hobbled out, made an inclination of the head J 
to the persons she was leaving, and remained standing on the steps i 
of the church till the carriage moved out of sight. Before she had 
passed the skreen of the door, Sir Frederick recognised his old | 
friend, and followed her into the edifice. 

kt Well," she said, with her usual Flemish frankness, ic 1 told 
the Princess it was you, though Madame Marguerite insisted that you j 
have an air plus guinde than that of the person who passed the I 



THE PRINCESS. 



291 



carriage with so quick and light a step, like one who was hurrying 
after somebody or something." 

- w She was quite right," he replied, smiling; u I was looking 
for you. " 

tc Tant mieux, " said the Beguine. " When a fine man of the 
world looks out in such a dreary place as this for a poor old sister 
of charity, it is a good sign. I thought you would come to see me, 
or at least to visit the Beguinage, as you promised ; so returning 
from the Puterie, where Madame la Princesses &s to see the Van- 
dyke with Madame Marguerite, her Highness took me up and brought 
me here. She has given me this money to distribute among the 
poor of the quarter of the Beguinage, in spite of the remonstrance 
of Madame Marguerite, who pretends, that money so given only 
multiplies the poverty it affects to relieve. C'est un esprit fori, 
que cette Madame Marguerite. For my part, I am but a simple 
christian, a good Beguine, and I understand nothing of the matter; 
all 1 know is, that the pious women of old had always ' leurs 
pauvrcs. ' " 

I believe Madame Marguerite is right in principle, whatever she 
may be as to feeling. But I like the pity which gives, ere charity 
begins ; and I beg of you to accept this trifle for the same purposes 
as the sum given you by the Princess. " 

" Heinl" said the Beguine, dropping the sovereign she had 
received into the Princess's purse, which she held between her linger 
and thumb. 

' : Tell me, ma mere, " said Sir Frederick, smiling at the avidity 
with which she seized the money, " does Madame Marguerite accom- 
pany the Princess?" 

" Yes, she is going to touch up some old pictures at the castle of 
Schaffenhausen. She has a fine time of it, that Madame Marguerite, 
since the Prince sat for his picture to her ; till then she had scarcely 
bread to eat; but since the Prince's death, she and the Princess are 
inseparable ; she accompanied her to England, and some say she is 
a poor relation. Everybody may have poor relations, n'est-ce pas, 
Monsieur?" 

Sir Frederick nodded assent, and sighed. 

" They are both semi-devotes," continued the old woman : 
the Princess is attached to les dames nobles du Petit Begui- 



292 



THE PRINCESS. 



nage de Gand; and Madame Marguerite is a sort of Beguine too 5 
but he'las ! we are no longer rigorous." 

" And what is the nature of the Petit Bdguinage of Ghent?" 

" It was founded by a great and pious lady, Marguerite, the 
sister of the Countess Jane of Flanders. It is a little aristocracy, 
where the noblesse and haute bourgeoisie repose from the fa- 
tigues of a stormy life, and the disappointments of the heart. I have 
no great faith in the piety of such persons." 

" Nor have I," said Sir Frederick, emphatically ; " and I dare 
say your two ladies find their account in " 

He paused in the feeling that he was committing an impropriety ; 
and he w T as pleased to see himself relieved from the necessity of 
finishing his sentence, by the Beguine's devotion, who was now 
kneeling before the statue of St. Beghe, a woman who, at the end 
of a thousand years, was still exerting a certain influence on society, 
receiving its ho'mage, and perhaps furnishing a veil to cover its 
follies and its vices. 

Sir Frederick made the observation mentally, with the shuddering 
conviction of the power of a sex of which, like others of his class, 
he held a contemptuous opinion. He expressed aloud, however, 
only the eulogistical part of his reverie to the Beguine. 

" Ah! mon Bieu, oui,^ she replied ; " our holy church owes 
everything to the pious Christian women of the better times ! But 
all that is over : religion banished from earth is returned to heaven, 
whence it came! Look, Monsieur," and she pointed to a dirty 
crazy image of the Virgin, " look at that sign of the times. Look 
at that old tissue silk petticoat ! You see by the fashion that it is 
as old as Maria Theresa's time. Would those artificial flowers be 
thus faded and covered with dust, if there was any piety upon earth? 
They say that Belgium is falling into the hands of the priests ; but 
what does it signify, that our priests influence the elections, if they 
return only esptits forts, who do not so much as offer a taper at the 
shrine of a saint, and who leave the blessed Virgin without a rag to 
cover her. I distrust those priests exceedingly ; they are but the in- 
struments of the people, and not their leaders : tant pis, ma fox. 
The people are good for nothing in their religion ! No, sir, the hope 
of the church was the noblesse ; but even they have deserted both 
church and state to take care of themselves. Still, if you do see a 



THE PRINCESS. 



293 



devotee of your own sex on his knees before a shrine, or with his 
arms outstretched, you may take it for granted that it is Monsieur 
le Baron, or Monsieur le Marquis." 

The lamentations of the Beguine over the neglected toilet of the 
Madonna, and the deplorable disuse of all those practices which in 
one nation constitute piety, and in another are accounted buffoonery, 
struck the English traveller as affording a remarkable feature in a 
country which had recently been deemed the most superstitious 
and bigoted of Catholic Christendom. The change implied was, 
however, by him deemed fatal to social order : for he was, or at 
least had been, of a party who, while they resisted the Catholic claims 
in Ireland even to the shedding of blood, and maintained the as- 
cendancy of their own church in England as the only true and fa- 
voured religion of Heaven, had forced the Pope upon reluctant Italy, 
had replaced on their forfeited thrones the bigoted and persecuting 
despots of the Peninsula, and were the steady allies of all who 
upheld old forms, cherished old errors, and fortified old abuses. 

Sir Frederick Mottram had now flattered the pious vanity of the 
old woman by admiring several bad pictures, and stopping before 
the neglected lateral altars of the church, when the tolling of a bell 
announced the coming celebration of some holy office. Having 
obtained all the information which, almost unconsciously, he had 
come to seek, from the sceur Greite, he took leave of his amusing 
old friend, with a secret conviction that she held no intimate com- 
munion with Madame Marguerite, and an expressed desire. that he 
might again meet one from whom he had derived so much instruction. 

" And where are you going then?" she asked with some anxiety : 
" for you have been so charitable, so good, and seem to have so 
true a vocation, that I should like now and then to speed a prayer 
after you in your wanderings." 

" It would gratify me to be remembered in your oraisons, " he 
replied, touched by the tremulous tenderness of her voice, which 
had taken the tone of departing friendship. 

" You are going to some of the German spas, I suppose, for your 
health. \\ know them all. I travelled with Madame VAbbessQ 
du chapitre de Namur, as her companion and nurse, to all the 
waters, to Ems, to Schlangenbad, Wisbaden, Baden-Baden, and 
many others. They are all good ; for they all bring the invalid 

22. 



294 



THE PRINCESS. 



back to Nature, to her hours, scenery, anil diet. You will begin 
by Spa ; and will perhaps be tempted to remain there by the beau- 
ties of the Forest of Ardennes. You have heard of the Forest of 
Ardennes? " 

She stooped to pick up a wreath of immortelles which had 
fallen from some grim-looking saint. Rosalind, Orlando, Jaques, 
rushed upon the imagination of the most ardent votarist that the 
genius of Shakspeare ever warmed into idolatry. 

" Yes! " he said, " I have heard of the Forest of Ardennes, 
through the medium of one on whose shrine I would hang this 
wreath" (and she permitted him to take it) "with a feeling as de- 
votional, as that with which you are about to replace it on the head 
of your saint. " 

" Gardez-le , monsieur, gardez-le! " said the Beguine; " the 
offering has done its duty here. Keep it in remembrance of la 
soBur Greite of Bruges ; and when you offer it to the saint you 
speak of, think of the sinner whom chance and St. Beghe have 
thrown in your way ; unworthy as she is, she may perhaps prove 
a chosen vessel, to recall you to the path from which temptation 
has early led you. Farewell, monsieur ! it is the last time you will 
see la sceur Greite. " 

" The last time, my good friend!" he repeated, considerably 
affected by the solemnity of her manner, and touched too by the 
gloom and silence of the place. 

" 1 predict, " said the Beguine, emphatically, " that we meet no 
more ; so God and the good lady St. Beghe bless and guide you ! " 

She offered him her hand from beneath the voluminous sleeve 
of her habit. It lay for a moment, soft and small, in his ; and he 
pressed it silently and with cordiality, when the opening of the 
screen door, and the entrance of the poor congregation afforded 
by the deserted quarter of the Beguinage, induced her to withdraw 
it hastily. Resuming her old pottering step and manner, she was 
the next moment involved with the remains of the sisterhood of 
St. Beghe, who, from a thousand, were now reduced to less than 
a score. 

There was something in the scene and in the person he had quitted, 
that left a fanciful impression on Sir Frederick, whose merit and 
whose weakness it was. to be but too impressionable. He was 



THE PRINCESS. 



295 



abstracted and preoccupied, and he wandered on, unobservant of the 
intricacies of the antique purlieus of the old town. Many a Spanish 

i fabric arrested his step, such as Bossuet* has delighted to trace with 
so much fidelity and finesse ; and many a Brabancon hotel caught 
his eye, whose masters consider it a religious duty to reside on the 
patrimonial mansion, transmitted to them from those stirring burg- 

t hers who maintained the independence of Brabant, before Spanish 
bigotry and Austrian despotism had reared their hateful crest above 
the head of the old Belgian Lion. 

It was now near four o'clock, and Sir Frederick was looking for 
some index by which to retrace his steps to the upper town, when 
he read at the corner of a street verging towards the ascent — ■ la 
Putterie.' On one of the largest and most antiquated houses of this 
street was inscribed, on a brass plate, 'Janssens pere, Fabricant 
de Dentelles. ' Vandyke, the Princess's visit, and the hope of out- 
bidding her, induced him to seize this opportunity of calling on the 
virtuoso tradesman ; and a massive brazen knocker announced the 
intention by reiterated vibrations, that stunned the old-fashioned 
quarter, where no variation in the beat declares the aristocratic rank 
of the petitioner for entrance. 

The door was almost immediately opened by a frightened servante 
de la Campine, ** with an inquiry in Flemish of 6 what was the mat- 
ter?' The sightof the visitant calmed the terrors which his loud knock 
had awakened ; and the broad, bright Brabancon face of the servant 
dilated into smiles, as she mustered up as much Flemish-French as 
went to inquire 'what was wanted for the service of monsieur?' 
Her curious cap, large gold ear-rings, coloured jacket, and full 
plaited petticoat, as she stood within the sculptured oaken frame of 
the massive door, gave a living picture of one of the coarse, cleanly, 
joyous fraus of the Flemish school. 

To the information that he came to see a picture which was to be 
disposed of, she only replied by opening her eyes, and a ' SHI vous 
plait, monsir? ' He repeated his wishes in simpler and more con- 
cise phrase, but she shook her head, and drew the door closer, 
replying— 

* A living Belgian artist, of less European celebrity than merit. 
** The ' Campine' is the country between Brussels and Antwerp. 



298 



THE PRINCESS. 



" u Jene suis qu'un sujet, foyez-fous, monsir. *' 

Sir Frederick, thoroughly puzzled, thought of sending in the card 
of Madame Marguerite with his own, and asked if Monsieur Janssens 
was at home. At the name of her master, she brightened up and 
said, " Ah ! c'est not' maitrel II est a la ?naison.' n 

Fortunately, a servant-man now came to the aid of her very limit- 
ed vocabulary. His rubicund, good-humoured countenance was set 
off by a pair of gold ear -rings, and he was carving a ponderous 
piece of bread and butter with a large clasp knife, as he advanced. 

" A moi, monsir, he said, laughing, and pushing aside the maid, 
in the pride of superior acquirement. "Not' demoiselle est indi- 
gene, voyez-vous. Speak Flemish to her, and you will have an- 
swer enough. " 

Sir Frederick gave his card, explained the object of his visit, and 
was instantly admitted into an immense vestibule. The lofty oaken 
wainscot was hung with pictures ; shrubs and pots of flowers were 
placed on marble encoignures upon frames worthy of Vanbruggen's 
chisel. A carved oaken settee, and an antique clock in a curious 
case, composed the furniture; while a broad and spacious staircase 
of polished oak to the left, conducted to the upper suite of apart- 
ments. The servant threw open the door of the parloir, and con- 
ducting in the stranger, said that he would inform his master. 

" But, perhaps," said Sir Frederick, recollecting the early hours 
of the lower town, " he is at dinner? " 

The good Brabancon stared. " Dinner ! " he said ; ki nous som- 
mes a notre goute", nous autres sujets. Our ladies are gone to 
the salut, and my master is in the garden-house. " 

Then, almost forcing from Sir Frederick his hat and cane, he left 
the room. But, again suddenly returning, he opened a door which 
communicated with an adjoining apartment : it was the salon, or 
best room, the fane of domestic festivity and ostentation. 

"There, monsieur," he said, " voild dc la pdturel People 
come to see our pictures from all parts. There is a Hemskirk— 
that small picture of boors drinking ; it is a gem. The Prince of 
Orange would have given any money for it ; but our master would 
not sell it, as he said, to Maria Theresa herself, if she had come 
back from the grave to bid for it. " 

He drew back the drapery of the window to throw a light upon 



THE PRINCESS. 297 

the picture, and then retired. Sir Frederick was amused by this 
little trait of plebeian virtie and national spirit. These were the 
feelings which, being - incidental to all classes in the Low Countries, 
encouraged their great schools, and enriched the masters; and they 
well explain the domesticity of their favourite subjects. It was the 
people painting for the people ; it was the contention of citizens for 
the chefs-d'osuvre of the Janssens, of the Van Helmonts, of thellob- 
bimas, which gave to the northern schools an eminence built upon 
a surer foundation, than that which fashion or favour, the breath of 
princes or the vogue of courts, can bestow. 

Sir Frederick was intoxicated with the works of art in which the 
sober wainscoted parlour and more sumptuous salon abounded. 
The walls of the latter were covered with the still richly gilt Spanish 
leather ; the architraves of the enormous doors were redundant in 
the rococo of the seventeenth century. The monumental stove, 
probably the work of some fashionable artist of the time of the Duke 
of Alva, displayed an architectural elevation; and every article of 
furniture was a chronicle of the Flemish taste and genius. The 
tapestry carpet was of Tournay. 

The armoires of oak, sculptured in bold relief, with doors half- 
open, displayed some rare and costly chalices, glasses, and covers, 
with quaint mottoes engraved in gold, long tapering drinking- 
vessels, specimens of carved ivory from the East, and boiseriex 
worthy of the chisel of Albert Durer. 'Indulging chairs' of im- 
movable dimensions, w ith high carved backs and velvet seats, secured 
by broad brass nails, might pass for the models of the furniture in 
the beautiful conversation-piece of Rombout, or in an interior by 
Baptista Franks, both of which decorated the walls of the apart- 
ment. The whole was marked by a ponderous richness, that plainly 
indicated the forethought of a race who constructed for posterity, 
without calculating upon chance or change ; while the total absence 
of modern taste was compensated by that neatness and propriety, 
that polished purity, which spoke the mistress of the mansion a 
vigilant and even fastidious housewife. 

Sir Frederick was standing enraptured before the portrait of Ca- 
therine Culemberg, by Netcher, in a frame that was itself a work of 
art, when the servant entered by a glass-door from the garden, with 
a request that " the gentleman would walk to the summer-house, 

22.. 



298 



THE PRINCESS. 



where the Vandyke was to be seen." He led the way under an 
arching trellis-work, through a garden as full of flowers as if the j 
tulip mania were still at its height. Monsieur Janssens came forward j 
to the door of one of those pavilions so prevalent in the old-fashion- I 
ed gardens of the Low Countries : he had risen from his indulging 
chair, with the flush of his siesta colouring his healthful counten- j 
ance. A furred velvet cap just permitted a few grey hairs to escape ! 
over his broad brows. He was dressed in a robe-de-chambre a \ 
grand vantage, and wanted only a gold chain, to look the wealthy j 
burgomaster of the olden times, the original of one of those nameless | 
portraits now purchased at any price. 

After his courteous assurance that he had 4 the honour to salute 
the English virtuoso, ' he insisted on seating him in the chair of 
honour, placed near a small table, on which a plate of biscuits, a ! 
glass tankard with its cover, and small goblets, were disposed. A 
cattle-piece, by Verboeckhoven, was hung on one side of the room ; 
and a curtained picture on the other. The rites of hospitality pre- 
ceded those of the arts. A draught of Alambique, which looked 
like liquid topaz, was poured into a tall crystal glass, and recom- 
mended by Monsieur Janssens to Sir Frederick as a cordial. The 
biscuit was praised as ' la biscotte indigene, which Corcellet and 
Chevet of Paris did not disdain to import. ' 

The good-breeding and the good appetite of the English guest 
equally induced him to avail himself of the old gentleman's after- 
dinner goute; while he entered at once upon the motive of his visit, 
the desire to see and to purchase one of the best pictures of Vandyke 
at present in the market; — so at least it had been described by 
Madame Marguerite. 

' ' Humph ! You may believe her if she told you so, " said the 
old man. u She knows what she is about, that Madame Marguerite! 
C'est une maitresse femme ! Not that she has much acquired 
knowledge. She has few rules, and no jargon. But her instincts 
are fine ! She lays her finger at once on a good picture : she can't 
tell you why, and laughs if you ask her. ,1 

c< She is also a good artist, 1 ' said Sir Frederick. 

" Not a fine artist, monsieur, but a fine genius. She has worked 
for bread more than for fame, and therefore wants finish ; besides, 
she has indulged her taste more than consulted her interest. She 



THE PRLNCESS. 



299 



has, too, a knack of painting a fool like a fool, and a rogue like a 
rogue — not to be mistaken ; and every one is sure to detect an 
enemy or a friend in the groups which she calls figures de fantai- 
sie, but which every one insists are living characters. Her pictures 
have all a moral object ; and so they were considered as epigrams, 
and our noblesse have never patronised her. She has the merit, 
however, of knowing a good picture when she sees it ; and is among 
the few who appreciate our immortal Vandyke, and place him at the 
head of the Flemish school." 

kw W hat ! before Rubens?" asked Sir Frederick. 

" Inasmuch as he is more Flemish, and less Dutch, monsieur." 
I have only very lately learned the line of demarcation," said 
Sir Frederick, much amused to see party spirit colouring even a 
passion for the arts. 

" There is a line of demarcation, " said Monsieur Janssens. 
vehemently, ; ' between all that is Dutch and Flemish, which neither 
Charles the Fifth in the sixteenth century, nor William of Nassau 
in the nineteenth, have been able to efface. We have nothing in 
common. Our schools of painting areas distinct as our national tem- 
peraments. Our Van Eykes and our Hemlinks, our Rubenses, our 
Van Balens, and, above all, our glorious Vandyke, come close upon 
the Cimabues, the Peruginos, the Titians, and the Veroneses ; but 
they have nothing in common, either in their genius, character, or 
life, with the Rembrandts, the Ostades, or the Brouwers. There 
are heads by that king of painters, Vandyke, comparable only to 
the pictures which Titian left of the grand seigneurs of his time — 
the same elevation, the same elegance ! But look at his own head ! 
Compare it with the portraits of any of the Dutch painters, the 
genuine models of their own bambocciate. Remark, too, that the 
Dutch masters remained at home, living, like Rembrandt, in garrets 
and beer-shops, whereas ours travelled. Rubens, Vandyke, Miele 
visited foreign countries and courts, and they were gentlemen by 
the letters-patent of Nature, though they were the sons of men of 
the middling classes. Our Belgian nobles never produced much in 
the way of genius of any sort." 

Sir Frederick ventured to cite a Dutch painter of celebrity, who 
had remained many years at Rome, in the time of the Dominichinos. 
and of Guido — " Peter Wander. " 



zoo 



THE PRINCESS." 



" Well, sir, " replied the old man, " that Wander passed his life 
there, as in Holland, stigmatized as the Oltra - montano and the 
Bamboccio ; and after twenty years' residence in Italy, he returned 
to die in his native Haarlem, more Bcunboccio than he left it. But 
with whom did the divine Guido study? Why, with a Flemish 
painter, sir ; with Dionysius Calvert, called in Bologna 77 Fia?ni?igo. 
It was he that put Guido into the true path. He gave him his rules 
for drawing, and conferred force upon his penello morbido, as old 
Passeri calls it. When not engaged in my manufacture, I have 
studied a little Italian, sir, on purpose to read Passeri. We had 
also another Fiamingo, the Fiamingo par excellence, (Louis Pozzo,) 
the greatest landscape painter of his age; and also a third (named 
Brill), who established himself at Venice, and was in the highest 
repute all over Italy. " 

" And yet," said Sir Frederick, " we English prize the Dutch 
painters very highly ; nor can I consent to abandon a school that has 
produced a Rembrandt, a Paul Potter, or a Gerard Dow ! The 
latter we place fully on a par with your Tenders, as coming quite as 
close to nature. " 

" To the nature of a broomstick, 1 ' replied the passionate partisan, 
in allusion to the well-known anecdote. " But our David Teniers 
gives as much elegance to his court subjects, as any royal painter of 
France or England. He throws imagination even over his Kermes- 
ses. There is a grace and an airiness in his groups, that show how 
much his genius ennobled subjects of the coarsest nature. 

" It was the peculiar luck of Teniers to have been the idolized 
painter of the people, and at the same time the artist most in vogue 
with the higher classes; and if that frippery Louis XIV. (spoiled 
by the cold affectations of Goypel and Mignard ) cried out, when 
they brought him a Kermess of Teniers, c Qu'on m'ote ces ma~ 
gots-ldT many noble and crowned heads sought his friendship, 
and lived with him on terms of equality. They saw, in the joyous 
and naive painter, the sublime mind which conceived L LesOEuvres 
de Charite, ' and ' V Enfant Prodigue, 5 in the latter of which he 
has painted himself and his family. His works were those of a 
great man, his life that of an honest one ; and his habits those of a 
gentleman. The director of the academy at Amsterdam, the gentle- 
man of the chamber to Leopold, the friend of Queen Christine, and 



THE PRINCESS. 



301 



the companion of Don Juan of Austria, was not a man like your 
Rembrandts, and your Dows, and Brouwers ! We'll drink to the 
memory of David Teniers, sir, if you please. " 

Sir Frederick, much amused, touched his lips to the glass, and 
named David Teniers. A thought crossed his mind, that at that mo- 
ment the Montressor party were riding- over the race-course at Mont 
Plaisir, while he was drinking to the memory of Teniers in nutbrown 
ale, and listening to the virtuoso details of an old Brussels lace- 
maker. There was at least novelty in the situation. 

But, monsieur, 11 continued the old man, " you will think me 
a bavard; and when you see this Vandyke, you will regret every 
moment wasted upon any other subject. " 

He arose, proceeded to the picture, but paused a moment with 
the cord in his hand before he raised the curtain. 

" I must first explain to you, monsieur, why I let so fine a picture 
slip through my hands ; being, as I am, a descendant of Vandyke by 
the female side; his daughter having married his favourite pupil 
Janssens, my great grandfather. Of this I am more proud, than if 
the heralds of Vienna could prove me of a family as ancient as the 
Trezeymers.* But 1 let the picture pass on a principle. It belong- 
ed to the church of St. Martin, in the village of Salthem, near 
Brussels, whence it disappeared, no one knew how. It would be 
sacrilege to buy it under such circumstances ; however, there are 
others not so fastidious on this point. But sit down, sir, and take 
this glass. Consider the picture at your leisure. There is a story 
attached to it, an old tradition in our family. I had it from my 
grand-mother, Helen Janssens. Perhaps you would like to hear it V 1 
Beyond everything, " said Sir Frederick. " It will give the pic- 
ture additional interest. " 

" You see it represents a Holy Family receiving a visit from 
St. Martin." 

He raised the curtain as he spoke, and discovered a picture of 
such magnificence of conception, and brilliancy of colouring, as daz- 

* Another claimant to a descent from Vandyke by Janssens exists in Brus- 
sels, in the fair person of Madame Charles Puqul, the wife of a young and 
ingenious portrait-painter of that name. The fine head of the descendant 
of the great master bears a considerable resemblance to his own. 



302 



THE PRINCESS. 



zled both the eye and the imagination of the critical spectator. 

" There is a Madonna ! What flesh and blood ! what an eye ! 
what a hand !" 

" More of a Spanish than a Flemish beauty," said Sir Frederick. 
" It resembles a Madonna of Murillo." 

" Bravo, monsieur, to be sure it does ; you are aware that Murillo 
was a disciple of Vandyke, and copied him closely. But here, you 
see, is a genuine Flemish peasant, with his blouse, in St. Joseph ; 
and as for St. Anne, she is a comely frau, and a true Brabanconne. 
Look too at this cavalier, monsieur ; what do you think of him ? 
Has not our St. Martin an air de grand seigneur, and a costume 
chevaleresque ? What a noble animal he has just mounted ! one 
is tempted to get out of its way, lest it should trample one under 
foot. What do you think, sir, of the gallant saint ?" 

" Why, that he resembles all Vandyke's pictures of himself." 

" C'est ca, monsieur. It is Vandyke at one-and-twenty ; and 
this picture, which so long received religious honours, is neither 
more nor less than a love adventure of the painter— que Dieu lux 
pardonne ! — which happened when he was on his way to Italy, 
where his friend and master, Rubens, sent him, and not without 
good cause. Every one knows how Rubens, the chief of the Flemish 
school, the prince of painters, lived in his palace at Antwerp, where 
his garden and portico still remain." 

" I went," said Sir Frederick, " from Brussels to Antwerp, in 
the year Twenty-nine, expressly to see them. It is more than 1 
shall now do to see the ruins of the citadel." 

u Well, sir, it was in that palace he held his school, which was 
a school of morals and manners, as well as of art. It was a grand 
thing to see that splendid painter m the midst of his disciples, ( ge- 
nerally as distinguished for their appearance as for their genius,) 
having the Archduchess Isabella, and other potentates, who delighted 
to converse with him at his easel. 

" Among his distinguished pupils, none was so gay, so gaillard 
as the young Vandyke. Vandyke's mother was a celebrated beauty 
and artist : from her he received both his genius and his good 
looks : and from her he had his earliest impressions of art, and 
first lessons. Rubens saw at once in him a genius, and perhaps sus- 
pected a rival. Many of the master's designs were filled out by the 



THE PRINCESS. 



303 



scholar ; and many of Vandyke's pictures slil pass for Rubens's. " 

'•It was a very sudden thought, and an odd one," said Sir 
Frederick, " in Rubens, to send away a pupil to Italy, who 
did so much honour to his school, and was so serviceable to his 
interests." 

" The artists," replied the old man, " said it was professional 
jealousy ; but the gossips of Antwerp reported that it was jealousy 
of another kind. Certain it is, that one of the finest pictures 
which young Vandyke ever painted, was that of Rubens's wife , 
Helen Forman. He made it a present to his master, who shortly 
after offered him the hand of his own daughter by a former mar- 
riage. The world was amazed when the young artist refused the 
alliance with the rich heiress. You saw her picture, probably, at 
Ghent, in the Scamp Gallery?" 

" Yes ; it is one of the most remarkable pictures in the collection." 

^ Well, sir, truth must out, as my grandmother Janssens said 
—Vandyke adored the stepmother. Whether Rubens suspected 
this or not, he strenuously advised him to visit Italy and study the 
Venetian school ; but Vandyke still lingered to paint a Christ in the 
olive-garden. Everyone knows that famous picture; the head of 
Christ is that of the painter. He left this picture behind him as a 
remembrance, and it long made a pendant to the Helen Forman. 
which Rubens himself had hung over the chimney-piece in his great 
room." 

" That was a present of great value from so young a painter ; 
what a price it would bring now !" said Sir Frederick. 

" Yes, sir, and so thought Rubens, who, not to be outdone, ( for 
who ever surpassed Rubens in generosity? ) took from his magnifi- 
cent stud an Arab given him by the King of Spain, and presented it, 
splendidly caparisoned, to Vandyke. There it is, sir ; you see 
St. Martin himself can scarcely hold it in. I have somewhere a 
sketch of Vandyke's departure from the house of Rubens. He is 
mounted on this Arab ; the arm of Rubens is thrown over the neck 
of the animal, while Vandyke stoops his head to catch his master's 
parting councils ; but his eyes — those dark eyes, which give our 
saint so unsaintly a look— are cast up to the window, where Helen 
Forman stands half-concealed by a drapery. The sketch is by 
Madame Marguerite, and is made after our tradition." 



304 



THE PRINCESS. 



" I should like to see it, Monsieur Janssens, " said Sir Frederick, 
eagerly. 

"Presently, sir, presently; we have not yet got to the end of 
our story of St. Martin. Vandyke cantered on to Brussels, looking 
like a cavalier of Wouvermans, just as you see he has made the saint 
curvetting it. You know the road from Antwerp, that nursery of 
great painters ! — not a village along it that Teniers has not immor- 
talized. But there was none so pretty in the seventeenth century as 
the village of Salthem, with its Gothic church and its beautiful 
peasant-girls. Well, the whole of its inhabitants waylaid Vandyke 
to do him honour, and to solicit him to paint a picture for the altar 
of their church. Flowers were strewed before his horse's feet, and 
a chaplet of immortelles, just such a one as you hold in your hand 
there," ( Sir Frederick coloured ; he had forgotten his chaplet,) "was 
presented to him by the beauty of the village : she was the miller's 
daughter. Vandyke accepted the offer, but gallantly placed it on 
the dark head of the donor : it looked like a glory, and Vandyke 
saw before him the model of that handsome Madonna we are now 
looking at. He acceded to the request of the good people of Sal- 
them, and the miller's daughter became the Fornarina of the Flemish 
Raphael. 

"You have heard of De Vien, monsieur, the celebrated French 
painter? He has made a charming drawing of this little episode in 
the life of Vandyke. It represents the enamoured painter sketching 
the Visitation of St. Martin to the Holy Family. His young mistress 
is leaning carelessly over the back of his chair, and his head is turned 
back, as if he was consulting, or, perhaps, admiring her : 1 have it 
in my collection. But I fear I am fatiguing you. " 

"On the contrary, you only increase my desire to possess a picture 
so enriched by a sentimental interest. But as to the price " 

" We are not come to that yet, sir. We will, if you please, drink 
to the memory of our Braban^on Fornarina. When the news 
reached Rubens, that the pupil who, he thought, was in Italy, was 
still loitering over his picture in the neighbourhood of Brussels, he 
trembled for the honour of his school ; and he sent his friend and 
guest, theCavaliere Nani, an Italian gentleman then returning to his 
own country, to carry off Vandyke along with him. The picture 
was finished; so, too, perhaps, was the passion of that rogue the 



THE PRINCESS. 



305 



painter. At all events, the cavalier succeeded in his mission, and 
carried Vandyke to Venice. Working in the schools of Titian and 
Veronese in that city, our immortal painter rivalled them in some of 
their merits, and surpassed them in others. You know the rest of 
his life, so much of which was passed in your own country." 

" Yes ; it was a splendid romance. His visit to Charles the First, 
his marriage with a great lady — the Lady Mary Ruthven, and the 
honours conferred on him, in creating him a Knight of the Bath. " 

" As for that, " said Monsieur Janssens , clasping his hands, and 
gazing earnestly on the head of Vandyke, " what can kings do for 
such a man as this? Who knows, out of England, that he was a 
Knight of the Bath ? What does it mean ? His dignities were in 
his genius ; his honours were in his immortal pictures ; and as to 
the great lady he married, he had better have married one of his 
own class, for he never throve afterwards,— one like his mother, a 
noble lady of Nature's own creation, (as Madame Marguerite said 
this day when she was looking at the picture.) But you English 
are so very aristocratic. " 

" I, at least," said Sir Frederick, "am rejoiced that your painter 
condescended to marry a daughter of Lord Ruthven ; for that lady 
was a collateral ancestor of my wife, and gives me a sort of claim to 
be considered a connexion of the family. " 

" Comment, done, monsieur I" said the old gentleman, his 
countenance brightening into cordiality, — "you, too, are a relation 
of Vandyke ! I thought there was something about you, unlike what 
I had ever observed of your countrymen before. " 

" Still, " replied Sir Frederick, " it is but justice to our country 
to say, that we honoured Vandyke while living, and that his remains, 
when dead, were interred in our great metropolitan church of St. 
Paul. " 

" I would much rather, " said the old enthusiast, wiping a tear 
from his eye, " that they had reposed in the great church of St. 
Paul at Antwerp, under his own picture of ' Christ carrying his 
Cross.'" 

To the blase" Englishman, there was something almost enviable 
in the freshness of feeling and fanaticism for the arts, which drew 
tears to the eyes of an old man, in honour of a great painter. He 
paused to let the flush of emotion pass ; but , considerably interested 

33. 



.306 



THE PRINCESS. 



in a picture to which the garrulity of age and virtii had given an 
additional charm, he soon afterwards asked — 

" And how came this picture into the market? " 

u Up to the French revolution, it had remained the treasure of 
the church of Sal them. It was then carried to the Louvre : but 
after the battle of Waterloo, when kings and pictures were sent 
back to their old habitations, St. Martin was restored, along with 
the rest. One fine day, however, as if by a miracle, the picture 
again disappeared, and was never heard of more, till some months 
back, when it again came into the market, and was purchased by a 
person, who, desirous of making money by it, has left it here 
for sale. " 

" And now," said Sir Frederick, worked up to a pitch of enthu- 
siasm almost as great as that of the lace-manufacturer, " and now 
to the point— the price. " 

M. Janssens drew forth a magnificent snuff-box, with a head of 
Vandernoot set on the lid, deliberately took a pinch, and offered it 
to the eager chapman. 

" The price ! " he said, " that picture is above all price ; and, in 
fact, it has brought a great price, for times like these, when people 
are thinking more of politics than pictures. It sold, not two hours 
back, for .... " 

" Sold?" interrupted Sir Frederick; " is it then sold?" 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! Did I not tell you so? This is what my bavar- 
dage comes to. Why, to be sure; it was sold this morning. " 

" And who is the fortunate purchaser ? " said the disappointed 
connoisseur, unaccustomed to be outbid in a matter of taste. 

u The Princess of Schaffenhausen. Madame Marguerite, her 
agent in the purchase, paid the money, in golden napoleons, not 
two hours back." 

Sir Frederick remained silent ; and Monsieur Janssens dropped 
the curtain, much pleased to have found a fresh auditor for his 
traditional anecdotes. Favourably impressed by the taste of his 
willing hearer, he invited Sir Frederick to take coffee ; observing, 

- - It is not usual, Monsieur le Chevalier, in the old quarters of 
Brussels, to admit strangers into the bosom of the domestic society. 
But a connexion of Vandyke makes all the difference. My wife and 
daughters are probably returned from the salut. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



307 



With a low bow, he then led the way to the salon. Sir Frederick 
followed, at once amused and disappointed ; yet resolved to see- 
the adventure out, and to take coffee before dinner, as he had al- 
ready sipped ale after breakfast. 

At the moment when they entered from the garden, the door 
opposite, leading from the hall, was thrown open by the formal 
old servant, and a loudly laughing joyous group bounced in. The 
women of the party, old and young, were all in their black silk 
failles. A priest in his quaint ridiculous habit ( revived since the 
Revolution ) , a young man in his military blouse, were equally 
picturesque in their appearance. There was one type of physiog- 
nomy running through the whole family, as in the family pictures 
of Frank Halls, proving an unmixed race. The presence of the 
stranger, as soon as it was perceived, at once silenced their mirth 
and steadied their movements. All were surprised, and the women 
abashed by the appearance of a foreigner ; an event so unexpected 
in their calculations. 

" My wife— my daughters, " said the manufacturer, taking 
Sir Fredericks hand, and presenting him separately to all the party, 
r This gentleman, who has come to buy St. Martin, a little too 
late, has the honour to be a connexion of the family of the immortal 
Vandyke. He has the happiness to be married to a descendant 
of the Lady Mary Vandyke. He may well be proud of the cir- 
cumstance. " 

To the formal curtsey of the Mesdames Janssens, Sir Frederick 
was endeavouring to return as formal a bow, when, raising his 
head, his eyes met those of Madame Marguerite, whose dark splen- 
did countenance shone forth with a sibyl contrast to the fair, round 
Flemish faces of the other females. Like them, she was habited 
in the faille; but she wore it with quite another effect. She 
bowed archly to Sir Frederick's confused recognition, and then 
took her seat in the deep embrasure of an old-fashioned window. 
The other females sat all in a row on the edges of the high-backed 
chairs, regimented against the wall ; the line beginning with 
Madame Janssens grand'mere, and ending with a fair chubby-faced 
girl in a round-eared cap, her youngest grandchild. Their calm 
countenances and cold blue eyes bore testimony to minds on which 
the passions had made no trace, and care induced no cloud. An 



308 



THE PRINCESS. 



arm-chair was presented to the English guest. The three gen- 
tlemen occupied a settee of as many compartments. 

This prim arrangement completed, a collation was rung for, and 
presented on trays by the man and maid. Tall crystal glasses, the 
fragile monuments of past times, preserved for generations by the 
most minute precaution, were half-filled with Burgundy, as bright 
as themselves. Coffee, tartines, fruit, sweetmeats, and a tankard 
of the precious biere de Louvain, afforded a variety of luxury, 
which seemed to concentrate universal attention. The voice of 
Janssens pere alone was heard, as he pressed his English guest to 
taste a petit pain a la Grecque, or to drink of his choice wine. 

Sir Frederick in vain endeavoured to move his ponderous chair 
towards the window where Madame Marguerite was niched. It 
was immovable ; and the moral courage he exhibited, in walking 
across the room and carelessly leaning against the frame of the 
window with his back towards the rest of the company, struck them 
with surprise, as a breach at least in the code of Brabancon good- 
breeding. 

" You have played me false, Madame Marguerite," he said, in a 
low murmur : " the Vandyke is already sold to you, for the Prin- 
cess of Schaffenhausen." 

" Why did you not apply sooner?" she replied : " you rich En- 
glish are always behindhand. You expect that circumstances will 
await your leisure ; but these are times in which even the greatest 
men must wait on circumstances." 

" It would be difficult," he said, petulantly, " to keep pace with 
one whose movements, like those of a steam-engine, are more rapid 
than comprehensible." 

" It is that difficulty that makes all the difference between mind 
and mind. Time, with me, is property. The sands in my hour- 
glass are all of gold, and I cannot afford to lose a grain. It belongs 
to energetic indigence to get the start of lazy wealth." 

" If you apply the phrase to me," he said, " you are mistaken. 
I have been busily occupied the whole morning." 

1,4 Strolling about the town," she interrupted, laughingly, " with 
that old gossip, la Sceur Greite. I suspect you gave her rendezvous 
at St. Beghe's to-day. We passed you, I believe, as the Princess 
conveyed the old Beguinc to her head-quarters." 



THE PRINCESS. 



309 



" Yes, I was the guinde person whom you passed. But my ren- 
dezvous with the Beguine was an accident." 

" Was your visit to the Beguinage an accident also? You are 
perhaps aware that there are some who adopt the great coif of St. 
Beghe for purposes not all tending towards Heaven." 

" I have suspected as much," he said, pointedly : " the spirit of 
intrigue finds its account in all disguises ; and none furnishes so 
many as religion. But what brought the Princess of Schaffenhausen 
and Madame Marguerite to the desolate quarters of the Begui- 
nage;?" 

" Merely to set down the old sister at her afternoon devotions. 
We were on our way to pay for the Vandyke, which I had pur- 
chased this morning from my old friend Janssens. But if you have 
missed the picture, are you not amused by the originals ?" 

" Beyond measure ; and I owe that pleasure, with many others, 
to you. 1 wish you would afford me an opportunity of expressing 
more fully my sense of the obligation. Your apparitions are those 
of an ignis fatuus ; and the few occasions I have had of profiting 
by your advice, have arisen in chance only. But grateful as I am 
for the past, I would not willingly trust the future to the same uncer- 
tainty." 

" At least avail yourself of the present, and attend to your hosts 
and to their conversation," she said, dropping her voice. " If, in 
your quality of statesman, you are desirous of obtaining information 
relative to the political state of these people, this is the circle where 
the truth will easiest be got at. Besides, it is against the law of 
Belgian good-breeding, which still clings to Spanish gravity and 
German etiquette in the quarter of the Puterie, to .... " 

He interrupted her with vehemence. 

i; One word, and I will obey you. Where are you going ? with 
whom ? When and where may I again hope to meet you ? Will 
you allow me to sit to you for my picture, for a friend in England ? 
And if, as the Beguine says, ( for, truth to tell, I only sought her 
to obtain some information about you,) you are going to Schaffen- 
hausen with your Princess, will you endeavour to soften her pre- 
judices against me, and obtain me an invitation to her castle on the 
Rhine ?" 

" To meet your wife?" asked Madame Marguerite. 

23.. 



310 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



Sir Frederick started. " Is she expected positively, then, at the 
Princess's castle ?" 

" I think I have heard that Lady Frances Mottram makes one of 
a large party of English invited there, or rather, who have invited 
themselves." 

The blood rushed into Sir Frederick's face at this confirmation of 
the worst suspicions he had entertained of his wife's prevarication 
and manoeuvring contrivance. 

" I hope I have not said anything to annoy you,' , she continued. 
Li Miladi Frances and the Princess are great friends : in London they 
were inseparables. But turn round ; Monsieur Janssens is offering 
you wine." 

" I propose you a toast, Monsieur le Chevalier" said the old 
man, as he presented a glass of Burgundy, and took another from 
the plateau for himself ; " I am sure you will pledge me with all 
your heart : — May the alliance between reformed England and libe- 
rated Belgium be as permanent as it must prove honourable and 
serviceable to both nations !" 

" I beg to be permitted to join in that toast," said the priest; 
" and I am sure Mr. Elias Janssens will have no objection to make 
one." 

" We women of Brussels were not idle during the Four Days, " 
said Madame Marguerite; " may we not take our eau de groseille 
to the same tune and time to which you, messieurs, quaff your 
chateau-margot ? Which of you gentlemen performed more service 
than Madame Janssens and her daughters, when they received the 
wounded in their own house, and attended the whole time at the 
hospitals?" 

" Brava, Madame Marguerite !" exclaimed young Janssens ; " you 
are in the right ! Allow me the honour of serving you." 

The fair, impassible countenances of the females flushed with the 
honest blush of self-satisfaction ; and the toast was drunk with a 
reflective earnestness by all the party ; while Sir Frederick, feeling 
for a moment the ardour of European liberalism, forgot that he was 

an English Tory, a term which belongs as little to the age as an 

English Whig, or a French Doctrinaire. 

The toast gave rise to a conversation purely political, to which 
Sir Frederick lent, as Madame Marguerite had advised, a willing 



THE PRINCESS. 



311 



, ear. The subject was discussed with an earnest frankness by the 
men, and listened to with deference and attention by the women. 
Each of the latter drew her knitting from the little bag that hung 

I on her arm ; excepting only Madame Marguerite, who sat sketching 
on a card produced from a portfolio, which, on entering the room, 

. she had deposited on the window-seat. The scene presented an 

: admirable subject to such a pencil as hers ; and the flexile figure of 
the elegant Englishman, as he lounged in his arm-chair, while every 
other person, even to the comely little girl who was winding a ball 
of thread at her grandmother's feet, sat bolt upright, was not the 
least remarkable in the entire group. 

The conduct of the people of Brussels during the Four Days had 
gradually become the chief point of interest ; and it was curious to 
observe how great a change it produced in the external expression 
of the debaters ; — a change particularly observable in the manly 
physiognomy and resolute gesture of the younger Janssens, ( who 
represented the educated youth of Belgium, ) and in the energetic 
manners of the republican priest, the epitome of a class which 
had always existed and always been popular in the Low Countries. 

During a momentary pause in the conversation of the Belgians, 
and in reference to the remark of the last speaker, Sir Frederick 
Mottram observed : 

" I never very clearly understood what determined the immediate 
march of the Dutch troops upon the city, at the outbreak of the Four 
Days." 

i " The moment chosen for the attack," said the young man, 
: " was so far appropriate, that it presented the fewest apparent 
elements of opposition. The Garde Bourgeoise, established for 
the protection of property, had shown itself unequal to the new 
position it had assumed, as guardian of the independence of Brus- 
sels, and it had lost the confidence of the people. On the day 
previous to the attack, a rising of the populace had disarmed them, 
dispersed their officers, and taking possession of the Hotel-de-Ville, 
( the seat of government, ) had left us absolutely without any 
acknowledged authorities : the fact soon found its way to Prince 
Frederick. . . ." 

4i And he, of course, thought, " said Sir Frederick, " that by 
advancing his troops he would take an unresisted possession of the 



212 



THE PRIjNCESS. 



town. The expectation was natural, and the action consequent. " 

" With any other people," replied the elder Janssens, " the 
expected surrender would probably have been the result. But the 
Belgian history is a suite of barrings-out, conducted by the populace 
of the great towns against their feudal oppressors, to which the 
example of Paris was a case strictly analogous." 

"Yes," added the priest, " that event was well calculated to 
rouse the traditional feelings of the people ; and the resistance it 
awakened was something more than a servile imitation : it was all 
the more effectual because it was not planned ; because it was the 
work of individual volitions ; and was guided only by each man's 
desire to place himself there, where his exertion was the most want- 
ed, and would be most effectual. " 

"What part," said Sir Frederick, M did the upper classes take in 
the battle?" 

"From the lists of killed and wounded, since published, " said 
young Janssens, "it is positive that the brunt of the Four Days' action 
was borne by the operatives of the town, assisted by bands of pea- 
sants and artisans, who flocked into Brussels from all parts; and of 
whom the Liegeois were the most remarkable. " 

"I saw them enter the town," said Madame Marguerite, " with 
Charles Rogier at their head. They swept by the balcony on which 
I was standing, with an effect glorious to witness." 

" And this revolutionary leader," said Sir Frederick, " has long 
since, doubtless, paid the usual penalty of taking the initiative in 
such adventures, by becoming the first victim of the perilous 
drama?" 

" He is at present," replied Madame Marguerite, coolly, " the mi- 
nister of the interior." 

"But what became of the wealthy and middle classes? " reiterated 
Sir Frederick. 

"Very few of that class," said old Janssens, "had committed 
themselves irremissibly with William ; and, as is usual under such 
circumstances, they mostly held back. Even those most compromised 
contented themselves with retreating to the frontiers, on the approach 
of the enemy 5 and it was not till the news arrived of the first days 
success, that many of the men, who have since taken the lead in the 
revolution, returned to share in its dangers." 



THE PRINCESS. 



313 



"Yes," said the priest, "it was under the fire of the Ring's 
troops, and when bombs were falling into the city, that Baron 
d'Hooghvorst, the ex-commander of the Gar^de Bourgeoise, Rogier, 
a stranger to the town, and one or two more, seized the reins of 
authority, which had fallen to the ground, and improvised a govern- 
ment to conduct the defence ; and it was not till the third day that a 
military commander-in-chief was appointed in the person of Van 
Halen. " 

"Had there not been any secret agency previously at work?" 
again asked Sir Frederick ; " no distributions of arms, or of money ?" 

"None whatever," they all replied, eager to communicate the 
information, and flattered by Sir Frederick's marked interest in the 
tale. "Everything was spontaneous, everything individual; nor 
does it very clearly appear whence the very ammunition came. Up 
to the second day, that important item was collected altogether from 
private and personal resources." 

"But what possible motive," said Sir Frederick, "could have 
urged the populace, a class without sentiments or principles, to so 
desperate a defence? " 

"When I was in England," replied Madame Marguerite, "it was 
fashionable to attribute their zeal to a thirst of plunder. But the 
facts are distinctly against the calumnious imputation." 

"No, monsieur," said the young man, his countenance kindling 
beyond the ordinary warmth of a Flemish temperament c 6 from the 
2alh to the 29th of September, the city was in the full possession of 
our artisans ; yet, with the sole exception of one house burnt and 
pillaged, in the intoxication of victory, and under the excitement of an 
imputed act of treachery on the part of the owner, there was not a 
single act authenticated to justify the imputation. My father here 
threw open his house to refresh the combatants during the whole 
siege; this room among the rest. Not a single article was injured, 
not a spoon or a fork carried away." 

" For what, then, did they fight?" said Sir Frederick, " for I am 
most earnest to know r the truth on a point so little understood. " 

" You English aristocrats, I fear," continued Madame Marguerite, 
" will never understand that point. The populace ( those scapegoats 
of society, whom you charge with all its sins ) are not such fools as 
you imagine. They do not syllogize and divide in their philosophy; 



314 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



but, pressed by necessity, and often by hunger, they possess a 
clearness and promptitude of judgment within their own sphere of 
thought, which your elaborate deliberations seldom reach." 

"I know the class intimately," said young Janssens, " as an 
employer; and they are not like Figaro's soldiers, who suffer them- 
selves to be butchered without knowing why. They might not be 
personally annoyed by the introduction of a foreign language into 
our law-courts, nor feel the exclusive promotion of Dutchmen to 
offices of trust ; but the lowest Belgian has his national honour, and 
his hereditary national prejudices and opinions, as well as the best." 

"And woe to the country," said Madame Marguerite, " where a 
national feeling does not exist even in the beggar in the street ! But 
the populace were touched in man's tenderest point— in the sto- 
mach : the taxes were grinding ; and employment had failed. Sal- 
vator Rosa has justly said, that ' no matter what scourge Providence 
may inflict upon nations, it is the poor who bear the brunt.' " 

" Humph!" said old Janssens, as if not understanding, or not 
relishing, the sentiment. " Yet, after all, it is as well that the lower 
classes should feel an interest in their country, even though it be 
through their necessities ; for if the affair had been left to the shop- 
keepers and gentry of Brussels, William of Nassau might still be 
Roi des Pays-Bas. Though they were good patriots, they were 
clearly not equal to the emergency : and though perhaps equally 
ready to payer de leurs personnes with the workmen, they were 
terribly afraid of their shops and strong-boxes. It was not, as in our 
great revolution of Eighty-nine, when Vonk and Vandernoot. . . ." 

'* The impulse of the operatives, " interrupted young Janssens, 
" to defend the city from a military occupation, which is the last of 
national misfortunes, was no taught dogma ; it was not even inspired 
by the collision of minds in pot-houses and other points of assem- 
blage. It was an electric spark propagated in the moment of 
emergency : it arose with the occasion ; and it was equal to the 
occasion. The mission of defending the revolution belonged to the 
mass, and fortunately they felt, if they did not understand, it. No 
one can say they erred ; no one will be hardy enough to assert that 
a tame surrender of Brussels could have been followed by any other 
result than that which it would have so well merited— a complete 
and universal despotism. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



315 



" And pray observe, Sir Frederick," said Madame Marguerite, 
kt that the blow once struck, the victory won, the people returned 
to their occupations ; and left the constituting a government to those 
more competent to the task than themselves. There was, surely, 
great national good sense in this moderation." 

" Certainly," observed the Priest, "we owe a vast debt to the 
artisans of Brussels; but, after all, a revolution of some sort was 
approaching. Insulted as the Belgians had been in their nationality, 
outraged in their religion, and defrauded in their financial relations, 
by the Dutch, the majority of the people were determined on resis- 
tance, and the event was inevitable." 

" So, indeed, it struck us Tories, who were then in office in 
England, " said Sir Frederick. " We were no lovers of revolution; 
I and if we embarked in the system of protocols, it was because we 
were fully sensible of the necessity of the case. " 

"Bravo!" said Madame Marguerite, in a low voice. And she 
added aloud, " Had you witnessed the scenes at which I was present 
during the Four Days (scenes of such heroism, humanity, and, 
' above all, of dogged perseverance under every disadvantage,) your 
convictions on that head would have strengthened an hundredfold. " 

" Yes," said young Janssens, " could you have seen the brave 
fellows returning day after day to the scene of action, and, when 
fainting with thirst and heat, refusing intoxicating liquors and call- 
ing for water ; could you have seen them breaking through the 
party-walls of a long row of houses to get at the enemy . . . . " 

" Eh Men ! eh Men I mon fils, " interrupted the old man, petu- 
lantly ; " vous prechez des convertis. We are all, I hope, agreed 
that our revolution of 1850 was indispensable, just, and perfect; 
but we must not forget its great precursor, our Brabancon revolu- 
I tion of Eighty-nine. Monsieur le Chevalier, you see before you an 

I old Brussels patriot of that epoch when the names of Vonk and 
Vandernoot were in every mouth ; when the three colours of 
Brabant were painted on every fan and worn in every dress. These 
\ younkers think nobody ever made a revolution but themselves. I 
1 was then younger than Elias there by many years ; and I remember, 
the day when it broke out, being sent by my father with a point- 
lace head to the Duchesse d'Ursel . . . . " 
Here certain symptoms of impatience were exhibited in the coun- 



THE PRINCESS. 



tenances of the family : the old lady coughed, Elias Janssens whisper- 
ed the priest, and Madame Marguerite passed her finger over her lip. 
as she directed an arch glance at Sir Frederick. 

" And so, as I was crossing the Grande Place, strange groups 
were pouring in from Willebroek and other faubourgs ; and whom 
should I meet in front of the Broodhuys but young Jans Van Haslin, 
of Mechlin, the son of the rich lace-merchant. He had never been 
at Brussels, and was staring at the statue of the Virgin, and was 
reading aloud, like a scholar of Louvain, the inscription — l A peste, 
fame, et bello libera nos, Maria pads, ' when I came behind 
him, and 

At this moment the pendule struck seven, and the company arose, 
as if by the same movement which directed the little figures of the 
German clock-work. The conversation-party, the type of the 
estamenieto, ( introduced by Spanish fashion three centuries before.) 
broke up at the same moment at which it had done so, in the Jans- 
sens' family, for the last fifty years. 

There was now an assaut de politesse on all sides ; curtsies and 
bows were made to the very ground. Madame Marguerite saluted 
her friends severally ; Madame Janssens, the priest, and the young 
ladies, sal down to loto; Madame Elias retired to hear the children 
their prayers and put them to bed ; Elias proceeded to the arcade of 
the Cafe des Mille Colonnes; and Janssens pere exchanged his 
robc-de-chambre for his redingote, in the adjoining wainscoted 
parlour, with the intention de faire son estaminet at the Co?nte 
d'Egmont, in the Place Wallon. 

Sir Frederick had not half returned the bows directed to him, 
when, perceiving the retreat of Madame Marguerite, he cut short 
all further ceremony, and followed her to the door ; but she was 
already seated in the calash he had seen in the morning at the 
entrance of St. Beghe. 

" You are like a fire-fly," he said, laying his hand on the carriage- 
door, 4t as bright and as evanescent. " 

• 4 The simile holds good in some respects,' 1 she replied, "for 
my light, such as it is, is all my own — unreflected, unborrowed : 
few of you great luminaries can say as much. " 

" I remember," he observed, coming still closer. " when 1 was 
in Milan, walking alone, on a gloomy evening, to La Simonetta. 



THE PRINCESS. 317 

From the myriads of brilliant insects that lighted its melancholy 
solitudes, I chased and with difficulty caught one, which I secured in 
my bosom and brought home. When all other lights were extin- 
guished, in the deep darkness of an Italian night, that light shone 
bright and pure, like a fairy star, cheering the imagination and 
delighting the eye. If again I could secure such an ' animate pel- 
legrino, gentile '—if for me was still reserved. ..." 

" And what became of your fire-fly? " interrupted Madame Mar- 
guerite, fixing her inquiring eyes on Sir Frederick's; "did it survive 
the night?" 

" Yes ; but it fell during the day from the flower on which I had 
placed it. " 

" And you trampled it under foot!" she replied, in a tone of the 
deepest emphasis and expression. 

" Ah ! c'est vous, Monsieur le Chevalier, " said old Mr. Jans- 
sens, coming forth from his hall-door, with his ivory-headed cane and 
broad-brimmed hat : " Pardie, I have half a mind to take you to 
the Comte d'Egmont. It is well worth seeing. It reminds one 
more of the old Corbeau than any esta?ninet of the present day. " 

He took Sir Frederick's arm, and the carriage drove away. Sir 
Frederick wished the Comte d'Egmont, and even the worthy 
Mynheer Janssens, at the bottom of the Senne. 

" I beg your pardon, my dear Monsieur Janssens," he said; 
u but I want to follow Madame Marguerite, to obtain an address, 
and. ..." 

" You cannot follow her without your hat. You have come out 
before Antoine could give it to you : etes-vous vifs , vous autres 
Anglais I And then, your guirlande d 'immortelles ; perhaps you 
are going to place it on the tomb of one of our patriotic victims in 
the Place St. Michel. Shall I have it sent to your hotel? Antoine , 
viens done. " 

Sir Frederick accepted the offer, and gave the chaplet to the 
servant, who now brought him his hat and cane. He felt how 
; narrowly he had escaped the absurdity of carrying such an object 
through the streets of the upper town. The triumvirate of the Belle- 
vue rose up to scare him at the very idea. The old gentleman had 
again taken Sir Frederick's arm, and they walked together down the 
Puterie. 



24. 



318 



THE PRINCESS. 



" I remember, " he continued, "when I thought little of mak- 
ing four estaminets per diem. I now confine myself to one. Times 
are strangely changed ; nobody smokes , r or drinks Faro in the Haute 
Ville now. " 

u I think they are all the better, " said Sir Frederick, peevishly, 
and bored beyond measure by his predicament : " it is a stupifying 
habit you Belgians have of drinking beer perpetually ; for 1 believe 
your estaminet means that. " 

The old gentleman withdrew his arm, offended at the bluntness 
of the observation. 

46 But," said Sir Frederick, something shocked at his own pe- 
tulance; " after all, every nation has its favourite beverage." 

Li Monsieur le Chevalier, " said Mr. Janssens, with some cold- 
ness, " I believe you are right. We do drink more of our excel- 
lent malt liquors than is favourable to our vivacity. But we owe 
the habit, like many others, to our foreign masters. We were 
once almost as lively a race as the French themselves; for we are 
both of the common stock of Franks. We lived like them, then, 
on the wine of our own vineyards. But that did not suit the 
commercial interests of the Spaniards ; and while they rooted up 
the vine in these provinces, to force a market for their own Sherry 
and Canary wines, they affected to extol our Brussels beer, by 
giving it the name of Faro : a name assigned to the precious be- 
verage grown in the south of the Peninsula. We swallowed the 
compliment and the beer together ; and ever since, it has had its 
place, with French Burgundy and Spanish Malaga, at our con- 
vivial meetings. It is scarcely fair, monsieur, to judge the manners 
of a nation, without knowing something of its history." 

Sir Frederick felt the necessity of attempting an apology, in 
which he was interrupted by the old gentleman— 

" Bu tout, du tout, monsieur, " said Mr. Janssens, taking off 
his hat; "we Brabancons are a little tetchy; we want the coolness 
of our brothers, the good Flemings. But that is your way to the 
upper town. I will not let you go further. " 

"' The fact is, " said Sir Frederick, standing with his hat in his 
hand, in imitation of Monsieur Janssens, "I have not yet dined: 
otherwise I would accompany you to faire mon estaminet, were 
it only to convince you that we English can drink ale, and smoke 



r 



THE PRINCESS. 319 

a cigar, with the best Brabancon of you all. Another time, if you 
will allow me . . . ." 

" Comment I monsieur, a relation of the great Vandyke! and 
presented to us by our good friend Madame Marguerite ! you will 
do us honour; we shall willingly admit you. But so true a lover 
of the arts, so liberal a purchaser, ( for Madame Marguerite tells me 
you have some of the finest pictures, for which you have given 
the largest prices, in England, )...." 

" Where could she have learned that?" thought Sir Frederick. 

" You must get her to show you the work-rooms of some of 
our modern artists. A Vhonneur de vous revoir, Monsieur le 
Chevalier. " 

The Brabancon lace-merchant then proceeded to his estaminct ; 
and the son of the manufacturer of Birmingham returned to his 
seven-o'clock dinner at the Hotel de Flandre. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE FRACAS. 

Sir Frederick Mottram, after a late, and almost untasted 
dinner, was sipping his claret, and reading the ' Independant, ' in 
which his own arrival was announced, with a pompous display of 
his former ministerial rank and present personal distinctions, when 
Fegan, with his usual flourish of trumpets, flung open the door, 
and announced, with the emphasis of a herald-at-arms, the Marquis 
of Montressor, Lord Alfred Montressor , and the Honourable Mr. Mon- 
tague St. Leger. 

" Your Paddy Menalcas* is unpayable, " said Lord Montressor. 

* On an expected visit of a great man to one of the show-places of Ireland 

(the Leasowes of the county of ), the servants of the farm were dressed 

and named after the personages of a Yirgilian eclogue. One of these shep- 



320 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Where did you pick him up, and for what purpose? One doesn't 
lionize such a tiger as that for nothing?" 

" I picked him up, " replied Sir Frederick, half rising, while the 
gentlemen flung themselves on a couch, "in my own stables, where 
he was living en retraite, in consequence of a broken arm, got be- 
hind my cab some years back. He was neglected by my coachman, 
who had orders to take care of him, and did not ; so I have taken 
him into active service myself. He is an excellent groom. " 

" Groom ! " said Lord Alfred, laughing ; " page of the presence, 
you mean. He is dressed like a young gentleman about to appear 
in the character of Belcour ; and he figures about like a master of 
the ceremonies in a country ball-room." 

" He answers my purposes for the present," said Sir Frederick, 
coldly; " but I am hiring foreign servants, and shall probably send 
him back to his former station. " 

" Oh !" said Lord Montr essor, putting the head of his gemmed 
cane to his lips, and looking significantly at his companions, while 
Sir Frederick seemed intent on tearing up a bunch of grapes, and 
was evidently displeased with the intrusion of his guests; " report 
says that you are going to form a foreign establishment altogether, 
and to reside abroad for some time for the recovery of your health, 
and for the enjoyment of mrtie. " 

"Report is a babbling gossip," said Sir Frederick, petulantly, 
" who devotes her strenuous idleness to echoing the nonsense she 
does not credit. Is your wife coming abroad, Montressor?" 

" Am I my wife's keeper ?" said Lord Montressor, yawning. 

" No, not you j " said Sir Frederick. 

Lord Alfred bit his lips, and knitted his brow. 

" But you probably know whether she is coming abroad or not. 
1 had a letter from Lady Frances which mentions her own intention 
of coming as far as Brussels with a party of friends ; 1 take it for 
granted they are Lady Montressor's coterie. " 

herds, ' for the nonce,' hadbeen laboriously drilled to answer the question 
of ' Who are you ? 1 by saying, ' I am Menalcas.' When the time for action 
came, and the preconcerted question was put, in the presence of the distin- 
guished visiter, the boy replied, with an air of perfect self-satisfaction, 4 1 am 
Paddy Menalcas, plaze your honor !' 



THE PRINCESS. 



.321 



The gentlemen exchanged looks. 

" Humph!" said Lord Montressor. " Yes, Georgina is not get- 
ting on. She proposes — that is, her doctors propose, that she 
should goto the Brunnens. 1 am wailing for her here, for we are 
her only advanced guard; and if you are going to push on, you 
had better leave us your route between Brussels and Baden. 
1 Lady Frances's accompanying her is the most likely thing in the 
world ; and if so, we will deliver our consignment in the like good 
condition to your address. " 

" I have written to Lady Frances to stop her journey," said Sir 
Frederick. " My own movements are uncertain ; and, at all events, 
business and friends will require my return to Mottram Hall by 
October. I have half-promised the Duke a battu." 

" Pray Heaven," said Lord Alfred, with mock gravity, " your 
letter gets in time to Carlton-terrace ; for I should not wonder if 
the party were already on the road. I know the Princess of Schaf- 
fenhausen expects them." 

Sir Frederick stooped to pick up the napkin he had let fall ; and 
the suffusion left by the effort on his brows was still apparent when 
he arose. 

tfc By the bye, I have given the Princess rendezvous at the Opera," 
continued Lord Alfred, as he looked at his watch. " Nearly nine, 
by Jove !" 

The gentlemen started up. 

" We are come," said Mr. St. Leger, " to take you to the theatre, 
Mottram; so order your coffee, and let us be off : we have the 
French Ambassador's box." 

" I hate the theatre," said Sir Frederick, rising and ringing for 
| coffee; " will any of you take chasse? " 

They had all gone through the regime de rigueur of the even- 
ing, and were impatient for the spectacle, 

" Ay, but the ' Pre aux Clercs, ' " said Mr. St. Leger, 
with Cholet and the Prevot, are novelties. You don't hate 
music?" 

" That depends," said Sir Frederick, who, after a little coquetry 
and a little reluctance, suffered himself to be persuaded. 

The French Ambassador's box was already full, chiefly of tra- 
velling English, passing through Brussels to the Rhine ; for never 



322 



THE PRINCESS. 



since the pouring down of the northern hordes from their Scythian 
forests to its frontier shores, had the Rhine been so invaded by any 
roving irruption, as in the summer of 1833. The new-comers, 
according to the etiquette of foreign boxes, took the pas, and occu- 
pied the front row 5 but after reconnoitring for a few moments the 
front of the house with their glasses, the Lords Montressor drew 
back, to talk English politics, scandal, and sporting intelligence 
with the newer arrivals from London. 

Sir Frederick Mottram directed his opera-glass in search of the 
Princess of Schaffenhausen's box ; but he saw nothing that resem- 
bled the fantastic dress and remarkable figure, ( the all that he knew,) 
of the Princess; nor was there anything that he could even mistake 
for Madame Marguerite. The return of Lord Alfred after a short 
absence, announced the fact that the Princess had resigned the box 
lent her by Madame Engler, whose own beautiful face and elegant 
toilet were very distinguishable, in a circle where beauty was some- 
times rather rare, and where dress was usually more conspicuous 
for its precision than its eclat. 

In the balcon, however, and immediately under the Ambassador's 
box, there was a dress sufficiently remarkable to attract very general 
attention, not only from the loungers in the loge diplomatique, 
but from the parterre beneath. The wearer was so truly Dutch in 
her build, as to excite some unfavourable impressions in many of the 
Belgian spectators. A wreath of white roses, encircling her broad 
brow, formed a dazzling contrast with the deep red roses that suf- 
fused her cheek ; and the pea-green plumes which waved before the 
eyes of Sir Frederick, as he sat behind her, matched with her velvet 
robe much better than with the tresses of a blonde hardie ( to say 
the least) of the head they adorned. 

A bust more decollete than the laws of Belgian decency permit, 
gave relief, by its whiteness, to a collar of emeralds, which, for their 
size, seemed fragments of that ' first gem of the earth,' whose hue 
they imitated. The whole exposure was so little in keeping with the 
decent Cannezous, the snow-white Vandykes, and the capped and 
bonneted heads of the female frequenters of the balcon of the 
Brussels theatre (the most modest, proper, and reserved of all Euro- 
pean audiences,) as to raise suspicions that this singular personage 
was of an order not supposed to exist in civilized society. 



THE PRIISCESS. 



323 



By the side of the lady, whom some of the elder Bmxellois de- 
clared to be a living impersonation of La Pino, the celebrated mis- 
tress of Vandernoot, sat and slept a portly model of the Sheriffalty 
of Dublin— to those, at least, who might happen to be acquainted 
with the type of city honours on a gala day. A full suit of black gave 
relief to a massive gold chain, with a double-eyed lorgnette, hanging 
from his neck. He wore powder in his hair, a brilliant brooch in 
his shirt, and a profusion of cravat that might have recalled to Bel- 
gian antiquaries the original article of that name, introduced into the 
toilet of the Low Countries, and borrowed from the Croats by Phi- 
lippe-le-Bon in the fifteenth century. Whether he was the owner, 
or the attendant merely, of the very eveillee person by whose side 
he slumbered ( while Cholet and Prevot were singing their favourite 
duet), was a matter of debate and wager with some of the gayest of 
the young Belgians. 

At the close of the second act, the lady stood up to her fullest 
height and breadth ; and turning back her wreathed head and bright 
rolling eyes to the ambassador's box, she tapped the hand which 
was leaning over it with her fan. Sir Frederick started, and met 
the basilisk glances of Lady Dogherty, which literally transfixed him. 

" I am inclined to raise an altar to chance, Sir Frederick," she 
said, " since it's to it entirely we owe the pleasure of meeting you. 
I hope you are quite well; and Lady Frances, 1 hope she was 
quite well when you heard from her." 

The address, the inquiries, the accent, and the whole person of 
Lady Dogherty, drew the attention of the Montressor party, and of 
more than one English dandy and French attache. Sir Frederick, 
whose exquisite apprehension of ridicule was never so wounded in 
its life-nerve, had neither the barbarity to cut dead, nor the tact 
to give in to the amusing absurdity ; and he received most awkwardly 
the reproaches and compliments of his friend of the Dublin court- 
ball in the time of the Duke of Richmond. 

At that moment, a loud yawn from Sir Ignatius ( who had awa- 
kened as soon as the two charming vocalists had ceased to sing, 
and who was rubbing himself round with as unconscious an in- 
dulgence of his national movement as Monsieur Sans-Gene in the 
French farce could have done,) excited a general laugh in the pit, 
accompanied by a murmur of disapprobation, at a gentleman ( in 



THE PRINCESS. 



a box too that represented majesty) conversing with a female whose 
appearance would be scarcely tolerated in the foyer of Franconi. 
The well-known admonitory nudge of Lady Dogherty's elbow soon, 
however, recalled her husband ; who, looking up into the face of 
Fegan's master, began an apology which filled up the measure of 
amazement to the young men in the box, and particularly to the 
Montressor party. 

" It was my raal and intire intintion," he said, " to wait upon 
you, Sir Frederick Mottram, this very day, and apologize for the 
little accident last night, in regard to our frolic, in which Mr. Fegan 
was nowise to blame : for th'ale here, sir, is the most treacherous 
liquor that ever a man let pass the threshold of his lips ; and a cratur 
as sober as a jidge gets disguised, before he knows whether it's 
table beer or bottled portlier he's drinking. And in respect of my 
shirt, sir, it was all a mistake ; and I'm proud to own it before 
your frinds here, who might have got odd notions into their heads. 
For it seems, Sir Frederick, by what I hear tell, that you hadn't j 
wore it a second day, before Mr. Fegan very politely had it washed, 
and put up in lavender, till he come to Brussels and give it to my 
wife's lady's-maid, who is there in the blue bonnet in the lattices 
above, with Mr. Fegan." 

Every one laughed ; while Sir Frederick, endeavouring to laugh 
too, was relieved from all further apologies by some one tapping 
him on the shoulder. He turned round and pushed back his chair 
to hail the welcome intruder ; when Doctor Rodolf de Burgo, with 
his pert flashy air, and fine tigrish-dressed figure, stared him in the 
face. C'etait Gribouille, qui se jetait dans Veau pour se sauver 
de la pluie. The intrusion upon the sacred precincts of a private 
box ( especially an ambassador's ) was a shock followed up by the 
most provoking familiarity, indicating many more foregone con- 
clusions of intimacy than the punctilious and reserved London man 
was willing to admit. 

" How do, Sir Frederick? — but I need not ask you : you are 
looking a devilish deal better than when we parted a ^impromptu, 
owing to the Princess of Schaffenhausen's sudden departure ; she 
is so rapid in all her movements, and somehow we got involved— 
but here we are. I have been to see the citadel at Antwerp : mag- 
nificent ! only returned an hour ago ; just time to dress and dine." 



THE PRINCESS. 



325 



Lord Montressor's star, shining on his tight-buttoned broad- 
breasted blue eoat, caught the Doctor's quick eye, and he said — 

• • Do introduce me to your friend ; I happen to be particularly 
intimate with a lady in whom he is very deeply interested." 

The rising of the curtain, and the universal ' Chut ! ' from all 
parts of the house, directed to the noisy box of the absent ambas- 
sador, produced the necessity for silence. Sir Ignatius and Lady 
Dogherty, who had been standing with their broad backs to the 
audience, and their broad faces to the party in the box, were now 
obliged to sit down ; while, to the utter annoyance of Sir Frederick, 
Doctor de Burgo drew the only unoccupied chair to the front of 
the box, between the Marquis and Lord Alfred, and, putting up his 
glass, recognised a number of Dublin, Cheltenham, and Brighton 
friends distributed through the house— all ' Pilgrims of the Rhine,' 
the emptying of the day's diligences from Ostend and Calais. 

The Doctor felt assured that, as far as the ' mere Irishry ' went, 
his being seated next to a knight of the garter, in an ambassador's 
box, would bring him more professional distinction, than if he 
united the skill of Abernethy with the courtliness of Sir Henry ; and 
he was partly beginning a puff on the subject for the ' Pilot ' and 
the ' Mail,' ( with both of which journals he corresponded, ) and 
partly making up his mind to address the Marquis on a subject to 
which it was in the worst taste to allude, when the noble brothers 
arose and left the box, followed by the whole remaining English 
party : Sir Frederick had already escaped. 

The Doctor, mortified to find himself alone and abandoned by the 
velvet friends whose personal acquaintance he so much coveted, 
arose, as if to follow, when the strong arm of Sir Ignatius caught 
the shining button of his coat. Wearied beyond all power of 
further endurance, and rising for the purpose of joining Fegan and 
the lady's-maid in the upper box, the Baronet had then first per- 
ceived the vicinity of his travelling physician ; and, irritated by heat, 
confinement, and listening, as he said, ■ to a parcel of balderdash 
of which he did not understand a single iota,' he revived all his 
lately cherished impressions of the airs and negligence of the Irish 
Apollo, who had moreover been two days absent during his em- 
ployer's worst fit of bile, and fear of cholera. He now, therefore, 
exclaimed, without reference to time and place— 



326 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Why, thin, doctor, I am intirely amazed at your conduct, 
laving my lady and self in this outlandish place, without as much 
as 4 God be with you,' or ' Good bye kindly,' or a powther to 
take, or a ditto repated, ( shaking the bottle; ) and Lady Dogherty 
all pimples, as if in the mazles, and as red as blazes ; and myself 
with the weight of a smoothing-iron on the heart, and as blue as a 
blanket about the eyes ; and wouldn't wonder it 's a touch of the 
collara I've got, which you tould me was raging through the 
place. And, allow me to ax you, Doctor de Burgo, is it for looking 
after thim ould ruins at Antwerp that I am paying you two hundred 
a-year, and your board and lodging, and a sate in my own carriage, 
and other benefits for which I make no charge. ..." 

4 Chut! chut i " with other expressions of displeasure, were now 
echoed on every side, as the voice of Sir Ignatius rose with the rising 
of his choler, and disturbed the actors as well as the audience. 
Lady Dogherty, in an agony of feeling, which probably gave an ad- 
ditional muscular force to her arm, endeavoured to pull Sir Ignatius 
down into his seat. But Sir Ignatius, in the irritation of his excited 
feelings, was more than usually recalcitrant against her ladyship's 
authority ; and, without any previous acquaintance with the theory of 
dynamics, he hung the heavier on the Doctor's button in proportion 
as he perceived the nisus on the uxorial side of the fulcrum to pre- 
ponderate. The Doctor, on his part, was taken at a mechanical 
disadvantage ; for, his person being tall and the front of the box low, 
the leverage was decided against him. What man could do, how- 
ever, he did; and, like another Atlas, he sustained the double world 
of Sir Ignatius's attractions and those of his lady, till, in an unlucky 
moment of increasing stress, the button of his coat, the pivot on 
which so many opposing forces turned, gave way. Lady Dogherty 
lost her centre of gravity ; Sir Ignatius was dragged into the track of 
her eccentric movement, and, catching convulsively at the Doctor's 
arm, shot him from the box with overwhelming force upon a Com- 
mis voyageur, who, thus impelled, rolled his German rotundity of 
person over the prostrate couple. 

To have remonstrated in no very measured terms with the living 
projectile, would have been the immediate consequence of the Com- 
mis recovering his legs ; but the agile De Burgo, a practised profes- 
sor of callisthenic exercises , on feeling that the impulse he had so 



THE PRINCESS. 327 

unexpectedly acquired was hurrying him irrevocably into the yawn- 
ing - gulf beneath, seized the front of the balcony in his passage, 
and was thus enabled to drop quietly into the pit, without further 
injury. The pit door stood at hand invitingly open ; and the Doc- 
tor, with an harlequin bound, which would have done credit to 
Eller, disappeared through the opening, and was seen no more. 
At this moment a gendarme, drawn by the increasing clamour of 
i the angry and astonished audience, made his appearance in the 
balcon. He approached Sir Ignatius, (who, once more having re- 
gained his feet, was beginning to show fight,) and with the utmost 
gentleness and civility requested the Baronet to accompany him out. 
Sir Ignatius mistook the molliter manus imposuit of the executive 
for an illegal arrest, and resisted the invitation with all his force, 
exclaiming, 

" Vous un fool, Monsir Policeman, vous un fool, if you think I 
haven't more law in my head, than to let myself be arrested and sent 
to a furren jail, for nothing at all, at all ! " 

" Soyez tranquille," said the gendarme, drawing him gently 
| on ; iC soyez tranquille." 

i£ Sorrow step I'll stir, sir, good or bad, till you show me your 
warrant," said Sir Ignatius. 

"Oui, out, Monsieur le Grand Connetable," cried Lady 
Dogherty ; " ou est votre lettre de cachet? " 

" Isn't it mighty hard," continued Sir Ignatius, appealing to the 
bystanders, " that an Irish nobleman, and magestrate of Shanbally- 
niac, can't spake to his own thravelling physician, without being 
taken up like a pickpocket, in the face of a furren audience?" 

Lady Dogherty, half affecting a faint, though not sorry to make a 
sensation, now bestowed her entire French vocabulary on the young 
Co??imis, whom she endeavoured to interest in the cause of outraged 
hospitality and violated gallantry ; but the phlegmatic German, who 
had visited the theatre for the express purpose of comparing the 
orchestra and vocal strength of the Brussels company with those of 
the free and noble city of Frankfort, had been incensed and 
annoyed, past all bearing, by the frequent interruptions his critical 
acumen had received, through the various nonconformities of Sir 
Ignatius and his better half; and to her pathetic appeals he made 
no other answer than a frequent iteration of, 



328 



THE PRINCESS. 



" ' Comment , matam ! Que fouler fous ! fotre ca falter est tin 
lapacheur. II m'a gdte mon opera , lui. " 

Meantime the gendarme continued his gentle but persevering 
efforts—" Je nous invite toujour s de sortir, monsieur, " he said ; 
and step by step he drew him towards the door of the balcon : but 
on gaining the lobby, he was himself suddenly seized by the collar, 
and hurled round with such force, that he reeled against the opposite 
wall; while Fegan, (by whose geste et fait this assault was per- 
petrated,) rushing forward, took Sir Ignatius under the arm, and 
brandishing a short stick, roared out, 

" Shall I kill him dead, Sir Ignatius? — shall I, sir? — say the 
word, the dirty furren polisman ! Does he know youre the sitting 
magestrate of Shanballymac? Does he know who you are, at all, 
at all ? Here, my leedy. Honor me with your leedyship's arum. 
Your leedyship's carridge is up and waiting at the blackguard door 
below." 

Lady Dogherty, trembling, accepted the proffered arm ; Sir Igna- 
tius followed raging; and Fegan, flourishing his stick, was clearing 
a way for them through the crowd, when they were met by the 
officer of the guard, who demanded which was the offender that 
had assaulted the gendarme. 

Two Belgian gentlemen pointed to Fegan, observing at the same 
time that it was a great outrage. 

" Outrage! " said one of a group of vulgar Englishmen, who 
were beginning to take a part in the fray. "The outrage is on 
your part, messieurs. If a gentleman is to be insulted by a gen^- 
darme for talking to a friend in an adjoining box, the sooner we 
English get away from the protection of this republican government 
the better." 

" I should like to know," said another, " what the Orange king 
could have done worse than this, or what the English papers will 
say of it." 

So much for mob governments," said a third ; "the magistrates 
are afraid to put the laws in force against the people." 

To all these sarcasms, which were not followed up by any overt 
act in behalf of the prisoner, the Belgian officer made no reply : a 
moderation which may be explained by his not having understood 
a word that was said : for the dialogue had been carried on partly 



THE PRINCESS. 



329 



in English, and partly in no-French. With considerable politeness 
he endeavoured to persuade Sir Ignatius to follow his lady into their 
carriage, and to leave Fegan in his charge ; assuring him that every 
justice should he done by the prisoner. 

Fegan, meantime, was marched off amidst a file of soldiers. The 
awful aspect of an armed force had electrified his imagination to a 
degree that no symbol of civil power could have effected. Pale and 
subdued, he made no further resistance ; for that courage which 
would have stood firm against an array of thousands of his fierce 
countrymen, on the heights of Cappoquin, or in the ravines of the 
Galties, was in perfect abeyance before the bayonets of a disciplined 
soldiery. 

It required the sedative powers of half a hundred of Ostend 
oysters, of two carafes of Alambique, qualified by a tumbler of 
Cognac and water, to tranquillize the irritation of Sir Ignatius, 
and to soothe the nervous emotion of Lady Dogherty. They had 
found the supper ready, according to order, at the Bellevue ; such 
a supper as, in the good old times of Ireland, was as indispensable 
after a party to the play, as an epilogue to a new comedy, or a 
' raking pot of tay ' after a county ball. 

Vhomme en mangeant remonte ses ressorts- and the supper 
discussed, Sir Ignatius and his lady began to see the affair which 
had at first terrified them in another and better point of view. 
The person carried off and imprisoned by the armed force, was 
the confidential own gentleman of one of the first men in England, 
a Privy Counsellor, an M.P., who would doubtless 'make a Star- 
chamber business of it, ' bring it before the Parliament, perhaps ; 
and, in all cases, the names of Mottram and Dogherty would appear 
together in the public papers. The necessity of calling on Sir 
Frederick the first thing in the morning, to procure his protection 
and assistance, was therefore the practical result of this speculation. 

Lady Dogherty, though she felt all the advantage of such a coin- 
cidence, had yet 4 a silent sorrow ' preying on her heart, which 
stood apart from all other grievances — the recent desertion of 
Doctor de Burgo ; and she gave but a divided attention to the apos- 
trophes of her husband in honour of the prowess and gallantry of 
Fegan, the object which seemed at present uppermost in his mind. 

" Och! he's a chip of the ould block,' 1 said Sir Ignatius, in a, 

25. 



330 



THE PRINCESS. 



sudden burst of emotion, called forth by a second glass of brandy 
and water, and the recapitulation of Fegan's noble defence. " He's 
a chip of the ould block ! And now, Kitty dear, did ever you see 
an handsomer fellow, or a taller, than Larry Fegan? and a pair of 
shoulders that would flank a martillo tower. I remember the day 
when the wild-goose flyers* of Kerry would have given any money 
for such a lad for th' ould King of Prussia. And when it is known 
who and what he is, this little ruction may be the making of him ; 
and wouldn't wonder . . . . " 

Sir Ignatius here looked earnestly and steadily at Lady Dogherty, 
as if he had a confidence to make which would require all her indul- 
gent sympathies ; but he looked in vain. Lady Dogherty's bright 
eyes were suffused with tears. Exhaustion, fright, oysters, ale, the 
vulgar indiscretions of her ill-assorted mate, the conduct of Rodolf 
de Burgo, were all weighing heavily on her heart or — her digestion ; 
and having thrown herself back in her chair, with her handkerchief 
to her face, she was indulging in a 'luxury of woe,' to which the 
monotonous mutterings of her husband gave no interruption. Con- 
fiding however in her silent attention, Sir Ignatius filled his glass and 
continued, 

" And now, Lady Dogherty dear, that this poor lad has risked his 
life for us in a furren land, and lies in jail this blessed moment for 
our sakes, and the honor of ould Ireland, and has proved himself a 

brave boy and an honor to the father that which I may say, 

Kitty dear, is coming to the point,— and— which— while— that is, 
ma'am !— for youth is youth; and the greatest man in Ireland has had 
his frolic out, and in that respect I am not worse than my bethers; 
as you who knows Ireland, [and what we Mallow boys were in 
thim ould times, and Rory Karney, of Fort Karney, your uncle, who 
was called Hell-fire Karney, can tell. Sure hadn't he his pickidillies, 
your own kith and kin?— and istn't the lad that was well known to 
be a bit of a byblovv, young Roderick Karney, a gineral in the 
Austrian service, and a Count? which shows that I was no ways 
particlar in regard of poor Larry, called Fegan, after his mother's 
maiden name, alias Betty Burke. 

* The name by which the crimps of the King of Prussia were known in 
Ireland , where they used to recruit for giants for his service. 



THE PRINCESS. 



331 



"And so, Lady Dogherty, on my bended knees, ma'am," (and he 
• suited the action to the word ' ) " I here, as if you were my pathron 
saint, declare and confess, to my great sin and shame, and mia 
maximd culpd, that Larry is my firstborn of two fine lumps of 
twins by the said Betty Burke, alias Fegan. If you will just pardon 
this trifling bit of a piccadilly, committed years before I had the high 
honor of making you Lady Dogherty, and marrying into the Fort 
Karney family, I declare to Jasus, and 'pon my word of honor as a 
gentleman, and a barinite, that I'll be true and loyal to your wedded 
love and bed and board, from this time out, now and evermore, 
amen. " 

Lady Dogherty, in an amazement that dried her maudlin tears on 
her crimson cheek, let fall her handkerchief, and gazing on her 
prostrate penitent, exclaimed— 

" What is it you are after telling me, Sir Ignatius? Lawrence 
Fegan your son ! your illegitimate child ! " 

" Sorrow word of a lie in it!" said Sir Ignatius, folding his 
brawny hands over his lady's knees : " I had my misgivings from 
the first time I saw him before the jidge de pay at Ostend. Big, 
bare, and naked, as he stood there, I felt my bowels yearn towards 
him." 

" And did he know of the relationship? " said Lady Dogherty, in 
a tone of deep mortification : " does Sir Frederick know that your 
natural son is his valet-de-chambre? " 

" Sorrow know he knows ! for the poor lad has kept the sacret, 
ever since he saw me by chance walking in that wild-baste garden 
in London, and says he followed us often, but wouldn't bring shame 
on me, nor himself neither : for it's he has the raal spurrit of a 
gintleman, not all as one as the Doctor, and would sooner beg the 
world than axe me for a tinpinny, after I throwning him on the 
Shaughraun, and never giving him bit nor sup, or trade to live 
by, sinner that I am ! And if it wasn't that it was a little hearty we 
got together last night, at a nate little tay-house, or shebeen, a taste 
out of the town, ma'am, (where we met by accident, and made our 
kermish and our staminay together, as they say in German ) the 
divel an iota I'd have known of it yet, only by guess ; and never saw 
the cratur since he was the height of a Munster potato. " 

"But, " said Lady Dogherty, perplexed in the extreme by a sense 



332 



THE PRINCESS. 



of all the inconveniences and embarrassments which might arise 
from this discovery, " how do you know that he is really your 

son?" 

u Know it ! why, isn't he as like me as if I had spit him out of my 
mouth? Isn't he six feet high in his stocking feet? and hasn't he 
the look of a lord, if lords weren't such little leprahauns as they 
are now, —to say nothing of Priest Murphy's certificate of his birth, 
which he has on his person ; for he was the mother's darling, in 
regard of his luck in coming an hour before th' other poor donny 
garlogh, whom she tuck up to the Foundling in Dublin. " 

" There are two of them, then ! " cried Lady Dogherty, raising 
her hands and eyes in dismay. 

" There ivere two of them, sure enough, Kitty dear, " said Sir 
Ignatius, taking her hands tenderly, and kissing them with propitiat- 
ing gallantry, and an ill-concealed smile of triumph. 

" I hope I don't intrude," said a voice from the half-opened door. 
tu By Jupiter !— a scena ! I trust I am included in the general am- 
nesty ; for as I am the offended, the injured, the insulted person, I 
of course am the person to cry peccavi." 

" It doesn't signify what you cry, Doctor de Burgo," said Sir 
Ignatius, rising from his knees, and wiping the dust from his best 
black pantaloons, equally ashamed of the humble position in which 
he had been discovered at his wife's feet, and enraged at the easy 
assurance of his travelling physician; " it does not signify whether 
you cry copaivi or not ; for you and I must part, Doctor de Burgo, 
and the sooner the bether." 

" With all my heart, Sir Ignatius," said the Doctor, ringing for a 
relay of oysters and a bottle of wine; " but let us part friends. 
The munificent offer I have received here, the prevalence of cholera, 
of which the foreign physicians know nothing, the certainty of 
being made state physician to my old acquaintance Leopold the First 
( to whose soirdes I went at Marlborough-house ), and, above all, 
the charming valetudinarian, the Marchioness of Montressor being 
expected every moment in Brussels — ( you saw her husband and 
brother in the box with me ; he with the star on my left was the 
Marquis;) — add to this, my interest with Sir Frederick Mottram, 
and the probable return to office of our party; and you, at least, 
Lady Dogherty, who know the world, will allow that to accompany 



THE PRINCESS. 



333 



you to theBrunnens of Germany, would, in a worldly consideration, 
be a great sacrifice. I do not say that certain feelings, Lady Dog- 
herty, will not wrench from the heart ties, ' which, breaking, break- 
it, ' but Sir Ignatius's conduct. . . 

The Doctor paused, and fixed his eyes on Lady Dogherty. Sir 
Ignatius was already mixing for himself another tumbler, and lis- 
tened patiently to this rigmarole, of which 4 the raging cholera ' was 
to him a cabalistical phrase. Lady Dogherty, who could upon 
occasions quarter the dramatic gentility of Lady Teazle with the 
royalty of Queen Dollalolla, drew up to her fullest height, and 
gently pushing away the tumbler of brandy and water from before 
her husband, said, with emphasis,— 

" Doctor de Burgo, while under the influence of feelings as violent 
as they are agitating, allow Sir Ignatius and myself to withdraw, 
and to defer all further discussion on the unfortunate events of this 
eventful evening till to-morrow. Oh ! sir ! may your night's reflec- 
tions bring with your morning's convictions a proper sense of 
your very improper error, and a sincere sorrow for the neglect 
of all those finer feelings, which, as the poet says, ' fills the happiest 
breast.' " 

" Amen! " said Sir Ignatius, gently stealing back the tumbler, 
which his wife again pushed away ; while she added, in an emphatic 
tone, — 

" All I entreat of you is, Doctor, that you will take no step till 
you hear from Sir Ignatius and myself, at breakfast to-morrow 
morning; till then, farewell ! 

6 And if for ever, 
Then for ever fare thee well.' " 

" I cannot part with you in anger, dear Lady Dogherty," said the 
Doctor, in a tone as dramatic and sentimental as her own ; " and 
if Sir Ignatius can forgive himself " 

" Is it me?" interrupted Sir Ignatius, softened to childish ten- 
derness by his recent confession, by the ' tumblers' he had already 
taken, and his desire for the one he had not yet tasted ; " Is it me? 
Divel a bit but I forgive every one ; and have enough to be 
forgiven myself, as Lady Dogherty knows, and will tell you, Doc- 
tor. ..." 



25. . 



334 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Enough of that for to-night !" said Lady Dogherty, taking his 
arm in a manner that obliged him to rise. 

" Aisy now, aisy, Kitty dear," he cried, as she forced him from 
his chair : " to cut the matter short, the Doctor and I'll just take a 
tumbler to our making up ; not forgetting poor Lawrence Fegan, 
now lodged in the watch-house for all our sakes." 

De Burgo, taking a hint from Lady Dogherty's eyes, replied — 
" Not to-night, Sir Ignatius, if you please ; it is enough that we part 
friends. Good night, dear Lady Dogherty ! We shall meet, I sup- 
pose, at breakfast : allow me to open the door !" 

There was a little struggle on the part of Sir Ignatius to remain ; 
and still, as his lady dragged him forth, he cast a c longing, linger- 
ing look behind,' at the tumbler of unlasted brandy and water, 
until she at last forcibly effected his exit, and the Doctor closed the 
door. 

Lady Dogherty trembled for the discretion and paternal vanity of 
Sir Ignatius, and resolved to make his silence on the discovery of a 
relationship at once so immoral and so disgraceful the purchase of 
his forgiveness for wrongs, and an infidelity which, like a ' coming 
event,' had £ cast its shadow before,' over the bright surface of their 
conjugal life. 

A dish of oysters, a bottle of Burgundy, ( entered, as soon as 
served, on the increasing bill of the Irist baronet, ) soon banished 
from the Doctor's mind his muddled patient and his maudlin patron- 
ess. More than ever annoyed by their vulgarity and absurdity, and 
ambitious to rise in a world for whose suffrages he had so many 
qualifications, he was resolved on cutting the connexion altogether 
as soon as anything adequate to the salary he enjoyed, and the 
advantages he reaped from it, should present itself. He thought 
the arrest of Fegan was a fair ground of appeal to the anti-continent- 
al prejudices of the tory ex-minister, and of the Lords Montressor, 
and a sufficient excuse for paying them an early visit on the follow- 
ing morning. With a true Irish imagination that was easily mount- 
ed to extravagant speculation, he drank and dreamed, and dreamed 
and drank, till he saw himself in prospect all that he had boasted of 
already being to Sir Ignatius,— the boon companion of Englishmen 
of rank and fashion, the Struensee of the Belgian court, if not of 
some higher power. 



THE PRINCESS. 



335 



He looked round him for a female autocrat, some Catherine of 
Russia, some Christine or Matilda, or even for a Maria Theresa. But 
there were no queens regnantes at hand to raise him ; though wo- 
men were the levers by which he hoped to attain to greatness. He 
thought, how ever, of Donna Maria di Gloria, and fell asleep over his 
last glass of Burgundy with her image uppermost in his mind. Vi- 
sions of advancement still floated round his head. He slept ; but 
(the elements of his previous thoughts combining in all the fervour 
aud vivacity of his waking expectations ), train after train of gratified 
vanity and ambition succeeded in gay and dazzling sequence, till all 
vanished in the person of Donna Maria di Gloria; who, taking the 
form of Lady Dogherty in a wreath of roses and green velvet gown, 
gave him her awful c good night ' in No. 144, Hotel de Bellevue. 

From any other form than that, his firm nerves would not have 
shrunk ; but even in sleep her bulky Ladyship had now become his 
bete noire. Roused therefore from his night-mare by the appari- 
tion, he started on his legs, emptied the carafe of water upon the 
table, and taking one of the nearly extinguished wax-lights, retreated 
to his bedroom, singing, as he passed the chamber of Sir Ignatius 
and Lady Dogherty, 

A rose-tree in full bearing , 

With sweet flowers fair to see, 
One rose beyond comparing, 

For beauty attracted me. " 

While Sir Ignatius lay snoring, the well-known words and voice 
fell upon Lady Dogherty's ear. She was seated before her writing 
desk, pouring forth her feelings on a sheet of bright yellow musk- 
scented paper, which, in the form of a letter, she was addressing to 
her dear friend, 



336 



THE PRINCESS. 



" LAURA LADT DICKENSON, ROSE COTTAGE, CHELTENHAM. 

"Hotelde Bellevue, midnight. 

s Tired Nature's sweet restorer, balmy Sleep, 
He like the world [the Doctor] his ready visit pays 
Where fortune smiles ; the wretched he forsakes j 
Swift on his downy pinions flies from woe, 
And lights on lids unsullied by a tear.' 

Young's Night Thoughts. 

"And oh! at this 'witching hour of the night' may he, my 
dearest Laura, shed his choicest poppies on the eyes of my sweet 
friend, while mine overflow with tears, and ache with unrequited 
kindness. While all are asleep in the Bellevue, (certainly the most i 
fashionable hotel in Europe,) and 6 leave the w orld to darkness and ! 
to me, ' your Kate keeps dreary vigils. 

"But, to continue my journal : after I had sealed and sent my 
last packet from the Tirlemont, by Mr. O'Reilly ( a friend of the 1 
Doctor's ), I removed to this truly splendid establishment, where I had ! 
the pleasure of again meeting my dear friend the Right Honorable j 
Lady Anastasia Macanulty, lately married to one of the most perfect : 
Adonises I ever beheld (as far as person goes, though with perhaps 
too strong an accent for my fastidious ears). She is still in her 
honeymoon, though not exactly in her premiere jaunisse. Sir j 
Ignatius, who knows every one, thinks Mr. W. Macanulty is one of j 
the Ring's County Macanulties ; and that he has claims upon the pa- 
tronage of an illustrious and gallant gay Lothario, who, in the words ! 
of the poet— 

4 Wide as his command 

Scattered Ins Maker's image through the land V 

■ 

" Be that as it may, he has been lately appointed a commissioner 
for inquiring into the state of Ireland, past, present, and to come; 
and is now travelling, rid Brussels, to the flowery shores of the 
Rhine, whence he proceeds to Vienna for the winter ( Lady Anasta- ; 
sias's cousin being expected to be ambassador there). They dine 



THE PRINCESS. 



a37 



with us every day at the table d'hote, which is the fashion here for 
persons of the highest rank. The Doctor and Mr. W. Macanulty 
are inseparables. They have been at Antwerp together to see the 
ruins : but of that hereafter. It is with unfeigned delight I have 
been of use to dear Lady Anastasia, as they came off before their 
carriage was finished, and mine is always at her service. In return, 
she has introduced me to many of the fine people here— all passing 
through : so that I shall have my circle ready formed at Baden-Ba- 
den ; and should I induce Sir Ignatius to visit Vienna, the advanta- 
ges of this connexion will be incalculable. 

" Why, my beloved friend, are you not here to partake of them ? 
We have also the Dowds and the Doolans of county Wexford, 
and the Smiths of Grouse Lodge, Tipperary, the Reilleys, the Ran- 
dals, the Roystons, and others of our Cheltenham and Brighton set 
of last season ; also the three East Indian families who are going 
for their livers to the Brunnens. The Marquis of Montressor and 
his brother Lord Alfred, who are waiting for the Marchioness and 
a large party of English fashionables, are in the Bellevue. Of 
course we shall be introduced to them all by our new, and cer- 
tainly much obliged friend, Sir Frederick Mottram. 

" Not that we have much to boast of from his gratitude. I wrote 
you word what imminent services we rendered him at Ostend ; 
offering him our purse and table, and lent him our linen (some of 
which was only returned to us here ) ; and would have taken him 
into our carriage and travelled with him to Germany : but from the 
time we parted with him on the ramparts of Ostend, we have never 
set eyes on him till this evening, at the play. He sent his card, 
indeed, to our hotel yesterday, and perhaps really meant to be 
civil as soon as he had settled himself, as he has every right to be. 
But he certainly is one of the haughtiest and most reserved men I 
! ever met with ; which is the more ridiculous, because he turns out 
to be a low-born person, the son of a Birmingham manufacturer, 
and come of people that, in Ireland, would not be admitted into 
high society at all. I should like to see Sir Ignatius's ancestors, or 
; his cousin the general Sir Shane, who proved his thirty-two quar- 
?ters at Vienna, associating with a tradesman's son. I say nothing 
of the Kearneys of Fort Kearney, or my mother's family, the Fo- 
gartys of Castle Fogarty. And yet these are the men who look 



THE PRINCESS. 



down on the Irish gentry, with the best blood of the country in 
their veins ! What will greatly amaze you, is that his mother was 
an actress, and never could be received at court by the late Queen. 

" But the pen of your friend runs away with her. Can you 
blame me, Laura sweetest, for thus ' drinking oblivion to my woes?' 
You will ask me, what woes ? Blessed with rank, title, fortune, 
a person still in its prime, though touched with the green and yel- 
low hues of melancholy; which, as our friend the Doctor {our 
friend — oh, Laura ! ) used to say, is but ' the scabbard eating away 
the sword.' How often has he said to you in our moonlight walks, 
under the shady trees of Montpellier buildings, at Cheltenham, 
' Dearest Lady D., if you could prevail on your susceptible friend 
to cease to feel, she would then cease to suffer !' But, ' paired, not 
matched,' with one whose ancient family and liberal fortune scarce- 
ly compensate for the want of all that ' something more exquisite 
still,' (as our national bard has it,)— that reciprocity of sentiments 
and sensations which makes the charm of connubial felicity,— I 
had hoped to have found in Doctor Rodolf de Burgo a Platonic 
friend, an instructive Mentor, a constant companion, a literary col- 1 
league, and a vigilant as well as skilful physician. But I tremble 
to confess to you, — to myself,— that I have been disappointed. 

" Devoted as he was in Brighton, his conduct here has been 
cold, careless, and neglectful. He has been running after great i 
people, to the perfect forgetfulness of his true friends. He was first i 
led away by a German Princess from Ostend to Brussels ; and it 
was not till after a visit of an hour long, that we discovered it was j 
her German maid we were talking to, the Princess herself having j 
gone alone to visit her estates between Brussels and Namur. Since 
then, he has been taken up by young W. Macanulty; and though 
he knows Sir Ignatius's horror of the cholera, and that my delicate 
and only remaining lung requires constant attention, he ran away 
two days to Antwerp without saying a word, and appeared first on 
his return in the French Ambassador's box, with his new and as- 
suredly very great friends, the Marquis of Montressor and Sir 
Frederick Mottram, with several other persons of fashion of his ac- 
quaintance. 

" This so provoked Sir Ignatius, that he took him to task very 
roundly, and more loudly, perhaps, than the stupid habits of these 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



330 



vulgar Belgians permit (for they are the vulgarest dawdles you ever 
beheld ; the women cased up to their chins in habit-shirts, and wash- 
ing muslins, with little bonnets and hats, and the men not dressing 

, at all for the theatre). The result was terrible ! A fracas ensued. 

i Sir Frederick's own gentleman and private secretary, a sort of atta- 
chy, who came to our assistance, was seized by a lettre de cachet 

, (such as you have read of in French novels), and thrown into a 
dungeon ! Sir Ignatius and myself were only saved by our rank and 
titles, and the effects produced by our carriage with the arms of the 
Doghertys and the bloody hand, and that of the Kearneys in the 
middle on a scutcheon of Pretence, which waited at the door, as 
Sir William Betham has proved. Pray read this to your radical 
friend, Mr. Wittingham, who is such a stickler for the Belgian 

' revolution, if he is still at Cheltenham when you arrive there. 

J " The Doctor, the cause of all this, got out of the way, and never 
made his appearance till after supper. Words have not power to 
express the indignation I felt ; though never did I see him look more 
bewitching; his face a little flushed, and his customary black suit 
set off with a cherry-colour and gold tabinet waistcoat, as Hamlet 
says, which I got over from O'Donnel's in Dublin, as a cadet for 
him, the day before we left Brighton. Sir Ignatius's too, too easy 
temper was yielding to De Burgo's pleading eloquence, when I car- 
ried him off from the voice of the charmer, whom, I must say, we 
left overwhelmed with deep emotion at the thought of parting 
from us. 

"I write this, dearest Laura, ere 'sleep knits up the ravelled 
sleeve of care,' to beg you will write him such a letter as will make 
him feel how blind he is to his own interests, and how unworthy of 
your (may I say?) maternal interest in him— ah, Laura! 

"And now, sweetest, good night! Lady Anastasia sends this 
early in the morning by the ambassador's bag, which leaves no time 
for adding more than that I am, to my heart's last beat, 

" My dearest Laura's ever devoted, 
though perhaps too susceptible, 

"Kate." 



340 



THE PRINCESS. 



CHAPTER XX. 

DEPOT D'ARCHIVES, AND THE LIBRARY OF THE DUKES 
DE BOURGOGNE. 

The results of the fracas at the theatre brought with them, if not 
disappointment, at least another issue than had entered into the j 
calculations of the several parties concerned. The designs of Sir I 
Ignatius and Lady Dogherty, the speculations of Dr. De Burgo, the 
apprehensions of Fegan, and the prophecies of the English lookers- 
on at the box entrance, all alike fell before the wise views of the 
Belgian authorities, who treated the smallest disturbances of public 
tranquillity with a delicacy rendered necessary by the circumstances 
of the revolution. Instead of making the most of the outrage, and j 
exhibiting an uncalled-for display of what public functionaries in | 
the older governments are so fond of calling 1 vigour, ' and the j 
' vindication of law,' they suffered the affair to die quietly away. In 
all that concerned the English and French visitors at the Belgian 
capital, there was a special desire to act with particular prudence; 
so that, while they leaned lightly on the subjects of states with which 
the national interests were so closely bound, they might avoid irri- , 
tating the rather susceptible jealousy of the populace, who, in the j 
novelty of their recently acquired independence, are perhaps some- 
thing too suspicious of foreign influence. 

On the ensuing morning, accordingly, Fegan was liberated, on a 
promise, backed by his word of honour, of keeping the peace while 
he remained at Brussels ; and on making an apology, founded on I 
the irresistible influence of Faro, to the aggrieved gendarme. The 
officer on guard waited on Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty at their 
hotel, accompanied by a friend, to act as interpreter; and after 
explaining to them the tenacity of a Brussels audience, where a fa- 
vourite opera or singer was concerned, presented them a ticket for 
an amateur concert. 



THE PRINCESS. 



341 



Sir Ignatius was stunned by a courtesy so unexpected. 

"A ticket for a concert, Lady Dogherty," he said, "when it's a 
challenge I expected, which would have seeiMhe upshot of such a 
frock-caw as ours in the Thaytre Royal of Dublin ; where, if you 
only brush by a chap's surtout, it's 'Here's my card, sir ; I'll trouble 
you for yours ! ' " 

" You see, Sir Ignatius" said Lady Dogherty, drawing up, 
u the value of the title, you were at first so reluctant to assume, 
and from which you have derived such incalculable benefits. 

" Why, thin, sorrow much!" muttered Sir Ignatius; "only 
being obliged to pay three-and-sixpence for but-ends of wax can- 
dles, when mowlds would have served our turn just as well, and 
better. " 

" In foreign countries, " continued Lady Dogherty, " the claims 
of high rank are always acknowledged with due deference and 
respect ! " 

" Why, thin, 'pon my daisy" said Sir Ignatius, " I'd back Ire- 
land 'gainst the world, in regard of its respect for quality, and 
titles too. " t 

While the Doghertys thus consoled themselves for the indignities 
of the previous night by the alchymy of their amour-propre, the 
party most concerned by Fegan's last indiscretion was Sir Frede- 
rick Mottram. The non-appearance of his servant had obliged him 
to close rather hastily with a French valet-de-chambre, who, 
with a German courier, were, before midday, installed in his 
antechamber at the Hotel de Flandre. He was himself deep in let- 
ter-writing, a porte ferme'e, when his Frenchman presented him 
with the following note : — 
• 

" TO SIR FREDERICK MOTTRAM, BART. 

" Sir Frederick Mottram,— Sir, I take lave to permise that 
you and I must part after what has happened last night at the play- 
house, in which I was noways to blame, but would have been the 
manest-spurited of spalpeens, if I had stood by, and seen them 
insultin a leedy, let alone an ancient Irish nobleman by seed, breed, 
and discent, like Sir Ignatius and my lady. To say nothing, Sir 
Frederick, of its coming out who and what 1 am, being a gentle- 

26. 



342 



THE PRINCESS. 



man bred and born by the father's side ; the same being now hereby 
sartified by Sir Ignatius himself; which would make it neither 
convanient nor dacent that I should remain any longer in your 
honor's service. 

" Who am, Sir Frederick, 

" Your most obed. servant, 

a Lawrence Fegan Dogherty." 

" P.-S. Anyhow, Sir Frederick, 1 should have discharged you, in 
respect of your taking in an underhand manner the furrin volet, 
who I will give your honor's kays to, and other wearables, being 
two dozen of new, Ostend, Holland shirts, til th' others comes over 
with the thravelling carridge ; which, with th' invantaries of white 
cambrick French pocket-handkerchiefs, the pistols, tellyscope, and 
other apparel, your new dressing necessare and de Colown, 
( two cases included,) and various articles, some in silver, and some 
in gold, bought yesterday in the Minuet de la Cure* I will de- 
liver up, and wait your honor's commands for that same. 

" I am, sir, yours faithfully, 

" L. F. D . " 

This letter was as great a puzzle to Sir Frederick, as the billet- 
doux of ' Cousin Con ' to Tony Lumpkin : 6 it was all buzz. ' That 
Fegan had again got into a drunken broil at the theatre, and was 
lodged in durance vile, he had learned from the servants of the ho- 
tel ; and he had already made up his mind to leave him to his me- 
rited and, perhaps, salutary punishment; and afterwards to send 
him back to England, with a handsome compensation for his recent 
services, and for his former sufferings. But, in all other respects, 
the letter was an hieroglyphic ; the production of a mind still stu- 
pified by a recent fit of beastly inebriety. The shortest way of un- 
riddling it , was to call in the writer ; which he forthwith did. 

Sir Frederick was struck by his air and appearance, on entrance. 
His manner was easy to insolence ; and his high white shirt-collar, 
black silk stock, and head fresh from the hands of the most fashion- 
able coiffeur of the Rue de la Madeleine, gave him such a resem- 



Probably Montague de la Cour. 



THE PRINCESS. 



343 



blance to Dr. De Burgo, that for a moment his master was the dupe 
of the illusion. A bow, still respectful, and an erect position at the 
door (with the lock of which he fiddled in evident emotion), repla- 
ced the flash dandy in his old character of valet-de-chambre of 
Ostend ; though it left no trace of the grotesque wretchedness of the 
porter's locum tenens at Carlton-terrace. 

" What does this mean , pray ? " said Sir Frederick, with his cold 
high manner, as he held up the epistle. 

" Plaze your honor, Sir Frederick, it's what it manes, that it is 
intirely out of my power to have the pleasure of keeping with you 
any longer, Sir Frederick ; and so, sir, I thought it was most gen- 
teelest to cut at once. " 

" If it only means that," said Sir Frederick, while he wrote an 
order upon his banker, " it is well : I intended to part with you 
this day. Your incorrigible neglect, frequent absences, dissipated 
habits, summed up by the very unpleasant scrape you got into last 
night, which might have involved me in its disagreeable consequences, 
had brought me to this conclusion. " 

" Why, thin, I 'd have been railly sorry for that, Sir Frederick. 
But sure, sir, I put it to your honor's self— long life to you !— that 
set a case, that your own honored father was un suited, and my 
leedy, his wife, by a dirty griddle-cake-faced furren polisman, 
forenent a whole playhouse, wouldn't you like to be after taking 
the dust out of his coat, Sir Frederick ? And sure it isn't because 
a man has oncet fallen into throuble, and has been obligated to put 
on a livery, that he isn't to have the spurrit of a man ; and he, 
above all, sir, an Irishman, and a gintleman by kith and kin and 
relationship; and the son of a barrynite, like yourself— and no 
offence, I hope, your honor. For, plaze your honor, I am war- 
ranted, and permitted, and sartified, to tell you, sir, by Sir Ignatius's 
own self, that I am his own son naturally born, and eldest heir, if 
I had the law on my side, and only offspring to inherit his fine 
fortune : and that is the truth, and the whole truth ; only hopes 
your honor will say nothing to nobody about it yet, and 'bove all, 
to my lady and the Docther, till we get back to Mount Dogherty 
Shanballymac, and gets rid of the Docther intirely, who gives 
himself the divel's own airs, saving your prisence, Sir Frederick : 
and it's heartily sick my father, Sir Ignatius, is of him. " 



344 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Oh!" said Sir Frederick, struggling almost vainly with the i 
laugh that was rising to his lip; " you are, then, the natural son j 
of Sir Ignatius Dogherty?" 

" Troth I am, Sir Frederick, " he replied, releasing the handle \ 
of the door, which he had nearly twisted off ; and drawing up to 
his full height, as he arranged his black cravat, he added with a j 
flush of pride— "His raal lawful and natural son; and 1 hope he J 
will never have cause to be ashamed of me, for I am as much above ; 
doing a dirty thing, sir, as the greetest man in the land ; and if 
iver, owing to your honor's goodness and purtection, and greet 1 
interest with the King and others, and my father Sir Ignatius's long 
purse, 1 should have the honor of serving his Majesty agin, (and I ! 
would prefer the Couldstrames afore the world,) I would show 
them furreners, as my half-brother Jeemes Burke, by another fa- i 
ther, did at Walherloo, that I could fight my way to glory, and get 
my medal, as well as any man in the Duke of Welliugton's army. " 

While the kindling imagination and military ardour of Lawrence I 
Fegan was thus 'plucking up drowning honour by the locks,' Sir | 
Frederick, with his head almost touching the paper on which he was I 
affecting to write, muttered an occasional, "Well, — so — .." At 
length he addressed the orator more directly, and added, "I wish i 
you well ; but in the mean time accept this : it is an order on my 
banker for a hundred pounds ; part of it is due to you, I suppose; 
and the rest pray accept as a trifling compensation for the accident j 
you met with, in my service, some years back." 

" You owe me nothing at all, at all, Sir Frederick," said Fegan, , 
bowing in his best way, and flourishing his hat. " I meed no agree- 
ment with you, sir, about stetion or weges, only just the high honor 
of being about you, to the great amazement of the servants' hall and 
steward's room, and no thanks to thim : and w r as too proud to have 
the honor to be so useful to you on your thravels, which I'll never 
forget : and if I accept this money at all, Sir Frederick," — and he j 
bowed again, as he took the draft and folded it up,—" it isn't as j 
weges ; I'd be very sorry, troth ; only just as a keepsake from your 
honor, in regard of th'ould times ;"—( Fegan put the back of his 
gloved hand to his eyes, and, after a moment's silence, added,) 
" and not forgetting the greet fun at Bruges, and the fine merry old ! 
nun, long life to her ! And will keep this note, if it were double as 



THE PRLNCESS. 



.345 



much, to buy a murning ring for your honor; and wishes you, and 
my lady, and young Mr. Emilius, every happiness in life, and a 
happy death, I pray Jasus— Amen !" 

Sir Frederick had risen with an air of impatience ; he waved his 
hand, with a half courteous " I wish you well j*' and Fegan, with his 
deepest Irish sigh, and most improved Flemish bow, backed out. 

He was already in the ante-room, when, suddenly turning on his 
steps, he again stept forward and said, " f forgot to mintion to your 
honor, that before I wint to the pley last night, there came some 
cards, a letter, and an iligant little donny garland of daffy-down- 
dillies : you'll find them all in the teeble-drawer, Sir Frederick, 
there, forenent you, sir. Allow me, your honor." 
The cards were those of the French and English Ambassadors, of 

Sir Frederick's Polish friend, Col. P , together with those of one 

or two English acquaintances who had seen his arrival in the papers. 
The garland was labelled ' De la part de Janssens pere and the 
note was from Monsieur E— , his obliging banker. It ran thus : — 

"It has been signified to Monsieur E , by Madame Marguerite, 

that the antiquarian tastes of Sir Frederick Mottram would be much 
gratified by a visit to the ' Library of the Dukes of Burgundy,' and 

to the ' Depot des Archives BelgiquesS Monsieur E has been 

enabled to appoint a meeting for this day, between the hours of 
twelve and four, with the learned gentlemen at the head of these 
rich departments. Mons. E hopes to be able to give Sir Frede- 
rick rendezvous ; but, at all events, encloses two notes of introduc- 
tion. " 

The one of these notes was addressed to ' Mons. Marchal, 
Conse? vateur de la Bibliotheque Royale des Dues de Bourgo- 
gnef the other, to ' Mons. Gachard, Archiviste du Royamne." 

These memorials of other times, and the recurrence to a name 
which seemed always to hang like a charm with all that was connect- 
ed with the poetry of life, swept away from Sir Frederick Mottram's 
recollection every record of the absurdities with which he had been 
engaged a moment before. Without, therefore, waiting for Mon- 
sieur E , and guided by his courier to the Depot des Archives, 

he hastened to escape the risk of a reproof from Madame Marguerite 
(should he meet her), of being always en arriere with time and 
circumstances. 

26.. 



1: 



346 



THE PRINCESS. 



The Depot of the Archives of Belgium lies in a very Spanish quarter | 
of Brussels. It occupies that part of the Palace of Justice which i 
commands la Place du Grand Sablon ; a locality which, though 
it unites many inconveniences both of space and distribution, is, 
from its antiquity, a not inappropriate site for perhaps the most pre- J 
cious moral remains of ancient Europe. 

To obtain access to such documents was, in the olden times, an 
exclusive privilege of royalty, or a favour granted by special protec- 
tion. In Brabant, the Grand Council alone could grant leave to in- 
spect the charters and state papers of the province ; and it often only \ 
named one of its own members, or the procureur-gdne'ral, to ! 
make search through the garde-charte for the particular date or j 
fact required. 

When the provinces which now constitute the kingdom of the 
Belgians were separate and independent, and were governed by their j 
counts and dukes, or by their republican corporations, each had its j 
own distinct archives, or, as they were called, tresoreri.es de leurs 
chartes ; which, for security, were often concealed behind the altars 
of their churches, or guarded in the strongholds of their fortified ! 
castles. In these several depots were preserved, from the earliest ' 
ages of the social existence of the people, records of public acts 
concerning the privileges, domains, and possessions of the reigning 
houses ; title-deeds and charters, foreign treaties, and ordinances 
for the internal government of the country ; with other documents 
of a more municipal and even domestic character : rich items for the I 
history of mankind, preserved for the use of a future and a better i 
day. 

As far back as the thirteenth century, Brabant, Flanders, Lim- ! 
bourg, Artois, Hainault, Namur, Luxembourg, etc. etc. had their 
several archives. The marriage of Marguerite Countess of Flanders 
with the Duke of Burgundy, in introducing- a new dynasty and a new 
order of things, made no change in this disposition. The brave, the 
enlightened, the spirited Philippe-le-Bon, who united so many of 
these provinces under his dominion, left their precious deposits 
where he found them. From this time, however, the state archives J 
were deposited in the castles of Rupelmonde, or of Lille : often, \ 
too, they were sent to the treasury of the Dukes of Burgundy, at ! 
Dijon. Under Maximilian and Philippe-le-Beau, they were still kept ! 



THE PRINCESS. 



347 



in the two first-named fortresses. It was in the reign of Charles the 
Fifth, that state papers first began to be preserved in Brussels; but 
the old collections still were left in their ancient depositories. 

In the troubles of the sixteenth century, so fatal to Belgium, and 
so favourable to every species of plunder, many of the ancient 
records were carried off by particular individuals for their own pur- 
poses ; * and, during the whole Spanish regime, nothing was done 
for their conservation. Maria Theresa, who, in her dull, maternal 
despotism, neither respected, nor probably remembered, the former 
independence of the provinces, had, however, the sense to discover, 
in the memorials of their former greatness, " des monumens fort 
utiles pour la conservation de mes droits, hauteurs, et do- 
maines',^ ** and she gave orders for the recovery and arrangement 
of all the public documents, under the care of the president de la 
chambre des comptes, at Brussels, and for the employment of two 
archivists for that purpose. 

The taking of Brussels by the French, after the battle of Fontenoy, 
put a stop to this operation. Notwithstanding the terms of capitu- 
lation granted by Marshal Saxe, which stipulated for the preservation 
of the archives and library of her Imperial Majesty, they were plun- 
dered and thrown into disorder by the conquerors ; the legitimate 
Louis acting precisely the part which has since been so bitterly 
execrated as exclusively revolutionary. Eight cases of this plunder 
were despatched to Lille, then become a French town. In the wars 
of Louis the Fourteenth, however, and on many other occasions, 
public documents to a much greater amount had fallen into the 
hands of the French : and it was not till the treaty of Versailles in 
1769, that any attention was paid to the frequent reclamations of 
Austria on the subject. In consequence of this treaty, however, 

* It was thus that the famous treaty of Marche-en-Famene, concluded 
between Don John of Austria and the States-General, in 1577, found its way 
into the possession of a Dutch family, who lately presented it to the King of 
the Pays-Bas: and thus, too, all the papers relative to the trial of the Counts 
d'Egmont and de Horne got into the libraries of private individuals. — See 
:\ otice sur le Depot, etc. etc. 

** So expressed in her letter to her Governor-General ad interim of the 
I'ays-Bas on the suhject. 



348 



THE PRINCESS. 



one hundred and twenty-six cases of papers were brought back 
from the depot in Lille alone. 

During the long period which elapsed, until the year 1794, vari- 
ous eiforts were made by patriotic individuals to draw the attention of 
the Austrian government to this subject ; and various attempts were 
made, in the slow, unsatisfactory way peculiar to that government, 
to secure and arrange the public archives. But in the summer of 
1794, a very large part of the collection was hastily packed up and 
transported to Holland, and subsequently to Vienna, in contemplation 
of the progressive successes of the republican armies. By the treaty 
of Gampo Formio, it was agreed that the Belgian documents should 
be surrendered to the French, as the new masters of the country : a 
stipulation but imperfectly fulfilled. The more valuable portion of 
the documents remained behind at Vienna, till the taking of that city in 
1809, when they, together with the archives of the whole German 
empire, were removed to Paris. After the treaty of Paris in 1814, 
the Belgic archives were again brought back ; with the exception of 
about three hundred articles, reserved for the Austrian court;— 
by what right, it would be difficult to determine. 

During the twenty years of French occupation, little or nothing was 
done for the preservation of such public documents as had been left 
untouched on the destruction of the Austrian pow er ; but upon the 
erection of the new kingdom of the Pays-Bas, the depot general , 
which had gradually been formed at Brussels, was greatly enriched, 
as well by the restitutions already mentioned, as by the acquisition 
of the archives of Brabant, Namur, etc. etc. 

Notwithstanding these frequent revolutions, and others of less 
extent, the collection as it now stands is one of the most extensive, 
and at the same time the most interesting, in Europe. The stirring 
and important events which have passed in the Low Countries, the 
valuable nature of their institutions, and the influence these have 
exercised on other states, give a value quite peculiar to this national 
collection : for if any new lights are to be obtained concerning the 
middle ages, and the times which immediately followed them, it is 
probably in these archives that they are concealed. 

As Sir Frederick Mottram passed through the long stone passages 
of the Depot des Archives , ascended its narrow stairs, and entered 
the first of the series of apartments walled with the documents of 



THE PRINCESS. 



349 



eight centuries, he fancied the very atmosphere impregnated with 
I the dust of antiquity. He was received in the antiquarian study of 
Monsieur Gachard by its learned occupant, with all the elaborate 
forms of Brabancon courtesy, which contrasted with the easy, cold 
i address, and simple ceremonial of the English gentleman, who never 
bends his head beyond the confines of his stock. 
The functionary of the most liberal government in Europe re- 
I ceived the ex- Tory minister with no other impression on his mind, 
j but that of the pleasure arising from doing the honours of past times 
to one whose visit was deemed a national compliment, rarely paid 
\ by the travelling English of any party, who usually consider Brus- 
| sels only as the great coffee-house of Europe, 
j After a short conversation concerning the origin and history of 
I the establishment, of which the preceding paragraphs contain a short 
, summary, Sir Frederick followed the learned archivist through a 
labyrinth of chambers, with increasing interest. 
) I " This," said Monsieur Gachard, " is the depot of the archives of 
the chambre des comptes de Flandre, an institution founded by 
[ Philip the Bold in 1383; and here, we approach the frontiers of 
, modern diplomacy, the archives of the conseil d'etat, dating from 
t the reign of Charles the Fifth. 'Tis from this collection that the 
Austrian government carried off the correspondence of that emperor 
with the Duchess Marguerite his aunt, and with Mary his sister, who 
governed the Low Countries from 1522 to 1555; and the corres- 
\ pondence of Marguerite with Ferdinand King of the Romans. It is 
from this depot, too, that we have supplied the correspondence of 
Marguerite of Parma with Gerard de Groisbeck, to the pages of the 
1 | Analectes Belgiques. But, precious above all its treasures, it 
contains the materials for the history of that Marguerite des Mar- 
\ guerites, the Duchess Marguerite of Austria, the aunt, guardian, 
i and governess of Charles the Fifth,— the most able and brilliant of 
our female sovereigns. Another clever Marguerite has been work- 
ing here this morning, with a view to the illustration of the 
lives of the able stateswomen to whom Belgium is so deeply 
indebted." 

" An author, or an artist?" asked Sir Frederick, with affected 
indifference. 

" An artist," replied his informant. lt She is employed, I be- 



350 



THE PRINCESS. 



lieve, by the Princess of Schaffenhausen to make researches for 
subjects to be illustrated by her able pencil. 1 ' 

" The Princess of Schaffenhausen," Sir Frederick remarked, " is 
a great aristocrat, a disciple of the school of absolutism, and full of 
all sorts of German prejudices." 

wt The very reason why she should search here, where the origins 
of so many European titles and dignities may be found. The Schaf- 
fenhausens boast of a descent from the Frankish Emperors of the 
West." 

*■ Does madame Marguerite return here to-day ? I should like to 
see some of her illustrations," said Sir Frederick, carelessly. 

" She is at this moment somewhere in this world of papers. I 
left her carrying a huge portfolio of letters, in one of these cham- 
bers, when I was called away to have the honour of receiving you. 
It is curious to see so pretty a woman so deeply interested in anti- 
quarian pursuits, and so frequently eliciting from her dry researches 
some new and brilliant inference. Not that she is learned in these 
matters ; but she sees everything through her imagination, which 
brightens the gloom of antiquarian lore itself." 

"It is thus women should always see !" said Sir Frederick, 
warmly. " It makes all the difference between poetry and pedan- 
try ; the ideality of female genius, and the dull dogged industry of 
female pretension ; between la femlne fantastique, and la femme 
savante ; a Madame Marguerite and a Madame Dacier." 

" Precisely so," said the Archivist, endeavouring to keep pace 
with the now rapid strides of his English visitor ; who, with his 
glass to his eye, as if in search of some object not yet found, was 
hurrying on from chamber to chamber, regardless of the curious 
labels which marked their ponderous contents— fc Arc hives de la 
jointe des terres contestees,'' ' Archives du comite' pour les 
affaires jesuitiques,' 4 des Dues de Brabant,'' 4 des Comtes 
de IVamur,' 4 des corps de metiers,'' 6 des corporations reli- 
gieuscs supprimees — each the text for a volume of reflections, 
the finger-post alike for philosophy and for romance. They soon, 
therefore, again reached the chamber of the Archivist, the ' tribune 
of the gallery,' containing whatever was most precious in the col- 
lection. 

This room, which they had left empty, was now occupied by a 



THE PRINCESS. 



351 



female student, intently poring over a portfolio of musty papers, 
whose smell of time was dispersed by a bunch of orange flowers, 
placed beside her. 

"It is Madame Marguerite, " whispered the Archivist, as they 
approached the fair student. " Well, Madam, you have found, 1 
hope, what you were looking for? 11 

• Yes, and more too, " she said, directing her eyes to Sir Frede- 
rick. " Good morning, Monsieur Mottram; I am glad you have 
been tempted to visit this interesting place : I was sure it would 
amuse you. " 

" Amuse me ! " said Sir Frederick, with a smile that was almost 
a sneer. " You think that, like other great children escaped from 
the English go-cart, I only come forth from my nursery of prejudices 
to be amused ! " 

" 1 don't say that, " said Madame Marguerite, resuming her work, 
as if she had no lime for mere discourse ; a but since you belong 
to the class of spoiled children ( spoiled alike by nature, fortune, and 
circumstances), the cup of Truth, presented to you by some officious 
hand, should perhaps have its cold but golden brim just touched with 
honey. " 

" It is the syren's hackneyed mode of delusion, " said Sir Frede- 
rick, with marked emphasis ; " but 1 knew not that the dignity of 

, Truth stooped to such arts." 

" Oh ! yes, Truth is — common sense ; and common sense treats 
children as she finds them, whether they fall in her way fresh from 
the hands of nature, or moulded by those of society : she consults 
their force or their infirmities, and with reference to either, she will 
restrain by a rope, or lead by a wreath ; and use hemp or roses, as 

, the object of her solicitude may best require. " 

\ "Of whose solicitude?" interrupted Sir Frederick, fixing her 
bright eyes, now raised, on his. 

j " Of — of — of whom were we talking?" asked Madame Margue- 
rite, with the colour rushing over her face. 
" Of common sense, " said the Archivist, the only one of the party 

; whose thoughts had not diverged from the starting-post. 

1 " Common sense, " said Sir Frederick, " is a common-place term, 
serving all sorts of purposes. It is sometimes applied to stupid dis- 
cretion, that risks nothing and gains nothing ; and sometimes it is 



352 



THE PRINCESS. 



taken as a nom de guerre by genius, to conceal its own intensity 
of meaning from the apprehensive feebleness of its distrustful audi- j 
tory." 

" Yes, it is impossible to appreciate terms, without some measure 
of the mind of the speaker, " said Madame Marguerite. " Give so- i 
ciety a word, and it will be adopted without inquiry, employed | 
without applicability, and flung away without thought, whenever 
fashion substitutes a newer phrase :— to give language a meaning, it j 
must pass through a mind that has something to reflect. By the j 
bye, Monsieur Gachard, your historians and antiquarians have treated 
words rather carelessly ( at least names, epithets ) when you suffered 
the charming Marguerite, 4 la gente Demoiselle, ' to retain the very 
false appellation of Marguerite of Austria ; for she is as much Mar- 
guerite of Belgium, as I am myself. " 

" Yes, " said Monsieur Gachard ; " our great names, with our rich 
territories, have been too frequently made the plunder of strangers. 
It is thus that Monsieur Chateaubriand has taken from us our God- ! 
frey of Bouillon. " 

" Oh ! that is only one theft among many, " continued Madame 
Marguerite. " Few are aware how often , and how ably, the great 
movements of European society have been advanced by the nerve 
and sinews of Belgian leaders. The Pharamonds, the Clovises, the j 
Pepins, for instance : one Flemish adventurer founded a kingdom on j 
the ruins of that of Solomon, and another re-established the Latin j 
empire in the East, in the thirteenth century. " 

"Yes, said Sir Frederick, "your Bras-de-Fer and* Tetes-de- 
Fer were fine fellows ; but such prowess as theirs is no longer to 
be met with. " 

" If such qualities were still available, they would be still forth- 
coming, 11 she replied, tying up her papers : " every age works 
with its own materials, and produces what it wants. This is the age 
of great events, and not of great men. There is no master-mind 
seen in Europe now— because there is no scope for its activity. The 
people have displaced individuals; and Napoleon would have fallen, 
without the snows of Russia. You English conservatives overlook 
this. You think and act as if the same engines, and the same methods, 
which belonged to the most ignorant of ages, were applicable to the 
most enlightened. Look around you ! It is in such mouldering 



THE PRINCESS. 



353 



masses as this, that you seek for precedents, as ill adapted to the 
contingencies of the day, as the Godfreys and the Baldwins would be 
to figure in your congresses of Vienna and Laybach. " 

" You non-conservatives, however," replied Sir Frederick, "are 
too absolute, too abstract in your conclusions. In theory, we are 
not, perhaps, so very far apart as you imagine : it is on the question 
of practicability that we most widely differ. Our views of human 
nature . . . ." 

" Are formed upon the narrow experience of your exclusive 
circles," she interrupted, "and they are for ever misleading you. 
But this is a great confession from you." 

" And a proof that you think the honey on the brim of the cup of 
truth has induced me to swallow the draught, sans m'en douter." 

"To sip, not to swallow," she replied, laughing: "but the 
honest are open to conviction when the faction 4 that doth hedge in' 
a minister, or leader of a party, can be broken through; the great 
difficulty is to get at "them. Few dare to step forward to lead the 
forlorn hope, and to risk life and peace in storming the outworks 
without the possibility of arriving at the citadel of the deeply-trenched 
prejudice.". 

" The hope, which is led by such eyes as now direct the charge, 
can never be forlorn," said Sir Frederick, in a low voice, and in 
English. 

"Monsieur Gachard!" she called out, rising, and taking her 
papers. Monsieur Gachard was at that moment engaged with a 
gentleman who had just entered the apartment ; but he hurried back 
to Madame Marguerite, who whispered some request, to which he 
replied with a bow, " I shall have the honour." Madame Margue- 
rite was now at the door ; and, turning round, she said, " Monsieur 
le Ministre, I count on you for to-morrow evening. It is my 
soiree d adieu to my Brussels friends and brother artists. You 
must, for a few hours, give up to a party what is meant for man- 
i kind." And she quoted the line in English, to one to whom the 
literature of England was familiar. 

" I shall not fail," he replied, offering his arm to the artist. 

"No," she said, drawing back, and laughing; " I have gone 
through life without an arm to lean on ; and I will not now risk my 
independence, by taking the arm of a minister of state, even though 

27. 



354 



THE PRINCESS. 



he be le plus aimable de tous les ministrcs possibles." She 
bowed and retired. 

" Who was that very intellectual - looking person, to whom you 
addressed the title of Monsieur le Ministre" said Sir Frederick, 
as he followed Madame Marguerite down stairs. 

" The Minister of the Interior, Monsieur Rogier. You are sur- 
prised at a poor artist inviting a minister to her tea-party, but such 
is the state of things at Brussels. Besides that the arts and literature 
are under the special protection of his department, he has all those 
sympathies for talent which belong to a man whose own personal 
qualifications have placed him in his present eminent situation. " 

They were now at the entrance of the Depot, and Madame Mar- 
guerite had sprung into the carriage that was waiting for her, when 
Sir Frederick put his foot upon the step, as if to detain her, and' 
prevented the servant from closing the door; " You spoke,' 1 he 
said, " to that gentleman of a soirde d'adieu. Do you, then, 
positively leave Brussels the day after to-morrow?" 

" It is the Princess's present intention; but, certainly, to-morrow 
evening will be the last appearance of Madame Marguerite on the 
stage of Belgium in the character of a professional artist. " 

Sir Frederick looked amazed. 

" x\nd if," she continued, "you have a mind to witness the 
exhibition, I shall be happy to see you at it. But I keep Belgian 
hours— point de re veil Ion." 

"You may count upon me, though the arts are not under my 
protection. But where are you going now? " 

" To the Bibliotheque des Dues de Bourgogne," she said, 
" to finish some illuminations which I have been copying for the 
Princess. " 

" I am going there too; perhaps you would set me down." 

w With pleasure. But I have a visit to pay on the road; not 
altogether unconnected with the arts, however. Will you trust 
yourself with me for the morning?" 

u For life ! " he replied eagerly, and he sprang into the carriage ; 
when, perceiving the front seat occupied, he paused, under the 
supposition that it was the Princess of Schaffenhausen; for it was 
her carriage and liveries. Finding, however, that the stranger was 
only a humble sister of the Beguinage, he took his place, mortified 



THE PRINCESS. 



355 



to be thus for ever disappointed in the hope of finding the piquante 
and original artist alone. He believed he had so much to say, so 
much to inquire, so much to discuss, so much to reproach; and 
with a marked sharpness of expression, he said in English, as the 
carriage rolled on, 11 You remind me, Madame Marguerite, of 
those religious orders, whose members are never permitted to go 
alone. " 

It is a wise precaution, " she answered evasively, and in the 
same language, " founded on a knowledge of the uneradicable folly 
of humanity, when left to itself. Solitude, enforced, is madness ; 
and, when freely chosen, it indicates natural defect or a diseased 
mind : no one, well organized, will love or seek it. No one is the 
better for wandering alone through life; and, trust me, no one is 
the happier. The wretched are often left alone, the fortunate 
never. 1 ' She sighed deeply; and then, after a short pause, added, 
" You never could have known, Sir Frederick, what it was to be 
left utterly to your own resources, abandoned, deserted, your very 
existence unguessed at, uncared for; for you have always had 
something to give ! — the Gordian knot of society. " 

" A severe summary of its nature and motives. But I have often 
wished to be all you mention ; I have often, like Madame cle Sevi- 
gne, been hungry for silence and solitude. " 

" And, like her, you would have broken through both to seek 
and to gossip with your gardener, rather than endure them for a 
week. No, no, it is not good to be alone! Omniscience admitted 
the fact at the creation, and declared co-operation the fundamental 
law in His great scheme of moral government. " 

" No human being can more thoroughly feel the wisdom of the 
doctrine than myself," said Sir Frederick, with earnestness. l ' I 
hold a communication with something that suits us, to be the sum of 
human bliss. " 

" And were there none among your late colleagues who answered 
to this description?" asked Madame Marguerite, with a tone of 
perfect simplicity. 

" My late colleagues ! " he repeated in a bitter tone, as he threw 
himself back in the carriage, jwith the feeling of one who was startled 
from a delicious reverie by a dash of cold water thrown over his 
heated brow. 



356 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Lord Eldon, for instance," she continued coolly; "or Sare 
Wetherell, or " 

" Madame Marguerite," he interrupted with vehemence, "1 have 
more than once observed, that you have the art of making yourself 
disagreeable beyond any person I ever met with. You have a power, 
all your own, of stilling the pulse you have raised ; of freezing the 
most genial flow of happy sensations, and of throwing the wretch, 
who would escape the purgatory into which destiny has hurled him, 
back to its deepest holds. " 

" Pour trancher le mot" she said in French, " je mis ce 
qu'on appelle une fdcheuse,—en Anglais, a bore." 

"It would be very difficult to say what you are," he replied, 
with an irrepressible smile, at variance with his closely-knitted 
brow ; " but it is possible to conceive what you might be, with a 
little restraint on your froward humour, a little warmth in your icy 
heart, and some of the ardour of your bright imagination thrown 
over your composed, regulated, and prudent feelings." 

" del, que de vertus vous me faites hairV she exclaimed, 
laughing ; " but you must take me as I am." 

" Take you indeed!" he muttered ; " you — " 

" . . . . Use me as you find me, and fling me off, when the ar- 
rival of your English set throws a ridicule on your acquaintance 
with one without a single artificial distinction to recommend her to 
your notice, and who above all wants that stamp of fashion, with- 
out which no merit is current in your London !" 

"And you really think me capable of that ?" 

" Think you !" she said, emphatically, and with deep emotion: 
" know you. Time may subdue, but cannot change. Habits of 
mind, like those of physical life, grow unconquerable by indulgence. 
Remember the death-bed in the parish workhouse !" 

" Ha !" he exclaimed, with the suspiration of one suddenly 
struck with a knife ; the blood rushed from his face, and then re- 
turned with increased glow and impetuosity. " Then you were \ 
the person, as I have long suspected, who brought me to that sad 
scene. But when you know all, — the motives, the circumstances—" I 

" I do know all. But it is altogether a painful remembrance ; 
and it is my creed not to encounter a pain, when no good is to result 
from the sacrifice. That scene, and all connected with it, is now 



THE PRINCESS. 



357 



over, and for ever ! autant en emporte le ventf and she kissed 
the tips of her beautiful fingers, as she spoke, and blew over them, 
with an air of infantine grace and naivete. 

" And now for the world of arts, the divine, fresh, and ever- 
inspiring arts. I am going to present you to the conservator of one 
of their most delightful temples. Trust me, my dear Sir Frederick," 
she added, in a tone which gave a touch of cordial and kindly huma- 
nity to the expression, " the arts are fine things to cling to ; they 
i are true friends, and, like true friends, they remain with us to the 
last. Music !— painting ! — they are the language of Nature herself; 
they are worth a world of sickly sentiment, and far beyond that 
girouette and pretending thing called Reason !" 

" You are in the right," he said, earnestly, " to cry down rea- 
son ; for none, I believe, like you, have so completely the power of 
deranging it. But pray forgive an earnestness, a more than curi- 
osity in all that concerns you. You express your love of the arts ; 
and yet you are relinquishing them, professionally." 
" Yes, in Belgium." 

" You are right. There is no scope here for genius like yours. 
A country, whose resources are so disproportionate to its wants, 
cannot recompense those talents which, though they contribute to 
the charm of life, must give place to the more pressing necessities 
of a young state just rising out of revolution." 

" To what country, then, would you advise me to direct my 
steps ?" 

" To England, where everything finds its market; a country 
where genius never works in vain, or, at least, never unrecom- 
pensed." 

<" Indeed!" exclaimed Madame Marguerite, as the carriage stop- 
ped at the door of a small house, in a remote and melancholy 
suburb : " here dwells one who tells a very different story." 

They alighted, and Madame Marguerite led the way up a narrow 
staircase, and was followed by Sir Frederick Mottram to a small 
landing-place on the second story. She put up her finger, in token 
of silence, and then opened the door of a back room, unheard by 
its sole occupant. A female in black habiliments was seated near 
the only casement, which commanded no gayer view than the red- 
tiled roofs of Brussels. She was deeply occupied in reading from 

27.. 



358 



THE PRINCESS. 



a folio bible, which rested on her knees. A large coffin, covered 
with hieroglyphics, stood open and upright before her : it contained 
the most perfect mummy, perhaps, in existence. The walls and 
floor of the little room were covered with fragments, drawings, and 
objects of Egyptian antiquity : on the table were several relics, deem- 
ed holy, in holy land, which once would have been purchased by 
the diadem of royal saints and imperial pilgrims, but which now 
derived their chief value in the eyes of their triste possessor, as 
memorials of that all-enterprising mind, whose researches extended 
into the abyss of time, and rescued from oblivion evidences of many 
of the great and successive events which marked its passage to 
eternity. 

The female was Mrs. Belzoni : she received the visitors with the 
grace which always goes with strong feeling, but was evidently both 
affected and surprised by the visit. 

" Madame Belzoni," said Madame Marguerite, " I have taken the 
liberty of bringing a countryman of yours, to do honour to the 
memory of your husband in your person : he is a lover of the arts, 
an antiquarian, and one of that large class of English virtuosi, to 
whom foreign talents stand so greatly indebted for liberal encou- 
ragement." 

Sir Frederick coloured deeply, and stuttered an awkward compli- 
ment to the genius of Belzoni, and a hope of being useful to his 
widow on his return to England. 

Madame Belzoni, in reply, observed, " that she wanted nothing 
but the means of leaving Europe, and laying herself down in the 
tomb ' under the shade of the avasma 1 at Gato."* She wept 
passionately, and, instead of expatiating on her own distresses, 
talked only of Belzoni's virtues, his services, and sacrifices. She did 
not utter one word against that administration which so largely be- 
nefited by the glory of his researches, without advancing one guinea 
in aid of his splendid, his stupendous exertions. 

The books, drawings, and objects of Egyptian virtii occupied the 
attention of the visitors, till the tolling of a bell reminded Madame 

* Belzoni died at Gato, in the kingdom of Benin, on his route to Houssa 
and Timbuctoo, 1825 ; he is buried under a tree, with a few palisades round 
his unhonoured tomb. 



THE PRINCESS. 



359 



Marguerite how little time was left for the visit to the library of the 
Dukes of Burgundy. 

Sir Frederick and Madame Marguerite were again seated in the 
carriage, and nearly half-way to the object of their drive, before a 
silence, mutually maintained, was broken. 

" Madame Marguerite," at length Sir Frederick said, with some 
bitterness, " you have a mode of acting epigrams, as other people 
dramatize charades." 

" There is nothing like these tableaux vivans" she replied, 
"for bringing home conviction. You Tories are fond of boasting of 
the great discoveries which illustrated your long reign ; yet Belzoni 
died of a broken heart, and his widow languishes in poverty in a 
foreign country." 

" This, it is to be hoped, is a rare exception to our general conduct 
towards those who have served us : we shall see what the Whigs 
will do for genius, now that they hold the public purse." 

The carriage now passed into the fine old monumental court of 
the Palais de Vancienne Cour, and drew up before a narrow 
arched gate. Sir Frederick and Madame Marguerite descended, and 
left the good little Sceur Beguine to pore over the life of St. Gu- 
dule, written in good old Flemish. Sir Frederick offered his arm. 

" Not so fast, " said Madame Marguerite, drawing him away to 
another part of the court. " You see, there, one of the royal car- 
riages. It is the young Queen, who frequently comes here. Besides, 
look about you. There is not a site in Europe more illustrated by 
historical events than this court and palace. Oh ! the scenes that 
have passed, the persons who have trod, the hearts that have throb- 
bed here ! The Homes, the D'Egmonts, the gallant William of Nas- 
sau, the splendid Gueux des Bois, with their devotedness to 
national independence, 6 jusqu'a la besace^ and then that great 
melodramatic event performed here, the abdication of Charles the 
Fifth ! There is no history so replete with dramatic incidents as 
that of the Low Countries. The habitual struggles of the people for 
an independence, so opposed by the circumstances of their position, 
has rendered it a stirring romance. This ancient palace will supply 
you with a whole day's amusement in itself. You must come with 
your Belgian Plutarch, or some other short cut to history, such as 
suits Englishmen of fashion and classical scholars." 



360 



THE PRINCESS. 



"Your arrow falls pointless, " said Sir Frederick, dryly. " I 
have been dipping into Flemish chronicles, in good old French, 
ever since 1 landed at Ostend. " 

At that moment the royal carriages drew up. A fair young 
person, accompanied by two other ladies, entered the first. It was 
the Queen, attended by Mesdames de Stassart and de Merode. 
Monsieur Marchal, the conservator of the library, was still bowing 
off the royal visitor, when, perceiving Madame Marguerite, he came 
forward, with equal courtesy, though with less formality, to receive 
her. After she had presented Sir Frederick Mottram, and as they 
ascended the narrow stone stairs together, she said, 

" You have a visit from a descendant of the Dukes of Burgundy ; 
an interesting incident ! Republicanism itself cannot resist the charm 
of such an association, connected as it is with all that is imaginative 
in history." 

" The Queen,' 1 said Monsieur Marchal, " has been here the greater 
part of the morning. This is her Majesty's fourth visit. The know- 
ledge she has acquired, and the pleasure she takes, in studies so 
rarely pursued by the young and gay of her sex, are happy presages." 

" It would never do," said Madame Marguerite, " to have the 
Queen of the Belgians like some of the queens distributed over the 
old courts of Europe ; who, with their narrow acquirements of tent- 
stitch and twaddle, expect the world is to go on, as in the good old 
times, when cabinets were agitated by the minuet de Lorraine, and 
V affaire des parasols fut une affaire d'etat. " 

" I 'd as soon they meddled with tent-stitch as politics, " said Sir 
Frederick. 

" Suppose they should happen to do both, " she replied, " and, 
like Madame de Maintenon, bring their work-bags to the privy 
council ; and direct the affairs of Europe , while they trace patterns 
for foot-stools ! The influence of woman was, is, and ever will be 
exercised, directly or indirectly, in good or in evil ! It is a part of 
the scheme of nature. Give her then the lights she is capable of receiv- 
ing; educate her (whatever her station ) for taking her part in society. 
Her ignorance has often made her interference fatal : her knowledge, 
never." 

"The result, at least, can never be the same," said Monsieur 
Marchal. ' ' We owe the principal treasures of this library to a woman . 



THE PRINCESS. 



361 



Marguerite of Burgundy, or of Belgium, (vulgarly called of Austria,) 
was to the Low Countries, what Francis the First was to France." 

" And a little more, " said Madame Marguerite ; "for the policy 
of her government was as wise, as her protection of letters was 
humanizing, and that is more than can be said of the ' fors Vhon- 
neur' > king." 

They now stood in the centre of one of the most curious, as well 
as ancient, libraries in Europe. Its air of antiquity, the gemmed 
lights of its stained windows, the portraits of the Dukes of Burgundy 
encased in its dark walls, the magnificent and antique binding of its 
precious volumes, render it as picturesque to behold as curious to 
examine. 

" Shake the dust of the age you live in from your feet," said 
Madame Marguerite, addressing Sir Frederick; " ' be innocent of 
the future, ' and resign yourself wholly to the past. I give you up 
to Monsieur Marchal, from whom old Time has no secrets, and 
whose tete encyclopedique may be consulted with confidence upon 
all subjects connected with the progress of mind through the dim- 
ness of past ages," 

She sat herself down before an illuminated volume, and continued 
to work at a copy which she had already begun ; while the gentle- 
men took down volumes and looked through manuscripts. 

"How far back does your library date ?" asked Sir Frederick, 
astonished at the antiquity of an illuminated missal he was looking 
through. 

"It is the sister of the Bibltotheque du Roi, at Paris," replied 
the Conservator, " of which Charles-le-Sage may be considered as 
almost the founder. At that epoch, arts and literature flourished in 
Brussels, Ghent, Antwerp, and, above all, at Bruges, where the 
finest parchment was manufactured. But the immediate founder 
of this collection was the Due de Bourgogne, Philip the Good; 
who, on succeeding to the duchy of Brabant, formed in Brussels an 
establishment for copying manuscripts, which he placed under the 
direction of David Aubert ; a man of great merit, who surrounded 
himself with a train of historians, romancers, translators, designers, 
and calligraphers ; and caused more than three hundred volumes of 
the greatest value to be completed, for the instruction and amuse- 
ment of his patrons. But, perhaps, you will be more amused 



362 



THE PRINCESS. 



with seeing the results, than with hearing the history ? " 

"No, no," interrupted Sir Frederick ; " pray go on. If you knew 
my passion for these subjects, and my ignorance on the present oc- 
casion, you would not hesitate. " 

" Charles le Temeraire," said Monsieur Marchal, " on succeeding 
to his father, continued to encourage the learned. The translation 
of the Gyropaedia, lately given to this library by the Queen of the 
Belgians, was transcribed for his use. It had been taken in the 
battle of Nancy, in 1477, in which the Duke himself was killed. 
Mary, his daughter, married Maximilian of Austria. A prince so 
miserable, ignorant, and wasteful, was ill adapted for maintaining 
the splendour of his predecessors ; he abandoned the volumes col- 
lected by them to the money-lenders ; and many of the most valuable 
works in this library thus found their way into the other European 
collections." 

" That was a worthy child of the house of Hapsburg, that Maxi- 
milian," burst forth Madame Marguerite ; " inimical to letters in all 
aspects." 

" Philip-le-Beau, his son," continued Monsieur Marchal, "by 
Mary of Burgundy, had all the good qualities of the Burgundian 
princes, without their faults. His reign was a golden age ; and his 
sister, our Marguerite (called) 'of Austria,' was celebrated for her 
literary labours, of which some volumes are still preserved in this 
collection. History places her among the most illustrious princes 
and able diplomatists of the sixteenth century. She it was that 
educated Charles the Fifth. " 

"Yes, "said Madame Marguerite; "but his mother, Jeanne la 
Folle, was before her." 

" Maria, Queen of Hungary, sister of Charles the Fifth, born, like 
him, at Ghent, had all the great qualities of a perfect stateswoman. 
She brought from Hungary the missal of Matthias Corvinus, trans- 
lated and illuminated in Italy, and finished in the Low Countries ; 
which is by far the finest manuscript now existing in Europe. Here 
it is. The Dukes of Brabant swore upon it to observe the Joyeuse 
Entree, the old political constitution of the province. See how this 
illumination has suffered from the process."* 

* There is one picture, on which this process has been so often performed. 



THE PRINCESS. 



363 



"How proud you Belgians ought to be of your women of the 
olden times,'* said Madame Marguerite, still occupied with her 
drawing. 

£t And I have no doubt we shall have reason to be so of some of 
the women of the present," said Monsieur Marchal, bowing and 
continuing. " In the turbulent reign of Philip the Second, the Pre- 
sident Tiglius assembled the volumes of this library in the palace of 
the sovereign, to protect them from outrage and spoliation ; since 
which time, till the reign of Maria Theresa, its condition continued 
stationary. Marshal Saxe carried off some of its best contents to 
Paris ; but they were restored on the marriage of Marie-Antoinette. 
In Ninety-four, everything precious was again transported to the 
French capital, and Napoleon caused a vast number of the volumes 
to be bound in red morocco and marked with the imperial cipher. 
In 1815 they were once more restored to this palace, though it is 
thought that William had some idea of depositing them at the Hague. 
Since the revolution, the collection has again been thrown open to 
the public." * 

thai it is nearly obliterated : — a fit emblem of the fate of such promissory 
oaths. 

* This short account of a collection so eminently curious, was taken down 
from the words of the learned and courteous librarian himself, to whom the 
Author lakes this opportunity of acknowledging the many obligations con- 
ferred by his kindness and attention. The story is shortly but clearly told 
in an inscription which he has set up in the library, and which runs as 
follows : 

" Cette ancienne bibliotheque royale, 
formed des librairies que les Dues de Bourgogne avaient crCees 
pour le delassement el Pinslruction des princes de leur sang, 
Augmented par les Souverains Autrichiens, 
Renfermant des Manuscrils pr£cieux de douze siecles, 
Transported en partie a Paris 1726, restitute en 1770, 
Fut ouverle au public en 1772 par Marie Ther&e 
et le Prince Charles, 
Denouveau enlevee en 1794— rendue en 1815, 
Elle est destinee par un arrele du 24 Avril 1831 , 
a devenir la base d'un Musee hislorique." 



364 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Well," said Sir Frederick, in acknowledging the courtesy which 
had inspired this detail, " you see that these princes, whom your 
revolutionary doctrines decry, are, after all, the best patrons and 
en^ouragers of learning." 

" When mind, like power, was confined to the few," said Ma- 
dame Marguerite, " the few were its natural protectors." 

" With all due gratitude to the Dukes of Burgundy," said the 
Conservator, " we stand also indebted to the present constitutional 
government. Notwithstanding the large demands which are made 
on the public purse by the unsettled state of our foreign relations, 
the Minister of the Interior has authorized me to continue the sump- 
tuous bindings commenced by Napoleon, to replace the portraits of 
all our sovereigns since the commencement of the Burgundian 
dynasty, and to ornament the windows with stained glass in imita- 
tion of the old art; and, every day, I receive permission to purchase 
fresh manuscripts : so that the sixteen thousand volumes of which 
the present collection consists, will be rapidly increased in every 
department of human knowledge." 

" Here is a book and a binding," said Madame Marguerite, 
" beyond all price in the estimation of such antiquarians as Sir Fre- 
derick and myself." 

She had taken up a very antique volume of manuscript, of an 
oblong form, bound in black damask. 

" It is the album or common-place book of one of our great 
stateswomen, the Duchess Marguerite," said Monsieur Marchal : " her 
government of the Low Countries, and her famous treaty of Cam- 
bray, in which she outwitted the wily cardinal d'Amboise, and a 
woman as astute, though not as enlightened as herself, entitle her 
to that epithet." He added, as he presented the book, " You see 
here her well-known and mystic device — ' Fortune, in fortune, 
fort uneS " 

Sir Frederick started : the eyes of Madame Marguerite were 
fixed on him with a strange expression; but she resumed her 
drawing. 

" Here," continued the Conservator, " are her arms on the cover, 
and here is her autograph." 

" Balades!" said Sir Frederick, reading the title, " a strange 
work for a diplomatist !" 



THE PRTSCESS. 



365 



" Oh, she was a true woman!" said Madame Marguerite — 
*' author, politician, sovereign, but femme avant tout; as every 
word in this most charming volume shows. Here is a stanza trace 1 
d' inspiration, in her own hand-writing, to prove it : it is in the old 
Flemish-French of her court, which has a charm for me beyond the 
purism of a French academician. 

1 Quelque soit,je vous oublieray, 
Pleust a Dieu que nil de cesle heure , 
Mais de tant plus , qu'a ce labeure , 
Tant plus en memoire vous ay.' 

Through the obscurity of this old French you see the idea of Mon- 
crieff's delightful refrain, 

' En songeant qu'il faut qu'on Foublie , 
On s'en souvienL' " 

" What a charming line !" said Sir Frederick, devouring the ma- 
nuscript. " It appears through all these stanzas that the Princess 
Marguerite was unhappy." 

, " To be sure she was," said Madame Marguerite. " She had got 
the start of her age, a crime never forgiven. She had the heart of a 
woman, the mind of a man, and was tied down to the barbarous 
.formalities of a court she despised. Here is the resume of her life, 
called Chanson faite par Madame : 

' C'est pour jamais que regret me demeure , 
Qui sans cesser , nuit el jour, a tout eure 
Tant me tourmanl que bien voudroie mourir.' " 

" En attendant , however," said Monsieur Marchal; " she 
amused herself pretty gaily, as this old and very damaged volume 
proves. You see, it once had a splendid cover ; it was bound in 
crimson damask. The paper is black with golden letters, its title 
Vlusiers basse dance. It was the quadrille book of the Court of 
Brussels in the fifteenth century, and belonged to our Duchess 
Marguerite herself. Here is an explanation of the dances a la 
mode, in seventeen pages that follow the music ; and here are the 



366 THE PRINCESS. 

names, ' La Marguerite ?, ' ' Vesperance de Bourbon^ * 
mours,' 1 Ma miej 1 Va-t-en, man amoureux ddsirf ' ^V/e* o I 
marierj ' dance de Ravestainf ' i« doulce Amour f and' £e 
joyeux de Bruxclles,' a name of true Belgian origin." 

" Yes," said Madame Marguerite ; " it is remarkable that the 
Belgians, like the old Castilians, were a vivacious people, till the I 
espionnage established in domestic life by the Spanish rule quenched j 
their spirit in a cautious, if not gloomy reserve; but they will soon j 
recover under free institutions, and we shall have them dancing 
the joyeux de Bruxelles, as in the time of their own Madame Mar- 
guerite." 

" No doubt," said the Conservator; " and I am glad that you, | 
Madame, are collecting materials for the life of that most accom- 
plished Belgian lady." 

" Oh! only for its pictorial illustrations." 

" Who, then, is to compose the text?" asked Sir Frederick. 

" The Princess of Schalfenhausen, " replied Madame Marguerite. 

" Is she capable of that? " said Sir Frederick ; " with her creed 
of absolutism, so different from your own, as to make your connexion 
a paradox. " 

" We have a stronger tie than that of opinion. She wants me, 
I want her— Je vous conviens, vous me convenez. As for the 
work, she will bring to it all her amour-propre ; and that is a great 
inspiration. Her husband, by the Trazeymers, is descended from the 
Dukes of Burgundy ; 1 have just picked up ' La veritable Histoire 
de Gilleon de Trazeymer, ' a very old work , with which she is 
delighted. " 

"But here," said Monsieur Marchal, returning from the other end 
of the library — " here is the pearl of our collection ; as bearing upon 
a fashionable branch of modern literature. It is the joint produc- 
tion of two pretty women ; commenced in the sixteenth century by 
one, and finished by the other in the seventeenth— Marie de Behercke, 
and Wilhelma Del Vael. " 

" The first bas-bleus on record, 1 suppose?" said Sir Frede- 
rick. 

" In what relation these two ladies stood to each other, or how 
the volume passed from one to the other, is unknown, " continued 
Madame Marguerite ; " but a very pleasant hypothesis was raised the 



THE PRINCESS. 



367 



other evening by Monsieur Campan,* that they were grandmother 
and grand-daughter ; and he speculated upon the ludicrous effect the 
love vows addressed to the elder lady must have had on the younger, 
who could only have known her as old, wrinkled, and venera- 
ble. " 

• Yet, " said Sir Frederick, " the thought did not prevent her 
registering her own loves for the benefit of her grand-children. The 
hommages, I see, are in all languages, and would answer as well for 
the albums for 1833 as for 1624 ( the date of some of its verses). 
Pray , what does this Flemish mean ? 

' Naer lyden 
Koinpt verblyden. ' " 

" Why, that the author was as great a coxcomb as any other of 
the species, " said Madame Marguerite : " verbatim, it is, ' after pain 
comes pleasure; ' the reverse was more probably the truth, though 
that does not much matter now. " 

" Here, " said Monsieur Marchal, laying his hand on a pile of very 
old manuscripts, in coarse antiquated binding, " here is another 
aera of mind, illustrated with the names and autographs of Erasmus, 
Heinsius, and Puteanus; but/e vous ferai grdce des pedans en 
us, one little anecdote excepted. Dorothee de Croy, Duchesse deCroy, 
sent these complimentary verses to Puteanus, 

' Blamera qui voudra le style de ta voix, 
Et tes divins Perils d'ou naissenl rambroisie, 
Elle n'a pas de gout pour Pignare et Penvie : 
Ains agace leurs dents et cause tanl d'abois j 
Abois qui n'ont pouvoir que d'honnorer ta fame, 
Et accroistre ton los en accroissant leur blame. 

' A Bruxelles, 6 e Fevrier 1614.' 

" And how do you think Puteanus replied? " 

" Like a pedant, of course," said Madame Marguerite. 

* Monsieur Campan has since made this manuscript the subject of a pleasant 
article in l' Artiste, a Brussels periodical work of distinguished merit, to 
which some of the most eminent men are contributors. 



368 



THE PRINCESS. 



"Exactly; by criticising the false concord in the second line, 
which he calls a 4 synthese peu tolerable. ' " 

" The learned men of that day, unlike those of the present times, " 
said Sir Frederick, with a slight bow of the head, Ci knew but little 
of the courtesies of life. " 

" Apropos to which, " said Madame Marguerite, " we must no! 
intrude farther on the inexhaustible politeness of Monsieur Marchal : 
the hour for closing the Bibliotheque is come. " 

" It is so natural, " said Sir Frederick, " to forget time, when 
searching into its records, under such auspices. " 

"I am always too happy to do the honours by visitors of all na- 
tions ; but more particularly by such true lovers of antiquity and arts, 
as Monsieur, and Madame Marguerite. " 

" It is a privilege, " said Sir Frederick, as he conducted her to 
the carriage, " to be presented by you. " 

" Yes, here : but I could do nothing for you at Almaek's. " 

6 - It is, perhaps, the only place where 1 should not require your 
protection. " 

u A VEopital de la Vieillesse Malheureuse, 33 said Madame 
Marguerite to her servant. " I will not ask you, Sir Frederick, to 
accompany me there. " 

" If you did, I should accept the invitation, as I have done that 
for to-morrow evening, without calculating the consequences. But 
you have not given me the itineraire of your Pavilion. " 

66 Here it is, " she said, presenting him a card, " and remember 
the hour. " 

" You will find it more difficult, 51 he replied, " to teach me to 
forget, than to remember : 

' En songeant qu'il faut qu'on Toublie, 
On s'en souvient. 1 " 

Madame Marguerite drove off for the hospital, and Sir Frederick 
to dress for a- dinner at Monsieur Engler's, preoccupied, amused, 
and— in love : golden circumstances in the life of the idle, the 
cnnuyd, and the susceptible. 



TI1E PROCESS. 



369 



CHAPTER XXI. 

THE FETE IN THE FOREST. 

No capital in Europe possesses more beautiful environs than that 
of Belgium. Deficient in every feature of sublimity, .in all that 
strikes boldly on the mind, and awes the imagination ; with no 
Alps that rise, no sea that rolls, no volcanic elements to threaten or 
destroy, there is everywhere much to cheer the spirit of man, and 
nothing to make him feel how light, in the great scheme of creation, 
are his individual interests and existence. 

That hardy and strenuous enterprise, which found the Low 
Countries the region of the crane and the stork, the refuge of the 
wolf and the boar, has left it the land where man may best feel 
himself the lord of the ascendant. Rich in a soil that teems with 
luxurious abundance, with forests that shade and temper the in- 
fluence of the elements, the provinces of Belgium unite in their 
scenery the highest features of moral and picturesque beauty. Its 
feudal castles, and holds of force and violence, serve now but as 
features for the painter, to tip a crag, or to frown over a glen. Its 
magnificent abbeys and lonely monasteries, once the causes of po- 
pular prostration, are now subsidiary to the wants of man, the 
receptacles and the shelter of his industry : and everywhere the 
bell-capped mansion and comfortable cottage give token of a per- 
vading equality, and fill up the fearful vacuum which in other less 
blessed regions separates the castle and the hut. Even the fau- 
bourgs and suburban dependencies of Brussels are scenes to paint, 
as well as to enjoy. The valley and village of Etterbeek, its gar- 
dens, and ponds, and rustic guinquettes ; the hamlet of Ixelles, 
with its splendid prospects ; the superb park of La Gambre ; Bois- 
fort, which rivals in beauty the villages of Switzerland, with the 
deep and dark line of the Forest of Soignes, are subjects of the 

28.. 



370 



THE PRINCESS. 



highest inspiration to pictorial genius— of the profoundest reflection 
to the moral philosopher. 

Amidst these various sites, replete with picturesque beauty, there 
is one of pre-eminent loveliness, where the eloquent silence of Nature 
in her grand repose is interrupted by the evening song of myriads 
of nightingales. It is called the ' Groenendael,' or green valley. 
There still moulder the ruined cloisters of the once stupendous mo- 
nastery, to which the Infanta Isabel, one of the ablest and most 
powerful sovereigns of the Low Countries, retreated from the cares 
of state and the tedium of a court. There, too, the Emperor Charles 
the Fifth bade his last farewell to greatness ; and, surrounded by 
Philip the second ; Eleanor, the wife of Francis the First ; Marie, 
Queen of Hungary ; Maximilian of Austria and his wife, and Mulez 
Hassan, a King of Numidia, took an early repast, previous to resign- 
ing the imperial crown for the cowl of a monk. 

In a site so favoured by nature, so consecrated by time, so tinged 
with ideality, and yet so within the lines of civilization, the late 
Prince of Schaffenhausen possessed an ancient hunting-tower. This 
descendant of one of the great feudal families of Europe, the Belgian 
Prince, the Spanish Grandee, the Count of the Empire, had all the 
faults, prejudices, and tendencies incidental to his caste. Selfish, 
haughty, despotic, sensual, he was witty and tasteful : a voluptuary 
in the capitals of Europe, passionate for the arts, and liberal in their 
encouragement ; in his castle on the Rhine he would gladly have 
been a petty suzerain, as his father was before him, whose uncon- 
trolled power had actually permitted him to pronounce sentence of 
death on one of his serfs, and to execute it in the court of his 
castle. The once astute statesman, the disciple of absolutism, was 
utterly disappointed and disgusted with the arrangements which had 
followed the battle of Waterloo. His hope for Belgium had centred 
in the restoration of the Austrian power ; and he was wont to say 
that he did not choose to be elbowed by the petty Princes of Nassau, 
who had no political existence when his own family were sovereign 
powers. 

He was one of the many grand seigneurs of Brussels who left it 
for Vienna, in the same disgust against the government of King 
William, as those of his class and temper have latety exhibited against 
King Leopold. In disposing, therefore, of his splendid hotel in the 



THE PRINCESS. 



371 



old Spanish quarters of Brussels, ( the neighbourhood of the Aivas 
and theFurstembcrgs, ) he had sent his precious pictures, and other 
objects of art, to his ancient campagne belonging to his family in 
the Groenendael, until he could make up his mind in which of his 
many mansions he should deposit them. 

Chance, and a pursuit of the arts, had brought to visit this remote 
gallery in the forest the person whom he had afterwards made his 
wife ; and it was at her suggestion that he had been induced to 
re-edify and enlarge the building; but the outbreak of the Belgian 
revolution drove him again from his temporary residence in its 
neighbourhood, and interrupted the progress of his improvement 
and his plans. 

Shortly afterwards he married,— partly from passion, and partly 
in the hope of disinheriting his next heir. His death, however, 
occurred almost immediately after his marriage ; and his liberal be- 
quests to his widow left the successor to his title nothing beyond 
that the law awarded him. Over his German property he had no 
power, save the splendid ruins of a castle on the Rhine ; but his 
Belgian estate, in the neighbourhood of the Forest of Soignes, he 
had left to the now celebrated Princess of Schaffenhausen. 

His widowed Princess had probably shared the prejudices of her 
aristocratic husband, as she had not visited Brussels since her mar- 
riage. It was only within the last few months, that orders had 
arrived from England to her agent, to continue the edifice in the 
Forest of Soignes, and to double the number of workmen employed 
on it. 

Since the Princess's arrival in Belgium, she had made the Pavilion 
of the Groenendael her head-quarters ; declining all visits, and busied 
in superintending her buildings, and inquiring into the state of her 
affairs. The caprice of ennui (that malady of the fortunate, that 
penalty of the rich ) might have probably determined her to seek 
amusement in this expensive toy ; thus adding one more super- 
fluous residence to those she already possessed without occupying : 
but it was generally supposed that the influence which Madame 
Marguerite had obtained over her, had been the more immediate 
cause of recommencing the fairy palace, in which possibly the 
whimsical Armida would never eventually dwell. 

It was in this pavilion that the retiring artist had obtained permis- • 



37S 



THE PRINCESS. 



siontomake her adieus to her brethren, on quitting professional 
life under the liberal protection of her sumptuous patroness. 

The sun had nearly set, and the tops of the trees of La Cambre, 
and the pinnacles of the abbey, were alone brightened by its declin- 
ing rays, as Sir Frederick stopped his carriage at that beautiful and 
elevated point of view called VArbre vert. He had done so at the 
advice of his courier, to look down on the rich and magnificent scene 
that spread beneath ; and then proceeded by Boisfort, through the 
Forest of Soignes, to an opening among the trees, which led by a 
foot-path to the pavilion of the Groenendael. Having left his carriage 
at a guinguette, ( where a vine - covered porch displayed a living 
group, such as, in the language of art, would be described as a 
happy accident, ) he set out on foot with his guide, by a tangled 
brake diverging into many ' an alley green, ' till the deep, dark 
defiles of interlacing trees scarcely left more than a straggling ray of 
light to point the way. A gurgling stream roamed amidst the high 
rank herbage, nourished by one of those springs which so frequently 
gush up amidst forest-scenery like magical creations. Sir Frederick, 
as he forced his way along the tangled and briary path, soon with- 
drew his attention from the natural beauties of the scene ; and in 
some impatience he asked his courier, "Is there no carriage-road 
to the pavilion?" 

" There is a road now clearing, Monsieur le Chevalier," replied 
the courier, " a mile below the village of Boisfort; and another old 
and rutted road leads from the hamlet of Groenendael to La Hulpe : 
but this is the shortest and the most beautiful ; and it opens at once 
on the rendez-vous de chasse, where Monseigneur le Prince began 
his maison de plaisance. Excepting the pavilion at Tervueren, 
there will be nothing comparable to it, if Madame la Princesse ever 
completes it : but, hundert tausend sacrament I ' who will answer 
for a great lady!' It was Madame Marguerite's postilion who desired 
me to bring voire seigneurie by this track : I hope I haven't lost 
my way." 

iC I hope so, too, with all my soul !" said Sir Frederick. 

The next moment the hope was realized, by the appearance of 
twinkling lights, which sparkled like fire-flies through the branches 
of the trees, and by the faint sounds of music. Farther on, 'a dark 
arcade, cleared under the entwined branches of a mass of elms, 



THE PRINCESS. 



373 



opened at once upon the pavilion, which stood in the midst of one 
of lliose cleared spaces that, in forest - scenery, are designated as a 
rendez-vous de c/iasse. Its gothic porch was of pure white stone, 
and presented a perfect specimen of the most ornamented and ela- 
borate style of that picturesque order. Its long, narrow, and ele- 

i gant casements, filled with painted glass, threw their many-coloured 
tints on the green sward without ; and three pointed arches, opening 
to the free air, gave a perfect view of the interior of an illuminated 
gallery behind. The light shafts and feathered tracery of this beau- 
tiful fragment were alone clearly discernible. The forest-trees, and 
the dark outline of a massive turret, formed the background. Beds 
of flowers, clustering shrubs, and cor bei lies of rare exotics, en- 
riched and perfumed the verdant lawn in front. 

Here, seeing all, himself unseen, Sir Frederick Mottram stopped, 
and seated himself on a rustic bench, under the wide-spreading 
branches of a giant oak, one of the leading features of the sylvan 
scene. Groups were passing in and out of the portico, and the 
inner apartment was occupied by a crowd of persons of both sexes. 
The hostess of the evening was occupied in arranging music on a 
piano - forte, which stood exactly in a line with the central open 
archway. Among the persons surrounding the instrument, Sir Fre- 
derick distinguished Colonel , and other Polish gentlemen, the 

Italian exile whom he had met in the treckschuyt, Gholet, the de- 
lightful tenor of the Pre aux Clercs, Messrs. Fetis, Belliard, and 
other professors and amateurs of distinction, some of whom he had 
met at the house of Monsieur Engler on the preceding evening. 
Among the groups scattered through the room, he also recognised 

i the striking head of the Minister of the Interior, Messieurs Gachard, 

Marchal, Van H , Mr. Grattan,* and M. Moch, (to whose several 

writings Belgium stands equally indebted for investing it with new 
interest,) with Dr. Friedlander, (one of the most liberal and elegant 
German writers of the day, ) and other foreign notabilities, who had 
been pointed out to him in the streets and public reading-rooms of 
Brussels. But, among this varied group, he saw no form to which 

I * The Heiress of Bruges, by Mr. Grattan, in historical research and local 
colouring, is comparable to many of Walter Scott's best pictures of national 
pecularilies. 



374 



THE PRINCESS. 



he could assign his own vague and fantastic idea of the Princess of 
Schalfenhausen ; and he rejoiced at the fact. There was nothing in 
the scene which by the remotest association could recal the restraint 
imposed by his own exclusive circle and its cold despotic forms, to 
scare his eyes and grieve his heart ! Everything around him was 
strange , new, unconnected with ancient habits and morbid feelings, 
as the site he occupied. 

The tuning of musical instruments was now completed. Madame 
Marguerite had taken her place at the piano-forte, with a sweep of 
chromatic modulations which showed the science of a mistress of 
the art. He thought, as he listened, of her pictures, of her conver- 
sation ; he looked at her person, irradiated as her splendid counte- 
nance then was, by sensations which music alone awakens in those 
organized for its enjoyments. Coquetry, too, could not have chosen 
a more appropriate dress than her usual, full, voluminous robe of 
rich black stuff, and her wonted faille, thrown back from her head, 
and serving as a fine relief to her flashing eyes and sibyl face. 

The music performed was a Polish hymn to liberty. The solo 
parts were sung by Madame Marguerite, in a deep, soul-touching 
contra-alto voice; the chorus, by the Polish and other foreign 
gentlemen. It was one of those calm and genial nights, when music 
acquires its fullest power over beings susceptible of its mysterious 
spells. Not a breath of air disturbed even the clear flame of a lamp 
which hung over a fountain, whose rills trickled round the roots of 
a huge, blighted elm, once the rival of the oak, under which Sir 
Frederick lounged. 

The impressionable temperament of the late cold and arid states- 
man, (the slave of mental habits at variance with nature's intentions 
in his favour,) yielded to the enchantment of the fresh and scented 
atmosphere, and the witching of sweet sounds. He thought the 
melody of the Polish hymn was almost an argument in favour of the 
Polish cause ; and even the liberation of classic Italy, and of honest 
Germany, stole on his affections as plausible and possible, through 
the passionate voices of men so gifted and so worthy to enjoy all 
that bounteous nature had created for their use. 

The music ceased ; the Belgians applauded. They had completed 
their great work, and their sympathies were offered with an unof- 
fending expression of pity and admiration for their less fortunate 



THE PRINCESS. 



375 



brothers. Refreshments were then served, and Madame Marguerite, 
circulating through her guests, advanced from the gallery to the 
portico, and from the portico to the open air. In the courteous 
surveillance of a society accustomed to receive those personal 
attentions which English bon ton has banished from its circles, she 
advanced to the last stragglers, with a pleasant word and a welcom- 
ing smile for each, till she reached the seat where Sir Frederick 
reposed. Her recognition was instantaneous and cordial. 

" Ah! " she said, "you have selected your del respiro well. I 
pray you mark the spot ; it is that on which Charles the Fifth took 
his last leave of his family, and of the allies of his power, the day he 
abdicated. What a group! what a scene! I have sketched it as 
the subject of a future picture. " 

" The scene," said Sir Frederick, " is exquisitely beautiful; but 
the historical interest you now attach to it is infinitely more interest- 
ing. What a lesson on the vanity of human passions ! " 

"And what a lesson of the vanity of that unlimited power beyond 
whatman should trust with man!" she replied. " Look at that 
German, that Italian, those Poles, all victims of the despotism still 
subsisting, still flourishing, which it was the ambition of Charles to 
establish; for that he laboured and fought, and for what? — to die 
of religious melancholy and ennui in a cloister ! The music, which 
still rings in my ears, is a fearful comment on the story. " 

" The music you allude to breathes of sentiment, of passion, of 
enthusiasm; but I do not see by what reasonable association it 
connects itself with the despotism (if so you will call it) of Charles 
the Fifth." 

" It breathes of human suffering, of national degradation, of 
force, of injustice ; and it but repeats the tale of centuries of wrong, 
enacted in every kingdom of continental Europe to this present day. 
And for whose benefit did the candidate for universal monarchy and 
unmixed despotism raise this superstructure of evil ? Think of the 
successors of Charles. The foundress of the stock was Joan the 
mad : Charles the Fifth died mad ; Philip the Second lived in feroci- 
ous deliriu n; and his bigoted -and stultified successors exhibited, in 
scarcely less striking characters, their intellectual monstrosity. 
Au reste, you were at the congress of Vienna, and can tell whether 
the successors to the power and the inheritors of the blood of the 



376 



THE PRINCESS. 



universal monarchist are either better or happier than their pre- 
decessor. " 

Sir Frederick remained for a moment silent. 

" You do not agree with me yet," said Madame Marguerite. 

" Perbaps not, " he said; " but I at least feel with you, and that 
is a preliminary step to agreement. That music of yours is a great 
rhetorician : and you have a mode of attacking the mind through 
the senses, which leaves it without the power or the wish of resis- 
tance." 

"A great cause," she replied coldly, "should owe nothing to 
such sybarite accessories." 

"And is not all here sybarite?" he said, endeavouring to detain 
her, by catching the floating end of her faille, as she was in the act 
of passing him—" The air we breathe, the scene we occupy, the 
voice which penetrates to the innermost recesses of our existence, 
and turns life into a trance ! " 

"And observe," she said with animation, taking his offered arm; 
"pray observe that Nature is the fountain of all this ; and that when 
you exclude her fresh vital breath, reverse her seasons, and, above 
all, neglect her great distinctions, for those of artificial society, you 
forfeit all the charms which now so much excite your rather excita- 
ble imagination. But T must make you known to some of our Bel- 
gian notabilities, our revolutionary ministers, past, present, and 
(I dare say) to come. I have nothing for you in the way of a Met- 
ternich, a Talleyrand, or a Montague St. Leger; nothing to set 
against the diplomatists 1 have seen filling the salons of the Princess 
of SchafFenhausen in London and Vienna. Ours are the agents of 
the day, the necessities of the occasion, the springs of a new move- 
ment ; and their characteristics are as peculiar as their position." 

"Pray," he said, holding her back, as she approached a group at 
the portico, "let me for a while, at least, be a spectator, an auditor— 
an-" 

" Oh ! I won't commit you ; nothing plebeian shall get between 
the wind and your gentility. Look at that energetic, gesticulating 
man, with a countenance all expression, and an eye all fire ; 1 may 
present you to him : he is of the equestrian order— of your order," 
(she added with pointed expression. ) " In England, he would be 
what the Princess calls i Sare somebody '.' Is not that like her?" 



THE PRINCESS. 



377 



"Too, too like her?" he replied, the whole scene in the Opera- 
box rushing on his memory. 

"But Charles de Brouckere s'en moque" she continued : "he has 
far other claims for distinction." 

"Is your Princess here?" asked Sir Frederick. 

" Oh !" she said ironically ; " princesses are patronesses of the 
arts. They purchase talent ; but they do not enter with it into 
social equality. ' Ces gens-la,'' as Madame Du Deffand called Vol- 
taire and D'Alembert— 'ces gens-la ' make a part of the parade of 
aristocratic station, but do not enter into its intimacy : but you see 
here men worth all the Altesses Bruxelloises that ever flourished 
since the time of the D'Egmonts and the Homes. Look to your 
left ; you see that person talking to Constantine Rodenbach, whom 
you met at Bruges. It is Monsieur De Muelenaere." 

"One of your ministers, I believe, " observed Sir Frederick, put- 
ting up his glass. 

" II est, le fut, ou le doit etre, " 

replied Madame Marguerite, laughing; " for talent and energies like 
his must always be available in such great revolutionary times as the 
present. His best distinction is simply that of a pure patriot; he is, 
however, an historical fact." * 

"By the energy of their movements, they must be deciding the 
fate of the nation, at least." 

" They did so once, " said Madame Marguerite, seating herself 
on a mound of cushions, which, after the old Spanish-Brabantian 
fashion, were scattered on the lawn. Sir Frederick drew a tabouret 
beside her, much amused at the moving and characteristic scene 
before him. " But pray observe that group to your right. " 

"I have been observing it some time," said Sir Frederick. 

"'Tis an odd coincidence," she continued, "but there stands 
nearly the whole of the last provisional government of the Belgian 

* "Lorsque MM. De Muelenaere et Vilain X1III furent e'carte's des 6tats- 
gene>aux, lors des elections en 1829, on ouvrit sponlan6ment, dans les Flan- 
dres, une souscriplion, pour leur ofFrir une mSdaille en or, a leur effigie." 
— Episodes de la Revolution, etc. etc. 

29. 



378 



THE PRINCESS. 



Revolution. There is Charles Rogier, the Minister of the Interior, 
who, in the most awful moment of popular fermentation, flung 
himself into the very gap of anarchy, and etablished that character 
of dauntless devotedness to a great cause, which may be deemed the 
chivalry of politics. Next to him stands the brave, the gallant, the 
patriotic commander of the National Guard, the Baron Vander- 
Linden D'Hooghvorst ; and there is the honest, single-minded. Count 
Felix de Merode : he is in conversation with Colonel Jolly, who, from 
aiding to emancipate and govern a nation, is now contented to fall 
back upon the arts, and is the Director of the Muse'e. That vene- 
rable personage who is about to join them, is the ex-regent, Baron 
Surlet de Chokier. He comes but rarely amongst us, now that he 
has abdicated his public functions ; but he deserves well of his coun- 
try, and is in full possession of its respect. That elderly man near 
him is the Baron de Secus, the Nestor of the Chamber of Deputies ; 
and next to him is Count Robiano."* 

" Oh ! you admit, then, that the Belgian noblesse did come for- 
ward? for here are barons and counts in plenty. " 

66 So few, on the contrary," she interrupted, "as to make the 
exceptions only more remarkable. " 

But where is your equestrian? his countenance interested me. 11 

" Ay! where indeed! He is 'the movement' personified; he 
has passed through every phasis of the Belgian Revolution, promi- 
nent in all, and giving to each something of his own characteristic 
energy; rapid as a meteor— as bright , and as unfixed; and, though 
shooting from sphere to sphere with incalculable celerity, always 
leaving the track of his light behind him : a patriot from sentiment, 
a frondeur from principle, and a lover of liberty and the arts from 
temperament. " 

" He has played, then, no ordinary part in your revolution. " 

" Oh ! he started from the post, and a little before it. Called to 
the representation in 1827, he distinguished himself by a motion in 
favour of the liberty of the press, which was then compromised by 
an exceptional law, — an act of vigour which placed him in public 

* At this time Monsieur Gendebien was in the country; and Monsieur Van 
de Weyer was in London, the Minister Plenipotentiary from his govern- 
in ent to the English Court. 



THE PRINCESS. 



379 



opinion at the head of the Belgian opposition. Conjointly with 
the Counts de Celles and de Langhe, he proposed, during the heat 
of the commotions of September 1830, the administrative separa- 
tions of Belgium and Holland. He was, on various occasions, the 
chosen negotiator with the Prince of Orange, and successively Mili- 
tary Governor of the Province of Liege, Minister of Finance, (a place 
which he threw up on the proposed election of Leopold,) Minister 
of the Interior on Leopold's nomination, and afterwards, on the 
invasion of the territory, aide-de-camp to the King, when he suc- 
ceeded in bringing together and re-arming ten thousand men of the 
dispersed and demoralized army after the affair of Louvain. At a 
moment of general confusion, when nobody would accept the 
portfolio of minister of war, it was almost forced on Monsieur de 
Brouckere. Still, however, he found himself placed in a false po- 
sition, by the conflict of his duties and sentiments towards the 
King with his feelings and principles as a member of the opposition 
in the Chamber of Deputies; and he ultimately vacated his seat, 
and accepted the office of director of the mint, which, being dis- 
connected with politics, he could hold without a compromise." 

' ; You have given me, 1 ' said Sir Frederick, " a reason the more 
for visiting the Hotel de la Monnaie to-morrow, which I had already 
intended to do.' 1 

" Yes, and you will find the Master of the Mint as sharp-cut, as 
salient, and as fresh, as any of his own coins. There are various 
opinions of Charles de Brouckere ; but I cannot help placing him in 
the first rank of national talent. He is accused, however, of 
wanting that sagacious submission to the pressure of events, that 
wise indulgence for the inconsistencies of men, which are indispen- 
sable for the conduct of all great enterprises. Honest, straight- 
forward, seeing at once what ought to be, and taking a bird's-eye 
view of the circumstances of a position, a pebble thrown in his path 
may check his progress : he starts, draws up, neither stumbles nor 
retreats, but flies off at a tangent, indignant at the paltry obstruc- 
tion. To the querulousness arising from the first check, he yields 
with the frowardness of a spoiled child ; and with ' all or nothing'' 
for his motto, he makes the impossibility of attaining the first his 
excuse for falling back upon the last. It was this quality which 
induced King Leopold, with his usual tact, to say, \ Charles de 



3S0 



THE PRINCESS. 



Brouckere est un homme dont on ne pent rien faire, mais sans 
lequel on ne pent rien faire. Would you like to be presented to 
him now?" 

" Not now," said Sir Frederick, hanging back ; " you see he is 
engaged, and with a person who looks like a preux of ancient 
chivalry, a 4 jeune et beau DunoisS " 

" You have hit him off well," said Madame Marguerite. 

c ' Felix Chazal is the Bayard of our revolution, ' sans peur et 
sans reprocheS Every trait of his short career is striking and 
elevated. The hero of the commotions at Mons, he at twenty-one 
years of age exhibited a presence of mind, a courage, and a diplo- 
matic dexterity, that would have done honour to a veteran general. 
At Antwerp, in conjunction with his friend Rogier, he succeeded, by 
the firmness and decision of his manner, in extorting an armistice 
for the city. During several months of official disorganization and 
confusion, he, as intendant-general of the army, had immense sums 
at his disposition; yet he quitted his office in a poverty as honour- 
able, as it is (under such circumstances) rare. He is now colonel 
commandant of the province of Liege." 

" And who is that intellectual young person, whose sedate air 
forms so striking a contrast with the physiognomies of the two fiery 
sons of republicanism ?" 

V 'Tis Monsieur Nothomb, the historian of the revolution, in which 
he has borne himself a distinguished part. He is another instance of 
the political talent latent in the middle ranks of society, which awaits 
but the call of occasion to show itself for the benefit of mankind. 
A doctor of laws at the age of twenty-one, he shortly afterwards 
quitted his native country of Luxembourg ( where he practised as an 
advocate), to commence journalist at Brussels. At the outbreak of 
the revolution, he became secretary of the constitutional committee, 
and was very influential in fixing the bases adopted for the Belgian 
constitution. In the congress, also, he defended the monarchical 
system with two chambers ; and, being convinced that nothing but 
ruin could result from a war, he became an active partisan of 
what has been so inconsiderately censured as the system of pro- 
tocols." 

" Yes," interrupted Sir Frederick, " ' twas the only chance. 
That was great foresight in so young a man." 



[L®^© FA ILRfl 1 K I> IT® K] 



THE PRINCESS. 



381 



" In March 1831 he became secretary of foreign affairs, and 
strongly advocated the election of Leopold. He was consequently 
chosen, together with Monsieur Devaux, a commissary to the con- 
ference in London, where they conjointly arranged with Lord Pal- 
merston the celebrated eighteen articles of peace." 

" I must, then, have seen him when in London," said Sir Fre- 
derick : " I thought his face was familiar to me. Pray go on." 

" In every step of our revolution he has contributed largely 
towards determining its character; and, being compelled by the 
necessities of the times to adopt the juste-milieu,* as the only sys- 
tem compatible with the permanence of national independence, he, 
of course, has constantly been employed, and has shown himself an 
active member of the government, and a firm and useful supporter 
of its measures in the Chamber. Replete with acquired information, 
and endowed with a singular perspicacity of judgment, he has 
acquired great influence with his party both in the cabinet and the 
chamber ; and in his work, which you have doubtless read, he has 
as ably as elegantly defended the revolution before the tribunal of 
continental Europe." 

" His book," said Sir Frederick, " affords the clearest insight 
into the origin and tendency of your revolution that I have yet 
acquired. It is marked throughout by a moderation and good 
sense, that gave me the impression of a more mature and practised 
mind than so youthful a person should indicate." 

" The Belgians," she continued, " though some think him too 
much a doctrinaire, are justly proud of his talents ; and, as a member 
of private society, he is not the less gay , spirituel, and unpreten- 
ding, than he is laborious and able in office : unlike some of your 
English rising young men, as you call them, who c cachent la me- 
diocrite sous le masque de la gravite? " 

' L He, I suppose," said Sir Frederick, " is one of your working 
men?" 

" Our ministers," she replied, " are all working men : Belgium 
is too poor to afford the luxury of aristocratic show servants. There, 
for instance, that tall, studious-looking person, is Monsieur Lebeau, 

^Whatever may be thought of France and England, the juste-milieu was 
forced upon Belgium by inevitable circumstances. 



382 



THE PRINCESS. 



minister of Justice, who passes for the leader of our cabinet, and the 
very spirit of the juste-milieu. Like his friend Nothomb, doctor 
of laws, advocate, journalist, and author, he was the first individual 
singled out for office by the provisional government, which appointed 
him advocate-general in the supreme court of justice at Liege. 
He was one of the committee of safety formed in that city to protect 
property and avert anarchy, on the breaking out of the revolution ; 
and he was also of the deputation sent by the inhabitants of Liege 
to treat with the Prince of Orange for the administrative separation 
of the two countries. Subsequently , he was chosen on the com- 
mittee for drawing up the constitution ; and he has continued ever 
since an influential member of the cabinet. As a statesman, cool, 
cautious, and astute, he has laboured to consolidate the system 
which the geographical and political circumstances of the country 
have forced on its adoption. He has with infinite tact and adroit- S 
ness laboured to conciliate the timid and suspicious allies who have 
agreed to acknowledge, without loving, the revolutionary govern- 
ment; and, in doing this, he has not retrograded into that semi- 
legitimacy which has depopularized the government of Louis-Philippe. 
That, indeed, the Belgian people would not have endured. As an 
orator, Monsieur Lebeau is the main stay of the administration. He 
is always heard in the Chambers with attention and respect; as 
uniting with a persuasive and energetic oratory, a penetrating in- 
tellect, a singular tact, and a compassed solid sense. In temper- 
ament and disposition he is the opposite of his friend Rogier. The 
latter, bold, frank, simple, all impulse and sentiment, was well 
suited to the moment of action, which drew him from the ranks of 
an arduous professional life; the former, reflective, cautious, almost 
Machiavelian, is better suited to treat with the corrupted cabinets 
of old Europe, and to parry their fence by a finoterie not inferior 
to their own. Rogier is the poetry, Lebeau the prose, of the 
revolution.*" 

" The poetry of the revolution? " said Sir Frederick, shaking his 
head. 

" What I" said Madame Marguerite, " do you think that revolu- 
tions are made by the cold-blooded ? Are great changes impressed 
on society by mathematical calculation ? The enthusiasm which 
placed Charles Rogier in the most perilous predicaments, was the 



THE PRINCESS. 



383 



quality most wanting in the moment of conflict. Parties may disagree 
upon shades of opinion ; the ministers of to-day may be inapplicable 
to the exigencies of to-morrow, in times of such rapid transition; 
but Belgium should never forget the men" who^ threw themselves 
headlong into her cause at a moment when everything that was cold 
and calculating deserted it.* Much of the purity and success of our 
revolution is owing to its having fallen into the hands of such men 
as these ; to the happy circumstance that none of the fragments of 
the old diplomacy of Europe meddled with it. The men who made 
it were in earnest : they had no reminiscences, no second thoughts. 
One Mirabeau, one Metternich, would have spoiled the whole affair. 
It was not a democratic movement merely, but a revolution of know- 
ledge, directed by the enlightened class ; with whom science was 
not subordinate to craft, nor virtue stifled by precedent." 

Sir Frederick, though amused and even interested, still listened 
with an air of incredulous attention, as one who sought to shelter 
his prejudices under his scepticism. 

" You asked me," he said, " to meet a society of artists ; but 
since the time of your illustrious namesake Marguerite of the Low 
Countries, no lady was ever so intrenched with ministers." 

"Oh! yes," she said, pointedly; " the Portsmouths and the 

* On the 20th of September the Garde Bourgeoise was disarmed, and all 
the authorities dispersed ; the 23rd was the first day of the battle of Brussels; 
and it was in the midst of this scene of carnage and of anarchy that a provi- 
sional government was formed. Of this, the following proclamation affords 
the evidence. 

" Proclamation. 

" Depuis deux jours Bruxelles est d^pourvue detoute espece d'autorit6 con- 
stitute : Tenergie et la loyautt populaire en ont lenu lieu. Mais tous les bons 
ciloyens comprennent qu'un tel elat de choses ne peut durer sans compro- 
meltre la ville et le triomphe d'une cause dont le succes d'hier a £te~ assured 

" Des ciloyens guides par le seul amour du pays ont accepts pro visoirement 
un pouvoir , qu'ils sont prets a remettre en des mains plus dignes , aussitot 
que les 6temens d'une autoritt nouvelle seront reunis. Ces citoyens sont 
MM. le Baron Vanderlinden d'Hooghvorst , de Bruxelles ; Ch. Rogier , 
avocat , de Litge ; et Jolly , ancien offlcier du genie. 

" lis ont pour secretaires MM. de Coppen et Vanderlinden , de Bruxelles. 

" Bruxelles , 24 septembre , 1850." 



384 



THE PRINCESS. 



Suffolks in your country, in past times : and, methinks, / have seen 
in London women of no greater capacity than my own carrying 
on a sort of diplomacy of the boudoir, ministeresses of the back- 
stairs, with nothing to distinguish their heads but the coronets that 
bound them. I have seen women, and so have you, who had yet 
their lasgia passare, to councils of state and faction, by qualifying 
for their position, just as the Suffolks and the Portsmouths had 
done before them. But what surprises you, Sir Frederick, is, that 
men in power should surround a woman, who has no one worldly 
distinction to recommend her." 

" I see, I feel I have offended you, Madame Marguerite," he in- 
terrupted ; " but I will be frank. There is not one among your 
guests more alive, perhaps, I should say, more infatuated by your 
talents, than myself ; yet, I am a little surprised that a professi- 
onal artist should form the centre of a circle composed of such 
authorities as one only expects to meet in the salons of rank or the 
chambers of royalty." 

" But you forget, Sir Frederick, that these are men who have 
risen from the class to which I belong. They are what your cabi- 
nets would call roturiers. In England, the whole political machine 
stops when you cannot get a lord to govern the springs, or a duke 
to direct the moving power. It is impossible to make you, or your 
caste, feel this ; mats brisons la." 

She rose as she spoke, and advanced towards the portico. 

6 ' En dame qui tient Men son salon, ( as Napoleon termed 
it, ) I must now circulate among my guests." 

Sir Frederick offered her his arm ; but she declined it. 

u You want to shake me off, " he said, laughing ; " but zeal is not 
enough for prosely tism ; perseverance is equally necessary : and I 
have yet," he added, pausing in search of some inquiry to detain 
her, tf so many things to ask, that I cannot so easily dismiss the 
Pythoness from her tripod ! Your ministers are fortunate fellows, 
with women to eulogize, and no opposition to embarrass them." 

" Eulogize! I only speak of them as necessary agents; and, up to 
the moment you see them, I will not answer for men, and, above all, 
for men in power. Fortunately for themselves, they have an opposi- 
tion, a spirituel and a spirited opposition ; though not a party busi- 
ness, such as your English oppositions often are. There is, it is true, 



THE PRINCESS. 



385 



a catholic opposition and a liberal opposition here, each making its 
own attack on the ministers, and often blaming them for the most 
opposite faults ; but this is not a conspiracy against their places, 
and to support goes on his own tack, and does not hesitate to praise 
Every man here where he can." 

" The sure sign, " said Sir Frederick, " of their newness to af- 
fairs." 

" Yes : that newness is their salvation. But, listen : there, is a 
spell that unites all parties in Belgium ! " 

" What divine music ! " he exclaimed. " The waltz, in its mea- 
sure, exerts some strange mystic charm on the organization of us 
Northerns. " 

A fine band was playing the melting measure of a beautiful waltz, 
of that marked and elaborate character which this species of music 
has received at the hands of the great modern masters. 

" How delicious I" said Sir Frederick. " Pray, do not leave me, 
Madame Marguerite 5 the air, the perfume of the flowers, the moving 
music of your own voice — this is life, enjoyment ineffable ! " 

" And how cheaply purchased!" said Madame Marguerite; 
" something cheaper than the faded flowers of Covent- garden, 
Collinet's band, and peas at a guinea a quart." 

" Don't talk of it," said Sir Frederick, with an expression of 
infinite disgust. 

" All here is the spontaneous offering," she said, "of unpurchas- 
able talent. That waltz is the composition of your accomplished 
Polish friend ; another gifted Pole is at the piano-forte ; and the rest 
of the band are all young Belgians, members of the amateur music 
of Brussels." 

" And who is that, not very young, but very animated and grace- 
ful person, who talks to one of the fair waltzers?" 

" An illustrious Polish magnate, Count P , the head of one 

of the noblest families of Poland, by descent, by patriotism, and by 
valour ; of a family, too, illustrated by the glorious devotion of a 
woman. The heroic deeds of the Countess P., his kinswoman, 
will shed a glow upon the history of her country, which not all the 
power of Russia can cloud or conceal from posterity !" 

Sir Frederick was irresistibly affected by the unexpected appear- 
rance of the noble Pole, under circumstances so much at variance 



386 THE PRINCESS. 

with his own preconceived ideas of expatriated nobility. 

4 ' And there," said Madame Marguerite, pointing to a light and 
elegant figure, as it whirled by them : " that dark, intelligent, but 
now reeling head, belongs to our opposition. 'Tis Henry de Brouc- 
kere, the brother of Charles ; more measured than him, but not, 
perhaps, less patriotic or gifted. You must hear him speak. He 
is followed in the dance by the archi-liberal deputy Ernst. He is 
now passing two of our best and most brilliant frondeurs, Jullien 
and Fallon. They are in conversation under the archway : let the 
Abbe de Foere and the Catholic party look to it." 

st But will you not waltz yourself?" said Sir Frederick, passing his 
arm round Madame Marguerite's waist. 

She shrunk from the encircling fold, with a shudder dispropor- 
tioned to an act in which a whole society was engaged with enthu- 
siasm : for in Belgium, as in Germany, the waltz knows no distinction 
of age, rank, or sex; and all yield to its intoxicating involvements, 
its delicious undulations : 

" Pair by pair, and group by group, unite : 
The fairest forms in thousand-folded light 
Still twinkle to and fro." * 

Sir Frederick drew back, hurt, offended. 

" At least," he said, picking up his hat, 4k letme not prevent you 
from doing the honours of your assembly, or distinguishing some of 
your guests by your selection." 

She touched the cordon of an order which hung gracefully over 
her bosom. ui You see/' she said, " I must not dance." 

" You must belong to a very rigid order," he replied, coldly. " I 
remember, some years back, dancing with a very pretty young 
chanoinesse at Vienna, in the full costume of the Barnes Nobles 
of Frankfort." 

' 4 But I am not a pretty young chanoinesse of the Barnes No- 
bles ; I have passed through too dreary a noviciate for the order I 
profess, to indulge in any such intoxicating gaieties. But look around 
you ! There is the beautiful Madame of Bruges ; there is the 



* Wieland's Oberon. 



THE PRINCESS. 



387 



truly elegant Madame Q , with a toilet as Parisian as if fresh 

from the hands of Victorine ; and there is an aristocratic belle, the 
handsomest woman in Belgium, the Countess .' 1 

" I do not mean to waltz," said Sir Frederick, peevishly. 

Ck Then you must move out of the way ; for here they come : 
neither grass nor gravel will form any impediment/ 1 

As she spoke, the animating influence of the waltz of Guillaume 
Tell gave a new elan to the rotatory movements of the party ; and 
the happy Belgians, escaping beyond the fretted roof and pointed 
arches of the gothic portico, were now dancing over the very site 
where the tyrants and executioners of their forefathers, with their 
dusky Numidian guest, once sat in gloomy state, amidst prostrate 
slaves and kneeling courtiers. 

Passing into the gallery behind the portico, Madame Marguerite 
gave to her guest a new impression of the talent by which she was 
surrounded, by pointing his attention to several glowing pictures 
of the modern school, which the liberality and kindness of her bro- 
ther artists had contributed as ornaments of the night's fete. A 
cattle-piece of Verboeckhoven exhibited all the truth and fidelity of 
Paul Potter, united with an ideality, of which Potter had not a 
conception, and of which such subject seem hardly capable. There, 
too, was the great Scripture subjects of Wappers, destined to figure 
in the exhibition of the coming anniversaire, and to recall the an- 
cient reputation of the Flemish school, — the school of Rubens and 
of Quilenus. There, too, were several cabinet pictures of land- 
scapes, of perfect beauty and execution, the works of the modern 
school. 

While gazing on these exquisite specimens, Sir Frederick's atten- 
tion was called off, that he might be presented to their authors ; and 
their intelligent and unaffected conversation heightened even the 
impression made by their works. In reply to his questions on the 
state of the market, in that sense by which the staple commodities 
of genius, as of vulgarer minds, must eventually be tried, he learned 
that the arts in Belgium could hope but for little support from the 
government ; and that the wealthy burghers of Brussels, and the 
manufacturers of Ghent, Liege, and the other industrial communi- 
ties, were the best patrons, (that is. purchasers,) of the works of 
compatriot genius. 



388 



THE PRINCESS. 



The group of artists which now surrounded Madame Marguerite 
and her English guest was from time to time increased by other 
persons, attracted by the presence of the hostess. Among the most 
distinguished of these was the astronomer royal ( as he would be 
termed in England ), Monsieur Quetelet, whose learned writings 
and European reputation had not prepared Sir Frederick for the 
mild simplicity of manner, the frank and benevolent cheeriness, 
which his conversation and address so favourably evinced. When 
will the world learn that modesty is the true mantle of genius ; and 
cease to run after solemn plausibility and arrogating pretension ; 
those infallible attributes of shallowness and inferiority ? 

Monsieur Lesbroussarts, the chef d' instruction publique, was 
presented to Sir Frederick, as one capable of giving him the best 
information upon a subject which must now occupy a prominent 
place in the inquiries of the sensible traveller, as it will in the 
views of such statesmen as must for the future be selected for 
the government of reforming Europe, — the education of the 
people. 

The Baron de Stassart, the Belgian La Fontaine, whose naive 
poetry resolved itself into very vigorous prose during the fierce con- 
tests of the revolution, and whose merits are rather obscured than 
illustrated by his post of president of the senate, at once engaged 
and fixed the attention of the British ex-minister, by the various 
information he so readily imparted, and by the polite and pleasing 
address of the man of the world and practised diplomatist. The 
Counts Vilain X1I1I., De Merode, and D'Arschot, the deputies 
C. Rodenbach, Devaux, and Jullien, were each severally presented ; 
and a general conversation ensued, in which the reigning topics 
were discussed in a manner that gave to the foreigner the most 
favourable impressions of a nation and a society that could produce 
such specimens of its culture and talents. The announcement of 
carriages broke up the circle, just as Madame Marguerite returned, 
after an interval of absence, to do the honours by her English 
guest. 

" You must know the Baron de Stassart," she said, " for many 
reasons : first, for his own sake, because he has passed through 
scenes the most singular and momentous, with honour to himself 
and advantage to his country; and next, because he may be of 



THE PRINCESS. 



389 



use to you, when you pass through Namur. He is governor of 
the province; and then, when you return for the great national 
fete. . . ." 

" But," he interrupted with impatient vehemence, " where am I 
to go?— when to return? for by this time you must be convinced 
that my movements are no longer under my own direction." 

" Under whose, then?" she asked gaily. 

" Yours, " was the abrupt reply. 

" Mine !" She shrugged, and hummed in a low voice, 

" 1 Ma foy, aultre part fay promis; 
C'est quit a quit, et bons amis.' " 

" You are taken in the fact, Madame Marguerite, " said a young 
Belgian amateur. " Every one present is dying to hear you sing the 
madrigal which you have discovered in the album of the Damoisel- 
les de Behercke and Wilhelma del Vael. " 

" And set to such an appropriate melody, " added Monsieur Fetis, 
in the indulgence of true talent. 

" Well, who will give me their arm to the piano?" she asked, 
looking round. 

Every arm was offered : Sir Frederick's was taken ; and his eyes 
(as she sang in her sweet, deep, contralto voice) were alternately 
riveted on her face and on the paper placed before her on the music- 
desk; where, in the good old French, written and spoken in the 
court of the Duchess Marguerite, were copied the following lines 
from the album of the sixteenth century :— 

CHANSON. 

Vostre humeur m'a point fasche" , 

Pour vous cognoistre distraicle j 
Ma foy , j'estois bien empesche" 

De faire un' honeste retraicte : 
Ma foy , aultre part i'ay promis— 
C'est quit a quit , et bons amis. 

Je ne vous aimois seulement 
Que pour vous cognoistre rauable ; 

30. 



THE PRINCESS. 



Je suis subiect au changement, 

Car chacun aime son semblable ; 
Ainsy n'y a-l-il de crime commis— 
C'est quit a quit, et bons amis. 

Lorsque i'estois votre cceur , 

Seul aussi vous eslies mon ame ; 
Je changeois de serviteur 

Lorsque vous changies de dame : 
Le changement nous est permis — 
C'est quit a quit , et bons amis. 

Adieu , nous nous verrons un jour , 

Pour raconter de nos fortunes ; 
Oblions donques nos amours , 

Quoy qu'elles soient bien importunes : 
Qui plus y pert , plus y a mis— 
C'est quit a quit , et bons amis. 

There was something in the words of this song that went home 
to the heart and bosom of Sir Frederick Mottram with an effect the 
most inexplicable. It not only entranced him by the arch and em- 
phatic manner in which it was sung, but it seemed to have a 
particular and personal application, that plunged him back into past 
events, and confused and involved him in a reverie that left him 
alone at the piano-forte, with his eyes and thoughts riveted on the 
written words of a song composed near three centuries back. 

Meantime, Madame Marguerite, overwhelmed by the brilliant 
plaudits which had followed her exquisite song, had taken the arm 
of the illustrious Count Plater, and escaped from the hot and crowd- 
ed gallery into the open air. 

It was some time before Sir Frederick found her alone, and stand- 
ing near the portico. Either she did not, or affected not to observe 
his approach ; for she moved on to a marble vase filled with bou- 
quets of fresh flowers, from which she was selecting a bunch of 
pensees, as he reached and addressed her. 

" You perceive, Madame Marguerite," Jie said abruptly, " that you 
make your ' honeste ret?*aicte' jn vain." 

She presented him the flowers she had culled, with a smiling and 
expressive air. 



THE PRINCESS. 



"I do not want your pensees, " he said, rejecting the offering 
peevishly ; "I am stiifocated by my own. Look at the effect of that 
moonlight breaking into silver fragments on the dark masses of the 
forest, and lighting up a sort of natural arcade of templing fresh- 
ness : will you trust yourself with one so dull and miserable, for a 
moonlight ramble of half-an-hour ?" 

"An arcade!" said Madame Marguerite, " it is what recall a 
wolf-tract! I will not venture!" And she turned away; but he 
intercepted her path. 

"You must hear me for a moment," he said vehemently ; " and 
then, if you will, 4 quit a quit, ' but not 'bons amis! '—nay, you 
had best stay and hear me: or, go where you will, I shall follow 
you, like your shadow, if indeed shadow you have. " 

"Oh! you take me for Madame Peter Schlemil!" she replied 
gravely. "Well, once for all, speak, and I will answer. " 

She permitted him to draw her arm under his, as they walked to 
and fro amid the illuminated trees. 

"First, then; when does your Princess leave Brussels? what is 
her route, and what do you know of my wife's projected visit to 
I her friend's castle on the Rhine ? Of course, you know everything— 
influence even their puppet movements ; you are of their confede- 
! racy." 

" You do me too much honour, " she said. " Madame Marguerite 
the artist, who lives, or rather, who has hitherto lived, by her la- 
bour, might be permitted to serve, but never admitted to the equality 
of confidence with such high and puissant dames. I know, how- 
ever, that the Princess had a letter from Lady Frances Mottram, to 
announce her intended arrival, wind and weather permitting, in a 
few days. But, doubtless, you also have heard from her to the 
same purport?" 

" No, indeed I have not. But, pray lay aside for once your tone 
of mystification, your jesuitism, and answer me frankly. Do you 
accompany this idle, frivolous, and dissipated party, who make 
their tour to that eternal Rhine an excuse for the neglect of every 
duty at home ? Am I to understand that this is your last evening at 
Brussels?" 

t; It was to have been. But the Princess of Schaffenhausen means 
now to await the arrival of her English friends ; and has taken a 



392 



THE PRINCESS. 



hint from my soiree, to give them a fete here before they proceed. 
It is to be a sort of court dinner, a la grande Buchesse; and we 
are to scour the country for a d'Aremberg, a d'Ursel, a Trazigny, 
or any fragment of the Altesses Bruxelloises we can collect. In 
short, we are to toast the Orange Boven in draughts of Metternich's 
Johannisberg, and show our contempt of citizen kings, republican 
ministers, and roturier society, a toute outrance ! I should not 
wonder if we formed the nucleus of a counter-revolution. " 

" Psha ! nonsense ! Your Princess is mad, or something worse ! 
But what are you, who hang upon her protection, and administer 
to her— her follies, her caprices, to say the least of them? " 

" Alas ! I am, what we all are— the creature of circumstances, an 
atom in the vortex of events : and, whatever you may think, or the 
world suppose, the Princess of Schaffenhausen has been everything 
to me. I owe to her the bread I eat, the air I breathe. It was her 
effort, her exertion, that rescued me from want, from crime, per- 
haps,— and, oh ! too certainly, from despair. " 

"Good God! how you talk!" said Sir Frederick, more touched 
by the passionate melancholy of her voice, than by the words she 
uttered : " with your talents, your intellect, it must always have 
depended on yourself to command success. " 

" You would not say so, if you knew my story, " she said, sigh- 
ing deeply. " It is one of the sad and incredible romances of real 
life, which fiction would shrink from relating. It is a story of strange 
incidents, from the moment of my birth in the Hospital of St. John 
of Bruges, to the moment in which here, in the Forest of Soignes, 
within view of that glittering fabric, of those brilliant and joyous 
groups, I now lean on your arm. Seduced into confidence by words 
so winning, by a voice that is itself seduction, I am led to forfeit 
some of the unblenching spirit that has hitherto borne me above the 
weakness of complaint, and to confess to you that I have been 
crushed to the earth, to a state more humble than that of the worm 
that crawls on it ; for I once occupied that bed in the parish work- 
house, where you shed tears over the " 

1 cannot let you go on— not for a moment, at least, " said Sir 
Frederick, in great emotion. 

She too was weeping. He led her forward, grasping with a con- 
vulsive movement the hand which hung over his arm. They had 



THE PRINCESS. 



393 



proceeded a few moments in silence ; the lights in the pavilion shone 
dimly through the intervening trees ; they were at the opening of a 
glen, with 4 thickets overgrown, grotesque and wild,' and he was 
still hurrying her on with, perhaps, unconscious and unintentional 
rapidity. His breath was short, his step uncertain, and his thoughts 
a chaos of remembrances, conjectures and doubts, the flash of new 
convictions, and the influence of passions, to which mind and ima- 
gination now lent their dangerous spells : yet he was silent. 

"No," said Madame Marguerite, sternly, and suddenly drawing 
up; 'I will go no farther. Let us stop here. Here we have still 
the forest and its vast silence around us; the pure light of that 
sparkling firmament above us : here we are still in the presence of 
the upholders of an ennobling cause, of the defenders of an eman- 
cipated people. If you are sufficiently interested for me, to listen 
to a few details, which may in future place us in the only position 
in which we can stand towards each other, seat yourself here. 
Shall I go on?" 

" Not, " he said, throwing himself on a bank beside the shattered 
trunk of an oak on which she was now seated, " not until— come 
what come may— I unequivocally declare my admiration, my grati- 
tude, my passionate devotion! Vague, mysterious, almost awful 
as are the emotions of this moment, one sentiment is predominant ; 
partaking of all that friendship has most permanent, and love most 
ardent. Whatever may be the result of such an avowal to one so 
cold, so regulated, so proud, and so ambitious; for all this, I am 
aware you are— I know not : but, in a word, Madame Marguerite, 
I— I love you ! " 

" You said so once before," she replied, " in such a spot, on 
such a night as this ! " 

" But not to you— not to you," he exclaimed, trembling with an 
emotion so strange, so wild, as to shake his whole frame, — " I 
guess— 1 know to whom you allude ; but to adore you, is to offer a 
tribute to her merits! There is a resemblance between you; a 
strange and almost maddening resemblance, which has long struck 
me; which convinces me that the unfortunate, whose eyes you 
closed, was some way related to you. But there is still a difference 
between what you are, andwhat she was, as wide as between the all I 
felt then, and the all I feel now ; between the effervescence of boyish 

30.. 



394 



THE PRIiNCESS. 



caprice, and the deep-seated, high-directed, irrevocable devotedness 
of manhood ; of that age, when man is in the prime of passion, as 
of reason: and when woman, retaining the charm of youth, gives 
to its allurements the more binding spell of mind. Oh ! you have 
seen and known too much, not to have discovered that all which is 
worth possessing in this melancholy farce, in which we are forced to 
play a blind and mysterious part— the all that is really good, is such 
a union as it is possible for us to form. I beseech you, hear me 
out ! You are no longer a girl ; and 1 am, in mind, even older 
than in years. We have both been miserable; we have been so, 
according to your bitter allusion, from an early estrangement from 
your goddess, Nature. Let us return, then, to her dictates, to her 
laws, while yet her best gifts are ours. I am weary of the world : 
the world is weary of me. I have found you here, in a region of 
enchantment. All that is beautiful in nature, all that is intoxicating 
in art, surrounds you ; but the paradise is only borrowed. Yours 
to-night, but whose to-morrow ? A woman's, who has won it by 
arts you have scorned to practise ; a woman who, were she worthy 
to be your friend, your protectress, would not now be mistress 
here. Let me, then, press upon your apprehension the uncertainty 
of your tenure of the favour of this bad or foolish woman ; the possi- 
bility of falling back, and at a time of life when the energies of youth, 
the moral force of that prime of womanhood you are now enjoying, 
may— can no longer exist, upon unavailing and unrequited industry. 
1 have shed tears in the dreary darksome room of the sublime 
paintress of the incidents of the Four Days; and I know what you 
have endured, what you must again endure, should your capricious 
Princess drop you, as she took you up. Let me press on you, then, 
the prospect of that worst of all human miseries— the isolation, the 
desolation of unprovided old age, ' la Vieillesse Malheureuse,' 
the hospital, the workhouse! Y'ou shudder; but remember, what 
beauty, what sensibility, what talents—" 

"—We have seen brought there !" interrupted Madame Margue- 
rite, in a deep, low voice, and covering her face with her hands. 

" Well ! — yes— we have. But instead of making that a subject ; 
of eternal reproach to me, use it as a warning, an example, a possi- j 
bility for yourself. Listen to that divine music ; look at that syba- 
rite scene : they are but the borrowed sources of a transient delight. 



the princess. 



395 



But there are regions as delicious, music as divine, luxuries'as refined, 
and minds as honest, as those you have here collected round you : 
and, for your own sex, you are already beyond and above them. 
In London, you may still have your wits, your authors, your artists, 
your statesmen, about you. Then let me implore you to reflect 
that there is a noble fortune, a devoted heart, at your disposal ; and 
that upon whatever terms you may please to accept it, I offer you a 
life of " 

" —Infamy!" she interrupted, coolly. 

" What jargon I" he replied, in a tone of deep provocation. 

" You would call it so, if offered to your wife," she said. 

" Good God ! there is no communing with you. If these are your 
opinions, if these are your prejudices, why have you thrown yourself 
in my way? why have you sought to pique me into passion, to warm 
me into the highest order of admiration? why have you taken pains 
to display a mind that has commanded my respect, a mysterious con- 
duct that has worked on my imagination, talents that have enraptured 
my senses, and graces that have lent themselves to every transition ? 
You cannot suppose that I am such a dolt as to believe that you 
have done this, all this, in a spirit of fanatical liberalism, to work 
a political conversion, and bring over one proselyte to a cause in 
which you can have no interest beyond that of abstract opinion!" 

" Why not?" said Madame Marguerite, spiritedly. " What have 
not women done for religious proselytism ! what are they not doing 
every day ! What oceans have they not been tossed on ! what distant 
regions have they not traversed ! what deserts have they not perished 
in!" 

" Religion!" he said; " that is another thing." 

4 ' Be it so : but have earthly interests no claims on our sympa- 
thies? Is that great faith which concerns entire humanity, the 
greatest happiness of society itself, to have no female advocate ? Is 
the moral, social, and political elevation of the species mere opinion, 
ever to be discussed, and never acted on? Oh! trust me, sir; if I 
have had the designs you attribute to me, they would have been a 
noble mission ! But the plain fact is , that impulse, not system, has 
dictated all that I save said, that bears on the country of my acci- 
dental birth and free selection. Belgium has been misrepresented to 
England ! The old cabinets of Europe have spared no pains to betray 



398 



THE PRINCESS. 



her cause, or to vilify her upholders! You are among those who 
influence opinion ! You belong to a party, sovereign by its wealth 
over that branch of the British press, which sells its honour, its inde- 
pendence, the interests of humanity, at a price ! You are listened to 
from the benches of the British senate ; and though no man is changed, 
save by time, and the workings of his own perceptions, still the way 
may be cleared for him, for the free and fair exercise of his faculties. 
You have accused me of throwing myself in your way ! I have but 
availed myself of the coincidence of our pursuits, and of our travel- 
ling contingencies. Had you ever painted a picture, or composed a 
tale, you would understand how admirably accident produces effects, 
and combines events, which might appear the results of deep and 
well-directed study. As one attached to the order of the Beguines, 
and wearing the habit when I perform its offices, I have frequently 
crossed your path under circumstances too amusing to escape 
my wayward fancy ; and I have availed myself of them to the full 
bent of my joyous humour, at your expense. I rated you in the 
hospital at Bruges ; 1 piqued your self-love in the treckschuyt at 
Ghent ; I met you in the tower of Charles the Fifth ; gave you 
my blessing on the Kantur, and mystified you in the church of 
St.Beghe!" 

w So," exclaimed Sir Frederick, folding his arms and throwing 
himself back, " you are, then, as I often suspected, la Soeur Greite! i 
But pray go on." 

" Our mutual love of the arts has more than once brought us also 
together, when it was in my power, at least, to amuse you ; and 
the Princess's loitering mode of travelling, her various stations— for 
she is a semi-devote, and has her casino in the Beguinage of Ghent, 
her apartment a la I)u Beff'and in her St. Joseph, in Namur, and i 
a pied-a-terre wherever taste or caprice may direct ; her interests, | 
too— for she is busy improving her property in the neighbourhood 
of Brussels." 

" So, then, all was accident, caprice, the whim of the moment, 
or the habit of mystification ?" 

"1 do not say that," observed Madame Marguerite, dropping her ; 
voice and eyes; ct I do not say that there was not an arriere-pen- \ 
see, a passion which, to a woman's heart, is " 

"Gracious Heaven !" said Sir Frederick, seizing her hands ; "why 



THE PRINCESS. 397 

not begin there? and having come to that, why should we not under- 
stand each other at once?" 

After a moment's pause, she said, coldly, withdrawing her hands, 
tu I will tell you why." 

"Well," he said, with peevish impatience ; "now, then, for more 
logic, more finesse, more eloquence, and another Jesuitical esca- 
pade. " 

I "Are you disposed to hear me? or shall we return to the com- 
pany?" 

" Oh, certainly, disposed— most disposed. Patience perforce, I 
am willing to hear what you may have to— mystify me further with." 
1 "It is no mystification," said Madame Marguerite, in a voice of 
some emotion ; "it shall be a brief detail." 

Sir Frederick again seated himself. 

" The great movement of Europe, amidst its direful epic, has pre- 
sented many episodes of domestic romance which fiction would 
scarcely have dared to imagine. A young Irishman, with gentle 
blood in his veins, and all the excitements of the troublous times of 
Ireland beating at his heart, joined the standard of rebellion in 

• Ninety-eight. Escaping from an ignominious death, he entered into 
the French service; and, with the usual fate of a stranger and a re- 
fugee, spilt his blood thanklessly, and fell unrequited, almost un- 
known. The distinguishing feature of his short, gallant, and luck- 
less life, was his imprudent union with an illustrious Polish lady, 
who, an exile like himself, had followed her veteran father, the friend 
of Kosciusko, through the campaign of Ninety-nine. In a moment 

i of alarm and danger, she had been rescued from a band of Cossacks 
by the Irishman, and she recompensed his chivalrous protection 
with (all she had to give) her heart and hand. His death, which 
happened when she was on the point of becoming a mother, left her 
bereft of everything; and, in obedience to his injunctions, she pro- 
ceeded to seek a wealthy lady in England, his sister, one whose life, 
like his own, had been one of vicissitude. She had reached Bruges 
on her way to England, when her resources became exhausted, and 
her strength failed her. Reduced to the last point of destitution, 
she was visited by the sisters of the Beguinage, and by them conveyed 
to the Hospital of St. John; and there, giving birth to a daughter, she 
—died. 



398 



THE PRIINCESS. 



" The orphan child inherited from its hapless parent nothing hut 
a tahlet with a few memoranda, a golden reliquary, and a seal with 
a crest and an Irish motto. She was baptised by the name of the 
saint on whose day she was presented at the font, and was taken 
home by the Sisters to their Beguinage. Becoming the plaything of 
the Sisterhood, she displayed such talents as interested their feelings, 
and promised many future advantages from such a person becoming 
a member of an order then fast falling into insignificance. Quick and 
passionate in all pursuits, her residence at Bruges and Ghent was 
favourable to the acquirement of arts which were congenial to her 
temperament. 

" She had attained to her fifteenth year in all the force of health 
and precocity of character, which a life so active and practical as hers 
was calculated to produce, when the Abbess of the convent of En- 
glish ladies at Bruges applied to the Beguines for a young person 
who could act as a dame de compagnie to a Catholic lady of rank, 
and superintend the education of her daughter. The name of the 
lady was that which was written in the tablets of the orphan's 
mother ; and the Sisters saw a strange coincidence in the fact, and 
gave their young protegee permission to accept the office. 

" There was something extraordinary in the reception of the 
young Beguine on her arrival in England. When the certificates 
of her birth and baptism, her seal, reliquary, and memoranda 
were spread before her new protectress, they excited an attention 
and interest far disproportionate to the seeming occasion. Nume- 
rous questions were asked of her, but asked in vain. All she had 
learned of herself from the good Sisters who had brought her up, 
was the name of her parents, and the date of their marriage, which 
was registered in her tablets ; and the first interview ended in an 
extorted promise of secrecy concerning the circumstances of her 
birth and breeding, save only as regarded the name of her noble 
mother, which was given to herself. The grave, plain habit in 
which she had arrived was exchanged for that beautiful and splendid 
Polish costume in which she is represented in that fine picture painted 
of her at his own request by Hopner, Avhich once decorated the 
walls of the crimson room at Mottram Hall." 

" This unavailing cruelty," exclaimed Sir Frederick, " what has 
it to do with present circumstances? You knew, then, this Polish- 



THE PROCESS. 



399 



Flemish girl in your Beguinage 5 you were contemporaries, and no 

doubt in some way related,— a half-sister, perhaps " 

" You promised to hear me out," interrupted Madame Margue- 
rite. " The part afterwards played by the little Polish girl, found 
amidst the snows of Russia, and exhibited in the fashionable circles 
of London by tonish sensibility, was rehearsed in Mottram Hall. 
Its beautiful mistress was a true Irishwoman, prone to all manner 
of excitement, greedy of sensation, and full of aristocratic prestiges. 
She showed off the grand-daughter of the friend of Kosciusko, 
turned her misfortunes to a romance, and deceived her coarse, 
astute, and bigoted Protestant husband,— who hated all that was 
Catholic in religion or liberal in politics, — to believe whatever she 
pleased. 

" The girl had become her passion; and when her son arrived 
for his first vacation from Oxford, his ' boyish caprice' for her was 
laughed at, and encouraged, by the imprudent mother, till it as- 
sumed a serious form. An offer of marriage was made at a distant 
day, ratified by a written contract, signed, sealed, and sworn to, on 
such a night, at such an hour, and in such a place as this. There 
was but one witness— an unexpected, an unseen witness,— the 
mother of the young parvenu, who then disclosed to him the secret 
of her niece's birth and previous vocation. In vain she opposed to 
her son's passion her own objections, and the circumstances of the 
case; and, as a last resource, she confessed the whole to her 
obdurate husband. The young man was sent from home, an atta- 
che \.o Vienna. The object of his ' boyish caprice,' maddened by 
insolent contumely and coarse reproach, was turned adrift, to labour, 
beg, or perish, as she might. The simple habits of her former life 
had become disgustful : she had learned to love, to live, as if life 
were but a splendid trance ; and when she was thus rudely awakened 
from her transient dream of bliss, another no less powerful excite- 
ment—indignation, seized on her being, in all the force in which it 
seizes on high-minded and feeling spirits, when thus oppressed, 
deceived, and wronged. Helpless, hopeless, with none to vouch for 
or to recommend her, her talent and acquirements availed her no- 
thing. Still she strove to work her way to an honest subsistence. 
But in that most humiliating, that only line open to female industry, 
which unites all that is confidential in trust with all that is servile in 



400 



THE PRINCESS. 



position, — her very appearance was against her. Her extreme 
youth, her personal attractions, were insuperable impediments in 
her way. Besides, there was a brand upon her : she was born in a 
foreign land, heaving with revolutionary convulsion; she inherited 
her mother's temperament, and her father's kindling imagination ; 
and even when her accomplishments opened to her the salons of 
the wealthy, the poetry of her song and the subject of her pencil 
furnished time-serving envy with the occasions to mark her for 
proscription. 

" But your feelings writhe under these details : to the result, 
then. Disappointment, failure, poverty, sickness, a wretched asy- 
lum, and, to finish life as she began it— an hospital bed." 

" There, there ! " interrupted her agitated auditor ; "let that 
suffice : let your desire and power to torture rest satisfied with the 
pangs they have inflicted : let your tale of vengeance end there !" 

" But it did not so end; — she escaped in delirium from the 1 
workhouse ; was received, sheltered, and when at length restored to 
comparative health, enabled to return to Bruges, by one whom sorrow 
had made compassionate — a poor Sister of Charity passing through 
London from Ireland on her way to Bruges. There the wanderer 
resumed the habit and profession of her indulgent order, but more 
as a protection than a vocation ; and there were no qualifying, 
or rather disqualifying, institutions to impede herway ; she became i 
an artist of some note,— economized sufficient means to study in 
Italy, and, on her return, attracted the attention of a distinguished 
amateur— the Prince of Schaffenhausen. His orders were munificent, 
calculated to inspire and to recompense genius. But he stopped 
not there— he had other views ; and employed all the arguments which 
you have now advanced, to rob genius of its independence and virtue I 
of its dignity. Like you, he failed : the result was more favourable 
than such sacrifices usually obtain ; and the Princess, his widow, is | 
now the only friend and protectress of her who addresses you. " 

A loud, sharp exclamation burst from the lips of Sir Frederick i 
Mottram. 

She permitted the burst of passion to subside, till its last sob | 
broke down into convulsive sighs.— Some minutes of silent emotion 
succeeded. 

" Shall I go on?" she asked. 



THE PRINCESS. 



401 



He replied by a faint pressure of her hand, as it passed over his 
row to remove the branches of a shrub which impeded the free cir- 
culation of air. 

" The rest," she continued, "is soon told. While residing in the 
Princess's family in London, 1 had frequent opportunities of seeing 
you, of witnessing your habits. I heard you in the House of Com- 
mons, saw you at the Opera, heard of you as the frequent theme of 
conversation and of comment in the Princess's circles. I watched you 
on the very evening when you sat opposite to her and Lady Frances, 
and when the abruptness of your action and frequent direction of 
your glass to their box betrayed the torture of some uncontrollable 
deep emotion. 1 had an appointment on that night in the hospital 
ward of a workhouse with a poor dying sister artist, whose story 
was almost a repetition of my own ; and it struck me, that you 
might, with a beneficial effect on your inflamed and distempered 
feelings, take a lesson from her deathbed-side worth all that precept 
ever produced. You were unhappy amidst every thing that life and 
society can afford to multiply enjoyment and ensure content. You 
were unhealthy in the prime of manhood, from a passive yielding 
to the circumstances and accidents of a false position, from an indo- 
lent addiction to the artificial habits of that society into which mis- 
directed ambition and the undue influence of others placed you. 
You wanted rousing, you required a blow ; I struck it boldly, for I 
wanted — my revenge !" 

She paused. Her auditor, — if indeed he was her auditor; if a 
discovery so stunning , if the dead restored to life, if the recapitula- 
tion of events and sufferings which gave to every word the sharpness 
of the dagger's point, had not blunted even remorse itself,— her au- 
ditor remained silent. He lay stretched and motionless on the mossy 
bank where he had lately lounged in passionate emotion. His head 
was buried in his hands ; and his breast heaved with a difficult and 
heavy respiration. AVhatever were his efforts to recover his poise of 
mind, and fling off the oppression which weighed down his very 
physical being, their success was doubtful and slow. A vague and 
inextricable confusion, a tingling sensation through the whole frame, 
( such as, it is said, accompanies the return to life of the half- 
drowned, ) the rush of memory with its pains, of remorse with its 
pangs— the past,— the present, with its delicious and empassioned 

31. 



402 



THE PRINCESS. 



convictions— succeeded to each other, like the phantoms of a pertur- 
bed vision ; and it was long ere the blood flowed freely through his 
veins, or the external world reassumed its empire over his senses. * 

When once more aroused to the consciousness of his position, 
when he again breathed without effort the delicious freshness of the 
breeze impregnated with the perfume of many a night-blowing 
flower ; the tinkling murmur of the rills which fed the illuminated 
fountain, the forest, the many-twinkling firmament that canopied 
his head, were objects that soothed and renovated him. 

He was alone. The sorceress who had worked so singular a re- 
vulsion of his whole being was gone. Strange to say, he felt relieved 
by this conviction. He arose, and plunged deeper and deeper 
into the intricacies of the wooded knolls, till their dark, sequestered 
wildness , and a rush of waters across a narrow glen, obliged him 
to return on his steps. He paused, in fear of encountering the gay 
groups of the Pavilion of the Groenendael ; but the toll of some distant 
clock, borne on the silence of the night, released him from the ap- 
prehension.— It struck two ! — It is not alone when 6 it treads on 
flowers,' that the foot of Time falls noiseless and unperceived. 
Strong emotions, whatever be the cause which rouses the passions 
and agitates the mind, are too preoccupying to admit of the slow 
counting of the hours. 

With slow and reluctant steps, Sir Frederick returned towards 
the rendez-vous de chasse. But there was now no reflection of 
bright lights, no sound of pleasant music, to mock his gloom, or to 
startle the timidity of his shaken frame. Silence and darkness the 
most absolute prevailed. He entered the Gothic portico : it was 
empty, as the ruined porch of some deserted monastery. He exami- 
ned the folding doors of the saloon behind it : they were fastened 
within. He drew back for a short distance, and threw an examining 
glance over the whole pile of building. The conjunction of the grey 
towers of the ancient maison de chasse with its beautiful Gothic 
addition, was more apparent by the glimmering of the starry firma- 
ment, than when a glare of lights in the foreground had thrown the 
remoter parts of the dusky pile into the depths of shadow. Not even 
the twinkling light of a candle, beaming through a loop-hole, testified 
that the building was inhabited. The whole scene, as he gazed on 
it, in its contrast to what it had been a few hours before, appeared 



THE PRINCESS. 



403 



like some magical illusion. The brilliancy, the loveliness, the music, 
the buzz of mirth, of wit, and of intellect, had subsided and disap- 
peared with the enchantress whose spells might be thought to have 
evoked them. 

Through the intervening branches of the forest, one spark of light 
shone distant, like a fairy star. Sir Frederick followed its flickering 
and uncertain ray. Another shot forth, and he at length perceived 
that he was in an avenue cut through the wood, which led from the 
Pavilion to the village, and which had been partially lighted for the 
convenience of the departing guests. Pursuing the avenue for some 
considerable distance, he reached the guinguette where he had left 
his carriage, and found his courier asleep on a bench under the vine- 

i covered shed. He appeared to have smoked himself into forgetfulness, 
as well as the postilion, who, stretched almost under the horses' feet, 
gave audible indications of the facility of repose to the rude and 
weary. The yellow flash of dawn was already tinging the forest's 
tops ; a few of the villagers were already issuing forth to their early 

I harvest labours ; and it was broad daylight when Sir Frederick's 
caleche drove under the porte-cochere of the Hotel de Flandres , 
where his new valet-de-chambre , as he attended him to his bed- 

; room, presented him a letter. He was too exhausted, too absorbed, 
to have opened or read it, had not the black seal attracted his atten- 
tion. There was a magic in the device, that roused every faculty 
back to life. He dismissed his servant, and gave himself up to the 
perusal. 



" Farewell !— The explanation which has taken place, will sug- 
gest to you the necessity of a firm and final farewell. Should this 
imply the sacrifice of a passing predilection, I claim and command 
that sacrifice— a slight compensation for the infliction of years of 
suffering and vicissitude. Any effort on your part to evade this 
conclusion, will compel me to throw myself on the protection of 
your wife, through the Princess of Schaffenhausen. I can never 



TO THE RIGHT HON. SIR F. MOTTRAM, BART., 
HOTEL DE FLANDRES. 



Midnight. 




404 



THE PRINCESS. 



meet you again, unless presented to you by Lady Frances Mottram. 

" You will offer me (as to a poor relation ) some certain means 
of existence for the future. The past renders it impossible that I 
should accept of such tardy liberality ; the present leaves it unne- 
cessary for me to do so. I am as wealthy as yourself; for my 
means are equal to, and even beyond, my wishes. They are within 
myself, a faculty which the world can neither give nor take away. 

" Pursue, then, your route. Bring your restored health, your 
renovated mind, to bear on subjects of vital importance to your 
country, — its foreign policy. Every step, from the capital of free, 
young Belgium, to the capitals of prostrate Germany, will offer facts 
for investigation, a text for comment. Pursue that route with one 
to whom time, common interests, and solemn vows have irrevocably 
bound you. Look to your wife, and live with her;— literally— not 
nominally. You made great sacrifices to obtain her ; make one 
more to recover and reform her. Like you, she is the victim of 
foregone conclusions. Grant to her errors the indulgence you so 
much require for your own ; and forget, for the sake of what you 
owe to her— to yourself— the object of a fantastic passion, the pas- 
sing dream of the two great epochs of human life, — always, as 
bearing on your destinies, a phantom, and now — nothing. 

" Marguerite." 

This letter, frequently perused, was answered before the agita- 
tion it produced permitted Sir Frederick to seek for the much- 
wanted oblivion of repose ; and the answer was despatched by the 
porter of the hotel, before any one of his own servants was in 
attendance. 

lt A MADAME MARGUERITE, AUX SOLNS DE MADAME LA PRIIVCESSE 
DE SGHAFFENH AUSEN , HOTEL DE GROENENDAEL. 

" You shall be obeyed, to the letter, by the greatest sacrifice your 
vengeance could impose, or your indifference dictate. Beyond this, 
I do not think you have a right to command. I shall make no 
effort to meet you again. Your apparitions have ever been fatal to 
my peace, and perilous to my honour. I owe to you my first false 



405 



THE PRINCESS. 



step in life ; to you I owe its last and deepest sufferings ; and— but 
complaint is weakness, recrimination vain. Farewell — forever! 

" F. M." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

GREAT LADIES. 

The multitude of strangers who had visited Brussels, attracted by 
the ceremony of the royal baptism, or infected with the epidemic of 
the Rhine, had now disappeared from the capital of the Low 
Countries ; and a comparative silence and solitude reigned in La 
Haute Fille, strongly contrasted with its recent bustle. The King 
and Queen of the Belgians had retreated for necessary repose to their 
villa of Laeken, to await the period of their departure for the pro- 
vinces of Namur and Liege. The Chambers were occupied with 
mere details of business, to which the vigilance of the opposition 
brought those 6 discussions zntempestives,' that always follow an 
attempt of the government to disburse the public money, even when 
letters and the arts make their demands on the exchequer. The 
ministers of finance and of the interior were kept on the alert; but 
amidst the endless though necessary details of a complicated budget, 
nothing of deeper interest was before the House, than such questions 
as the claim of the Abbe de Pradt for his pension, and the letter of 
the French ambassador to solicit its liquidation.* Neitheir natives 

* The Abbe" de Pradt, at the general restoration of 1815, had surrendered 
his archbishopric of Malines at the desire of King William (who probably did 
not like such a mnlli-scribbling politician for a subject), and in consideration 
of this had received a pension of 12,000 francs. During the revolution this 
pension had been suspended ; and the French Government having applied for 
its payment, the affair was treated as an undue interference, by Monsieur 
Dumortier, and other deputies; and reflections were cast on the ministers, 
as not sufficiently alive to the national honour and independance. 



31.. 



406 



THE PRINCESS. 



nor foreigners, therefore, found amusement to detain them in the 
upper city : the former retreated to their country seats ; the latter to the 
assigned fashionable points of legitimate and established travelling : 
and the mansions of the Rue Ducale were closed, and the portals of 
the Bellevue and the Flandres were silent and deserted. 

The good old quarters of La Basse Ville meantime exhibited 
much the same aspect as they have done through a sweep of centu- 
ries. La Grande Place, with its beautiful monuments of the middle 
ages, and that noblest of all, the Hotel-de- Ville, the capitol of 
Belgium freedom, presented, as for the last five hundred years it 
has done, the rural commerce of Brabant and Flanders, in bustling 
activity. Waggons of luscious fruits, panniers of bright-coloured 
vegetables, pots and baskets of shrubs and flowers, were arranged 
in front of the Broodhuys,* occupying a spot once wet with the 
blood of martyred patriots. Groups, as fantastically dressed as 
any which Teniers painted, or Callot engraved, circulated in 
noisy confusion; giving a life and a colouring to the beautiful 
and ancient mart, which contrasted strangely with the quietude 
of the Place Royale and the deserted Park (so widely diffe- 
rent, though so closely approximating). Still lower down in the 
town, near the Porte de Laeken, the neighbourhood of the canal 
presented its usual commercial groups, the Wapping of Brussels; 
and everywhere the manufactories of thread, of woollen cloths, of 
calicoes and muslins, and of the thousand other articles of use or 
luxury which support the multitudinous population of the city, were 
teeming with life and movement, as in the fashionable season : such 
branches of industry know no vacation, and continue their wonted 
hum of activity in the absence, as in the presence, of their fancied 
protectors. 

In a busy street of La Basse Ville stands the Groenendael, one 

* The Broodhuys, a beautiful specimen of the fantastic Flemish architec- 
ture, is one of those corporation buildings, which have their political antitypes 
in the halls of the London Companies. It was rebuilt in 1518, and restored 
and embellished a century later by the Infanta Isabella, who placed in front 
of it a statue of the virgin, with the inscription "A peste, fame, et bello, 
libera nos , Maria Pacis. ? The Counts d'Egmont and de Horn received 
the last consolations of religion in this edifice, on their way to the scaffold. 



THE PRINCESS. 



407 



of Ihe most ancient hotels of Brussels, since the destruction of the 
famous Corbeau. To this hotel, the flight of the birds of passage 
made no difference. Its rafted and wainscoted chambers had their 
usual complement of guests : Belgian Barons of the old Austrian 
stamp, who had not made up their minds to cut William or to op- 
pose Leopold ; Orange manufacturers, with whom the regime which 
sets their looms in motion is the regime par excellence ; or coun- 
try gentlemen of all or any factions, whom business, and not plea- 
sure, had brought to the capital. 

On the morning which succedeed the fete given by Madame Mar- 
guerite, the journals of the day announced the arrival of the Princess 
of Schaffenhausen at this hotel. Both these events were thus recor- 
ded, under the head of ' Nouvelles de la Joumee :' — 

" Last evening, Madame Marguerite, so favourably known as one 
' nee pour tous les arts,'' gave a fete-champetre, on the occasion 
of her retiring from a profession she has exercised with so much 
respectability and talent, and, it is hoped, with substantial success. 
Most of our celebrated artists, litterateurs, and scientific professors 
were invited, together with MM. les Ministres, and many of the 
authorities : some French and English celebrities also joined the 
brilliant party, which was singularly favoured by the fineness of the 
evening." 

" Last night, or rather this morning, her Highness the Princess 
of Schaffenhausen arrived at the Hotel de Groenendael, where her 
suite and carriages have for some lime awaited her. The wealthy 
and widowed Princess has been visiting her estates in Brabant, and 
her chapter of Barnes Nobles at Namur. It is said, that she is com- 
pleting the ' Tour de Chasse, ' begun by the late Prince in the 
Forest of Groenendael, for the purpose of disposing of the whole 
beautiful property there, and of fixing her residence in Germany." 

These paragraphs attracted the attention of the Princess on the day 
after her arrival, as she sat in the best salon of the Groenendael, 
looking over the various journals, which were piled on an old spider 
table before her. Her quick eye was glancing from column to co- 
lumn, from page to page, and from journal to journal ; and her acute 
smile was sometimes clouded by a lower of passing disapprobation, 
or brightened to its most vivid expression, as the political or social 
news happened to meet her approval, or to awake her displeasure : 



408 



THE PRINCESS. 



hers was a countenance in which men might read ' strange things, 1 
the reflection of a mind through which strange things had passed. 

Within the embrasure of the old-fashioned window, sat at work 
a Beguine, in her black habit and snow-white coif ; while a chas- 
seur ( that showy and brilliant appendage to foreign rank ) was bu- 
sied in arranging vases of flowers on the old carved encoignures 
of the antique apartment. In the corridor, without the apartment, 
more than one lackey, in splendid livery, awaited ( for in the old 
Brabant hotel there were no antichambers for lounging valets and 
intriguing abigails ) to name or to reconduct the visitors whom the 
news of the Princess's arrival might bring to offer leurs hommages 
to the wealthy widow of the deceased Belgian Prince. 

Since the marriage of Prince Schaffenhausen, which had taken 
place in Germany nearly three years before, strange events had 
passed in Brussels. Its society had changed with its reigning dy- 
nasty ; and of the very few persons left who had known his Highness 
( his ancient contemporaries and boon companions during the short 
reign of the Emperor Leopold), but few remained. Of these, more 
than one was shut up in the ' measureless (Mscontenf of his anti- 
quated palace or dreary ??ianoir; and the rest had fallen into an 
utter obscurity or indigence, for which time, high play, and their 
own intrinsic insignificance, when not supported by artifkal acces- 
sories, were more accountable than the Belgian revolution. 

Among these, was the old Baron Van Gobbelscoy, who had been 
frondeur en permanence of Brussels since the affair of Vandernoot. 
He had grumbled through the reigns of Leopold and Francis, the 
French occupation, the Orange regime, and ( to sum up in one the 
bitterness and spleen of all ) the Four Days of eighteen hundred and 
thirty. The Baron's millennium was of the past, not of the future. 
In his boyhood, he had seen Voltaire and La Belle Emilie ; and now 
actually occupied ^premier in the hotel of the Marquise de Chatelet. 
He had corresponded with the Prince de Ligne ; had been the friend 
of the minister Staremberg, and the intimate of the Prince of Schaf- 
fenhausen's father. He preserved, as a sacred relic, the chamber- 
lain's key, presented to him by Prince Charles of Lorraine, governor 
of the Low Countries for the Empress Maria Theresa ; and he piqued 
himself on an album enriched with the autographs of Kaunitz, and 
his imperial mistress, and filled with endless anecdotes of the Court 



THE PRINCESS. 



409 



of Brussels in 1772, his great epoch, when he had gone with a 
trifling mission to Vienna. He wore on his breast many extinct 
orders, in their day (like the Saint-Esprit) 1 des collie?*s a toutes 
betes and he preserved in his head, the prejudices, errors, and 
aristocratic illusions of nearly eighty years. 

The Baron Van Gobbelscoy presented himself to the Princess with 
the air of an old courtier, and with the cordiality of the friend of 
her late husband's father and family. He brought with him his 
court album, ( he never went without it, ) which he introduced 
immediately after himself; and the Princess was soon deep in its 
pages, over which she gloated with an obvious delight, that flattered 
its doating owner to his bent, and extorted from him the exclamation 
of, " Ah ! Madame la Princesse, on voit bien que vous etes de 
la vieille souche" She was listening with unaffected attention to 
his emphatic persual of a letter from Marie Therese to the chan- 
cellor of the Low Countries, forbidding the appearance of the Prin- 
cesse de Stolberg at court, on her daughter, the celebrated Countess 
d' Albany's, marriage with the Pretender, in the eternal 1772,— 
when another guest was announced, equally a stranger to the Prin- 
cess, and equally brought within her vortex by the newspaper 
account of her arrival. 

The lackey had already announced to the chasseur, and the 
chasseur had repeated twice to the Princess, the high-sounding 
title of the Count Melchior Von Katzenellenbogen, (in plain English, 
Cat's-elbow,) before she lifted up her eyes from the old chronicle 
of the Brussels court, and half rose to receive her unknown visitor. 
Colonel Count Katzenellenbogen— ancien guidon in the service 
of the quondam Electors of Saxony ; lieutenant of cavalry in that 
of the King of Prussia ; aide-de-camp to Field-Marshal Lefebvre, in 
the imperial army of France ; colonel en activite of the body-guard 
of the Grand Dnke of Darmstadt ; and general in perspective to the 
Duke of Modena, through the interest he meant to, awaken in the 
Emperor of Austria on the first available occasion,— had served all 
powers and all opinions j and was the modern refacciamento of 
the condottieri of the fifteenth century. Semi-barbarous and semi- 
civilized, he united to the person of a Croat, the air and address of 
a Parisian merveilleux. Drilled in dress, as in principles, in the 
school of military despotism, he might have passed for the beau 



410 



THE PRINCESS. 



ideal of a chef de brigade of Potsdam, or the Cossack dandy of \ 
Petersburg. The combinations which went to make up his cha- 
racter and being, were dominated by a well-developed organ of 
self-love, or of vanity, which had induced him, on the principle of | 
St. Paul, to try all things 

A German metaphysician, a French sceptic, a mystical evangelical j 
in Berlin 5 a latitudinarian in Paris ; and an anythingarian in Lon- I 
don ; a Werter in sentiment, a Richelieu in gallantry everywhere ; 
the Count, as hero, author, wit, cavalier, and mediatized Prince of I 
the ci-devant absolute sovereignty of the Cat's-elbow, was, in his I 
own estimation, an object to fix the world's attention ; whether he I 
figured in the salons of Stutgard, Paris, or London ; or withdrew 
from their distractions, to his own castle and domains, in— he w r as | 
not very certain where. The Katzenellenbogen territory had been 
so often translated from one German sovereignty to another, that 
his loyalty might well be puzzled, when suddenly questioned, 
where to bestow his allegiance. 

A truant disposition had brought him from his Siamm Schloss 
to Wisbaden, where he had drunk the waters, and played at the ! 
Kursaal. The epoch of the baptism at Brussels found him attending | 
its festivities, he scarcely knew why ( for Brussels was not within the 
sphere of all his ambitions, literary, military, or matrimonial) ; and | 
an accidental rencontre with Lord Alfred Montressor (an acquaint- 
ance and ally of the salon at Paris ) had detained him at the Belle- 
vue after the conclusion of the festival ; until the advent of the rich 
and noble widow opened to him new views, which came not within 1 
the prospect of belief, on his first arrival in the democratic capital of i 
Belgium. 

The Count entered the apartment of the Princess of Schaffenhausen 
with all the ease of a European man of fashion, and all the confidence 
of a man whose self-possession was never deranged by his modesty. 
One white-gloved hand was occupied with a gemmed cane, the other 
with a splendidly bound volume in duodecimo. There was in his 
gait and gesture a mobility, which almost tempted the heholderto 
believe that ' his wiskers thought. ' His well-turned moustaches 
bristled like the brindled cat's; and his svelte and serpentining 
figure had all the elasticity of youth ; though ' the damning wit- 
nesses ' of time, which crowded round the corners of his small 



THE PRINCESS. 



411 



and feline eyes, bore testimony against his juvenile assumptions. 

He opened his address of self-introduction in German, but fell 
immediately into French, an easy chair, and an elegant attitude. He 
briefly detailed his excuses for presenting himself to the Princess, in 
a strain of elegant , but not too obvious flattery, which dwelt more on 
her personal and intellectual distinctions, than on her rank and sta- 
tion. " His petite glo?iole d'auteur had, " he said, " induced him 
to lay his last literary work at her feet" (and he playfully suited 
the action to the word). " It was entitled 6 Memoir e pour servir a 
Vhistoire de Villustre famille de KatzencllenbogenS " 

A more perfect pendant to the not very young, but still very 
elegant and artistry made-up German dandy, than that presented by 
the still very handsome, but no longer very girlish German Prin- 
cess, never figured in the tete-d-tete portraits of an old-fashioned 
magazine. 

In manner, air, and a grace, not • beyond the reach of art,' but 
formed with its obvious aid, the Princess of Schaffenhausen might 
have recalled, to the person who had visited Rome in 1820, the style 
and manner of that splendid imperial petite-maitresse, who, to 
the visitants of the ' eternal city,' was as attractive a modern monu- 
ment, as the Colosseum was an antique one. The Princess of Schaf- 
fenhausen. who in London had assumed the brusque and tranchant 
tone of the English and German stateswomen with whom she lived, 
was now, manieree to the extreme of coquetry. Her first look, 
word, nod, — the play of her small silken-slippered foot on a crimson 
velvet cushion, the frequent flinging back of a voluminous sleeve, 
to display a fine and splendidly clasped arm, and the daring experi- 
ment of drawing up her hair to the summit of her head with a golden 
bodkin, — convinced the Count that the rich widow was son affaire. 
Looking at her askance, with his sly, unquiet eyes, he suddenly let 
them fall, and mentally observed, C'est bon I The rich vineyards 
of Schaffenhausen and the ruined towers of Katzenellenbogen were 
already definitively united in his speculation. 

" When I read in the journals of your arrival, belle Princesse^' 
said the Count, taking a flower from the vase beside him, and placing 
it in his bosom, " my first impulse was to throw myself at your feet ; 
and my first reflection, to wonder what could have brought the High 
Transparency of Vienna to the court of the Roi bourgeois v" 



412 



THE PROCESS. 



Not to the court; for I have not written myself there. Business 
brought me here, a few chetifs thousands of florins ; rien que 
cela. " 

" You have estates, then, in Brussels?" 

" A— a— pied-a-terre " she replied, carelessly, and fluttering over 
the leaves of the book which she still held in her hand 5 " a pied-a- 
terre in the forest of Soignes." 

" Your late illustrious father-in-law," said the Baron, " and my 
colleague in my mission to Vienna in 1772, was reckoned the weal- 
thiest of our Belgian noblesse, the D' Arembergs excepted. But your 
late husband, Madame la Princesse, is said to have lost immense sums 
at Vienna." 

" And won them also," replied the Princess. 

" High play," said the Count, "is high excitement; the infirmity 
of great minds, of men like Charles Fox and Marshal Blucher." 

" But 1 hope not of Count Katzenellenbogen," said the Princess, 
smiling. 

" Give me a motive," said the Count, u either for pursuing an 
object, or of abstaining from it, and I am capable of anything." 

" You must have found one here," said the Princess, pointing to 
the Count's ' Memoir, 1 which she took up from the table. " The me- 
moir of a noble house, drawn up by its noble representative, opens 
a sufficient field for the two greatest excitements — fame and glory." 

" If the royal historian of the House of Brandenburg did not find 
it so, then well may not I. But Frederick of Prussia was a passion- 
less man. " 

" I have a fac-simile of his autograph somewhere in my album { 
it was given me by my witty friend the Prince de Ligne, " said the 
Baron, trying to get in a word. 

While he proceeded to search for the precious document, loitering 
over every page in fond delay, the more rapid interlocutors passed 
through a world of subjects on sentiment and sensibility. The 
splendid distinctions of superior genius and high birth, the inesti- 
mable value of many talents and many quarterings, letters laudatory 
from the learned of Europe, and letters of nobility recorded in the 
Herald's Office of Vienna, were run over in a jargon, to which the 
ultraism and bas-bleus-ism of the coteries of Weimar, Paris, and 
London equally contributed. The Princess and the Count knew 



THE PRINCESS. 



413 



all the royal authors of the day. They had both wept over the 
pathetic poetry of the royal bard of Bavaria ; they had both wander- 
ed through the primeval shades of the Black Forest, and the ro- 
mantic defiles of the Taunus, with no companions but Burger. 
Goethe, Wieland and Schiller, she with her parasol and reticule — he 
with his regenscherm and note-book, and both followed by their 
sumpter mules, after the fashion of the middle ages, of ''force pier- 
reries, et point de chemise p?*opre. ' The Count had read of 
nothing but the Princess's brilliant success in London ; the Princess 
was eminently conversant with the Count's praises in the ' Mor- 
genblatt. ' 

" Oh ! they are too partial, ?' said the Count : " they are dazzled 
by my rank, when they call me c the brightest gem in the Gothic 
crown of German literature ; ' and they are fascinated by my humble 
talents when they place me at the head of the mediatized Princes, 
and call me the Frundsberg or German Bayard of the day. I am 
more proud of their calling me ' one of those rare meteors which ' 
allow me to show you the passage. " 

He took up his Memoir, and read from it an e'loge of himself, 
which could not have been more extravagant if he had written it or 
paid for it himself. 

" 'Tis a great distinction, " said the Princess, - - to be reviewed by 
such a man as Goethe; and it is immortality to be praised by 
him." 

" Pas mat, " said the Count, curling his ebony favoris, " if one 
wanted that sort of thing, or cared for it. To the roturier it is 
bread ; but we do not want literary immortality ! That sort of fame 
has been forced on me ; though I have sought military glory e'en in 
the cannon's mouth. Goethe, more than any one, knew the value of 
birth, rank, and fortune. The inmate of palaces and guest of kings, 
he disdained to join the literary canaille of Europe ; and that was 
his great merit. Think what mischief that man might have done, 
had he taken the liberal side of the question, as it is stupidly called ! 
As far, however, as my merits are concerned, I was his guest (for 
I made his house my own ), and the pride of the host might, perhaps, 
have— a— a— coloured a little the strictures of the reviewer. " 

" Mon Dieu! mon Bieul " said the Princess, ct vous etes par 
trop modest e" 

33. 



414 



THE PRINCESS. 



<4 The fact is," continued the Count, interrupting for the twen- 
tieth time the attempts of the poor old Baron to put in a word, 
" I have known most of the professional writers of Europe, English, 
French, and German ; and I never saw one of them who did not 
donner dans la seigneurie, as the charming Marquise de Sevigne 
has it. Starting from Voltaire, and his hero the King of Prussia, 
and his Catos Diva of Russia " 

64 Ah, pour ce qui est de Voltaire" interrupted at length the 
Baron, raising his quivering voice to its highest possible pitch, and 
laying a hand, distinguished by its dirty fingers and diamond rings, 
upon the Count's shoulder, " on peutse rapporter a moi. Every 
one knows that the immortal Emilie came to Brussels, like the 
Princess here, on business concerning her property ; and that her 
friend being engaged to superintend the publication of . . . ." 

*' It is ridiculous," continued the Count, rising so abruptly as 
almost to overset the remnant of Belgian nobility, and pacing the 
room to the advantage of his fine figure; " it is ridiculous, the 
manner in which your friends of the high English coteries court the 
scandal-mongers of the press, and bring forward the trading au- 
thors." 

" Yes," said the Princess, " who are but spies on society, and 
who, being admitted into great families, 6 talk of beauties whom 
they never saw, and boast of favours which they ne'er received' 
—cela passe outre. They flatter even the booksellers, and have 
sugar-plums for the printer's devils. What do you think of Lady 
Agnes M'Gregor stuffing the red hands of her libraire into a pair 
of white gloves, sticking a chapeau habille under his arm, and 
then thrusting him into a soiree at Montressor House ?" 

" Mais elle est si bete! " said the Count. 

** Pas si bete, " she replied. " It sold her the copyright of her 
fadaise par excellence, which had been refused by half the 
publishers of London. " 

"Milord Albrecht Mon-tresor, " announced the German chas- 
seur. Lord Alfred entered, the mirror of English fashion in dress 
and address ; both being as simple and concise as Nugee and English 
taste could make them. He walked straight up to the Princess, who 
held out her hand a V Anglaise. 

■ u It is too bad, " he said " that 1 am always to be indebted to 



THE PRINCESS. 



415 



chance for finding you out. I have only this moment read of your 
arrival in Brussels. Where have you been? and why . . . ? " 

He now for the first time perceived the Count, reddened, and said 
coldly, " Comment I c'est vous, Comte? " 

" Oui, c'est moi, mon eher, "he replied, advancing-, and throw- 
ing himself on the tabouret that the Princess had pushed from before 
her feet. 

" You are always en avant, " said Lord Alfred, with a sneer. 

" So they say, " returned the Count, conceitedly. 

" Mais dites done, Milord, "said the Princess languidly. 1 ' Our 
confederation of the Txhine, what have you to tell me of it? " 

" It is at this moment assembled in congress at theBellevue. " 

The Princess started up, the colour mounting to her brows ; and 
the abruptness of her movement deranging the bodkin which fasten- 
ed up her hair, she gathered up the scattered tresses with affected 
carelessness, and asked, " Who are the members? " 

" To begin, ' ' said Lord Alfred, " with the three great powers : 
there are the Ladies Montressor, Mottram, and St. Leger ; then, there 
are their ministers plenipotentiary, Lords Aubrey and Allington, and 
the little diplomate bijou, Claude Campbell. " 

The Princess now stood before a curious old dusky mirror, ar- 
ranging her head-dress. The representatives of British and of German 
dandyism each played with his flexile cane, and eyed each other's 
rival beauties with looks malign askance. The Belgian Baron, over- 
whelmed by the modern steam-engine rapidity with which subjects 
were discussed, and stunned by phrases, names, and events fifty 
years in advance of his vocabulary, sat incorporated with his ber- 
gere, a movable of the same antique date as himself; his eyes daz- 
zled, his ears tingling, and his trembling hands employed in tying up 
his precious album, in a silken damask cover, embroidered by the 
Duchesse Dowager B'Ursel, in 1772. 

" And what," asked the Princess, after a pause, " are the proto- 
cols of their High Mightinesses? what are their plans of opera- 
tion? " 

" They await for your Highness, as presidente de ladiete. They 
only arrived last night, or rather at one this morning ; and they are 
now seated at the council, that is, their breakfast-table. They have 
despatched me as ambassador extraordinary to announce their pre- 



416 



THE PRINCESS. 



sence, and to express their ardent desire of the honour of seeing yon. 
They would have come to you, as in duty bound; but that poor Lady 
Georgina is really dreadfully shattered, and far from well. Then, 
la petite St. Leger is the tea-making angel of the dejeune • and poor 
dear Lady Frances in a sort of Ephesian-matron predicament, and 
not to be consoled for the loss of her faithless lord." 

" What does that mean? " continued the Princess, still making 
her toilet at the old mirror. 

" It means," said Lord Alfred, " that the great commoner, the 
most moral man in England, left Brussels by the Porte de Namur, as 
his wife entered it by the Porte de Laeken; and that he is accom- 
panied by a handsome artiste, who figures away in the 4 Indepen- 
dant 1 of this morning, as the Amphitryon of a fete-champetre given 
last night in the forest of Soignes. The report this morning is, that 
they went off together by moonlight, from the Groenendael, in Sir 
Frederick's calash, which was left the last at the place where the 
carriages put up. But he was at the Hotel de Flandres at daylight, 
wrote some notes,— one to Montressor, to forward Lady Frances, 
well packed up and marked • glass,' to Spa; and then left Brussels 
alone for Namur : but whom he may have picked up at your Highness's 
pavilion in the forest, on his road, this deponent sayeth not." 

" There is but one objection to your innuendo," said the Prin- 
cess, throwing herself into an arm-chair ; u and that is, that your 
• handsome artiste,'' Madame Marguerite, is at this moment closely 
occupied about my business, and under my roof! " 

" C'est e'gal," said the Count; " his story is a good story. Iknew 
Mottram in London. He is one of those collets monies in morals, 
who are so numerous in England. His society is as guinde as his 
person. D'ailleurs, joli garcon et veritable Amphitryon : but, 
Lady Frances !" (and he kissed the tips of his fingers as he spoke) 
" Mon Dieu, quelle femmel et si Men conserve'e! " 

Lord Alfred was now hanging over the back of the Princess's 
chair, and muttering something, in that practised voice of mystery, 
so distinct to the person to whom it is addressed— so inaudible to 
all else. The Count hummed a German air, and fiddled with the 
strap of his embroidered pantaloon. 

" I shall order my carriage directly," said the Princess, aloud ; 
^ I will follow you to the Belle vue. " 



THE PRINCESS. 



417 



" My carriage is in wailing," said Lord Alfred. 

u And mine, " said the Count, advancing, u is in the court." 

" No, no, " said the Princess, laughing ; " I was once so situated 
as to have no carriage of my own, and then nobody offered me one 5 
and, now, Je m'en venge. Besides, I have promised myself the 
pleasure to set down Monsieur le Baron, who has taken the trouble 
to walk here. " 

Monsieur le Baron rose, bowed to the ground, scraped the old 
Courtrai carpet with his cocked hat, and began a speech that was 
not finished when the two modern cavaliers were already seated in 
their respective carriages, on their way to the Bellevue. The Ba- 
ron spoke on uninterruptedly, got through an account of Voltaire's 
arrival in Brussels, and brought down his anecdotes to the year 
1772; when the britzka was announced by the chasseur. 

The old cavalier buttoned up his album in the breast of his 
coat, flourished his cocked hat with one hand, and giving the other 
to the Princess, conducted her to her carriage. He seated himself 
bolt upright, and remained bareheaded till he arrived at his dis- 
mantled hotel, immortalized by having been the residence of Voltaire 
and La Belle Emilie. 

The Princess, then, drove to the Bellevue. More than once du- 
ring the course, she raised the black crape that shaded her face from 
the ardours of the mid-day sun, to catch a breath of air : but sud- 
denly let it fall, as some of the recognized authorities of the revo- 
lutionary day passed her; probably, in disgust at the democratic 
changes, which left a woman of her rank with no other society 
than English detrimentals, German fortune-hunters, and bygone 
Belgian vieilleries. 

Whatever were the causes that veiled her countenance and knit- 
ted her brows, they were all probably removed as she descended 
from her carriage in the porte cochere of the Bellevue, where Lord 
Alfred and the Count were stationed to receive her. She took the 
offered arm of the former ; while the latter followed, observing that 
" he would make his bow at the levee of the ladies before he went 
out to ride. " 

They were preceded by Hypolite, Lady Montressor's page, to the 
most splendid apartment of the most European of all hotels. The 
Marchioness had not yet left her room. Mrs. St. Leger was buried 

32,. 



418 



THE PRINCESS. 



in the depths of an arm-chair, and in the pages of the last number 
of the Court Magazine, gloating over the portrait of her own c hi /found 
face, and a memoir of her own frivolous life : the one from ' a 
splendid miniature by Mrs. Mee f the other conjointly from the Red- 
book and from her milliner's puff of her birthday dress, the united 
jargon of Lodge and Madame Carson. 

Lady Frances, more languid than ever, half lying, half seated on 
a chaise longue, was rapidly filling whole reams of rosy paper ; 
while Claude Campbell, fresh, fair, and fragile, ' as the flower in 
his bosom, 1 was immersed in the pages of Mingaud's work on 
c Billiards.' Lord Aubrey had not yet left his dressing-room ; and 
Lords Allinglon, Montressor, and Mr. St. Leger had gone to look at 
some horses belonging to the Prince of Orange, which were expected 
to be offered for sale. 

The party had just resolved not to leave their names at the palace, 
and to reserve their visits to Sir Robert Adair, the Prince Auguste 
d'Aremberg, etc. etc. till their return to Brussels, in their way back 
to England. The Princess's entrance made a sensation. Cheeks 
were touched by cheeks, hands were kissed, and faint exclamations 
and languid inquiries, with the other minauderies of feigned affec- 
tion, occupied the interval, till Lady Montressor entered, supported 
by her woman, and followed by two footmen with a couchette. 
It was some time before the Count could find an opportunity of 
making his bow ; and though he was known to all the party, it was 
received with a coldness that marked no very ardent desire to renew 
the acquaintance. The Count twisted his favoris, twirled his 
moustaches, and bit his nether lip; then, taking up the Court 
Magazine, fixed his eyes on the portrait of ' the Hon. Frances 
Eleanor de Vere, Wentworth, St. Leger,' and muttered in an audi- 
ble apostrophe, t1. How lovely! and how like!" 

The observation brought Mrs. St. Leger to his side, and the 
gallant and plausible Count soon found that he had Men place son 
mot; for the fair little diplomatist was at home in a flirtation with 
all nations, from the Don to the Tiber; and the Count, always, in 
his own opinion, irresistible, did not let his powers of fascination 
lie idle. Meantime, Claude Campbell, who hated the Princess 
because he feared her, flung aside his book, and left the room ; and 
Lord Alfred, taking up the discarded volume, soon appeared lost 



THE PRINCESS. 



419 



in its perusal ; though a strong expression of annoyance deepened 
the traits of habitual ill-humour which at all times marked his 
countenance. 

The three great ladies were now c in colloquy sublime and high 
divan.' Lady Montressor, stretched on her couch, was supported 
by pillows soft and glowing as summer clouds, her feet covered 
with a cashmere shawl. The Princess was seated beside her in an 
easy chair, and Lady Frances, at her feet, on a tabouret. Their 
discussion was warm, though carried on in a low tone. Lady 
Frances's manner was vehement, and her countenance more than 
usually marked by expression. 

" You will never tell me, Princess," she said ; " Sir Frederick's 
leaving Brussels the day of my arrival is decisive; and his conduct 
for the last six months will justify my appealing to the protection 
of my friends, and demanding a separation." 

" Nonsense, child," said Lady Montressor. 

" His insupportable temper," continued Lady Frances; " his ne- 
gligence ; his selling my own villa— I call it mine, since he gave it 
me at the birth of Emilius ; his hating every one I love ; his refusing 
to associate with my own particular set last season ; his refusing 
to meet you, Princess, at his own table ; his killing my poor Coco ; 

and, above all, his ordering me not to join him What 

do you say to that, Georgy ?" 

" Why, dearest, I say that the whole thing is in bad taste, and 
very like the quarrels of two lovesick children. Why should a man 
and wife quarrel about anything, as long as they have the means 
to follow their own separate way ?" 

"Exactly," said the Princess. " Live and let live." 

" I now speak in a mere worldly sense," continued the Marchi- 
oness ; " in a religious point of view, as poor dear Medlicot says, 1 
Uiink the last folly married people can commit, is to part, even when 
there is a little cause for jealousy : but I don't place under that head 
an habitual predilection for the society of some particular individual, 
which time has rendered respectable." 

" A thing perfectly well understood in Germany and Italy," said 
the Princess. 

" And inLondon, too," interrupted Lady Montressor. " I could 
instance fifty such things at this moment among our own friends. 



420 



THE PRINCESS. 



where the husband, the wife, and the friend form— a— that is, a. . . ." 

4 * — A triangolo equilatero" said the princess, quietly. 

" But," said Lady Frances, vehemently, "that would be impossi- 
ble with us ! Day and night, fire and water, are not more opposed 
than Sir Frederick and . . . ." 

" Your paroquet I 1 ' added the Princess, coolly. (LadyMontressor 
laughed.) " And therefore your husband got rid of it ; and he may 
again rid himself, by a process equally violent and short, of any other 
object that may be obnoxious to his feelings." 

"If I thought that," said Lady Frances, passionately, the blood 
rushing over her fair face, " I should at once know how to prendre 
mon parti, I am capable of making any sacrifice, sooner than be 
tyrannized by a man so every way my inferior." 

" How very much in love with him you must be!" said the Prin- 
cess. 

" I in love with himl — never ! and he knows it. I was sacri- 
ficed to his wealth and his boroughs . There was nothing in common 
between us. I thought him vulgar when I married ; at least, he was 
not like the men I was accustomed to ; and I never could get over 
the idea, that if his father had not succeeded in his contracts with 
government, instead of my marrying his son, my housekeeper would 
have been buying his gridirons." 

She burst into a fit of laughter, in which she was joined by Lady 
Montressor, who, in the intervals between lozenge and lozenge, lan- 
guidly added, "Yes — there is— something in that. Lord Aubrey 
says that different men are made in different moulds : something 
about porcelain and the pottery ; I forget now." 

" Just that," said Lady Frances, smiling ; " Lord Aubrey is so 
clever when he does speak. A little hard, though, to get on with at 
first : did not you find it so, Georgy V 

" He is not demonstrative," said the languid Marchioness; " but 
that suits me ; I sould die of a beau parleur." 

" And then his eyes are never silent, " added Lady Frances, mu- 
singly. 

Lady Montressor raised hers to her friend, with so strange an ex- 
pression, that Lady Frances coloured through her rouge ; and aver- 
ting her head, she added, 

" Don't you think so, Princess?" 



THE PRIjNCESS. 



421 



" Lord Aubrey's head is so handsome altogether," replied the 
Princess, " that one would be tempted to think there was something 
in it,— if one did not know to the contrary ! " 

" You are very severe ! " observed Lady Montressor, carelessly. 

"Very!" reiterated Lady Frances. " But nothing under the 
head of a Metternich satisfies the Princess. " 

" I think I could make something of Sir Frederick Mottram's, " 
said the Princess, dryly. 

" It is more than I could ever do," said Lady Frances. 

" So I should suppose," said Madame Schaffenhausen ; " but 
that being beyond your reach, suppose you try to gain his heart ; 'tis 
the odd trick a woman is sure to win, if she knows how to play 
her cards. " 

" When / play for hearts," said Lady Frances, " I promise you 

it shall be for higher stakes than in short, nothing risk, nothing 

have. " 

" And when you have risked all, " said the Princess, " what do 
you expect to gain ? " 

" What?" said Lady Frances, with a passionate expression, and 
throwing up her eyes. 

There was a momentary pause in the conversation ; and the Prin- 
cess sat, with her keen glance fixed on the face of Lady Frances 
Mottram, as if she was reading every lineament, and extorting a 
conclusion from every line. 

" At all events, " resumed Lady Frances, " I happen just now to 
have the cards in my own hands. Sir Frederick the moral, or, at 
least, the reformed ; for since he sighed in vain at the feet of our 
Marchesa —you know we were once rivals, Princess" — (Lady Mon- 
tressor smiled faintly) — "he has had no belle passion, and has 

been doing the proper Well, mes amours, I know it for a fact, 

that Sir Frederick has a chere aniie travelling with him, with whom 
he went off on the very night of my arrival ; and if I should follow 
him to Spa (which he knows I won't), I should be very much cle 
trop." 

"Pshaw! nonsense!" said Lady Montressor ; "that is Claude 
Campbell's and Alfred's fun about the artiste Madame Marguerite ; 
Lord Montressor says 'tis all nonsense. " 

The Princess smiled significantly, and shook her head. 



422 



THE PRINCESS. 



u There ! " said Lady Frances, " you see ! The Princess believes 
it; she knows something." 

" If you won't betray me, — if you won't show me up. " 

A thousand ' honour brig fits'* were pledged and pawned. 

" Well, then, there is an artiste, a Madame Marguerite, in the 
question. She is at this moment an object of as much annoyance 
to Sir Frederick, almost as— as his wife." 

" There, Georgy !— there now !— Go on, Princess." 

" She is a poor relation of his, who has claims on him. She has 
been supported by me, for years , belongs to a religious order ; and 
has naturally a desire to avail herself of her accidental rencontre 
with so wealthy and distinguished a relation. " 

" Just the thing to bore him! " said Lady Frances, much pleased. 

" He is always afraid of his vulgar relations coming in my way. 
His cousin Molly and Dolly, from Button-town common near Bir- 
mingham, as Claude says— he ! he ! he ! " 

" Oh ! but he has cousins from Ireland much more annoying, " 
said the Princess ; " and this Madame Marguerite is one. " 

" Yes, " said Lady Frances; u his mother was an Irishwoman— 
an actress— a sort of Mrs. Jordan. She only died, you know, five 
years ago : quite beautiful ! but a vulgar fine lady, and such a brogue ! 
besides being a papist, my dears, a la derobee. " 

" Well, ma belle, this poor cousin is the daughter of Lady Mot- 
tram's brother, who narrowly escaped being hanged in your Irish 
rebellion, le pauvre ho?nme /—at least, so she says. " 

" Charming! only think of one of Emilius's grand-uncles being 
hanged, and another being the hereditary grand But go on, dear." 

" Observe," said the Princess, " I only repeat what my protegee 
tells me. Your mother-in-law, Lady Mottram, had another relation, 
a half-brother, who kept an inn in Ireland. " 

"My uncle the innkeeper!" said Lady Frances, half amused, 
and more than half mortified : " that is the comble." 

u On whose head have fallen the honours of an ancient baronet- 
age, by the death of a very distant relation. He is at this moment 
here in Brussels, with such an entourage /" 

" And does Mottram know this? " asked Lady Frances, folding 
her arms on the Princess's knees ; her mirth subsiding into an ob- 
vious mortification. 



THE PRTNCESS. 



423 



" No ; the whole embroglio lies in the keeping of Madame Mar- 
guerite, who waits her own moment to unveil the plot, or not, as 
Sir Frederick may conduct himself. Meantime, she has applied by 
letter to the Baronet, the quondam aubergiste, for assistance, whose 
lady has peremptorily refused her, and affects to consider her an 
impostor. I saw an insolent letter from her to the poor creature, 
this day." 

" And what are these creatures called, " asked Lady Frances 
turning pale, " that I may keep out of their way?" 

"Ah! ca, voyons," said the Princess, with a humorous attempt 
at an Irish pronunciation ; "ccla s'appclle Saire Dogerty, et Mi~ 
ladi Dogerty, sa digne epousc ! " 

The Marchioness tittered. 

"It is no joke," said Lady Frances ; " it may be very annoying, 
coming to the ears of such men as surround us." 

" Oui" said the Princess ; "tine ridicule ineffacable." 

" For Heaven's sake," said Lady Frances, anxiously, " don't let 
your protegee take any step till we are gone." 

"And when will that be?" said the Princess. 

" Oh !■ to-morrow, to-morrow ! " said the Marchioness, with all 
the restless impatience of a sick and spoiled child : " this place ap- 
pears to me covered with a black crape : all gone that 1 knew or 
cared for." 

"Exactly," said Lady Frances. "St. Leger says that there is not 
one of our old set left, pas cequc s'dppelle un. The men, too are 
bored to death, being kept so long waiting for us. Only look there 
at Alfred Montressor : he has mounted his sulky look ! I suppose 
he has been losing at billiards to that odious Count." 

"Piano pianissimo," said the Princess, putting her fingers to 

I her lip : and stepping forward, she whispered, "Cut him, if you 
will, in London ; but don't offend him here. He will put you in 
' Morgen-blatt,' ou, par die, pire que cela. Besides, he may be of 
\ use to you. He may give you a fete at his ancient castle. It lies 
somewhere between Darmstadt and Baden. And then he has re- 
cently been appointed Jagd Junker, in the magnificent wilds of Oden- 
! wald, or Oden's forest ; and can command a boar-hunt or busch- 
gang, and take the unoccupied men off your hands." 
The ladies smiled and caressed the Princess. The resources she 



424 



THE PRINCESS. 



had opened, the new words she employed, not only gave a new co- 
lour to their tour, but raised the Count cent per cent in their opi- 
nion; who, as well as Lord Alfred, though both affecting preoccu- 
pation, threw from time to time a furtive and observant glace on the 
confederated powers of the couchette. 

The entrance of the cavaliers of the party, Lords Aubrey and 
Montressor, Lord Allington, Mr. St. Leger, and Claude Campbell, 
broke up the conference. They respectively offered their devoirs to 
their future hostess of the Rhine, according as their various views, 
or their common prestige in favour of her rank and influence, di- 
rected. Those among the men who had not yet seen the Count 
bowed coldly to his haughty recognition : but the ladies, beckoning 
them to their side, whispered the advantages to be derived from the 
Count's acquaintance in Germany ; talking in great excitement of 
busch-gangs, jagd-junkers, and the forest of Oden. 

The gentlemen, let down by their dreary journey from Calais to 
Lille and from Lille to Brussels, kindled at the awakened fires of the 
languid ladies of their thoughts : a general council was called ; a 
round table was spread with maps, prints, tours up the Rhine and 
down the Rhine, and ' Autumns in the Taunus.' ' Summers in 
Western Germany,' ' trips,' 'journals,' 'voyages,' with all their 
thousand-times repeated raptures about Thurmbergs, Lurleybergs, 
Marksbergs, were consulted, from Gottschalk's Mountain Castles of 
Germany, down to the last bookseller's guide-book. Some wished 
to steam up the Rhine, and return through the magnificent scenes of 
the Taunus ; others chose to go by land and return by water; some 
were for stopping here, and others there; some were desirous of 
seeing the ruined towers of ' the Cat ' and ' the Mouse,' of going by 
the famous ' route Napoleon ; ' others had designs on the Berg- 
strasse. 

Lord Allington, who sat coolly looking on, with his cane at his 
lips, and his eyes half closed, declared, " that he travelled princi- 
pally for change of diet; being heartily tired of white bait and 
poacher's black game. His stomach," he said, " wanted a new idea 
—hungered for Kramts rogel, and thirsted for Kalt schale. Au 
reste, the party, and not the journey, was his attraction : but he 
would propose, that whoever repeats the slang of the Rhine guide- 
books, should pay a forfeit for every offence." 



THE PRINCESS. 



425 



" As, for instance?" said Lord Alfred. 

" Why, phrases cut and dry, such as, 6 the castled craigs of the 
Drachenfels,' or ' the exulting - and abounding river.' " 

" Or telling the story of Nonnenswerth more than twice," ob- 
served Lord Alfred. 

" Or even alluding to the brothers, and their castles of Lieben- 
stein and Steonfels," added Lord Allington. 

" Or quoting Lord Byron, " said Lord Alfred. 

" Or Baron Von Gerning's pretty poems on the Taunus, " said 
Lord Allington. 

The Princess and the Count exchanged looks bordering on con- 
tempt. 

" As far as I am concerned, " said the Marquis, " so that 
I am in time for 4 Robert le Diable ' at Frankfort, I am satisfied ; 
since my dear opera at Darmstadt is no more, where, you may 
remember, Aubrey, we heard Wild and the pretty little Marconi 
in 1819. " 

" Yes, " said Lord Aubrey, listlessly, " and where I was con- 
signed to the Dowager Margravines and Altesses, to practise the Po- 
lonaise, while you were shut up with the Grand Duke, scraping 
your violin for some opera of his own composing! I have a perfect 
recollection of the whole bore. " 

" I propose, " said the Princess, who, as well as the Count, had 
celebrated the beauties of German scenery in every variety of extra- 
vagant eulogy , " that you leave the entire affair to the Count and 
myself, who have traversed every wolf-tract of the forests and moun- 
tains, from Cologne to Hanover. " 

tc Oh ! by all means, " exclaimed Lady Frances ; " do, Princess, it 
will be so very nice. " 

" By all means, " re-echoed the entire party, delighted to be 
spared the trouble of thinking for themselves. 

" Well, then, I propose your starting from Cologne for Bonn, as 
fast as our lazy post-horses can carry you ; and then, emerging from 
the mountains and following the brink of the Rhine to Bingen, you 
shall plunge into the purple hills of the Rhingau, and reaching In- 
gelheim. ..." 

" Of which the following tradition, " interrupted the Count, " is 
but little known. In one of the ' castle craigs' of Ingelheim, frown 

33. 



426 



THE PRINCESS. 



the ruins of an ancient palace of Charlemagne. Here the Imperial 
Bertha and the Emperor's . . . . " 

"Oh Count, spare us the loves of the eternal Bertha and Egin- 
hard, " cried Lord Allington. 

" It was not on the Index Ezpurgatorius, " said the Count, 
pettishly. 

" Here is the whole legend, " said Mrs. St. Leger, opening a guide- 
book, printed in the year 1777. "Lady Agnes M'Gregor is turning 
it into verse, for her Legends of the Rhine.'" 

" Then, " continued the Princess, " you will stop to sleep, if you 
please, at Mayence. " 

" Where you will pause and bend the knee, " said the Count, 
" at the shrine of Gutenberg, the first printer ; and kiss the walls of 
Faust's house. " 

" I think I see myself!" said Lord Albert. 

" Comment I " said the Count, turning round fiercely. 

" If I kiss anything, " said Lord Allington, " at Mayence, it shall 
be the tomb of the old Abbot Frauenlob, or ' Praise-the-ladies ; ' his 
name is so funny." 

"Go on, " said the Marchoiness, impatiently. " Shan't we be off, 
Princess, the next morning?" 

" Yes, the next morning, " said the Princess, marking the stages 
with her golden pencil. " There is nothing to be seen at Mayence, 
but casernes and cabarets, barracks and beer-houses ; with Prussian 
soldiers stuffed with wool and horse-hair, and Austrians with faces 
as white as their uniforms. So cross the Rhine at once to Cassel, 
and enter the dominions of the Duke of Nassau." 

"Dominions! " repeated Lord Allington, with a sneer. 

" Whose beautiful capital . . . . , " continued the Count. 

" A tidy English watering-place, with white houses and green 
shutters," said Lord Allington. 

" His peace establishment . . . . ," said the Count. 

" Is, I dare say, a thousand strong," muttered Lord Allington. 

" Hasn't Nassau something of a little constitution of her own?" 
asked Lord Aubrey. " I think somebody said so in the House, the 
other night." 

" Oh, yes," said the Princess, sneering; " a little house of com- 
mons in the village of Beiberick, close to the Duke's country-house; 



W Q 

A' 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



427 



and prettily he has been paid for it. One of its members chose to 
oppose the budget. The Duke naturally turned him out, and all 
who voted with him. The frondeur refused to pay the tax, all 
the same ; was thrown into prison, and died. The son, following in 
the father's steps, had his property in Wisbaden seized, when two 
pictures, amongst other things, were put up to sale ; the first, the por- 
trait of the frondeur, sold for four hundred francs ; and the second, 
the Grand Duke's own, was knocked down for three kreutzers." 

" Well, if they will give constitutions to nations who are not fit 
for them, they must take the consequence, " said the Marquis. 

" True, Milord," said the Count. " Germany isessentially aristo- 
cratic. The people are well fed and contented ; and provided the 
press be kept quiet, and a few turbulent spirits curbed, all will go 
the better for it. " 

" That is just the reverse with us," said Lord Allington : " our 
people are better taught than fed ; and that's the reason I have 
mange ma fortune, before the radicals rise to eat it for me." 

"Not," said the Count, " that our people are ignorant. The King 
of Prussia, for example, has taken the national education into his 
own hands ; and, improving on Napoleon's catechism, has deter- 
mined, not only what the nation shall believe, but what they shall 
know. By his benignant despotism, in educating the youth of his 
land to be useful and submissive subjects, and preventing them from 
educating themselves in the school of French jacobinism, he has done 
one of the greatest things that has been effected since the foundation 
of the Jesuits." 

"I prefer the Emperor of Austria's plan," said the Princess: 
" plenty to eat, and no press ; pleasures for the obedient in Vienna, 
and fortresses for the refractory in Hungary. Your king— for I be- 
lieve, Count, you are are a subject of Prussia— has put thoughts into 
his subject's heads, and arms into their hands. Not but that the 
Prussian system would do very well for England and France ; and I 
am happy to see that the j us te-mi lieu ministry in France are trying 
to import it, and that your English Tory writers, my Lord, and 
reviewers are preaching German metaphysics and German criticism, 
and German institutions, to their countrymen. One way or other, 
the press must be put down. You must dog the heels of miscreant 
publishers, and incarcerate revolutionary authors in dungeons as 



428 



THE PRINCESS. 



deep as those of Spielberg, or as high as those of Marksberg, if you 
do not mean to merge hereditary honours in a universel democracy." 

"You are quite right, Princess, 1 ' said Lord Alfred. 

"I saw two statesmen in Marksberg, the other day," said the 
Count, while the vehement Princess paused for breath : " they are 
shut up, the one for forty, the other for two-and-twenty years, for 
some inflammatory publication." 

"You will see the romantic fortress," resumed the Princess, 
penning the route with her pencil, " where these erring mortals 
behold from their grated windows the glories of the Rhine beneath. 
The late affair at Frankfort will people the towers, and fill oubliet- 
tes long untenanted." 

" It is all the fault of the Whigs," said Lord Montressor, yawning. 

"From the very first attempt to abolish the patriarchal Leibeigen- 
schaft,I augured the worst," said the Count. 

" Why, Count," said Lord Allington, " you and the Princess 
seem to anticipate the restoration of the secret tribunal ! W hat do 
you call it in German ?" 

"The frei gericht" exclaimed the two mediatized potentates 
together. 

" My own castle,' 1 said the Count, " was a frei stuhl, or seat 
of the tribunal. Margrave Rodolph II., from whom I descend in a 
direct line, was the last stahl graf or supreme judge ; and all the 
family were frei schoppers for many generations." 

" How very nice ! "said Mrs. St. Leger. " I do so love the German 
language !" 

" But the whole magnificent system," continued the Count, 
" was overset by the short-sighted policy of Charles the Fifth." 

" Or rather," said the Princess, " by the innovating spirit of that 
reforming age to which Charles was obliged to yield." 

" The very word 6 reform' makes me sick," said Lord Alfred. 

"What really was that secret tribunal?" asked Mr. St. Leger; 
" one reads so much about it in German romances. 

Lady Frances Mottram and Claude Campbell were meantime en- 
gaged in a window apart, muttering over a bouquet of flowers and 
some toys he had brought in : Lord Aubrey was leaning over Lady 
Montressor's couch, catching, as he might, the feeble murmurs of her 
lisping accents. 



THE PRINCESS. 



429 



" The fret gcricht" said the Count and the Princess, speaking 
in a breath, but the Princess maintained the parole—" The fret 
geric/rfwas a mysterious tribunal which spread throughout Germany, 
selected from princes, nobles, and citizens; for all, who could, were 
anxious to be the agents, rather than the victims, of its terrific but 
necessary denunciations. The ivissenden, or initiated, knew each 
other by secret signs." 

" A sort of despotic carbonari, I suppose, 1 ' said Lord Allinglon, 
a sly look of mingled humour and surprised curiosity passing over 
his countenance. 

"The accused knew neither his accuser nor his judge," said the 
Count. 

" That was pleasant," said Lord Allington. 

" The oath," said the Princess, " was to spare none— (and what 
beautiful poetry ! ) none that the sun shineth on, or the rain wettelh, or 
that floats between heaven and earth. Is not that fine? How very su- 
blime !" 

" Very !" said Mrs. St. Leger : " what Lady Agnes would give 
for it, for her traditions of the Rhine, which will now have such an 
interest, when everybody is going there!" 

" And such novelty !" said Lord Allington. 

" Lady Agnes is a twaddle !" said Lord Alfred. 

"I think her charming!" said Mrs. St. Leger. "But goon, 
Count, about your tribunal." 

" The proceedings were summary," said the Count " The 
culprit was summoned : if he refused to appear, he was su- 
rely found dead, with the executioner's knife sticking in his 
breast." 

" And if he did appear?" said Lord Allington. 

" Why, he was brought to one of our castles, let fall through 
a trap into the oubliettes, and there was an end to him," said the 
Princess, carelessly. " But pray read Goethe's divine ' Goetz Von 
Berlichingen.' " 

"Oh! I remember," said Lord Allington; "his extravagant 
heroine was a victim of the secret tribunal." 

" Should such an institution be again required," continued the 
Princess, "in these most innovating times, I believe, Count, that 
many of our castles are still in statu quo.'' 1 

33.. 



430 



THE PRINCESS. 



" One of mine," said the Count, " has its range of dungeons 
perfect, with dark vaulted chambers, stone doors, instruments of 
torture fixed in the walls, and oubliettes." 

" How very nice !" again exclaimed Mrs. St. Leger : " I wonder 
all the romance writers in the world don't come to Germany, to visit 
these castles on the Rhine." 

" It would make a famous ballet," said Lord Montressor. 

" The secret tribunal?" asked Lord Allington. 

"No, but Goethe's drame. Think of Taglioni in Adelaide of 
Weislingen !" 

" Dancing to her own execution," observed Lord Allington. 

" Well," said Lord Alfred, peevishly, and jealous that the Count 
had engrossed so much of the general attention, " enough of the 
secret tribunal : I am sick of Germany, and all belonging to it." 

" Mine is not exactly on the Rhine," said the Count. " It lies 
in the midst of mountains, on the summit of a crag, peering through 
vast forests of the pinus silvestris, interspersed with oak and beech. 
The impetuous brawling of a torrent, while it adds to the magni- 
ficent horrors of the scene, guides the eye to a delicious valley, 
which terminates in purple vineyards on the shores of the noblest 
river in the world. There, the village of Rodolfs-baden-dorf disco- 
vers its slated roofs, amidst young plantations, plants of my hand, 
and children of my care, and the bubbling Brunnens of my newly- 
discovered spa, superior to those of Baden, Ems, Schlangenbad, 
and ' pouring fresh health and renovated life through all my lovely 
glens,' as the Baron Von Gerning sings." 

A general exclamation of delight and wonder, elicited by this 
description, was interrupted by the Princess's proposition " that they 
should all pause at the Count's castle in their way ; and that Lady 
Montressor should try his spa. If it was successful, they need go 
no farther ; and on their return they might stay at Schaffenhausen, 
which, lying amidst terraces of vineyards on the edge of the ravines 
of Rhudesheim, where the tradition of a virgin and a dragon . . ." 

" Here it is," said Mrs. St. Leger, referring to her old book. 
. .Will be more sheltered for your reception than the ruder 
heights of the Count's chateau." 

There was now a unanimous vote of approval and of thanks to 
the Count for his invitation. The Count was confused. " He 




M A IT 3E 1¥ c k 



THE PRINCESS. 



431 



looked forward with pleasure to seeing them on their return ; but 
he had just then an urgent engagement to meet some friends of the 
Faubourg St. Germain at Baden. Besides, Rodolfsdorf was just 
then overrun with architects, artists, landscape-gardeners, hydrogra- 
phers, etc. He was creating, remodelling, working mines, building 
baths, etc. etc. Karl Schinkel, and Theodore Ottmer, were working 
for him at that moment." 

" Oh dear!" sighed Lady Montressor, wearied by the buzz of 
voices, " let us get quietly and quickly on to Baden-Baden, and keep 
Schaffenhausen and Cats-what's-its-name and all the other bores, for 
our return." 

There was a general titter, and the high contracting parties deput- 
ing Mr. St. Leger to draw up a plan on this basis, he was already 
installed in his office, and pen in hand, when the door opened, and 
the page announced " Lady Anastasia Macanulty." Every one 
loo "d surprised when they perceived their Scotch cousin, the worn- 
out rag of quality, who had forced the pass of half the doors in 
London, introduced by a name they were yet unacquainted with, 
though they had laughed over her marriage in the papers. No 
relationship, moreover, or connexion with the Montressors justified 
Lady Anastasia's being accompanied by the tail that followed her ; 
for close behind were marshalled Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty, 
and Dr. de Burgo. 

The utter want of common sensibility, and a habit of pushing her 
way into all societies, rendered Lady Anastasia invulnerable to the 
freezing reception of the Marchioness, who scarcely turned her eyes 
on her, but renewed her conversation with the finest of all fine 
men. Unappalled, however, she stooped her long crane neck over 
the Marchioness's sofa, and said aloud, in her broadest Scotch 
accent, 

"Eh, weel, here I have caught you all together; I'm only passing 
through, and could not refrain from inquiring after your Leddyship's 
health, and my cousin Montressor's." Then putting her mouth to 
the Marchioness's ear, she added, " I will explain to you another 
time, my dear Lady Montressor, why I have been obliged to intro- 
duce Sir Ignatius and Lady Dogherty, who, par parenthese, are 
intimate friends of Sir Frederick Mottram, with whom I believe they 
have travelled thus far, and are worthy and wealthy people." 



433 



THE PRINCESS. 



"Oh," said Lady Montressor, " there is Lady Frances." 

Lady Frances was looking out of the window at the promenaders 
in the Park, with Lord Aubrey, who had yielded his place to Lady 
Margaret. She was now gently touched on the elbow by Lady 
Anastasia, who, rising to take Lady Dogherty by the hand, said, 

"Dear Lady Frances, allow me to present you to Lady Dogherty 
and Sir Ignatius : they can give the very last and best accounts of 
Sir Frederick. They were to have had the pleasure of being intro- 
duced by him to your Leddyship ; I only riprisent him." 

By this time the eyes of the most select coterie out of St. James's 
parish, or Belgrave-square, were all turned on the newly-arrived 
group, with looks of such varied and humurous expression of inso- 
lence, ridicule, and curiosity, that the assembly of English exclu- 
sives had the air of a last sceneof some farcical drama. Lord Aubrey, 
unable to stand the contact, had taken his hat and left the room. 
The St. Legers threw their heads over their shoulders bouches K^:n- 
tes, the one with his pen, the other with her book, suspended over 
the backs of their chairs. Lord Allington was chuckling with a sense 
of the ludicrous. The Count fixed his golden double-eyed glass ; 
and the Princess, stealing behind Lady Frances, whispered, " C/iere 
amie, c'est notre oncle." 

Lady Frances changed colour, and drew back with a movement 
that amounted almost to a shudder, casting her eyes rapidly round 
to observe if anybody laughed at her. Lady Dogherty, pressing 
forward, and leaving Sir Ignatius, squatted on a divan, where Lord 
Allington had invited him, began a speech, of which Lady Frances's 
tingling ears scarce heard a word. 

" I hope I have the honor of seeing your Leedyship perfectly well, 
and quite recovered from your racent dilicacy. Sir Frederick was 
raally unaisy about your Leedyship. He only departed last night,— 
a greet counter-torn : but at the reet you travel, you will soon over- 
teek him. 1 hope you left your freends all well, the Devonshires, 
the Duncannons, and the Chesterfields. I see by the peeper, Lord 
Chesterfield has left town. Charming book his ; quite a brevery of 
ton, Dr. de Burgo says : such rules for good breeding!" 

There was a general titter, in which Lady Frances was the only 
one who did not join. 
While Lady Dogherty was thus endeavouring to make her way, 



THE PRINCESS. 



433 



by her knowledge of high life, and high life literature with one great 
lady, ( who received with silent sullenness and a disheartening bow 
of her haughty head the outpourings of her vulgar civilities,) Dr. de 
Burgo had actually taken the chair beside the noble invalid, vacated 
by her cavaliere servente. He had previously opened a window, 
replaced the cashmere and couvre-pied, which had fallen to the 
ground, and in a low soothing voice, and a look of considerate inte- 
rest, he said — 

" A professional man may be forgiven for obtruding such little 
services as contribute to the relief of suffering humanity, whatever 
may be its rank or distinction. This room is much too crowded and 
noisy for your Ladyship ; I am sure you benefit from the opening of 
that window. Warm extremities, and a free circulation of air, area 
great secret; and I presume to offer it to your Ladyship as a travelling 
opinion." 

" Thank you," said Lady Montressor, half distrustfully and half 
graciously. 

She was benefited by the fresh air, and if there was something in 
the dress of the Doctor that startled, his eyes and words were plea- 
sing, and his practice successful. He continued in the same sub- 
dued and gentle tone to ask a question, or to anticipate a reply. He 
had analogous cases at hand from the Red-book of rank, and anec- 
dotes amusively illustrative of his subject from less distinguished 
patients ; and Lady Montressor, weary of striving to keep the drowsy 
mind of Lord Aubrey awake, was pleased by being herself amused, 
without an effort. 

In the mean time the Princess drew out Lady Dogherty, for the 
particular amusement, but to the infinite horror and consternation, 
of Lady Frances. Lady Anastasia joined the St. Legers, and Claude 
Campbell; and commenced an account of her marriage, and a list of 
the seducing qualifications, personal, intellectual, and hereditary, of 
W. W. Macanulty, Esq. of Castle Macanulty, county of Tipperary ; 
to which they listened with a tittering attention, interrupted by insi- 
dious questions. 

Lord Allington and the Count had got Sir Ignatius to themselves ; 
who gave them his reasons for leaving Ireland, his journey from 
Tower-Stairs to Brussels, his protection of Sir Frederick Mottram, 
his lending him his shirt and Lady D.'s pocket-handkerchief, with 



434 



THE PRINCESS. 



every incident and circumstance of vulgarity and ridicule, that the 
Baronet's demonstrative feelings and Irish garrulity led him to 
detail. 

Lord Allington was in the third heaven. This was the first event 
in his tiresome journey which had amused or interested him. The 
fancy, which he had mistaken for a predilection, in the circles of 
London fashion, and which had the diplomatic petite maitresse 
for its object, had subsided in the first day's journey. Shut up in 
the same carriage, she had gone through all the manege of her 
coquetry; and her joumalier looks had changed from something 
like prettiness into absolute ugliness. Besides, she was evidently 
more interested by the frolics and mischief tricks of the petit page 
& amour, than by the bon-mots of the witty peer, whose self-love 
she did not spare, and whose cooling down mortified her into 
reXaliation. 

Superior in wit and intellect to all his party, Lord Allington had 
worn out every possible resource of amusement derivable from the 
insipid follies of his travelling companions, and was yawning him- 
self to death, when the reappearance of the Princess of Schaffen- 
hausen on the scene had roused him from apathy into a disagreeable 
and morbid sensation of aversion. A Tory, if any thing, in po- 
litics, he listened to her exaggerated principles with displeasure, as 
tending to put him out of conceit with his own creed, without sup- 
plying any other. " That woman," he said to Lord Aubrey, when 
sbe was preaching her absolutism, "is enough to force one upon 
downright radicalism. I sometimes think she is paid by the Italian 
carbonari or German revolutionists to turn us into ridicule and 
he was now led back to the same conjecture, by impressions still 
more unfavourable. Sir Ignatius's appearance was therefore a 
grateful relief. Lord Allington remembered him, drunk on the 
Montague de la Cour, and asleep on the balcon of the theatre : 
and he now deemed him a treasure of inappreciable value. He 
suspected that there was some intrigue between the Baronet and Sir 
Frederick, which it might possibly afford amusement to unravel, 
during the rest of the journey. The lowering looks and flushed 
cheeks of Lady Frances proved to him that she was annoyed ; and 
the sly-looking Princess, he plainly saw, went for something in the 
imbroglio. Even the Count, too, the descendant of Rodolf the 



THE PRmCESS. 



435 



wSecond, was evidently not wholly unknown to the devotee of ' Shan 
van vaugh : ' for his Highness's eyes followed with a shifting gaze 
the now suddenly averted looks of Sir Ignatius ; and he writhed 
under the basilisk glance, until, overcome by annoyance, his face 
grew purple, his hands fiddled with his green-lined grey hat; and 
his flaunting silk handkerchief, ( illustrated by the Milesian face of 
the ' great Liberator, ' ) fell to the ground, without his having the 
courage to pick it up, or even to raise his glances to the brilliant circle 
which surrounded him. 

" That, I presume, is a specimen of the Irish arts?" continued 
Lord Allington, looking at the prostrate head of the representative 
of Ireland. 

" It is, my Lord, " said Sir Ignatius, crushing his hat. 
k ' The oriflame of Irish independence ! " 
" Intirely so, my Lord." 

" To what, Sir Ignatius, do you ascribe the extraordinary in- 
fluence of the representative of the Irish people over his coun- 
trymen? " 

" Is it over the boys, my Lord?" said Sir Ignatius, endeavouring 
to collect his scattered thoughts. 

" Is that the technical phrase for your hereditary bondsmen?" 
u It is my Lord. " 

" 1 should like to know how he manages them," said Lord Al- 
lington. 

" Why, first, my Lord, he bulthers them up ; and then he slithers 
them down : divel a thing else ! " said Sir Ignatius, with a humorous 
gravity. 

" Butters them up ! and slithers them down — a short process 
for governing public opinion. You are a repailer, of course, Sir 
Ignatius?" 

" Oh, troth I am, every inch of me, my Lord. " 
" And on what principle, may I, in my ignorance, presume to 
inquire?" 

" Upon every principle in life, my Lord. " 

" As, for instance, Sir Ignatius?" asked the Marquis. 

"Why, my Lord," said Sir Ignatius (looking round for the 
means of escape, and by no means in a mood for political discus- 
sion), " first and foremost, it would bring back all the great Irish 



430 



THE PRINCESS. 



quality to the country, thim that sould the pass at the Union, bad 
squeeze to them ! and make them spind their money at home, and 
not in furrin parts. " 

" By which it is clear that you did not vote for that false measure, 
the Union ! " said Lord Allington, with ludicrous emphasis. 

" Oh ! I'd be very sorry, my Lord. " 

" You were not in parliament then, perhaps? " 

" I was nat, " replied Sir Ignatius, with an irrepressible twist of 
his mouth. 

" I wonder, " said Lord Allington, " that you patriotic Irishmen 
did not come in a body, and present yourselves at the bar of the 
House. " 

" Oh ! then it's often I did/' said Sir Ignatius, conscientiously 
availing himself of the pun, his eye still fixed on the Count. 

" And for what particular bill did you call? " 

" I left that intirely to the head-waiter, " said Sir Ignatius , com- 
pletely bothered ( in his own phrase ) by the tittering of the fashion- 
ables, and the reprobating looks of Lady Dogherty, who was talking 
fashions with the Princess and at Lady Frances. 

Lord Allington, in his turn, somewhat thrown out by the reply, 
gave one of his semi-inquiring, semi-humorous looks; at the sam,e 
time chuckling with infinite relish—" Oh ! you consider, " he said, 
" the Commons House as a very common house indeed. " 

" Sorrow a commoner, your Lordships, in regard of the 
Union. " 

Sir Ignatius now made an effort to disengage himself, by starting 
up, with an exclamation of, 

" It's schocking hot! I'll take my a-jew, my Lord, with your 
lave. This place don't agree with me at all— (I mane Brussels,) 
whatever the Doctor, there, may plaze to say. " 

"Allow me," said Lord Allington, rising ceremoniously, "to 
reconduct you, .and to express the hope of au revoir, a tantot. " 

" With all the veins, my Lord, I'll be happy to meet you toe to 
toe, or any way you plaze, over a bottle of Johnny's berg." 

Lord Allington still kept bowing back Sir Ignatius; who, on 
retreating a reculons, by one unlucky false step stumbled over a 
footstool, and in his fall, catching at the cloth which covered the 
round table, drew down the splendid bagatelles spread over it, 



TEE PRINCESS. 



437 



books, portfolios, bronze inkstands, incense-burning-lamps, vases 
of flowers, and a. whole toyshop of bijouterie, and ivory and cut- 
paper inutilities, which, combining with a pot of Indian jasmine, 
scattered all the elements of nature, earth, fire, water, ' in hideous 
ruin ' round his devoted head. The bouleversement was general, 
the laughter universal. 

"I am afraid you are half-drowned,''' said Lord Allington, picking 
up the vase , whose water had fallen directly on the white chitter- 
ling of Sir Ignatius's 'best new baby-linen-warehouse shirt.' 

" Or burned," said Mrs. St. Leger, whose childish mischief, 
once awakened, knew no bounds, and who was slyly applying the 
half-extinguished lamp to the well-powdered, well-pomatumed head 
of the prostrate Baronet. 

" Or buried alive," said Claude Campbell, permitting the earth of 
the flower-pot to fall over his head and breast, as he affected to take 
it out of his way. 

Lady Dogherty, whose cheeks glowed 6 deeper and deeper still ' 
with stifled anger and mortification, exclaimed, amidst a profusion 
of Oh ! rays' and ' graciouses,' and ' I am so shocked,'-—" My 
dear Sir Ignatius, how can you be so awkward !" 

Casting a reproachful look at the Doctor, she advanced to raise 
her husband from the ground. Sir Ignatius, however, anticipated 
the movement; and in his efforts to rise, flopped his hands in a flood 
of ink, which (inadvertently applied to his heated brow) produced, 
by the newest lithographic process of transfer, a humorous impres- 
sion, that carried the laughter of the children of a larger growth 
crowding about him to an inextinguishable excess. 

The discomfiture of Sir Ignatius was at its height, and he was 
turning abruptly away to reach the door, when the Princess arrested 
his steps by observing, " You forget your hat, Sir Ignatius;" and 
at the same time presented it with an air of compassed gravity and 
respect. 

" It is the Princess of Schaffenhausen, my dear, who does you 
the honour," said Lady Dogherty. 

" I ax her Royal Highness's pardon," said Sir Ignatius, cheered 
by the distinction. " We were highly disappointed at not overta- 
king your Royal Highness on the road, which was all owing to the 
Doctor's mistake." 



34. 



438 



THE PRINCESS. 



• And may I put in my claims to recognition? " said the Count, 
bendinghis cane and bowing gracefully. " I think I had the honour of 
being your guest, Sir Ignatius ; of being under your hospitable roof, 
and entered on your books." 

The Baronet was now at his wit's end ; he saw the explosion that 
was impending, and his Irish pride and Irish humour both impelled 
him to show fight. 

•• If you are in my books, " replied Sir Ignatius, his Irish blood 
mounting to his brow.' - it was all in the way of trade : but that's no 
raison in life why you should put Rilly Kelly, the barmaid, into 
fours, as Lady D. here tells me you did. And it was all Tallaght- 
hill talk afther all. divel a more, poor little'cratur ! and she as inno- 
cent as a lamb : but never would have got a place, for want of a 
charackter. if Lady Dogherty hadn't turned her into her own lady's- 
maid, and is at this blessed moment here in Brussels to tell the 
same ; and moreover, if she has the pleasure of seeing your High- 
ness, will tell you more of her mind — ay. in troth!" 

A burst of laughter followed this tirade, and Lady Dogherty took 
advantage of its cover, by a sudden jirk, to pull her husband out of 
the room. Sir Ignatius, toojiappy to make his escape, lent his gigan- 
tic bulk to the douce violence of his mortified lady; and found him- 
self, the next moment, with intense delight, on the fourth flight of 
stairs. No. 144. 

The laughter which had favoured the escape of the mystified couple 
was not abated by their departure. 

' ; Lady Frances," said Lord Montressor. wiping his eyes, " do 
come here, and tell us who your friend in the green pelisse is. I 
assure you. she was taken for a fie-fie lady at the theatre, the other 
night. I never saw such a friendship as yours, since the toasted 
cheese business in the Antijacobin." 

1 knownolhing of her."" said Lady Frances angrily, and blushing. 
• She is Lady Anastasia's friend, and I refer you to her." 

" Dear ! *" said Lady Anastasia, " she travelled with Sir Frederick 
Mottram." 

" But the Count." said Lord Alfred, sharply, "seems the ami de 
famille. His acquaintance with the bo?i, gros cavalier seems of 

ancient date ; and the book and the barmaid Come. Count, 

come into court."' 



THE PRINCESS. 



439 



44 To be sure he is,'" said the Count, laughing off a scowl of anger. 
44 He was my host for a week, when I visited the Irish lakes, with 
the FUrstenibourgs, and Lord and Lady Sackville." 

" Then the charmer really is an Irish Baronet?"' asked Mrs. 
St. Leger. 

44 No, but an Irish innkeeper,'' said the Count : 44 I occupied his 
best apartment." 

Dr. de Burgo, during this long scene of mystification of his friends, 
had kept his place at the farther end of the room, behind Lady Mon- 
tressor's couchette, apparently as much amused as one whom it did 
not concern ; and vigilantly prompt to 4 meet the wish,' and 4 explain 
the asking eye,' as eau de luce was required or a sunbeam obtruded. 
But when his personal interests became involved, as being presented 
to the noble circle as a friend of the ridiculed Doghertys, he came 
forward, and drawing up his fine figure, and settling his black stock 
with an air that even Count Katzenellenbogen might have envied, he 
said — 

44 1 remember hearing of your visit to Ireland, Count ; for who did 
not ? The event was European ; and literature has since benefited 
by it. But mistakes may creep into the conceptions of the most 
observant. Are you quite sure that this Irish gentleman was your 
aubergiste? V 

44 Quite Sir," said the Count, coldly. 

44 It is very extraordinary, for I really believe that, however gro- 
tesque and original he may be, Sir Ignatius Dogherty is still, beyond 
all doubt, the representative of one of the most ancient families in 
Ireland, and very wealthy." 

44 Perhaps!" said, the Count, measuring the speaker haughtily 
with his eyes; 44 but he is nevertheless ( or at least was, when I vi- 
sited the Irish lakes ) the master of the Stag's Horns on the Cork road 
to Killarney." 

44 Then I have been strangely imposed on," said the Doctor : 
44 1 met them at Brighton, was introduced to Lady Dogherty, pro- 
fessionally, by my friend the Dowager Lady Dixon ; and finding 
her case one of the most singular that ever occupied medical atten- 
tion, a case that puzzled Halford, Cooper, and Brodie, 1 determined 
to see it out, and to accompany the family to Baden-Baden, of whose 
springs I have the highest opinion." 



440 



THE PRINCESS. 



^ And what may be her complaint?" said Lord Allington. 
" Plethora? — that worst and vulgarest of diseases, too much 
health?" 

" No, sir," said the Doctor, cc she has but one lung." 

" By Jove!" said Lord Allington, " but that is a wapper; for she 
puffs and blows like a porpoise." 

The Doctor permitted the laugh excited by this observation to 
subside ; and then entered on the case, with a display of technical 
eloquence, which had its due effect on the fashionable coterie ; 
every member having some darling hoard of hypochondriasis, that 
was flattered by the medical generalities of the plausible lecturer. 
Even the Count came round, when he passed an eulogium on the 
Brunnens of Germany ; and he invited him to visit his own spa at 
Rodolfsbad, which he expected would absorb the whole profits of 
the Duke of Nassau's establishments, and make him the first bath- 
keeper among the potentates of the Rhine. 

AVhile the Doctor was thus engaging the attention of the company 
in general, Lady Anastasia was making her way with Lady Frances 
in particular ; who severely, and in no measured terms, accused her 
of unwarranted intrusion, in bringing such people down upon so 
select a society. Lady Anastasia, half a fool and half a manoeuvre!*, 
was now going on the Doctor's tack, and was throwing in a word 
about Sir Frederick's intimacy, when she was cut short by Lady 
Frances turning on her heel. She remained, however, standing for 
a while where she had been planted, simpering, smiling, and 
tearing a flower to pieces ; and then took leave of Lady Montres- 
sor, and sidled out of the room. 

Accustomed to similar rebuffs, she was consoled (as she often had 
been ) for the insolence of her great friends, by the use she had made 
of them in paying off her vulgar ones. She had a long arrear to 
settle with the Doghertys, for money lent, carriages shared, dinners 
given ; and Mr. W. W. Macanulty was at that moment paying an 
account of long standing with a Brussels banker, with part of a re- 
mittance which Sir Ignatius had just received from Kerry, and with 
which they were to set off for Baden-Baden on the following day. 

The party now thinned off. The Doctor took his leave, leaving 
the odour of his plausibility behind him. The rest of the gentlemen 
and Mr. St. Leger went to make their toilet for a dinner-party at 



THE PRINCESS. 



441 



the neighbouring chateau of Count Hompesch. There still remained 
Lord Allington, the Count, and the three great ladies : Lord Allington 
reposing himself over a book, the Count thrumming a guitar ; and 
the Princess and Lady Frances in a solemn conference at the Marchi- 
- oness's couchette. The Princess stood with her despotic air of dic- 
tation ; Lady Frances leaned with her face on her arms ; and Lady 
Montressor listened in languid silence, quite exhausted by her morn- 
ing's fatigues. 

" I have nothing more to add, " said the Princess. " Don't mis- 
take common sense for cant. I cannot join your party on any other 
terms. " 

The terms were, that Sir Frederick Mottram, for the sake of that 
decency which even the most profligate of the foreign aristocracy 
preserve, should be followed to Spa, and incorporated with the so- 
ciety. The promise was given ; being extorted by some cabalistical 
word which the Princess murmured in Lady Frances's ear. She then 
took her leave, arrangements having been vaguely made that she 
should meet the party at Frankfort, on its return from Baden, and 
accompany them to her castle on the Rhine, on a certain day. 

The Count, as the Princess withdrew, gave her his arm. " How 
I regret," he said, pressing her hand, not knowing Hompesch, since 
you dine with him to-day. I ought to know him, for he is of one 
of the greatest families in Germany. His father was one of our last 
feudatories of the Rhine who held his courts of justice within the 
walls of his castle. When may 1 hope for the honour of seeing you 
again?" 

"I was just going to ask the same question," said Lord Alfred, 
coming up to the other side of the carriage, in which the Princess 
was then seating herself. 

"Oh! a— a, "said the Princess, coquettishly : "suppose in the 
Count's castle on the Rhine?" 

" Nonsense !" said Lord Alfred, with temper. 

" Well, then," she said, " it may be in one of my ch&teaux — 
en Espagne /" And the carriage drove off. 

The two great ladies still remained in council some minutes after 
the departure of the Princess ; and perceiving Lord Allington, Lady 
Montressor faintly exclaimed, " W hat ! are you still there, Allington ? 
Ain't you been very much amused this morning?" 

34.. 



442 



THE PRINCESS. 



" Very ! " he said, still reading. 

" We have settled everything for our journey," said Lady Fran- 
ces, turning back as she was leaving the room, " and start early to- 
morrow morning." 

" What is to be our first halt?" asked Lord Allington. 

" Spa," said Lady Frances, sighing. 

" So I thought," said his Lordship. 

" Why, for Heaven's sake?" asked Lady Frances, eagerly. 

"Because I heard the Princess say so." 

" What do you think of her?" 

"What I always thought of her," said Lord Allington, reading 
from his book, " ' Elle domine partout oil elle se trouve, et fait 
toujours la sorte d' impression qu'elle veut faired " 

"Humph !" said Lady Frances, still lingering on the threshold of 
the door: " perhaps— but not always : however, we shall see. 1 ' 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Letters on a Journey. 

FROM SIR FREDERICK MOTTRAM, TO HORACE HARVEY, ESQ., 
GLEN DRUID, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. 

" Hotel d'Harschamp, Namur. 

" Dear Horace,— This date will send you back to your Tris- 
tram Shandy, while I am pretty much in the situation of uncle 
Toby, when, one morning, lying on his back in bed, the thought 
came into his head, that if he could purchase such a thing as a large 
map of the town and citadel of Namur, with its environs, etc. etc. 

" I am not exactly on the broad of my back, but on a couch, to 
which I have been only transferred this day from a bed of worse 
than sickness. I have purchased my map of Namur, which lies 



THE PRINCESS. 



443 



before me, with some charming old chronicles and local histories, 
accompanied by sundry less intellectual comforts ( fruits and other 
delicious things, furnished ky the kindness of the governor of the 
province, and the gracious and graceful attentions of his accom- 
plished lady). I am attended, too, by the Sceur Beguine, who nur- 
sed Corporal Trim ; only she is something the worse for the passage 
of a century or so. Having no one motive to proceed or to recede, 
I should be satisfied to eke out the fag-end of my ill-wearing life on 
my easy couch in the hotel of Harschamp, looking on my old plan 
of the town ( printed in the very year of the battle of Ramilies ), 
for the gate of St. Nicholas, where Captain Shandy received his 
wound ; and gloating over the pages of a journey to Spa, through 
Namur, by the beautiful Queen of Navarre, Marguerite de Valois, 
which it is worth coining to Namur to read. There is, I believe, 
a magic in that name— Oh ! those Marguerites ! 

" This leads me to the principal points of your two long and de- 
lightful letters, which, strange to say, I brought here unopened 
from Brussels ; having found them on my table, the night, or rather 
morning, of my departure. And first, as to your anecdote : I have 
been maliciously watched by two or three idle Englishmen at Brus- 
sels, the fourriers of my wife's travelling junta, who have forwar- 
ded their gossip to their scribbling friends in London;— patrons of 
the 'Age,' and contributors to the c Court Journal and the story, 
with many commentaries and conjectures, is the result of their mis- 
chievous activity. 

" The small basis of truth on which their superstructure rests, is 
the fact that, since my arrival in Brussels, I have, for many reasons, 
avoided all English society ; and, above all, that of the set which, by 
connexion and party, were most likely to waste my time, had I given 
into their distribution. Amused, interested, entangled— in short, 
bewitched with Brussels, its old quarters and its new men, its ancient 
school of art and its modern school of politics, I plunged into Bel- 
gian society, cutting all else ; and on this, 'some d d good-natu- 
red friends' (to use Sir Peter Teazle's energetic phrase) have built all 
sorts of ill-natured reports, which have been exaggerated in London, 
for the amusement of the Sunday-morning breakfast tables.* I have 

" Similar absurd and malignant reports of the English party papers have 



444 



THE PRINCESS. 



neither run away from my own wife, nor with any other man's ; 
but an incident has arisen, of which your newspaper authorities 
know nothing, but which has had powerful influence on my late, 
and will have on my future, life. It is an incident that will astonish 
and painfully interest you ; but one on which I cannot trust myself 
to dilate in a letter. I distrust letters : they were not invented ' for 
some wretch's aid; 5 but to betray the honest, and serve the purposes 
of rogues. During my short apprenticeship to foreign diplomacy, 
I have seen such things done with letters ! Louis the Fifteenth, with 
his mistresses gloating over the broken seals of half the correspon- 
dence of Europe, while the post-master general stood shaking out 
his sack, is no solitary fact. I have seen things done equally vile; 
and if the actors had been private individuals, and not ministers, 
kings, or concubines, equally pendablcs. 

" Now, though this be not a case of diplomacy, I will not commit 
my feelings and infirmities to paper ; and give up the most intimate 
passages of my life to the chances of a dropped letter, or to the false 
keys of intriguing curiosity. Still, from you I will withhold no- 
thing ; and more especially on this subject, to which you are yourself 
not wholly a stranger. Let us therefore meet at your earliest leisure; 
and, if possible, here in Belgium, whence we can proceed wherever 
you please ; for I will not now return to England, for I know not 
how long a time ; and have written to Mr. Harris to this purpose. 

And now for my illness, and detention in this old historical town. 
The night before I left Brussels, I was at a fete in a forest (such a 
fete ! and such a forest ! ) where I met the notables of the country, 
ministers, deputies, ( all of the new coin, with the fire-stamp fresh 
and unworn on the bold-cut medals,) together with professors, 
artists, authors, journalists, and savans; intellect, in short, in all 
its varieties and departments. This party was given by a Madame 
Marguerite, a portrait-painter. I am not sure, but I think I men- 
tioned her to you in my letter from Bruges : though I did not then 

appeared respecting the private life of the highest personages in Belgium, 
which would produce a smile in the well-informed, if the scandalous politi- 
cal purposes they are intended to forward did not provoke indignation. 
This petty warfare, whether it be of espionage or of invention, is a disgrace to 
the public who encourage, no less than of the tools who practise, it. 



THE PRINCESS. 



445 



know who she was. This, by the bye, is the person with whom it 
is reported ye me suis eclipse, because I was met in her carriage by 
Alfred Montressor in the streets of Brussels : though I have never 
seen or heard of her since her soiree, and probably never shall. 
An event, however, did occur on that night of the most agitating 
nature, which drove me from the crowd, into the darkest, dampest 
depths of the surrounding forest, where I threw myself on a bank 
under a spreading oak dripping with the night dew. In a word, 

4 A summer's night in greenwood spent' 

did not exactly furnish 1 the morrow's merriment; ' for I set off for 
Namur w ith a burning fever in my veins ; suffered myself to be de- 
tained on the road ; in short, committed all sorts of imprudences. 

" As you like an anecdote or an incident picked up on the high- 
way of accident, here is one, to which 1 stand indebted for some 
further insight into national feeling here, and to an increase of fever 
into the bargain. 

" My servants had begged of me to let them stop to breakfast at 
Waterloo ; as I had left Brussels without much consideration for 
their wants. Sol walked on, partly in my restlessness, and partly to 
shake off a swarm of brawling children and old women, who besieg- 
ed me on the eternal field, with the usual solicitations of—' Com- 
mencez par Veglise, monsieur. Je suis le guide pourle cliamp 
de bataille, et pour la botte de Milord Oxbric/i.' In raising my 
eyes on the lion which still crowns the monticule, ( ' ce monument 
gigantesquej says the Guide-book, ' eleve au j'eune heros qui scella 
de son sang Vindependance de sa patrie/) the thought crossed 
my mind, that the hero had, since then, marched at the head of an 
hostile array against the independence of Belgium. At the moment, 
a young Belgian officer, loitering along the road, joined me. He was 
in command of a troop of horse, which was reposing under the 
shade of trees, and formed a true halte de brigade of Wouvermans. 
Slightly touching his cap, he said, 

'* ' That monument is in a perilous situation. Without perpetual 
repairs, the lion will soon lie prostrate ; for the mount on which it 
stands is but the earth of the neighbouring field, piled up without 
any solid foundation. But it has already survived many of its con- 



446 



THE PRINCESS. 



sequences, and has served its temporary purpose. Where are now 
the combinations of which the murderous and hard-contested battle 
it commemorates was to have been the seal ? where the settlement 
of Europe, that was to ensure the peace of centuries ! Since then, 
what an overthrow of all diplomatic arrangements !' 
" ( Of not a few, certainly,' I admitted. 

" 4 A few !' replied the \ Q\m%milUaii"e, with animation. ' Par 
exemple ! Belgium free ; Holland driven back on its own resour- 
ces ; England reformed ; Ireland emancipated ; the legitimate Bour- 
bons in exile ; Spain and Portugal revolutionized ! How little now 
remains of the great work of the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle, to 
bear testimony to the political wisdom de ces Graves rois, who in 
their estimate of Europe only overlooked the nations which inhabit 
it, n'est-ce pas, monsieur ?' 

" There was something mortifying and unanswerable in the rapid 
sum-up of the final results of the battle of Waterloo. It only wan- 
ted that my young soldier should have known that he was walking 
with one of the party in England which had taken such a share in 
that congress, to make the ridicule of my position complete. To 
evade the topic, I asked him if there was anything worth seeing in a 
picturesque point of view, in that neighbourhood, and he replied, 

"'Ah! Monsieur est a?*tiste done! Tant mieux. Our 
Belgium furnishes so many fine subjects. A friend of mine, Mon- 
sieur Fourmois,* has been occupied upon one of them,— the ruins 
of the Abbey of Villers close by. You cannot do better than visit 
it. When you arrive at Quatre-Bras, look to the east. You will 
see a long line of forest falling like a curtain on the horizon. It is 
the only part of the forest of Soignes which the hatchet of specula- 
tion has altogether spared. You will plunge into its romantic 
recesses ; and in the bosom of a delicious valley, watered by refresh- 
ing streams, you will see the abbey. It was founded by St. Bernard, 
the adversary of Abelard, and has many points of interest.' 

" At that moment, my carriage overtook us. My companion saw 
his mistake ; but did not the less press on my notice his abbey of 
Villers, with that national pride which is now so very obvious in all 

* Monsieur Fourmois has since produced some splendid views of the 
environs of Spa. 



THE PRINCESS. 



447 



ranks in Belgium. I proceeded on his recommendation; went 
some miles out of my road, and found the noble ruins of the beau- 
tiful structure, with the surrounding scenery, so much in harmony 
with my own gloomy feelings, that I loitered among them for some 
hours, arrived at Namur late in the evening, took to my bed, became 
delirious, and, instead of proceeding to meet my wife at Spa, 
remained for four days in utter unconsciousness. The Governor of 
the province, Baron de Stassart, who seems to have found me out 
by inspiration, provided me with every aid and attendance my state 
required. I have had excellent medical advice, and am now per- 
mitted to pursue my journey after another day's rest. 

' ' I have interrupted my letter for a drive in the environs of Na- 
mur, from which I have returned refreshed and almost amused. 
Let no one visit these ancient and picturesque sites of the Low Coun- 
tries, till they have set aside all classical associations, and replaced 
them by the stirring - events and more touching images of the middle 
ages. This old Namur, for instance, what a picture! and what a 
monument ! nestled in its lovely glen at the confluence of two noble 
rivers ; overhung by its rocky and awful heights, bristled with the 
fearful engines of violence and destruction ! The country on every 
side so beautiful and so rich ! the cheerful, joyous peasantry, so well 
conditioned, so well dressed, so beyond the miseries and privations 
of the same classes in other countries! 

" From the little that I have seen, and the much that I have heard 
of the Namurois from their excellent Governor and Governess, they 
completely answer the Abbe de Pradt's character of the Belgians in 
general : ' Voulez-vous un peuple bon, franc, hospitaller, labo- 
rieux, econome, amide Vordre et de la regularity? vous le trou- 
verez dans le Beige S And yet these lovely valleys, these fruitful 
plains, peopled by a mild and industrious race, have for ages been 
the battle-field where the despots of Europe have met to vent their 
ferocious passions, and to spread desolation on the soil that lay in 
the way of their mad ambition. There is scarcely a nation of the 
great civilized commonwealth which has not a long account of wrong 
to settle with this devoted country, that cries for reparation ; and if 
the diplomacy which is now at work shall establish for Belgium 
centuries of peace and of industry, ( while it will ensure the largest 
\um of human happiness that it is perhaps capable of bestowing, 



448 



THE PRINCESS. 



it will only discharge a small part of its long-accumulating debt. I 
am surprised that this has never before struck me. You will say 
that I am coming round to your opinions : but it is one thing to 
read of victories in gazettes ; another to come into personal contact 
with the humanity they afflict. 

" In looking upon this paradise of the Sambre and Meuse, and 
on the gigantic citadel frowning above it, I did not wonder that 
that splendid fellow, Don Juan of Austria, conceived such a passion 
for the scene, and made it his favourite residence. 

" But I dare say, while you have the history of the ' race 
d' Agamemnon, qui ne finit jamais'' at your fingers' ends, you 
know nothing of the memoirs of my Don Juan. The son of the 
Emperor Charles the Fifth by a beautiful Belgian,* he was the most 
favoured of all our Elizabeth's suitors, and the bravest and hand- 
somest cavalier of his day. He first came to Namur to watch the 
steps of the beautiful Marguerite de Valois, '/« feinme la plus 
coquette et la plus spirituelle de son siecle 7 ' says my old Chro- 
nicle. She was suspected of some French intrigue, ( organized by 
her mother, Catherine de Medicis,) when she visited Spa; and Don 
Juan, instead of treacherously waylaying, fell in love with her — and 
with Namur too which he made the seat of his government and 
vice-regal court from that moment. His life and death form a ro- 
mantic tragedy : he died in the flower of his age, his beauty, his 
heroism, and his popularity 5 poisoned, says Strada, by his half-bro- 
ther, Philip the Second, who feared the ascendency of his genius, and 
his superior personal merit. Such was the diplomacy of those times. 

iC You will laugh at these historical legends getting possession 
of my imagination : but Marguerite and Juan have for me far deeper 
interests than the virgins and monsters of your legends of the 
Rhine, after which the English are running. The Marguerites of 
the sixteenth century (the first queen of Navarre, and this clever, 
beautiful, but fearful Marguerite of Valois, ) would make a singular - 
and amusing work. You will think that I am as mad about names 
as Mr. Shandy. Perhaps I am so, and on more points than that: 
but, above all,— I tell it you in confidence, Horace,— I am mise- 
rable ! " F.M. " 



* Marguerite Van Geesle of Oudenarde, 



THE PROCESS. 



449 



Letter II. 

FROM SIR FREDERICK MOTTRAM TO HORACE HARYEY. ESQ 

"Namur. 

" Namur ! still at Namur? Yes. still here. 1 sent you off a letter 
yesterday by our old friend Gen. C, with whom I ascended the 
heights of the citadel. The view from it is superb beyond descrip- 
tion. As a military position, it is strong, though partially comman- 
ded; and in the campaigns of 1790, 1, 2, 3, and 4, it was an im- 
portant place. It makes me sick, melancholy, desponding, to 
witness the immense sums unavailingly expended on such places, 
for the destruction of man ; while every sous given for his benefit 
is calculated, measured, and grudged. 1 cannot enter into techni- 
cal details; but what men, what genius, what efforts have been 
brought to bear against this fortress of Namur! Louis XIV.. 
William III., Lowendahl, the revolutionary Generals Valence and 
Hatry, have all been engaged in its siege; and on each occasion what 
has been the result of this employment? — carnage, desolation, and 
the transfer of aheap of ruins ; without one permanent consequence, 
even to the short-sighted governments which so misdirected the re- 
sources placed at their disposition by the people. In short, dear 
Horace, we neither study modern history, nor visit the sites connec- 
ted with the great events which bear upon our existences political 
and social, as much as we ought. What is the Campidoglio or the 
Tarpeian rock to us ! when compared to the plains and fortresses 
of modern Europe, which England has so often and so recently 
bathed with her best blood, to the exhaustion of her national re- 
sources, and sometimes to the detriment of her national principles. 
And yet, after all, the interest conferred upon this spot by the single 
pencil-touch of genius, its consecration by the ideal presence of 
Captain Shandy and corporal Trim, exceeds all that history with its 
blood-stained pages has bestowed upon it. 

" On our return from the fortress, we dined at the Government- 
house. The conversation abounded with information on the subject 
of this renovated, and, to me, interesting, country. Namur, not- 

35. 



450 



THE PRINCESS. 



withstanding its commanding citadel, took its part in the late revo- 
lution; affording another instance of the influence of municipal 
institutions on the recent destinies of Belgium. After all that has 
been said on the merits of centralization as an element of force, of 
combination, and of economy in national government, it is at the 
same time an element as readily turned against the people as for 
them. The contrary system has prevailed in the Low Countries. 
The House of Austria, as much from necessity as principle, left the 
details of local administration in the hands of the ancient municipa- 
lities ; and the subsequent French occupation did not break through 
the habits of self-government of the Belgians. 

44 By the constitution cf the kingdom of the Netherlands, councils, 
elected by the people of each district, and of a most popular charac- 
ter, formed a recognized part of the system of government ; and 
when the revolt against the Dutch, or rather the House of Nassau, 
took place, there existed in every city a body enjoying public con- 
fidence, ready to receive the sceptre of power as it feil from the 
hands of the ejected authorities. Men. well known to all, were pre- 
sent on every spot, to lead the people, to moderate their passions, to 
control brigandage, and to maintain order ; and thus the barring 
out of one city was converted in a few days into a national revolu- 
tion. Such a man was our excellent host Baron de Stassart, gover- 
nor of NamuF, who having filled a variety of posts in the public ser- 
vice, was an ensign of probity and talent for his fellow-citizens to 
rally round. On the 1st of November 1830, Namur rose in arms 
against its Dutch garrison, and reduced it to a prompt capitulation. 
On the 2nd, Baron de Stassart took the command of the province by 
general consent ; and , without any other authority than the volun- 
tary and confiding submission of the people, he succeeded perfectly 
in his self-appointed mission of peace. The province continued the 
image of a united family, amidst the perils and agitations of the re- 
volution ; while it contributed its undivided energies to forwarding 
the new order of things which succeeded. 

;i It was at the fete in the forest that I first met the Baron de 
Stassart. He has Wane hi sous le hamois of civil administration; 
and was confidentially employed by Napoleon, both at home and in 
Italy. The Baron is a litterateur, as well as a statesman; and one 
of the few European men remaining, who, having been formed in 



THE PROCESS. 



4ol 



the great school of the French revolution, entertain views extending 
beyond a municipality or a nation. Madame de Stassart is an accom- 
plished and charming person, and tient son salon, as a Parisian lady 
only can do. 

M I start for Spa to morrow, by Liege and Chaude Fontaine, a 
route strongly recommended to me by the Baron. Everything I see 
and hear now interests me for this country : and. as the subject is 
new. I bless my sin of ignorance, which obliges me to make a course 
of middle-age reading ; calculated to open new stores of literary 
and romantic associations to middle-aged gentlemen, whose habits 
of mind have been formed by the classic : Goliahs of the Bodleian 
library.' I shall make the Ardennes my head-quarters till my wife's 
return from Baden. I won't go there. • f hat"s flat : 1 she would not 
wait for me at Spa: for I saw this day her name in the Eclaireur 
(the Xamur journal | . among the arrivals and departures from that 
once famous resort of idleness and dissipation, that haunt of poten- 
tates and pickpockets. Direct to me then at Spa. if you do not come 
yourself. As time and space are now 'annihilated." I can receive 
your answer in a few days ; and shall wait for it : et sur eela. je 
prie Dieu, etc., etc. 

Letter III. 

FROM SIR FREDERICK MOTTRAM TO HORACE HARVEY . ESQ. 

•• Claude Fontaine. 

M The date of this will surprise you. I dare say you never heard 
of Claude Fontaine: nor I neither, till 1 gave myself up to the sway 
of chance, which has certainly varied my life of late- if it has not 
improved my humour. 1 am as wayward as a spoiled child : and . 
like all spoiled children, I am governed by impulse : and live 
and loiter on. without object as without result. All the voli- 
tion I have left is expended in writing to you : I make you no apo- 
logy, for I know your kindly, and. above, all. your steady, feelings. 
I have but one means of lightening the tax my selfishness thus im- 
poses : and that. is. by keeping to subjects which have a charm for 
you. I have not made a step in this journey that your idea and that 
of another person have not followed me. All here responds to 



452 



THE PRINCESS. 



your artist's taste, and to your philantrophic views : political inde- 
pendance, according to your ideas ; and a country beautiful beyond 
description. 

" The road from Namur to Liege along the Meuse, combines 
every feature that makes the beautiful and the sublime of river 
scenery : on its left bank, the mansions of wealthy industriels, the 
comfortable dwellings of rural gentry ! clustering villages, the 
towers of feudal chieftains, or the spires of suppressed convents ; 
on the right, a range of bold rugged rocks, shooting up from the 
very bed of the stream, coloured with the richest tints, and bristling 
with the vegetation of centuries. The valley of the Meuse constitutes 
one of the richest mining districts of the Low Countries, abounding 
in iron, lead, zinc, and coal; and the working of these mate- 
rials, if it sometimes detracts from the picturesque effect of the scene, 
not less frequently adds to it, by combinations which confer a moral 
beauty on its mere pictorial loveliness. Numerous trim and pros- 
perous villages, inhabited by the thriving workmen, rich in the 
images of rural comfort, are not less gracious to the eye than to the 
heart of spectators like yourself. 

" There is not a bourg or a hamlet along the Meuse, that has not 
also its historical reminiscence. Even the little town of Ardennes 
is remarkable as the site of the first monastery of the Low Coun- 
tries, founded by St. Beghe, the nucleus of the chapter of Dames 
Nobles at Namur ; and the fact induced me to stop, where no 
English traveller, I suspect, ever stopped before : but thereby hangs 
a tale. In the midst of the defile of the Meuse, stands the fortress 
of Huy, the key to its military pass. Rising boldly across the glen, 
as if to block the passage of invasion, it bristles over the antiquated 
town, which reposes at the base of the receding heights. The jag- 
ged forms of the old feudal castle mingle with the less picturesque 
outlines of a modern fortification, pierced with innumerable loop- 
holes, and presenting a succession of frowning batteries. 

" Huy, from the circumstances of its position, has been the scene 
of military adventure in all ages. Here the powerful bishops of 
Liege aided their friends the Spaniards against the States-general ; 
here the Spaniards defended themselves and fought against Louis 
the Fourteenth 5 and here ( and not in Rome, ) resided the general 
of those military monks, Les Croisief-s, whose preaching and ex- 



THE PROCESS. 



453 



ample assisted to unite the Christians of all Europe in the expedition 
to the Holy Sepulchre. Here, also, Margaret of Valois, my Queen 
of Navarre, whose journey I am reading, encountered an adventure 
coloured with more than the romance of her romantic age. I would 
tell it, but that you would accuse me of Margaret-mania ; and, per- 
haps, not without reason. 

" On approaching Liege, the genius of manufacture takes a gra- 
dual precedence over the genius of war and of feudality ; and in the 
very environs of its seven celebrated abbeys, and under the stately 
roofs of its baronial chateaux, the fume of the forge rises, and the 
clang of the hammer resounds. The old episcopal city itself is— but 
I cannot enter into its details, because it is — Binningham ! I must 
not, however, pass over the antique ecclesiastical palace of its war- 
rior Prince-bishops, with its square courts and arched galleries of 
an almost Moorish architecture, which resembles the Doge's palace 
at Venice. In this palace, Marguerite was received with her little 
French court, by the gallant Bishop of Liege, Gerard de Groesbeck : 
but its chambers and halls are now appropriated to other purposes 
than those of princely show, or clerical luxury and holy gallantry. 
I lingered, however, amidst its ancient magnificence, and its present 
coarseness and trumpery, ( for it is a sort of grotesque Palais Royal, ) 
with an interest which, I blush to say, I did not bring to the steam- 
engines of Mr. Cockerell. But, notwithstanding my wayward 
humour, it is impossible for an Englishman not to be struck with 
the bustling activity of this prosperous city ; or to withhold his 
sympathy for a brave and industrious population, thriving by their 
own efforts, under a free government of their own choice, and a 
king of their own election. Leopold is extremely popular here ; 
and they are making active preparations for his approaching reception. 
He is expected in the town, with his fair young queen, in a few days. 

" With all possible respect for the venerable city and its well- 
denominated braves Lie'geois, I rushed from its hot, bustling, 
noisy streets, and plunged with delight into scenes of such quiet 
and refreshing beauty as reminded me at every step of Italy, and 
especially of Tuscany. The broad road that leads from Liege to the 
very verge of the Ardennes, winds along the garden shores of the 
silvery Vesdre, spotted with villas and pavilions, and fringed with 
orchards, flower-knots, and vineyards, which crown the summits 

35.. 



454 



THE PRINCESS. 



of the most craggy rocks. Although my courier had written to 
Spa to order apartments and dinner, I found it impossible to gallop 
through Chaude Fontaine ; so I sent forward Herr Kircher to make 
what arrangements he might, and have already lingered away three 
days in the environs of this elysium. There is a balsamic mildness 
in the air, which communicates its serenity to the feelings. The 
atmosphere is as genial as its fountains. I have been quaffing at its 
health-giving springs, which bubble up, warm and abundant, in a 
little island rising from amidst the peculiarly icy water of the Ves- 
dre. This may well be the native region of Gretry and of Lairesse, 
( the Rossini and the Raphael of Belgium ; ) for such elements go to 
form such men. I am sumptuously lodged in a comfortable auberge, 
between the village and the vast and majestic ruins of Chauvremont, 
which looks like the watch-tower of the Ardennes. 

The historical legends connected with this edifice ( the very highest 
romance of history) I picked up on a book-stall at Liege ; and 1 am 
now going to ascend its heights, and read among the splendid ruins 
the ' joustes et faits ' of the Seigneur de Chevremont, and of Noger- 
le-Grand, Prince-bishop of Liege, which, with the episode of 8 La 
Dame Gerbage et le Chevalier Gisilbert,' strike with more novelty, 
at least on the imagination, than Herr Roland and his nun, and their 
eternal loves. I heard that 6 legend of the Rhine ' sung, on board 
the Ostend treckschuyt, by a Miss Tyler, of Milk-street, (not, how- 
ever, quite as Schiller has sung it;) and it has ever since been star- 
ing me in the face, from half the Guide-books of the Rhine which 
strew the tables of every travelling party one encounters. In the 
temper I am now in, 8 77 me faut du nouveau, n'en fut-il plus 
au monde V Whatever rouses my dreary spirits is a miracle wrought 
in my favour. 1 am off for Spa to-morrow, where I shall wait for 
your letters. 

Yours, 

88 F. M. » 

Letter IV. 

PROM SIR FREDERICK MOTTRAM TO HORACE HARVET, ESQ. 

••Spa. 

" Now am I in the forest of Ardennes- 'the more fool V 



THE PRINCESS. 



455 



(perhaps : ) yet, alas ! I cannot add, with Touchstone, 'when I was 
at home, I was in a better place. ' I really believe, that if I had 
my choice, from Indus to the Pole, this is just the spot I would 
select. Jaques, in his most wild and wayward mood, did not enjoy 
the Forest of Ardennes, or throw off more thoroughly ' all the 
penalties of nature, save those of Adam, the season's changes, ' 
(pretty frequent here, by the bye,) than I do. 1 have this antique 
little village all to myself : its hotels are empty, its streets almost 
deserted; and if its redoutes are open, I have not passed their 
threshold, nor met even the ghost of an English traveller to scare 
8 my eyes or grieve my heart. ' 

" I live in the depths of the forest, follow the wolf-tracks, and 
revel in sites which the English tourist in search of the picturesque 
(for ' the trade') never dreams of visiting. These gentlemen, thank 
Heaven ! are now on their pilgrimage to the Rhine, with the Tylers, 
the Doghertys, the Montressors, and the Lady Frances Mottrams. 1 
am lodged here, (like Peter the Great, when he visited Spa, ) ' dans 
une hutte, ' hanging as it were by a peg from a wooden declivity 
above the promenade de sept heures, with one of those "fon- 
taines vives, ' as they are poetically called, gushing from a rocky 
basin, and tumbling among beds of flowers, of which Nature, or 
perhaps Christine of Sweden, first flung the seeds. My habits are 
as wild as my wanderings : I go by the sun ; drink of the medicinal 
springs prepared in the laboratory of old Mother Earth; eat when 
I am hungry, and lie down to rest merely because I am weary. I 
shall stay, as was the fashion when Spa itself was the fashion some 
fifty years ago. till the wolves* come in and turn me out ; except my 
wife joins me sooner. On my arrival I found a note from her at the 
post-office, which is worth copying, as eminently characteristic; 
and thus it runs :— - 

li 'I was much disappointed not to find you here, as your note, 
dated Brussels, led me to expect. Without asking your motives for 
this delay, 1 shall only express a hope that it is not occasioned by 
indisposition ; and that 1 may have the pleasure of seeing you at 
Baden, as soon as you find it your convenience to join our really 
agreeable party. We have lost, however, one of its most pleasant 
members, -Montague, St. Leger ; who was sent for to London just 



456 



THE PRLNCESS. 



as we were starting. The old tory Duchess, his grandmother, has 
teased the whigs into making him envoy extraordinary to some of the 
Northern courts. Lord Aubrey has written to his whig friends to 
get Claude Campbell appointed secretary of legation. My maid 
thinks she saw a footman in your livery, in the streets of Namur, 
as we hurried through ; but I suppose she was mistaken. The 
Princess of Schaffenhausen is not with us. I mention this as a 
peace-offering. She is detained by law business in Brussels, and 
cannot receive us at her castle on the Rhine. Our society salutes 
you, with yours, etc. etc. 

" ' F. MOTTRAM. 

" 6 P.-S. I am sorry to say that dear Georgina Montressor is rather 
losing than gaining health ; though she is still sometimes as brilliant 
and delightful as ever. She has derived great benefit from the skill 
of a very clever travelling physician, Dr. De Burgo, who is besides 
rather an amusing person, and plays sweetly on the guitar. 

" ' F. M. ' 

kC This precious document needs no comment! I have written 
her two lines, merely to say 1 shall expect her by the 23rd of next 
month. If she fails, the penalty be on her head ! 

' L Your letter, directed to Brussels, has this moment arrived, 
forwarded (with money) by Monsieur Engler. Well, there is no 
chance then of our meeting in the Ardennes ! How your sense of 
filial duty would tell in poetry ! Pope turned his to fame; and the 
maternal tenderness of Madame de Sevigne (recorded in such prose 
as none but she ever wrote) has made her immortality ! After all, 
the affections do go for something, out of the frozen circles of Eng- 
lish bon-ton ; where a man takes it as a personal insult to be asked 
for his mother : I am sure any one of Lady Frances's exclusives 
would. It is quite curious to see how she and Alfred Montressor 
stand in check of each other! Ouf! 

" I break off and resume, as I am hunted by uneasy sensations, 
or as the sun shines or the shower falls ; and have just been driven 
home. Home! (alas! I have no home)— well, sent back to my hut 
by a torrent of such rain as I never witnessed but in Italy. The more 
I see of the environs of this place, the more it suits my present tastes 
and views. I should like to raise a monument in the forest to the 



THE PRINCESS. 



457 



honest blacksmith who, some centuries ago, purchased a few i bon- 
nier 's de bois 1 from the Prince Bishop of Liege, cleared away the 
brambles that choked the spring of the Pouhon, raised a few huts, 
and thus laid the foundation of Spa, — the future rendezvous of poli- 
tical and amatory intrigue of all Europe. The forest of Ardennes 
smells of early English poetry. It has all the greenwood freshness 
• of Shakspear's scenes ; and it is scarcely possible to feel the truth 
and beauty of his exquisite ' As you Like It, ' without having loiter- 
ed, as I have done, amidst its tangled glens and magnificent depths. 
I am living as if I had drunk from the lotos leaf, forgetful of 4 friends, 
lovers, countrymen;' and as to politics, provided the five great 
powers do not, in their contentions about Luxembourg, meddle with 
my Spa, and throw back my poetical forest into the cold, clammy 
grasp of Holland, they may ' take all the rest the world goes 
round. ' 

" There is something extremely primitive in this place. The 
honest inhabitants are principally occupied with a minor and very 
simple branch of the fine arts, the painting flowers, and their own 
beautiful scenery, on all sorts of trifling elegancies, fabricated of the 
wood of the surrounding forest ; which, when steeped in the mineral 
springs, receives a delicate tint, well adapted to form a fine ground 
for their vivid colours. In one of the little magazines of this domes- 
tic industry, where I was bespeaking a portfolio for you, I saw a 
large folding-screen painting by a delicate and very pretty girl. It 
represented the circumstances of Margaret de Valois' journey to the 
Ardennes. The artist was at the moment employed upon a 6 halt, ' 
where a sudden impracticability in the way obliged the royal cortege 
to return on its steps to Liege. There was then no Macadamized 
road to bowl along, from Namur to Aix-la-Chapelle. She shewed 
me the coloured drawing from which she was working ; such an 
exquisite thing ! the grouping, the costume, so bold, so historical ; 
Marguerite's white palfrey, the obsequious and gallant Prince-bishop, 
the Queen's handsome and favoured cavalier, so obviously marked : 
in short, it was a fine 6 cavalcade, ' in the best Flemish manner. 

" In the corner was written, 6 Marguerite.' One might have 
thought that the drawing was by the accomplished young Queen 
herself; but it was marque au coin in more than the literal sense. 
I knew the style, and was not surprised to find it in the hands of the 



458 



THE PRINCESS. 



Spa artist, by the orders of the Princess of Schaffenhausen, the pa- 
troness of that Madame Marguerite 1 have mentioned to you, and by 
whom the drawing was made. 

" The work, it seems, is destined for a residence, un petit chd- 
teau in the Ardennes, called L 'Oubliette, which the puissante dame 
has lately purchased : a strange name, that ; as if that stirring and 
ambitious spirit who is its mistress ever wished to be forgotten. I 
offered any sum to outbid the Princess ; but the morals of Spa were 
proof against bribes. I could not even obtain a duplicate without 
her permission ; and so the Princess has been written to. She is 
still, it appears, at Brussels, and does not join the party on the 
Rhine. She will probably pass through Spa to visit V Oubliette, 
which, I hear, is a curious antique gentilhommiere, delightfully 
situated. 

" I have picked up some ' indigenes, "* in my wanderings, whose 
local information and peculiarities give an interest and almost dra- 
matic effect to the place, and whose courteous civilities Timon 
himself could not resist. One is a Belgian Baron, of a noble Liegeois 
family, quite a character for a French comedy. He has visited Spa 
annually from the time of Marie Therese, and carries about an 
album, with the autographs or all the crowned heads who have 
drunk of the Pouhon for the last sixty years. He turns out to be 
an admirer of the Princess of Schaffenhausen, to whom he has been 
offering ses hommages at Brussels. Another is Monsieur le Bourg- 
mestre, a modest, courteous, and very intelligent gentleman ; and 
the third, a respectable ancien avocat of Brussels, who also has 
spent his summer in Spa for the last quarter of a century, with 
madame son epouse. He takes up the chronicle of Spa just 
where the Baron leaves off indignantly — at the French occu- 
pation. 

" I have another friend, of an humbler class, who has made a part 
and parcel of Spa, God knows how long, and who looks like the 
Merlin of the mines. He is a mineralogist, and lives under the craggy 
heights which overhang the town, in a hovel shining with spars, and 
filled with minerals and butterflies, made up in boxes for sale, by 
which the poor old hermit lives. His conversation is full of local 
information. He has walked and talked with all the seigneurs et 
domes vemis aux eaux minerales de Spa during the long period 



THE PRINCESS. 



459 



of his residence here. He pointed out to me the old house 1 Le 
Dauphin J in the Grande Place, where, in 1774, lodged the two 
French celebrities, the Princesses de Poix and de Hennin ( the 
latter, the rival of Sophy Arnaud), with their circle of Craons, Beau- 
vaus, and Boufflers, the habitues of Madame du Demand's salon, 
of whose absence she so much complains in her letters to Horace 
Walpole. 

"My venerable cicerone has taken me also to the site of the 
Mouton blanc, the auberge in fashion in 1775, when it was occu- 
pied by the Prince and Princess de Guiminee. The Prince is regis- 
tered in the old man's chronicle as ' commandant en survivance 
of the gendarmes of the King cf France and the Princess, as '-gou- 
vernante en survivance des Enfans de FranceV A little further 
on is the name of Madame de Genlis, gouvernante en activite, I 
suppose, to les Enfans d'Orleans : a curious approximation ! 
Where now are les Enfans de France ? and where les Enfans 
d' Orleans I 

" We have visited, too, the apartment occupied by the witty Bel- 
gian Prince de Ligne, whence he dates one of his pleasant letters. 
He is recorded in the Fasti of Spa as ' proprietaire d'un regiment 
d'infanterie de son nom, 'etc. I daily tread the promenade where 
stood the house (since burned) in which the beautiful Duchess of 
Devonshire and her coterie resided ; and I scent the wild and self- 
sown successors of a garden of flowers, amidst which she bloomed 
— ' herself the fairer flower.' I took home with me a published vo- 
lume of Morning-Post diaries of arrivals and departures of the last 
century. It contains names and recalls events that stir one even to 
recollect ! Sovereigns, ministers, warriors, celebrities of all casts 
and predicaments, have for many generations deposited in this para- 
dise some of their mischievous energies : but Spa, long chosen as the 
favourite mart of every intrigue, the temple of every species of pro- 
fligacy, is now regaining something of its original romantic quiet. 

" It is the fashion here to hire one of the stout steeds of the coun- 
try , to dress in a blouse, to sling a fowling-piece over your shoulder, 
and, hiring a guide mounted like yourself, to proceed on sporting 
excursions into the Ardennes, which extends into the duchy of 
Luxembourg. I leave Spa to-morrow on such an expedition, and 
thus equipped. The handsome blue blouse, strapped on with a 



400 



THE PRINCESS. 



broad leathern belt, and a large straw hat. are just the most light, 
commodious, and becoming dress which reason and dandyism could 
combine to invent. I have two or three motives in undertaking 
this excursion. In the first place, the royal progress makes Spa one 
of its stations; my new friends are all in a bustle, and all 

' That world of businesses. 

Which by interpretation are mere nothings.'' 

that have enabled me to vary the monotony of my own triste 
thoughts, are for the present suspended. In the next place, I am 
in want of more vigorous exercise than this loitering life affords ; 
and I prefer the Ardennes to the Rhine, which I am determined to 
cut, for many cogent reasons. 

'•The very idea of the German principalities, and their eternal 
Badens. with their pompous insignificance and prim solemnities, 
makes me sick beyond the power of all their waters to cure. Amidst 
'the pleasures of these pathless woods,' one is certain of not being 
elbowed at every step by those petty sovereigns of absolute Liliputs. 
4 some twenty miles in circumference. 7 who, with incomes about the 
half of my own, expect as much servile homage as the Emperor of 
all the Russias. They were great nuisances when I was in Germany 
many years ago, and for ever in one's way : and now, that many of 
them have swelled into minor monarchs, despotic as the Grand Turk, 
by the choppings and changings, the makings and the marrings of 
the European top-sawyers, 1 can imagine their courts to have become 
absolutely insupportable. You will tell me that I have contributed 
my mite to all this ; and it is true : but when the arrangement of 
the balance of Europe was before the cabinet council, other views 
than those suggested by a journey to the Rhine par terre et par 
mer, predominated. Shut up as the last generation of statesman 
have been in our own island, it is not very surprising if we blun- 
dered a little in our calculations of foreign affairs. 

"I have obtained a charming carte du pays from my friends, 
for my tour through the Ardennes and into Luxembourg. My 
Bourgmestre tempts me with scenes of the golden age of pastoral 
poetry, and with ehasses and battues, for which Nimrod might 
have pawned his crown. My old Baron talks of monumens et 



THE PRINCESS. 



461 



autrcs vestiges du moy en-age ; creneaux, donjons, et anti- 
ques cast els. Ah! Seigneur Dieu ! it est passe, ce bon vieux 
temps. My old gnome of the mines boasts of the exhaustless trea- 
sures of the province, the iron, the lead, and the antimony, with a 
whole geology of various formations ; and he has sent me to Martilly, 
where they fish for river pearls, which he called 6 Les Marguerites 
des Marguerites.'' 

I must break off abruptly, having just met Lord C. — , on his 
way back from Frankfort. He is hastening home for private thea- 
tricals at Hatfield, and a battue in perspective at Strathfieldsay. I 
trembled lest he should discover my designs upon the Ardennes. 
He takes charge of this letter, and of some odds and ends of the 
fabrique of Spa, for your study. He is now at my elbow, and 
scarcely leaves me time to add, that I am, etc. etc. "FM." 

Letter V. 

■• FROM SIR FREDERICK MOTTRA3I TO HORxVCE HARVEY, ESQ. 

" Ecternach in the Ardennes. 

" Dear Horace, — You have no doubt heard of Rome and her 
seven hills ; but never , I dare say, of Echternach, 6 la ville aux 
sept collines.' But to begin with the beginning, and give you an 
idea of my wanderings; — after bagging a whole battue of gelinottes 
and black game, starting a stag, missing a boar, losing myself in the 
endless windingsof the forest, and having plunged nearly neck-deep 
in a torrent, by neglecting the advice of my guide, I at last came in 
view of a little donjon, a tiny chateau, with its turrets and crenel- 
les, and all the external forms of feudal power in miniature— a toy 
to put on the round-table of some fair disciple of pure absolutism ! 

" My guide advised me to apply for hospitality, never refused in 
these simple regions ; and as I was cold, wet, hungry, and fatigued, 
I took his advice, and we turned up an old woody avenue, and 
found a peasant smoking at the gate, with a couteau de chasse at 
his side, and a brace of dogs at his feet. I told my tale ; and with 
the most patriarchal frankness he invited me to enter, stir- 
red up the embers of a wood-fire in the small hut antique 
hall, dried my blouse, got me bread and milk, and eggs, a dis- 
ss. 



462 



THE PRINCESS. 



cretion! He excused himself from doing more, because madam the 
housekeeper (at least so I interpreted his Walloon dialect) was away. 
Madame had gone to Spa. She had locked up the apartments, and so he 
could only do the honours by the old vestibule in which he received 
me. The whole property was, it seems, bought the other day by a 
Belgian lady for the price of one of Alfred Montressor's gold neces- 
saires. Several boxes of books, furniture, etc. still lay unopened, 
having just arrived from Brussels. The new chatelaine had. not 
yet visited her purchase ; but she would no doubt come in time to 
be present at the fetes to be given at Spa for the King and Queen. 
My informant was a gaj^de-chasse of the former residents of the 
chateau, and had been reinstated with his dogs by the new purchaser, 
trhough the mediation of Monsieur le Bourgmestre. He was in 
unutterable amazement at all the improvements that were making, 
which he proposed to show me. Of these, the principal one was what 
he called 6 un jar din anglais,'' where, he said, a shrine had 
recently been erected to the image of a saint with whom he was not 
acquainted, or it might be a holy bishop of Liege perhaps. 

" 6 And the name of your new chdtelaine?' I asked. 

" 4 La Princesse de Schaffenhausen,' was the reply. 

tc I have now ceased to start at that cabalistical name, and so fol- 
lowed my guide to the jardin anglais (a part of the forest in all its 
primeval beauty, with a few walks cleared, and flower-knots planted 
on the verge of a sparklyig fountain). The image of the saint 
turned out to be a fine bust of Shakspeare by Chantrey, crowned 
with a wreath of immortelles. 

" Do you not give the odious Princess some credit for this? 
Shakspeare honoured in his own Ardennes ! And the garland ! — 
that 1 should have a claim upon that! Yes it was labelled with my 
name. This garland had been given me by a Beguine in the church 
of her own St. Beghe at Brussels. I left it behind me at Monsieur 
Janssens' at the Puterie, who sent it ticketed to my hotel. Leaving 
Brussels in a hurry, I forgot my garland, as well I might; but here 
1 find it. The bust came ready crowned with it, and was accom- 
panied by an order that it should be placed under a particular tree, 
the very type of that under which Orlando found his unnatural 
brother asleep. Oh, genius ! what is there in the world comparable 
to your inspirations ? Could you not, Horace, adore this Princess 



THE PROCESS. 



463 



(if indeed it was to her taste, her enthusiasm, and appreciation of 
Shakspeare that this monument is due)? I wrote down a few 
foolish lines on a card, which I left on the pedestal w ith an offering 
of flowers. Both may melt away before any eye shall dwell on 
them ; since none of the rout inters tourists will visit the Ardennes. 
But so long- as I shall be capable of recalling one pleasurable sensa- 
tion, this little incident will be worshipped in my memory and ima- 
gination. 

" Having rejoined my guide, who remained in the chateau to 
finish the fragments I had left, we set forth on a fresh expedition, 
finding everywhere hospitality and good cheer among the honest 
Ardennois ; breakfasts for nothing, and dinners for a franc, which 
the Roc her or Lailier could not give you for a napoleon. On the 
evening of the second day, my guide had got out of his track, by fol- 
lowing instead of leading; and so we might have spent our night 
c under the greenwood tree, ' but for a vesper-bell that tolled us to 
a little bourg, a chef-lieu, in the forest, where 1 was lodged, not 
in a Kaiser holF, or Berlin hoff, or Nassau hoff, or any other hoff 
consecrated to the greater or lesser divinities of the German Olympus; 
but still with a Puissance ; for I was lodged w ith the Bourgmestre, 
in the Hotel du Gouver?te?nent Communal, where I feasted on 
venison and gelinottes, drank Rhenish and Moselle, and followed 
the chase (without fear of game-laws) for two delightful days. 
But lest you should think that I am boasting, I must c rise to ex- 
plain. 1 The good Bourgmestre was an honest peasant of the true 
Belgian stock, ' tete dure et bras found. ' He had played his part 
in the tiny revolution at Spa, which followed the Four Days ; and 
so he is, in recompense, a magistrate, not indeed clothed in the 
ermine robe of corporate greatness, but in a blouse, rather the 
worse of the wear. When we asked our host's advice on the best 
route to the city of Luxembourg, he opened his eyes, and said, 

" ' Surely you will not depart on the eve of the fete. ' 

" I asked c what fete?' and he replied, 

" ' 31a foi, mon bon monsieur, you must have come from a 
great distance never to have heard of the fete of Echternach.' 

" Leaving our intentions unexplained as to the fete, we accepted 
the peasant he recommended to conduct us, and proceeded to Ech- 
ternach. The guide, as he trotted on before, in dress and figure 



464 



THE PRINCESS. 



was just ready for the opera-comique. He bounded on, by the aid 
of a long staff, three steps forward, and then two back; apparently 
practising- some strange pas seul to a sort of ronde, the words of 
which I could scarcely catch. Each stanza, however, ended with— 

'• Si nous ne dansons pas 
Larira, larira, 
Le Diable nous emportera, 
Larira, larira.' 

" I endeavoured to stop him, and find out the meaning; but the 
only answer I could obtain was, ' Saquer Bieu ! vous ne savez 
pas ? not know our fete of Echternach ! Si nous ne dansons pas, 
larira,' etc. And thus we were danced and sung into a most ro- 
mantic little town, even in the bosom of the Ardennef; or Grand 
Duche of Luxembourg. Echternach reposes in a rich valley, wa- 
tered by the Sura, under the shadow of its seven Hills, which are 
crowned to their summits with vineyards. It owes its origin to an 
abbey of Benedictines. It has had the fate of most Belgian towns ; 
having been given to France by its Spanish despots, and again tossed 
back to Spain by the treaty of Riswyck. Its surrounding hills are 
full of game, and I mean to proceed through them, towards evening 
( firing a few T shots on my way ), to Luxembourg. And now for the 
carnival of Echternach ! 

" I was awakened this morning by the noise and bustle, not only 
of the inn, but of La Grands Place, on which it stands. On look- 
ing forth, I saw hundreds of well-dressed peasantry pouring down 
from the sunny heights that dominate the town, in holiday garb of 
every colour in the rainbow , and filling the streets, square, and 
market-place of the town. The church was the point of assemblage. 
I inquired from the fresh Luxembourgeoise, who served my break- 
fast, what was the fete ? 

" c Bam I vous ne savez pas? C'est la fete d' Echternach. 
There is high mass, and after that the ball.' 

t4 It was for this, then, that my guide had been practising his 
steps. The girl added, 

" 6 If we only ceased to dance on this day for one year, we should 
have the devil's cloven foot once more in Echternach/ 



THE PRINCESS. 



465 



" This was the first time I ever heard that the devil was seared 
by dancing and song ; so having a passion for high masses ( the last 
I heard was magnificent, in St. Gudule at Brussels), I joined the 
procession, and got within view of the church, but no farther. The 
peasantry were kneeling to a considerable distance, in the open air. 
Returning to the inn, 1 found it empty ; so I took my place under 
its vine-covered porch, where a traveller was already seated smo- 
king a cigar. He was very communicative ; told me that he was an 
officer of artillery, on his way to Walferdange near the city of 
Luxembourg (the horse-market of the Low Countries), to purchase 
for the public service some of those stout horses for which the 
Ardennes has always been famous. The fete, he said, was a remnant 
of an ancient religious ceremony instituted to protect the cattle 
from the malignant influence of the demon. Satan, it should seem, 
had been in the habit of setting them dancing to his own music, by 
a spell rivalled by that of Paganini alone. The dance diabolic could 
only be counteracted by the dance holy, and the demon only beaten 
at his own weapon. When, therefore, this legend was in its full 
authority, the whole population, of all ranks and ages, did their 
best to outstep the common enemy ; men, women, and children, 
bounding through the country, leaping and cutting, and pirouetting 
to the sound of fiddles, and to the echoes of their own voices, which 
reiterated without pause the fifteen notes of the very old tune that 
was the theme of this curious country-dance, and which still rings 
in my ears from the guide's ceaseless ' Lanra, larira^ I must 
break off. " Ever yours, F. M." 

Letter 

" TO THE nON. MONTAGUE ST. LEGER, DUCHESS DOWAGER OF % 

LONDON. 

" Mon eon Ami, — Your despatch arrived this morning, and was 

* A more detailed account of this wild legend, and the ceremony arising 
from it, will be found in that truly national work L' Artiste, a periodical 
recently commenced in Brussels, and dedicated, as the name implies, to (he 
music, painting, and literature of the new kingdom. 



36. 



466 



TiiE PRIiNCtSS. 



laid before the council assembled round the eternal couchette. I 
am desired d'en accuser la reception, and to express the satisfac- 
tion of their High Mightinesses at your appointment. It is really a 
distinction for so young a man to be sent to so respectable a court ; 
d'ailleurs, cold as an iceberg, and triste comme mon bonnet de 
nuit. Still if Claude Campbell goes as your Sec. of Leg. and you 
are allowed a few attaches, we shall make up a tolerable coterie of 
our own. 

u I have quantities of news from the Home-department; but, 
unluckily, have mislaid your cypher. Au reste, tout va son train, 
as at Brussels. No. 144 lives a porte fermee, by order of her new 
medical friend, who sings la mere Medlicot's hymns to his guitar, 
a ravir, and mimics the Doghertys, a mourir. No. 32 drives out 
in the britzka of No. 110, to see sights and study the picturesque, 
entendez-vous ? Le Page d' amour takes all in good part, and hums 
'■T avals une maraineS Poor dear boy! he is moving heaven 
and earth to get on our embassy, and has written to his mother to 
attack her old cavalier in the Foreign Office. He says, drolly enough, 
he is already half a Whig— you know why. 

k ' Lord A. reads Paul de Kock all day, and plays ecarte all night; 
it is said, with success. Cousin Anaslasia, and her inseparables the 
Doghertys, have niched themselves in the mansardes of our hotel. 
lis cassent leurs nez contre notre porte daily, but have never got 
beyond the ante-room. You know how Alfred Montressor fait 
ses farces, when he once begins. He, Claude, and the Doctor have 
actually dyed the Dogherty in a blue bath, and brought on the 
cholera, of which the Doctor, of course, cured him. We have a 
regular Carlist conspiracy here, half the faubourg St. Germain. 
Claude and I waltz every night, at the salle de bal ; soj'e m'ennuie 
tres Men ici. 

" Everybody is hastening back to Brussels, to get through before 
the Bartholomew puppet-show begins. As soon as Georgina M. has 
a good interval, we shall start. I shall wait there for your orders. 
En attendant, kiss dear grandmamma for me. Did she like her 
black silk mittens? Put in a word, too, for the diamond agrafe. 
One must far effetlo, as the representative of majesty. 

" Count Cat'selbow is here. He and Alfred are great friends. 
The Princess has shaken us off. I believe she said true enough, 



THE PRINCESS. 



407 



When she called her castle on the Rhine a ckdteau en Espagne. 
It is rumoured that her late husband's heir is going to law with her, 
and that she will lose her estates in the Rhingau. Alfred says that, 
even so, she will be immensely rich. 77 s'y commit, le bon homme. 
In haste, et sans adieu, 

Ever yours, F. St. L." 

Letter 

u TO HORACE HARVEY, ESQ. ETC. 

" Spa. 

"HereI am again ! No letters, a great disappointment! a posse of 
English, a great bore! They are now parading the streets under 
their umbrellas (for the rain is falling in torrents), and are making 
faces at the Pouhon, or tossing over the bagatelles in the toy-shops, 
till the hour for redoute and roulette shall arrive to afford relief to 
their ennui. I have had a sort of bird's-eye view of the Duchy of 
Luxembourg, which does not exactly accord with that which I took 
of it from my study in Carl ton-terrace. Luxembourg is so enclave 
in Belgium, so naturally situated to form a part of the kingdom, so 
much a sine qua non of its existence as a nation, that to abandon 
it to Holland will undo the whole arrangement recently sanctified by 
the adhesion of the five powers. Imagine the King of Holland hav- 
ing a capital city within forty-four leagues of Brussels, with a fine 
Macadamized road, to march at a moment's notice upon its citizens ; 
or to launch a conspiracy from, — packed in an omnibus or a dili- 
gence anglaise. 

" This is one of the cases in which parchment rights go for no- 
thing; the great natural right of self-preservation superseding all 
human arrangements. Belgium must insist upon the possession of 
this province, under penalty of political extinction; and the five 
powers having adopted the independence of Belgium as an element 
in their system, are bound in common sense and consistency to pro- 
vide for the consequences of their own act. If the rights of Holland 
are valid, she has not ( and, while the present system continues, will 
iiot have ) actual possession ; so that deference to William is a mere 



468 



THE PRINCESS. 



form : while the leaving so great a matter unsettled, and a ready 
make-weight to throw into any other dispute that may arise, is 
the shortest road to a general war. The present protocoling farce 
that is playing in Europe at the expense of Belgium, and ultimately 
of Holland too, now appears to me a lamentable weakness : and here, 
as elsewhere, ' to be weak is to be miserable, doing or suffering.' 
In pacing through the beautiful solitudes of this fine province, my 
mind, disengaged from passion, ran back upon the recent diplomacy 
connected w ith it, and thence to the general European policy of the 
party with whom I so long acted ; and the result has been a convic- 
tion that, whatever may be the merits of the theories we adopted, 
our ignorance of details led us into many false measures. 

" Luxembourg is a magnificent district, though in many respects, 
I am, told, a pays vierge, and its resources not yet rendered fully 
available; — forests, rivers, mines, vineyards, lovely valleys irrigated 
by gushing streams, and its highest hills feeding cattle even in the 
heart of winter. How I should like to hear ' the music of my 
hounds' in the woods of Aulier and Cedrogne ! This is the region of 
the artist, the novelist, and the sportsman. Its wooded heights and 
deep-embosomed glens perpetually disclose some feature of moral 
or picturesque interest ; a fragment of Gothic architecture, a cross 
with its inscription, a forester's cottage, a miner's hut, or one of 
those small cdstels, or rather gentilhommieres, the monuments of 
another race than the robber-barons of the Rhine. Their forms are 
quite as pictorial as the narrow perilous holds of the magnificent ri- 
ver c where power dwelt amidst her passions, and where each lordly 
bandit did 

' His evil will j not less elate, 
Than mightier heroes, of a longer dale.' 

" I have almost concluded the purchase of one of these secluded 
chateaux ( four leagues from Luxembourg, and twenty-eight from 
Brussels ), which has seized on my imagination. I can reach it, from 
my house in London, in less time than the Duke of Devonshire takes 
to arrive at his castle in the south of Ireland, or Lord Londonderry 
at his residence in the north. There is but one hitch in this business : 
I should like, first, to know whose subject I am to become, and whose 



THE PRIjNCESS. 



469 



wild beasts I am to hunt. I have some, not very pleasant, recollec- 
tions of the forest laws and usages of Germany. I was once shot at 
( by mistake) for a poacher, in a busch-gang, in Hesse Darmstadt; 
and in Hesse Homberg, I was called oif from a track ( a cowardly 
sort of butchery of game, where great lords and ladies fire at the ani- 
mals driven towards them by the country people ), to hunt an unfor- 
tunate peasant, who had shot a hare, and who was hunted by the 
illustrious Nimrods, with much more ardour and zeal than they would 
have shown in chasing a chevreuil or a boar. As yet, I have met with 
no such impediments in this country. 1 have only had to ' find out 
the forester,' and ' being in the vaward of the day,' to pursue my 
sports till the going down of the sun. 

" I envy the antiquary or the artist who for the first time visits the 
city of Luxembourg, the Augusta Romanorum of ancient geogra- 
phy. It was one of the points in the defence of the Roman empire 
against the irruptions of the Northern barbarians ; and the kings of 
France, considering it in the same light, have always regarded its 
possession by the Germans with grudging and an enforced submission. 
Accordingly, it has ever been an object of dispute in all the long suc- 
cession of European wars, from the siege by Francis the First of 
France, to the present times. This you will say, is a reason the more 
for confiding it to Belgium, a neutral power, in whose hands it will 
no longer be the instrument of national ambition— the weakness of 
one power, and the tyrannous strength of another. 

" Luxembourg is the Gibraltar of this part of Europe; and its 
mines and counter-mines plunge as deep towards Tartarus as its for- 
tifications rise towards heaven. Attached as a military dependence 
to the German empire, its civil possession as part of the dissolved 
kingdom of the Netherlands, was a curious anomaly in sovereignty ; 
and the inhabitants ( if they indeed go for anything in diplomacy) 
are anxious to be reunited with Belgium, as well to escape the chances 
of war, as to re-establish the natural relations which exist between 
countries which God has joined, and which no man ought to put 
asunder. 

" I have found here a public library, once very rich, and which 
still contains some curious manuscripts ; particularly one of the ninth 
century; another, a Chronicle of the First Crusades; and a third, a 
beautiful Pliny's Natural History, of the thirteenth century, recently 



470 



THE PRLNCESS. 



bought for twelve florins I Where was Horace Harvey when this 
purchase was in the market ! This collection has arisen from the 
destruction of the neighbouring convents, and especially the Abbey 
of Dorval, whose chronicles were the sources of the middle-age 
history of France. Germany, and Belgium. 

" I am interrupted. — A courier has just spattered and clattered 
through the tranquil streets of Spa. He has dropped me a despatch 
from Lady Frances, dated Baden. Her party go no farther, in con- 
sequence of the illness ( or caprice) of Lady Montressor. The Con- 
federation of the Rhine ( to use their own jargon ) is about to break 
up. Lady Montressor (says my wife) pants after England, 'there 
to return and die at home at last. ' — At last ! She has been dying, 
in public and in private, at midnight assemblies and mid-day levees, 
for the last three years. Lady Frances makes a very polite apology 
for not joining me at Spa, as she proceeds direct to Brussels, where 
she hopes to meet me; though she thinks it more probable that this 
happy event will take place at Mottram Hall. All this is sheer farce; 
but I have no objection to return to Brussels. I have many reasons 
for wishing to see the Grand Anniversaire ; and have half promised 
the Baron de Stassart to do so. 

"I am, it seems, to have a copy of the skreen. Mademoiselle 

Lavinie L , the young Spa artist, has read me a letter from the 

Princess, containing a very courteous acquiescence. She (the Prin- 
cess) is still in Brussels, and will remain at her villa of Groenendael 
to receive her English friends. This is all of no consequence to you, 
but much to me;— how much, you shall know before long. Direct 
to Brussels. It is hardly three weeks since I left it : yet it appears 
three ages.— Adieu! "F. M." 

Letter 

" TO CORNELIUS MACDER310T, ESQ., ATTOR>'EY-AT-LAV. 
SHANBALLTMAC. 

" Baden. 

" Dear Mac — Would 1 advise you to give in to Mrs. Mac's great 
desire to come on a tower to the river Rine in Germany? Why, 



THE PRINCESS. 



471 



thin, npon my daisy, I would not; and. mind my word, sorrow 
thing ever ye did would make a greater Judy of you than that same. 
Stay where you are. man alive ; where, as the song goes. 

' You 've everything daeent about ye 
A snug little cabin and farm,' 

with the best bit of red bog in the county to your rare, and the river 
Shannon forenent you. that's worth all the rivers that iver flowed, 
since the flood, and before. Oh ! Cornelius 3Iacdermot. if I had ugly 
drames about this journey before I undertuckit. it 'snow that I know, 
in undeniable experience, that it 's the greatest of amadauns I made 
of myself the day I quit Shanballymac ; for. save and except my pro- 
vidential discovery of that garloghofmine at Brussels, and the having 
set him up. sir. in the handsomest hotel and restorong ( I'll throuble 
you for change for that) in Europe, as I tould you in my letter via 
Mrs. Rafferty. and. barring that, sorrow elsebutsorrowandsickness, 
and every sort of murther and ruination, I've seen and known since 
I crossed the threshold of home. 

" Well, sir, in obedience to your request, I now sit down to fulfil 
your commands, as to the journey, and other things too numerous 
to put in a letter. AN e left Brussels in our own boroche; and, by 
that rogue of a Docthor's advice, with veterinary horses to go on all 
the way to Colone with us, where all the Hungary water comes from. 
My Lady, and her frind. Lady Anny-Statius Macanulty. and the Frinch 
lady*s-made. and a tombore (maning a bandbox) full of caps and 
things, inside; and self and Kitty Kelly in the dicky-box, with the 
currier, as they call the Frinch foreign servant hired for us by Lady 
Anny-Statius. who does nothing but smoke a meer sham pipe; and 
if the whole is not a mere sham from beginning to end, or will turn 
out so. I'm intirely mistaken. 

" Well, sir, the divel be in the Docthor. but he put his comether%® 
upon the quality at the Belle -view, that he contrived to flop himself 
into one of their fine coroneted carridges; saying, as we were all to 
travel together, and put up at the same inns, it would come to the 
same thing. And so, sure enough, we started from the post with 
them ; but they soon gave us the go-by, and left us behind, and were 
at Aichs-la -Chapel, while we were still trapesing over the battle of 



472 



THE PRINCESS. 



Watherloo, buying up ould brass buttons; Lady D. crying for an 
oul.d batchelor of hers, one Ensign Roudlum, of Cloneen, who fell 
here in the Heavies ; and Lady Anny-Statius looking for the tomb, in 
the church, of her second cousin, General somebody, and other Lords 
and haros of her acquintance : nor did we ever more set eyes on one 
of them, good or bad, until we overtuck them in this outlandish 
place ; and only then itself owing to my Lady and her noble frind 
looking into all the inn -books, and cross -questioning the waithers 
along the road about great English Lords and Ladies, saying he had 
lost them on the road— lost them, oh musha ! 

" All this time, mind ye, Cornelius, that little-do-good, young 
Mr. W. W. Macanulty, ( to get rid, I suppose, of his ugly ould wife,) 
started before us to prepare the way, as he said ; though we never 
saw an iday of him, till he came down philandering on board the 
Damp-ship, as the Garmans call it, (and damp enough it was, for 
certain, ) from out of one of the islands in the river Rine, in company 
with an ould English gentleman, and his daughter and son-in-law, a 
furren Count, with a busheen of slack hair on his face would stuff 
a mattaress, and just that sort of a buggaboo-looking fellow that 
would frighten the life out of you, if you met him in a loan place, 
for all his star and ribbon, and being a great officer, as Mr. W. W. 
tould us, in the Prussian service, and his particular friend. 

" Well, sir, there you have us now on board the stamer, or Damp- 
ship, on the river Rine ; and if you have, all I can tell you of it is, 
that it is no more to our own Shannon than I am to the Duke of 
Leinster. And if it put me in mind of anything, it was the new line 
between Carrigeenglass and Criggan-na-beeagh ; neither house, nor 
tree, nor potatoe garden, to be seen or heard, so that it's going to 
Liverpool 1 thought I was all the time. As the morning was could, 
and the rain pouring like ramrods, and the cabin choke-full, and 
every one calling for breakfast, and not a screed of a cloth on the 
table, I settled myself on deck close to the stame-chimley, to get an 
air of the fire, till I was as full of smuts as a chimney-sweeper. For 
I've lost my appetite intirely since 1 left home, and only just takes 
my morning, which, with a drop of schnaps in the middle of the 
day, keeps me going till dinner. 

" Well, sir, after a time, up comes our ladies, reeking with the 
hate, saving your prisence. to see the prospects ; and Lady Dogherty 



THE PRINCESS. 



473 



sprawling over her maps and books to find out the names and 
places of the ould castles ; but the divel a one of the real ones she 
saw, barring the pictures. And it's small loss she had ; for such 
bathered-down, old gazebos you never clapped your two good- 
looking eyes on. Neither stick, barn, nor bawn ; but just a scare- 
crow r sort of a thing, stuck up on the top of a craig, like an ould 
raven's nest on the highest bough of a rookery. 

64 So, sir, when my Lady began her parley-vous with Count 
Smutch, turning up the whites of her eyes, and calling us all ' pil- 
grems of the Rine,' as if it was to Patrick's Purgatory we were 
going in the Shannon ! and spouting poetry , like ' Diveldoubt' in 
the Christmas mummeries, with the young Countess, (who is in her 
honey-moon, and a nice little pullet, ) I couldn't restrain myself ; 
' And I wonder at you, Kitty D.' says I, ' renaging your own 
country— you that has seen the castles of Portumna and Mount 
Shannon, and Ballymac-Egan, and Bally-na-leen, and the other 
great castles on the Shannon, where there's smoke in the chimleys, 
and fire on the hearths, and claret in the cellars, and whiskey in the 
halls, and plenty everywhere. ' 

" ' And does the Rine,' says I, 6 run like the Shannon, two hun- 
dred and thirty-four navigable miles, from mouth to mouth ; con- 
taining eight lakes, and more, from Limerick to Leitrim; and wash- 
ing ten counties, Kerry included; and has it a Knight of Kerry, and 
a White Knight, all alive and kicking, not all as one,' says I, ' as 
them ould pirates up there, in their ruins?' 

" 4 Then, as for poethry,' says I, ' there has been more purty 
verses mades on the Shannon than on any river in Jermany :' and 
so I lilts up the ould song— 

'You may thravel the wide world all over 
And sail from France to Ballinrobe. 1 

" Oh, thin, maybe the company wastn't highly delighted, and such 
clapping of hands and bravoes ! and maybe my lady wasn't ashamed 
of herself ; and Lady Anny-Statius blushed as blue as a blanket; 
and the ould English gentleman, one Mr. Tyler, from London, that 
we tuck up at the island, tould me, if he had known as much as he 
does now, it's on the Shannon Steam Company he had bought shares, 

37. 



474 



THE PRINCESS. 



and not on the Island of Rolandsack, where his daughter was 
abducted by Count Smutch from a bourding-house where they 
stopped, and where his son lies buried, who died of the cholera, 
(Lord save us !) with ating too much fruit and other unwholesomes ; 
which shows, as that rogue of a Docthor says, we should be on our 
guard, and keep to a regement, and beware of the savouries! 

" So, having said my say, I slipped down to the bar and got a 
glass of schnaps, and fell asleep on a sophy, in a fine room they call 
the pavillion ; and never saw more of the river Rine, till 1 was landed 
at the White Horse in the town of Mens, a poor ould barrack of a 
place, full of soldiers — and a poor donny set they were ; and that's 
ray opinion of the River Rine, which is a regular ould humbug. 

" Well, sir, here we are at the world's end, lodged in a fine hotel, 
with our friends the Marquis and Marshuness, owing to the clever- 
ness of Mr. W. W. Mac. And maybe I didn't give the, Docthor his 
congy; and would never set eyes on him agin, if I hadn't been near 
kicking the bucket, by getting the blue cholera with ating too much 
bully and sour crout— an excellent furren dish, which I mistuck for 
beef and cabbage. And so, sir, nothing would save my life but an 
hot bath prepared for Lord Alfred, which he good-naturedly sent 
to my bedside ; and the smell of it would kill a cat. Rut it's bluer 
I came out of it than I went in ; and had the clargy to me to clear off 
ould scores, and made my will, settling everything on my Lady, 
except a bit of a codicil I kept back with regard to the garlock in 
Rrussels and other persons — mum ! 

" Rut after all, sir, that divel of a Docthor recovered me; and so 
we shook hands, and are all to return together to Rrussels for the 
fates. And W. W. is going to Frankfurt, to Mr. Cock the great ban- 
ker, to fetch back his money. He insists on paying me interest and 
principal when he comes back from Rrussels, which is more than I 
expected ; and Lady Anny-Statiushas written to the Marquis of Tho- 
mond, to get me made Deputy Lord Lieutenant of the county of Kerry; 
and wishes 1 was in it,— which 1 will, plaze God, to ate my Christmas 
pudding : And am yours till death, 

* ,l 1, Dogherty. 11 



THE PRINCESS. 



475 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE FOUR DAYS, 1833. 

The month of September 1833 was marked by a general move- 
ment, vibrating between the capital of Belgium and the ancient and 
gloomy cities of the Rhine, and giving life and motion to those silent, 
stagnant holds, where princely and priestly domination have so long 
held, and still hold in abeyance, minds whose energies, though 
latent, are not extinct. Three years of Belgian peace and prosperity 
had consolidated the revolution; had permitted prejudice to yield to 
curiosity; and had converted the timidity of foreigners into confi- 
dence. Travellers once more proceeded to the Rhine and the wa- 
tering-places of Western Germany by the magnificent towns and noble 
roads of the Low Countries ; and tours were taken by all parties, 
for all purposes. Paris poured forth her dlegans from the Chaus- 
see d'Antin, and her vieilleries from the Faubourg ; London emptied 
her new West-end, and saw her bon-ton reduced to its ' last man : 1 
even V ultima Irlanda contributed her portion of absentees, the 
representatives of her fancy and feeling, fun and ferocity ; and more 
than one Scotch /eelosopher took up his scrip and his staff, in search 
of German transcendentals and a German meerschaum, with the 
hope of enveloping himself in the double cloud of smoke intellectual 
and smoke material, the common attributes of Kantists on both sides 
the Channel. 

Those ancient allies, gallantry and diplomacy, took the same route 
in the same vehicles; and, mounting their britzkas and barouches, 
their caleches and post-chaises together, were charged with mis- 
sions in which tender hearts and crowned heads were equally invol- 
ved. Attaches, devotedly attached, followed in the train of the 
stateswomen they served ; intrigues of the cabinet and intrigues of 
the boudoir worked well together ; exchanges of vows and of trea- 
ties, alliances matrimonial and political, mutually assisted each 



476 



THE PRINCESS. 



olher; while all found a tour to the Rhine, a trip into the Taunus, 
or a peep into Frankfort, a conducive medium or a convenient ex- 
cuse for their respective enterprises. 

While the Emperors of Austria and of Russia were holding their 
tete-a-tete conference of seven days at Munchen Gratz, exchanging 
( says the legitimate journal of Frankfort ) ' proofs of mutual confi- 
dence and attachment,' and laying plans for the future liberty and 
happiness of— Italy and Poland ; while the King of Prussia, en ga- 
lop, between Potsdam and Berlin, was directing the sword and 
grammar exercises of his squadrons and classes ; the King of the 
Belgians was quietly and unostentatiously progressing through the 
free and prosperous country, to which he had been called, in oppo- 
sition to the unjust aggressions of the great despotic powers, upon 
the principle of self-government. He w as accompanied by his young 
and gentle Queen, and the few Belgian gentlemen and ladies who 
formed his staff and circle. 

In all the great towns and smaller bourgs, from Brussels to the 
Ardennes, he was received, not with - des oris mille /bis repetes, 
like the twice rejected Bourbons ; but with the frank and honest ex- 
pression of sentiment, which evinced a people satisfied with the object 
of their choice. * Everywhere the arts furnished the modes of the 
royal reception; and music, painting, and specimens of national in- 
dustry, formed the offerings made to their King, by a people who had 
given arts and manufactures to Europe before Italian schools and Italian 
looms had illustrated civilization w ith their magnificent productions. 

Brussels, in the absence of the King, and in the interval between 
the two flights of the birds of passage, was occupied, in its Cham- 
bers with legislation, and in its streets with preparations for the 
anniversary (then fast approaching) of those four days which had 
relieved it from the tyranny of a foreign government, imposed by 
force, and perfectly unsuited to the wants and desires of the people. 
The decree for the celebration of this festival had been issued by the 
National Congress. The programme had been determined and signed 
by theMinister of the Interior, andby the council called the ' Re'gence.' 

* At Vervier, the King having observed to the Burgomaster, 6 qu'elle 
protegerait toujours V industries the Burgomaster replied, ' II n'y a pas 
besoin ; ca va bien comme ca. • 



THE PRINCESS. 



477 



Composers, artists, architects and mechanicians, all the talent and 
all the patriotism of Belgium, were called into activity to celebrate 
with propriety an event in which all were interested. The beautiful 
city seemed as if cleared out, to leave scope and verge enough for 
their operations. Hotels, restaurants, hotels garnis, were empty, 
and preparing for the reception of guests expected from all parts of 
the kingdom, and from nearly all parts of the Continent, who had 
previously bespoken apartments in anticipation of the solemnity. 

By the 22nd of September, Brussels swarmed with strangers ; 
some purposely to partake in the festivities, as in a carnival ; others 
to enjoy their feelings of triumph in the success of their own painful 
sacrifices and persevering exertions. Many were led by a pure love 
of the arts to be present at the national concerts, to bring their 
works to the exhibition, or to inspect the productions of the new 
Flemish school, in their respect for old Flemish masters. Many of 
the French and English fashionables, who had served out their time 
at Ems, Wisbaden, Baden, and other prescribed baths, had chosen 
the Four Days for their passage through Brussels, to avail themselves 
of its amusements; and the English gentlemen of the turf, who had 
horses to run, or who were led by a sporting spirit to the race- 
course of Montplaisir, were already assembled in the Bellevue, the 
Flandres, and the Hotel de l'Europe. 

Among the latter, the Marquis of Montressor and Lord Alfred 
were conspicuous. They had returned to Brussels before the splen- 
did Brigata, with which they had been rather joined than asso- 
ciated ; and which had only advanced on their return as far as the 
Grand Monarque, at Aix-la-Chapelle, to repose in the most sump- 
tuous of hotels, under the care of the most courteous of landlords. 
Other hopes than those to be tasted at Montplaisir had hailed the 
return of Lord Alfred to the neighbourhood of the Groenendael ; 
while the Marquis, completely out of his element at Baden, where 
there was no ballet, was glad to accompany his brother into what 
he termed a ' pays civilise.' He found ample occupation and 
amusement in the rehearsals of the service funebre at St. Gudule, 
of the 'Faust' by M. Pellaert, and of the new opera of M. Messmac- 
kers at the theatre. 

On the morning of the 25rd, shortly after daybreak, a salvo of 
cannon announced the arrival of a day, which recalled to some, the 

37.. 



478 



THE PRINCESS. 



loss of all they had loved ; to others, the triumph of all they desired ; 
and to the majority of the nation, that well-fought battle in the heart 
of their metropolis, which had won for them their independence. 

The dawn of that day, in 1850, had been an awful epoch. Brus- 
sels cernee by the royal army; the public functionaries dispersed, 
the city abandoned to the people and to a few brave gentlemen, 
with no ramparts but their barricades, no sound to cheer them but 
the toll of the tocsin, and the universal cry of 'liberty and arms.' 
Prince Frederick of Nassau had determined to carry Brussels by a 
coup de main; but the people, without leaders, and with a force 
composed of volunteers, Gardes Bourgeoises, and the gallant band 
from Liege, were equally determined to defend it with all the ener- 
gies of despair. The heroes of the barricades took their position. 

On the previous night it had been agreed that resistance should be 
attempted; and in the morning the royal army advanced to the 
attack. They moved on the city by the four roads of Flandres, 
Laeken, Schaerbeck, and Louvain. Each column had its artillery 
and a numerous cavalry ; and batteries were erected to protect their 
advance :— -the people had only their barricades, and the obstinate 
enduring courage of their national temperament. The four hostile 
movements were executed at the same moment. The first cannon 
was heard at a quarter past eight ; and it was answered by the com- 
bined toll to arms of every bell in Brussels, which ceased only, at 
the set of sun, with the enemy's fire. Without, an army; within, 
an undisciplined population, consisting of men, boys, women, 
and children ; each gate of the city became the scene of a pitched 
battle. 

The first victory, so humiliating to the Dutch troops, so glorious 
for the people, was obtained at the Porte de Flandres. At the Porte 
<le Laeken, the enemy was simultaneously repulsed, and fell back 
on Prince Frederick's head-quarters, behind the Botanic Garden. 
But the main point of attack was the Porte de Schaerbeck ; and it 
was made with a force of more than seven thousand combatants 
( the double of the whole real force of the citizens ). From this gate 
to the Park, the road lay through open spaces, protected by the 
fewest and least efficient barricades. At the moment of attack, 
there were but about sixty men posted at the gate, mostly of the 
free corps of Rodenbach and Niellon, and some Liegeois. Under 



THE PRL\CESS. 



479 



the fire of the enemy, they chose for themselves a captain of the 
name of Hildorf, who, when his leg was broken by a bullet, conti- 
nued through the whole day, from a neighbouring house, to con- 
duct the defence. 

It was through this route that the Dutch troops forced their way 
to the Park, after a murderous resistance; and they reached their 
destination by a rapid march, more resembling a flight, pursued by 
the fire of the people from every window and vantage-ground. 
The defenders of the gate itself, finding their post no longer tena- 
ble, repaired to the Observatory, to renew their efforts against the 
enemy. 

At half-past ten, the Dutch were masters of the Park, and, it 
might have been thought, of the city; but, whether through cowar- 
dice, ignorance of localities, or want of tactical knowledge, they 
suffered an old artilleryman, ' Gharliev,ja?nbe de bois,'' to protect 
the passage from the Park into the Place Royale with a single gun ; 
and he, with about twenty men, posted without order and without a 
leader, in the windows of the Bellevue and the coffee-house de 
i' Ami tie, kept in check eight hundred disciplined soldiers. By 
twelve o'clock, the Dutch troops were confined to the ground they 
occupied; the moral force of the citizens was developed, that of the 
soldiers subdued, and the ultimate fate of the city decided. 

Such w ere the events of the 23rd of September in 1830— about 
to be commemorated in 1833. The morning was fresh and bril- 
liant. The tree of liberty, planted in the Place Royale, bore the 
tri-coloured flag of Belgium. The beautiful Grecian peristyle of the 
off Use de Caudemberg, converted into an orchestra, was draped 
between its Corinthian columns with the national colours. Every 
house was decorated, every balcony bannered ! Every avenue teemed 
with peasantry, pouring in, in their gala-dresses, to celebrate the 
anniversary of the day in w hose conflicts they had participated. The 
numerous corps de musique, convoked for the national concert to 
be given to the peolpe, marched in, w ith banners flying, by the gates 
of Anderlecht, Flandres, Laeken, and Louvain:— those gates against 
which the enemy had, three years before, made their sanguinary 
attacks. The music of Gretry, Rossini, Mayer, and Fetis, succeeded 
to the roar of cannon and the toll of the tocsin. The museums, 
public libraries, galleries, and exhibitions of pictures, were thrown 



480 



THE PRINCESS. 



open to a people who, three years before, had been steeped in 
blood ; and who now, with a noiseless pleasure, a deep-seated and 
tranquil satisfaction, were standing in quiet wonder before the repre- 
sentations of their national scenes by their own national artists. 
Everywhere a sort of respectful deference was paid to a little band, 
dressed in a particular costume, with glazed hats and tri-coloured 
plumes. Maimed, pale, haggard, (someon crutches, and some sup- 
ported by friends, ) they were announced in a low tender tone by the 
demand of 6 Place aux blesses. ' 

The day of the 23rd closed, as it began, in peace not altogether 
divested of melancholy ; for at the setting sun ( that sun which, in 
1830, set over a scene of blood), many hearts sank, and many eyes 
were wet, as ' la sonnerie des morts ' slowly chimed forth from 
the belfries of every church in Brussels. 

The feeling of pride and sadness which closed the solemnities of 
this day, was deepened by the ceremony which opened the morning 
of the 24th. That day had been the bloodiest of the city's contest 
with a foreign foe. It was on that day that Brussels had been 
bombarded by the royal batteries, and that the temporary success 
of Prince Frederick's army was marked by pillage, devastation, and 
massacre. The battle was then still raging in its streets ; every 
house had been converted into ' a house of mourning and, on 
the anniversary of that day, the memory of its disasters still 
gloomed the spirits of the people who had resisted, and finally 
overcome them. 

On the morning of the 24th, a funeral service was celebrated in 
the church of St. Gudule, by that grandest and most imposing of 
forms and sounds, a requiem mass. Never, in the days of her bold 
Brabantian Dukes and splendid Burgundian Princes, had the capital 
of the Low Countries beheld in her metropolitan church a scene of 
more picturesque, more magnificient ceremony : never did the vast 
nave of St. Gudule re-echo to sounds of greater force, or carry the 
hymn of grief home to suffering hearts with greater effect. 

The choir was occupied on either side by the King and Queen, 
the two Chambers, the municipal authorities, and foreign diplomacy, 
all in deep mourning. The nave, the aisles, the chapels, were 
crowded with the multitudinous people to the very steps without 
the portals. In the centre of the nave rose a black cenotaph, on 



THE PRINCESS. 



481 



which was inscribed the names of the victims who had fallen in the 
four days' fight. Before it, bent many a hooded head, and knelt 
many a proud but weeping heart ; some mother, who, like Rachel, 
would not be comforted ; some affianced and plighted bride, whose 
wedding veil Avas now changed for the coif of the Beguine, or the 
black crape of the Sister of Charity. The comrade, too, was there, 
who had fought in the same fight, and had performed the last offi- 
ces—the friend, the brother, the son, Beyond these, the surviving 
band, the blesses, offered the tribute of their gratitude to Heaven, 
alike for the dangers they had encountered for their country, and 
for their restoration to reap the fruits of their victory. Even the 
most indifferent of the spectators had their feelings excited to a 
vague but powerful emotion by the music of a hundred voices, 
accompanied by as many martial instruments, mingling with and 
swelling the organ's solemn peal. 

This imposing and almost awful ceremony was followed by an- 
other not less affecting . The whole congregation of St. Gudule, led 
on by the King and Queen, the senate and representatives, the 
ministers, the municipality, and the military, proceeded to the Place 
des Martyrs, where, over the tombs of those who fell in the Four 
Days, a funeral hymn was sung, of which the whole population of 
Brussels were the auditors. The day concluded with music, per- 
formed in the antique forum of Belgian liberty, the Grande Place ; 
in front of the H6tel-de-Ville ; in the Places des Barricades, La 
Monnaie, and Le Sabion. 

All honours done to the gallant dead, and reverence paid to the 
feelings of their surviving friends and companions in arms, the two 
remaining days were devoted to recreating the spirits of the people, 
and to the amusement of their foreign visitants. The 2oth was a 
day of brilliant bustle, of unclouded gaiety; and of general but tem- 
perate enjoyment. It seemed as if the whole peasant population of 
Belgium were pouring in the one direction, in cars, waggons, and 
carioles, or on foot. The centre of attraction was the race-course 
of Montplaisir, where the King's cup was to be run for, and prizes 
of less distinction assigned to the victors. To this point the French 
caleche, the English barouche, the German britzka, rolled in slow 
procession ; while cavaliers, grooms, and jockeys, the sons of the 
turf of all countries, hurried on,— a spectacle in itself to the good 



432 



THE PRINCESS. 



Brabancons, who were seated in groups, under trelissed porches of 
their guinguettes and restaurants, on the road-side. 

The course of Montplaisir, like other courses, had its royal stand- 
house, its pavilions for the rank and fashion of all countries, its um- 
pires, its clerk of the course, etc. all mounted on the English scale. 
A day the most brilliant and exciting shone upon an amusement in 
which all took a share, from the prince to the peasant; and was 
followed by an evening still more diversified by its amusements. 
The theatre was thrown open to the people, the best places being 
reserved for the blesses : and for those who, after the old Flemish 
fashion, preferred the enjoyments of the open air, there were rural 
sports prepared in the environs, the bar, the ring, the dance a la 
ronde, and music everywhere. The night closed by an illu- 
mination. 

The 26th of September, the last of the four days, signalized in 
1830 by a second bombardment of the city, and by the glorious cry 
of victory and the deliverance from the Dutch army, was dedicated in 
1835 to a review of the troops by the King, to popular games given 
at mid-day by the city to the people, and to the ' Concert monstre? 
executed in the open air in the Place Royale by the bands of all the 
Belgian regiments and the several amateur societies. The evening 
was devoted to the theatre, where the King and Queen were present ; 
ant the night closed with a second illumination of the public and 
private edifices, including the lofty and light spire of the Hdtel-de- 
Ville, and the Gothic towers of St. Gudule ; a spectacle of singular 
and striking effect, visible over the wide plains of Belgium for many 
miles. 

It was on this last day, about three o'clock in the afternoon, that 
a cortege of English carriages, loaded with imperials, tambours, 
cartons, and lady's-maids, lords, ladies, and lap-dogs, approached 
Brussels by the Route de Namur. It must have been a matter of 
surprise to the travellers to find the faubourgs deserted and silent ; 
yet never had the guinguettes and other places of public resort been 
so tricked out. Triumphal arches crossed the road ; garlands and 
bouquets of flowers hung over every door, and ornamented every 
window. There were merry-go-rounds which did not go round, 
wooden horses without riders, and feasts laid out in decorated ar- 
bours, which no guest had yet arrived to touch. 



THE PRINCESS. 



483 



Three carriages had already passed on; but as the last of the train 
(a rickety calash that with difficulty kept up with the rest ) approached 
the Porte de Namur, a voice from an occupant of the rumble 
commanded a halt ; and the calash drew up at a small, whitewashed, 
green-shuttered auberge, decorated with the sign of a harp, and the 
motto of ' Caed mille faltha ; ' above which was inscribed, 

' HOTEL D'lRLAIVDE, 
AT BERG E ET RESTAUR ATION, 
PAR MONS. LAURENCE DE FEGAN. ' 

The windows of the Irish inn were thrown open, gay and garish 
with garlands and devices ; while the general silence of the deserted 
faubourg permitted the accents of a singular song, accompanied by 
anuntunable violin, to be heard. 

To the musical query from a bard, who satin the window, 

"Why don't you sell your fiddle, 
And buy your wife a gown ? " 

from without, and from the rumble, was answered, 

' ' I will not sell my fiddle 
For all the wives in town, 
And if I sold my fiddle 
The folks would think me mad, 
For many a rollicking day 
My fiddle and I have had. 11 

A shout from the window and an exclamation from the rumble, 
were followed by the rapid descent of a bilious, bloated elderly 
gentleman, who was received at the porch in the embraces of Larry 
Fegan : it was Sir Ignatius Dogherty. 

Turning to his fellow-travellers, he dismissed them with the inti- 
mation, " Yez may go where yez like ; but the divel a foot further 
I'll go till I get a drop of something to wash down the dust ; for I'm 
choking alive with the drouth." 

" Continuez, continuez, Monsur le Coc/ier,'' exclaimed Lady 
Dogherty, in great confusion. 



484 



THE PRINCESS. 



u Eh ! gude God, the mon's mad ! " observed Lady Anaslasia Ma- 
canulty. " What does it all mean, my Leddy Dogherty? " 

" It means, Lady Anaslasia," said Lady Dogherty to her noble 
fellow-traveller, " that Sir Ignatius, previous to his leaving Brussels, 
set up a favourite servant, that in Ireland is called a follower of the 
family " 

" Yes, yes ; one of the clan." 

" Exactly, my dear friend, — one of our clan, in that hotel ; and, 
with his usual generosity, he stops there now just to contribute 
something to the house-warming. But we will proceed, if you 
please." 

" Eh ! gude God, to be sure. We shall lose all the royal festee- 
vities else." 

wC Continuez, Cocker" said Lady Dogherty. " Et vous, Mon- 
surle Currier, or, I should say, Herr Muncher, ollezau Bellevue, 
llerr Muncher, sive ou plait! " 

The old rickety machine was the next moment again enveloped in 
the clouds of dust which the lighter and more elegant vehicles had 
thrown up behind them in their rapid route. But either the sud- 
denly increased velocity of the calash tested its fragility beyond its 
powers of endurance, or some unobserved obstacle disturbed the 
even tenor of its way, and frightened the horses from their Flemish 
propriety; for precisely at the outside of the Porte de Namur, the 
whole concern, with its cumbrous freight, came with a crash to the 
ground, pitching the courier on one side the road, and the Ladies 
Dogherty and Anastasia Macanulty, with the lady's-maid, into an 
enormous pile of vegetables on the other. 

The proprietor of the stall, like the rest of his confraternity, had 
abandoned his little market to take a glance at what was passing within 
the gates ; and so deserted was the spot, that no one appeared to offer 
assistance to the prostrate sufferers. The courier was disabled by a 
fractured limb ; the postilion dared not leave his horses ; and the 
ladies, more frightened than hurt, were still moaning amidst car- 
rots, cabbages , and onions, when a light and elegant vehicle came 
flying past. From humanity or curiosity, it was suddenly stopped 
by its sole occupant, an English gentleman. His agile leap over the 
side of his carriage brought him at once to the assistance of the objects 
of his solicitude or inquiries. 



THE PRINCESS. 



485 



Her dress steeped and stained with the juice of a crushed water- 
melon, Lady Dogherty, breathing of onions, and bleeding from the 
nose from a too rude contact with a red cabbage, was the first object 
that presented itself to the chivalry of Sir Frederick Moltram ; who 
with some difficulty, and more violence to his own risible faculties, 
raised her from the ground. Her Ladyship, with a promptitude of 
perception which no accident could blunt, where rank and fashion 
were in question, immediately recognised her deliverer ; and with 
her usual mincing tone, and, as she imagined, graceful manner, 
expressed her hopes that he was well ; regretted they had not met at 
Baden, where she would have had much pleasure in presenting him 
to a real German prince, her friend Count Katzenellenbogy ; and 
made her never-failing inquiries for the Duke of Devonshire and the 
Duncannons, and a passing observation on Lord Chesterfield's last 
work, which she had in her hand, she said, at the moment of her 
frightful accident. 

Lady Anastasia, " less studied in a sad ostent" to play the part 
of Lady Teazle in a basket of vegetables, claimed the acquaintance 
and aid of Sir Frederick, with the ease of a woman of the world, 
accustomed to make use alike of friends or enemies, acquaintances 
or strangers, as the exigence of the moment might require; and 
while the maid was shaking out the now, alas ! well - worn Erin- 
green pelisse of Lady Dogherty, she took possession of Sir Frederick's 
arm, dusting her canzou with her handkerchief in her disengaged 
hand, and coolly exclaimed, 

"Eh! gude God, my dear Sir Frederick, what would have 
become of us, if we had not the gude fortune to meet you, and to 
have your carriage ready to take us into the town? There never 
was such a disaistrous journey as we hae made from Aix-la-Chapelle, 
— all owing 1 ' (and she lowered her voice) " to these excellent, but 
poor dear, vulgar people endeavouring to keep up with my cousin 
the Marchioness's party, who hae been shirking them at every step 
sin we left Brussels; for they hae no their ain carriage, poor crea- 
tures! and this crazy concern is just hired, do you see, for the oc- 
casion. But don't let us lose time, Sir Frederick; you '11 just order 
your carriage to draw up, and allow itto set us down attheBellevue, 
or we shall be too late for any of the gaieties. " 

" We must first look to that poor wretch," said Sir Frederick, 

38. 



486 THE PRINCESS. 

pointing to the courier, who was now assisted by Sir Frederick and 
his servants (but still continued looking round for the fragments of 
his pipe and pouch). 

" Eh Heave him with the postilion," said Lady Anastasia. u Yon- 
der is a cabaret, and we'll leave our maid to take care of the things, 
and tie up the old machine. Come, my dear Leddy, we shall be too 
late for everything." 

Sir Frederick, however, insisted on replacing the wounded Herr 
Muncher in his own rumble, with his own courier to take care of 
him; and then, with a feeling of deep mortification, which even his 
humanity combated in vain, he placed the two ladies in the post of 
honour of his calash, and throwing himself sulkily with his back to 
the horses, proceeded along the Rue de Namur, which opens at once 
upon the Place Royale. 

At that moment the Place Royale was the salon of Belgium, 
where the sovereign and the people of all ranks were assembled to 
hear the most extraordinary concert that was ever performed to the 
most multitudinous and attentive of all audiences. As the carriage 
flew along, it passed the cortege of English vehicles which were 
drawn up at the corner of the Rue des Petits Carmes, where it was 
stopped by a sentinel. The two ladies' heads were instantly thrust 
past Sir Frederick, so as completedy to exclude his view ; while the 
protrusion of Lady Dogherty's bulky proportions threatened to add 
suffocation to the calamity. Tender inquiries after the fatigues of 
the journey were addressed to the occupants of the carriages, with a 
narrative of the speaker's own misadventures, in which Sir Frede- 
rick's name was mentioned with the epithets of u kind friend, " 
" old travelling companion," etc. 

Sir Frederick was little ambitious of sustaining the character thus 
thrust upon him, before the audience which he suspected to be pre- 
sent; he therefore opened the opposite door, and let himself out, 
for the purpose of cutting his ridiculous protegees, sans tambour 
battant, and escaping unseen into town. He sidled along there- 
fore, his hat drawn over his eyes, and his eyes glancing from be- 
neath his hat. The first carriage he recognised was his own,— the 
very easy, luxurious travelling chariot which Fegan ( whose name 
over the Hotel dTrlande he had just read with infinite amusement ) 
carefully sent back from the Tower-stairs to Carlton-terrace. He 



THE PRINCESS. 



487 



looked no farther, but increased bis speed; and finding tbat pedes- 
trians were permitted to pass, though carriages were not, he entered 
under the arch which opens into the Place Royale from the Rue de 
Namur, and found himself in the midst of a scene and a society, and 
within hearing of a music, which, taken altogether, combined the 
most extraordinary spectacle ever witnessed in modern times. 

Sir Frederick placed himself close to the left of the church of 
Caudemberg, the central point to which all eyes and ears were di- 
rected. On an elevated estrade in the front of the peristyle, whose 
columns were hung with trophies, an orchestra of six hundred mu- 
sicians were performing the national hymn, the Brabanconne, to 
an audience of many thousand persons. The still and breathless 
multitude filled the vast and beautiful area of the Place Royale to its 
utmost boundaries, stretching onwards to the right along the Rue 
Royale and the Park, descending the Montagne de la Cour in front, 
and filing off to the left through the spacious Rue de la Regence 
and Rue de Namur," as far as sounds were audible or objects visible. 

The audience was composed of many generations ; old men sup- 
ported by their grandchildren, and babies on their mother's bosoms. 
In the strictest sense of the word, it was the Relgian people. Within 
a slight boundary of frame-work, over which some hundreds of red 
rude arms were leaning, sat the legislative representatives of the 
people, the public authorities, and such foreign guests as applied 
for admission by the sacred name of strangers. Without the bar- 
rier, stood the promiscuous multitude ; and above their heads, in 
the windows of the surrounding architectural edifices, were crowded 
the higher classes, native and foreign : the public Hotels de l'Europe, 
de Flandres, and the Rellevue, contained their own guests; and the 
other buildings sparkled with the beau-monde of the country ! 

In the balconies of the Hdtel de Merode stood the King and Queen, 
the etat-major, and a numerous society of Belgian gentry, brilliant 
in uniforms, or in the gaiety and freshness of a Parisian morning 
toilet. There was no military array, no body-guards. A sentinel 
stationed at the various entrances into the Place, to prevent the en- 
trance of carriages from disturbing the music by their roll, was the 
only obstacle to the approach of all who could find standing-room ; 
and not a gesture or a word disturbed the solemnity of the scene, or 
the exquisite harmony of the concert. 



488 



THE PRINCESS. 



Sir Frederick Mottram forgot the adventure in which he had a 
moment before been so ludicrously involved ; his narrow escape 
from the Montressor party, and from his own wife. He forgot all 
personal considerations. The scene he gazed on, the persons he 
beheld, the music he listened to, absorbed his whole attention, his 
imagination, and his feelings. 

It was a curious sight to witness a member of the feudal aristo- 
cracy of Germany standing forward as the elected chief magistrate 
of a free people ; to listen to a national anthem, the dirge of despo- 
tism ! It was a singular event so see the descendant of Henry the 
Fourth, a daughter of the House of Bourbon, listening to the music 
of the Marseillaise and of the Brabanconne. It was gracious to 
behold, in the ruddy countenances of the assembled multitudes, the 
evidence of a people who have strictly realized the vague wish of 
her best ancestor, having each la poule au pot, or something more 
substantial. But more remarkable, more striking, was the solemn 
silence, the deep and profoundspirit with which these hymns to liberty 
were heard. There were no vivats, no expolsions of sentiment, such 
as those with which France is accustomed to hail the freedom she has 
so often and so bravely struggled for, and so often and so lightly re- 
signed. The pervading feeling was that of men, in earnest in all 
Shey do; and who, though they may again be overwhelmed, as in 
former times, by masses, will never be subdued in spirit : for the 
tetcs dures des Flamands are at this day precisely what they were 
when Phillippe -le-Bon of Burgunday reproached them with the 
temperament which resisted even his splendid despotism, and which 
they derived from their remotost ancestors, the sturdiest and the 
most awakened of the Franks. 

The concert was concluded with a round of applause ; and the 
multitude dispersed as quietly as they had assembled, pouring down 
the streets and avenues, and along the shady walks of the Park, each 
to his habitual or temporary home, to repose or to regale, in readi- 
ness for the gratis representation of the theatre, for the fireworks, 
or for the illumination of the Tour St. Michel, ( the beacon political 
and religious of the good people of Brussels). 

Sir Frederick still retained his seat under some floating draperies, 
to which a member of the chambers had courteously conducted him. 
A slight shower, which fell with the concluding bars of the concert. 



THE PRINCESS. 



48S> 



lo the domage of many a chapeau ?*ose, and robe bleu celeste* gave 
him an excuse for keeping to his shelter, and it enabled him to 
watch, unseen, the entrde of the English carriages at the conclusion 
of the ceremony. His own travelling chariot led the way, occupied 
within by Lady Frances and her maid, and without by her livery- 
servant and page. Lord Aubrey's britzka followed ; his Lordship 
and Lord Allington on the dicky, their two foreign valets within, 
and a courier and livery-servant behind. The third carriage con- 
tained Lady Montressor, stretched at full length on piles of cushions, 
and accompanied by her own woman, and Dr. Rodolf de Burgo ; 
and on the coach-box were Mrs. St. Leger and Claude Campbell 
sous le meme paropluie. A sort of sumpter carriage closed the 
march, laden with footmen, maids, a green monkey, a grey paro- 
quet, and a French dog ; the latter three articles recent purchases of 
her Ladyship, and intended for her menagerie in London. After a 
moment's interval, Sir Frederick's calash appeared with the Ladies 
Dogherty and Macanulty . The whole cavalcade passed slowly through 
the dispersing but still dense crowd, and drew up at the porte-cochere 
of the Hotel de Bellevue. 

Apartments at a high price must have been retained at the Bellevue ; 
for the whole party, received at the gate by Lord Montressor and a 
host of English beaux, alighted and entered. Not so the ladies 
occupying Sir Frederick's carriage. After an altercation of some 
length with the porter and waiters, they drove to the H6tel de 
Flandres and de PEurope ; and then, to the owner's mortification, 
he beheld his carriage slowly winding down the Montague de la 
Cour, his servants still keeping their seats. His first attempt in his 
own behalf was to seek his old apartments at the Flandres; but 
they, with every other room in the hotel, had been occupied for 
the Four Days, excepting only that one appropriated to the obliging 
hostess herself, who resigned her- family entresol in his favour, 
till the clearing of her house on the following day should leave the 
suite he had previously occupied au premier disengaged. 

A spot wherein to repose independently of his wife and her party 

* The freshness and elegance of the Belgian toilet on the occasion of Ihe 
morning festivities of the Four Days was very conspicuous, and had a very 
brilliant effect, particularly upon the occasion here described. 

38.. 



490 



THE PRINCESS. 



being thus secured, he sought the solitude of the now silent, empty 
Park, to concentrate his thoughts, calm the perturbation of his 
spirits (ruffled beyond his power to control them), and to arrange 
something like a plan of conduct, not only for what might occur 
during his short residence in Belgium, but, as far as his wife was 
concerned, for his future existence. The soft, drizzling shower, 
which had caused such a rapid dispersion after the grand concert, 
was still falling, mingling with the rays of a bright evening sun. 
The Bassin Vert, the usual centre of the promenaders, was now 
deserted, and a thousand odours were exhaling from the dewy tufts 
of flowers which embalmed the adjoining bosquets of acacias and 
chesnut-trecs. 

To avoid the chance of obtrusion, Sir Frederick descended into 
one of the bas-fond, where the intertwining foliage renders 
retirement so facile, and affords a calm and delicious retreat in the 
bosom of a busy and bustling city. And now, breathing freely, 
and for the first time raising his eyes, he was about to throw him- 
self on a bench, when he perceived that it was already occupied 
by a Beguine in full costume. She was leaning thoughtfully on 
her arm, and a small basket lay by her side. He instantly retreated. 
Associations more powerful than his will to overcome had rendered 
every circumstance and person connected with that order inte- 
resting, and even agitating to him ; and before he had reached the 
summit of the acclivity by which the bas-fond is quitted, he was 
seized, first with a suspicion, and then with a conviction, that the 
absorbed aud pensive Sister of St. Beghe was the Soeur Greite of 
St. John's at Bruges— Madame Marguerite herself. 

He paused for a moment, struggled with his feelings, his hopes, 
his desires, and his plighted promise; but animpulse stronger than 
all beside combated and conquered every wiser and more prudent 
thought. He returned upon his steps, and, bursting through the 
interwoven branches which formed an umbrageous bower over the 
seat he had left, he found it empty. The Beguine had disappeared , 
but, in the hurry probably of escape, had left her little basket 
behind her. 

The dense skreen formed by the luxuriant shrubs concealed the 
path she had taken. He took up her basket, which contained only 
a programme of the fetes, some flowers, and a large drawing-card. 



TUE PRINCESS. 



491 



on which was sketched, with the most characteristic fidelity, and 
with a bold but feathery touch, a view of the scene recently exhi- 
bited in the Place Royale. The Be'gumc's coif was obvious among 
the listening multitude, leaning over the barrier of the reserved 
seats. The noble facade of the Caudemberg formed the back-ground ; 
and among the many heads grouped to the right of the spot where 
the artist stood, it was just possible to distinguish one figure, holding 
back Ihe-drapery in which it was shrouded ;— that figure w as his own. 

The Begui?ie, then, who had mingled among the people on this 
triumphant day, and who had taken this felicitous sketch, was the 
artist of the Ostend trekschuyt— was indeed Madame Marguerite. 
He arose ; and was already hastening along the path, the forgotten 
basket serving as an excuse for overtaking the owner ; but as he 
passed in front of the military orchestra, with his glass to his eye, 
and looking in every direction in search of his object, he perceived 
the plain, dark calash wheeling away from the iron gates, which 
open on the Place Royale, (the white coif of the Beg nine just seen 
behind its curtains : ) the next moment it was out of sight. 

He was now no longer in a mood for tranquil meditation or sober 
resolve 5 still less for a rencontre with the members of his wife's 
parly. lie returned to replace the basket where he had found it, 
first buttoning up the drawing within his coat : and, after an hour's 
pacing under the shade of the plane-trees which shadow the eastern 
alley of the Park, he returned to his hotel— having finally resolved, 
to resolve on nothing ! to leave everything to the chances, and to do 
the decencies (as he mentally phrased it) by immediately presenting 
himself to his wife and her party. 

On arriving at the Hotel de Flandres, he found his own carriage 
entering the gateway; it having deposited the wounded courier un- 
der medical care, and dropped the Ladies Dogherty and Macanulty 
without the Porte de Namur ; the Hotel dTrlande being the only 
shelter they could find, after traversing Brussels high and low, 
kt d'un bout a V autre" as Sir Frederick's valet expressed it. The 
man added, with a very sly look, that " their Ladyships had reques- 
ted him to present their thanks, and requests that the carriage might 
set them down at the theatre in the evening; but that, as one of the 
springs was broken, he had assured them de son chef, that that 
was quite impossible." 



492 



THE PRINCESS. 



To dress, and to send a penciled note to Lady Frances, announ- 
cing his arrival, were Sir Frederick's occupations for the succeeding 
half-hour. The following penciled answer was returned : — 

" We had already learned from your friends ( I believe I should 
say your relations ) the Doghertys, that you had arrived— I am 
happy to hear, in perfect health. We are all very incommodiously 
lodged here; but as I share the room of my dear (and. 1 fear, dying) 
friend, Georgina Montressor, it matters little to me. I am glad you 
are better provided at the Flandres, as I know how much you are 
put out of your way by want of comforts. We are dressing for the 
theatre, (a gala night, and the King and Queen going.) having taken 
a morsel an bout clu banc, by way of dinner. We have places in 
the Princess of Schaffenhausen's box ; prayjoinus. Alfred Montres- 
sor sends you his bone ; as our men won't honour the Citizen Ring 
with their presence, even though tempted by the society of our 
Grande Princesse." 

A bitter but irrepressible laugh followed the perusal of this cool 
and inconsequent billet. The dear friends of the dying Lady Mon- 
tressor dressing for the theatre ! The whole was a sedative ; and he 
determined to take his wife and her patry on their own terms, and 
to give the conjugal rendezvous, ( after an interval to which a crowd 
of strange and unexpected incidents had given an artificial length, ) 
in the box of the very woman who had been one of the most urgent 
causes of their recent separation. 

In referring to Lady Frances's note ( between his soup and his 
pdle ), which he had at first only glanced over with irritated rapi- 
dity, the words " I believe your relations, the Doghertys, " struck 
him first as a joke got up by the party, and then as an insult, a pal- 
pable hit at other relations, whose unpretending respectability had 
not secured them against the insolent mystifications of Lady Frances's 
noble friends, nor him from her own impertinent and unfeeling 
reproaches. He tore the note in a thousand pieces, finished his din- 
ner, drank more than his usual quantity of wine, and then set forth 
for the theatre, flushed, and flurried with a thousand conflicting 
feelings and strong excitements. 

The streets of Brussels, so tranquil an hour before, now resem- 
bled one of those fairs of ancient limes, which, in the palmy state of 
I he Hanseatic league, assembled at their great marts the population 



TEE PROCESS. 



493 



of half Europe. Persons of every condition and costume were pour- 
ing forth to watch the fairy lights gradually kindling along the plat- 
form of the towers of the cathedral, or sparkling with fantastic 
beauty over the spire, and even to the arrow on the summit, of the 
Hotel-de-Ville. 

It was with extreme difficulty that Sir Frederick threaded the 
crowd in the Place de la 3Ionnaie. and fought his way to the theatre, 
and found himself at last at the open door of the Princess of Schaffen- 
hausensbox, which was crowded to excess, and resounded with the 
buzz of many languages. The theatre itself was thronged to its sum- 
mit, the pit and balcony crammed to suffocation. Opposite, and on 
the right-hand side of the stage, sat the King and Oueen of the Bel- 
gians. The King's Staff occupied the box on the left. 

Whoever has seen the parade of an Irish Viceroy's visit to the 
theatre, in what Dean Swift styles - wretched Dublin, the capital of 
wretched Ireland; "* whoever has witnessed an armed force con- 
ducting a respectable lady and nobleman from one neighbouring 
street to another, to pass an hour or two at a play ; whoever has on 
that solemnity heard the clattering of cavalry, and the word of com- 
mand given by the officer of the guard; and seen the entrance of the 
Lord Lieutenant and his Lady, in court-dresses, into a box draped 
and decorated Avith the bygone insignia of feudal royalty ( tiny pages 
holding up regal manteaus. aide-de-camps, comptrollers and stew- 
ards of the household, gentlemen ordinary and extraordinary, with 
state physicians in solemn black, and state beef-eaters in short petti- 
coats and long halberds, all tilling up the pageant ) . whoever has 
seen this, and estimated it as such things were once estimated in Ire- 
land—as the Doghertys and the Doctor de Burgos still estimate them, 
—would think very little, or rather would think nothing at all. of a 
' spectacle gala ' honoured by the presence of royalty at Brussels 
theatre. 

In the simple, plain box of their Belgian Majesties, the ladies and 
gentlemen who accompanied the Royal Family did not stand behind 
them the entire evening, deeming even a lounge against a wall a 
luxury. There were no pages, comptrollers, physicians, dancing- 
masters (of the ceremonies), gentlemen ordinary, or gentlemen ex- 
traordinary; but. en revanche, the peaceful tranquillity and 
attention to the play were not interrupted by any uproarious expres- 



494 



THE PRINCESS. 



sions of party feeling, by oranges flung at the heads of the unhappy 
actors, or bottles at the objects of all this pageantry. No factious 
air was called from the gallery, nor opposed by another factious air 
demanded from the pit ; not a prisoner was made, nor a head broken. 
For nothing in the histrionic chronicles of nations less resembled a 
viceregal visit to the theatre of Dublin, than the visit of the King and 
Queen of the Belgians to the theatre of Brussels on the twenty-sixth 
of September 1833. 

Sir Frederick Mottram stood at the threshold of the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen's box, just able to see, overheads lower than his own, 
the royal party and the opposite side of the theatre. It was a grate- 
ful and splendid sight ! The piece performing was ' Le Mariage 
Impossible.^ It had been chosen appropriately, as being the pro- 
duction of a Belgian author, Monsieur Grisar of Brussels, whose 
brilliant debut had been hailed with compatriot triumph. 

There were some points in the play which the Princess of Schaf- 
fenhausen's box might have applied to themselves ; but these per- 
sons were in themselves a drama, and occupied with their own 
parts. In the front of the box sat the Princess and Lady Frances 
Mottram, each with a cavalier immediately in waiting, leaving the 
tops of the ladies' heads alone visible from behind. The blonde 
coiffure, wreathed with pearl, of the English lady, was contrasted 
by the jet-black head, bound simply with a diadem of brilliants, of 
the foreigner. Between both sat, or rather fidgeted, the frivolous 
chiffonnee impersonation of HerbauWs last— Mrs. St. Leger; her 
chapeau rose flaunting its vapoury marabouts in the faces of the 
many aspirants for her universal smiles, who hung about her and 
filled up the box to its farthest verge. Among the men were Lords 
Aubrey and Allington (less of the extreme droite than the bro- 
thers Montressor, who were at that moment playing a family-game 
at e'earte w ith Doctor de Burgo at the couchette of Lady Montres- 
sor); and Claude Campbell, with his fair tresses confounded with 
Mrs. St. Leger's marabouts, evidently the favourite of the day. 

The rest, though chiefly English, were unknown to Sir Frederick. 
He stood, therefore, patiently awaiting the conclusion of the first 
piece, leaning against the frame of the door. At the dropping of 
the curtain, when the box was thinned by the temporary departure 
of some of the gentlemen, he advanced, and was recognised by 



THE PRINCESS. 



495 



Lord Aubrey. Lord Allington, Claude Campbell, and Mrs. St.Leger. 
Lady Frances's head was turned to the adjoining box, and almost 
touching that of a young and beautiful person, on whose bright 
countenance sat the immortal bloom which poetry gives to Hebe, 
and painting fails to realize. She was talking to the French Am- 
bassadress — the young, the good, the beautiful Countess de Latour 
Maubourg.* 

The Princess, on the contrary, was stooping down her diademed 
head to some one who was addressing her from the balcony below. 
A garland of crimson roses binding the crimson brows of Lady 
Dogherty, marked her as the person thus distinguished by the 
" observed of all observers." The Princess appeared to excite in 
many of the audience much admiration, mingled with profound 
astonishment ; odd doubts of the fidelity of their own senses, or 
of her identity, were heard to escape their lips ; and the title of 
Schaffenhausen, coupled with the name of Madame Marguerite, was 
heard on every side. Lady Frances at last drew back her head, 
and turning to address Lord Aubrey, found seated in his place— 
her own husband ! 

The recognition was cool, courteous, brief: one word on the last 
accounts of their son, another on the health of Lady Montressor, 
and then a broken sentence, an unfinished phrase, with an infinite 
deal of nothings, about nothing, and tending to nothing. On the 
re-entrance of Lord Aubrey, the bon-ton husband instantly resigned 
his place ; and was joining Mrs. St. Leger, who, with Claude Camp- 
bell, was now perched on one of those high seats which flank the 
private boxes facing the proscenium in the theatre of Brussels, when 
Lady Frances, tapping his arm with her fan, said, " I suppose I 
may now present you to the Princess of Schaffenhausen, the pa- 
troness of your friend Madame Marguerite?" 

Sir Frederick felt the blood mount in his face, in spite of every 
effort to maintian an aplomb equal to the cool impertinence of his 

* The death of this lady, a few months after the epoch here described, 
cast a shadow over the elegant and rational pleasures of Brussels ; and left 
an impression of regret on all hearts, even on those of her slightest acquain- 
tance, not yet dispelled. The Countess de Latour Maubourg was daughter 
to the celebrated Count Daru. 



496 



THE PRINCESS. 



wife's speech. He answered, however, composedly, "I shall be 
happy to have the honour. " 

Lady Frances bent forward her head and whispered the Princess, 
who nevertheless waited to finish an audience obtained by the per- 
severing efforts of Lady Dogherty. She at last slowly and carelessly 
turned half round. 

" Sir Frederick Mottram desires to have the honour of being- 
presented to you, Princess, " said Lady Frances, half laughingly, 
half ironically. 

" Sir Frederick does me honour, " said the Princess, turning full 
round, in all the blaze of beauty and brilliants; the one enhanced 
by the blush that mantled on her cheek, and the fire that sparkled 
in her eye 5 the other relieved by the black head and robe by which 
they were contrasted. It would have been difficult to conceive a 
more striking picture than that presented at the moment by this 
splendid original. It struck even the nonchalant Lord Aubrey 
that he had never before seen the Princess so handsome ; it struck 
Sir Frederick Mottram that the Princess of Schaffenhausen was— 
Madame Marguerite ; that Madame Marguerite was the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen; — that . . . that . . . that he was himself drunk, 
dreaming, or mad ! " 

The foreigner who had been leaning over the back of the Prin- 
cess's chair now arose, and, with the true courtesy of a foreigner, 
offered his seat to the stranger. The offer was promptly accepted, 
if not with equal courtesy : Sir Frederick dropped into it. The 
Princess resumed her seat ; the curtain drew up ? and the gay petite 
piece, ' La Gageure Imprevue began amidst a cry from the pit 
of " Chut— chut— silence ! 51 The Princess pressed her finger on 
her smiling lip with a significant air; the causeries of her box 
ceased, and all eyes were directed to the stage, to the relief of all 
who had nothing more to say, or who had more to express than 
words could tell, or eyes communicate. 

Sir Frederick Mottram rested his hand on the back of the Prin- 
cess's chair, his head upon his hand ; and his quick respiration dis- 
turbed the only vagrant tress which had escaped from its brilliant 
confinement and floated on her marble neck. 

The farce finished, the curtain dropped, the audience rose; and 
the departure of their Belgian Majesties, like their entrance, was 



THE PRINCESS. 497 

followed by the unanimous acclamations of respect of the entire au- 
dience. But not one servile exclamation, not one party word, not 
one flagornerie de circonstance, disgraced the free expression of 
respectful good-will, which honoured those who offered, as well as 
those who received, it. 

Lady Frances gave her arm to Lord Aubrey, Mrs. St. Leger hers 
to Claude Campbell ; the Princess took Sir Frederick's, which was^ 
hesitatingly offered. 

" Pass on, Princess," said Lady Frances, with an arch smile and 
significant nod of the head, and standing back to make way for the 
greater lady. 

The Princess took her precedence. Her carriage was the first 
up ; and she had reached the portico of the theatre in unbroken si- 
lence, save the utterance of an ' au revoir" to Lady Frances, as she 
passed her. She was already in her carriage, and her chasseur was 
on the alert to close the door, when Sir Frederick asked in a sharp 
tone — 

" And I ! have not I a right to demand an ' au revoir?^ Have 
not I fulfilled to the letter the conditions imposed?" 

" Then make one effort more," was the reply : " fulfil them in 
the spirit, and then . . . ." 

" What then?" he asked, grasping firmly the hand which strug- 
gled for its release. 

" Why, then" she said, bending down her head, and softening 
her voice to a whisper — " then 

" Nous nous reverrons un jour, 

Pour raconter de nos fortunes : 
Oublions done nos amours , 

Quoi qu'elles soient bien importunes. 
Qui plus y perd , plus y a mis — 

C'esl quit a quit , et bons amis." 

She kissed the tips of her fingers, and drew back : the footman 
closed the door, the glass was raised, and the coachman received the 
word—' Au Pavilion de GroenendaeW 

The rain was now falling in a light, pattering shower, that scarcely 
dimmed the brilliant fireworks which shot athwart the midnight air. 

39. 



498 



THE PRINCESS. 



The crowds hurried from the theatre and the Place de la Monnaie 
to the Porte de Sehaerbeck, to the Boulevards, and along the Rue 
Royale ; the great object of the people being to see the last repre- 
sentation, which was to close the national festivities in honour of 
the anniversary of the Four Days. The fireworks represented the 
facade of a temple, on which was inscribed, in letters of living light, 
the simple phrase. 

' 26 me Septembre. ' 

The happy multitudes read it with enthusiasm. There was one 
among them, ' not of them,' who read it, too, with a strange and 
deep interest; to whom it was a date, an epoch, never to be 
forgotten. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE CHAMBER OF REPRESENTATIVES AND THE OLD PALACE. 

The Four Days were over; the national fetes of the -anniversary 
of the Belgian revolution had terminated; and in the universal 
movement of the dense population which had filled the streets of 
Brussels, no riot, no disorder, not the faintest disturbance had 
arisen. The Hague might (as it was averred) have given its orders 
to excite commotion : not even an accident had occurred to interrupt 
the harmony, the solemnity, or the enjoyment of the festivity. 

A short altercation on the race-course, not known beyond the 
parties concerned in it, between an Irish son of the Turf (or of the 
bog) and a Belgian groom, had occasioned more mirth than anger. 
It arose out of what was called the '■course des chevaux indi- 
genes, • in which a ver?neil cup was to be contended for; when the 
sporting Hibernian had offered (in his own phrase) to insinuate 
his black colt, Paddy Whack, in the place of a Belgian horse, which 
he characterised as 'a cratur that would rather die than run." 



TliE PRIjNCESS. 



499 



The proposition, in itself an insult, was followed by such dent- 
g rant obser\at\ons on all horses in general not bred for the Curragh 
of Kildare, and all Belgian horses in particular, by the Irish gentle- 
man, as threatened a prompt appeal to other means than a reference 
to ' les j'ure's but the interference of Lord Montressor, Lord Al- 
fred, and some English gentlemen, turned the whole affair to their 
own account of broad fun. The sporting Irishman, who had said 
more bitter things of Belgian racing than it might have been safe to 
translate to his adversary, was promised a fair field for his colt on 
another occasion ; and having, in the true spirit of squireen chivalry, 
given his card, it served the double purpose of announcing his 
name, and recommending his hotel, for it was inscribed ' Gomfur- 
table Irish In, by Monsieur Lawrence Fegan, Aubergiste, Hotel 
dTrelande, Porte de Namur. ' 

The fetes, however, though over to the letter, continued in the 
spirit ; and amusements both private and public detained the steps 
of the gay, and furnished an excuse to the idle for still lingering in 
Brussels. The exhibition of pictures remained open ; the city had 
offered a brilliant ball to the King and Queen, and to all the strangers 
of note then in the capital. The splendid and hospitable mansion 
of the French Ambassador was twice a week the rendezvous of the 
elegant and the gay ; and the British Ambassador gave agreeable din- 
ners. The delightful operas of the 1 Zampa" and the ' Pre aux- 
Clercs* were performed to full houses, alternately with the repre- 
sentations of Madame Dejazet, one of the most charming of modern 
comedians. 

It was in vain, therefore, that the ' Deputations Orangistes ' 
departed to London, Frankfort, Toplitz, to solicit the restoration of 
the House of Nassau, and to represent the Belgians as in the deepest 
distress, commercial, financial, and political; as supporting with 
reluctance the revolutionary government, and ready, les amies a 
la main, to effect a counter-revolution. The Belgians continued, 
notwithstanding, to dance, play, and sing; to applaud the 'Zampa,' 
to attend the races of Montplaisir, and to study the pictures in the 
exhibition, crowding the avenues of the old palace from the opening 
to the shutting of its gates. 

The several members of the Montressor party had each a motive 
or a necessity for remaining. The .Marchioness, whose illness was 



500 



THE PROCESS. 



no longer a tic, or a means of coquetry, could not travel— at least 
so Dr. de Burgo averred; and all who were, or affected to be, inte- 
rested in what was whispered to be her approaching end, would not 
leave her. 

Lord Alfred and Claude Campbell alone had broken off from an 
association to which both, in a certain degree, had become a charge. 
The latter had been recalled into service, and went in hopes of 
negotiating for the office of secretary of Legation to his friends 
Mr. and Mrs. Montague St. Leger. The young diplomatist had left 
England deeply enamoured of his cousin and godmother Lady Fran- 
ces Mottram; he quitted Brussels quite engoue with his confidante 
and playfellow Mrs. St. Leger, who had been the first to announce 
to him that he was superseded in the good graces of sa belle ?nar- 
raine, and the only one to console him for an infidelity, which had 
but anticipated his own by a week, or perhaps a day. 

Lord Alfred had quilted Brussels suddenly and secretly ; in dud- 
geon, in debt, and in utter disgrace with more than one of his party. 
He had run horses and lost at Montplaisir ; and had actually left a 
large sporting debt unpaid to the fortunate owner of Paddy Whack, 
the master of the Hotel d'Irlande, Porte de Namur. He had played 
roulette, and been cleared out at Baden. He had lost an enormous 
sum at billiards to Count Katzenellenbogen, at Aix-la-Chapelle, 
which his brother had paid. But his debts to the man of rank being 
discharged, Lord Montressor drew up his purse-strings, and de- 
clared off. Lord Montressor had shared his brother's hopes, and 
was even positive of his ultimate success with the Princess of Schaf- 
fenhausen ; and it was not until he had been himself the bearer of a 
second proposition on Lord Alfred's behalf, on the morning of the 
last day of the anniversary, that the cold, firm, and indignant refu- 
sal of the Princess convinced him that, in his brother's technical 
phraseology, it was 6 no go.' 

All farther ways and means therefore being cut off, Lord Alfred, 
on the evening when the little piece of ' UEscroc dn Grand Monde" 
was performed, enacted himself one of its scenes, and made an 
abrupt exit from Brussels, which by no means elicited the plaudits 
of his creditors, nor proved satisfactory to the friends and associates 
he had left behind him. 

Lady Montressor, meantime, had been removed to a splendid man- 



THE PRINCESS. 



501 



sion in the Rue Ducale, the hotel of an absent Belgian noble, w ho 
was waiting upon circumstances in his chateau near the Dutch fron- 
tier. The Bellevue had been voted close and incommodious by Dr. 
de Burgo, whose opinion, while it met the desires of the whole party, 
was more expressly calculated to suit the interests— of himself. 

The members of the Montressor family had each their elegant 
apartments detached and independently of each other; but Lady 
Frances, the most devoted of friends, occupied a lit de repos in the 
Marchioness's dressing room, and shared with Lord Aubrey those 
tender duties, that, in English high life, often produce scenes in 
which feeling and folly, piety and profligacy, are so strangely min- 
gled. To such scenes and such characteristics a close parallel is 
presented in the history of French society before that revolution of 
which they were the precursors, and, to a certain degree, the 
occasions; and whoever has read the memoirs and letters of that, 
epoch, will find in the circles of the Choiseuls, the de Graminonts 
and the Boufllers, of the d'Epinays, Du Deffands and the Espinasses, 
types of the habits and morals of particular sets among the highest 
class of the modern English oligarchy. 

Sir Frederick Mottram neither resented the incivility of not being 
included in the arrangements of the hotel in the Rue Ducale , nor 
objected to the earnest request of his weeping lady, to be permitted 
to remain with the dying Lady Montressor, for the short lime which 
it might please Divine Providence to spare her to her sorrowing 
friends. The intentions of Heaven, however, on this subject 
seemed anything but fixed. The autumnal skies, which wept and 
smiled alternately upon Brussels and its lingering guests, were not 
more changeable than the health, spirits, and looks of Lady Mon- 
tressor. 

Occupying an apartment which recalled all that is most splendid 
and tasteful in the boudoir of a Parisian petite maitresse, ( for all 
Belgian ladies do not ' live in kitchens,' and dress in 4 bedgowns,' ) 
she sometimes drew her coterie round her easy-chair, where, shel- 
tered from the sunshine by skreens of living jasmine and other odo- 
riferous plants, she was all life, gaiety, and frolic. At other times, 
seated in the demi lumiere of drawn draperies, she congregated 
them round the fire, where she lay shivering in cashmeres, on cush- 
ions of eider-down, with one cold hand clasped in her husband's 

39.. 



502 



THE PRINCESS. 



and the other in that of— Lord Aubrey, — fragile and faded as the 
flowers over which she moralized. 

Lady Frances, meantime, sobbed over her tapestry ; Mrs. St. Le- 
ger dropped pearly tears over the pearl purse she was knitting for 
Claude Campbell ; and Lord Allington sketched clever caricatures of 
the whole group in the fly-leaves of his Rabelais, which he was now 
reading avec delices for the first time. 

At other times, again, Lady Montressor would insist on her 
friends adjourning to Sir Robert's box at the theatre, or to the mu- 
sical promenades of the Park ; and when they returned, she fell 
into hysterics of laughter at the absurdities discovered or mysti- 
fications enacted at the expense of friends and foes, natives or 
foreigners. Again, she was found in hysterics of tears, complaining 
of the neglect and seeming want of sympathy of those for whom she 
had lived and made such sacrifices, ( and she turned her eyes on 
Lord Aubrey. ) " She was abandoned," she said, " to the skill 
and care of one who, however skilful and kind, was still a stranger;" 
and then Doctor de Burgo threw down his eyes, and muttered 
something of ' professional duty,' 4 intense sympathy,' and 'devoted 
respect.' 

Au reste, the clique lived as exclusively to themselves in the 
Rue Ducale, as they could have done in all the most fastidious 
jealousy of an overflowing London season, when cousins come from 
the country, and exacting constituents threaten an incursion of the 
Goths and Vandals. The gentlemen, however, went once to the 
Chamber of Representatives, as a matter of mere curiosity : they 
were accompanied by Lady Frances and Mrs. St. Leger, old fre- 
quenters of the Duchess's box in the House of Lords, and well-known 
habitudes of the ventilator of the House of Commons. 

The exclamations of the Tory stateswomen at the elegance and 
accommodation of the handsome tribune to which they were con- 
ducted, were sufficiently audible to excite the attention of some of 
the young members immediately beneath them. The eloquence of 
the orateur who at their entrance was in possession of la parole 
was deranged. He was one to whose ears the lowest lispings of 
female accents were familiar. The tonsured head, clerical precision 
of toilet, tonpatelin, and sly sidelong expression of countenance, 
declared him to be equally devoted to the service of the church 



TliE PROCESS. 



503 



and of the ladies. It was the Abbe de F , the spiritual director 

and vert-vert of the Dames Anglaises de Bruges, the bel esprit 
of the English coteries of that city and of Brussels. 

Singularly enough, the subject of his eloquent discourse was a 
woman ; and his speech was sufficiently personal to attract the 
attention of the English party, who, like Horace AValpole, 1 aimaient 
les noms propres,'' and who were almost tempted to encourage 
the speaker with a ' Hear him, hear him !' 

On the Abbe's resuming his seat, the sudden rising of the member 
for Bruges excited universal silence : he was one who never rose 
but to command it. Concise, witty, and rapid, the speech of 
Monsieur Jullien had the point of an epigram, and the close cogency 
of a logical argument. The chivalrous championship he assumed 
6 for the nonce, ' admitted of all the gaiety and playfulness which 
are the peculiar characteristics of his somewhat French eloquence ; 
and carrying, as he did, the gallantry, if not ' the sense, ' of the 
House along with him, his reply to the Abbe's philippic produced 
that 1 gr -ancle hilarite^ which, in the language of the English 
journals, may be translated ' continued laug liter. ' 

Lady Frances and Mrs. St. Leger were amused up to their bent. 
"Do you know," said the latter, "that this is infinitely more 
entertaining than either of our Houses?' 1 

u Yes, " said Lady Frances ; "one tires of everything in the long- 
run — even of dear old Eldon's tears, which used to affect one so 
very much." * 

" And then," said Mrs. St. Leger, "there is some difference 
between the fresh air of this delightful box, seeing and seen, and 
our mounting to the ventilator at St. Stephen's, and thrusting one's 
head through pigeon-holes, to inhale an atmosphere of smoke and 
candlesnuffs. " 

• k Or to be treated, " said Lady Frances, laughing, " with black 
tea and tallow-lights, by some rising young member, a candidate 
for our soirees and pic-nics. " 

" Gome," said Lord Aubrey, gravely, "this is antinational; and. 
worse still, democratic and revolutionary. " 

" And yet," said Lord Montressor, looking round at the beautiful 
edifice and commodious arrangement of the chamber, "this is a 
splendid thing ! I scarcely know an Opera-house in Europe superior : 



504 



THE PRINCESS. 



and whenever the Nassaus recover their authority, and put down 
these Jacobin clubs, it will make a delicious salle de spectacle. 
Here are private boxes, you see; and a pit and two tiers for the 
public. By the bye, how crowded they are ! only look ! " 

il They are open, 1 suppose, to the canaille, " said Lord Aubrey ; 
' 1 for you see there are men in blouses, and women in the dress of 
the Campine." 

kt Yes; but what elegant toilets in the front row ! I'd swear that is 
a nceud d'Uerbault in the chapeau de paille de viz, " said Mrs. 
St. Leger. 

u And look at the nun in the thick of it all ! " said Lady Frances. 
• I never saw a real nun before; though I went as one to the 
Dowager Lady Lansdowne's masquerade. " 

1,4 That is a Beguine," said Lord Montressor, " I Jiave often 
thought a ballet of Beg nines, in the high grotesque style, would be 
very effective. It w ould beat the dance of the dead nuns in 'Robert 
le Diable' hollow.' 1 

•'There! " said Lord Aubrey, t; you have all stared the poor 
Beguine out of countenance. She is off. W ho would think she 
could see anything under that penthouse of stiff linen ?" 

lt Humph !" said Lord Montressor, "I have my suspicions of that 
sisterhood. I saw a friend of yours, Lady Frances, in full chase of 
one, not very long ago." 

^ Why, there is Sir Frederick, I declare L" said Mrs. St. Leger, 
" stuck to the w all like one of the pilasters. Oh ! now he sees us, 
and is struggling to get out." 

" Pray let us meet him," said Lady Frances, with a mischievous 
laugh; " I have not seen him for five minutes since 1 introduced the 
Princess to him." 

The next moment the w hole party were rapidly descending the 
beautiful flight of marble stairs which descends to the Doric vesti- 
bule. Sir Frederick was already at the entrance, talking to a gen- 
tleman, w hose quick, intelligent eyes seemed to have assumed their 
spectacles to conceal their penetrating and observant glances. It was 
Monsieur Nothomb, the secretary of state. He had given Sir Frede- 
rick rendezvous at three o'clock, to show him certain diplomatic 
curiosities ; and it was now a quarter past. The gentlemen were 
walking away together, when the English party came down upon 



T1IE PRINCESS. 



505 



the English politician, with other expectations than that of finding 
him with a minister of state. 

" Mottram," said Lord Montressor, "we have lost onr breath in 
ninning after you ; do stop a moment. 1 '' 

Sir Frederick turned round abruptly, and not much amused by 
the rencontre. "Lady Montressor," he said, kt is better to-day, by 
your all being here." 

" So well, " said Lady Frances, with unusual cordiality, " that 
she insists on our dining with her ; and has charged me to engage 
you to be of the party." 

" I am engaged," said Sir Frederick, coldly. 

" You are always engaged," muttered Lady Frances, poutingly, 
and passing the hand she had withdrawn from Lord Aubrey's arm 
under Sir Frederick's. " Will you come with us now, to see the 
pictures? There is a sort of Somerset House business here, they say, 
that is very good indeed, and quite in your way. " 

" I have seen the Exposition already," he replied, drawing back 
his arm, " and I am particularly engaged at present with this gen- 
tleman. I am going to see some diplomatic documents which " 

" Cannot we go with you?" interrupted Lady Frances, pertina- 
ciously, and triumphing in the evident perplexity of her husband. 

The polite and inexhaustible courtesy of the young minister was 
instantly extended to the whole English party, to whom he was pre- 
sented in form by the inexpressibly bored Sir Frederick. The ho- 
nours were then done by the historical interests of the Palace of the 
Representatives of Belgium,— the monument of many changes. It 
was once the place of the Council of Brabant, then of the ttats 
Generau.v ; and, in earlier days, it was the modest house in the 
Forest of Soignes, where Charles the Fifth retired immediately after 
the gorgeous ceremony of his abdication, to live in religious retreat, 
until he embarked for Spain. 

In the official apartments of the minister of war were displayed 
for Sir Frederick's inspection the treaties by which the five powers 
severally acknowledged the present independence of Belgium, and 
the sovereignty of its newly-elected king. The seal of each subscri- 
bing sovereign was enclosed in a gold or silver box of handsome 
workmanship ; and the documents were written on the fair pages 
of volumes so splendidly bound in crimson, scarlet, or purple 



506 



THE PRINCESS. 



velvet, that they might have served for the albums of a modern fine 
lady, or the breviary of a royal saint of old. 

A man's writing, it is said, may be taken as a fair indication of 
his character. That of William of England was the stout, plain 
round hand of the inditer of 'go it, Ned.' The signature of the 
Autocrat of all the Russias was dashed with such violence, that the 
pen had almost penetrated the paper, and the ink had spattered from 
the concluding flourish. It was obvious that the brother of the fu- 
ture Queen of Holland had recognized the sovereignty of the Belgian 
people, as a neccessity, and not a choice. 

"How very pretty!" said Mrs. St. Leger, looking only at the 
bindings of the volumes. 

" Very," said Lady Frances : u l should so like to borrow one 
for a pattern for my book of butterflies." 

i4 When they are done with, Monsieur," asked Mrs. St. Leger, 
(her head full of red-boxes, demontes diamonds, and other diplo- 
matic perquisites,) " whom do you give them to? 1 should so like 
to have one— when they become useless." 

"Do you mean that for an epigram, Mrs. St. Leger?" asked 
Lord Allington, while every one laughed. 

"No, no, " said Mrs. St. Leger; uw they really would make such 
very nice chifflonniers ; and I have seen such pretty things made at 
our Office, of the red boxes and other things, you know. " 

The conversation then took a gay and rather spirituel turn ; sup- 
ported principally by Lord Allington and the Secretary of State : 
while Lady Frances talked in a mutter to Lord Aubrey, and Mrs. St. 
Leger made eyes at the Belgian statesman. Sir Frederick Mottram 
alone appeared to take no interest in the conversation. He had 
seated himself at the table, and seemed deeply engaged in looking 
through the royal recognitions of the new and independent kingdom 
of Belgium. How many such treaties, formed at the will of the 
world's great (or little) masters, had been made, only to be scat- 
tered on the winds by the bursting hurricane of events, which no 
absolute will could control, and which no royal wisdom had fore- 
seen ! What now are the recognitions that placed William of Nassau 
on the Belgian throne ! They are, what Mrs. St. Leger proposed 
making of those he gazed on— chiffons ! It struck him that hence- 
forth nations, not cabinets, would make recognitions; but what 



THE PRINCESS. 



507 



would his ex -colleagues at home think of the reflection ? 

Monsieur Nolhomb was now obliged to return to the Chambers ; 
and the English fashionables agreed to walk through the Park to the 
ancien Palais, to see the exhibition of paintings. Sir Frederick 
Mottram, who had preserved the peevish look and tetchy manner of 
one annoyed in the extreme, was something surprised to find his 
arm suddenly interwoven in that of his wife's; Mrs. St. Leger se- 
lected Lord Aubrey for her cavalier ; and Lord Montressor, breaking 
off from the party, joined the charming representative of Sophie 
A?*naud, whose exquisite personifications of the bon-ton of the 
days of the Henins and the Lauregais, had, on the night before, 
made more conquests than that of the English hereditary legislator. 

The old Palace of Brussels, the residence of the Austrian and Spanish 
governors and ministers, and the site of many historical events, is now 
exclusively devoted to arts, sciences, and letters. It contains a ca- 
binet of natural history, the Bibliothequesde Bourgogne, the national 
gallery of ancient masters, and the exhibition of the products of the 
modern school. There are also some objects of antiquarian interest 
lying neglected, and almost unknown, in one of the old mouldering 
chambers, formerly used as a dormitory for the ladies of the court. 
Among these, is the cradle of Charles the Fifth, in which he was 
rocked by imperial hands in his native city of Ghent. It is a some- 
what clumsy crib, curiously carved; and now, no longer draped 
with purple and gold, but covered with the poduce of the spider's 
loom, and incrusted with the dust of centuries. 

Beside it, on the floor, lie various pieces of the emperor's armour, 
finely chased and gilt, and of a massive weight ; while the palfrey 
ridden by the brave Infanta Isabella at the siege of Ostend, a small 
Spanish horse, appears almost alive. On the death of her favourite 
steed, it had been stuffed by the Princess's order ; and now, with 
the war-horse of Albert, shot in the fight, shares the fate of the relics 
of the immortal monarch of half the world. 

Sir Frederick had already seen these various monuments of an- 
cient times so little known ; and he had haunted the Exposition 
incessantly, intruding on the precious time of Monsieur Joly by 
endless questions concerning the arts, and making the acquaintance 
of many young and aspiring Belgian painters. He continued to 
lead them back to a subject on which they were not unwilling to dilate 



508 



THE PROCESS. 



— the elevation of Madame Marguerite to rank and wealth, her 
efforts to serve the arts, and the interest she was endeavouring to 
spread by her example and her eloquence. She had bespoken a 
cattle-piece of Verbrockhoven, views of the castles of Liege and 
Luxembourg of Bossuet, and an historical picture of the Four Days 
by Wappers. 

It was singular, however, that in the haunts where it was so pro- 
bable that the artist-Princess should frequent, she had not been seen : 
since her appearance in her own box at the theatre, she had not 
been met with in Brussels or its environs. 

Sir Frederick had soon discovered that the self-involved English 
exclusives knew nothing beyond their own party, its amusements, 
or the deeper interests that occupied them ; and that the identity of 
the Princess of Schaffenhausen with Madame Marguerite remained 
unsuspected by his wife, and might probably do so until her return 
to England. — an event which he had determined should be imme- 
diate. 

During their arm-in-arm walk from the Park to the Place, Lady 
Frances was as strikingly gay and talkative, as her husband was 
grave and silent. She even ventured on bantering him on his Bel- 
gian flirtations ; adopted the hint of the Beguine, and adverted to 
the old story of Madame Marguerite, praying for grace in his eyes 
for her patroness the Princess; and, half seriously, half tauntingly, 
reproachinghim with having banished her from Brussels, by his bar- 
barous reception of her civilities in her own box. 

" I think," she said, "her business to Namur (as her note of adieu 
calls it) is only a pretence to keep out of the way till you are gone. 
I see there is no use in contending with you , for it is guerre a la 
mort." 

" Not on my part," said Sir Frederick. ' ; But you may write to 
your friend, that 1 shall leave Brussels the day after to-morrow, 
when! desire that you may be ready to accompany me." 

" Me !" said Lady Frances , with an involuntary start, and a com- 
pression of the arm she leaned on. " I leave Georgina Montressor, 
in her present state ! You don't expect that?" 

" I am sick of this parade of sensibility," he replied, petulantly; 
" sick of this grief a la mode; of this dying to-day, and giving par- 
ties to-morrow ! Lady Montressor has her husband, her friend, and 



THE PRINCESS. 



509 



her cousin Mrs. St. Leger, or her relation Lady Anastasia. to take 
your place at her sofa." 

" She detests Lady Anastasia," said Lady Frances, almost suffoca- 
ting with suppressed feelings; " never lets her inside the door, 
though she has almost forced it ; and consigns her to your friends 
the Dogherties, with whom she is actually living at a public-house 
outside the Porte de Namur." 

" 31y friends the Dogherties, as you please to call them, happen 
to be utter strangers," said Sir Frederick," with whom chance has 
brought me into contact in the course of travelling : they are as 
much your friends as mine; for they pursued you with their 
vulgar familiarity, as they did me, till I peremptorily shook them 
off, with that obtrisuve charlatan, Lady Montressor's new physi- 
cian. " 

" The Dogherties my friends ! they are no friends of mine, unless 
you admit them to be yours : at least, they are not my relations, " 
said Lady Frances, forgetful of all the ' honours bright' pledged to 
the Princess. 

" What does this silly and reiterated mystification mean?" said 
Sir Frederick, suddenly pulling up in uncontrolled provocation. 

" It means just that," said Lady Frances, recovering her temper 
as her husband lost his—" It means that they are not my relations : 
and that they are yours." 

" Do they say that?" asked Sir Frederick, so loudly as to extort 
from Lord Allington the observation that " there was a regular con- 
jugal flare up." 

" It is said" replied Lady Frances. 

" By whom?" he asked. 

" What does that signify?" she replied, lowering her voice and 
slackening her pace, that their conversation should not reach the 
party in advance. " What does it signify by whom such malicious 
and mortifying things are said? If they are true, one must submit 
to the humiliation, and keep as clear as we can of the subject; — 
you know, we have done so already with other relations : and if 
they are not true, we may laugh at the calumny." 

" You must answer my question," said Sir Frederick, with a 
stern and peremptory emphasis. " If it is a mystification of Lord 
Allington's or the Montressors' — or if it is a dull invention of that 

40. 



510 



THE PRINCESS. 



solemn, empty coxcomb, Lord Aubrey, I shall then know how to 
act; but if " 

" Oh ! no, no; by 6 those heavens that shine above !' " exclaimed 
Lady Frances, borrowing the words of a fashionable song, u it is not 
so. The persons you have named have nothing to do with it ; and be it 
true or false , 1 am as desirous to keep the fact from them as you can be . ' ' 

" The fact V he interrupted vehemently. " Why, you are mad!" 

" Well, then, the story, the invention, the mystification— what 
you will. I would conceal everything of the kind from such men 

— men so extremely fastidious as,— as, — as In short, Georgina 

Montressor alone has heard it breathed, and she has her reasons for 
not betraying a secret of mine.' 1 

" By all that's sacred ! you'll drive me mad, if you are not so 
yourself," exclaimed Sir Frederick, stopping short, as they entered 
the court of the old palace. " What are you about? — what do you 
allude to ! You do not mean,— I had almost said, you do not dare, 
to assert that the Dogherties are relations of mine? Why, his son 
was a helper in my stables, and then my groom— the servant who 
accompaneid me here." 

" Yes, yes, I know it all," said Lady Frances in an agony. "He 
is your cousin : his rapid promotion created great surprise among 
our people. But, pray, don't make a scena now : let us join our 
party. You see they are waiting for us under the archway. 1 be- 
seech you !" 

" I will not move one step," said Sir Frederick, stopping short, 
and turning full round, with his eyes fixed steadily on his wife, 
" till you tell me who invented so absurd, so malicious, a story. " 

"Well, then," she replied, with a propitiating look and manner, 
the tears swelling in her beautiful eyes, " only don't let them observe 
the ridicule of our position, and you shall know all. " 

"Well, well," he said impatiently; and he turned his back on 
the party, with the air of observing the Gothic fragment of a prince- 
ly tomb, which lies on the pavement of the court to the left of the 
entrance. 

"Why then," muttered Lady Frances, dropping her head over 
the antique monument as if she knew or cared anything about any 
of the antiquities upon the earth or beneath it— " it was . . . ." 
She paused. 



THE PRINCESS. 



511 



" Who, who, who ?" he vehemently repeated. 

" The Princess of Schaffenhausen, " she almost sobbed out, let- 
ting fall her veil over her face. 

"Did she say this— the Princess of Schalfenhausen?" 

"Yes; she heard it all from Madame Marguerite, her protegee. 
Lady Mottram, your mother, was half-sister to this Sir— Odious 
Dogherty. She had gone on the stage, was thrown off by her fa- 
mily, and changed her name ; but when she married your father, 
(being as much ashamed of her family then as they had before been 
of her,) she concealed from them her elevation. This Madame Mar 
guerite is her niece, the daughter of Lady Mottram's half-brother, 
an officer in the French service, and, of course, niece to Sir Igna- 
tius Dogherty. " 

This detail was made with a rapid utterance, but with an empha- 
tic bitterness that proved the haughty victim of an interested me'sal- 
liance to have a secret triumph in the mortification she was inflic- 
ting. Sir Frederick affected to stoop his head over (he monument, 
took out his handkerchief, as if to remove the dust which obscured 
the inscription, and then, when Lady Frances again took his arm, 
suffered her to lead him towards the porte-cochere of the palace. 
The party were sufficiently pre-occupied in obtaining admittance 
from the porte, not to have noted the continuance of the ' conjugal 
set-to 1 in the court : the hours of admission were over, the doors 
were closed, and les lords Anglais attached an importance to get- 
ting the entree, which under other circumstances they would not 
have felt. 

While disputing the point, and asserting that though the hour of 
opening was fixed, no hour for closing was announced, and that 
the public ought not to be disappointed, in a country where the 
public are everything, a young artist was descending the stairs which 
open into the porch. He immediately came forward, and, with a 
series of courteous bows, assured them that an exception would be 
made in favour of strangers. At his intercession, the whole party 
were admitted into the gallery. 

The salon of the exhibition is a long, lofty, and noble apartment. 
In ordinary times its walls are covered with a collection of the an- 
cient Flemish masters, of great antique curiosity and pictorial value; 
but on the occasion in question, these were covered by a temporary 



512 



THE PRINCESS. 



skreen-work, on which the pictures of the modern artist were ex- 
posed. Although the gallery was closed for the day against the 
public, several artists of both sexes were still lingering before some 
of its finest paintings ; or were seated in conversation on benches 
placed for the accommodation of the visitors. 

" What a handsome gallery !-" said Lord Allington, as the English 
party entered; " and it seems nobly filled too !" 

" Yes, we are proud of our school; but among the most brilliant 
pictures of the present collection," said the young cicerone, c< we 
count the works sent to us from English artists." 

He pointed to the magnificent picture.of the ' Fall of Nineveh,' by 
John Martin. The English party took the compliment as it was 
meant, and expressed their surprise at observing not only the work of 
an artist of whom the English nation is proud, but several charming 
landscapes by Constable, with sea-views, landscapes, and portraits by 
the Reinagles and other British artists." 

" Come," said Lord Montressor, " this is liberal indeed !" 

" It was at least a judicious idea of the directorial commission," 
said a gentleman who had joined his friend the artist, " to unite 
in the same exhibition the productions of the several European 
schools. It prevented any tendency to exclusion or intrigue ; and 
it afforded the opportunity for comparisons of manner, style, and 
conception, between the foreign and national masters, by which 
all may profit, even in preserving their own distinguishing charac- 
teristics." 

" The conception was generous," said Lord Allington, the only 
one of the party who brought either taste or judgment to the dis- 
cussion ; " but 1 should suppose that a great impediment to its exe- 
cution must have been found in the expense. These are not times 
in which painters, like your Rubens, can rival in their pecuniary 
liberalities the princes who affect to patronise them." 

" And therefore it was," said Monsieur Campan ( the gentleman 
who had joined and addressed the group), " that the Commission 
Bi?*cctrice, in inviting the foreign artists to contribute to the exhi- 
bition, undertook to pay all the expenses of conveyance. Under 
the old system here, such a union of talent would have been impos- 
sible. Indeed, it was not then known at Paris, that we even had 
an exhibition." 



THE PRINCESS. 



■513 



With a natural and national pride, the young artist and his friends 
then proceeded to point out the magnificent picture of the 1 Trou- 
peau effraye par Vorage. ' by Yerboeekhoven ; the 'Christ in the 
Tomb.* by Wappers: the 'Christ restoring the Blind, ' by Gallait : 
•the Deluge." by Matthieu : with the works of Delvaux. Van Bree. 
Ducorron. Shaepkins. Mademoiselle Kindt, etc. They were animated 
by an earnest desire to obtain for each the approbation of the foreign 
visitors, and to do the honours by the salon. 

The party, however, soon broke up into smaller groups. Lady 
Frances had advanced towards a picture, followed by Lord Aubrey ; 
who. however, instantly retreated, as if by command. Mrs. St. 
Leger stood before the picture of • Eleonore and Rosamonde. " of 
Mademoiselle Fanny Corr. coquetting as she would have done 
before the high altar of St. Peter's. She had already collected 
around her a bevy of young artists, borrowed a catalogue from 
Lorenzo Zampieri. asked a question of Monsieur Madou . and furnish- 
ed a subject both for the pen and pencil of Monsieur De ^Vasme. 
Like a true diplomatist, the had placed herself in relation with all 
within her sphere:— it is so easy for a pretty woman to attract, who 
gives herself the trouble to exhibit. 

Sir Frederick Mottram stood before the fine statue of Count Felix 
de Merode. by Geef ( of Ghent ) : himself, in pose and fixture of look, 
a living statue. The details communicated by his wife had made 
his thoughts a chaos. Thick-coming resolves were passing through 
his aching head : but his stern and inflexible countenance gave no 
indication of the war of feelings which were agitating his mind. 
Meantime, the young men. whose attentions were rendering the salon 
so amusing to the English party, pointed out some of the notables 
of the country who were present. Among these, was Henry de 
Brouckere. whose eloquent discourse in the Chamber, against the 
parsimony of the minister, and in favour of the claims of art. had 
induced the artists to purchase a picture out of the exhibition for 
the purpose of presenting it to him as an appropriate offering. 
Monsieur Coghen also was pointed out as a true patron of the arts : 
for he that pays a liberal price for good pictures is the best en- 
courager of genius : and Monsienr C.'s recent purchase of Verhoeck- 
hoven's beautiful work — which unites to the fidelity to nature of 
Paul Potter, the life, the spirit, and the picturesque ideality, the 

40.. 



514 



THE PRINCESS. 



highest departments of imaginative art — was a sufficient proof of 
his claim to the character. 

Colonel Joly ( the President of the Commission Directrice ) 
and the Minister of the Interior were respectively named, as they 
passed together towards a picture in the distant part of the apart- 
ment. At the moment when the eyes of the English were turned 
towards them, they were returning the salute of a lady who had 
stopped before the ' Christopher Columbus' of Schaepkens, an ex- 
traordinary composition by an artist as yet scarcely ' known to 
fame.' The lady, though plainly dressed and deeply veiled, had 
something marked and original in her movement, air, and ges- 
tures, — a freedom, an ease and decision of step and attitude, which 
indicated the habit of self-reliance, equally removed from awk- 
wardness and affectation. As she advanced, she attracted the 
attention of Lord Montressor. 

" How well," he said ; " that woman steps out ! How admirably 
she treads the boards, as we say behind the scenes. Look, 
Allington ! Est-ce une artiste, Monsieur?" 

"It is the Princess ofSchaffenhausen," replied Monsieur Verberckt 
himself, ( a true disciple of Benvenuto Cellini, whose works were 
among the more remarkable objects of the exhibition. ) " She was an 
artist before her marriage, and well known as Madame Marguerite." 

" And she was more prized as Madame Marguerite," said another 
artist, who was conversing with Monsieur Verberckt, C1 than she 
ever will be as Princess of Schaffenhausen." 

" Madame Marguerite !" burst forth in simultaneous exclamation 
from the whole English party. But the Princess was now so close 
as to break off the farther observations, of which she was about to 
become the subject. She started back with an evident surprise and 
displeasure on recognizing her English friends, who instantly gathe- 
red round her, and placed their astonishment, which it was impos- 
sible to conceal, to the account of her sudden apparition. 

•We thought you were at Namur !" was the general observation." 

' ' I only returned an hour back," she said, ' • and took the opportuni- 
ty of the gallery being closed against the public, to visit it a tete re- 
posee. But you English have a passe-pa?*tout. Europe has no retreat 
from your curiosity. You ; stop the chariot, and you board the 
barge, 1 as your poet says, no matter who maybe the passenger." 



THE PRINCESS. 



515 



She spoke with bitterness, and in good round English. The 
party she addressed smiled significantly ; the foreigners drew back; 
Sir Frederick advanced a few steps, with a look of intense expres- 
sion : the rooms became rapidly thinned; and, after a short pause, 
Lord Alligton replied to the Princess's observation, 

" Yes, we English are the Paul Prys of the highways and byways 
of the whole ,worId ; and, ' hoping we don't intrude,' we thrust our 
stupid phizes into every one's privacy, from the harem of the Grand 
Signior, to the mysterious melodv of the statue of Memnon ; no matter 
what reasons the party intruded on may have to escape observation 
or elude discovery. 1 ' 

" Pre'cisement, " said the Princess, coolly : " and then, like the 
badauds of Paris, who turn out to faire leurs farces, as they term 
it, you always pay the forfeit of your own bungling curiosity, by 
getting into some dilemma, worse than that you hoped to discover. 
You are a most thinking people, vous mitres Anglais • an excellent 
people ; but you are the mere results of your own beef and pudding, 
the sublimitated distillations of your port and porter : and the same 
dogged, sturdy, perseverance that has placed you at the head of the 
plodding mechanists and calculating boys of Europe, disqualifies you 
for the finesse of social intrigue, and the finoterie of political com- 
bination. Solemn politicians, you are notoriously the cavaliere 
paganti of every cabinet. Great philosophers, you start at your 
own discoveries ; and join the cry of the Sir Andrew Agnews against 
Locke and Hobbes, — you are ready to gulp down the mysticism of 
dreaming Germany, to study the unknown tongues of Irving, and to 
preach conservatism, when all around is changing and progressing. 
You fancy yourselves the Paul Pries of Europe ; you are but the 
George Dandins : and for the scrapes you get into, and the scrapes 
you are trying to get out of, the world will offer you no other con- 
solation than ''Vous Vavez voulu, George Dandin — vous Vavez 
voulu! ' " 

There was a dramatic vivacity in the delivery of this tirade, that 
would have placed the laugh of the auditors on the side of the Prin- 
cess, had they not been themselves the subjects of the diatribe. 

" These are strange observations," said Lord Allington, " and 
new as strange, coming as they do from the ultra Princess of Schaf- 
fenhausen. One would almost suppose they had been prompted 



516 



THE PROCESS. 



by Madame Marguerite, the fair artist whose representation of that 
revolutionary scene hefore the Hotel-de-Ville bears testimony to her 
principles being anything but conservative." 

En e/fet," said the Princess, laughing. "they are Madame Mar- 
guerite's opinions. Wrong or right, they are honestly and frankly 
hers." 

Here Lady Frances seized her arm with a compression to strong 
as induced her to draw the grasping hand through hers. 

"But."* she continued, " you none of you know Madanie Margue- 
rite ; and yet she has long been desirous to make herself known to 
you. I have undertaken to present her to you all, when circum- 
stances should favour the project; and (as I know you English cele- 
brate all events by a good dinner, and love to discuss principles and 
pates, to enjoy soups and sensations at the same moment), suppose 
you all dine with me to-morrow, at my old rendezvous de chasse, 
La Groenendael. in the Forest of Soignes. " 

• You may count upon me," said Lord Allington, half in love, 
and yet half in distrust of the Proteus Princess. 

• And me. and me, and me!'' said Lord Montressor, Lord Alling- 
ton, Mrs. St. Leger, and Lady Frances. 

"And Sir Frederick Mottram ?" asked the Princess; :k may I not 
count upon him?" 

■■Sir Frederick Mottram come into court," said Lord Allington. 
looking round. But Sir Frederick was gone. He was, in fact, 
rapidly walking to the farther end of the gallery, at the moment 
when his name was pronounced. 

" C'est egal" said the Princess, .gaily ; "Lady Frances shall 
answer for him." 

"Ibeg to decline the responsibility." said Lady Frances, sharply: 
" let those answer for him who have led him from his friends and 
party." 

"Led him!** re-echoed the Princess; "no one has led him— cir- 
cumstances alone have forced him; and they are a power which. 
bon gre, mal grtf, force you all ; a power which imperial despo- 
tism itself cannot mediatize."* 

"We had better go," said Lady Frances, impatiently ; ;i they will 
certainly close the gallery." 

"Which." said lord Allington. "may never again contain so 



T1IE PRINCESS. 



517 



many originals as at this moment. So, pray let us prolong the ex- 
hibition, till we study a little more the principal subject of by far 
the greatest original in the collection." 

14 At least," said the Princess, drawing forward a chair, il let her 
choose a favourable light for her pose : none but artists and co- 
quettes know how much depends on that. " 

"None," said 3Irs. St. Leger, with an impulsive naivete that 
excited a general smile. 

" And stage-managers," observed Lord Montressor. 

Lord Aubrey sneered, and Lady Frances muttered — 

" Stage-managers indeed— and manageresses too! " 

" Then, here," said Lord Allington, throwing himself with an air 
of importance on a bench — " Here 1 take my seat as umpire." 

The rest of the party followed his example, with looks of eager cu- 
riosity. The only attendant who remained in the gallery was busied 
covering some works at the farther extremity. The Princess seat- 
ed herself in an arm-chair in front of the group, threw off her bon- 
net, and drew r herself up in the attitude suited to the pose for an 
intellectual and poetical portrait of the highest order. The picture 
of Pope Giulio. by Raphael, was not more characterestic ; nor that 
of Joanna of Naples by Leonardo da Vinci, more pictorial. Her 
drapery was black, her complexion pale, her eyes flashing ; and the 
background of a sombre picture, before which she was accidentally 
placed, gave relief to her figure, that seemed to make a part of the 
composition, and to be cased in the rich gold frame surrounding it ; 
while a bright full shower of light, falling on her head, completed 
such an original, as Vandyke would have delighted to copy, and as 
Rubens seems never to have encountered in a female form. 

Every one w as struck by the brilliant and extraordinary effect 
produced. There was a momentary pause. Lady Frances saw 
before her the concealed mistress of her husband, a person who had 
doubly made her a dupe. Lord Allington regarded her as a political 
intrigante, endowed with great beauty, and as much ability as he had 
ever - coped withal.' Lord Aubrey thought she made Lady Frances 
look fade; and Mrs. St. Leger saw the heroine of a German romance, 
painted by a member of the romantic school ; while Lord Montressor 
exclaimed — 

-i There is a tableau, if you will 1 " 



518 



THE PRINCESS. 



Yes, vivant" said Lord Allington, looking with the closed 
eyes of a practised connoisseur. 

But the eyes of Madame Schaffenhausen were not idle ; they also 
seemed to read the countenances before her, (where not one high 
thought or noble passion had left its trace ; where all was conven- 
tionally cold, or affectedly languid,) with the stern contempuous gaze 
of one who knew them well, and who 

G f > 

' did but for a while uphold 

The unyoked humour of their idleness.' 

" Well," she said, (the curl upon her lip yielding to a smile 
more of pity than of complacency,) " Well, will no one offer an 
opinion? The picture has been sufficiently submitted to your critical 
acumen to to obtain, at least, a decision on its authenticity." 

" Copy or original, it has obtained our unqualified admiration, " 
said Lord Allington : " but what we want to get at is, the prima 
intenzione of the artist. We see the effect produced, but know 
not the motive of the combination." 

" Nothing can be simpler," said the Princess, assuming a serious 
air, and an attitude of easy repose. " The best combinations are 
ever the simplest. To drop figure, then, for fact, and to clear up 
your doubts ( I will not call them suspicions ), you all received me 
in London, under a delusion in which 1 had no part, as the elder 
Princess of Schaffenhausen; as the widow of one great diplomatist, 
and the daughter of another ; as a disciple of the school of Kaunitz, 
and an agent of that of Metternich ; as one whose illustration was 
that of forms and titles, whose genius lay in intrigue, and whose 
character, ( shaded by vices which should have banished Jier from 
society, ) was yet no greater impediment to her reception among 
the autocrats of London, than it had been in the aristocratic circles 
of Vienna. You were told that I had been false to one hus- 
band, and something worse to another : but you supposed me 
high-born, and you balanced my elevated rank against my despicable 
life." 

A look of annoyance and a struggle to suppress risibility were va- 
riously depicted on the various faces of the auditors. 

"You do dot expect that in courtesy we can reply to this charge."' 



THE PRINCESS. 



519 



said Lord Aldington smiling. " We leave it to Doctor's Commons 
to decide upon equivocal ladies, and take all upon trust till the jury 
pronounces sentence." 

" Yes, but the character of the woman for whom you took me 
was not equivocal ; it was known to all Europe, and the jury of pub- 
lic opinion had long passed sentence of guilty' on it." 

" Then, you are not the real Princess of Schaffenhausen?" asked 
Mrs. St. Leger eagerly, " who is said to carry about a printing- 
press, and who ..." 

" Not you?' real Princess — not the Princess of whom you must 
have heard so much in the diplomatic circles of the little German 
courts. When application was made to some foreign ministers for 
letters of introduction for me to London society, the carelessness 
with which such letters are given produced a farcical mistake. The 
parties knew not. or at least thought not. of the Princess Albert de 
Schaffenhausen, the parvenu whom the younger brother of the 
quondam minister had married a short time before his death, and 
with whom he had lived in retreat among the mountains of the 
Rhyngau. 

■* I was already deep in the honours paid to the supposed diploma- 
tic celebrity before I was myself aware of the qui pro quo. That I 
should have availed myself of such a prestige in my favour, for a 
short time, was my humour, my whim— perhaps my philosophy. 
It answered purposes also which I had at heart to effect : it gave me 
the power to serve some, without doing injury to any. I was an 
artist let loose in a gallery of models ; and I repaid my unconscious 
sitters in the coin they most appreciated. You all revelled in my 
salons, feasted at my table, and were pleased to benefit by the fashion 
you had yourselves conferred ; and if some among you have not 
profited by my desire to serve you to the full extent of my wishes 
and exertions in your favour, it is not my fault." (She glanced at 
Lady Frances: after a pause she added,) 

" You all intended to make use of me, that is quite certain ; and 
my castle on the Rhine, like my house in London, was an item in 
your scheme of pleasure and amusement. That castle is literally a 
castle in the air— a ruin on a crag. But the house occupied by the 
Prince Albert and myself, like the rural residences of the other Ger- 
man nobility, is a plain square stone-house, with a blue slated roof, 



520 



THE PRINCESS. 



in the midst of slovenly grounds and fine scenery. To this anti- 
romantic residence 1 had intended to have lured you all ; and tag- 
ging a moral to my tale, to have sent you home, like the dramatis 
personce in the last act of a play, c/iacun avec sa chacune; — 
husbands with their own wives, and bachelors with their own — 
egoism. For the rest, it matters little to you to know who I was 
before that accident which placed me on the same grade with 
yourselves." 

She paused and sighed. 

tc Oh !" said Lady Frances feverishly. we have no right to pry. 
no right to inquire farther than " 

" No right," interrupted Lord Allington : " but it is impossible 
not to have an infinite deal of curiosity, and an ardent desire of 
knowing all that the Princess may please to tell, on a subject in 
which we all must feel deep interest and intense admiration." 

" Exactly," said Lord Montressor and Mrs. St. Leger. Lady 
Frances sullenly folded herself up in her cashmere, and Lord Au- 
brey took out his watch. 

" The rest is soon told," she continued with simplicity. " 1 am 
Irish by descent, Belgian by birth. My father was a soldier of for- 
tune ; my mother, an heroic Polonaise. Educated on charity, I have 
struggled through the flower of my youth for existence, honestly and 
diligently. I tried in England, and failed ; in Belgium, and at least 
met with friends who appreciated, if they could not serve, me. I had 
relations wealthy and powerful ; but they flung me off. As niece 
to the late Lady Mottram. 1 am cousin to Lady Frances's husband; 
and this relationship, which has occasionally brought us into contact 
for the last few months, has been the cause of the idle stories put into 
circulation by the mischievous humour of Lord Alfred. Even Sir 
Frederick found his poor Irish cousin de trop ; and the other rela- 
tions I have, who pursued me as the Princess of SehafFenhausen, 
had thrown me off as Madame Marguerite the portrait-painter." 

Everybody stared. 

" Your aristocratic, revolutionary Polish friends, I suppose?" 
asked Lord Aubrey sneeringly. Everybody looked at each other 
wilh suspicious archness, as if each thought the other might be the 
party alluded to. 

•• No.*' said Madame SehafFenhausen : ki I have but two Polish 



THE PRINCESS. 



521 



relations living ; a grandfather, an aged man, who has thrice refused 
to acknowledge the Russian, despot, and has been thrice sent back 
to the dungeons of Warsaw ; and an uncle, who is now perishing 
slowly amidst the eternal snows of Siberia. The rest of my mother's 
kindred have been swept amay by Russian bayonets." 

A tear she endeavoured to suppress glistened for an instant in her 
eye; but, as if ashamed of her weakness, she brushed it off, and added, 

" Do not suppose I would profane a glorious cause by complain- 
ing here of a system to which all present are parties. The digres- 
sion has been accidental. The other relations to whom I allude are 
known to you all; have been honoured by that notice which is 
distinction — Lord Allington's; and they are nearly connected 
with. ..." 

" It is time to go,' 1 said Lady Frances, rising : " we are keeping 
the gallery open. You see the man. ..." 

" A five-franc piece will settle that," said Lord Allington. "Pray 
go on, Princess ; I am prepared for any denouement. Your taste- 
less, worthless relations are known to us all, you say?" 

" To all I " said the Princess, looking round significantly. 

4 4 Have / the honour, the high honour, of being so distinguished?" 
said Lord Allington, with unaffected gravity. " I really should 
prefer " 

A ' You! " said the Princess, drawing up with a humorous ex- 
pression of dignity — '•■ You disdain me!— you, whose grandfather 
lived by his own labour, a city banker, or lawlord, or some such 
plebeian thing ! Talk of old blood in England ! the Red-book, there, 
is but an ennobled ledger : all now are lords of trade, like the fore- 
father of Lady Frances's ducal sire, who kept a grocer's shop; or 
Lord Aubrey's great granduncle, who was a linen-draper and 
mayor of London, in the time of William the Third. Oh, no ! the 
persons who despise my relationship as a blot in the escutcheon of 
true nobility, have royal blood in their veins; they are the true con- 
servatives, and represent the least changed of the primeval families 
of Europe— the Celts. They quarter arms with Abel, who, says an 
old heraldry book I have just picked up, 1 bore his father's coat quar- 
tered with that of his mother Eve, she being an heiress. ' " 

There was a general laugh, and a cry of "Name ! name!" from 
Lords Allington and Montressor. 

41. 



522 



THE PRINCESS. 



Sir Ignatius Dogherty!"" replied the Princess. 4 1 uncle to Sir 
Frederick and Lady Mottram. and to their poor relation, a quondam 
distressed gentlewoman. Madame Marguerite. "' 

Lord Aubrey arose with a countenance lowering with impatience 
and digust ; Lady Frances, in evidently deep and angry an- 
noyance. 

" Princess! " said Lord Allington. taking her hand and kissing it 
respectfully. " you are made to subdue those, whom you could not 
tame. I throw myself at your feet, the most devoted of your slaves 
and the most faithful of your allies. Accept at once my palinodie 
and my allegiance. "" 

With all my heart! "" she replied, laughingly. ~ TAe wits need 
be true to each other, considering the numerical superiority of pre- 
tending dunces we must strive to make head against. But here 
come the officers of the house to clear the gallery.— My dear Lady 
Frances, fear nothing from your uncle of Dogherty. that sage, grave 
man. I have my petit brin d ' aristocratie. like yourself. Ignorant 
vulgarity and unfeeling obtrusion are plebeian with me, all over the 
world ; and I am quite as desirous as you can possibly be. to keep 
clear of these descendants of the Princes of Inneshowen. for they 
are no less than that. Just now. however, there is nothing to fear; 
our uncle is laid up. 'in durance vile" for a debt of his gentle- 
blooded friend, the husband of your noble relation Lady Anastasia ; 
and. if I do not liberate him myself. I suppose nobody else will. 
The Ladies Dogherty and Maeanulty are gone off by the diligence 
for Cheltenham, to make trial of the generosity of a wealthy English 
friend, a certain Lady Dixon : the box, therefore, still remains 
unopened ; and if some Pandora, in the shape of an old Irish gossip 
or an Irish priest. ( the usual depositaries of all Irish family secrets.) 
does not come forth with a Bramahkey to open the patent lock, and 
let out mischiefs beyond the power of Hope at the bottom to remedy; 
the hateful relationship need not go farther. But I thought it would 
amuse you all just to know it. " 

•• Yes, it's very amusing. said Lord Allington, dryly. 

Lady Frances neither understood the humour of her cousin's 
speech, nor its causticity : she hurried sullenly on, with an air of 
offended dignity; but the Princess followed her into the court, and. 
almost forcibly taking her arm under her own. insisted on drop- 



THE PRINCESS. 



523 



ping her at the Bellevue, her own carriage being the only one in 
waiting. 

Seated in the same little dark calash which a few weeks before 
had been lashed on the deck of the treckschuyt of Ostend, the two 
ladies drove off together. Lord Allington looked after them ; and 
taking Lord Montressor's arm, while Mrs. St. Leger took that of 
Lord Aubrey, said, " That is one of the most extraordinary women 
of her time. " 

" So she is" said Lord Montressor. " What a fine stage figure 
too ! What a Ballerina she would have made ! " 

" She is a regular adventuress," said Lord Aubrey. 

" But very amusing," added Mrs. St. Leger. "And, oh! how 
she does dress! " 

" There are two sorts of adventuresses," said Lord Allington, 
thoughtfully : "the one adventures out of obscurity, with honest 
and high intentions, seconded by great talents and bold concep- 
tions; the other, with designs vague, unmeasured, and purely per- 
sonal, relies only on a genius for intrigue, on a ductility of morals 
that bends to all occasions, and an hypocrisy that covers all defects. 
The Princess belongs to the first class, and is a rare example : 
you will find specimens of the second hanging about every old 
court and cabinet in Europe. " 

" Oh, you know what Lady D says," observed Mrs. St. 

Leger; "that, with some beauty, no passions, and no principles, 
any woman may be anything she pleases." 

" You may take her word for it, " said Lord Allington. 

" Did you observe Mottram, " asked Lord Aubrey with more ani- 
mation than usual, " hovering about, all the time of the Princess's 
exhibition? There is something very strange in his whole con- 
duct. " 

" Very! " said Lord Montressor. " I am much mistaken if, 
under that serious, sentimental air of his, he has not given that 
worthy woman Lady Frances some cause of uneasiness. " 

" Oh ! I assure you, " said Mrs. St. Leger, " elle est poussee a 
bout. " 

" 1 cannot understand that — when a woman is so handsome as 
Lady Frances, with one half the world at her feet, aud the other 
half dying to be there. " 



524 



THE PRINCESS. 



Lord Aubrey smiled, and the conversation was interrupted by a 
rencontre with a party of English. 

During the whole of a scene which had been pregnant with amuse- 
ment to some, and of interest to all, Sir Frederick Mottram had con- 
tinued to move about the gallery like an unquiet spirit. He had for 
a moment left it in uncontrollable agitation; but he again returned. 
Almost breathless mith emotion and annoyance, he was without the will 
to depart, and yet without the wish to remain. Every feeling, every 
passion, every weakness of his nature was involved. Now catching, 
now losing a phrase, a word, or a name, he approached or retreated, 
as the interest of the Princess's relation deepened and touched him 
personally; until at length, he stood fixed, immoveable, before the 
fine picture of Marguerite de Bourgogne. * The image of the histo- 
rical heroine confounded itself with the voice and tones of her sin- 
gular namesake. It was not till one of the officers of the exhibition 
politely informed him that it was impossible to keep the gallery open 
any longer, that he was roused to an actual conviction of the circum- 
stance of his position ; and having first given the impression of being 
an English amateur, his wild look and abrupt exit left the conviction 
that he was an English maniac. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

The Elopement, 

"TO THE HON. MONTAGUE ST. LEGER, LONDON. 

"Rue Ducale, Bruxelles. 

" My dear Harry, — I scarcely know how to begin, or to tell you 
all that has happened. I cannot stop to use ciphers now, par 



* By Monsieur Court. 



THE PRINCESS. 



525 



exemplel What has occurred is really beyond beyond ! What do 
you think ! Lady Frances is gone off, run moins que cela ! But 
with whom? you'll never guess. Well, then, with Lord Aubrey. 
Je n'en reviens pas. There never was such an absurdity — so 
unnecessary a thing; as Lord A. says, so English. Here is the his- 
tory, as well as 1 can for the present give you any idea of it. All 
was going on well here ; Georgina Montressor better, quite in love 
with her hotel in the Rue Ducale, and a little so with her new Doc- 
tor, who turns out to be tant soit pete a saint, notwithstanding 
his flashy appearance. Old mother Medlicot had arrived too, and 
was upon active service ; which gave us all an opportunity to amuse 
ourselves a little, and we went to the Belgian House of Commons. 
It was very entertaining ; some of the young opposition really well- 
looking, with dark heads : Henry de Brouckere like Lord William 
Wentworth. 

" They never took their eyes off our tribune. Such a love of a 
box ! so different from the ventilator ! Then, we went with one of 
the ministers to see the royal recognitions— very pretty. They'd 
make such dear albums ! There we met Sir Frederick Mottram ; 
and so bored a man you never beheld of which more hereafter. 
After that, we all walked across the Park to the exhibition of pic- 
tures : Lady F. aWgentillesse to her brutal ; which did not prevent 
their fighting all the same, like lord A.'s story about the Kilkenny 
cats. We heard such high words, as they walked after us ! In the 
salon of the exhibition, we came on the Princess of Schaffenhausen ; 
and such a romance ! — but that will keep : only she turns out not to 
be the Princess, par exellence, and only the woman we heard 
Prince Albert married, to spile somebody, 1 forget who. She is 
moreover a poor cousin of Sir Frederick's ; and has been mystify- 
ing him, Lady F., and the rest of us pour son bon plaisir. But, 
what is most odd, she is that very identical Madame Marguerite 
whom Lord Albert deterrait as the supposed friend of Sir Frede- 
rick. 

" Well, there was quite a scene in the gallery. The Princess told 
us all, and discovered that the ridiculous old Irishman, who made 
such fun for us in the Bellevue, is Lady Frances's uncle ; and she 
put Lady F. into one of her fits of temper, which you know makes 
her beautiful face look like an Italian lake in a storm, as Lord A. 

41.. 



526 



TIIE PRINCESS. 



says. After all, however, the Princess carried her off in her carriage 
to her villa, (for her power over her is like magic. ) 

" When we returned to the Rue Ducale, who should we find but 
Sir Frederick, pacing up and down the salon alone. You must 
know he was asked to dinner ; but nobody thought he'd come, 
because he scarcely ever calls, and has been away at Antwerp, 
seeing the ruins. While we were dressing, it seems, the Princess's 
chasseur brought a note to him, and her carriage, to bring him 
out to her villa, with an apology from Lady Frances for not return- 
ing to dinner ; which 1 read to Georgina Montressor, who took it 
in good part, and said something about St. Paul and Mrs. Medlicot. 
So we concluded that Madame Schaffenhausen was making up the 
whole affair; which, after all, was the best thing could happen, as 
Lord Montressor said. Lord Aubrey was, as usual, peu demon- 
stratif, and un-usually silent even for him ; and he left us after 
coffee, having gone for a moment to Georgina's room and found 
them at prayers, Mrs. Medlicot officiating. He only kissed her 
hand, as usual— you know his way. 

" Lady Frances returned in the evening, and was set down by 
Sir F. himself, who went on to the Hotel de Flandres ; for there 
was no room for him here. I saw her for a moment, as I was 
going off to a ball given to the King and Queen. She looked very 
unhappy, and her eyes red with weeping. She said she was fati- 
gued, but would tell me all another time. She bad me tell Geor- 
gina M. that a sort of a reconciliation had been patched up between 
her and her husband, by the Princess his cousin, and that she was 
to leave Brussels the following evening for England, to stay for a 
year at Mottram Hall; but that she would rather go to her grave, 
and other heroics. 

" Well, as I was crossing the corridor about one in the morning, 
from Georgina's room, I met little Hypolite the page with a note 
in his hand, which he thrust into his bosom when he saw me. It 
struck me at the time as very odd. The next day, about twelve 
o'clock, we were at breakfast. Lord Aubrey never breakfasts with 
us. and Lady F. rarely; so their absence created no surprise. But 
Allington, who had sat up all night with an English party at play, 
said that Lady Frances had been unusually early in her walk. 
( Ever since our return, she has walked before breakfast in the 



THE PRINCESS. 



527 



Park, a thing the most extraordinary for her. ) After breakfast we 
were all to go to the Botanical Garden ; but no Lady Frances ap- 
peared. Then, you know, came inquiries, and the whole thing- 
came out. She was off with Lord Aubrey, her maid and page 
accompanying her. 

" They have taken the road to Aix-la-Chapelle , and Sir Frederick 
has followed them ; so there will be a duel ; but neither of these 
men will stir to prevent it , which is very selfish. What will Claude 
Campbell say? Will he sing now ' Tavais une marraine ; que 
mon cceur, que mon coeur a de peine ! 9 The most extraor- 
dinary thing of all is, that Lady Montressor, who, you would think, 
must die of a broken heart at this double treachery, has heard it 
with a resignation quite miraculous. She sent me immediately to 
the Pavilion at Groenendael , to hear what the Princess would say ; 
but she had left the night before, nobody knows for where. 

" It strikes me that Georgina is not sorry to get rid of Lord Au- 
brey, even at her friend's expense. Since he had grown weary of 
being the souff re-douleur en permanence, he said such very bitter 
things, and something so very disrespectful about St. Paul, who 
kept company, he says, with a coppersmith, and was no example 
for a gentleman. Though nobody can be more proper than Lord A., 
nor more regular at church. Besides, Dr. de Burgo is much more 
amusing. 

" The delay in your appointment is monstrously provoking. 
Everybody says, if you are appointed to Hummenburg instead of 
Sweden, you ought to insist on having Claude Campbell your secre- 
tary—a small compensation. At all events, I shall stay quietly here 
till you come over. Ask Claude for the drawing of Lady M.'s fune- 
ral procession ; it was so very nice. 1 am happy to say, she will 
have no immediate occasion for it. She drove out to-day. Lords 
Montressor and Allington leave this for London in a few days. 
Lady M. does not move till after Christmas. 

" There are such nice Poles here, you have no idea ! such divine 
musicians. I wish the Emperor would forgive them all, and take 
them into favour. They do so dance the mazurka ! quite perfec- 
tion ! The ball last night was magnificent : rather mixed to be sure 
—seven hundred people ! But, oh ! the music ! The Queen danced 
all night ; such a sweet toilet, so simple ! Leopold is grown fat, 



528 



THE PRINCESS. 



and is as handsome as ever. He remembered, and chatted, with 
me, just as inMalbro' House. There is not a word of truth in all 
you have read in the papers ; they are the happiest of the happy. 
I am quite in love with Brussels now. But I must stop. Send me 
the ' Age, ' the ' Court Journal, ' all the papers that mention the 
elopement. What a sensation it will make ! Kiss dear grand- 
mamma for me. 

" Yours affectionately, 
" Fanny St. Leger. 

" P. S. That odious Lady Anastasia is at last gone away, with her 
Irish friend, Lady Dogherty. The poor old beast that made us all 
laugh so is in gaol. And what do you think ! Lord Alfred went off 
from the races indebted to every one, even to old Dogherty's son 
(un enfant d' amour), who kept an hotel here.— Did you, ever ! ! — 
Dr. deB. told me this in confidence, and in a manner a mourirde fire. 
He has told us also a conversation of Lady Frances's about Lady 
Montressor, that would render it impossible that the ■ inseparables" 
could ever speak again, even if that poor lost creature had not taken 
the step she has done. But the Doctor hates the Mottrams, and calls 
him ' The Don.' "F. St. L." 

Letter II. 

" TO THE HON. MONTAGUE ST. LEGER, LOSDOJ*. 

"Rue Ducale. 

Ck My Dear Harry,— Just as 1 had despatched my letter by the 
embassy, an express arrived from Namur to Dr. de Burgo. Sir Fre- 
derick overtook the fugitives between Namur and Huy : a duel en- 
sued, and Lord Aubrey is mortally wounded ; so Dr. de Burgo thinks, 
by the statement of the Belgian surgeon ; still /te does not despair of 
saving him, and has started for Huy. Georgina was half inclined not 
to let the Doctor go; but he was already off, and rode Lord Mon- 
tressor's Taglioni. Mrs. Medlicot is going to put up prayers for his 
recovery, (that is, Lord A.'s) in the Protestant church. His dying in 
sin would be awful ! Au reste, she thinks it a lucky event, as a step 



THE PRINCESS. 



521) 



towards reformation, if he will but improve it. She has given me 
a book oil il y ade quoi penser, really. I believe we are all worse 
than we are aware of. To think of Lady Frances, so rich, so admi- 
red! To be sure, it does make one reflect : — what a change for 
her, next winter ! But then, carrying off Lord A. and mounting 
his head to such a step, was a triumph few women could resist. 

" I was asked to dine at the King's, but could not leave Georgina, 
now she is so completely alone; for the two peers are gone to Paris. 
How provoking ! I am triste comme un bonnet do nuit; so, 
for God's sake hurry your departure. I won't close this till to- 
morrow's post arrives. 

"P. S. A most amusing letter from Dr. de Burgo. Lord A. is 
really mortally wounded in the shoulder. The Doctor extracted the 
ball in a most extraordinary manner, with an instrument he made at 
the moment, with an old pair of scissors and some harpsicord wire, 
he found in the room; so he hopes he may not die. He quite aston- 
ished the Belgian surgeons, and thinks them great blockheads not to 
see Lord A.'s danger ; for they insist upon it there was no difficulty 
in the case. 

" The Doctor had a long interview with Lady Frances, at a little 
auberge atHuy : never was such a scena; her hair dishevelled, and 
in a white peignoir. She put him in mind of Miss O'Neil, etc. etc. ; 
Sir Frederick did not leave Huy till Doctor de B. arrived ; but he 
would not see Lady F. The Doctor has been negotiating with all 
parlies, but to no purpose ; so there must be a divorce. Georgina 
thinks Lord A. must marry her ; and means to preach him into it : 
c'est unique! Sir Frederick will I suspect marry the Princess of 
Schaffenhausen. She is so very rich, be she who she may. 

" You will have all in the English papers before you get this. The 
duel, and its cause, have appeared in the 4 Eclarreur" of Namur, 
and in the ' Liberal' and the 4 Independent' here. The liberty of 
the press is frightful. They are quite right in Austria and Prussia ! 

Cw Tell Madame Devy to send me a douillette, on my oldpattern,— 
black gros de Naples, doublee, bleu fonce ; and a travelling ca- 
pote, to match. What do people in England say of things here? I 
know you think that cela ne tiendra pas; but things go on so 
quietly, you have no idea. The King and Queen drive about without 
guards or any state whatever. He looks so happy, and she dresses 



530 



THE PRISCESS. 



so very well— quite a ravir. In short 1 am beginning to give up 
old Sir Francis Wronghead, as Lord Allington calls the Dutch King. 
Yet, if I was sure it would not offend here, 1 would drive to the 
Hague, to see the Prince and Princess of Orange. He is such a 
delight ; and she, a veritable grande Princesse. I often wish 
everything was left to La Diete at Frankfort. 

" A propos : the dear little Comtesse has written to me from 
Deux-Ponts. She says things there are beyond beyond : worse than 
at Nassau and Hesse Darmstadt. Les jeunes gens all infected. 
The Ring of Bavaria has forbid them from travelling in France, or 
in Belgium and Switzerland : i Notre excellent roi^ she says, 
• redoute notre contact arec V esprit re'publicain and she adds, 
' you cannot conceive with what difficulty my brother obtained a 
passport for your republican country. It requires more than high 
recommendations to remove the interdict.' 

" 1 really think Georgina is better since the escla?idre. She says, 
she always suspected Frances Mottram would come to that. She 
was witness to the pains taken by the Princess to make her observe 
les bienseances, but it wouldn't do. What do you think of Lord 
Alfred and Count Katzenellenbogen being aux petits soins, at 
Paris, aupres de Madame Christophe the black Empress ! 

" The Princess, the papers say, is living in great privacy at 
her chateau in the Ardennes. Was there ever so enviable a 
woman ? 

" Adieu! F. St. L." 

Letter 

k TO CORNELIUS MACDERMOT, ESQ. SHA>'BALLYMAC , KERRY. 
IRELAND. 

M New Gaol, Brussels. 

" The divel set his foot after me, the first step ever I made on 
the Dublin road of Shanballymac ; for luck nor grace never attended 
me from that cursed hour to this. And better for me to have staid 
on the right side of the Shannon, and cut sods or picked pitaties, 
before I went trapesing about the world at my time of life, goster- 



THE PROCESS. 



531 



ing after the quality here, and foostering after outlandish places and 
people there; spending my hard thirty year's earnings everywhere : 
and for what? I'll be afther asking you, Cornelius Macdermot. 
Why, then, for nothing at all but intire ruin to me and mine- 
neither profit nor pleasure, but the money running off like a 
mountain-straim after an hard day's rain : and to find myself shut 
up like a wild baste in a cage at a fair, in a furrain jail; for it's 
there where 1 am at this prisent writing, sorrow elsewhere ; far 
away from kith, kin, and relations. Them that's nearest and 
dearest to me are gone, like the rest ; and it's what, if you don't 
make a last gathering for me, though you driv Terence Kelly's cattle 
for it, and sould every baste and hedge-stake on the farm of Shan- 
ballymac house, I am a dead man, and a prisoner for life. 

" Och! Macdermot, Macdermot, it isn't with a dry eye you'll read, 
or I write this : but let nothing tempt you to that murther of the 
world, becoming an absentee. Take warning by my fate; and be- 
lieve me, Mac dear , that if oncet it's my great luck to set foot again 
on the green sod of ould Ireland, if Saint Peter himself opened the 
gate of paradise, and said, 'Walk in, if you plaze, Sir Ignatius 
Dogherty, and take an air of the place,' I'd look twice before I'd lose 
sight of Mangerton mountain. I declare to Jasus, my dear frind, 
I am so moidered, and bother'd, and bediveled, that though I have 
a power to tell you, and nothing to do but tell it, (for I'm all alone 
by myself from morning till night, and not understanding a word 
that is said to me, by them that is about me, good nor bad, no more 
than if it was Greek,) still my heart and my eyes are so full, that I 
can't get out a syllable : and don't know where I left off, nor where 
to begin. And I wish that, instead of sending my last by th'embassa- 
dor's bag , I had bagged off myself : but there's no use in talking 
now. 

" Well, sir, just as we were all getting a little pace and quiet at 
the German spaw r , that I tould you of— but 1 forget all thim furrain 
names— thedivel be in my Lady and her streel of a frind Lady Anny 
Statius, but they must be off to Aches-le-Chapel, because thim great 
people got tired of the other place; and my Lady Dogherty declared 
to God, and upon her honour, that she'd lose her last lung if she 
lost sight of the Doctor. But what do you think, sir? that raal 
scamp and Rabrah, if there's one on the face of God's creation, 



532 



THE PRINCESS. 



Mr. W. W. Macanulty borrowed my ilegant thra veiling carridge 
that cost me three hundred pounds before it left Mr. Hutton's yard 
in Dublin, to go, as he tould me, to Frankfort (a morning's drive, 
sir,) to fetch his own new bespoke galash : but from that day to 
this, I never set eyes on Mr. \V. W. Macanulty, nor my thravelling 
carridge either ; and though Lady Anny Statius and my Lady made 
belief he had gone on before us, and cut across the river Rine, to 
secure invitations from his ould frind the King, for the fates, the 
divel a word of thruth was there in the whole fiction ; so, when we 
had to start, it was an hired galash we were obliged to take : and I 
had the greatest mind to pitch the ould she-dragon to the divel. and 
lave her to her great relations, only Lady D. persuaded me that she 
was to get me an order for a star and ribbon from King Leopold : 
for you're nothing at all at all at them furrain German coorts, if 
your're not hung over in gewgaws and scraps of ribbons, like a 
pedlar's box on a market-day. You might be the Duke of Leinster 
here, and nobody would care a pin about you, if you hadn't a scrap 
of blue at one button-hole, and a rag of red at another; and a donny 
cross on one side, and a star as big as a pewther plate on the other. 
And 1 wouldn't be after throublingyou with all this bladeruraskite, 
only by way of giving you some rational raisin for my great foolish- 
ness. 

" Well, sir, owing to some mistake of the Docthor, in the map he 
made for us of the road, we missed the great people, till we came 
in sight of Brussels city ; when the first thing we saw, outside the 
gates of the town, sir, was a hotel or inn, that, if I had my desire 
to be King of Brussels 9 or of that inn, it's the last I'd chuse. It's 
little you'd think of the Kilmaine Arms, or the ould Stag's Horns, if 
oncet you see the Hotel d'Ireland, with an intire new golden harp, 
and ' Caed mille faltra, ' over the corte pochere as they call the 
hall-doors here. But I need not tell you whose it is, poor lad ! 
The moment I came within sight of it, and I choaking alive with the 
thirst, and my throat as full of dust as the Dunleary road, that was 
dry the day after the deluge, out I slithered, sir, and the first thing 
I heard was ould Kit Fitzpatrick's fiddle singing out, and th ' ould 
song, 

k Why don't you sell your fiddle. 
And buy your wife a gownd ? 1 



THE PRINCESS. 



633 



—you know yourself. And 6 AVhat does ye plaze to have? ' says a 
comely cratur in the bar, and in as good English as I am spaking to 
you at this present moment ; and then a hullaballoo, sir, and a f mille 
murthur ; ' and before I knew where I was, who should be 
hanging round my neck but Betty Burke ! For, what would you 
have of it, sir, but Larry, the cratur who has more heart in his little 
finger, than all that ungrateful Docthor has in his whole carcass, 
wrote for his poor mother to come and keep house for him, and see 
that he was not plundered intirely by them furrain thieves ; and so, 
two days before 1 got back from the river Rine, Mrs. Burke and Kit 
Fitzpatrick arrived by steam from Shannon river into the port of 
Antwerp, close by to Brussels, booking themselves at Limerick; and 
they coming in not a hair turned, and fresh as four year olds, as I 
was tould. Well, sir, Larry was just returned from the race-coorse. 
after winning every bet he made ; and when he and land Mrs. Burke 
set down to boiled fowl and bacon and greens, a pot of ale and a 
tumbler of hot, and Kit playing up th'ould song, divel a bit I'd have 
taken my bible oath that it was in ould Ireland we were oncet 
again, in the little room behind the bar in the Stag's Horns. 

"And so, laving the ladies to streel after the great people and go to 
coort, and so forth, I settled down quiet and aisy at the Irish hotel ; 
and was very useful, keeping all together, and looking to the till, 
and one little turn and another, while Larry was running his colt, 
and betting with the best in the land, and winning lashings of 
money ; and Betty Burke worth her weight in gold in looking after 
the larder ; only the cratur had her ould failing— you know yourself 
—and kept looking at the people drinking, and took the Faro and 
the Lambick like mother's milk. And the house as full as it could 
hould— like a rookery, sir, with the first Irish families on the road, 
(and maybe there wasn't oceans of them.) We had Counsellor and 
Miss Rafferty oh premieyere, as they call it, which manes in the 
first flure; and their daughter and son-in-law, Major, and Mrs. 
Major Driscol, of the Heavies, H.P. And there was Mrs. Widow 
Murtagh O'Sullivan, of Goosegreen, county Cork, and three lively 
fine girls her daughters, that gave tay-parties and hot suppers to 
the young officers of the Guard here ; and two of the Reilys from 
Tiprary. But the Raffaties went for a day to see the battle of 
Walherloo, and never returned, so that we had to send their account 

42. 



534 



THE PRINCESS. 



to their agent in Cork ; and Mrs. and Miss O'Snllivans went to see 
the ruins of Antwerp ;— and, to make a short story of it, divel a pay 
they paid, till it brought ruin upon us all : my poor Larry having 
been traited mighty ill by a young Lord, after whom he is now gone 
to Paris to get back his property. And then, down comes all the 
tradesmen for furnishing the hotel, and for carving and gilding the 
harp. But, the cormorants ! I cannot tell you the set of dirty black- 
guards they are, giving no credit, like as in Ireland, for a year and 
a day, and having a little indulgence after : and it's all for ready 
money they work, says they, the dirty spalpeens ! So they distrained 
the goods, and sould all in the premises — divel a screed they left, 
not as much as a feather-bed for poor Betty to die upon : for the 
Faro, sir, was the death of her. Her stomach couldn't bear it, after 
th' innocent mountain dew she was accustomed to from her cradle, 
the cratur ; it sat upon her like a wet blanket, and was her death. 

" And, och ! Macdermot, the things she tould me with her dying 
breath, and in the prisence of her priest, that is Father Macgil- 
licuddy, of the county Cork in Ireland, but now cojutor in the Irish 
Ladies Convent at Bruges, and preacher to the Beguines, a sort of 
Sisters of Charity, like our Cork Ladies, in Belgium. And, sir, I'm 
bound on the cross, and the Holy Evangelist not to let a word pass 
the threshold of my lips for one year and a day ; and then Father 
Mac is to absolve me, and the world will know who and what I am. 
And it's little the Kearneys of Fort Kearney, and Lady Anny Statins, 
or that storkna voragagh* Lady Dixon, that is for all the world 
like a lane horse looking over a gate, thinks who I am ; and, pace 
to the sowl of my sister Honoria Dogherty, alias Lady— it matters 
not who; and also Fineas her brother, who died fighting for his 
king and country with Boncy in Germany. But it will all come 
out, sooner or later, if I live to get back. 

* 6 And there is a great Princess in the secret, and Father Mac her 
director, and a Mimber of Parliament; and Nature's above art ; as 
my best baby-linen-warehouse shirt would tell, if it could spake. 
And it's a wonder, you'll say, but a man that's under the greatest of 
compliments to me and mine, as Sir Frederick Moltram surely was, 
wouldn't come and bail me olf. But here comes the thing that 



* A tall gawky : - literally, the slake in the market-place. 



THE PRINCESS. 



535 



bates Bannaghar ! If I am between four walls this day, it isn't for 
my own filandering and gallantry, as in the ould times, when 
myself and the high sheriff were locked into jail together, but for 
a blackguard that I knew nothing about ; and went surety, 
at my Lady's request, for Mr. W. W. Macanulty : just a matter 
of form, says he, ( a pretty form, that claps a man into jail 
for life,) besides lending him two hundred pounds, and his i, o, n, 
for his tailor's bill ; being palavered out of my substance by Lady 
D., and her orders, and ribbons, and crosses ; and the divel a cross 
of my money I ever seed, and had nothing but crosses, and plenty 
of that same, ever since. 

" Well, sir, after waiting a day or two for poor Larry's return 
and Mr. Mac's arrival, I bethought me of my frind that wore my 
best shirt for a week and more, and I wrote him a civil note, and 
sent it to his hotel. Sorrow taste of an answer he sent, except, as 
I could make out their gibberish here, that his wife had run away 
with another gentleman, and that he had run after her. And then 
I wrote to the Docthor, the unnatural blackguard ! and to this day 
believes him to be the real and undoubted son of sporting Jimmy 
Burke, and that I had neither act nor part in. And proof is, that 
my mind niver once misgave me about him, all the time he was my 
travelling Physician! not all as one as Larry, with his mother's 
roguish eye ! But of that ?nore in a yea?' and a day, sir. And what 
was the answer? Why, that when I had paid him what I owed him 
of his salary, he would have no more communication with me, at 
all, at all ! for that my low habits and bad company obligated him 
to cut the connexion ! His own words, the villian of the world, och 
murthur ! And if you knew all, as one day you will, a fellow I 
found flourishing about the streets of Brighton, with a pair of odd 
boots and a threadbare surtout. 

" So, sir, all my line quality frinds left me to die here : if it wasn't 
for the excellent jail allowance, ( for I'll say that of them Belgians, 
that they understand raal good living, and give plenty of it, ) I'd been 
starved alive. But my heart is broke, Macdermot dear, and my 
appetite gone. I never recovered that stinking ould tan-pit they put 
me into at the German spaw ; and I'm as blue as a blanket after it 
to this day ; and except a taste of Faro, which the jailor gave me ( a 
mighty genteel sort of man, and has a little English, and puts me in 



536 



THE PRINCESS. 



mind of Phadrig Flaherty) I'd have been dead in a furrain land long 
since, and not a frind to close my eyes. And at this moment there 
is a weight on my heart, that it's with the greatest of difficulties 1 
hold the pen. Och musha, musha ! With which, being your ould 
frind till death, I remain ever, my dear Macdermot, hoping an early 
remittance, if the last heifer on the land is put up to sale for it, who 
is ever 

" Your most affectionate frind, 

" Ignatius Dogherty. " 

"P.S. Och ! blood and thunder, here's news! The great Princess 
that I often mentioned to you, and that we kept skelping after from 
Ostend to the world's end, and would never so much as look at my 
Lady, has sent her home d'affair, as he calls himself, to pay my debts, 
and a fifty-pound note to pay my way back to ould Ireland. I've 
no time to say more, for I'm going to sail by the canal to Antwerp, 
and so straight across to the Shannon home ; laving a note to Larry 
to follow withja frind of his,'and my curse on the Docthor on my dying 
bed, if I was on it. And have had lave from the Princess ( a fine cra- 
tur! ) and Father Mac to write to the Doctor, and tell him who he 
turns out to be— little Rory Burke, who passed for my natural twin- 
son, and was chosen, for some bumps on his head, by the dispensary 
pottecary to be his prentice ; and when I get back to Shanballymac 
has lave to write the same to the Marchioness, his new greet frind, 
and as greet a scamp as himself, if it's all true Lady Macanulty tould 
my wife, of her goings on. But no more at prisent. It's with the 
greatest of joy 1 tell you that I shall be my own postman, and will 
be after delivering you this at your own door ; and I'll ingage it's not 
by Brighton I'll return, that set us all scattering over the world like 
a flock of wild geese on a common ; for it's there, that dive! of a 
Docthor — Lord pardon me for saying so of my own son ! ( if it's my 
son he is,) first driv it into my Lady's head that she had lost that 
lung of hers, and would never find it till she went up the Rine and 
tried the German spaws! Well, it's folly to grieve, Corney honey, 
but ye may tell them all at Shanballymac, that if iter they catch me 
in the charackler of a ' Pilgrim of the Rine, ' I'll give thimlave to 
hang me up for a scarecrow in my own poraty field ; and that I'm 



THE PRINCESS. 537 

free to confess it's rightly served 1 am for turning up in my ould 
age an Irish absentee. And so farewell till we meet. 

" I am affectionately yours, 

" Ignatius Dogherty. " 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

CONCLUSION. 

Towards the commencement of the winter of 1834, the British 
emigration of the autumn of 1835 had winged their way back to 
their own first, best country, which, in spite of its boasted supre- 
macy over all other countries of the earth, sends forth more ennuUs 
in search of sensations than any other nation of the known world. 
The London papers teemed with arrivals of the noble and the 
wealthy, from ' a tour on the Continent,' at their unrivalled seats 
in the country, or, en passant, at their splendid mansions or 
fashionable hotels in the capital, British heiresses returned the 
wives of foreign pauper Princes ; young fortune-hunters come back 
the husbands of well-jointured dowagers : some too, arrived who 
had left their wives behind them ; others, accompanied by the 
wives of their friends. 

Under the latter category, Lord Viscount Aubrey was gazetted 
as arrived at his mansion in Belgrave-place, where he was received 
by his tout-tout Colonel Wintcrboltom, whose councils with house- 
keepers and tradesmen had prepared a commodious and luxurious 
residence for its future frail mistress, one of the model-mansions 
a la Louise Quatorze of the new West-end. 

There was something in the unwonted boldness of this step, whicli 
violated all the decencies of vice, extremely consonant to the feeble, 
petulant, and inconsequent character of Lady Frances Mottram, and 
to the laisser alter insensibility of her noble paramour ; whose va- 
nity, flattered by the devotedness of the reckless mistress, took no 



42.. 



538 



THE PRINCESS. 



cognizance of the deeper shame it would throw round the character 
of the future wife. 

The Marchioness of Montressor's arrival ' at her Ladyship's mansion 
in Arlington-street, under the care of Doctor de Burgo, the confiden- 
tial medical attendant of the noble family,' glittered in every journal; 
and was followed by a succession of 1 we-regrets' and ' we-are- 
happy-to-announces,' according to the frequent variations of her 
Ladyship's health. The eye, if not the mind of the public, was kept 
on the stretch of expectation for her Ladyship's recovery or her 
Ladyship's death ; events concerning which the public (her tradesmen 
excepted) were equally indifferent, and equally curious. Not so, 
however, the journalists and chroniclers of fashion. Sentiment, elo- 
quence, scandal poetic and prose, were pressed into the service of 
the last days of Georgina Marchioness of Montressor. Every bulletin 
delivered by the porter of Montressor-house was the text of a com- 
mentary, of an eloge on the virtues of the dying lady, or the skill of 
her excellent physician ; of her Ladyship's resignation, Christian for- 
titude, and angelic patience ; of the Doctor's unceasing vigilance, 
profound skill, and miraculous resources. The scenes of the death 
chamber, too, were narrated with dramatic effect. The solemn 
leave-taking of the ' afflicted and noble husband,' her last interview 
and parting admonition to 'her friend' Lord Aubrey, and the edifying 
influence of Mrs. Medlicot, and of the evangelical Kitty Cochrane, the 
Irish saint, were eloquently displayed. 

At length, the last act came ; and the Queen of Almack's, the leader 
of a political coterie, the newlight penitent of Mrs. Medlicot, and the 
illustrious patient of Dr. de Burgo, died, like a French lady of the 
old court of Versailles, supported by her husband and her quondam- 
lover, wept over by his friend and rival, and in the midst of relations, 
admirers, and devotees. The ' Court Journal' announced the ' me- 
lancholy intelligence' with a mourning margin an inch deep; and 
half the other journals of the empire reiterated the astounding fact, 
that the Marchioness of Montressor, notwithstanding her rank, 
wealth, and 'all of grace and virtue that dignified humanity,' had 
paid the great debt of nature, like the most ordinary of mortals. 
Half the noble families of the empire went into mourning ; and her 
disconsolate husband went—into the country, to join a partic de 
chasse at Belvoir. 



THE PRINCESS. 



539 



Brighton and Shanballymac, meantime, had received back their 
complement of the ' pilgrims of the Rhine;' and hundreds of future 
tours to ' the beautiful and abounding river' and its 'castled craigs, ' 
were already in preparation, to delight the world, and hold forth 
the bright examples of political wisdom, which preside over the 
beautiful scenes and happy peasantry of the Rhingau. Among the 
earliest announced was 'A Summer's Wanderings through Belgium 
to the Rhine,' by Catherine Lady Dogherty, dedicated by permission 
to her friend the Right Honourable Lady Anastasia Mecanulty, and 
edited by Lauraphemia Lady Dixon. 

Lady Dogherty, herself preferring" a sentimental dependance on 
the wealthy widow Dixon in Cheltenham, to the rude exile of a resi- 
dence at Shanballymac, had accepted the promise of a separate main- 
tenance from Sir Ignatius, as soon as his embarrassed affairs could be 
reduced to order by his friend and confidential adviser and attor- 
ney-at-law,Mr. Cornelius Macdermot; a consummation so devoutly 
to be wished, and so difficult to attain in Ireland. 

Whatever picturesque, romantic, statistical, social, moral, or 
political impressions, Belgium, its revolution, government, society, 
scenery, etc. had left on the mind and registered on the journal of 
Lady Dogherty, during her residence at the Bellevue ; and whatever 
incidents or reflections, feudal, metaphysical, and mystic, Germany 
had afforded her, during her passage up and down the Rhine, her 
drive to Beiberick, or her sejour at Baden— those of Sir Ignatius 
were of a different and darker character. 

A few drunken bouts with his beloved son Larry, at a Kermess, 
or in the Hotel d'Irelande, with Betty Burke and Kit Fitspatrick, 
excepted, the whole of his tour had been a series of privations, mor- 
tifications, and tribulations. The unrepaid sums lent to young 
Mr. Macanulty, who had gone Consul to Algiers through his lady's 
interest, with the still larger sums expended at the instigation of 
Doctor de Burgo, in show and making a figure, and the money la- 
vished in setting- up the Hotel d'Irelande, and establishing Larry as a 
sporting gentleman at Monlplaisir, had reduced the Baronets's mo- 
derate property to one-half of its original amount. His absence from 
home, the consequent non-payment of rents, the dilapidations of his 
property, with the breaking down of the Shanballymac Provincial 
Bank, and the blowing-up of a mining speculation on the Shannon, 



540 



THE PROCESS. 



gave tbe coup de grace to a fortune, which his former successes 
as a popular Irish innkeeper and land-jobber had so slowly and la- 
boriously raised. 

After a year's residence from home, varied as the locomotive ten- 
dencies of the ladies Dogherty and Dixon directed, Sir Ignatius found 
himself, one November evening seated in the window of the front 
parlour of Shanballymac-house from which a legal execution had 
conveyed the furniture; ''the people about the place" (to use his 
own words) "had taken as many of the moveable fixtures as they 
could lay their hands on, th' ungrateful bastes !" 

Sir Ignatius had drained the last drop from his tumbler, and sha- 
ken the last dust from his German pipe (the sole relic of his disastrous 
pilgrimage). He looked at the sun as it set behind the mountains, 
and then on the Shannon which rolled majestically by, and he thought 
of the money he had left on the shores of another river. He thought 
of Ostend, and the Doctor's rigmarol, which had first turned the 
head of Lady Dogherty. He thought of Brussels, and all its ' mov- 
ing accidents ; of his arrest at the theatre, his bills at the Defame, 
and his confinement in the debtor's gaol. He thought of his tiresome 
tour on the Rhine ; of his being dyed blue in the baths of Baden, 
and pinched black by Lady Dogherty's admonitory fingers every- 
where; and he finally thought, that if all these melancholy reminis- 
cences would turn out but 'an unaisy dhrame,' what fun alive it 
would be to awaken and find himself rid of Miss Kitty Kearney, of 
Fort Kearney, and once more seated by a rousing turf-fire in the old 
bar-room at the Stag's Horns, singing 

" Why don't you sell your fiddle, " 

to the obligato accompaniment of Kit's instrument, and with Larry 
bearing a chorus, and some of his old gossips and cronies playing 
audience. 

AYhoever may feel an interest in the fortunes of Sir Ignatius 
Dogherty, representative of the Princes of Ineshowen. if their love 
of the picturesque should carry them to the Lakes of Killarney as it 
led them to the Rhingau in 1835. may turn a little out of the direct 
high-road to Kerry, and behold at the four cross-roads of Shanbal- 
lymac a square, white-walled, blue-slated-house, with a flaunting 



THE PROCESS. 



541 



sign, bearing a noble pair of antlers, and the inscription of " New 
Stag's Horjns, by Lawrence Fegai\ t Dogherty," where they will 
find the spirit of Sir Ignatius's dream fully accomplished. 

The arrival of Larry Fegan, his son 'and darling without end, ' 
a few weeks after his own return to Ireland, had bound up ' every 
corporal faculty ' of the Baronet to the point he had long contem- 
plated, of returning to his old vocation. He expended the fragments 
of his fortune and credit, therefore, in fitting up the as yet unfinished 
Shanballymac-house as an inn, and in furnishing it in a handsome 
style. The announcing the new establishment in all the Munster 
papers, the settling Larry as its master, Kit Fitzpatrick as its resident 
bard, and Mr. Macdermot as its honoured and permanent guest, was 
a work as rapidly executed as conceived : for, unable to lay aside his 
newly acquired dignities, Sir Ignatius conciliated his tastes and habits 
with his family pride, by becoming a sleeping partner only in the 
house. 

While Lawrence's name, therefore, figured on the sign, and his 
handsome person on the Kerry race-ground, bringing custom to the 
shop by his sporting accomplishments and popular qualifications, 
Sir Ignatius looked to the business en amateur, — sat on a stone 
bench at the door, had a word and a joke for every guest, and a wel- 
come for every passenger; and having made ' over a bit of land' to 
his lady, for the payment of her separate maintenance, on condition 
that he was never to hear a word more from her, ' good or bad, ' 
for the rest of her life, he soon forgot the disastrous consequences 
of his temporary gentility, and taste for picturesque travelling. Be 
it hoped, therefore, that the worthy Baronet is destined to pass the 
remainder of his days on his own terms, indulging in his 6 sup of 
hot, ' and singing Shan-van-vough to the delight of the tap-room 
of the Stag's Horns. Larry, meanwhile, talks openly of my father 
Sir Ignatius ; 1 and sinking his former stations of tiger, helper, 
groom, and valet of his cousin Sir Frederick Mottram, is already 
taking his place among the squireens of the country ; and recalls to 
his proud and doting father the flower of that old, but now extinct 
race, ' the Rakes of Mallow.' 

But the same ardour of feeling which rendered Sir Ignatius the 
fondest parent of one illegitimate son, had aggravated his aversion 
for the other. The Irish, who are the best of haters, as of lovers, 



542 



THE PRINCESS. 



and whose national virtue it is to be true to their kindred even to 
the third and fourth generation, are alive to filial neglect, and feel 
more than wiser but less sensitive parents. 

" How sharper than the serpent's tooth it is, 
To have a thankless child. " 

It was, therefore, strictly consonant to the temperament and cha- 
racter of Sir Ignatius to hate the elder born of Betty Burke's twins 
with the same intensity, with which he loved the younger; and 
when he read in the papers the pomps and circumstance of Dr. de 
Burgo's professional career, and remembered his insolent sneers 
and cruel conduct to himself, he could not resist writing to Lord 
3Iontressor a statement of the birth and breeding of Rory Burke, 
and putting the illustrious patron on his guard against the ingrati- 
tude, insolence, and scheming policy of his own son. 

Lord Montressor was amused by this letter, which he handed 
over to Dr. de Burgo, who laughed at it as heartily as his Lordship. 
Whether the statement was true or false, 'his Lordship gave himself 
no trouble to inquire. His confidence in the Doctor's skill was not 
to be shaken ; and as for the parentage and personal morality of his 
physician, these were of little consequence to the high-born volup- 
tuary. 

The divorce of Sir Frederick and Lady Frances Mottram, in the 
interim, was proceeding in due course, and, it was generally thought, 
would be followed by the nuptials of the foolish and faithless wife 
with the dull and seduced lover. Events so calculated to become 
topics of private discussion in all the particular circles of the great 
world, and subjects of interesting intelligence to the public at large, 
were considered as benefactions by the journalists, during a par- 
liamentary recess,— when they formed convenient pendants to a 
4 fatal fire, ' or a ' horrible murder; ' and supplied the tardy letter 
from ' our own correspondent' at Paris, Rome, or Timbuctoo. A 
divorce is always a piquant theme; and in the present instance the 
parties were of sufficient fashionable notoriety to give a protracted 
interest to the epigrams of private scandal, and the coarse allusions 
of parly malice. As Sir Frederick had placed himself in that political 
position, in which ' the Tories called him a Whig, and the Whigs a 



THE PRINCESS. 



543 



Tory, ' it was a full month before the partisans of ' both their 
houses ' ceased to make his domestic afflictions a point of attack for 
damaging their several opponents. 

To Lord Aubrey and Lady Frances the press was something more 
lenient, and became as soon tired of serving them up for the edifi- 
cation of the Sunday morning's breakfast-table, as the parties 
themselves had become tired of each other. 

Although Lord Aubrey intended to let judgment go by default, 
and Sir Frederick was determined not to profit by his wife's disho- 
nour, nor to bring forward any pleas in aggravation to enhance the 
damages; but still 'the law's delay,' and the slow length of parli- 
amentary forms, held in suspense the disgraceful translation : and 
they, whom feeling and inclination had long eternally separated, 
were still bound by the cold and iron links of legal bonds to each 
other. 

Meantime, bets were booking at the clubs of London, and ru- 
mours were circulating in the coffee-houses and reading-rooms of 
Brussels, of which the marriage of Sir Frederick Mottram and the 
Princess was the subject. In an age from which no secrets are 
hidden, the relations in which the Belgian Princess and the English 
Baronet stood to each other had become as much publici juris, as 
the last English novel, published by Bentley, reprinted by Galignani, 
and pirated by Melini, all in one week. Domestic life, like domestic 
literature, has now no copyright; the protagonist and the author 
are alike the victims of private speculation or public curiosity; and 
they suffer or write for the universal public. 

The Princess had added one more romantic trait to a life which 
already showed how far beyond the utmost imaginings of fiction is 
the romance of real life. She had given up to her husband's heirs 
(to disinherit whom the Prince had married) the estates of the 
Bhingau, spontaneously, and without any claim on his part; re- 
taining only the personal property, and the pavilion in the Forest 
of Soignes. 

Between this pavilion and her chateau in the Ardennes, she had 
divided the interval of time N which had elapsed since the anniver- 
sary of 1833. Baulking curiosity by gay evasion, and answering 
an argument by an epigram, she left private interest in doubt, and 
public curiosity at fault, as to her real views and future intentions, 



544 



THE PRINCESS. 



Sometimes she Worked in her old studio in the Basse Ville, some- 
times she went on service as a Beguine. Her active energies still 
seemed to require employement, and the habits of her adversity 
continued to be those of her preference and her taste. 

" I belong," she said to Lord Allington, who suddenly appeared 
at the Pavilion of the Groenendael, during- the summer of 1834, as 
envoy very extraordinary from Sir Frederick Mottram, — " I belong 
to a propaganda, that of the age we live in ; and I cannot share my 
mission with less noble objects. I reject the hands of the husband 
of Lady Frances de Vere. " 

" AVhat ! after having taken such pains to win his heart?" 

" To touch, not win it, and that too, for purposes, in which my 
own interests had no part." 

" Then," said Lord Allington, " you have been mystifying us, all 
along?" 

" I have only played your own game," she replied. " When you 
English oligarchs received me into she sanctum of your mysteries 
political and social, you had hoped to make use of me for your pur- 
poses : I availed myself of the hint, and worked for my own ; which 
were those of my country." 

" And, femme avant tout" interrupted Lord Allington, " you 
turned the head of the man, while proselytizing the politican." 

" I flatter myself," she replied laughingly, " I have succeeded in 
both. But there ends my mission." 

" And then?" asked Lord Allington. 

" Why, then," she replied, drawing the voluminous folds of the 
Beguine' $ habit over her dress, and adjusting the white coif before 
a mirror, " I shall end as 1 began— a Beguine" 

" As you began !" said Lord Allington, sinking into the depths 
of an easy-chair, and gazing with amused surprise at her sud- 
den transformation. " Princess! how I should like to hear your 
story!" 

" I will get some one to write it, like some other noble authors ; 
and you shall be my editor." 

" With all my heart : but first I must learn the fate of the 
hero." 

"Oh! you would have the hacknied de'noue?nent of all novels. 
Let us try something new. It may be well, perhaps, to leave one's 



THE PROCESS. 



545 



reader, like one's lover, in doubt. At all events, we will try the 
experiment in our ' forthcoming work,' which, with the style and 
title of c The Princess,' may aim at serving- a great cause, while 
detailing domestic facts." 

" Or, what is better," interrupted Lord Allington, " amusing 
fictions." 

" AVe'll try both," said the Princess, gaily; " and if we fail, 
the honest public will, at least give us credit, for our good inten- 
tions." 

* * * * * * 

Belgium meantime, and her affairs, continued to advance in pros- 
perity and stability, in illumination and in wealth. Every succes- 
sive event proved that her revolution had been, not an accident, 
but a necessity ; that it was a step forwards for the great family of 
Europe, and ( as far as it has gone ) a successful experiment in self- 
government. Thoroughly democratic in its principles and tenden- 
cies, the career of the new government has been blotted by no 
excesses, and stained by no legislative extravagances. A perfect 
and absolute freedom of conscience, unattained either by France or 
by England, has left the true interests of religion on a basis firmer 
and wider than established monopoly could ever boast. A total 
overthrow of aristocratic privileges has left property undisturbed even 
by a momentary alarm. The authority of reason is respected in the 
Chambers, and that of the laws prevails in the tribunals ; and, 
maugre the political preponderance of a Catholic hierarchy, and the 
lingering endurance of much deep-rooted popular prejudice, the 
diffusion of a steady and beneficial intellectual light is gradually ma- 
nifested even in the smaller cities. 

At the aspect of so much moderation coupled with so much firm 
resolve, foreign states, have begun to feel the importance of the 
stand made by the Belgians under the banner of national indepen- 
dence. The old cabinets of Europe, which had kept their envoys 
on the confines of despotism, waiting at Frankfort upon events, have 
at length discovered in the ' bloody and needless revolution,' a 
power and a permanence worthy of respect; and Brussels, which, 
in 1833, had no diplomatic residents save those of France, England, 
and the United States has since received the representatives of the 
other great powers, and their dependant followers. 

43. 



546 



THE PRINCESS. 



Fertile, laborious, commercial, and rich, Belgium has entered 
boldly into the question of free-trade, and is hourly rising superior 
to prejudices which belong neither to the age nor to her equitable 
government. Pressed on one side by the hostility of Holland, and 
on the other by the uncalculating jealousy of the French miners and 
manufacturers, she does not[ seek protection in reciprocal restric- 
tions ; but has sent commissioners to Paris, to join in that greater 
commercial revolution, which is the destined supplement of the 
constitutional Europe. This is worthy of her intelligence, and of 
the frank and manly character of a people formed for freedom. 

The industry and commercial spirit thus announced, afford the 
strongest guarantees for the beneficial influence of the new govern- 
ment on the peace and prosperity of Europe. Admitting that the 
independance and political existence of a nation consisting only of 
four millions of people, must in some degree repose on the will of 
the neighbouring powers,; which have as many millions of bayonets 
under their command, still, in the rapid progress of civilization, the 
domination of force is hourly declining ; and it may be hoped that the 
well-understood interests of all the limitrophe states will range them 
on the side of Belgium integrity. A general war may again deluge 
the fields of Belgium in blood, and subject its cities to the law of the 
strongest ; but , if the lessons of the past have not wholly been given 
in vain, it will be long before Europe will again be visited by a ca- > 
lamity so dreadful. It is not therefore too much to augur a pro- 
tracted and a brilliant existence to this infant state, or to look with 
confidence on its future destinies, reposing as they do on the same 
foundations with those of French and English liberty, and the future 
prosperity and intelligence of the great Germanic body. Of this, 
however, Belgium is sure— that it can never be worse than it would 
have been, under the 3Iezentian embrace of Holland, and bound 
hand and foot to the will and pleasure of the three great bulwarks 
of ignorance and slavery. 



THE END. 



