Eleanor: or, The spectre of St. Michael's: a romantic tale
V ELEANOR.
CHAPTER I.
"\Vhen~IIea\eii on man is pleas'djts wealth to shower, Ah! what an envied bliss doth Iluivcn ues'tow ! r To raise pale merit in her hopeless hour, And lead despondence from the tomb of hoc , Flndar. AFTER the departure of Mr. Crosby, all remained for some time silent. Elea¬ nor felt unaccountably interested in his sorrows, which she was convinced were acute; and as she reflected on his beha¬ viour, a pensivehess stole, over her own frame. Mrs. Conway observed the dejection which was fast displaying itself on her .vol. in. t ; b f. ,
face, and exclaimed—" Why, Eleanor, you look as mournful as though something was the matter with yourself. Do not smrer that old man's griefs to make you miserable; it is his way. For my part, I don't mind him, or he would always be making me wretched if he had his will; because he has no relish for the pleasures oP the world, he rails at all who are cap¬ able of enjoying it. But pray who can answer that his youthful days may not have been passed in as much dissipation as those whom he now so much condemns?" (i I am not of that opinion, my dear," returned Mr. Conway. " I have heard him often speak of the very retired life which he has always led ; domestic com- fort&'have alone constituted his felicity, from which, by some cruel blow, he has been torn. But though he has acknow¬ ledged thus much to me, I have never known the true cause of his sorrows, which he cautiously conceals." "' I'Could not help thinking," said Mrs. Conway, " that his behaviour was parti-
cularly strange to-day; he appeared as if the sight of Eleanor revived painful sen¬ sations within his bosom.' ? " It is very possible," cried Mrs. Con¬ way, "Miss Glendinning'may have re¬ minded him of some object who has been dear to him ; perhaps the name of Eleanor has been familiar to his 3 ears; a trifling in¬ cident will often cause great emotion to a mind which carries an unconquerable sor¬ row.* But what is your opinion of him, Miss Glendinning?" " I feel more interested for him, sir, than I can express," was her reply. " It is true his tongue gives utterance to Se¬ verity of language with respect to the follies of the world, but I am certain his heart is the seat of benevolence; his Vener¬ able- countenance is adorned with the stamp of humanity, and all must feel the greatest regret that he is the victim of con¬ cealed sorrow." " You judge him rightly," returned Mr. Conway M "I ( sineerely belieye th?
onlyfhappinessVhe enjoys is that of ;rer ii^ing:^ wants' o^others. Hetias,,:I understand, come into the-possessipn of a .large fortune, -which he applies to the noblestpurposes.,^: v Nq tale of distress ever peaches his >ars s in yain; his life is;,past hi;seeking, out different objects; he is for ever on the alert in. ;the cause of charity* and]; like«the, great Jloward of old, visits all-those places .where poverty,?and even yice^i.dwell; the former he relieves, the latter lie endeavours to suppress, and many are the -objects whom, ; ;his, mild doctrine has led into the ways of truth, who, for;a shprt; time, had departecl from her righ^r pus paths; and when such,a man as this possesses the will, as well as the means,;it is needless to eulogize, upon his actions.";' yf.i? Upon mywordj" exclaimed (Mrs. Con- W ity; : ** you : have really given a more,seri¬ ous^ dissertation [than I thought you ; cap r able of, Edward; reaUy you, T wili in.time beepme quite;a, grave orator." J; $> .«.„■.'"••" '>> 1 : [Mr,;Cqnway. > smiled.—" No, -my; ^lear/ he replied, " I shall>never, I fear, possess
that acquisition; but when I am convers-; ing on, and pourtraying the .merits of a- friend, I cannot be too warm; nor is that man -worthy of such a friend, who would, not exert every effort to,set forth his merits; for, though a young and gay fel¬ low myself, believe me I can admire the noble actions of others, and know how to appreciate them, though'perhaps incap¬ able of imitating, them.-' < . "No one, sir,^ said, Eleanor, "could. desire a more,able eulogist than yourself. It would be well if all were willing to set forth the virtues of others as you have done those, of-Mr. Crosby." . ." Ihave said no more than ;he, deserves," he replied*;," but with all these matchless? qualifications, he oftentimes displeases,,by Jiis bluntness in giving t his, opinions ,oppo- site.to, those with whom he converses; but then. I must add,- that it is only the more trifling and insignificant characters of fhe dav at whom ! he f levels his; shafts;, merit ne*:er pleads imvvain. He. is truly cap¬ able of ^distinguishing beauty and worth,.
as he has this day clearly evinced by hlti decided approbation of MissGlendinning." He^ bowed to Eleanor, who blushed at his compliment, and'the subject changed. ^ As■ i there was no company, Mr. Con?: way accompanied them to the drawing- room, and in pleasing conversation passed the remainder of the day. '■■•-.■ ; 'o;/ Eleanor delighted them: both, by play¬ ing and singing some Scotch:airs, with much sweetness and melody*, and save that some painful [ recollections still obtruded themselves *>n her miudi she would have feltliappy. ; ^r ! --^:.^ o.y;r ;.•'.-, '>■.:/. i'.-.uy. vJVtr. Conway expressed^his intention of cojnmencing his tour 5ft <■# few days, and aaded ; the pleasure ^it gave him in the^ kiiowled^ithat Mis; Conway would kave? so charming^ a } companion during his ab* seii cei ahd'that-he hoped lady Glendinning would permit her tb Continue there-until : hisreturn; ; ' ;: " v: "-' : ' .■•■■•?- !, - ; v-' ■■'.'•'■■■'- '-■' • ^■'• dt .}\> ■ Eleahor^repliedl that she had tio doubt> but her ladyship would give her permis^ sion to'stay there until her own return to
Scotland, as she hoped never more to re¬ side under the roof of lady Cecilia Gray. " That you never shall, depend upon it," cried Mrs. Conway, " while I have a house to offer you. I am sure lord Arthur would never forgive the affront she put upon vou; and after the genteel treatment which we experienced from him, be as¬ sured I will never see a niece of his in¬ sulted without resenting it. Lady Ceci¬ lia may command a title, but I despise her arrogance, and dislike her company ; but 1 can see through her designs. She is fear¬ ful that you will prove the barrier to her favourite designs, and so in a genteel way has removed you from her house, and, as she thinks, from the sight of her nephew-. Rut I hope lord Montalban will justify the opinion that I have formed of his spi¬ rit, and visit my house whenever he likes; I shall always be proud to receive him/' Eleanor blushed excessively at Mrs. Colli. way's allusion—" For Heaven's sake, ma± dam!" she cried, " what is it you mean ?
—what barrier am I to her ladyship's wishes ?" " Ah! Eleanor," replied Mrs. Conway, " that pretty blush which now adorns your countenance, plainly shews you un¬ derstand my meaning. Lady Cecilia, I suppose, sees but with the same eyes as other people, and must doubtless observe the preference given by her nephew to yourself. Take my word, Eleanor, lord Montalban will never marry Georgina; you, I am-convinced, are the object of his affection's. Consider the impression which you made on your first meeting, when he mistook you for his destined bride. Re¬ member I know it all; and I am confi¬ dent he will brave every difficulty to gain you for his own." " Hold, madam !" cried Eleanor, who was sinking with confusion during this painful retrospection, which she could not but acknowledge to be a true one:' " pray forbear such a strain as this; however cir¬ cumstances may at first have arisen, lord Montalban became sensible of his error,
and has, to" my knowledge,- voluntarily pledged his word to unite himself to Geor¬ gina on his return to Scotland, and I must not listen on such a subject even from you.", " Not if it distresses you," replied Mrs.,- Conway, who saw the emotion under which she laboured. " Be assured I would not willingly give you a moment's pain; but you must not.be offended at my still being of opinion that; lord Montalban will never ratify his present engagements," She then changed the conversation, and at an early hour, Eleanor, once more bid¬ ding her friends good-night, sought .the. solitude of her own chamber,. , i ; The remarks of Mrs. Conway had rais¬ ed the strangest sensations within her, bo¬ som. She reflected on the pain it caused her in merely asserting that lord Montal¬ ban would not ratify his engagements; the.busy pulses of her,heart phiuly told her, it was an event which would seal, her misery for ever; yet doubtless it would*
occur, and she should in sorrow and in silence witness an event which would for ever make her wretched. She sat for some time lost in her own reflections—" WheiL their union takes place," she mentally ex¬ claimed, " then shall I be once more, I suppose, restored to dear Scotia's land; there only can I expect to find peace. Yes, there is one who will soften the sor¬ rows of Eleanor, and on whose bosom I can rest my grief,—-Oh! joyful moment, that will reunite ns!—Oh! how tedious. will seem this long separation!" The tears chased each other down her cheeks. She arose, and endeavoured to shake off her depression; she advanced to one of the windows, which looked to the Grove, and opening it, gazed on the unri¬ valled beauty of the sky. The moon rose in majestic splendour; "the bright floor of heaven was richly inlaid with bright patterns cf gold," and all nature appeared to rest. The scene was congenial to her feel¬ ings, and she remained for a few minutes stationed at the window. Suddenly she
ELEANOR. heard a footstep, and beheld, at a small distance, the figure of a man, who was f evidently observing her. She instantly withdrew; the stranger also retreated. But what were the sensations of Eleanor, as she caught a glimpse of his face 1 She thought she beheld the form and features of lord Montalban; but thought washer only evidence, for overcome by his sudden" appearance, she sunk on her chair, incap¬ able of rising; nor was it till after some; time she could gain sufficient courage to 1 look at the window. No one was, how¬ ever, now to be seen; and Eleanor, with, a disturbed imagination, closed the win¬ dow, and retired to her pillow. Rest- was, however, a stranger to her eyes, and- the night was passed in vain surmises and conjectures. One moment she persuaded herself that she must have been mistaken. in supposing it to be lord Montalban, as. why should he be wandering about the house at so late an hour ? Again she felt- convinced that it really was him. Fronv what motive then could he be thus watch-
ing her movements? Her own heart whispered the real reason, and in spite of her resolution to forget him, she exulted in the sweet idea that she was beloved hy him. • In reflections like these she passed near¬ ly the whole of the night; nor was she sorry when the morning arrived; and at an early hour she repaired to the parlour where Mr. and Mrs. Conway soon joined her. They both remarked that she look¬ ed more pale and languid than on the pre¬ ceding day. She alleged a bad headache as her excuse, and cautiously concealed from them the real reason, as she could not arm herself with, courage, enough to say that she had seen lord Montalban.. , Mr. Conway, as usual, departed, as soon as he had breakfasted, for town; and Mrs. Conway proposed remaining at home, as they; expected Miss Clifford to spend the day with them. To this Eleanor readily acquiesced, and they together seated them¬ selves in the drawing-room, and Eleanor offered to read some of her favourite au-
thors. Mrs. Conway gladly accepted of her offer, and was quite delighted with the judicious subjects which she chose. . The thoughts of Eleanor were, however, more in St. James's-square, and at length laying down her book, she ventured to express her wishes to. know how lady Glendinning was by this time, as she had left her evidently labouring under ill health. She had been hurried away so fast by Mrs. Conway, that no arrange¬ ments had been made relative to seeing the family again, and she scarcely knew how to act. On mentioning this to Mrs. Conway, she said she w T ould with pleasure accom¬ pany her any time she liked, to visit her ladyship ; for although she hated lady Ce¬ cilia, yet that was < no .reason why, she should not go and see lady Glendinning*, if she liked.— " t However," said she, "I dare say it will not be long before either some of the family, or perhaps lord Mont¬ alban, will pay us a visit, as doubtless he would wish to see you."
Eleanor blushed, as she recollected the v visit which he had already paid, though she did not choose to reveal it. They were interrupted in their conver¬ sation by the arrival of Miss Cliffo/d, who had ccme, as she expressed it, thus early, purposely to pass a long day with them. Eleanor instantly inquired after Mrs, Clifford, and > hoped. she was recovered from her indisposition of the preceding day. Miss Clifford gracefully thanking her, assured her she was perfectly convalescent; and added, that she begged her kindest regards to Eleanor, and hoped that she would repeat her visit as soon as she pos¬ sibly could. Eleanor expressed the pleasure it would afford her in cultivating-the friendship of Mrs. Clifford; and the lovely Emily, with a warmth that did credit to her heart, ex¬ patiated on the merits and amiable dispo¬ sition of her dear mamma, as she styled Mrs. Clifford. If Eleanor had been pleased with her on
a first sight, how much more delighted' was she on a farther acquaintance with her, as she found her conversation replete with good sense, and her manners so irre¬ sistibly pleasing, that it was impossible to be in her company, and not enraptured with it! Her person and figure were ele¬ gant ; she was evidently the senior of Ele¬ anor, who already felt inclined to look up to her as a friend, on whose advice and counsel she could place implicit reliance; and never since she left Scotland had she found the hours pass so pleasantly. The conversation of Miss Clifford was brilliant and lively, and her mind evidently well cultivated and expanded. Mrs. Conway, who was never so happy as when, to use her own expression, she had " real genteel people with her," was quite delighted, and certainly did all in her power to add to the comforts and pleasure of her guests. At the usual hour of dinner, Mr. Con¬ way returned, and without any further addition to their party, they sat down to
table; but, before they had scarcely dined, Mr. Crosby was announced. Eleanor'involuntarily arose at his en¬ trance ; a trembling seized her, as he ad¬ vanced towards her, and taking her hand, first of all, addressed her in a voice of the .utmost kindness. He appeared more composed than on the preceding day, but deep sighs escaped his lips, as he pronoun¬ ced the name of Eleanor. Mrs, Conway hoped he was better than when they last saw him. " "■ I hope so too, madam," was his reply; " at my time of life, we ought to improve every moment, so as to render us more fit for the awful change of nature." Mrs. Conway, smiling, replied, that it was to his health she alluded, and not the failings of his disposition: - He paid no attention to her reply, but- turning to Miss Clifford, he took her hand.- —" My Emily," he cried, " how glad am, I to see you! I can now once- more fan¬ cy myself surrounded by innocence and' virtue. Yes, thou lovely pair!" he added,
at the same time 'joining the hands of Eleanor and Emily, " thou shalt'be bright: examples of purity; for your sakes, I will believe that truth and goodness still dwell on earth; love then each other, and by encouraging congenial notions of true ho¬ nour and virtue, form the best basis for a. real and lasting friendship*between ye." " That 1 trust we already feel, sir," re¬ plied Miss Clifford; " at least I can truly assert, thai Miss Glendinning, on her first appearance, warmly interested herself iu my favour; I felt for her all the regard of an old friend, which, perhaps you will say, sir, was too sudden a sensation to be last¬ ing, as I know you are no advocate for sud¬ den impressions." . " I am not, I own," he interrupted;, " but, in this instance, J believe I' must yield to your argument, having myself fallen under the same sentiment; for, oh, Miss Clifford! yosi know not how much I felt at first sight of Eleanor." , > ' He paused, and again appeared agitated,
and seating himself in a chair, sunk' ab¬ sorbed in thought. Sirs. Conway smiled, and rising, begged her young friends to follow, her to the drawing-room, and leaving the two gcn- tletrienover the bottle, they entertained themselves with music. Miss Clifford both played and sang very prettily; and, on her finishing a popular ballad, she entreated Eleanor to favour her also. ' ' ' Ever willing to oblige, our heroine be¬ gan a soft and pleasing strain, when the gentlemen entered the room. They mo¬ tioned her to proceed, while Mr. Crosby stationed himself close to her, and, for some few minutes, attentively listened to her. 1 ' ' Suddenly his whole countenance be¬ came agitated, and laying his hand on her shoulder, he interrupted her by exclaim¬ ing-^" Are you sent here to torture, cr to please me ? Oh, that voice! you know not how much it reminds me ------ 1 cannot
bear it!" he continued, at the same time raising his handkerchief to his eyes. '* I am extremely sorry, sir," cried Ele¬ anor, in a voice of concern, though not en¬ tirely free from terror, " that I should be the unfortunate means of distressing you ; but indeed I will never repeat it!" " Oh, 1 do not say so!" he replied; " I will learn to listen to you; it will afford me a melancholy pleasure, and remind me of the strains of one who was once the dearest treasure of my heart! Oh, me¬ mory !" he added; •' why for ever wilt thou thus torture me ? will not lapse o£ years, fortitude, and resignation, strength¬ en my mind? Alas, alas! how vain is the resolution of man!" " J am much concerned, my dear sir," cried Mr. Conway, " to see you thus af¬ flicted. I certainly cannot enter into the^ nature of your sorrows, as the cause of your grief is entirely a secret to me; nor would Is presume to make an inquiry, which might only tend to wound you still further."
" May it ever remain secret," replied Mr. Crosby; " my sorrows are of a nature not to be revealed. I will not betray the author of them; no rude tongue shall ever babble out I her disgrace! no, I will pre¬ serve her honour, though she has robbed me of my peace! suffice it to say, no one action of my own life ever yet sullied my own character! my wrongs have been oc¬ casioned by the hand of another—not my own!" i " I sincerely believe you, sir," returned: Mr. Conway, " and I lament to see you. the victim of unconquerable grief." " I fear," cried Eleanor, in a voice of ti¬ midity and apprehension, " that my pre¬ sence disturbs Mr. Crosby, the thought of ' which'causes me sentiments of the deep¬ est regret,» as it will of course deprive, me of the pleasure of being in his society.", " Oh, do not say so, my dear Eleanor!" he replied, taking her hand; " I feel a me¬ lancholy pleasure in your company, that I would not forego for worlds! Pray .pardon- the weakness of an old man, Emily," he
cried, turning to'Miss Clifford. " I pre¬ sume upon our old friendship, in begging ■you tb plead for my excuse." ' - f [ " Most willingly, Sir," she replied; " but I am confident Miss Glendinning will not admit of any being offered; her looks pro¬ claim the tender commiseration "of her soul."' -, ' " None shall be offered," cried Eleanor. " Think not so meanly of my understand¬ ing, sir, as to suppose I would wish to pre¬ vent the ebullition of your feelings.' Sor¬ row, whatever her shape,' ought to be re- • spected, and when she displays herself in a form whose time of life should be strew¬ ed, at least with calm content, it is parti¬ cularly distressing,, and claims our utmost commiseration. I am myself the child of sorrow—how little do you know the grief that rankles at my heart!" She paused, as if fearing she had said too much ;" f the tears t chased each other down her cheeks, which she,vainly endeavoured to suppress.'' - . \ w > .' - j ■ i, < AH looked tat: .her with astonishment.
Mr. Crosby pressed her hand with warmth. *—"" So young," he cried, " and yet un¬ happy ! What can have disturbed your peace, unless, indeed, the bane of human felicity has crossed your path ? Yes, I see how it is! love, insidious love, has already marked you for its prey! beware the dan¬ gerous delusion ! withdraw yourself from its grasp, while you yet preserve your in¬ nocence—certain destruction awaits you, in yielding to the fascinating allurements of man!" His voice became severe as he spoke. Eleanor trembled, while Mrs. Conway, who had been tired of this harangue, ex¬ claimed—" Mercy on us, Mr. Crosby! you are enough to frighten us ali to death ! By your conversation one would suppose, by your descriptions, that one lived in a land of savages, and that all mankind were bar¬ barous and inhuman."' < ' j i " AndT will maintain, madam,", ho re¬ plied, " though we are not in alandofsa¬ vages, as you please to term it, that many who bear 1 the character 1 of a civilised
Christian, are less deserving of it than those 6bjects to whom you allude; for what action can prove a savage hearfrmore than the man who hurls innocence and vir¬ tue from its greatest climax'; and when satiety has cooled his once-ardent passions, he leaves his victim to perish, to waste its loveliness in penance or prayer; or, what is still worse, leaves it, forced hy desertion, to become the associate of vice in her most wretched garb. Can any thing, I say, prove such an inhuman picture as this ? We condemn the cruel actions of those poor uncivilized beings, and denominate them as savages, while man, in a country like our own, may boast of such scenes as I have been describing, and at worst he is only considered as a gay fellmv, and a man of fashion"' Before any one could make a reply, Mrs. Conway, who had been amusing herself by looking at the window, 1 in order to'avoid the conversation of Mi*. Crosby, suddenly exclaimed—" Here is sh\Henry T S barouche driving up 1 the Grove.-' 'I wondep who he*
■/. hasjgot withhim ;,it.is quite fille^ilsMercy on me, ; Eleanor!"5 she : added, ";lord Mont- alban;is;in it!'V ; ;a n^v'sx-.: .j : ^] i^lM^ ■•)?;■.;':;■' i , ■ • y -iLord ? Montalban ^repeated Eleanor, starting-ufrom.iher, seat ;,f sure ,;you are .mistaken^'r^n^-j'Ui-.' idd ir.;i ; :'t r -j ;■.;.:{■; /jr.!;;;*.- ■".Indeed, my^deariibutilamjno^shjer^r plied, at the^ same t ;time w kissing her hand to the ; party in jhe ; carriage ;^pray, why did you suppose I,was :mistaken ? i: did you think lord ^Montalban; would- not have condescended tp;visit:me,?■" u< ; ;; ■ ; ■: ,*fOh no, madam,"[retHrned Eleanor,." it . w ; ^;npt.thati : but--T^^ :> .; ; '. ; .j;;.,: :i i-.,'; ■, -. She: paused, s as she observed the eyes,of Mr. jCrosby, fixed full upon her. . ;j ; ., ; !',On the first mentioning of his lordship's ■name, ihe,cheek of Eleanor had assumed a deadly paleness, and her agitation was, top^ visible; to escappjthe penetrating glance ofjMr. Crosby, iwho 4 immediately drew his own .conjectures 011 the f subject. •.; . v :Bytliis time the party were announced, whwhiConsistediprsir, Henry Con way and, his spUy an^, -totheir^ great; surprise, ,Geor-
gina Glendfnning r < lord Montalban, and Robert. A mutual introduction of course took place, while lord Montalban flew to the side of Eleanor,^ and taking lier hand, addressed her in terms of tenderness. He felt it tremble beneath his. pressure, nor was his own free from the same emotion. Eleanor was overcome by contending passions; his unexpected appearance" now, and likewise on the preceding evening; all rendered her extremely confused, and she was glad when Georgina' advanced to¬ wards her. ' She extended her hand with great kindness to Eleanor, and inquired if she was not surprised at her appearance. " I trust," cried sir Henry;" it is- an agreeable surprise to all, and as I am in a great degree the occasion' of it;' I shall take upon me to explain it." The information which he' then gave > was briefly this r on the 1 day before he- and his son had called on lady Glendinning in St. James's-square, whom ^they found so ill as scarcely to be able to conversephet ' VOL. III. c '
ladyship had however exerted* herself as much as possible, and Mr.-William Con-' way and Georgina had soon become on very good terms, as their lively ideas and dispositions assimilated; and after paying a long visit, they; departed, with the pro¬ mise of soon renewing it. • On this evening, being extremely warm and lovely, sir Henry proposed to his son a <ride to St. James's-square, with which he readily t agreed; but on their arrival they found lady Glendinning much worse, and confined to her dressing-room. Lady Lenox and lady Cecilia ,were with her/ as also a friend of her ladyship's"; therefore Geor¬ gina, Robert, and lord Montalban, were alone in the drawing-room when sir Hen¬ ry,and his son arrived, who soon proposed a ride to Camberwell, and William Con¬ way used all his entreaties to prevail on Georgina to accompany them, to which she agreed. To lord Montalban and Robert the re¬ quest was particularly agreeable, as it was to the presence of Eleanor they should be
brought. The excursion was therefore com¬ municated to the elderladies, who, though they did not approve of it hi their hearts, could not make any reasonable objection. Lord Montalban made a virtue of es¬ corting Georgina, though in fact Mr. William Conway handed her to the ba¬ rouche, and, lady Cecilia Gray was mor¬ tified beyond measure at her nephew's visit to Camberwell. Part of, this explanation having been given by sir Henry, and mutual compli¬ ments passing, Mrs. Conway telling Geor¬ gina how very genteel she took her visir 9 all appeared now at their ease, and being seated, the conversation became more ge¬ neral
c2
CHAPTER. II.,
If thou rememberest not the slightest folly 'lhnfc ever \o\e did moke thee run into, Thou.hast apt lov'd. Suakespeatie. ^1r.j Crosby ha,d seated himself at some little distance from the group now assem¬ bled, and, as was hi? usual custom, ob- - serving and making comments on the actions of all. He plainly saw, in a ml- nute^ that Eleanor and lord Montalban were labouring under an emotion at the. sight of each other which evinced a mu¬ tual regard, and so much interest had Eleanor excited in his bosom, that he trembled for her peace. His next concern was Miss Clifford, who, on being intro¬ duced, to Georgina and Robert Glendin¬ ning, turned extremely pale; her voice failed her as she endeavoured to speak, and
she remained evidently agitated during the evening. .Robert Glendinning fre¬ quently addressed her; his seat was close to hers, and her fascinating form appeared to rivet his attention. Mrs. Conway was delighted, as she was never so happy as when entertaining a Jarge party, and she looked with pleasure at the genteel assemblage before her. A title had ineffable charms in her eyes, and to her inexpressible satisfaction, her house was now honoured by such noble visitants, and on tea being brought in, she express¬ ed her thanks to sir Henry for the agree¬ able surprise which he had given them, and hoped that the present company would now dispense with all form in future, and repeat their visit as often as possible. Georgina, with unexpected compliance. replied that she should be most happy in doing so, while Robert, bowing with great gallantry, cried—" Indeed, madam, your request has too much pleasure in its ful¬ filment not to be instantly complied with, fox where the seat of hospitality, like
yours, is adorned by the sister graces, who could resist the temptation of being in their company ?" ' He bowed to Eleanor and Miss Clifford, while Mrs. Conway also curtseyed to his compliment. Lord Montalban, seizing a moment, whispered to the ear of Eleanor—" The house of Mrs. Conway must ever prove a delightful resort to me, while it contains a gem whose presence only has the power of allaying my sorrows." Eleanor blushed ; she was about to re¬ ply, when the countenance of Mr; Crosby met her view. She saw his penetrating glance, and she remained in silence. " I perceive, young gentleman," cried Mr. Crosby, addressing Robert, " that you have been trained in the school of flattery: Mrs. Conway's house will, I hope, sir, continue the resort of the graces, which must arise from its remaining, as it is notv, the abode of innocence and virtue, for without those treasures grace cannot be found."
** You do me injustice, siri" replied Ro¬ bert. ," I am no flatterer": ''!■: have ever been accustomed to- speak the sentiments of my-soul without disguise,'which prompt¬ ed mean the present ^instance to utter the dictates of my heart." ; ^ n , i ?.Vln the presence of; so much beauty," cried Mr. William Conway,,,;in a tone of great gaiety, -ff I should be ashamed to own I. possessed a heart, unless it was one given me in- exchange for, my own lost one." :,.t\ ■ • '• ;■• .-:..:.,.■, ;■■. ,,:. -■' .• >;-■ -;', " I suppose youi mean to infer, by; that, sir," ; interrupted ; Mrs. Conway, ."that you have already -suffered that loss."., "Why really, madam," he replied, ?[ I ain .not quite; .certain,: and that; is half an acknowledgment, I think." „;• ^ p : ., ", An4 ; :pray, f sir," .returned Mrs. Con¬ way, [."may, I inquire who is the envied lady that is in the : . possession of; s uch a .noble acquisition s as , your heart s must prove?"; .■..,:/.■■ ..-a.-.,- ,.'..■;/, ;•,; ly^^y.iiu': . : i..;" ^hy,cmadam," he ^returned, IfH must sayf/tie not a-fair question; but, be assured
of .this,' it has not wandered farther than the limits of this room." All the young i ladies blushed at his avowal; but the niost confused in her ap¬ pearance was Georgina, who, replying to the first part of his speech, cried—" I think indeed, sir, it is not a fair question." *' A very pretty investigation of hearts," cried Mr. Crosby; " were we to enter mto a minute scrutiny, I doubt much whether we should find any of your hearts in the right place, or at least not directed to the , object fixed upon by friends." " True, sir," interrupted lord Montal¬ ban, " for as our immortal bard observes, * the course of true love did never yet run smooth,' an observation which strikes me as a most forcible one." > His lordship sighed as he spoke, and fix¬ ed his eyes upon Eleanor, who fully un¬ derstood his meaning. Mr. Crosby was about to reply, but was interrupted by Mrs. Conway, who, rising from the tea-table, proposed to shew the young party her beautiful flower-garden.
All the gentlemen, except sir Henry, Mr. Crosby, and Mr. Conway, immediately arose and offered to attend the ladies. Mr. William Conway, regardless of the pre¬ sence of lord Montalban, presented his hand to Georgina, who smilingly receiv¬ ed it. Lord Montalban instantly took that of Eleanor, and Robert willingly drew the arm of Miss Clifford within his own, who appeared equally pleased with the attentions of the young Scotchman, and Mrs. Conway led the way to the garde;!, which she perfectly idolized. Eleanor and lord Montalban were the most silent of the group; both, appeared equally embarrassed, till at length,, with a view r of breaking a silence painful in itself, Eleanor commented on the beauty of the scene, and the delightful situation of Mrs.. Conway's cottage. " Yes," replied lord Montalban, "• too- well I feel its charms, for to speak in the language of a complete master of the pas¬ sions— c 3
" Here for ever could I stay, Sfld proof how well a lo\er cnn obey !" Eleanor could ,not but understand his allusion, but recollecting that he had vo¬ luntarily promised to unite himself to Georgina, she considered that he was not altogether acting with the dictates of ho¬ nour. Drawing as much reserve as possi- , ble into her countenance, she therefore re¬ plied—" No doubt your lordship fully feels the force of those lines, particularly as Georgina shines conspicuously in the scene, to whom, of course, your lordship's allusion is due." To Georgina he replied—" Oh, Elea¬ nor ! why will you thus cruelly misunder¬ stand me ? Do you not obserye that she is engaged in a way as much congenial to her feelings, and more so to mine, as it gives me this delightful opportunity of conversing with you? and I can also bring proof sufficient to convince you that she is not the magnet of my attractions. This spot contained not Georgina last night.
Ask you. self who was the object of my nightly admiration." v '- s * ; Eleanor 1 blushed excessively—"Then it was your lordship," she cried, *" whom I last night beheld from my window. May I ask why you thus chose so late an hour, when Mrs. Conway would have felt ho¬ noured' by your lordship's visit at an earlier period ?" " I can only answer you, Eleanor,' by saying that it was the result of one of those follies which love makes us run into. I had been out with a party of male friends and' passing the Camberwell road in • our way home, I made an excuse for quitting the carriage, and wishing them good-night, T sauntered down the Grove. The hour; I found, was later than I at first supposed it to be, but I could not resist the opportu¬ nity of gazing on the house which contains -you. ' I easily ascertained it, and by the drawing-room windows being in darkness, I concluded the family had retired to rest; but how was I 'soon gratified by observing a light at another window, which discover-
ed to my >gaze the form of her, whose image is ever present in idea! You, Eleanor,, I thought, also saw me; but'being fearful that my presence might wound your deli¬ cacy, I withdrew, and returned home in high spirits at having obtained a sight of you." ' . ' i , He pressed her hand, while Eleanor, greatly agitated at so warm an avowal, which suited in itself but too well with her own.feelings, replied—" Wherefore, tny lord, this desire to see me, or why should you give yourself this concern after another, when 1 know that your engage¬ ments f forbid such proceedings? Am I not fully aware that you have consented— nay, cheerfully promised to comply with the wishes of your friends on your return to Scotland?" "Ah, Eleanor!" interrupted lord Mont¬ alban, " I see the opinion you have form¬ ed #$ me; you think me insincere and wa- venug** I own I did promise to marry Georgina—I acknowledge, all my folly; but at the moment I did so, I loved you
with increasing passion.—Nay, start )hot," he continued:; " I cannot conquer ii It was madness, it was desperation drove me to that fatal promise. Oh! Eleanor, I believed you engaged to another. If you knew the cruel cause which led me to give assent to the commands of my friends, you'would pity me. But you shall know all; you alone can relieve me; and I will trust to your generosity in explaining those scenes which have induced me to act as I have done." ' Eleanor trembled violently; sheialmost dreaded what would follow; but for the present she was spared, as Mrs. Conway turned towards them, and presenting Eleanor with a bouquet, fell into conver¬ sation, 1 and continued by their side during the remainder of their stay in the garden, much to the mortification of lord Montal¬ ban, who found it impossible to proceed in his conversation with Eleanor; to whom, notwithstanding all his former re¬ solutions, he found himself more and more attached, and- he resolved to acquaint her
with the scene to which he hadbeen'wit¬ ness in the rocks/ and to beg lier to remove his doubts- or to confirm them for ever, as. he felt .this suspense was almost worse than tlie reality.^ He was however oblig¬ ed still longer to continue its victim, and the little party once more entered' the drawing-room, to which they found an¬ other addition in the persons of Mr. and Mrs. Clifford, who Had taken a ride in their. carriage, and' called for Emily in their way home. Mrs.. Clifford arose, and taking the hand of Eleanor, expressed her pleasure at seeing her; but seeing strangers around' her, she curtseyed gracefully to'all. r < Mrs. Conwayfirst introduced lord Mont¬ alban, and then added—" And now, Sirs. Clifford, J can actually present to you the son. and daughter of lord Arthur Glen- dinningi. Miss Georgina Glendinning, Mr; Robert Glendinning," she continued, as she presented them;. ' ' • ," -' ' .. Mrs. Clifford again appeared- agitated. She took each of:, their hands—"You are
no strangers to mei by name? she cried, «* though, till this period, we never met; but I hope this chance introduction wDl afford me the pleasure of commencing a more lasting acquaintance, and that you will favour my house by honouring it .with your company as often as possible." t« Robert assured her of the pleasure he should take in accepting of her kind.invi¬ tation, and Georgina promised to take the first opportunity possible; but *added> be¬ ing so perfect a stranger to London, she qould only avail herself of her friend's kindness in taking her about. . Mr. William Conway instantly replied, that he should always be happy to be her chaperon, and escort her wherever she pleased, as he was both able and willing to shew her all over London. She thanked him for his offer; <md as the hour was now drawing late, she beg¬ ged the favour of sir Henry to order his barouche, as, she added, her mamma being so ill, she would wish to return to her. .- < Eleanor expressed her regret at her la-
dyship's illness, and added, that she Would certainly call and see her, if it would prove agreeable. " Certainly so, M replied Georgina; " I am sure mamma will be very glad to see you, and think it very unkind if you did not." '. '.'Were it her ladyship's own house," replied Eleanor, " I should not hesitate one moment; but I am not certain that I shall prove a welcome visitor to its owner," «' Oh ! you mean to lady Cecilia, I sup¬ pose," returned Georgina,' in a laughing tone. . " But never mind her; all the rest will be glad to see you—wont they, loni Montalban ? I hope you will excuse mc for making so free with the hame of your honoured relation," she added, in a sarcas¬ tic tone. " Oh!, certainly," he replied. "I am sure lady Cecilia will be happy to receive ,the friends of lady "Glendinning'at~ any time," " I make no doubfcof it,",returned Gfeor-
gina., " But I hope, Eleanor, you will make a point cf coming to see ns when¬ ever you can." ,Eleanor assured her she certainly would, -and could not at the same 1 time but men¬ tally observe the visible alteration*in that young lady's manner towards her, which, instead of wearing that haughty reserve which she had formerly adopted to' Elea¬ nor, was now good-humoured and kind; indeed she appeared almost an altered be¬ ing. Sir Henry's barouche now being an¬ nounced, that party took their leave 1 . Lord Montalban could only press the hand of Eleanor in silence; but the expressive glance of his eye spoke volumes to her heart. On'their leaving' the room, Mrs: Con¬ way looked out of the balcony, and with much satisfaction beheld the splendid equipages at her door, and congratulated herself on the idea that her house was as much the resort of fashionables as any in the Grove.
. * After the departure of sir Henry and his little party, Mr. Crosby made-his usual observations and comments on all, and purposely spoke of lord Montalban, to try the effect on Eleanor. She however re¬ mained silent on the subject, when Miss Clifford replying to him, said, she thought his lordship certainly was one of the most handsome men she ever saw, and that every one must be pleased with his com¬ pany. " And do you not also think Mr. Glen¬ dinning very agreeable ?" cried Mr. Cros¬ by. " I am sure you ought to feel sensi¬ ble of his attention, which was evidently directed towards you—nay, blush not, my dear Emily; I think it the greatest proof of his sense, in fixing his attention on au object so every way deserving of his re¬ gard." i , " You will make Emily too vain, my dear sir," cried Mr.Clifford, smiling. "It ,is the custom of young men to be gallant to every young lady with whom they may happen to be in company; and this> I am
-perfectly aware, is often construed by the mistaken female into a declaration of love. I should be sorry to have my Emily fall into this error." ' " Indeed I have no such thoughts," she replied, while her cheeks assumed a crim¬ son blush. " I will answer for the good sense of Emily," exclaimed Mr. Crosby; "but you must acknowledge, Mr. Clifford, I am a close observer of human nature; I can also clearly see the direction of your relation's wishes, Mr. Conway." "What, my cousin William?" return¬ ed that gentleman. " Yes," replied Mr. Crosby. " Miss Glendinning, or I am much mistaken, is the magnet of his attractions." « Oh? said Mrs. Conway, " you must be wrong there, sir, in your surmises, or at least it is to no purpose if she is. Miss Glendinning is engaged to lord Montal¬ ban; that is very shortly to'be a match, I believe." " To lord Montalban!" repeated Mr.
•Crosjby; starting from his chair, and fixing liis eyes full upon Eleanor, whose varying countenance plainly evinced the emotion of her soul; " What motive can induce such a sacrifice ? Oh ! human nature! where can we find thee pure and unen- slaved by passion? Another victim is about to be added to the many instances already on record. Oh! Eleanor, Elea¬ nor! beware of man; you are on the brink of destruction!—Beware, I say——" /' For Heaven's sake! Mr. Crosby," in¬ terrupted Mrs. Conway, " do not let us have any of your dreadful prophecies; you terrify Eleanor by your violence; I de¬ clare she is'quite pale already." . ,f/Lperceive she is," he replied; "but there are many causes to agitate her, and I,will not add .to them. Farewell, Elea¬ nor !" he added, taking her hand, " fare¬ well ; I shall now bid you all adieu for to-night." '.' Why this sudden haste?" inquired Mr. Conway. u I shall set out on my journey to-nlor-
row, and shall not have the pleasure of seeing you for some time again perhaps.'^ " Then, sir," he replied, " I shall now take my leave of you, and wish you all the pleasure such a journey can afford you." He made towards the door; it was in vain they pressed his farther stay; and- taking leave of the Cliffords, he hastily retired, " What a strange being he is !" cried Mrs. Conway. " When he gets into these gloomy fits, I think his absence is better than his presence. As to you, Eleanor, he seems determined to prove a plague to you, always tormenting you about some¬ thing or other." Eleanor sighed—" I know not how it is, madam," she replied, " but Mr. Crosby certainly appears to take great interest in my fate; and let him express what he will, however severe, if seems I'can only re-> ceive it as a proof of his regard. I own U do not, nor cannot, feel offended; there is, something in him that calls forth my re¬ gard and admiration." Mrs. Clifford expressed herself of the
same opinion as Eleanor, adding, that his venerable form always excited a sentiment of respect in her bosom; and although there was certainly a great eccentricity in his character, yet she much valued his friendship. Mr. Clifford now reminded her that the hour was getting late; she therefore arose, and taking the hand of Eleanor, begged she would soon return the visit of Emily, by spending a long day at Brixton; and added, as Mrs. Conway was going to lose Mr. Conway, her wishes that she would visit her whenever she could make it conveni¬ ent to all her other engagements. Mrs. Con way t readily promised compli¬ ance, while Eleanor, still retaining the hand of Mrs. Clifford, expressed her readi¬ ness to comply with her wishes. She could not account for the feelings of her bosom, as she gazed on - the face of Mrs., Clifford; she felt the warm pressure of her hand; she almost involuntarily raised it to her lips. Mrs. Conway looked at her with sentiments of delight and affection;
n tear started in her eye, which she endear voured to conceal; but Eleanor observed it. It increasied her surprise, and raised • an emotion in her heart she could not con¬ quer. "'. ■ ' '■ Mrs. Clifford broke the spell by which they appeared bound, by wishing her good¬ night; and hastily bidding adieu to Mr. and Mrs. Conway, she left the room. Emily also took a tender leave of her, and telling her she hoped soon to see her again, followed her papa to the carriage; while Eleanor remained transfixed to the spot with surprise and wonder—" Strange as¬ similation of interest and feeling!" she mentally exclaimed. "Why should I thus feel for a lady, who, but lately, was so perfect a stranger to me ? Yet so it is, that I already love her, and delight to re¬ ceive her proffered affection ; perhaps it is because she is said to bear so great a like¬ ness to myself; certainly the resemblance is striking. She calls to my mind the form of lord Arthur; just his noble, his com¬ manding countenance. With her sure I
may pass my time in rational delight; for could he have sought for a woman any way suited to his mind, to trust his Eleanor, I am sure he would have acknowledged all in this charming Mrs. Clifford/'
CHAPTER III.
Ye stars! which are the poetty of tlea\en! If in your bright leaves \vc would read the fate Of men and empires, 'tis to be forgiven, That in our aspirations to be great, Our destinies o'erleap their mortal state, And claim a kindred with you,' for yeaie A beauty and a mystery, and create In us such love and reverence from afar, That fortune, fame, power, life, have ttam'd themselves a star; All heaven and earth are still. Lord Byron's Childe Harold. This beautiful quotation was mentally eja¬ culated by Eleanor on her retiring that night to her room. The moon and stars shone with such unrivalled brilliancy, that she gazed on the lovely work of nature with wonder and admiration; a calmness pervaded her mind, and a soft delight stole over her soul. At this hour on the pre- VOL. III. D
ceding night she had beheld lord Montal¬ ban, and the spot appeared now to have double charms for her; he had also in his visit of that day acknowledged the senti¬ ment which prompted him to seek her presence; he had again avowed he loved her, and the sweet idea dwelt in her bo¬ som with pure delight; and but for,the interruption of Mrs. Conway, he would doubtless have explained those reasons which had given her cause to doubt his honour, with regard to his ready promise tb marry Georgina. She could not but observe the pleasure which that young lady appeared to take in the attentions of Mr. William Conway, and her heart beat with delight at the probability of such a circumstance taking place. She was well aware that such an event would cause a universal dissension in the two fa¬ milies; but if Georgina persisted; lord Montalban was free. Por the first time she indulged hope within her bosom, and rais¬ ing her eyes to heaven, almost wished she could read her fate > she knew, it was an
obscure one, and the thought was instant¬ ly banished in the idea, that it is enough for mortals to know their present ills. An all-merciful Providence has wisely placed the veil before our eyes, that each may fill the station allotted them; for were we to know the sorrows and evils which are ready to burst on our heads, we should sink with the apprehension of those woes, which, by meeting unlooked-for and sud¬ denly, cannot have made so deep an im¬ pression as to render us incapable of forti¬ fying our minds to receive with resignation the mandates assigned to us, by the wise decrees of Him who orders all things for the best. With such sentiments as these passing in her mind, she at length closed her window, and retired to rest, and soon fell into a sweet and undisturbed slumber. As the following morning was the time appointed for the departure of Mr. Con¬ way, Eleanor repaired to the breakfast-ta-J ble at an early hour, and found Mr. Con¬ way already equipped for his journey, as he
expected his companions to call for him in a travelling carriage. His cousin, Mr. William Conway, was to have made one of their party, but he had suddenly, with¬ out assigning reason sufficient, declined going. Mrs. Conway was quite out of spirits at her husband's departure, and declared that if it had not been for the kind company of Eleanor, she did not know what she should have done during his absence. Mr. Conway good-humouredly soothed her, and promised not to extend his stay beyond the time appointed, but which was to be at least three months. He beg¬ ged Eleanor, if possible, to remain with her all that time, to which she replied, though she should take great pleasure in so doing, yet that entirely depended on lady Glendinning, whoso intended stay in London she could not ascertain, and she mentally hoped to see her native plains before that period. At length a travelling carnage stopped at their door, and Mr. Conway, taking an
affectionate leave of his lady, and a very kind one of Eleanor, joined the gentlemen who were waiting for him. Eleanor saw that Mrs. Conway's spirits were low, and during the remainder of the morning, she exerted herself to amuse her, and with so much success, that she de¬ clared Eleanor was the best companion alive, and that'if she could but remain with her, she should not feel Mr. Conway's absence near as much as she should other¬ wise have done. Eleanor had taken up a book, in order to amuse her^ at which she appeared much pleased; but being seated at the drawing-room window, eveiy ob¬ ject that passed engrossed her attention, and Eleanor was constantly interrupted by her remarks on such and such persons, who, she observed, had either got on a very genteel bonnet, or an old-fashioned hat, which Mrs. Conway considered as very important observations. At length Eleanor had been suffered to proceed for some time without interruption, when Mrs. Conway suddenly exclaimed- " Look,
Eleanor! make haste! here is the very lady that I told you of! she is riding up the Grove. Is she not a genteel figure ?" Eleanor laid do wn herbopk; and leaning - over the balcony, behead, as Mrs. Conway had asserted, a lady, whose^appearance was, certainly very dashing. She sat her horse with the greatest,eavse, and galloped by so fast, that she could scarce see her face. Two grooms, in rich liveries, followed her, and-denoted the consequence of their mis¬ tress. Her figure was elegant; she was attired in a riding-habit, of pale blue cloth, richly ornamented, a white beaver hat, and a superb plume of ostrich feathers completed her dress, and added, in a great degree, to the elegance of her figure. She was evidently young, and possessing a commanding and noble appearance. ■■? Well," cried Mrs. ^pnway, "what do you, think of her? is she not a very genteel woman?" ; ," She is certainly very attractive in her appearance," replied Eleanor;, " no doubt she is a lady of great gaiety and fashion."
" I dare say she is," returned Mrs; Con¬ way. " I should so like to know who she is; I wish I could get acquainted with her; it is evident she is of very great con¬ sequence by being so attended. Pray, don't you think her very handsome?" " Really, madam," replied Eleanor, " she rode by so very fast, that I could scarcely see her face, though I thought it seemed agreeable." " You'll see her come back presently, my dear," said Mrs. Conway; ", she only rides to the top of the Grove, and returns immediately." " If she keeps the same pace with which She rode by," cried Eleanor, " she will soon pass again. I think we must allow her plenty of courage, for I never saw a fe¬ male ride so fast." . , " That shews what an excellent horse¬ woman she is," returned Mrs. Conway. " I wonder Who she can be." ' Eleanor could not refrain from smiling at the eager curiosity of Mrs. Conway after this unknown lady. The book which she
had been reading to her was now lain down disregarded; nor could she attempt to take it up again, as Mrs. Conway was now Stationed in the balcony, watching the return of the stranger, which, in a short time, she joyfully announced to Eleanor, who was obliged to look at her again to please Mrs. Conway. The lady was now walking her horse slowly along, and on passing the house, she turned her face towards them, and Eleanor beheld that she really was handsome. Her black and piercing eyes seemed at one glance to look you through; her nose was aquiline, and her high forehead was admir¬ ably displayed by the parting of her lux¬ uriant tresses, w T hich shewed to advantage under her hat. As she passed the win¬ dow, she looked at Mrs. Conway. A smile of complaisaney passed over her face; and Eleanor saw Mrs. Conway incline her head with a half-bow. —" So," thought she, " this is a preparatory introduction ; Mrs. Conway will not be easy until she effects an acquaintance with this lady, I
see." Mrs. Conway gazed after.her, un¬ til she turned out of the Grove, and then broke out again in her praises of this stranger, and with much delight spoke of the affability of her manners, " as she was sure," she added, " that she smiled to her as she passed." " Most probably, madam," replied Elea¬ nor, " she has observed you as much as you have her,, and it is her politeness which induces her to notice you in re¬ turn." " Oh, very likely so," returned Mrs. Conway; " perhaps she may wish as much as I do to be introduced to me. I am sure I should like her acquaintance vast¬ ly." Eleanor, though' she could not help owning the ease and elegance of her figure, was not so much taken with her as Mrs. Conway; there was a certain boldness about her that did not quite please Elea¬ nor, but which Mrs. Conway styled only as the effect of grace and fashion. d S
So much did this subject occupy the at¬ tention of Mrs. Conway, that all others were dismissed, and it was not until a few occasional visitors- camein, that the theme was changed, and the remainder of 1 the day spent in entertaining them. The time of Eleanor was now wholly engrossed, and passed on in a variety of amusements, which Mrs. Conway proposed for her gratification; and had not Elea¬ nor been the cherisher' of secret pangs, her hours would have passed on pleasant¬ ly. She frequently visited Mrs. Clifford, in whose society she took increasing de¬ light; she had also-met with Robert Glen¬ dinning there, who-had availed himself of their kind invitation, and was received as a welcome visitor by alh From him Elea¬ nor heard of the increasing indisposition of lady Glendinning; and she atldngth-re- quested that Mrs. Conway wouldtake her to St. James's-square. She immediately assented, though she declared "she w*ould sooner visit any body than lady Cecilia Gray; but as they could not see lady Glen-
dinning without, why of course she must. The carriage was therefore ordered, and Mrs. Conway and Eleanor stepping into it, were soon on their way to St. James's 1 . Varying sensations occupied the mind of Eleanor during their ride: the recep¬ tion which would be given her, and the thoughts of seeing lord Montalban—al! agitated her so much, that Mrs. Conway observed her agitation, and rallied her on the occasion. At length the carriage stopped, and Eleanor inquiring if she could see lady Glendinning, they were shewn into the parlour; and on sending up their names, Georgina came doWn to them her¬ self, and kindly Welcomed both, and in¬ vited them to the drawing-room, where she said lady Glendinning was, who, though very ill indeed, had come down for a short time to see a friend. " Has her ladyship company with her ?" said Eleanor; " perhaps she is engaged at present." " Ohj no," replied Georgina; " mamma
is loo ill to see company; she has only an old acquaintance with her, and will be glad to see you;" saying which, she led the way up stairs to the drawing-room, where Eleanor beheld ladies Cecilia Gray and Lenox, and on a sofa reclined lady Glendinning, whose altered appearance shocked Eleanor extremely. Her cheeks were pale, her eyes had lost their lustre, and her form was wasted. Close by her side sat a gentleman, who was apparently attending upon her ladyship with great tenderness, and to whom they were intro¬ duced by the name of colonel Bellingham. He arose on the entrance of the ladies, and bowed to them %vith much politeness. Lady Cecilia arid lady Lenox coldly spoke to them. Eleanor trembled; she glanced her eyes around; lord Montalban was not in the room ; this gave her more courage, and she hastily advanced towards lady Glendinning, who took her proffered hand, at the same time telling her she w r as glad to see her.
Eleanor expressed her sorrow at her vi¬ sible indisposition, as her looks so plainly indicated. Her ladyship replied, that she was very much out of health, but trusted she should soon recover. ." Perhaps, madam," cried colonel Bel- lingham, addressing Eleanor," you may possess influence enough to persuade her ladyship to have medical advice called in, which she persists -. at present in refusing. Not all my entreaties, nor her friends wishes, can yet have any effect." .-.■■;.. " I hope her ladyship will see the ne¬ cessity of complying- with those wishes," replied Eleanor;, ''most earnestly, sir, would I add my entreaties to that effect, if it will have any avail." , .; , : " There cannot be the least occasion for all this,'! cried lady Lenox; "if lady Glen¬ dinning will not take the advice of .her mother, and the friends:about her, it is pf no avail talking to other people about it." ..." ,;,..;.
Eleanor could not refrain from looking indignantly on her at this rude speech. She saw Mrs. Conway was greatly irritat¬ ed, the colour mounted in her face, as, in a tone of asperity, she exclaimed—" Why, lady Lenox, sometimes we are alpt to take the advice of other people, as you style it; sooner than those near to vis. However, in the present instance, lady Glendinning would be only yielding to the wishes of a very near part of her fa¬ mily. As her ladyship's niece, Miss Ele¬ anor mustof course feel interested in her welfare;-—" " As who would not," interrupted the colonel; " for my part, J own I am parti¬ cularly interested. It really unmans me, to behold so much worth and loveliness a martyr to ill health, brought on, I fear, more by mental sufferings than any other cause!" ' He spoke* this in rather a low key; and rising to the window, appeared as if l hid¬ ing his emotion.
Eleanor observed all this with much surprise; who was this colonel Bellingham, she much wondered. Lady Glendinning looked earnestly at him. A slight colour mantled in her cheek as she exclaimed---" Pray do not make so much serious discussion upon* so trivial a subject. I am not so (obstinate as to decline the entreaties of my friends, and, to oblige all parties, I will certainly see a physician." " There/' cried Mi's. Conway, who was resolved to plague lady Lenox, " there, I thought Eleanor would have influence with her ladyship-rafter all, I am generally right in my conjectures." Lady Glendinning smiled* i A dead pause succeeded, as ladies Ce¬ cilia and Lenox were both too awgryito speak. It was with much astonishment that Eleanor beheld the visible alteration in the whole appearance of lady .Glefldiimircg, who, sinking beneath the pressure of a lingering malady, appeared tfio longer the
same being; the pride and haughtiness of her. character were now lost in a soft lan¬ guor, and those eyes, which, a few months since, had darted scorn and pride around, .were now sunk in mental debility; yet the change appeared for the better, and lady Glendinning, suffering under the effects of indisposition, was now really and irresist¬ ibly fascinating and lovely. The first that broke the long silence was Mrs. Conway, who inquired after lord Montalban and Robert, and was informed they were out together; and Eleanor al¬ most felt glad that they did not return while she staid, as she knew that on see¬ ing lord Montalban, she should feel ex¬ tremely agitated. Mrs. Conway, who hated to be in the presence of the two elder ladies, soon pro¬ posed their departure. Lady Glendinning pressed their stay ; but lady Cecilia, whose real place it was to invite them, remained in perfect silence; they therefore arose in order to depart.. Eleanor thought lady Glendinning look-
ed vexed and disconcerted, as, taking her hand, she expressed her hopes that she would soon come and see her again, and make a longer stay. Eleanor replied, that she should be most happy to comply with her wishes, if it would prove agreeable; and added, if she could in any way be' of service to her lady¬ ship during her indisposition, she would be most ready to attend her night and day —to sit up with her, if she required it, and to add to her comforts. Lady Georgina pressed her hand.— " You are a kind good girl," she cried, "and I thank you; but you are better where you are, for many reasons." She added, in a low voice—" I think you" will be more comfortable with Mrs. Conway than under this roof." She drew Eleanor still nearer to her, and looking cautiously around, as if fearful of being heard by any one else, she continued—" Tell me, Ele¬ anor, if you have heard from lord Arthur yet." Eleanor started, as she replied in the
negative> adding, that as lord Arthur was in ignorance 6f her residing with Mrs. Conway, that his letters would of course be directed there, and begged, that if any came b they might be forwarded to her; at the' same time she inquired if she should Write to lord Arthur, and acquaint him with her ladyship's illness. She hastily shook her head.—" To what purpose Would it be," she replied, " to ac¬ quaint him ?" She stopped, as colonel Bellingham ad^- vanced towards her. Eleanor saw plainly that he was endeavouring to catch their conversation, and she therefore dropped the subject, and, with Mrs. Conway, re- tired'from the room; and entering the car¬ riage, their discourse naturally turned upon the company they had just left. Much wonder was excited by the be¬ haviour of colonel Bellingham, and Mrs. Cortway made many inquiries concerning him, which Eleanor could hot however answer, as she did not recollect even ever hearing his name before; and they
were mutually surprised at his being styl¬ ed as so old a friend of her ladyship's. And, now, supposing our readers are un¬ der the same impression of curiosity, we shall give them some information respect¬ ing him, and throw a light on the subject of his acquaintance with lady Glendinning.
CHAPTER IV.
«< ------ ■ ---------- His demand Springs, not from well-meant honest love, But from deceit bred by necessity." Colonel Belhngham was the descendant of a noble and wealthy family, but being only the second son, the title and estates of his father, of course, devolved upon his elder brother; but, in every other respect, young Bellingham was made ample amends; the most liberal provision was settled upon him, and he had received an education worthy the son of a nobleman. In his early youth he displayed symptoms of an extravagant disposition, and large demands were often made on the purse of his father, who still forgave his follies, and treated him with the greatest kindness; but wishing, if possible, to settle him in some way of life, he informed him it was
necessary to make choice of some profes¬ sion, by which he could maintain himself as a gentleman. Young Bellingham was however of too gay a turn to settle in any thing sedate, and after some little consideration, he made choice of the army ; not because his bosom glowed with ardour in his country's cause, or that he was ambitious of drawing his sword in her defence; on the contrary, the gaiety to which he had been occasion¬ ally witness among young officers of rank, suited his ideas, and the parade of show, mess dinners, &c. were to him induce¬ ments irresistible, and accordingly a com¬ mission was purchased for him. His career of fashionable depravity was now unbounded, and the gay captain Bel¬ lingham was every where the rage. His person and figure were handsome, added to which, he possessed the advantages of a polished education, and could, when he chose, assume manners the most pleasing and fascinating. Many a female heart had been surrendered to the captain, but
he was of too volatile a disposition to make a serious choice; and he at length bore the character of a general lover, as each new face attracted his attention. - At this period it was that lord and lady Lenox visited London with their family; and, as will be remembered, lady Geor¬ gina, previous to her union with lord Ar¬ thur Glendinning, was every where the object of universal attraction, and received many noble offers, all of which she imme¬ diately refused. Captain Bellingham, then in his one- and-twentieth year, was by chance intro¬ duced to her, and on a farther acquaint¬ ance, found himself so captivated with her, that he really felt a ray of that passion, of which he had before only pretended. Lady Georgma was pleased with his agreeable address, and passed much of her time in his company; and it at length be¬ gan to be whispered that it would prove a match. The father of the captain was delighted at the prospect of' his son's settling with
so charming a woman, and- did all in his power to promote it. The qaptain was however artful' enough to arrange plans, in his own mind, for the completion of his wishes, for he really now found his heart enslaved; but he sawi the pride attending on the character of lady Georgina, he had witnessed the instant rejection, on her part, of those lovers who had offered themselves, and he was re¬ solved, as he imagined, not to be treated in the same way; he therefore took every pains to render himself agreeable to her s to pay her the most unbounded attention, and yet never spoke to her on love, re¬ solving thus to ensnare her affections, be^ fore she was aware of it, and eventually, secure himself a favourable compliance on Uer part. His companions rallied him on the sub¬ ject, at the same time telling him he would never succeed, and doubtless share the same fate as her other lovers. This piqued him, and he determined now to gain her, and triumph over the rejected party. Had
he not even loved her, at all, this idea would have proved a sufficient stimulus, as, to gain an object so universally sighed for, was a point too ambitious to be disre¬ garded by hira. The mode of conduct which he had adopted towards lady Georgina was ex¬ tremely agreeable to her, as she did not even suspect that it concealed a warmer sentiment, and it enabled her to pass her time in an agreeable manner, without supposing any mischief would ensue. She knew that the captain was gay, but she believed him honourable at heart, and she granted him her friendship without re¬ serve, and which he now mistook for the most impassioned regard; and at length believing himself perfectly secure as to his object, he took an opportunity of declaring his real sentiments, and laid his hand and fortune at her feet. The surprise of lady Georgina could only be equalled by his own at her beha¬ viour. " The same conduct marked her ac¬ tions as on former similar occasions. She
instantly gave him so decided a refusal, that even he, master as 'he was of all .per¬ suasion, could not urge her any farther on the subject. The same pride and scorn darted from her eyes, as had been describe ed by all her other rejected lovers ; and captain Bellingham found himself reduced to the same situation as those at whom he had laughed, and hoped to triumph over. Mortified, and stung to madness at this unexpected rejection, he instantly quitted the house; and, in a tone of disappoint¬ ment and rage, he acquainted his noble fa¬ ther of the failure of his hopes; who, much vexed at a circumstance from which he had hoped the reformation of his son would arise, resolved to take up the cause, and try what success he could obtain. For this purpose he waited on lord Lenox, and informed him of the wishes of his son. Lady Lenox was of course consulted, and she condescended to approve; fbrcap- tain Bellingham had insinuated himself so VOL. Ill, E
much into her good graces, by a little well-timed flattery, that she would have received him as her son-in-law. Lord and lady Lenox now spoke on the subject to lady Georgina; but the same conduct marked her as before—a positive rejection, without assigning any reason, was all they could get; and, though lady Lenox felt some disappointment, yet she immediately reconciled her mind to it, in the idea that her daughter was certainly entitled to look higher, and of course ought only to be matched with a title. Thus ihe affair dropped; captain Bel¬ lingham avoided meeting with lady Geor¬ gina, and plunged deeper and deeper into the vortex of dissipation. His gay associates soon beheld his non-intercourse with lady Georgina; and he was, as might be ex¬ pected, generally laughed at, as sharing the same fate as the former competitors. Some time after his disappointment, the regiment to which he belonged was quar¬ tered out at some distance from London ; and glad was the captain to quit a spot
where he had been so unsuccessful in love; and, without again seeing lady Georgina, he departed with his regiment Soon after this, lord and lady Lenox re¬ turned to Scotland, and, as will be remem¬ bered by our readers, earl Campbell im¬ mediately laid his proposals before them, and lady Georgina, who had so scornfully rejected all former offers, to their great surprise, unhesitatingly consented to ac¬ cept of the hand of lord Arthur Glendin¬ ning. Previous to their union, he made a tour round England, and at length arrived at the very place where captain Bcllingham was stationed; they were entirely strangers to each other, lord Arthur being unac¬ quainted with his attachment to liis in¬ tended bride; the captain was now in¬ dulging in all licentious excesses, and lord Arthur beheld his vices with abhorrence, and declined all the overtures which the captain made for his acquaintance. At length, finding it impossible to gain B2 '
liis friendship, he resolved to be revenged upon him, and meeting him one night at a tavern, the captain so grossly affronted him, that it was impossible to overlook it. High words ensued, a challenge was the consequence, and the next morning they met at a private spot, armed and alone. They fired together—captain Bellingham missed, but the arm of lord Arthur prov¬ ed triumphant; the ball had entered his an¬ tagonist's breast, and he fell to the ground, bleed ng profusely. Lord Arthur, who had been provoked to this act, felt all the horror of a true Christian at such a sight; rage instantly subsided, and humanity and compassion took its place; he flew to his side, he rais¬ ed him in his arms, and, to his great hor¬ ror, beheld him senseless; he bound his wound with his pocket-handkerchief, and spent some time vainly endeavouring to re¬ store animation. At length two considerations prevailed over his mind, his own personal safety, in case of the captain's death, and the neces-
sity of procuring surgical assistance; he therefore gently• laid him on the grass, and. hasteziing to th$ town, sought out a sur¬ geon, whom he desired to go immediately to the spot where he had left the captain, whom he asserted he had found in that si¬ tuation. He then, as quickly as possible, retreated, without exciting any suspicions, and immediately took measures for his own personal safety. On arriving at the place, the surgeon found the captain lying as had been de¬ scribed to him He saw, however, that life still remained, and that he had only fainted from excess of pain and loss of blood; he therefore had him conveyed by his attendants to his own house, where, in a short time, the captain recovered his senses, and was enabled to explain the nature of his wound. This of course he did with all due exaggeration, making lord Arthur the culpable party. It was soon seen that he was the person who had sent the surgeon to'his assist-
ELEAN0&. ance; and, as he declared the life of his patient to be in great danger, search was made after the unfortunate lord Arthur, of whom, however, no clue could be traced; and captain Bellingham, regardless of the affront he had put upon him, burned with fresh rage against him, at his having proved so triumphant; and he vowed the most im¬ plicit revenge against him, if his life was spared. It pleased Heaven to restore him, the ball was extracted, the surgeon was skilful, and, after a long confinement, the captain was restored. All attempts to find lord Arthur proved ineffectual; no information could be gain¬ ed respecting him, and years'rolled on, without granting captain Bellingham the revenge he wished; and the idea gradual¬ ly subsided in his bosom, until at length he by chance heard of the union' of lord Arthur with lady Georgina. This intel¬ ligence drove him into the most furious rage; that lie should again have triumphed
over him, was distraction, and, in the first moment of rage, he vowed to sacrifice him to his just fury. Lord Arthur, however, being stationed in Scotland, it did not immediately suit the captain to bend his steps thither; he was much taken up with his regiment, and still immerging into deeper follies; through the interest of his father, he had obtained the rank of a colonel, and during his life he was liberally supplied with large sums; but, on the decease of this worthy parent, he found great alteration in his affairs; it was true he was left a li¬ beral provision, but the riches of Peru would scarcely have supplied his extrava¬ gance, and he found his brother's purse not so ready or convenient a one as his late father's: thus his life had rolled away in continual dissipation, he was still the same dangerous character as ever, still pos¬ sessing the most pleasing exterior, and specious address; the years that had rolled on since his youth appeared more as an ornament, and at the period of lady Glen-
dinning arriving in London, with lady Cecilia Gray, the colonel was one of her gayest votaries. He now residing again in the purlieus of St. James's, it soon reached his ears that she had come unaccompanied by loi;d Ar¬ thur; his long dormant revenge now broke forth with redoubled sway, and he was resolved to make lady Glendinning tho instrument, Presuming on his good terms with lady Lenox, he sent his card, and was imme¬ diately admitted ; and* with all the art so inherent to his character, expressed his happiness at seeing her, and inquired after her daughter, alleging how much he wished to see her; and added, all past at¬ tachments had entirely subsided, and that he considered lady Glendinning only in the light of an old friend, to whom it would give him great pleasure to be intro¬ duced. Lady Lenox informed him of the ill state of her ladyship's health, but pro¬ mised he should see her; while the colonel
artfully .questioned her as to the happiness of lady Glendinning in the married state. With all the imprudence of an enraged> woman, lady Lenox openly commented on the ill treatment, as she styled it, of lord^ Arthur, whom she declared she now T al¬ most hated.; . This information was highly advantage-- ous to the colonel, who resolved to make lady Glendinning his prey—to possess him¬ self,of her, and thus revenge her former haughty refusal of him; and what was still more glorious, he should at length amply triumph over lord Arthur, in a way too- the most glorious of all—he should wound his honour, by tearing his wife from the pinnacle of virtue, and lowering her to the rank of the depraved and fallen of her sex, In this short interview, the abandoned. colonel gained sufficient knowledge, from' the imprudent lady Lenox, to lay all his future plans; and thus did this inconsider¬ ate mother, indulging in her spleen, assist in the means of destruction,for her daugh. e3
ter, for whose aggrandizement she was stilLso anxious. On the colonel being admitted to lady Glendinning, she certainly felt some little emotion; but his behaviour was so respect¬ ful, so void of offence, that unsuspecting his real designs, lady Glendinning felt really glad to see him. ' He beheld her no longer the proud'and scornful beauty. She was now suffering under mental and bodily debility, and none but a heart capable of the blackest designs could have marked out so inter¬ esting an object for his prey. Lady Glendinning had parted from lord Arthur under the impression of violent anger. He had neglected her, and wound¬ ed her by his coldness—the colonel w r as all attention and tenderness to her; and, un¬ used to tlie kindness of man, she felt the more grateful for his assiduities, particu¬ larly as he still kept the most proper bounds to his actions. Lady Glendinning daily got worse and
_ worse, yet her illness was not of a nature to confine her more than to her own dress¬ ing-room, to which lady Lenox admitted him, when she herself was present. He still contrived to keep on the best terms with her, and to lady Glendinning he became an amusing companion; he read to her, he conversed with her, and was* constantly by her side. It" was the colo¬ nel who was with her on the day sir Hen¬ ry and his party called at St. James's; and her ladyship at length found the com¬ pany of the colonel the only solace to her Wounded heart. > Thus a dangerous acquaintance was al¬ ready formed between them ; and the co¬ lonel at length dropped expressions of ten¬ derness, which could not but excite the alarm of lady Glendinning; still she did not j udge unfavourably of him. Her own bosom, notwithstanding the many in¬ stances which had appeared agamst her,, was the seat of purity and honour; but at present her virtues were buried in the waters of oblivion, and the unfortunate
lady Glendinning was now exposed to the artful designs of a villain; for such, with truth we must assert, was colonel Belling¬ ham.
CHAPTER V.,
" If you would avoid temptation,- Jly from its fascinating allurements j: Tis «■ lovely stream, Which bears upon its surface Embroidered flowers, crystal fountains, And verdant meads." . - ' On the second day after Mrs. Conway and 1 - Eleanor's visit to St. James's-square, lord Montalban was announced, and after pay¬ ing his compliments, he informed Eleanor that he was the bearer of a letter which lady Glendinning had entrusted to his' care, as he had with pleasure availed him¬ self, he added, of so pleasing an opportu¬ nity to see her. Eleanor turned pale as she took the let¬ ter from his hand, but glancing her eye on the superscription, she appeared relieved from her momentary embarrassment, and exclaimed that it was from lord Arthur.
« So her ladyship informed me," he re¬ plied, «* and as I conclude there may pro¬ bably be some message to his family, I shall, with pleasure, deliver rt to lady Glendinning," Eleanor thanked him, and withdrew to- the window^ to read it, while Mrs. Con¬ way entered into conversation with lord Montalban, as her curiosity had been greatly excited respecting colonel Belling¬ ham. She ventured to make some inqui¬ ries, to which his lordship could make no> other reply than by informing her that he had once been her ladyship's warm ad¬ mirer, but was now her respectful friend. ' Mrs. Conway smiled, and dropped some hints that her ladyship must be careful, as love renewed was sometimes very danger¬ ous, &c. Lord Montalban forbore any remarks on the subject, but proceeded to say, that her ladyship continued very much indis¬ posed, and that she had seen a physician, who pronounced her to be in a very low- and dangerous state. Her complaint was
now a nervous affection, and the doc¬ tor hinted his opinion, that it had been occasioned by mental anxiety, and a mind 1 ill at ease ; though of the truth of this as¬ sertion, he added, they could not vouch, as lady Glendinning persisted in a total si¬ lence on the subject; nor would she own to any one that she had cause for unhap¬ piness. ' ' " Why," replied Mrs. Conway, " I must say, that her ladyship is of so haugh¬ ty a disposition, that she will scarcely con¬ descend to be conversant with any one, much more own her griefs; but to be sure she inherits it from her mother, for lady Lenox I dislike much." " That lady Glendinning possesses what the world calls a proud spirit," returned lord Montalban, " I will allow; but in my humble opinion, it is also a noble one. Her ladyship, I am confident, has qualities, which, if called forth,, would doubtless pro\ e her to be a woman of ai* exalted disposition." " Oh, no doubt," cried Mrs. Conway; "far
be it from me to speak: disrespectfully of her ladyship; after the genteel treatment I experienced in her house, it would bev?ry ungrateful of me; I dare say she is a very good soitf of a lady at heart, as you ob~ serve." By this time Eleanor had finished read¬ ing her letter, which was from lord, Ar¬ thur, in answer to the one which she had written to him. It contained the kindest expressions of regard and apprehensions for her safety, and again warning her as to her conduct and pursuits while in Lon* don; he then concluded by desiring her ta> take upon herself the task of remembering him to his family, whom he hoped would also attend to his wishes and instructions. The language, though fraught with kindness, still bespoke the anguish of mind which evidently marked the whole demea¬ nour of lord Arthur; and Eleanor' again sighed as she reflected on the unhappy- state into which he had plunged. himself, and a thousand ideas respecting him crowd¬ ed upon her imagination; she however
roused herself, and reflecting that most probably lady Glendinning would like ta know the contents of his letter, she took a pen, and addressed a few lines to her lady¬ ship, enclosing lord Arthur's letter for her perusal. With this she troubled lord Mont¬ alban, who expressed himself happy to oblige her. He staid with them great.part of the morning; and though he couldnot openly avow himself to Eleanor in the pre¬ sence of Mrs. Conway, yet every action marked the lover;.and on his departure he promised very soon to repeat his visit. Eleanor found her lime completely oc¬ cupied with Mrs. Conway, who had either company at home, or paying visits almost every day. Mr. Crosby spent a great deal of time with them, and appeared to grow so fond of Eleanor, that he was never so happy as when by her side. He gradually lost his asperity and moroseness, and his behaviour to her was tender and affectionate; while Eleanor^ on her part, felt an affection for,
him almost parental. Mrs. Clifford she, also frequently visited, and each time she saw her, added to the regard which she cherished for her, and which indeed seem¬ ed truly reciprocal, for Mrs. Clifford ap¬ peared never so happy as when she had her with her. Georgina had also com¬ plied with her promise of visiting her, and had, w)th her brother Robert, dined at Brixton on this occasion. Mr. Wil¬ liam Conway had also contrived to call on Mrs. Clifford, and the party appeared mu¬ tually pleased with each other; and while the rest were conversing together, Mrs. Clifford would draw Eleanor aside, and take much delight in talking with her re¬ specting the plains of Scotland, where, she said, in her younger days, she had passed much of her time. Of lord Arthur's fa¬ mily she asked many questions, and at length inquired if Mr. Charles Lenox was still living 3 Eleanor replied in the affirmative^, and commented, in warm terms, on his kindV
ness towards herself, and the interest he had taken in her welfare, supposing her to be the child of lady Frances. Mrs. Clifford appeared to take great in¬ terest in this communication, and again asked if he was single, or whether he had ever entered into the married state ? Eleanor replied in the negative; while Georgina, who had overheard this ques¬ tion, exclaimed—" Who's that you are talking about? is it my uncle Charles ? If so, I can tell you he is a decided old ba¬ chelor. He has always remained single for the sake of lady Frances, and now intends still to continue so for the good of Eleanor, resolving to make her his heiress, for the sake of her mother." " Generous man!" involuntarily cried Mrs. Clifford, while a tear evidently dim* med her eye. They looked at her with surprise, but to avoid further remark, she walked to the other part of the room, and entered into general conversation with the rest of'the company, The more Eleanor saw of her, the more
she was surprised. That Mrs. Clifford took great intei^st in, the family of Glen¬ dinning, w T as evident, and the likeness she bore towards her was a matter of much wonder to Eleanor, who entertained many vague conjectures in her own mind, but which, however,were too obscure to reveal; certain it was, that in this short time she felt as much attached to Mrs. Clifford as if the closest ties had united them; and whenever she could make it agreeable to Mrs. Conway'» engagements, she always passed her time there. Her attention was, however, soon called forth to another ob¬ ject, which at once brought Mrs. Conway to the height of her wishes. One morning, after breakfast, the wea¬ ther being uncommonly beautiful, Mrs. Conway proposed to take a short walk to the top of the Grove, with which Eleanor instantly complied; and tying on her straw hat, and throwing a silk plaid across her shoulders, she took the arm of Mrs. Conway, and they commenced their walk. The beautiful prospect before them
had a thousand charms to the eye of Elea¬ nor, who delighted to behold the works of nature, which, on reaching the top of the Grove, is admirably displayed. Every thing looked lovely around; and Eleanor still lingered in the various walks, point¬ ing out fresh beauties which she discover- ed, until at length Mrs. Conway declared she began to get tired, and the sun was getting so hot that they must return to their house. Eleanor of course assented, and they proceeded down the Grove; and, about half-w r ay up, Mrs. Conway discerned her unknown lady coming on horseback. She joyfully communicated this intelligence to Eleanor, and resolv¬ ed, in her own mind, to make a full curt¬ sey as she passed, which, of course, she thought would be returned. Fortune, how¬ ever, happening to be in a complying hu¬ mour to the votary of folly, caused a tri¬ fling circumstance to occur, which gave to Mrs. Conway the long-wished-for intro¬ duction. Before they had quite met, the lady sud-
denly stopped her horse, and putting her hand to her eye, appeared labouring under some uneasiness. The grooms rode up to her; and Mrsr Conway, hastening her steps, heard one of them, in a respectful manner, inquire if he should procure her some water; to which she replied in the affirmative, but added—" I do not know how you can get any, unless some¬ body would be so kind as to give you some at one of tliere houses." This was enough for the delighted Mrs. Conway, who immediately inquired if the lady was ill, adding, that her house was at her service, if she would honour it. The stranger, looking up, and seeing Mrs. Conway, gracefully thanked her, al¬ leging that the wind had blown some dust into her eye, which gave her so much pain, she could not proceed; she therefore thankfully accepted of her offer; and dis¬ mounting, and resigning her horse to the care of the groom, walked with Mrs. Con¬ way into her house; and being ushered up with great ceremony into the drawing-
room, Mrs. Conway rang for a bason of water. The lady poured out an effusion of thanks for her kindness, and it was evi¬ dent that the pain she had evinced was real, as the drops ran from her eyes in quick succession ; and it was not until af¬ ter some time that she could cleanse away the dust, which had much hurt her sight. Eleanor, ever humane and attentive to any one in distress, had also offered her as¬ sistance ; anci as tiie jaoy recovered from the pain, she addressed Mrs. Conway and Eleanor in the most affable terms, ex¬ pressing her sense of their kindness, which, she added, sh-. N hoped to have the honour of returning, by begging they would con¬ descend to visit her humble roof, with which, if they complied, she should ever rejoice at a trifling disaster, that had given her the pleasure of an introduction for which she had long wished ; " for," added she, " in my morning rides down this de¬ lightful spot, I have always noticed your elegant abode, which so truly evinces the taste of its mistress."
Eleanor bowed; while the delighted Mrs. Conway assured her of the pleasure it would give her in commencing an ac¬ quaintance for which she had long wished* at the same time pouring out an effusion of compliments; while the lady, drawing some cards out of a beautiful little case* presented one to each; and Mrs. Conway, with inward exultation, read—" The ho¬ nourable Miss Hargrave, Woodbine Cot¬ tage, Peckham-llye." Convinced now of the rank of her guest, Mrs. Conway cast a look of exultation on Eleanor, who had also perused her card, and she now became confirmed in the opi¬ nion which she had before formed, name¬ ly, that Miss Hargrave was a lady of great fashion and gaiety; her manners evinced a complete knowledge of the world, and her conversation was certainly easy and graceful. In a short time she and Mrs. Conway appeared as much acquainted as if they had known each other for years; and Mrs.. Conway had soon informed her of the par-.
ticulars of her stolen wedding, her recep¬ tion" at lord Arthur's in Scotland, aud her pleasure at having Miss Glendinning as her guest. Mrs. Conway took great de¬ light in introducing Eleanor as the niece of lord Arthur, and spoke of their visits to St. James's square, asking Miss Har¬ grave if she were acquainted with lady Cecilia Gray, &c &c? thus, as she thought, shewing she was in the habits of visiting with titles, as she considered Miss Har¬ grave now as great as those. Miss Hargrave replied in the negative, adding, that she had passed the greatest part of her life in the country ; but on her coming of age, she had quitted the abode qf lier guardian, andflown to the fascinating amusements of London, for which she owned she had the greatest relish, though at the same time she made her residence away from the noise and bustle of the metropolis, but at so easy a distance, that she could partake of the pleasures of town, and also enjoy the pure air of the country. vol. ill. f
Mrs. Conway, qf course, admired her taste, which, she said, was so similar to her own; and then ventured to inquire if she had lost her parents, as she had mentioned her residence with a guardian ? Miss Hargrave sighed as she replie d she was an orphan, and had no relations in town. . Eleanor'observed a gloom pass over her face as she spoke, and her own feeling heart instantly commiserated her suffer¬ ings, as she concluded the loss she had sus¬ tained affected her too much to conceal. - Miss Hargrave, however, instantly re¬ covered herself: her eyes now reassnmed their lustre, and the most fascinating smile adorned her dimpled chin. There was so penetrating a glance in her piercing eyes, that Eleanor could scarcely bear her gaze; and though she certainly admired the beau¬ ty and elgance of her face and figure, yet there was a something about her, that did not altogether please the pure bosom of Eleanor; while Mrs. Conway seemed ab¬ solutely charmed with her gaiety and fa-
shion. She at length desired that the horses might be called, as she must tear herself away, alleging she had many en¬ gagements, and at night, she added, she was going to a masquerade at the Opera- House, and asked JMrs. Conway if she should be there ? " Dear me! no," she replied; " I did not know there was to be one to-night, or I should have liked it of all things, for I never was at a masquerade in all my life." " Indeed !" returned Miss Hargrave; " they are my delight—I dote on the very name-—I seem to exist, to have a new life in the delights of a mask and disguise. Why, how is it possible, my dear Mrs. Conway, that you have never yet resorted to a scene with which I am sure your taste and spirits, so w ell accord ?!' a « Really I don't know-how it has hap : pened," replied she, " but I never had tickets offered^ me,-1 suppose." , v< And perhaps- then; Miss Glendinning,
you have never partaken of such an amuse¬ ment ?" inquired Miss Hargrave. " No, madam," replied Eleanor, " I ne¬ ver did; I am not a votary of fashion; I have ever led a calm domestic life in Scot¬ land, and have not an inclination for such amusements." ** Astonishing!" cvied Miss Hargrave. " Why I should ha-, e thought your heart would have panted for such a scene. Po¬ sitively you shall go to one; I will cha¬ peron you. What say you, Mrs. Conway ? shall I endeavour to procure you tickets for to-night?" ""Why really," replied Mrs. Conway, " your offer is so kind and genteel, that I hardly know how to refuse it. But I am afraid there will hardly be time to procure dresses." " Oh, yes, there will," she cried. " You can go in dominos; I will send my ser¬ vant to town for two directly." During this conversation, Eleanor had brought 'to mind the advice ;and warning of lord Arthur on her leaving Scotland.
Temptation appeared to be standing before her; she recollected his description of it, and, with a firm mind, she resolved to fly from its allurements—*' Pardon me, madam," she cried, addressing Miss Hargrave, " if I appear guilty of rudeness in refusing your kind offer, hut from, the description which I have heard of a public masque¬ rade, I should not choose to gOj unless lord Arthur were present to sanction it. I , can only thank you, madam, for your po¬ liteness, but I must decline it. Let not? my refusal though have any weight with you, Mrs. Conway," she added, " as you certainly are mistress of your own actions, and I will, with pleasure, remain at home during your absence." Miss Hargrave fixed her penetrating glance upon Eleanor—** You really sur¬ prise me," she cried; w but act as you please, though a little introduction into the fashionable world wiU soon remove those fears from your bosom; and I shall, with pleasure, initiate, you into them." " Never, I hope," mentaUy sighed Elea-
nor, but she forbore io reply; while Miss Hargrave again asked Mrs. Conway, whe¬ ther she would accompany her ? Mrs. ConWay however had prudence sufficient to refuse, as Eleanor was not inclined to go, and pleaded the shortness of the time as her excuse. Miss Hargrave accepted of it, and added, that she would take care to inform her of the next in time, when She hoped that Miss Glendinning would have laid aside her fears, and accompany them also. Mrs. Conway now inquired as to what dress Miss Hargrave intending wearing. She replied, that she had for that even¬ ing chosen a very humble one, as she was going as a ballad-singer. Mrs. Conway told her, that was ac¬ knowledging that she possessed a beauti¬ ful voice, and said how much she should like to see and hear her. She replied, she should be happy to gra¬ tify her, and would certainly exert her ta¬ lents at any time; and as to her dress, she would shew it her the first time she would
honouvher with a visit, which she hoped would be very soon. Mrs. Ccnway replied, that Miss Glen¬ dinning and she would do themselves the pleasure of calling on her the next day, and inquire how she found herself after her fatigue. Miss Hargrave thanked her in the warmest terms, adding, that she took it as a proof jof her promised friendship, and begged they would do her the pleasure of dining with her. Mrs. Conway replied, that they certain¬ ly would at some future opportunity; but as she would doubtless be fatigued after the masquerade, they would only give her a morning call; and that must not be too early, she supposed, or she should not find her risen. » Miss' Hargrave smiled, and said she would give orders to see them, and rise, if she were not up; and once more asked Mrs. Conway if she would allow her to send for a dress for herself as she dare say
she cduld gel/ the friend with whom she was going to get a ticket for her. Mrs. Conway, in rather a reluctant tone, declined, though Eleanor saw she had half a-mind, • i* ' . Miss Hargrave however now took her leave, and once more thanking them for their extreme kindness to her, she left the room; while Mrs. Conway came half way down the stairs with her,- and expatiated 6n the pleasant exercise of riding on horse¬ back, &c. Miss Hargrave replied, that it was her favourite amusement, and that she gene¬ rally made her morning ride from her house down to Camberwell, and up the Grove, and back, as she much admired so charm¬ ing a spot. She then once more bade adieu to Mrs. Conway, who returned to the drawing-room window, time enough to kiss her liahd to Miss Hargrave as she rode down the Grove. " Well," cried Mrs. Conway, " is not this a fortunate introduction ? I told you
she was a person of consequence.' What a charming woman she is! She will prove quite an acquisition during the absence of Mr. Conway, and will be a good compa¬ nion to escort us about." Eleanor smiled, but made no reply, as her sentiments were not quite in unison. " I should much have liked to" have gone to the masquerade to-night," re¬ sumed Mrs. Conway. " It was very po¬ lite of her to offer to send to town for dresses for us; I think I should ruTvebeen tempted, only you seemed so averse to it." " I am sorry, madam," replied Eleanor, " if I have been the means of depriving you of any amusement; but indeed it did not meet the ideas which I have formed respecting the promises I gave to lord Ar¬ thur, who, 1 know, would be angry at my going to such a place without a protector." Mrs. Conway could not refute her ar¬ guments, but added, that all genteel people went to such places*' 'and that she would certainly go some time or other. f S
This circumstance had now so completely engrossed the attention of Mrs. Conway, that she could think nor talk of. nothing else; and Eleanor was 1 glad to make an excuse of writing to lord Arthur, as a means of obtaining a little cessation from the theme; and retiring to her own room, she sat down to write, in order to answer the letter of lord Arthur, in which she in¬ formed him of her present residence, and of the indisposition of lady Glendinning, whom she described as labouring under evident bodily and mental sufferings; she likewise addressed him, in the most affec¬ tionate terms, respecting his own health, and begged he would remember her most grateful regards to Mr. Charles Lenox, whose kindness, she added, she should hope to deserve. She had scarcely time to finish her letter before dinner; and on go¬ ing down, she found Mr. Crosby, who was listening to Mrs. Conway's description of he?* new acquaintance, and exultingly shewed him her card. Mr. Crosby heard her in silence, and al-
most indifference, until she informed him of her inviting, herself and Eleanor u to ac¬ company her to the masquerade, hut that Eleanor t .refused—" She was. right," ex- claimed^r. Crosby; "she would have disappointed rae in my opinion of her if she had gone. Eleanor," he continued, " Eleanor at a masquerade! what should innocence and virtue do there ?" , « Lord! Mr.. Crosby," said Mrs, Con¬ way, "do you mean,to assert that,every body who goes to a masquerade are bad sort of people? A pretty compliment .. indeed you pay to many of our ladies of fashion, who, though truly good and vir¬ tuous, frequent such places!" " I mean to assert, madam," replied he, " that such persons are better away, for a virtuous woman should not expose her¬ self to such scenes of temptation, lest it should eventually tend to lead her mind to the same species of dissipation practised by those whose principles are unfortunate¬ ly perverted by fashion and folly; and at a masquerade, you must allow, charac-
•teifc fere 'to*be found bf ev**ry description; and better,!-say, will it be if Eleanor re¬ mains in -ignorance of such a scene." Mr£ Conway, as i iisual,^cdfttended ihe point; ' and as Mr. Crosby and she seldom agreed on any subject, an argument fol¬ lowed.' r Mr. Crosby condemned Miss Har¬ grave as a mere votary of fashion. From this circumstance, Mrs. Conway was en¬ raged. ' Eleanor endeavoured to draw the medium between both parties, and suc¬ ceeded in restoring amity between them ; and tne day, to Mrs. Conway, slowly ap¬ peared to move on, so impatient was she for the coming of the next, anticipating the pleasure and gratification she should experience in paying a visit to Woodbine Cottage, the charming abode, as she thought it must be, of the elegant and fas¬ cinating Miss Hargrave/
* CHAPTER VI. ^ ■, , Sweet Sohtudo ! thou hast chaims to me ' Unknown to those who court the woild's false gaiety; Thy peaceful joys I seek with eager care, And comfort find, though plung'd m deep despair; Thy charms, oh, Solitude ! still are mine, To thee I yield iny soul, my mind to thee resign. Ihe Authoi. Look ! a here it goes now; even out of the portal. SUAkESPEAUK i j Lord Arthur Glendinning, since the de¬ parture of his family from Scotland, had closely resigned himself to' his favourite solitude, and, if it may be so expressed^ more fully enjoyed it; by not having so many observers on his conduct, he was enabled to take a wider range round the environs of St. Michael's, and freely in¬ dulge in those meditations which absorb¬ ed his soul. The absence of Eleanor was of great grief to him, and could he but
have had her society, he flattered himself he should have been happier; but in this instance iady.Glendinning had proved re¬ solute, and.in consequence of this he had severely reprimanded her; they had part¬ ed in anger, and apparently at variance; he considered that a breach was formed between them, never more perhaps to be closed in amity; she was dpubtless, en¬ gaged in those scenes of dissipation, which he considered as congenial to her mind; he had therefore scarcely any concern about her. It was true-she was his wife, and the mother Of his children, but she had never been exactly the woman of his choice. He had please^ a^father—-he had oteyed his wishes^ and murdered his own happiness. His son and daughter were doubtless well pleased with their excursion; his fears were therefore for Eleanor alone; she, he knew, was the child of sorrow; exposed to the persecutions of her enemies, and taken from his protection, he trembled for her peace. On her departure, every acute sensation appeared to take possession of his breast, as
she entered-iritQ the' carriage zvhich was to conduct her away.i He repaired ( to his window,, and on losing sight of her, he sunk on a seat, overwhelmed t with melan¬ choly sensations, and'remained in that state until the return of Charles * Lenox, who kindly sought to cheer his drooping spirits. He related to him the particulars of her reception at B------ House, and liis own declaration of making her a " bachelor's heiress." Lord Arthur seized his hand, and with a warmth which bespoke the interest he took for Eleanor, poured forth a torrent of thanks. Charles then reverted to lord Montal¬ ban, and with delicacy hinted his opinion, that his lordship's affections were more hers than his niece Georgina's, and asked the advice of lord Arthur under such par¬ ticular > circumstances, as, though he said he certainly felt for the honour of his fa¬ mily, yet it could not conduce tq the hap¬ piness of Georgina to marry a man whose heart was another's.
" liOrd Arthur coincided in this opinion, and candidly acknowledged his wishes in that respect, but at the same time inform- ed J him of lord Montalban's behaviour to 'him, when he had given him so much en¬ couragement to open his real sentiments with regard to Eleanor. Charles Lenox was astonished;' he still believed that he.regarded her with the most ardent affection, and added, he was sorry his lordship should have used such dissimulation. They were, however, partly aware that lord Montalban was under painful restric¬ tions for the sake of his father. Lord Ar¬ thur felt the force of this. He had de¬ voted himself for the sake of a parent; and he rosolved, if possible, to save lord Montalban from becoming another sacri¬ fice ; and though he could not own to Charles the real reason which prompted him to feel so much for lord Montalban, yet he agreed with him, if'possible, to unite him to Eleanor; for that she also regarded him, they were perfectly con-
vinced;- and on their return to Scotland, they resolved to Use their joint- efforts to secure their happiness^ '-i ^ v ; Charles also; endeavoured to divert lord Arthur's melancholy, and frequently, in¬ vited him to join again with society ; but rinding entreaties vain,- he resigned his fruitless efforts, and left him to his only comfbrtof solitude.' He now frequently left the e^stle,:and wandered about unseen^ and his,actions consequently unnoticed,, at least by hu¬ man eyes! In,the calm of the evening,, he would: Wander to the sea-side, or some-: times stroll to the village, Where he would stand and gaze on the spot where the dread¬ ful conflagration had been,- and which was not yet quite repaired. .Often did he in¬ quirei.if tlie female, v/ho had been so mira¬ culously preserved by lord Montalban,. had ever since been heard of ? He was constantly answered in the negative; nor could he ever gain any information, of her. He heard by chance that her name was Mrs. Hamilton; but the people with
whom she had lived at the time of the fire, knew nothing more of her than that she was a woman of the most amiable charac¬ ter, and they regretted her loss extremely. - Lord Arthur sighed as he turned away from his informant, and wandered al¬ most unconsciously to the rocks by the sea-side. The sun was just sinking, and reflected its radiant beams on the waves. Lord. Arthur cast a wistful look over the wide expanse, which now, alas! divided him from Eleaaor. He mentally breath¬ ed a prayer for her safety, and invoked a blessing upon her head from that Power whom he dared to address in her behalf. For his own peace he could scarcely dare to pray; a pang harassed his mind, which, alas! no time could erase; one guilty ac¬ tion had for ever sealed his fate in misery and despair. The hour, the deed, was passed; but memory dipped her barbed arrows deep in the inmost recesses of his heaifc, and marked him as a prey to grief, secret and desponding. He felt his own dereliction from honour, for which he was
severely,punished. He was unworthy of Divine protection; j but for his .Eleanor he prayed with confidence and hope; ,she was innocent, and he fondly traced in imagina¬ tion/the youthful beauties,which adorned her glowing cheek—" All good angels guard her!", he exclaimed aloud,. "and guide her safe to these, arms in,all her native purity and truth! All earth is.still; every breeze seems lulled to peace; and I alone am wan¬ dering and wretched; perhaps my. Elea¬ nor is likewise retiring from the noise and bustle of fashionable riot, and seeking in the silence of night a short respite from her wees ; how applicable," he continued, " are the words of a noble poet * to my feelings! with thee I can exclaim-----. Child of love, though horn in bitterness, Sweet he thy slumbers ! O'er tiie sea, And from tlie mountains where 1 now rospir*, Fain would I waft such blessings, upon rhr.«. As, with « sif-h, T deem thou might'st have been to me. " How congenial ,is solitude to the trou* bled mind!" added lord Arthur; "here * Loid Byp'»n. ' ' "
no eyes are on me, save that One> that aw¬ ful One, from whose glance no human be¬ ing can escape; hidden from all but that, 1 can freely breathe^—here can I acknow¬ ledge the errors of my soul, and give to the passing winds my sorrows; they re¬ gard me not; nor can I seek for pity in the flinty rocks, which hang in massy grandeur o'er my head." He paused, as raising his eyes as he spoke, he beheld a female figure on one of the projections. She was evidently in the attitude of kneeling; her hands were clasped together; her flowing drapery waved carelessly around her, wafted by the evening breeze, and gave her more the appearance of a sylph than of a human being. Slowly she arose; and turning her face full upon where lord Arthur stood, almost transfixed with surprise, her eyes met his; a loud scream burst from her lips as she darted down the precipice, un- heeuful of danger. Before lord Arthur could have power to move from the spot —" Almighty Powers!" he exclaimed,
" it is she Zierselfl That face, that form —it is no longer delusion ! Oh! stay," he cried; "ily me not! in mercy speak to me!" He remained motionless for a few mo¬ ments, as if expecting a reappearance of that form, which had thus evidently agi¬ tated him ; but no sound was to be heard, or a creature seen: in an agony of disap¬ pointment, he rushed from the spot where he had stood, and darted up the various projections of the rock; he searched every aperture, but in vain; the object of his search was no where to be found—'* She has again eluded me," he cried, in a tone of bitter disappointment; *• she baffles every endeavour I make to catch her; yet," he continued, raising his hand dis¬ tractedly to his head, " what is it I would pursue ? a fleeting vision, a phantom, who only appears to torment me; for has not the cold ground long since received her mouldering form, while I, her murderer, alone drag on a wretched existence on earth,? Yes, spirit of an ill-fated being!
thou art revenged; Glendinning is the slave of torture, while thou, released from his grasp, repose in peace, or at least only quit thy heavenly confines to strike the guilty breast of thy destroyer with dismay and horror."* Overcome by the violence of liis own feelings, lord Arthur sunk down exhaust¬ ed, and for some time he lay in a state of stupor. The cold chill ot night seized him; he looked about, and found it was dark ;' a sense of his danger aroused him, at the top nearly of so stupendous a rock, unac¬ quainted with its turns, from which, if he varied, destruction was certain. lie shud¬ dered; and though life, a few moments previous, had seemed a burden, yet the love of it, so natural in the hour of danger, returned with double ardour, and with cautious steps he bent his way, and almost miraculously arrived in safety at the bot¬ tom ; and in a state of mind bordering on distraction, he reached the Castle of St. Michael. ! •■ ' Sad and' heavily passed the succeeding
hours; his mind became more and more disturbed, and in 'his siate he answered the epistle of Eleanor, and in dictating the language of affection to her, he alone de¬ rived comfort. Earl Campbell, almost now sinking with the weight of years, and visibly declining towards the end of all nature, beheld, with anguish at heart, the miserable state of his son—that son whose peace he had sacrificed by his ambitious hopes; and that title, of which he had been so proud, would, on his death, descend to one, now incapable of keeping up its ancient dignity, until years should roll away, and in general succession the young Robert Glendinning might re¬ trieve the fallen grandeur of their house. A general gloom pervaded the Castle of St. Michael's, its two noble masters closely secluding themselves, one on ac¬ count of age and infirmities, the other in¬ capable of partaking in the social delights of society. The rocks were now the constant resort of lord Arthur, hoping, yet dreading to
behold the appearance of that form which had struck such agony to his soul, ,1-lis wishes were not gratified; and when he gazed on the almost-inaccessible points of Mie flinty rock, he persuaded himself that it .must have been his fancy only, and that no female could brave such dangers; and after gazing in contemplative awe, he would return melancholy and dejected to St. Michael's. But here, alas! fresh per¬ plexities awaited him. The general gloom which prevailed around the walls at length disturbed the minds of.the domestics; su¬ perstitious terror began to .steal over their senses, and every fancied noise was con¬ strued into the most fearful causes. Ap¬ paritions were now declared to walk in so¬ lemn silence along the gloomy corridors of .the castle, and mouldering forms, which had lpng:since slept in peace, were now, by the, imagination of the servants^oused from their eternal slumbers, tOvdisturb the peace of the living. One female domestic declared dbhat shejhad seen, with her.awn eye^a >figure,iul in.w ( hite, &it jalong/ihe
dismal gallery, in tlie dusk of the evening, and vanish she knew hot how; and the terror which beamed in her countenance, as she vouched for the truth of her asser¬ tion, left very little room for doubt in the minds of her auditors, who were likewise most willing to believe it. These accounts at length reached the ear of lord Arthur, who was of course much displeased at such reports. But, while he blamed the silly domestics for their cre¬ dulity, he mentally asked himself if he were quite free from the terrors of super¬ stition ? It was his duty however to check such idle reports, and, upon pain of dismission, he forbad the repetition of such accounts. For a while the trembling domestics obeyed, consoling themselves with inform¬ ing each other of the dreadful signs, omens, &c. which they daily heard, and which at length-were duly explained by the most able, as warnings of the approaching death of the old earl; and not a female servant vol. ni. g
but had planned hi what manner they should proceed on the solemn occasion. Meantime lord Arthur, who vainly imagined he had quieted the minds of his household, remained in his own state of uninterrupted solitude, from which no¬ thing appeared to have power to rouse him. ' He would sit Whole evenings in his own room, buried in reflections, and lost to all around. In such a mood as this he had remained one aiight, Urtheedfui of the darkness which was encompassing the earth, when he was startled by a violent scream, which sounded at no great distance. Much alarm¬ ed, he rushed to his door, which he open¬ ed ; the screams were repeated, ac'compa- nie'd by a noise which was immediately succeeded 'by a silence as calm as death. He looked about, unable to jascertain the cause; the gallery in Which-he *■ stood'was long and' dreary, the end in which he was contained 'his own arid other < habitable apartments; the other end, he knew, led to the church of St. Michael's, by whichfthere
w<is a private entrance, but which had never>been used of late years. He shuddered, as the screams had evi¬ dently proceeded from that direction, and ringing his bell for lights, he determined alone to seek the cause. Snatching a lighted taper from the hands of his man, he rushed down the gallery, and soon be¬ held a female form lying prostrate on the ground. He paused for a moment—ago¬ nizing sensations assailed him, as, with a trembling hand, he raised her, and gazing on her face, he beheld, to his great sur¬ prise, one of liis own domestics in a strong fainting fit. He raised her in his arms, and bore her towards his own room, with (the intention of a-inging for assistance; but, on reaching that end of the gallery, he saw a number of his other-servants, evidently in an atti¬ tude of listening, and peeping over each other's heads, with marks of the greatest terror on' their countenances. i In a peremptory tone he demanded an
explanation of the present scene, when, after great hesitation, they owned they were anxiously waiting the return of the housemaid, who uoav lay insenoible before them ; that she having laughed at the re¬ port of a ghost haunting the gallery, she had declared her resolution of going, at the dusk of the evening, when it was said to appear, by herself to the spot, and that no doubt she had paid the forfeit of her pre¬ sumption, as her present situation proved. Lord Arthur listened to this account with varying sensations; anger assailed him,, but he could not confute the truth. She had doubtless been frightened by some cause, and glad was he when she began to display symptoms of returning animation. He dismissed the rest of the domestics, re¬ solving to question her alone. . It was some time before her senses were collected enough to make a reply, which she at length did, by owning the same story- as the other servants had told, with the addition, that, after remaining in the passage a few minutes, she beheld a form,
in long white drapery, advancing towards 1 her with slow and solemn steps; though greatly terrified, she called to it, when it instantly turned round, and vanished, she knew not how—that her fears then over¬ came her, and screaming violently, she sunk insensible. This account greatly agitated lord Ar¬ thur, and he dismissed his trembling ser¬ vant from his presence, in nearly as dis¬ tressed a state. Concealment was now im¬ possible, and it was universally believed- that the castle was haunted. Some assert-' cd that it was the spirit of the lost lady Frances, wandering over her native place; and this report reaching the ears of the old earl, it awakened all the father in his bosom, and most truly did he repent his" severity towards her. To lord Arthur he expressed his anguish, who was far more wretched than himself, and he determined, if possible, to fathom the mystery which surrounded them. At the end of the gallery he was aware that a large pair of folding doors opened
to the church of St. Michael's, which hfcd been, formerly used for the convenience of; the family, but which,' of later years^ had never* even been opened. Lord Artlmr was determined" to explore, these, and-as¬ certain whether any being* could gain, ac¬ cess to the castle this way; but, on a> close- examination, he found it was iinpracti- cablo> for so crusted were the bolts with rust, that it was impossible to draw them, in their present state, and perfectly convinced liimthat the dours, had remained closed, since their own family had ceased to pass through, them. StlU more perplexed than ever, he was resolved to make one more desperate effort, and this was,,to watch every evening.at. the appointed spot,, and ascertain whether a>human or supernatuval, being did make its i appearance. The earl' applauded his resolution ; but begged,,for his own safety,.that he would have attendance, and suffer his own man tabebyhissideu This however, he positively refused ;
and, with a beating heart, he awaited the approach of that hour, in which it was said that the graves, yawning, yielded up their dead, and their embodied spirits wandered in slow and majestic solemnity over the Castle of St. Michael's.
CHAPTER VIL
J could n tale uufuld, whobc lightest word Would hiiriow up thy sou I, freeze thy young blootf,. I^Itike thy two eyes, like stars, sunt from their spheies,. Thy knotty and combined locks to part, And tach jiarticul.iv Iwir to stand on end, Like qtiilis upon the fretful porcupine. Suakespeaue. We left Mrs. Conway in eager anticipa¬ tion of her promised visit, and, after break¬ fast, she declared to Eleanor that she must do something to pass away the morning, as it would seem so long before she could visit Miss Hargrave, as they must not dis¬ turb her too soon, after her fatigue of the preceding night. Eleanor smiled at her impatience; but as she wished to inquire after the health of lady Glendinning, she requested Mrs. Conway would take a ride to St, James's, which would sufficiently delay the time.
Mrs. Conway assented ; and, as soon as the carriage could be got ready, they re¬ paired to lady Cecilia's. . , So full was Mrs. Conway of her new acquaintance, that she could think nor talk of nothing else; and the idea of the honourable Miss Hargrave appeared to have superseded all her other acquaintance from her memory; and, during their ride, she was the subject of her conversation 1 . • On arriving at St. James's they found the whole of the family assembled, with the exception of lady Glendinning, who was still too ill to leave her room thus early. Lady Cecilia, as usual, received them very coldly, while lord Montalban ex¬ pressed tlie pleasure it gave him to see them; and the fervent pressure of his hand, as he took that of Eleanor, and the joy that danced in his eyes, sufficiently corro¬ borated the truth cf his assertion. A slight agitation pervaded the frame of Eleanor, as his lordship's presence always created a degree of emotion, which she vainly endeavoured to conquer. G 3
Georgina and- Robert both expressed themselves in terms of kindness; and, on Eleanor inquiring for lady Glendinning, Georgina offered to inform her mamma that she was there, as she- knew, she said,. that her ladyship would be glad to see her. Eleanor thanked her, and Georgina quitted the room for that purpose. Robert now inquired of Eleanor when she had seen Mrs. and Miss Clifford, and expressed himself highly delighted with their charming society. This was a theme on which she could converse with pleasure ; and she entered into a warm eulogy on her favourite friends. In a short time Georgina re-entered the room, and begged that Eleanor would go to her mamma, who would be very glad to see her. She instantly obeyed the summons, and found her ladyship still in bed. She kind¬ ly extended her hand to Eleanor, and re¬ quested her to sit by her. Her ladyship ptill appeared very weak and languid, and Eleanor endeavoured to
raise, by a lively conversation^ her evident dejected spirits. - ' • Lady. Glendinning appeared sensible of her kindness, and conversed with her with as much composure as she could assume. She inquired how she passed her time with Mrs. Conway, and if she were not more happy there than she should be with them ? Eleanor assured her of her willingness to remain with Mrs. Conway, until their return to Scotland, which, she added, in a tremulous tone, she hoped would not be far distant, as she much longed to behold her peaceful home. " Not more so than I do,"- replied her ladyship; " yet, Eleanor, I fear St. Mi¬ chael's will never more prove the seat of peace or happiness—at least to me.?" Eleanor sighed.—" I trust your lady¬ ship will yet find it otherwise," she cried; " and that you will there- regain your health and spirits, of which, I am much afraid, London has deprived you." Her ladyship shook her head,—" Alas!"
she replied, " it is not change of residence alone which has thus shaken me! Know you not, Eleanor, what the poet says— 1 To no •'pot confined is hajiji'iicsa sinceie, Tis ho w here to be found, or every where." "It is a very true assertion," returned Eleanor, " and yet I am confident it would add to my happiness, could I return to Scotland." " Ah, Eleanor," cried her .ladyship, " that happiness would greatly meet with its alloy, so closely would it be allied to sorrow; for are you not aware of an event which is to take place on our return, and which, if I am not mistaken, will cause you much grief at heart?" *■ To what does your ladyship allude?" falteringly inquired Eleanor. " The long-intended union of lord Mont¬ alban and Georgina," she replied, casting her eyes full upon Eleanor, who, unpre¬ pared for such a conversation, became ex¬ tremely embarrassed—her cheeks assumed a deadly paleness, while her ladyship pro-
ceeded—" Believe me, Eleanor, I have not chosen this subject for the purpose of idly tormenting you, but I cannot be blind to the unfortunate attachment, formed, I fear, between lord Montalban and yourself, which, alas ! can only terminate in misery. I would save you, Eleanor, if possible, from the pangs of hopeless love. Conquer your feelings while yet in your power,; save yourself from everlasting sorrow, by seriously reflecting on the-impossibility of accomplishing your wishes. Lord Mont¬ alban has pledged his word of honour to unite himself to my daughter. Can he, as a gentleman, break that, unless circum¬ stances warranted such a forfeiture on his part? But, above all, relations on both sides are decisive, and, unhappily on his lordship's part, certain destruction must ensue if he refuses to fulfil his engagement; therefore, Eleanor, save yourself from fur¬ ther misery, plunge not yourself into a gulph of sorrow, which must inevitably consume your days in fruitless repentance." The feelings of Eleanor during this ad-
dress, can better be conceived than de¬ scribed; soiiserious> so unexpected,' that she scarcely knew how to make a reply. She was aware that lady Glendinning was net a character to be trifled' with ; slie es¬ sayed to speak, when the door opened, and lady Lenox entered the room. Lady Glendinning looked disconcerted, as in a low T voice she cried—" Be silent." Eleanor bowed, and, for the first time, felt indebted to the interruption of lady Lenox, whose motive for thus breaking upon them was to prevent much conver¬ sation between lady Glendinning and Elea¬ nor, for so envious was she that the latter • should gain the favour of her daughter, that she determined to prevent all commu¬ nication between them; she therefore seat¬ ed herself, and remained in the room dur¬ ing the stay of Eleanor, who at length took her leave of lady Glendinning, as she knew Mrs. Conway would be impatient, as the morning was now fast advancing. On entering the drawing-room, she found Mrs. Conway conversing, with gieat
volubility, on her intended visit to the ho¬ nourable Miss Hargrave, and enumerating her various engagements;. and added, that she meant, on the following evening, to take Eleanor to the th ?atrc, as she knew she would much like it. Lord Montalban replied, that it was an amusement of which he was particularly fond, and that very likely he might have the pleasure of seeing them there on the same night '* I have taken a box," cried Mrs. Con¬ way, "and if your lordship will honour me so far, I shall be happy to accommo* date you with a seat." 13is lordship expressed the pleasure it would give him, and promised to be there; hut on casting a look towards lady Cecilia, he saw anger darting from her eyes; she appeared as if ready to pour forth a torrent of rage ; but suddenly, as if commanding her passions, her features assumed a more placid appearance;, and,, to the surprise of all, she turned to Mrs. Conway, to whom she hardly ever condescended to speak,
and with* a smile, which but ill concealed the malice rankling at her heart, informed" her, that she should, also feel much obliged by a seat in her box, as she should very much like to accompany her nephew. Although Mrs. Conway hated lady Ce¬ cilia, she was'highly gratified at her offer, not aware of the true motive which prompted it, which, in fact, was only that of preventing the attention of lord Montal¬ ban to Eleanor, and to be a watch upon their actions. Of this Mrs. Conway had not the least idea, and she took it for grant¬ ed that it was out of respect to her, and she felt proud at the idea of accommodat¬ ing lady Cecilia Gray, whose title was of sufficient consequence to raise her in the eyes of tlie world; she therefore expressed the pleasure she should feel in lier lady¬ ship's company; while lord Montalban was mortified beyond measure, and Eleanor quite disconcerted. Georgina was then invited, but she pleaded the indisposition of her mamma as an excuse for staying at home; and Robert asserted an engage-
ment at Mr. Clifford's; lady Cecilia and lord Montalban were therefore to join Mrs. 1 Conway and Eleanor at the theatre.' Mrs. Conway now ordered her carriage i and bidding adieu to the family at St. James's, ordered her coachman 1 to Peckam- Rye; and though the horses flew with the utmost speed, the ride seemed long and tedious, so impatient was she to behold her new acquaintance. On reaching the place of their destina¬ tion, she looked at her watch," artd found it was turned of three ; she therefore ob¬ served to Eleanor, that she should suppose they should not disturb, the lady, as the hour was so late. Eleanor, who was not initiated into tho ways of fashionable folly, smiled at the idea of disturbing her at so late an hour; while Mrs. Conway beheld, with great satisfac¬ tion, the beautiful cottage at which the carriage stopped. Its exterior was the picture of elegance; the drawing-room windows opened into a balcony, where the hand of nature hac}
been most 'luxuriant*, and: spread ;a most delicious, odour around., While Mrs. Conway was taking this survey, and'before lier,footman could ap¬ proach, the door opened* and a,gentleman came- out, dressed in a large loose great¬ coat; His appearance was:extremely fop¬ pish, or, in the more; appropriate phrase of the present-, day?,,,he > looked an. exquisite dandy.* He made a. pause* as the, footman inquired for Miss.- Hargrave;; and, after staring at. f V carriage, he.made. a. slight how> andi passed; on» Tjh,e* servant who, opened the* door,re^ plied y that Miss Hargrave- was. at home, but that she was not yet visible* having been,out very latelast-night. . Mrs. Conway desired her. card might be taken to her, when a female servant ap¬ peared, and'begged that the ladies would alight, as Miss Uargrave.would.be happy to receive them in her dressing-roQm, as shehad 1 given orders for that purpose. v Mrs. Conway and Eleanor- now entered the house, and>\vere-conducted up stairs to
a; chamber, wheref every luxury seemed to- prevail. The most beautiful vases and' plants* adovned the room-, which was deco¬ rated in a> style of elegance. ' The prevail¬ ing colour was a delicate- blftOj relieved by drapery of white muslin; 1 On a* couch, which stood on dne side of >the room, re¬ clined Miss Hargrave, most elegantly at¬ tired in a morning robe, but' which, for it* beauty, might have^ graced '■ a ball-room, being composed of white-lace, relieved- by^ satin of the same purity; a. 1 cap of similar materials- adorned 1 ' Her head ! ;and Ji had' & limner'wanted acopyfdra-Madona-, Miss Hargrave- might have- been L his model. 1 Temptation< here, appeared'to spread' her allurements around r it was here she seem¬ ed to dwell'; and on this* view, onedialf the world might have pronounced the- object before tliem as a subject of envy, 1 as well as of admiration, so deceitful are appear¬ ances. How little do we know the heart- corroding pan g& which are concealed be¬ neath the smiling face; or the vice which
dwells under a countenance .adorned with^ the smile of innocence and virtue! . Miss Hargrave arose from her reclining posture, and taking a r hand of each,, ex¬ pressed her, pleasure at seeing them ; and apologized for being so lazy, adding, she> had just risen previous to,.their coming, and finding, herselftoo fatigued to go down stairs, she had* ordered breakfast .in her dressing-room, and hoped they would par¬ take of some with, her., , , , Mrs. Conway, who was delighted-with, everything she saw, assented, in order that Miss Hargrave might not be deprived of her beverage .by ; their'presence; and, on its being brought in, they found it was all of a piece with the res r t:of the luxuries, as it consisted of every; dainty, which could -please,the palate, and might be styled more' as a cold collation than a breakfast. Mrs„Conway now inquired how she had been entertained on the preceding night j. and casting her.eyes to another part of the room, 1 where lay. some* articles ofapparel^ presumed it was her masquerade attire^
Miss Hargrave replied in the affirmative, and desired her maid, who was in waiting, to bring them forward—" I had a most de¬ lightful night!" she exclaimed. " I much wished you had accompanied me; I am sure you would have been delighted; and to you, Miss Glendinning, who are yet a novice in fashionable life, it would have been a most delightful introduction. We had characters of all sorts and descriptions, ancl a vast number of persons of the first rank." Mrs. Conway was now busily examine ing the dress of the ballad-singer, and smil¬ ing at its humble appearance, which con¬ sisted of a plain gown, but made in such a way as to shew the shape to great advan¬ tage, over which was>thrown a red cloak; a large straw hat, tied down with white riband, • completed the dress, which had evidently well cbntrasted the beauty and elegance of Miss Hargrave. After she had taken a little refreshment, she arose, and with the utmost gaiety of manners, .cried—" Come, Mrs. Conway,* J
will keep the promise I made you of she v- r - ing you my dress, as I know you expressed a wish to that purpose, and so now for my humble-costume;" saying which, she threw on the things; and tying on her hat, the fine lady was lost in the robe of humble attire. " What a metamorphosis!" exclaimed Mrs. Conway; " yet how truly does it be¬ come you! your face looks beautiful dn that hat. I am sure you must have excited uni¬ versal admiration among the gentlemen." Miss Hargrave bowed at her compli- 3v>ent, and smiling, replied—" Oh, madam, thore was very little'fear of'that, 'for thus 1 hid my humble countenance;" saying which, she placed the mask before her face, and taking up a piece of music from some others, she began singing a most beautiful <.air, in a voice and >tone which ! exceeded the expectation of Mrs. Conway and Elea¬ nor. Miss Hargrave possessed indeed a most lovely voie£<; added to which, her'science Un music qualified 1 her ibr-afirst^rateisinger.
'Eic&nor was much delighted with lier song; and on its conclusion &h*, thitnjked hei for,tbe pleasure she had conferred on them. ^ Miss Hargrave gracefully replied, she ' should be heppy at any t .ne to repent it to them, and to add, m her best manner, to their amusement- She was interrupted by a loud knock at the'outward door, and in a few moments a gentle f ap sounded at her own. She -de¬ sired her maid to see who was there, Who, on obeying her orders, informed lier that it was Mr. Nugent, who begged to know if he might be admitted. Miss Hargrave appeared confused; her cheek turned pale, as turning to Mrs. Con¬ way, she cried—" It is a most particular friend of mine, with whom I went to the masquerade. I suppose we must admit him." " I beg our presence may not prove any hindrance to your wishes," replied Mrs. Conway. , . .Miss.Hai'grave 'bow^d, 3 and-desired hex
maid to let Mr. Nugent in, who, as he en¬ tered, exclaimed, in a drawling tone— w Upon my word, Eliza, you are as diffi¬ cult of access as a prime minister, or an eastern sultana." " Why," replied Miss Hargrave, "you ought to think it a favour to be admitted at all to a lady's dressing-room, and wait her pleasure without repining. But give me leave to introduce you to these ladies, who have done me the honour of a visit __Mrs. Conway and Miss Glendinning." Mr. Nugent bowed—" I am extremely happy to see them," he replied, at the same time casting a rude stare on Eleanor, who, unused to the familiar gaze of fashion, felt abashed. In Mr. Nugent, Mrs. Conway and Elea¬ nor recognised the same gentleman whom they had seen quitting the house as they entered, and whose appearance was not very prepossessing. He was young, and rather personable, but there was an expres¬ sion in his countenance of great haughti¬ ness, and a something in his tout-ensemble
which, to the pure ideas of Eleanor, was particularly disagreeable, while, on the contrary, Mrs. Conway was so delighted with all she saw, that it would have been impossible for her' to have found any thing wrong. Miss Hargrave had been throwing off her ballad-singer's dress, which she had not accomplished, when Mr. Nugent came in, who cried—" What! still masquerad¬ ing, Eliza ? I should have thought you would have been tired of that abominable dress; do pray throw it off, and let me see you look yourself once more." Miss Hargrave complied, while Airs. Conway informed him of Miss Hargrave's kindness in putting it on to shew them, and added, how well she became it! Mr. Nugent replied, that he differed in opinion with her there, as he thought he never saw her look worse. This was spoken in a tone of some as¬ perity. Miss Hargrave looked mortified, and vol, III. H
in an embarrassed manner asked him if he would take some breakfast ? " Yes," he replied, " I came on purpose, and indeed I have been here before; I went away just as these ladies came up to the door, being told you w r ere not risen from your slumbers." Miss Hargrave smiled, and replied that he had been rightly informed—" And,'' continued she, " when I say I did not leave the Opera House until six this morn¬ ing, and consequently it was nearly eight when I got to bed, I shall be excused for lying until three. Do you not think so, Mrs. Conway ?" To this, of course, Mrs. Conway assent¬ ed, adding also her opinion that Miss Har¬ grave had really risen very early, consi¬ dering her fatigue; for so delighted was she with her new acquaintance, that no¬ thing she did could have appeared wrong to her. Eleanor, on the contrary, was not so well pleased. Mr. Nugent she disliked even upon this shore acquaintance, and
the whole scene appeared to partake of so much luxury and fashionable dissipation, that it suited not with her pure and unso¬ phisticated ideas of morality. Mrs. Conway was absolutely in her glory; every thing was the height of gentility, and she was quite loth to quit it. Mr. Nugent partook of a very heaity breakfast, but found fault with every thing, while Miss Hargrave, it was evident, studied every look, and made every effort to please him. At length Airs. Conway, finding that the hour was past her own dinner-time, unwillingly arose to go, but first made a request that Miss Hargrave would return her visit as soon as possible, ancl likewise extended her invitation to Mr. Nugent, as she considered him, no doubt, to be the favoured lover of Miss Hargrave. Before her departure, she likewise tocV care to speak of her intended visit to the theatre, and that she expected lady Cecilia to be there, and requested that Miss Plargrave H2
would also favour her with her company, as there would be plenty of room for her and Mr. Nugent also. Miss Hargrave partly promised she would, and that she would likewise make a point of visiting the Grove very soon again. A very friendly leave was now taken between the ladies, and Mr. Nugent attended them to the carriage, which, when they entered, Mrs. Conway began in high praises and panegyric of th/; beautiful and accomplished Miss Hargrave, who, .she declared, was the most elegant and genteel woman she ever saw. Eleanor acknowledged the external qua¬ lities of Miss Hargrave; but as she was not quite so enraptured with all she had seen as Mrs. Conway, she was not quite so profuse in her praises. On their arrival at home, they found Mr Crosby waiting their return with some' degree of impatience, as he declared him¬ self alarmed for the welfare of Eleanor, whom, he added, he supposed was being drawn in to mix with the fashionable world.
Mrs. Conway, who could think nor talk of no other subject than Miss Hargrave, related to him the account of their visit, and the elegance and style in which she lived, and her decided opinion that she must possess an immense fortune* " The question is, does she make a good use of it?" cried Mr. Crosby. " That inquiry is already answered, I should think," replied Mrs. Conway. " Have I not been describing to you the elegant manner in which she lives; her liberality and hospitality appear evident enough, and is not this making a good use of fortune?" " Certainly^" answered Mr. Crosby* "they are two good qualities in themselves, but they are often misapplied. For in¬ stance, this lady may delight in feasting the wealthy, and in pouring luxuries into the lap of the great, while the wretched and the unfortunate might beg in vain for a fnOrsel of food to keep them from famish¬ ing." u You always draw such dismal conclu¬ sions/' cried Mrs. Conway, " that there is
no talking with you. I dare say Miss Hargrave is as charitable as most people; but in this short time I could not expect to hear her sound her own praise. I am quite satisfied with what I saw of her, and I am sure even you would allow her to he a very charming woman, and were you to hear her sing, you must be delighted. I could have listened to her whole hours, for slie was so obliging to us, that she sang a song this morning. I wish yon had heard her, Mr. Crosby; I think your heart would have been softened?' " No doubt, madam," he replied, " but it would; " but I was also entertained with a song this morning, which gratified me as much as yours; and I will venture to assert, though I give the lady all due credit, that the strain I heard was sweeter to my ears than all the soft cadence of her notes." " It must have been delightfully sung then," interrupted Mrs. Conway; "and pray, sir, who was this divine singer ?" " A poor widow, madam," he replied,
in a tone of warmth, " who, with four helpless children, I - have had the happi¬ ness of saving from starving. Chance con¬ ducted me to their abode, I saw their misery—I relieved their wants, and on— again calling this morning, I found them all comfortable and full of joy. The chil¬ dren gathered round mc, and joined in their innocent exclamations of gratitude, while the widow's heart sung with joy, and as she uttered forth expressions of thankfulness, I felt no music could prove so sweet to the ears—no sound so gratify¬ ing to the mind; and nozv, Mrs. Conway, which song, think you, was the best, yours-* or mine?" " Why, sir," replied Mrs. Conway, " they are of a very different nature ; but to you, who are such a philanthropist, yours was, of course, the greatest treat. The charities of Mr. Crosby are already well known." " And, I should hope, universally ad¬ mired and copied," cried Eleanor, who had attentively listened to his narration,
while the tear of sympathy adorned her eye; " oh, sir, how I envy your feelings, and how I respect yosr principles! Permit me, sir," she continued, "to have the heart¬ felt satisfaction of contributing a small share towards the relief of the distressed widow and her helpless babes.' r She put her purse into his hands, which he received, and taking both hers, he gazed on her with tender delight.—" Noble, ge¬ nerous Eleatioiv" he exclaimed," thy wishes shall be gratified; tlie offering of an angel shall be acceptable to the widow and the fatherless. Charity still exists on earth r her true copy stands before me; meekness, humility, pity, love, and energy, adorn your countenance, and the form of Elea¬ nor shall henceforth be my care. Yes, dear girl! be assured, that for the least part of what you have done for this poor widow, shall be doubly returned unto yourself; and when I am no longer an actor upon this mortal world, you will find that my assertion was not confined, to words alone."
Eleanor was greatly affected; she could not misunderstand his meaning; the tears streamed from her eyes as she endeavoured to speak. He strained her to his heart, and bestowing a paternal blessing on her head, he retired from the room for a short time, in order to recover his composure; and after some tittle while he returned to them, and passed the remainder of the evening in their society, while Eleanor each moment felt more and more attached to the venerable and benevolent Mr. Crosby, whose virtues shone conspicuous, even among his peculiarities, and proved him to move in the highest state of man, name¬ ly, a true Christian.
H 3
CHAPTER VIII. " Heftven lins no pa c sions like Iu>e to hntied ttnnM, N'jr hell \\ fury, liko n hoih m scorn'd." The next morning Mrs. Conway and Eleanor paid a short visit to Mrs. Clifford, who always received our heroine with the most fiattering marks of affection, and would have had her entirely take up her abode with them, if Mrs. Conway would have parted with her; but as she declared she should be quite r liserable without the society of Eleanor curing the absence of Mr. Conway, Mrs. Clifford could not, in politeness, urge the subject farther. Towards the amiable Emily, Eleanor felt a sisterly affection, and she could have been happy to have passed the whole of lier time with them. She found that Ro-
bert Glendinning passed much of his time there, and by the blushes which adorned the cheeks of the lovely Emily, as his name was mentioned, she concluded that he was not indifferent to her heart; and most truly did Eleanor rejoice at such a prospect, as, in that Ci«se, lus unfortunate attachment towards herself must of course subside; for she did not doubt a moment but that the attachment was reciprocal, as she was sen¬ sible that Robert had been much prepos¬ sessed on his first interview with Emily, which a farther acquaintance had evidently increased, and she saw no obstacles betv\ sen them and happiness, save the one of fa¬ mily pride, which might prompt the elders of the family to seek a higher alliance for its heir. Miss Clifford was however no mean choice; her fortune, it was true, was but small, but her beauty and accomplishment* rendered her an object cf admiration, and fit to adorn the highest station, consequent¬ ly she was adequate to grace the proud family of Glendinning. These thouglits
fully occupied the mind of Eleanor during their stay, as she had plenty of time for reflection. While Mrs. Conway was conversing en her favourite theme, namely, Miss Har¬ grave, Mr. Clifford, who was present, said, he had heard her name mentioned as being- a very gay- lady, who had lately come to reside at Peckham, of which place she was the universal talk and envy. Mrs. Conway replied that she did not wonder at her being the envy of any one, as her beauty alone was sufficient to cause that in the hearts of her own sex, and ad¬ miration in that of the gentlemen. Mr. Clifford smiled, but made no far¬ ther reply, and Mrs, Conway now arose, and with Eleanor bid them adieu for that day. After paying a few other morning visits, they returned home, as Mrs. Conway de¬ clared they should now have enough to oc¬ cupy them for the remainder of the day, until the time of dressing for the theatre. On entering the house, the servant in-
formed Mrs. Conway that Miss Hargrave was in the drawing-room waiting their re¬ turn. Delighted beyond measure at this> intelligence, she hastily ascended the stairs,, and found Miss Hargrave seated at the piano, from which she instantly arose, and. making an apology- for using so much freedom at her house, proceeded to say, that finding herself perfectly disengaged for that day, and Mr. Nugent also being to dine out with some friends, she had done herself the pleasure of coming thus eariy to spend the day with them, and to- accept of Mrs. Conway's kind invitation to accompany them to the theatre in the evening. Mrs. Conway expressed herself highly obliged by her visit, and begged that Miss Hargrave would wave all ceremony, and give them as much of her company as her other engagements would admit. MissHar- grave indeed appeared perfectly at her ease; she sung to them, and certainly did all in her power to render her^lf agreeable; and
even Eleanor, though no advocate for fa¬ shionable life, could not but acknowledge the pleasing elegance of her manner. , She likewise conducted herself towards Elea¬ nor with so much good-humour and kind¬ ness, that she.could not but return it; yet she knew not why, but she felt a repug¬ nance steal over her at the idea of calling Miss Hargrave her friend. Once or twice she had observed her fixing her eyes full on her face, while her own features would assume a deep melancholy; a sigh escaped her bosom., but it was instantly banished. She would force her countenance instantly to reassume its former vivacity,, and enter upon the most lively subjects, while a common observer would have ranked her as one of the happiest of mankind. This was not however the opinion of Eleanor, and she felt convinced that Miss Hargrave was not exactly the character she assumed. The ladies sat down to dinner by them¬ selves, from which they arose- early, in order to equip themselves for the theatre. Miss Hargrave, though dressed extreme-
ly elegant, displayed another dress with superb ornaments* which her maid had brought with her, in order that she might also make a change for the evening. Mrs. Conway, of course, applauded her thought, and the important business of dress was begun. Eleanor, arrayed in pure white drapery, but, most of all, " adorned in her own na¬ tive lovelines," was the first who entered the drawing-room, where she found Mr. Crosby. He took her hand, and bestowed on her the greatest marks of his approba¬ tion ; the simplicity of her dress,, the light elegance and symmetry of her figure, ap¬ peared to give him evident satisfaction, and he entered into a pleasing eonversa>- tion with her. Eleanor listened to his remarks with real pleasure, until she heard the steps of Mrs. Conway and her new friend on the stairs. She informed him of their approach. " So," he cried, " then I shall behold this fine lady who has so enraptured the weak heart of Mrs. Conway. I expect to
behold a complete contrast; for now," con¬ tinued he; looking tenderly on Eleanor, " I view the pleasing resemblance of inno¬ cence and virtue, unsophisticated, nature, and native-purity,from which I shall turn to behold the lady of fashion." He paused as the door opened; and Mrs. Conway entered with Miss Hargrave, who- was indeed dressed in n style of elegance not easily to be surpassed. Three large ostrich feathers,, which waved gracefully on her head, added to the nobleness of her figure, and even Mr. Crosby thought she looked lovely. Mrs. Conway-exultingly introduced her to-him, and returning the low curtsey she made him with a vener¬ able bow, he seated himself without speak- in o*. Tea was now brought in, in order that ' they might be in readiness for their in¬ tended pleasure;: and Mrs. Conway order- ,ed her carriage to be at the door by the time they had finished, though, she added, she did not wish to be too soon, as it was 'not genteel to go too.early.
Miss Hargrave coincided in her opinion, and amused her auditors by again exerting her vocal talents. Mr. Crosby owned her powers were veiy great, but added, that the sofl strains of Eleanor had made so deep an impression on his heart, that no others could ever remove. Miss Hargrave smiled, but it was a smile which seemed to denote the consciousness of her own su¬ perior abilities. At length Mrs. Conway arose, and say* ing it was time to depart, half-jestingly invited Mr. Crosby to accompany them. This he of course refused, adding, after having handed them to the carriage, he should return to his own house. He press* ed the hand of Eleanor as he bade her adieu, at the same time whispering a friendly caution in her eaiy warning her from entering into too much gaiety with her companions. The heart of Eleanor sunk as the car- riage moved on. She was going to meet lord Montalban, hut in the presence of lady Cecilia Gray, who,, she knew, would.
treat her with incivility bordering'on rude¬ ness. Besides, she had still another task to contend with; each interview; she had with lord Montalban appeared to strength¬ en the affection she felt for himy and after the conversation she had had with lady Glendinning, how could she dare to en¬ courage such thoughts ? She saw the bar¬ rier placed between them, and she ! shud¬ dered; and when the carriage stopped at the theatre, she felt as if she were going to a scene of misery, rather than that of gaiety and splendour. On entering the house, the music, which was playing, and the brilliant appearance of the scene, tended to raise her depressed spirits, and on being conducted to their box, she endeavoured to force a smile into her face. Lady Cecilia and lord Montal¬ ban were not yet arrived, which gave her time, in some measure, to recover her spirits. Mrs. Conway seated herself be¬ tween Miss Hargrave and Eleanor, and never did she feel more in her element. They had not been long seated, when.
the door opened, and lady Cecilia Gray was announced. All rose to testify their respect to their noble visitors. Lord Mont¬ alban followed his aunt, Mrs. Conway begged lady Cecilia to take a seat in the front row, alleging plenty of room. She complied with her request, adding, she would take a seat by Miss Glendinning, and immediately placed herself by Eleanor at the end of the row. Lord Montalban seated himself behind Eleanor, to whom he spoke in terms of kindness; but on casting a timid glance in his face, she beheld dejection and sor¬ row stamped upon it. His manners were evidently abstracted, and grief appeared to dwell upon his mind. Lady Cecilia alone was happy; she ex¬ ulted in the visible sorrow of which she knew she had been the cause, and she con,- gratulated herself upon her quick thought in accompanying her nephew to the thea¬ tre, and thus preventing his having so glorious an opportunity with Eleanor dur* ing their ride. < She had succeeded in ren-
dering lord Montalban cbrnpletely wretch¬ ed. She had again attacked him respect¬ ing his attachment to Eleanor, and again threatened the destruction of his lather oh his refusal to unite himself to Georgina^ Until, working upon his fecfings, she made him give a half-;eohsent to comply With her wishes. She hinted that their return to Scotland would hot he far distant^ though she would not satisfy-him as to the appointed time, but told him it Would be suddeh whenever it Was. This intelligence^ of course, gave him the deepest sorrow, and when he entered 1 the theatre, his heart was almost'bursting ■between contending passionsi The mo¬ ment he beheld Eleanor, and Saw the be¬ witching beauty of her face and. figure,, I love assailed >hi$ heatt • with redoubled ar- | t(6m\ and he almost resolved to welcome- ruin with her^ rather than marry another*. Miss Hargrave, who had been intro^ £iiced to him,, displayed all her powers of lively conversation to attract his notice; hut^ though he answered her with all due
politeness, yet he was evidently so en¬ grossed in thought as scarcely to heed any remark made at all; and she at length whispered to Mrs. Conway that he was certainly a very elegant and handsome young man, but extreme dull company. Lady Cecilia, with a heart exulting at her own.machinations, sat with a smile of satisfaction on her envious cheek; but not of long duration was her triumph, Fate had ordained that at the very moment she was exulting in her own schemes, she should meet with a blow which at once put an end to her fancied satisfaction. Before the end of the first piece, Eleanor had observed a gentleman in a naval uni¬ form enter the next box, and at length finding there was room, he advanced, and seated himself on a line with lady Cecilia Gray. Eleanor had been led to notice him by the noble appearance of his figure; he was evidently rather past the prime of life; but; his countenance was extremely prepossessing. A sort of instinctive* me¬ lancholy appeared to have taken.possession
of'his features, and rendered him an ob¬ ject of interest to his beholders. He ap¬ peared to be paying great attention to the stage; but on the dropping of the curtain, he took a survey round the house. Eleanor at length turning towards lady Cecilia, was astonished to behold her in a state almost beyond description; her cheeks were pale as death—her eyes appeared al¬ most'starting from their sockets, and her whole frame trembling with agony. Her glance was rivetted on the before-mention¬ ed gentleman, who did not as yet seem to observe her, Eleanor, greatly astonished, exclaimed __« Are yon not well, lady Cecilia,?" This sentence was overheard by the gentleman, who, leaning over the box, gazed earnestly at her. His own face be¬ trayed great agitation, as, in a voice of great emotion, he cried-—" Lady Cecilia! 'tis indeed so! Well may you tremble," he continued, looking sternly at her; "well may you thus shrink at the sight of a man whom you have so grossly injured!"
'" Forbear your insults, sir," she replied, in a voice scarcely audible ; " this is not a place for your invectives." " All places," he exclaimed, " are open to my just indignation, though, no doubt, the voice of truth sounds hateful in your ear." " Captain St. John," cried lord Mont¬ alban, advancing towards him, " I am not, I believe, mistaken, although some years have elapsed since last I saw you." " You aie right," he replied, at the same time extending his hand. " Towards your lordship I bear no enmity. You greatly resemble her, for whose loss I incessantly mourn, and her counterpart cannot be otherwise than good," " For your own sake, sir," cried lord Montalban, " endeavour to banish this strain at present! the time, the place, are ill calculated; captain St. John, I know your wrongs are great—but your suspi¬ cions may perhaps be ill founded." " Can I want greater proof?" he quick¬ ly replied. si Look at the terror, the guil-
ty countenance of your wretched aunt! Inhuman woman!" he continued, darting a look of fury on lady Cecilia, * where is my Amelia? say, does she yet exist? or have your cruel arts entirely destroyed the loveliest form that ever breathed?" »- By this time the eyes of all, were turn¬ ed upon this distressing scene,. Miss Har¬ grave and Mrs. Conway whispered each 6ther it was very strange, while lord Mont¬ alban, evidently much distressed, again implored the captain, to forbear, as they should attract universal attention, particu¬ larly as lady Cecilia Gray had now sunk back, nearly insensible. Eleanor felt much distressed at this strange scene. Lord Montalban looked at her with a countenance of sorrow and vex¬ ation, and most sincerely did she sympa¬ thize with him in his,feelings. She held a smelling-bottle to the nose of lady Cecilia,, and,, iu tremulous accents, begged lord Montalban to, be composed. He seized her- hand, and passionately exclaimed:-*" Composed!' ah, dearest Ele-
anor, my feelings are racked, are tortured— they are past even assuming composure!" Captain St. John turned towards him. —" For your sake, Frederick." he cried, " I will be silent; but if you could know the agony I endure, you would not won¬ der at my conduct. Behold this cruel wo¬ man," he added, pointing to the insensible form of lady Cecilia; " see how conscience has reduced her; self-conviction acts upon her frame, and convinces me my suspi¬ cions are but too true, although I cannot prove them, Montalban, be cautious ; if that treasure be yours," he continued, mo¬ tioning with his finger towards Eleanor, whose hand lord Montalban yet retained, " be cautious, lest lady Cecilia Gray should tear it from you, and leave you, as I was left, a prey to hopeless despair; youth and beauty are her prey; therefore I warn you to be careful how you trust your treasure to her. Farewell, Montalban, for to-night —but you I should like to see again, if you will favour me." VOL. III. i
He then placed a card in the hand of lord Montalban, and wringing it in expres¬ sive silence, bowed to the ladies, and im¬ mediately quitted the box. . > i ' Lord Montalban pressed the hand of Eleanor.—" How well captain St. John appreciates my feelings !" he cried; •' oh, would I could indeed call this treasure my own!" Eleanor blushed, her eyes fell in soft confusion; but their expression was not lost upon lord Montalban, who read a con¬ firmation of his hopes and fears. All was now, of course, bustle and con¬ fusion ; Miss Hargrave, Mrs. Conway, and Eleanor, attending upon lady Cecilia, and all highly surprised af the preceding scene, for which we shall now endeavour to ac¬ count. It was after the period of the marriage of the marquis of B ------ to his amiable la¬ dy, that lady Cecilia Gray accompanied them to London, where they spent some time in partaking of its pleasures and amusements.
, Lady Cecilia was at this time nearly in her thirtieth year, possessing the advantage of a fine person, with many showy accom¬ plishments ; still she had as yet passed ott, without having had a single matrimonial offer, or having felt the slightest effecfc of that passion which directs the heart to¬ wards the opposite sex. The truth was, that lady Cecilia, notwithstanding all the advantages of birth and fortune,, was an object rather shunned by society than sought; her pride and temper were vio¬ lent, and her passions once roused, knew no bounds. St was at- this eventful period that cap¬ tain St. John, a young and gallant officer, came on shore. He had been the early friend of the marquis, and now yielded to his pressing invitation of passing some time with him, at his own house, while in London. Captain St. John, therefore, took up his quarters, and, as his ship was expected to set sail again in the course of a few months, he promised to° remain en- I2T ■ ' . .
tirely with his friend during that time. The captain was then only in his two- and-twentieth year, handbome, gay, and spirited. His time was spent chiefly with lady Cecilia, towards whom*he behaved W,ith the greatest politeness, which he con¬ sidered only as her due, as the sister of his friend, and as a female of rank and fortune. As they partook of much fashionable amusement, captain St. John was of course her attendant; and it was soon universally whispered, that an union between the par¬ ties would be the result. These ideas were encouraged b) r lady Cecilia, whose own hopes centered in the same point. The captain had, indeed, without designing it, made himself com¬ plete master of her affections; and so se¬ cure was she of her own power, that she did not suffer herself for one moment, to doubt its being mutual; and she was in daily expectation of hearing him make an avowal to that effect. t Alas! poor lady Cecilia was much mis¬ taken. Captain St. John admired her as he
would have done anv fine woman; but the softer sensation of love never entered his bosom ; nor, had he any desigiu upon the heart of lady Cecilia, At this period Amelia Cleveland, a cou¬ sin of lady Cecilia's, who was an orphan, and in the possession of a very small for¬ tune, came also to pay them a visit. She was in her eighteenth year, beautiful as an angel, with a mind adorned with charms to grace a female. The tenderness of her disposition, the softness of her manners, soon displayed themselves upon the warm-hearted cap¬ tain ; and never was. a conquest > sooner made. The blushing cheek of Amelia, the downcast eyes, soon conveyed the in¬ telligence, to his heart, that the language of his soul was understood by its mistress, and a mutual acknowledgment soon took place. No obstacles appeared between them and happiness, and Amelia only lamented that a short time must again inevitably
consign the object of her affections to the watery element. Meantime lady Cecilia began to won¬ der that the captain did not openly avow his affection for herself. She saw his at¬ tention towards Amelia with a jealous eye, still she had too great an opinion of herself to suppose that she could rival her; and she concluded that the captain was too diffident to declare himself, lest it should be deemed as presumption. She therefore determined to bring him to an avowal; and* on the first private opportunity* she threw out such plain hints, that it was impossible to nlieuhflet- stahd hen It was now, for the first time, he felt the awkwardness of his situation; but his soul was above mean disguise, and he candidly owned the true state of his heart towards Amelia. But who shall describe the rage of lady Cecilia,! 'she vowed the most implacable revenge^ and, hastening to the room of
Amelia, she poured forth a torrent of a- buse; nor was she content with words alone, but even directed blows towards the unhappy girl, who sunk appalled at her feet. All was now confusion. Amelia left the house immediately, and of course captain St. John declared his intention of quitting it also. It was in vain the marquis and marchio¬ ness interfered, and endeavoured to pro¬ mote a reconciliation between the parties; lady Cecilia, with the malice of a fiend, de¬ clared her intention of pursuing revenge, which she avowed should be ample to her sufferings, and from that moment vowed the destruction of the innocent Amelia. Meantime captain St. John pursued the steps of the unfortunate object of his love, who, overwhelmed with grief and trouble, had retired to a small cottage at a little distance from London. Here the captain found her, and vowed no power on earth should part them.
Amelia received his vows of constancy with pure delight, and in a short time they were united in marriage. Thus secure, as they thought them¬ selves, from the revenge of lady Cecilia, they enjoyed, for a few short months, per¬ fect happiness. But, alas ! too soon their woes began. Captain St. John was oblig¬ ed to take the command of his ship, which had orders to set sail immediately. The parting was agony, but the idea that his Amelia was his wife, consoled him, and he looked forward to the period of his return with hope and pleasure. He wrote to her at every possible op¬ portunity, but as he never obtained an an¬ swer, he began to feel uneasy; but still he considered it might be owing to the un¬ certain element on which he was, and judged that her letters had miscarried. At length, after a cruise of two years, he returned in safety to his native shore, and, with a heart agitated with various feelings, he hastened to the cottage where he had
left his treasure. But who shall describe Jiis feelings, at finding it inhabited by strangers, who could not give him the least intelligence of his Amelia! Distracted with apprehension, he re¬ paired to the house of a neighbour, with whom she had been intimate; and here he heard the dreadful news which awaited him. He was informed that, in about s?x months after his departure, his wife was suddenly missed from her cottage—that the most serious alarm had been raised for her own personal safety, as she had doubt¬ less been forced away by some unknown hands. The servant, who was the only one in the house with her, had given the alarm, when she arose in the morning, that her mistress was missing; and since that pe¬ riod, although every pursuit had been made, and great rewards offered, no clue had ever been obtained respecting her mysterious flight. This account quite overwhelmed the un- 13
fortunaie St.'John, and, for a few minutes, the brave feelings of the tar gave way to the softer sensations of grief. He wept for the loss of his Amelia, when suddenly the image bf lady Cecilia crossed his mind. Tie doubted not she was the cruel con¬ triver 6f this dreadful scheme, and, with feelings little short 6f distraction, he has¬ tened to London, and once more threw himself in the presence of lady Cecilia, whom he openly accused of having de¬ prived him of his wife. " tleVengeful as he knew her to be, still he could not form an idea of the extent of her malice until her present behaviour. She laughed at his agony, insulted his grief, and defied him to charge her with the crime, as he had no proof, but merely his own suspicions; and her high rank in life raised her above his power. ' Astonished'at her unparallelled cruelty, captain St. John left her in disgust. He was fully convinced that she was the au- thbr of his wrongs; but, as she had assert¬ ed, he had no proof, and he could not act
upon suspicion only. : Of course they were now decided enemies, and whenever they met, he always accused her with his woes and injuries. The marquis of B------was much dis¬ tressed at the circumstance, and sincerely hoped that his sister had not had any con¬ cern in so dreadful a piece of business. The wretched captain spent whole years in endeavouring to find his lamented wife, but in vain, and he sank a prey to melan¬ choly and despair. With the marquis he kept a correspond¬ ence; and he had frequently seen lord Montalban, whom he much esteemed, as he bore a great resemblance to the lost Amelia. Owing however to the residence of the marquis, of late years, in Scotland, he had not seen lady Cecilia for some lapse of time, until his rencounter with her at the theatre; and at the unexpected sight of his dreaded enemy,his noble heart shrunk with horror. The scene that followed has been related, and our readers will no longer feel sur-
prised at the emotion displayed by the much-injured and unfortunate captain St. John.
CHAPTER IX.
Alas, the love of women ! it is known To be a lovely and a fearful tiling! For all of theirs upon that die is thrown, And, if 'tis lost, life hath no more to bring . To them, but mockeries, of the past alone; And their revenue is us the tiger's spring, Deadly, and quick, and crushing; yet as real Torture is theirs—what they inflict they feel. Lono Byron. After the departure of captain St. John from the theatre, all remained in confusion, until lady Cecilia recovered her senses. A lady having a fainting fit is too common an occurrence to happen in a playhouse, to excite any surprise in the minds of the bystanders; therefore none but her own party had heard or attended to the excla¬ mations which passed between the captain and lady Cecilia.
Lord Montalban of course felt greatly distressed at this unpleasant rencounter, and he blushed at the conduct of his aunt, which had given rise to such a con¬ versation; for though, like the rest, he could not prove lady Cecilia to have been concerned in the strange disappearance of the unfortunate Amelia, yet he doubted not her vindictive spirit had occasioned the dreadful calamity. Lady Cecilia, on opening her eyes, look¬ ed fearfully round her; her countenance exhibited the most horrid expression—ter¬ ror, rage, and malice, were all there de¬ picted ; and Eleanor involuntarily turned her head from her w r ith horror. Mrs. COnway and Miss Hargrave both inquired how she found herself? She answered them, in a tremulous voice, that she was perfectly recovered; and turn¬ ing to lord Montalban, asked him if that foe to her peace had retired ? * ' k ' 1 «* If you tnean captain St. John, ma¬ dam," lie replied, "he has left the house: nor will he intrude himself on your pre
sence again, as,' I am convinced, it is as obnoxious to him as it is disagreeable to you." Lady Cecilia, on being convinced he was really gone, appeared to recover her¬ self quickly. Her face soon resumed its wonted haughtiness and scorn, and, as the curtain was now rising for the after-piece, she arose, asserting that she would no long¬ er engage their attention towards herself; adding, she would sit in the lobby, while lord Montalban found their footman, as she had ordered her carriage to be in rea¬ diness, as slie seldom ever stopped late. She then turned towards Mrs. Conway, Miss Hargrave, and Eleanor,' whom she thus addressed—" No doubt, ladies, but you must have formed some very strange conjectures on my indisposition to-night, atid at the conversation which passed be¬ tween captain St. John and myself. This* is not,'If'am aware^a fit place for an ex¬ planation; but as Pdo not-choose'to enter into any particulars at all, not considering
my actions are ,to be called in question, I shall say now all I intend to assert: that gentleman, who has just left the box, was, in early life, upon the most intimate terms with me; I admitted him to my confi¬ dence, which he abused. He formed a con¬ nexion with another part of my family; misfortunes were the result of it, with which, with the most daring effrontery, he has this night accused me. ,But, however his sudden appearance might have affected me at the moment, I laugh at his puerile assertions, and defy him to prove the truth.. I am above all mean suspicions, and this, I trust, is now quite sufficient for me to explain, as I shall not trouble my¬ self with any further account, as the opi¬ nion entertained by the present company cannot be of any moment to me; nor will I suffer any inquiries to be made hereafter inconsequence." r - She bowed very haughtily, and told lord Montalban she was ready.,- . r . , His lordship, in great agitation, pressed
the hand of Eleanor; and softly whispered —" Be at home to-morrow—I will call on you at Camberwell." > ' ' He then conducted his haughty aunt from the box, whose steps were yet totter¬ ing and unsteady. Mrs. Conway, highly provoked at her haughty apology, broke out into the most bitter invectives. She was ' highly cha¬ grined at Miss Hargrave witnessing such treatment, particularly as she had boasted so much of the acquaintance of lady Ceci¬ lia, who now, in her 'haughty speech, evinced the contempt she felt for all pre¬ sent. Miss Hargrave laughed at the bustle which had been occasioned, and declared there was more between her and the cap¬ tain than she chose to acknowledge. Of this opinion was Eleanor also. She knew not why, but she felt an unusual sensation at her heart. -'• Lady Cecilia was to her an object of dread and terror; a sick¬ ness stole over her frame, and her face be¬ came pallid. The last words of lord Mont-
alban still sounded in her ear; he had pro¬ mised to see her on the morrow, and she doubted not but it was to explain to her the nature of this strange scene. ' Miss Hargrave observed the paleness of her cheek, and rallied her on the occasion, asserting, that the abrupt departure of lord Montalban was the occasion.—" Upon my word," she cried, " I think our party has proved particularly agreeable to-night; there is only Mrs. Conway and I who yet retain our composure—two ladies faint¬ ing, and our only beau the greatest pic¬ ture of melancholy I ever saw. His lord¬ ship has, I suppose, some cause for unhap¬ piness rankling at his heart, for despair dwells in his countenance. Pray is it the cruelty of Miss Glendinning," she added, in a sarcastic voice, " which has reduced him to this dejected state ?" * ",Why I don't know but what it is," cried Mrs. Conway, in a laughing tone, but. was checked by Eleanor, who, turn¬ ing her pallid icheek, and casting a look of reproach,.exclaimed—" This is not a fit
time^maddm^for raillery; mysspirits are not equal to the task." * ■ The tears actually arose in her eyes. She felt much displeased with Miss Har¬ grave, who again attacked her on her agi¬ tation, when the box-door opened, and, to the great surprise of all, Mr. Nugent made his appearance. f i The countenance of Miss Hargrave as¬ sumed a graver aspect, as she inquired why he had joined them, as he was engaged elsewhere. " So I was," he replied; " but I could not resist the pleasure of your company>" he cried; " you see, Eliza,*what power you have over me." . • He burst into a loud laugh as he spoke this. He was evidently inebriated, as he staggered down On the seat. Miss Hargrave now, in her turn, looked disconcerted; but, pretending to laugh it off, appeared to be paying great attention to the stage. ■ ' * Mrs. Conway now inquired of Eleanor if she felt better? upon hearing which 1 ,
Mr. Nugent seated himself close to her, exclaiming—" Is the divine Miss Glen¬ dinning indisposed? permit me to offer you some assistance." Eleanor, provoked at his free address, answered him very coldly, and endea¬ voured to rid herself of his importuni¬ ties ; but in vain, as lie kept paying her the most fulsome compliments, to which she attributed his evident intoxication as the cause ; and truly rejoiced was she when Mrs. Conway proposed to retire, as she said all the genteel people had left the theatre. 1 Mr. Nugent, who was as noisy as he was troublesome, loudly expressed his readiness to attend them to the carriage, and, to the great annoyance of Eleanor, insisted upon having the superlative felicity of conduct¬ ing her. Nor could she release her hand from his grasp. His conduct, she thought, appeared very questionable, after his first assertion, on coming into the box, respecting the power which Miss Hargrave had over him, as he now so evidently slighted her,
and she felt fearful of exciting that lady's resentment towards herself, though shewas innocent of any intention of that kind. On finding the carriage, Mrs. Conway of course invited Mr. Nugent to accompa^- ny Miss Hargrave, with which he instant¬ ly complied; in consequence of which the ride proved very disagreeable to Elea¬ nor^ whose mind was attuned to melan¬ choly reflections, ill suited to the company in which she was. On arriving at her home, Mrs. Conway invited Miss Hargrave and Mr. Nugent to take some refreshment, with which they complied ; though Miss Hargrave actually now appeared to wish to hasten her de¬ parture, as Mr. Nugent was not in a state fit to be in the company of ladies. She apologized to Mrs. Conway and Eleanor for him, and trusted they would place it to his having made too free with the bottle. Her apology was accepted, and Mrs. Conway insisting upon her carriage con-
ducting her home, she accepted it, and with Mi*. Hugent left the house. On their departure Eleanor commented on the folly of the latter, to which Mrs. Conway could' not but assent; but added, for the r sake of Miss Hargrave, she should not feel offended at it, as she was so charn> ing a woman; but she thought certainly his behaviour towards her was very inex¬ cusable, as she demanded every attention at his hands. Eleanor, who really felt very ill, gladly availed herself of the lateness of the hour to retire to her room; rest she doubted whether she could obtain, as her mind was a prey to varying sensations. The figure of lord Montalban was continually before her eyes—the dejection of his countenance, and his evident distress, all arose upon her recollection; his happiness was indeed dear to her heart; she would, if in her power, have gladly contributed to it; but, alas! Iiow was she to act? She dreaded her promised juiteryiew^with Mm, leather own weakness should prompt her to listen to his
avowals of love. She remembered the' conversation of lady Glendinning on the subject, in which she had fuDy set forth the'obstacles which subsisted between lord Montalban and herself. Most heartily did she wish herself in the peaceful retirement of St. Michael's; yet again thatwish was embittered by the conviction that, on their return to that spot, the union of his lord¬ ship with Georgina was to take place. From this introspection she turned with, agony, for to meditate calmly on this event was totally impossible. In such reflections as these she passed the night; and, with a mind ill at ease, she joined Mrs. Conway in the morning, who noticed her depression of spirits, and, with a view to raise them, she invited her, after breakfast, to take a ride. Eleanor felt embarrassed. Lord Mont¬ alban had requested her to remain at home, to)receive his visit, and slie felt unwilling to leave the house, ^as he might very prob¬ ably call the while, she therefore made an excuse to Mrs. Conway ibr not accepting
her>offeiytOiWhom however she could not fee.1 courage;, to assert the real .reason,, no,t daring to trust herself *to repeat the name of- Montalban, which t ever cost her too _much emotion to escape observation., > 3 Mrs. Conway^ replied, S1 that as she had a> letter, to write to u Mr, Conway, she should : like t to .remain at home best, only she had thought the air would,have been of service to her; and also ^added, that it was veryjikely that Miss Hargrave would give, them a call, and jthat she should vbe sorry to be out in that case. . * .Eleanor could scarcely help smiling at the infatuation which had taken possession of her bosom for this Miss /Hargrave, of whom' she, as -yet, knew ,nothing; >but whose shining appendages were/quite suf¬ ficient, in her eyes, to constitute her as every thing great and good. '. On Mrs. Conway seating herself at her writing-desk, Eleanor took up a book, with a view to divert her thoughts/, but she felt it >was "impossible to 'read, and as the mornings advanced,;she, unconsciously fix-
ed hen eyes Jtowards) : theowindo:Wi*i>vjuch commanded a view of the Gfove^ ift^ppe^ she might behold lord Montalhari} .?Slpw- lyi however, passed bmth'e\ houf s/ and still he didruot appear.^ She felt disappointed and urieasyi-when aloudknockfsounded at the door. Her hopesi arose, herf;;heart beat, the colour fled her cheeks,,, When f Mr. Crosby was announced. r;:fM '}K<:>:t: ; 'ini<i- v; For/the first time she felt /ever* hisfpre- sence was unwelcome.v> Her emotipnwas too visible t6 escape ihis- observation, as, while faking her; hand, .?.he closely;scrutii nized^ her countenanceV;andi tendevlyiinr quired if she were not well? ' : . .-•.«*.. o| •: l ■Eleanor replied,; that she iwasiratherhi- disposedi which Mrs. rConwayrcpnfirmed*, by asserting that? she- looked; very unwell and ; pale;^ ■:'.-■.& i^ •;■-. vin M ir.djh r if ;; ■ • *^ How;can you expect her to look others wisev madam ?1" he replied; '5 are ^ou-^pt; contributing to her indisposition bylaun,ehh ing her into continual scenes ;pf<gaiefyv? dissipation;.and^ late: hoiirsswill soon erase. the^^ roses from her cheeks for ! ever^whidi vol. in. k
1<)4 ELEANOR." can'foutiirbe supplied by art, 1 , the only re- sort J l r eft^for the vain land-thoughtless ";„vy> -'/'Mrs. ConHvay replied rather sharply.,to • this speech, adding, that she r had; merely taken 'Eleanor '■ to a rational] amusement, which'ought-not)to be construed-by him in'such a severe light, . /* . ..wi/L-i, :■ 'Mr. Crosby of course defended his,opi¬ nion ; while Eleanor endeavoured tp* soft* en ! tlie argument; of which she was. sorry to have been the'cause.». * j ./• ^ J , Mrs. Conway exultingly asked him what he thought of Miss Hargrave, and if\s}ie wereUidt as beautiful as she had described her to be? ^ i! ■' • '• - -•< *-• ' u n . "Beauty " he replied, '5 is but a poor ex¬ ternal'acquis! tion, and isa sorry compensa? tion for internal endowments." ,.*- \ r "Well, but, my good sir," cried 4l Mrs ( Conway,' .<«-youi cannot say.) surely i that Miss ! Hargrave is wanting in sense or un¬ derstanding—will you (not allow that* she is.amiost accomplished woman?". ;.,- .. j -vA*.:Invill allow that she is a,very gay la- tfyfhe .replied; -'.« and, no? doubt, in' your
eyes, a prodigy. For my part/ madam, I am old, and cannot be caught only by glitter." te Well, but you can certainly do justice to her qualifications, Mr. 'Crosby," cried Mrs. Conway, s highly provoked* at his in¬ difference to her favourite. *' Come, now, you must acknowledge that she looked uncommonly lovely last night—was f she not most elegantly dressed?" <l D?*essed, madam!" he re-echoed, 1 " ra¬ ther say elegantly undressed, for this fa¬ shion 'the lady had evidently studied to attain ; and though I own myself a lover of nature, unadorned by art, yet I am still more an advocate for the gem of modesty, which/I am inclined to think, is not much the study of your new friend, by the thin- iiess of her garment." Mrs. Conway was now quite enraged.— " I see you are determined, sir,"'she cried, " to contradict me in every* thing I say; therefore, for the future, I shall be silent - on the subject, contenting myself with the } t \ > .,' k2 * %: "' )
sweet enjoyment of Miss Hargrave's soei^ ety, which will afford-me the highest gra¬ tification." f ° " You are perfectly right, madam," M he replied, *' to enjoy your own opinion; and I only hope that you will" find Miss Har¬ grave deserving the regard you have form- e;d : forher." Mrs. Conway contemptuously smiled at this'half-formed hint, but forbore to, reply, and the conversation dropped. • , Mrs. Conway resumed her writing; and during the remainder of his stay, he con¬ versed with Eleanor, for whom he was all anxiety, as he considered her quite indis¬ posed ; and under this plea Eleanor con¬ cealed the true cause, which was, in fact, a mind ill at case. She wished for the ar¬ rival of lord Montalban, yet dreaded his appearing before Mr, Crosby, whose pene¬ trating glance she^ knew would read her heart; and though he was a man whom she esteemed and venerated, yet, on 1 this occasion* she was even glad when he arose to depart. With sincere affection he begged
her to take great care of her health, and taking a kind leave of her, left the house. On finishing her letter, Mrs. Conway looked 'at her w T atch, and found the hour for dinner was drawing near; she therefore declared they must make haste to dress, adding, she supposed Miss Hargrave would not give them a call now, as it was too late for armorning visit, and concluded she felt too fatigued to take a ride, in consequence of being so iate the night before.—" I ful¬ ly expected she would," continued Mrs. Conway; " it is so lovely a morning, and it is so tiresome to be disappointed when you are wishing for any body to come." " It is indeed, madam," replied Eleanor, who felt what she said, although Mrs. Con¬ way was not aware of the real reason which prompted her quick reply. They sat down to dinner with uo other company than Mr. Reynolds, who had called in to see his daughter, and yielded to, her invitation of stopping the remain¬ der of the day. Eleanor could scarcely eat a'morsel; her
mind } dwelt: upon- * the:proirase^ of fiord Montalban 1 , whom she had expected would have arrived long • before.' thi§ time. £$he dreaded; lest any family fracas should have 1 . taken; place y and eyentually^preyent his, coming-^,again, she consoled ,herself• with- tl ie ithpughts, that he: might; possibly take. a ride:hi the- evening, and she ehdeayouiv ed to recruit her nearly; exhaustted patience^ iShe was that day doomed-to : suffer he^ tween hope and disappointment, as.a great number of Mrs^Conway's friends occasion— ally called in; and, on each fresh arrival, her heart beat with the hope that it was his-.lordship. With a degree of vexation she beheld quite a large party ready for the tea-table,, as she considered, even; if he really anivedV she could have no opportu¬ nity to converse with him before so many- people. :•■•', ■'.: ; 4 : Mrs. Conway was in the highest spirits imaginable, and noticed the visible dejec¬ tion of Eleanor with much concern. This drew upon her the remarks of all the com¬ pany, which ill-suited with her present
j feelings, as she would gladly have escaped J from observation. At length the tea was brought upon ta¬ ble, and Eleanor began to give up her ex¬ pectations, when a loud knock once more broke upon their ears. Eleanor trembled violently ; the colour, fled her cheeks, and scarcely cbuld she have the courage to look towards the (1 door, which now opened—a gentleman entered, and she actually heard the servant announce lord Montalban.
CHAPTER X. i r ' Tl*w h>vst r,i^ tdl j my throbbing hen rt i3 faf) With thee aioiie; I've thought of nothing else, Nor shall (I from my 1 soul believfe) till death. h thfltthe ftice of cm&M Hypocrisy ? , Jf she is guili y, stars are made of darkness, And beauty shall noinoie belong to heaven. Young. Mits. Conway arose on the entrance of lord Montalban, and most cordially welcomed him—" This is an unexpected pleasure," she exclaimed; " but I hope your lord¬ ship will enhance it by favouring us with your company for the remainder of the evening." " Most certainly, madam," he replied; « I came on purpose, and am happy to find I have not been the means of keeping you in suspense as to my arrival, which has been protracted beyond my intentions."
He looked towards Eleanor, who felt greatly confused, as she had kept his in¬ tended visit so secret to herself. Mrs. Conway, too much engaged with her company to observe the cause, again seated herself at the table, of which she be¬ gan to do the honours; while lord Montal¬ ban had advanced towards Eleanor, by whom he seated himself, and, in a voice of irreat tenderness, inquired as to her health, adding, that he was sorry to pay her so ill a compliment, but he could not avoid re¬ marking that the glow of health had left her cheek, and the lily supplied its place. The roses again revisited her face for a minute, as she met the tender gaze of his lordship. She replied, that she had been suffering with a headache all day, which would probably not leave her until she obtained some rest. " I have been persuading her to take a little air," cried Mrs. Conway; " but I fear she is really worse than she will ac¬ knowledge, as I could not prevail on her to stir out to-day at all. w k3
Lord Montalban, who guessed'the cause, cast a look of such tender expressionuiporu Eleanor, that she sunk in soft* confusion beneath his gaze ; she felt self-convicted— the eyes of the company were all upon her r she therefore endeavoured to rally< her spi¬ rits; and 1 turning to Mrs. Conway, she- cried—f^Really, madam, I am much obliged to you for your kind concern! on myaccount;. but I canassure you, my in- disposition is not' so serious as tyou ima-. gine; nor would I have, been so obstinate as to'have refused your kind offer in tak¬ ing the air, had I really thought it would have been of service to me." " Why, my dear,"' returned Mrs. Con¬ way, "> air is often very beneficial for, the headache, which made me recommend,it to you ; the weather is now very, warm, and may affect you." < . ,"* u • ■ " It is not too late for you to try its ef¬ fects,"' cried lord Montalban, turning a look of entreaty on Eleanor,; who fully comprehended his meaning; "the evening is lovely to the extreme, and I should be
most happy, to. accompany .yonin a short walk, if you would allow me the. pleasure." Mrs. Conway immediately seconded lord Montalban's proposal,, and begged hereto comply—"lYou cantake a turn to the top: of the'Grove,'! she criedj. " and-perhaps you will find great-relief." w~ : - • .a Eleanor could, not' refuse, I without ap¬ pearing either obstinate or fastidious; she therefore assented; and on the tea equi-i page being removed, she attired herself. for a walk.- ■ - ■' Sl " M Mrs. Conway laughingly desired .they would not stay s too long, as she should' wish for their company. Lord Montalbanreplied, that he would- not detain Miss. Glendinning, a minute longer than was agreeable to herself; and- taking her.hand, .they left the house. On entering the Grove, he drew the^ arm of-Eleanor .within, his own, and ex¬ pressed his hopes -that the gentle,breezes of the evening would remove'the pain- in her head. She trembled'as they pro- ceeded .along, jand lord, -Montalban • oh- -
served > the f emotion of her whole frames With a view to give her time to recover herself, he delicately forbore to speak on any* particular subject, confining <■ himself to mere cursory remarks, until they reach¬ ed the top of the Grove, when, striking into a retired path, the scene became so congenial to his feelings, that he broke out into the most'lively expressions of admi¬ ration. The birds were heard to chant their melodious strains, which no sound disturbed; all was calm and serene; it was tranquil as if i " 1 he general puUe Of life stoo 1 s*titl,.i»d tnture }\u\<\e n p.uisc " " How truly beautiful is this lovely spot f " he exclaimed, " and how well it accords with my 1 present disposition! ' '1 Ims could Imlc carelcsbh aw.ij 1 lie milder e\einng ot hle's i luiidless d.ny, From business and the world's instruction free. With huoks.with love, with friendship, and .viUi thee; No tartiitr WMitf no wu>h ytt unpossebt, Could e'er disturb my unambitious bitiist." His lordship pressed her hand fervently
as he ejaculated this, and gazed- tenderly in her face. She felt incapable of reply¬ ing; the most bewitching expression stole over her lovely countenancej and increased the admiration of lord Montalban; a thou¬ sand agonizing sensations crossed his mind j all his doubts, his fears, assailed his bosom respecting the supposed falsehood of Elea¬ nor ; he was determined, if possible, to have an explanation. He looked earnest¬ ly in her face, which displayed the strik¬ ing features of truth and virtue; and he mentally reflected that she could not be guilty of dissimulation — " How much obliged I feel," he cried, "by your kind, acquiescence to my wish, in accompany¬ ing me in this delightful walk, where, un-, restrained by the presence of others, I can : openly converse on those subjects which at present torment my aching breast, aiyl. to which 1 beg your most serious atten¬ tion !" Eleanor bowed, and he thus proceeded. " It is painful in the extreme to the in¬ genuous mind, to suffer under any appear-
som of those we hold'most dean*' 'Thus it- is^vith'me; so anxious am I for your good opinion, that I fear lest any circumstance should'injure me in'your estimation; I mean with regard to the unpleasant scene which occurred last night- at tho theatre with my 'aunt, lady Cecilia, and which I r now wi sir to explain to you." » « I hold myself much obliged to your- lordship," she replied, "for your confi¬ dence; but 1 indeed I'would not wish to dive into any family affairs, which cannot' concern me. 'All of us have some secret causes,' which may perhaps give rise to < strange suspicions, which, however inno¬ cent, cannot be explained, and leave us the'unfortunate object of doubt— 1 -"" " But those doubts must, and can be re¬ moved," quickly interrupted lord Montal¬ ban, " and X will put in pratf ice thte theory I am preaching, by revealing to you the cause of those expressions you heard made use of*by captain St. John." He then fully related to Eleanor the.
particulars of the history, with -which we have already' acquainted our readers, re^ spectingi lady Cecilia and the unfortunates Amelia. * y "■ i ut Eleanor was much shocked afrthe reci¬ tal, and sincerely sympathized with lord- jMontalban at his feelings on the occasion^ '• M?ny causes," continuedhis lordship^ " combine to depress my mind; i but tliere* is one which predominates above all'the rest, and which I am resolved no longer to^ conceal. It is in your power, Eleanor, lo>* relieve me'from this pang, and which, I trust, yon will no longer refuse."' > Eleanor was greatly agitated; she dread¬ ed the subject on which he was about to speak—"* My lord," she cried, ** I do not understand you. How is it possible for me to relieve you from the burden that oppresses.you?" / "Byexplainingtome," he replied, "those' suspicious* circumstances* which-have dri¬ ven me almost to madness, in the thought of my having a rival in your affections*.
