CHAPTER I.



" I loved, I love you, for this love have lost

State, station, heaven, mankind's, my own esteem,

And yet cannot regret what it hath cost,

So dear is still the memory of that dream.



Yet if I name my guilt, 'tis not to boast, -

None can deem harsher of me than I deem.



I trace this scrawl because I cannot rest;

I've nothing to reproach or to request."—Byron.



Lady Howard was sitting at a late breakfast, in the month of May, exactly that day sixteen years since the foregoing paragraph was read in the Morning Post.

A change had passed over her beauty since that early day of its first exceeding loveliness,





4 • " '•• - " THE DIVORCED.

but she was still a beautiful woman, and what she had lost in bloom she had gained in expression.

There was a sweetness and a melancholy in her smile which showed that sorrow had touched her nearly; a mingled humility and pride was visible in her whole demeanour; she was leaning on her hand thoughtfully, when her daughter came hastily into the room.

" So soon returned, Alice, love! why you have not had time to take your usual exercise. How came Miss Sharpe to allow you ?"—

" Oh, mama!" (cried the child, interrupting her, in extreme agitation).—" Oh! mama, I am never to see Fanny again; I am never to speak to her—never to play with her in the square." And she put her head into her mother's lap, and sobbed loudly. " Fanny, Fanny!" she ejaculated in broken phrase, but never could finish what she seemed to wish to say, and Lady Howard's lap was wet with her child's tears.





" What is the matter Alice? you terrify me. What has happened to vex you? Have you and Fanny quarrelled? if so, take comfort; she will soon be friends with you again, if you go like a good girl, and beg pardon, should you have offended her;—do not cry, Alice, do not cry so. Tell me love, what does so distress you ?''

" Fanny and I have not quarrelled

mama; oh ! no—but we are never to play together again. A nasty cross lady came and took Fanny away from beside me, on the bench, where we were sitting together, making daisy chains, and she said ' Do you remember what I told you, Miss Fanny,'-then whispered in her ear, and led her away. I ran after them, and asked Fanny if she was to be in the square this evening; Fanny said nothing, but was ready to cry, and the cross lady answered ' No, you are not to walk here to-night.' And then she turned to me, asked where my governess was, and bade me go to her; and I heard her say as she walked away, ' You must not play with that young lady and her brother, any more, Miss Fanny. Your mama does not choose you should,' and she took her out of the square; but I saw Fanny look back very sorrowful at me, and we kissed our hands to each other. I am so fond of Fanny, mama. I love her so much, it is very hard that we may not play together again; and Henry too, is so fond of her. He will be very angry at the cross





lady but that will not bring us together

again—and—and—I will never walk in the ugly square, now that I am not to meet Fanny

it is very hard—can you conceive what

for, mama 1" and her tears flowed afresh; she looked up through them to her mother's face; it was covered with a blush of scarlet dye, and an expression of dismay and vexation was visible to the child, as she folded her in her arms, and tried, but in vain, to comfort her for the loss of her play-fellow and friend.

For a few moments, neither spoke, and Lady Alice continued to sob and weep, leaning on her mother's breast, and causing her such anguish as none but those under the same awful, and pitiable circumstances can "know.





The child's tears were fire-brands to the mother's heart.

" I wonder why Fanny is forbade to play with me," resumed Lady Alice, with the tenacity of disappointed affection. " I wonder why Fanny's mama does not choose she should any longer be friends with my brother and me. Fanny always told me her mama was a good mama, and a kind one, as kind and as good as my own dear mama; it is very odd, why we are to be parted,—can you conceive why?" and again Alice Talbot looked in Lady Howard's face, but she could read no answer there; she only saw the same deepening blush, and heard the sigh that was almost a groan. Happy would it have been for that innocent girl, could she never have known the fatal truth !





" I am grieved, Alice," Lady Howard at length replied, " that you have lost your little friend's society; but perhaps this separation is only on account of Fanny's having been naughty, and that she is to be punished for a few days, by not being permitted to talk with her accustomed play-fellows, and perhaps she will be in the square again soon; therefore do not cry, love, and vex yourself so, my sweet child; besides, you will soon make more new friends; there are many other pretty agreeable girls, of your own age, Alice, to fill her place ; so kiss me dear, and promise me not to cry any more."

Thus did Lady Howard try to deceive her child — try to deceive herself; but the thorn was in her heart.

" / forget Fanny ?" asked the fond impetuous girl. " / forget Fanny, mama. Never!—and Henry !"





" Oh, Alice, as to Henry, do not tell him any thing about the matter. He is going abroad in two or three days, and need not know it, it will only give him pain; so let me see, Alice, how well you can keep a secret, and say nothing about Fanny Harcourt to your brother."

The child put her arms round Lady Howard's neck and kissed her fervently, but said, " forget Fanny Harcourt! never, mama. She is a good dear girl, and she loves me, I know she does, and I will always love her; but if you wish I should not, I will not tell Henry, unless he asks me about her, and asks me why she is not in the square, when he goes there to-morrow, which he means to do, to bid her good bye ; but then, you know, I must not tell a lie; what can I tell him but the truth ?" More daggers to poor Lady Howard.

" Alice, love, do not say you will never forget Fanny Harcourt, for you will do so; it is not B 5





natural at your age—at any age, not to forget; but you will please me very much by keeping this silly story a secret from your brother."

" Then I will, to please you, mama; you know I would do any thing to please you—

any thing but ." And Alice hesitated, and

smiled through her tears—" forget Fanny."

" Thank you, thank you, for promising to keep this a secret from your brother; thank you, dearest,—you are very kind."

" Do not thank me, mama," and the child was struck by the steadfast gaze of her mother; but then again in a moment she thought only of Fanny Harcourt, of her own vexation at being separated from her, and she relapsed into sorrow and lamentation.

When she received no answer, she again fixed her eyes, questioningly, upon Lady Howard.

What could be the meaning of that odd stare, with which her motor's eye was suddenly rivetted to the Newspaper, that lay on the breakfast table, before her.





Alice felt that there was something peculiar in her countenance—something that she had never seen there before; but she was very young, not fourteen—ignorant as well as innocent of sin and shame, and totally at a loss for a meaning of the expression, which in after-times recurred to her with anguish that never could be entirely obliterated.

" Leave me, dearest Alice; at present I have letters to write—letters of business. Go to Miss Sharpe, and tell her I shall take you out with me this afternoon, and to-morrow, if papa has no objection, you shall go to the play."

"That, will be delightful!—Oh, dear mama ; you are the best mama in the world: nobody ever was so good;" and she kissed Lady Howard a thousand times before she departed.





When alone, Lady Howard again took up the paper; she read, and re-read, " Festivities at Vernon Castle;" and then followed a long paragraph describing them, and the names of the illustrious visitors who had met to celebrate the birth-day of the heir-apparent, Lord Stuart, and closed with these words: " The Honourable Miss Agar presided as mistress of the festivities/'

What a history of the past—what a chronicle of sorrow and remorse did these lines open out as it were, before the mind of her who read them! They fell like molten lead upon her heart: Lord Stuart was her own son—she had forfeited all right to his love,—she had incurred her child's abhorrence; at least, she had rendered herself despicable in his eyes. He must blush at the recollection of his mother.

Can any gratification of unhallowed love compensate for such a thought? His father too, the noblest,, gentlest, kindest of human beings,—even she acknowledged that truth,— had he, in the midst of these gay revels, remembered that Lord Stuart had a mother, who had been his wife ? and if he did, would he curse her in thought ? Oh no ! She knew he would not, and involuntarily a burst of admiration of his character was wrung from her; and, thinking upon all he had been to her,— all he was in the beautiful integrity of his noble being, the contrast with herself struck her in the freshness of a renewed feeling, and she said,





" Wretch that I am ! he is revenged; but Miss Agar—why is that serpent domiciliated

in his house? Yet what right have I "

Lord Howard entered the room unexpectedly; her tears were visible; she endeavoured to wipe them away; she turned to the window, said something of the weather, and pushed the newspaper under some books, as if by accident, and felt that Lord Howard was fixing his eyes upon her all the while, though she endeavoured to appear as if she was not conscious he was looking at her. There was an awkward silence. At last she said, with a half hysterical laugh,





" Why are you staring at me, Howard ? One would suppose I had been committing some crime." Unlucky word.

" Not exactly that, Laura, at present," (with emphasis,) " but you are playing a part which I don't like; with me, at least, you may be sincere. Tell me what is the matter with

• you."

" Nothing, nothing is the matter with me. <

What can be the matter with a poor creature, mewed up as I am, and never seeing a soul, but a few dull men, such as you choose to bring to the house ? "

Lady Howard did not mean to be cross and impertinent, she only sought for some feeling that might cover the true one.

" It ill becomes you, Lady Howard, to find fault with my friends. You may be happy that I have a friend left who will come to us; and you must remember that you knew, when you left your first estate, the consequences, the humiliating consequences which, in despite of my tenderest care, must become your portion. Neither have you suffered alone; the man who ties a mill-stone about his neck cannot expect to swim on the surface."





" You need not constantly remind me, Howard, of that which I know so well, and feel so deeply, at every moment of my existence— it is unmanly, ungenerous."

" Nay, Laura, weep not; forgive me. We have mutually much to forgive each other. You know I love you. Pardon me, if I have been betrayed into harshness."

" Pardon me, if I have forgotten the duty I owe you,—the only duty I can now fulfil."

He kissed her affectionately. They both sighed deeply.





" Well, Laura, and now tell me what caused your tears before I entered. Remember, duplicity is my abhorrence. I know, alas! that to others it is almost necessary that we should occasionally practise deceit—to our inferiors, to our friends, to our children. Yes," (they looked mournfully in one another's countenance,) " we are separated from the world. 'Unclean, unclean,' as the lepers of old. But to each other! What need we of disguise ? It is adding sin to sin."

Lady Howard arose ; she took the newspaper from beneath its hiding-place; she pointed to the paragraph about Vernon Castle. He read it slowly several times, and laying the paper down, he said,

" Yes; this is gall and wormwood. Poor Laura ! we have mingled the bitter cup for each other; we must drink it even to the very dregs." He arose, and left her alone.

How heavily that day passed ! Lady Howard went out at the accustomed hour, attended as usual by the insignia of her rank, brilliant equipage, numerous servants,' more even than are customary. Did her heart, ache the less ? No; it ached the more. The curiosity of the vulgar—the impertinent smile of the great— the turning away of those who once knew her, and now tried not to seem to see her, were circumstances to which eighteen years might have inured her; and so they had in some degree, for what goad does not become gradually less sharp by continual use ? But on this day these minutise came with peculiar power of venom; every thing seemed to give her back the first agony of her guilt, without restoring that inebriation of the senses which made the world well lost for love. Lady Alice proposed to her mama to stop at a shop of great public resort to buy her some gloves.





" Not there—not at that shop, Alice, love; we will go on to some other."





But the child had already pulled the string of the carriage.: it was in a moment closed in on every side by advancing ranks of other carriages, flying in all directions, and in one of these, which drove furiously against Lady Howard's equipage, and broke the pole, was seated Lady Harcourt and her child.

"Oh,Tanny, dear Fanny!" screamed Lady Alice, " how glad I am to see you."

" I hope we have not broke your carriage," said the former.

" Oh, never mind," cried Lady Alice, " we shall be able to talk."

But at the moment, the coachman of Lady Harcourt, with one of those dexterous and dangerous rushes of coachmanship, drove half over a carriage that impeded his way, and while the affrighted crowd were screaming with terror, he passed like lightning down the street, and was lost to the eyes of the offended parties.





That coachman was the jewel of his lady's establishment, and the admired Jehu of his tribe. Lady Howard was obliged to leave her equipage until another pole could be substituted for the broken one ; and she had the mortification of hearing her name whispered to the right and to the left, and of seeing the various nods and glances which were exchanged as she entered the most fashionable of shops, which the empressement of the attendants to show her their choicest goods, and to offer her any thing which might calm her after the alarm she had received, did not abate. These scenes Lady Howard had had the good taste and judgment always to avoid; and now, when for the first time she had become exposed to them and their consequences, she was as much distressed as though she had wilfully sought them.

Several young men, gay persons, notoriously such, who happened to be passing, and hearing of the accident, were particularly anxious to have an opportunity of seeing the secluded beauty; and the more so, as Lord Howard was a very jealous husband, and exceedingly averse to receiving them under his roof, though formerly he had lived in intimacy with them. These persons made this accident an excuse for offering their services to Lady Howard, and for being unusually officious in handing her to ano-^





ther carriage, which had been sent for to

Square.

The whole affair, though in fact nothing, grew » into a story, as Lady Howard feared it would, and occasioned a temporary revival of her history. Her husband was displeased with her when he heard of the accident; this was unreasonable, but not unnatural. Many very kind-hearted men, with ill regulated tempers, are always cross when they are vexed, and especially with their wives. Lady Howard was not a woman to brook this injustice without saying that it was one, and a sort of second quarrel ensued.





" And pray did your servants suffer tamely the insolence of Lord Harcourt's coachman ? "

" Indeed they behaved very well. They could not stop the man, and they forbore any impertinent or unbecoming language; in short, the whole affair passed like lightning; there was no time for any one to think of any thing but their own safety."

" And pray, madam, who escorted you from, and to your carriage ?"

Lady Howard blushed as she pronounced the name of the two gentlemen who had been civil to her.

" You are always fortunate, madam, in meeting with the very persons I most particularly dislike; but it is of no consequence, it only adds another feature to our notoriety, but as to that cursed coachman of Lord Harcourt's, his lordship shall give me ample apology for the fellow's diabolical behaviour, or he shall know more about it."





" My dear husband, I beseech you not, before Alice," whispered the distressed mother, " do not speak harshly to me before our child."

Lord • Howard was soon softened, and the first impulse of anger having subsided, he was all kindness again; but Lady Howard did not so readily return to a placid state of feeling; she could not brook being made to cry at one moment, and then be told to laugh the next; it was not in her nature to comply with this tyranny, and though she had acquired great self-command, the frequent wounds she received from him, whom alone she thought ought never to have made her conscious of her situation, had gradually hardened her feelings, and began to shake the very foundation of her love for him.

That day Lord Howard dined out; every body knows how inexpressibly melancholy it is to sit down to a sumptuous feast, surrounded by attendants, the only one to be waited upon; it is, as if some Banquos would rise up to surround the board; and many were the ghosts of departed hours that surrounded Lady Howard's melancholy dinner table.





She arose before the dessert could be set down, and was passing into her boudoir, when the groom of the chambers gave her a note. She opened it hastily, it was from the governess Miss Sharpe, requesting, as her ladyship was alone, to be allowed half an hour's conversation with her.

" Tell Miss Sharpe to come in."

When that lady made her appearance, she entered with a little mincing step and self-satisfied air, bowing instead of courtseying, which she conceived to be the most fashionable mode of coming into a room.

" Sit down, pray, Miss Sharp," Lady Howard said with that simple good breeding which puts the airs and graces of under-bred persons to the rout: " I am always happy to see you when I am alone, that is, when my lord is out, and Alice does not require your society; come and tell me of her improvements, and what you think of her advancement in the several accomplishments which she is taught, especially what her masters think of her talents."





This kindness and natural ease of address puzzled Miss Sharpe for a moment, and she nearly forgot the set speech which she had studied for the occasion; but, recollecting herself, her own unequalled consequence, and unequalled virtue, (she was as ugly as a wizened apple,) she put her glass to one eye, while the other wandered off a thousand ways in a minute, and looking, as she thought, daggers to the person before whom she intended to show off, she said, " I regret on Lady Alice's account to declare to your ladyship that I can no longer live under your roof, and therefore I am come to give your ladyship warning, that you may suit yourself as quickly as possible with some other person to fill my place."





" How so, Miss Sharp, has any thing given you offence ? "

" A.great many things, my lady."

" Indeed ! you astonish me ! why this is the first time I have ever heard you make any complaint, and you have lived with me nearly two years."

" Every thing does not unfold itself at once, your ladyship knows ; I have met to-day with such an affront as I never thought to have met with in my life;" and here Miss Sharp pulled out her pocket handkerchief and began to whimper.

" I am exceedingly concerned that you should have been thus insulted in our house. Did Alice give way to any of her passionate sallies,—was Henry rude, as school-boys sometimes are ? Pray let me know your grievance, and I shall be the first to redress it; I should be exceedingly sorry you left Alice, she is so attached to you."

" Ah ! poor dear Lady Alice, I truly feel for Vol. i. - c





her; this is only the commencement of her sorrows; but your ladyship must know, that a young woman, (she was near forty,) a youqg girl, I may say, who has nothing but her character to depend upon, cannot run the risk of losing it without making an effort to retrieve her good name, that good name which never yet has borne the slightest taint of slander.'

" And pray, Miss Sharp," asked Lady Howard, authoritatively, though she trembled at her heart's core before the impertinent piece of frippery, who was covertly arraigning her; " and pray who has dared to slander your immaculate fame ?"

" My lady, I hope your ladyship will excuse my entering upon particulars, it is a very delicate subject, one I do not wish to be obliged to enter upon in detail, but you know we are told not to meddle with pitch, lest we be defiled thereby; therefore we must not only avoid evil, but avoid even the appearance of evil; and in





short, my lady, I mean to go to-morrow morning, I do not care whether I am paid my salary or not, so long as I am out of this house. I am much obliged to your ladyship for past favours, and I beg to offer my compliments to my lord. Poor dear Lady Alice will half break her heart, I know, but my character is all I have to depend upon, and therefore I have packed my trunks, and to-morrow I go."

" I never wish to detain any person in my service who is desirous of leaving it. Your salary shall be paid you ; and as to your regrets about Alice, you may comfort yourself by the idea, that as soon as she knows how rudely, and how unexpectedly and inconveniently you have given me warning, she will cease to care for a person who has behaved so ill to her mama. I wish you good night, Miss Sharp." And Lady Howard left the room-. But though she had made the best of this unpleasant scene, she could not help saying to herself,





When such a creature has power to wound me, I am sunk low indeed !" and then that burning blush of shame, which was for ever scorching her cheek, burned with all its dire intensity. At such moments, nothing soothed Lady Howard but to look upon her children's innocent faces, and she went to her daughter's room, and saw her in childhood's rosy sleep, looking beautiful, but not in the quiet repose in which she usually beheld her. A murmuring voice of entreaty uttered indistinct sounds, and a few tears coursed down her cheeks.

Lady Howard hesitated whether or not to awake her, but Alice again fell into her childlike slumber, and she sat down by her bed-side, wishing those wishes for her peace and happiness which, in a mother's breast, are prayers.

The fact was, that Alice Talbot had forgotten, in the pleasure of driving about with her mother, and looking at all the pretty things which caught her eye, the pain she had felt that morning when her friendship with Fanny Harcourt was so suddenly and, to her, so unaccountably broken off; but when she lay down in bed, and that every feeling she had experienced during that day— every word she had said—every trifling circumstance which had occurred, returned to her memory, as it does to every one, not overcome by fatigue, at the time when they lie down to rest,—and that an approving or condemning conscience gives its award to the actions and thoughts of the past day,—those heart-rending words: " You must not play with that young lady and her brother any more, Miss Fanny; your mama does not choose that you should,"—returned to her recollection, and sounded in her ears with all the harsh cruelty with which the cross voice of the stiff governess had uttered them, and made poor Alice weep anew, at the loss of her friend's society, till, tired with unhappiness, she dropped into sleep, but not the refreshing sleep that is generally the portion of the young, the innocent, the happy.





" Don't go, don't go,—Fanny, Fanny !" were the words she uttered when she closed her eyes, and these words she continued indistinctly to .murmur as her mother watched her with an aching heart.

Lady Howard had endured mortifications, such as always attend upon conduct similar to her own. Scarcely a dayhad passed since she forsook her first husband, that some circumstance had not occurred to make her writhe with anguish, and hang her head down with shame, for she was not a woman who could brave the world's opinions. 4^

She bore its rebuke well; knowing she had deserved the punishment. Yes; she had borne patiently the scorn of those who were perhaps more sinful than herself, but more wary,—those who made the cloak of a husband's sanction their apology to live for a lover,—those who idly or wantonly trifled with the reputation of their fellow-creatures and shed abroad the venom of detraction; and she had endured with resignation the^ silent contempt of others, whose blameless conduct rendered them harsh to the failings of their sex.





She had also meekly borne the sallies of her husband's temper, hard as it was to endure reproaches from him, for whom she had sacrificed every thing,—rank, station, consideration, virtue. All this, for sixteen long years she had endured,—and endured with a meekness and a passive courage surpassing all courage, save that of woman's; but this day brought with it a sorrow and a humbling upon whiqh she had forgot to calculate; every thing was light, compared to this: she had seen her sins visited upon her innocent child.

The first pure affections of Alice Talbot's heart were to be uprooted for the offence of her mother; and those early friendships have a raciness and a vigour in them, which are never the growth of an after time.





Beware how ye extinguish or eradicate such primary shoots of affection, all ye who have the superintendence of childhood and youth ! they are the germ of many virtues. Disinterestedness, heroism, constancy, truth, are component parts of the heart's first pure attachments.

How unlike those of later life, of which the very reverse are too often the characteristics ! Oh, how frequently in age do we look back to the time when the first spontaneous bound of the heart was felt for a friend ! It may be, that that friend proved fickle, or unworthy,—we may have long ceased to care for them; but the sentiment itself, abstracted from the object, was of so high and inspiring a nature, that its memory can never die. Of all this, Lady Howard thought, as she looked upon her sleeping child, and said,





" Yes, dear one! your mother has blighted the very bud of your happiness; she marked you with the brand of sorrow and of shame in giving you birth;" and as she thought of this, she felt that arid agony which finds not the relief of tears.

Lady Howard knew the character which Lady Harcourt bore : it was that of a blameless, heartless, prudent person,—one who had never swerved for a moment from the narrow way—who had scrupulously adhered to the ceremonies of custom, and chosen her associates, not from any charm or attraction they might possess, but from certain straight lines of propriety by which she squared her every action.

She had a right, if any body had, to sit in judgment upon the conduct of others, and Lady Howard well knew that the verdict she would pronounce upon her child's holding any communion with her daughter, would be peremptory and irreversible:—" they shall never meet in intimacy more."





Her son, too, Henry Talbot, how would he bear, —when he returned to town the next day,— how would he bear a separation from his little wife, as he used to call Fanny Harcourt, without sifting the cause thoroughly.

" Yes," said Lady Howard, "the moment so long dreaded seems fast approaching. My children are to know their mother's crime."

Very terrible was the pillow, which should have been that of rest to Lady Howard, and the more so, because she had no one being to whom she dared unburthen her »orrow. Her husband was the last person whom she would remind of his misfortune—of her delinquency. With his ungovernable temper, to irritate was to drive him to desperation; and while remorse and shame had been mingled with her daily bread, her whole care was employed in soothing him into forgetfulness. She had rejoiced when his family or his friends had invited him to pass any time with them, and, though scorned herself, it cast a momentary ray of pleasure over her to see him courted and respected.





The evil she so much dreaded, did not however occur at that time, or for some years after. Fanny Harcourt went out of town, so did the Talbots; and, although Alice did not forget her playfellow, the departure of her governess, to whom she was much attached, made a diversion to her sorrow; and Lady Howard's judicious kindness to her child restored the latter to her hitherto usual state of happiness.





CHAPTER II.



How fragrant was the jasmine's flower!

How pure its spotless hue !

It breath'd of sweets, one short liv'd hour,



Bloom'd gay and bright, like you,

Then died—to tell that beauty's reign,



Is transient as 'tis fair,

And that the blight of folly's stain,



Or crush of griping care,

Will make the flowers of young love die ;



Its fragile stem will sever;

Will soil the bloom of purity



And fade life's flower for ever.—MS. Sokc.



It is Alice Talbot's birth-day, she is seventeen—her parents' delighted eyes behold her with admiration—she is beautiful, and good as beautiful—she leaves the room, Lord and Lady Howard are alone.

" The time is come, I tell you Laura, when all must be known. Do you wish that your children should hear our story from the lips of strangers ? Shall your crime be told them by one of that world, who justly condemn the shame, though they pity the offender ? or, will





you, that I ?"

" No, Charles, no; our crimes must first become known to our children by our own lips, but I would fain put off the evil day. Yet it is

hard that I ; but no matter, if you think

it is right—if you think it is for their happiness, to have the veil torn from their eyes, which, hitherto, we have been fortunate in placing

before them tell them all ; or, if you

order it so, I will, myself, declare to them that

I am , that their mother is ," and she

wept; but she resumed, drying her tears, and suffocating sobs, which impeded her utterance, " but it is my part to tell my daughter— yours to tell your son, perhaps—it is I who ought to be humbled, yes, even to the dust, before mine own offspring—for that she is my offspring—. I hope, Charles, she will not turn and hate me, as some have done. I have been a fond, nay, a good mother;" and Lady Howard looked humbly, and inquiringly, in her husband's face as though she sought his word of testimony, to set the seal to the praise she had ventured to bestow upon herself. " I have nursed her, Charles, at my breast. I have been her instructor, as well as her play-fellow. I have tended her in sickness. I taught her to lisp her first prayer. I have prayed with her, andybr her. I have prayed to be blessed by her love, and to be allowed its continuance; and we have mutually lifted up our voices to heaven to call down blessings on her father's head. All this I say, not for vain boasting,—woe is me ! of what can I boast ?—but to comfort myself with the assurance that she, at least, can never despise—never cast me from her. But if she did—if she changes only in one hue of a less vivid affection than she has hitherto shown me, I shall be quick at perceiving it, quick at supposing it, even though it is not so; ' for conscience makes cowards of us all.' Oh ! I have hoarded my child's love, as a miser hoards his gold. I am greedy of it—I cannot forego one grain of it. I have grudged any one's sharing it, save yourself. Henry, dear Henry, too, not less dear, though less feared perhaps, what will he feel towards me, when he knows the truth ? Oh, love mine ! it is very terrible. Could we not hide our fatal secret from them yet a little longer ? A few years, and 7, please God, shall be at rest. Could we not pass these years as we have hitherto done, in retirement, in seclusion ? Could we not ."





" Laura, dearest Laura! I have felt every word you have uttered, entering like daggers into my very soul. I have not had sufficient courage to interrupt you, till now;—and now, if you could but see the ten thousandth part of what I endure, it might, perhaps, lessen your own sufferings, to know that they are more than shared. I am the responsible one, after all, dearest Laura. I wooed you, to your undoing. I am the one to whom the world will look for justice being done to the children of our unhappy loves; and what will be the condemnation passed upon me, not only by the world, but by my own conscience, if, to spare ourselves some pangs, we neglect to give our children such advantages, and affora" them such chances of happiness, as our position still may have in store for them. Are we, Laura, to sacrifice these to a selfish pride, or morbid sensitiveness? surely not. Nothing can justify us longer in wearing the mask we have hitherto worn. I am sick of living in a state of duplicity with my children. The time is come, when they must judge us; ay, judge their parents, as they will be j udged in their turn by their own offspring; and whatever the avowal may cost, it must be made."





" Charles, I would die for my children, our children, if that could do them any good ; and God knows, it is long since I have had any pleasure in existence, apart from the life I lead in them. But there is something, call it selfishness, if you will; there is something of human infirmity in me, which makes me feel and say that your cold-blooded feelings, towards myself, the total indifference you manifest for my sufferings, nay, humiliations, make me look back with a degree of pity for myself, seeing how little loved I am now, by the man for whom ." She wept again; she wept bitterly.

" Am I never to hear any thing but reproaches ? Never to see any thing but tears ? You have smiles to give to the whole world— but to me ."

" The whole world," said Lady Howard, suddenly ceasing to cry, and looking up haughtily, " what world do I sea—to whom do you allude—when do i" smile ? or, when I do, is it not a mask, that covers the canker-worm of despair ?"





" Laura, you vex me:—you were once proverbially sweet tempered—once beautiful, and lively, and gay,—you are none of these now; and am I to blame if I love you less ? By heaven it were as the song says,' perjury to love you now' —changed as you are become, from the person I professed to adore."

" And who has soured my temper ? Who has withered the youth of my person, before its time ? Is it not you, Lord Howard ? and you are the person to taunt me with the faults, of which you have, alone, been the occasion."

" It is a pity, madam, that we should ever have committed so great a mistake, as to suppose that we could go on for ever loving, and for ever loved : but we are not the only couple who have made the same mistake - there is a remedy, even for this desperate case."

" Name it."





" Separation. But in that case, the children are under the husband's guardianship, you know."

" Charles, forgive me—forgive your distracted wife ;" and she fell at his knees. " Leave me not—take not the children from me. I have been betrayed into violence. I am the veriest wretch breathing. But think of all I suffer; think how tremblingly alive I am at the idea of your caring less for me than you once did. The very restraint under which you live, in having such a wife, terrifies me with the thought, that I shall lose you. I have never, till lately, been thus exacting— thus profuse of expressions of jealous love; for it is only love after all, that has made me petulant, and provoking. Charles, I will master this too much of fondness. I know that the very reproaches I make are so many scare-crows, to frighten away love. I did not use to be ill-tempered. Oh! what a world of unseen evils spring up from one root of error; but I will check this irritation, this nervous tremor. I will be what I have hitherto been, a fond, obedient, and devoted wife. I will do any thing to please you. I will go this moment, and pour into my child's ear the fearful history of her mother's fall."





Lord Howard had looked at her, as she uttered these words, with much sterner resolve than he had ever shown towards her, till she professed her willingness to obey his wishes, and tell her child the secret of her birth; and then the husband and the father pleaded within him; he raised her in his arms, —he spoke to her with lover-like earnestness— all was forgotten, and they remembered only that they were the whole world to each other.

" Since then, dearest Laura, you deem it best to leave our children in ignorance, be it so; after all, I only wish your happiness, their advantage — for the present we will forego making any change in our life; and whenever it may be necessary, by some untoward chance, to declare the truth to them, then will be time enough for us to decide in what manner we shall fulfil our painful task:"





Lady Howard thanked her husband with all the earnestness and warmth of one who seems to have escaped from death to life; and he felt satisfied with himself for having yielded to her wishes.

There were times when Lord Howard lamented the step he had taken. How should it be otherwise ? for though the world have so decided the question of wrong and right, as to make the man, in such cases, immaculate, the woman, impure: though the one is thrust out of society, the latter is courted and well received. Still, no man can be inwardly at- ease, who sees his wife set apart, as a thing the good avoid, and the worldly fear to acknowledge, lest their own errors might be drawn out to light by the contact. And in measure as his children grew up, these melancholy thoughts intruded themselves more frequently, and with more poignant regret.





He was naturally a man of violent temper; and lately Lady Howard had become irritable. Affected by the new trial that came upon her, that of knowing her own offspring must very soon learn their mother's story, she became comparatively careless of all else; and the great object of her erring life, which had been, hitherto, the preservation of her husband's affections, had become secondary.

" Good news, good news, mama!" cried Lady Alice Talbot, flying into her mother's apartment Hke a gossamer, " Henry will be here to-morrow. Oh, what happiness !"

" Happiness, indeed," said Lady Howard; " go tell your papa, dearest; but of course Henry has written to him," and Lord Howard ~





entered the room at the moment with an open letter in his hand.

" From Henry," he said exultingly, " he will be with us to-morrow. He sends you a thousand loves, Laura."

Lady Howard took the letter, her eyes filled with tears,—' so then,' she thought, ' he has written to his father, to Alice, but not to his mother!'

" Thank God, we shall see him once again," she said aloud, stifling the painful supposition, that he loved her less than formerly; and, endeavouring not to give way to the ideas that crossed her mind. "Henry knows all," she thought, "and he despises me."

But when her son arrived, when he rushed into her arms, and cried out, " Dearest mother, dearest father, dearest home!—do I see you once again ? do I come back to you, and find all unchanged? Yet not so, there is Alice grown up a woman, I declare; but, in short, every thing exactly as I could wish to find it— all so beautiful, all so comfortable, so much better than any other place, so much more perfect than any other human being in the world."





When Lady Howard heard these delightful words, which at once carried bliss and pain to her heart, she knew that as yet her son was in ignorance of the truth. A thousand questions were asked and answered by all parties; there was that hurry of spirits attendant on a first meeting after a long absence, which leaves every subject that is touched upon in a confused mist, as it were; all is indistinct except the one absorbing idea, that we are once more with those dearest to us.

It was not till a few days had passed after the re-union of the family, that in talking over the persons Lord Talbot had met at Rome, he said, one day to his mother, " Of all the acquaintances I have made, there is not one I like half so well as young Stuart." Lady Howard was electrified, but she spoke not, moved not. Her son went on talking.





" He is a fine spirited fellow; he saved a man from being drowned in the Tiber, one of those Italian scoundrels too, who might just as well have been drowned for all the good he will ever do; and, instead of buying objects of virtue, he gave away all his money in charities. I believe the cardinal would have canonized him for a saint, if he had continued to remain with them and given out the same largesses to all their churches. He had but one fault that I could find out; he was generally very melancholy, and when we made parties to go and shoot, at the villas in the neighbourhood, he would seldom accompany us. I think he must have been in love, for he was always longing for letters from England, and

VOL. I. D





when a post arrived which brought letters for me, and none for him, he looked as though he could have hung himself:—one day in particular when I got a long letter from you, dear mother, in which you gave me an account of your expedition to Fountain's Abbey, I read him a part of it aloud, and I cannot think why (for there was nothing particularly touching in the letter, though it was very dear, as yours always are, my dear mother.) He absolutely shed tears. ' How I envy you, Howard,' he said—' how I do envy you ! You have a mother—a fond and loving mother, but I'— and he sighed and said no more. What is become of Lady Vernon ?—is she dead ? "

" No, she is not dead, but worse," replied Lady Howard in a calm under-tone that excited no suspicion in her son.

" Worse, mama," (for so he sometimes loved to call his mother, when unheard by others) " Worse ! what do you mean ?"





" Lady Vernon left her husband, and was divorced, and married another man.".

" That is a sad story indeed. I cannot conceive any thing more distressing to a child, than to know of its mother's crimes; a father's is bad enough, but a mother's,—that is indeed a heartbreak."

Had Lord Talbot asked the name of Lady Vernon's present husband, he would have known that that heart-rending situation was his own; but he soon changed the conversation, and Lady Howard complaining of feeling unwell, retired to her apartment to reflect on the consequences that would ensue to her when her children should be acquainted, as they 'soon must be, with the fatal truth. She half wished her son had pushed the question one point farther, but she had not courage to say, " I am her.'

The next day, as Mr. Willoughby was driving Lord Talbot through the Park, the latter exclaimed,





" What a beautiful creature that is!"

"Where, where?" rejoined his companion, looking round, " There are so. many beautiful creatures, how should I know which you mean ?"

"Oh, but that one—there, to the left; so different from every^other, in the vis-a-vis."

" Oh ! there are a thousand handsomer persons than Lady Fanny Harcourt; but she is a sweet, blushing, lively girl, quite fresh, quite new. You will not lose your character for a conoscente in professing yourself one of her adorateurs; and doubtless Lady Harcourt will give you every encouragement, notwithstanding all her prudery."

" Fanny Harcourt!" repeated Lord Talbot. " Can that be the little girl I used to play with in the Square some six or seven years ago ? I must ascertain the fact. Do you know her? Will you introduce me to her?"





" Oh, nothing so easy ; yet when I say that, I take upon me, perhaps, more than I have a right to do, for Lady Harcourt is one of those disagreeably proper people, who never allow of any acquaintance being formed with her daughter, by any person, whom she does not conceive to be altogether out of the question, as your humble servant, for instance, or else who is of sufficient note in the world to become, what she would deem, an eligible alliance. Of the latter, I must conceive your lordship to be one, though, as I said before, she is starch and stiff enough to go back to old stories, and make them great objections in your case. In the mean time, you can renew your acquaintance with the daughter. I'll present you to her to-night at Almack's."

"What old stories do you allude to, that Lady Harcourt might raise personal objections to me upon?"

" Come, Talbot, it is not possible that you should be in ignorance of and he looked





him full in the face.

" I am in total ignorance of any story being attached to me that is in any way disgraceful," replied Lord Talbot, in a displeased tone of voice ; " and I must insist upon your explaining your meaning, for such unpleasant and dark innuendos."

" Nay now, my good fellow, dear Lord Talbot, reflect how unreasonable your anger is. I accidentally alluded to a circumstance which all the world knows; of course I could not suppose you to be the only one to remain in ignorance of it—you, whom it most concerns; and now, when I accidentally discover that you are so, you are angry with me for not entering into details, which would only make you unhappy, and do no good, since the thing is irremediable."

Mr. Willoughby, I am not in a passion—I do not mean to be in a passion; but when one man tells another that a dark story attaches to him, or to his family, which is the same thing, feeling as I feel towards mine, and then refuses to give any account whatever of this unaccountable allegation, why then, it is very natural to desire an explanation."





" You distress me greatly, Talbot, for I have a real regard for you, and I foresee that whether I answer you, or do not answer you, you will equally hate me. At all events, I must drop this subject now,—to resume it at another time, if you insist upon it; but allow me a few hours' reflection, and press me at this moment no further."

Lord Talbot replied,

" Be it so ;" and soon after was set down at his own door.

His usual gay cheerfulness was flown; a weight, that he could not account for, oppressed him, and his family observed it. They inquired kindly if he was ill; he answered pettishly, that he was quite well, and going that night to Almack's.





" Ah," thought his mother, " he has heard some rumour that will soon come to him in the shape of a fact,—a horrid fact, that will poison the rest of his existence."

Lord Talbot did go to Almack's; and without the intervention of Mr. Willoughby, was presented to Fanny Harcourt. They talked, danced, and laughed together; they recognised each other as former playfellows, but mutually wondered at the change a few years had produced in them,—a change, not for the worse, but for the better; but a change which placed them, however, on a very different footing towards each other; and after the first pleasure of recognition was over, something of shyness and outward reserve followed,—they were no longer children.

After the first cotillon was finished, they walked, as all well-regulated young persons do, in quest of Lady Harcourt. She was sitting on one of the highest benches, and it was with some difficulty Lord Talbot contrived to re-instate his partner by her mother's side. Fanny attempted to make an introduction between the latter and her partner, but the noise of the music, and the talkers, and the particularly unfavourable position in which they stood, prevented either hearing what the other said. Bows and curtseys were all that passed at that time.





" Well, Fanny, and who introduced you to that young man? I have always told you to be particularly cautious in making new acquaintances," said Lady Harcourt to her daughter; "but in the present case, I think there can be no impropriety in your dancing with Lord Talbot; nevertheless, you know I broke off your intimacy with his sister when you were children, because it would be impossible to know the girl without knowing the mother, and that is out of the question; but, with a little prudent management, it is easy to avoid knowing her ; of course, in her circumstances, she, poor thing ! can never cross your path,—never move in the society which you frequent."





" Poor dear Lady Alice !" rejoined Fanny, " I never can think of her without being ready to cry; she was so fond of me."

" So fond of a fiddle-stick ! Little girls are fond of their dolls, but they do not play with them when they grow up, and I should not have been justified, as a parent, had I encouraged your engouement for Alice Howard; but all that is gone by. I don't know how I came to speak upon the subject. There, look, Fanny, —there is Lord Stuart, the Marquis of Vernon that will be. He is, I am sure, coming with most flattering eagerness of manner to ask you to dance. Now do not look haughty and shy, just when you ought to do otherwise."





" Any thing," thought Miss Harcourt, " to escape from this lecture;" and she accepted Lord Stuart's invitation, and joined the dancers.

Lord Talbot, observing that Lady Harcourt had a vacant place next to her, hastened to avail himself of it. He spoke first of indifferent matters, but with such nature and grace, that he softened even the suspicious and cautious temper of his hearer, and then passing on to a subject which was dear to her—(for what mother's heart, however cold to others, does not warm to her child's praises)—he declared he never should have recognised Miss Harcourt again, so much more beautiful was she become since the happy days of his boyhood, when he had played with her in the square. " I quite long to see my sister out, and that she should have the advantage of being in the gay world at the same time as Miss Harcourt. Once they were great friends," (he added) " as children, and he hoped they would be so in youth. I never could conceive why their friendship was broken off. I believe some cross governess that my mother sent away afterwards, was at the bottom of that separation."





Lady Harcourt felt embarrassed; she did not wish to cast off Lord Talbot altogether, lest the better and higher game she aimed at might fail to be caught; and yet, to acknowledge any thing that looked like the opening of an acquaintanceship with Lady Howard, made her risk any thing, every thing, sooner than fall under that dreaded odium, and she replied dryly, " I never was acquainted with Lady Howard."

Lord Talbot felt that all was not amicable between her and his mother, and concluded the former must be in the wrong; but for the present dropped any farther elucidation of the subject; and as his eyes followed Lady Fanny in the dance, he observed, " How well she dances ! what grace !—and I must acknowledge my friend Stuart is a partner worthy of her."





" Your friend Stuart, do you know Lord Stuart?"

" Yes, to be sure, why should I not ? is there any thing so strange in that?"

" Why, really you astonish me, Lord Talbot; I should not have thought it possible that at your age you could have been,—I beg your pardon a thousand times,—I am distressed beyond measure, at having started a subject which "

Lord Talbot felt as if some unseen power were hovering over him for evil; or, in plain English, that some mystery surrounded him which he was determined to elucidate; and yet he felt an invincible dislike to do so at the present moment, as he pondered on what he should reply to Lady Harcourt.





Her daughter and Lord Stuart approached ; of course he rose, and bowing to Miss Har



" Stuart," he said aloud, " At what hour tomorrow will you allow me to see you for halfan-hour alone V

" Any hour you choose till three o'clock."

" At two, then,—good-night."

" What! going so early ?"

" Yes, I am not very well," and he walked as hastily as he could through the crowd, and Miss Harcourt saw him leave the ball-room.

" I am sorry Lord Talbot is gone, mama ; I was so happy to meet with him again; and he is grown so handsome."

" He is very well as to personal appearance; and he will be Lord Howard, and have a magnificent estate; but what are all these advantages worth, when there is not a respectable foundation for them to rest upon? It is in vain to deceive you, Fanny, or to allow you to deceive yourself. I think it my duty to warn you as my child. That Lady Howard was Lady Vemon; that she left her husband (and such a husband) to run off with Lord Howard. Although this scandalous affair happened twenty years ago, still, now that her children are grown up, Lord Talbot a parti for those who regard worldly advantages more than respectability of character, the matter will be discussed, and the whole thing be brought forward again. How it should chance that Lord Stuart is the dear friend of Lord Talbot, and that neither of them should know the story of their birth, is quite an enigma ; but so it is, that is evident, from a conversation I held with the latter just now. This state of things cannot, however, continue, and how it may end, who can say? At all events let us be cautious, and have nothing to do with this tripotage;—by keeping aloof we shall be able to judge of what it may be expedient to do hereafter, but at present it would be highly indecorous that we encourage Lord Talbot to form habits of intimacy with us, which we might be obliged afterwards to forego."





" What a distressing story, mama. How I pity these young men, they both seem so amiable! What will be their feelings when they come to know that they are brothers ?"

" Ah ! these are the sad consequences which arise out of the light conduct of our sex. Let these things be a warning to you, Fanny."

Miss Harcourt went home with a sadder heart than she had come out. How deep an impression may be made in a short space of time! Lord Talbot's image had fixed itself in Miss Harcourt's fancy, and all night long she dreamed about brothers, and fighting, and the various incidents which her waking thoughts had vaguely, but fearfully suggested, and which were now magnified and rendered more horrible by the inexplicable mirror of sleep, in which we see not always darkly, but sometimes with a distinctness and a colouring, that is even more vivid than life itself.





When Lord Talbot left Almack's he went to Mr. Willoughby's lodgings, and found him at home, and not yet gone to bed. He requested to be allowed five minutes' conversation with him. Of course the request was granted.

" Willoughby, your enigmatical conversation this morning has been followed by one equally incomprehensible from another person. I entreat you to explain yourself. Nay, I insist upon your doing so."





" Lord Talbot, I am the last man in the world who could wish to insult you, or to give you a moment's pain; but I am not to be bullied into any thing. Having made this preamble, and concluding that you allow I am sincere, and in the right, I will be guided by your wishes as to the explanation you demand, having first made you aware that such explanation cannot fail of giving you just cause of deep but irremediable regret, and that I may be hated by your parents for having done so, for evermore. Think well, therefore, before you press me further on this subject, and be assured that I am your friend."

" It matters not," replied Lord Talbot impetuously, " what happens,—I must know the truth—tell it me?"

" Remember, I do so with feelings of deep regret. Your mother, Lady Howard, was the wife of Lord Vernon. Lord Stuart is her son by her first husband; she ran off, and left him, and was divorced,—married your father, and you and your sister are the fruits of that marriage."





Lord Talbot did not speak, his teeth were close set together, and cold perspiration broke out on his forehead.

Mr. Willoughby feared that he would go into convulsions; and brought him some cordials, and took his hand, and implored him to speak, and say that he forgave him, for having been the unwilling organ through which he had heard this painful fact.

At length he said, in a low under tone of voice, " Nothing can prepare one for the knowledge of such disgrace; but had my father or my mother only told me that I am the son of a divorced woman, I could have borne it better; it was very cruel in them to deceive me ; it was very wrong; and what could they gain by such deception ? only the protraction of that secret, the discovery of which, come when it might, would have been robbed of its bitterness, in being told by a parent."





Mr. Willoughby, whose feelings upon such a subject were very different from those of his young friend, offered him some of those consolations with which a long admixture with life, and its debasing realities, supplied him.

" It is unpleasant, my dear Talbot, certainly; but the case is so common ; it is so smoothed down by the indulgence of the world ; so many are interested in being compassionate, the surest way of meeting sympathy; and so many persons don't care three straws about the matter, that really, if you were not so young and new, I should half laugh at you, for this excess of sorrow, and by-gone grief, with which you have nothing to do. Then, reflect on your advan





tages; fortunately, your birth is legitimate.— You must be Earl Howard. You are very rich, very handsome. Will any person, whom you select for your bride, love you one iota the less for being the son of the divorced Lady Vernon? You are raising up giants, and preparing to fight them, but will find them mere phantoms, after all."

Lord Talbot looked as if he could have annihilated his friend.

At length he said, " If such are your opinions, if such are the opinions of the world in general, I forswear it, and your friendship also. I will never blush before the eyes of the hardened multitude,—whether they feel for my shame, or not, I shall feel it for myself,—for those who are far dearer than myself; and from this moment I will forego all society; I will lead a life of retirement; but, I will never mingle with the world again."

Mr. Willoughby heard these words, as he would have done the ravings of an excited madman; but he was a really good tempered, kind person; and though, at his age, and living as he had lived, it was utterly impossible that he could enter into Lord Talbot's feelings, still he understood, to a certain degree, that the fact which had come to his knowledge was one that could not fail to give him pain, and he lamented that he should, himself, have been the unfortunate person to have made the disclosure to Lord Talboti





It may well be said, that we cannot put ourselves in the place of another; and never was this more truly exemplified, than in the two persons here described.

Mr. Willoughby slept just as well that night as if Lady Howard had never been divorced; but Lord Talbot passed the night in wakeful and miserable watchings.

" So then," he thought, " this dear home, to which I looked forward to return with such pride and delight, such rooted affection, is no longer a home for me. Can I see my parents, knowing that they ought never to have been such, and be as placidly happy, in their presence, as honourably proud of them, as I have been?—impossible! I love them still, it is true,— love them, love my mother—Oh, God! you know how I love her! It is for that reason, I can never bear to live under the same roof with her —never! And my father too; why did he not inure me to the knowledge of my humiliation, by an early disclosure of the fact? Why was I doomed to hear from a stranger's lips, that which was to blast my existence ? I go again into the world, among the sneers of the vicious, and the pity of the good !—never, never ! And Stuart, poor Stuart ! Brother of my heart, brother in my wretchedness, brother of my shame. Will the dreadful fact, when revealed, incur your hatred? will you despise me?"





In similar thoughts with these, the highspirited young Lord Talbot passed a night of restless fever.

He was punctual to the hour, which he had named the night before, for meeting him; and he found Lord Stuart waiting for him. The same gay, unconcerned, happy countenance greeted him with smiles, as it was always wont to do.

Lord Talbot had sought his friend, in the hope that he could have rendered Mr. Willoughby's dark speeches plain to him; but now he came not to have his own doubts solved, but to carry his misery and wretchedness into his friend's heart.

He hesitated—he doubted if he was right in acting as he had intended, in the first impulse of wounded feeling; and then he decided that he should not be justified in such a mode of conduct. No, he thought, I will go where no person can know my sufferings. To live on in the world, and not betray my knowledge of the fact, would be impossible; and then, I could not be answerable for the consequences. I should draw upon my family that contumely which I would die to avert: so, I will be silent, and depart.





When Lord Talbot met his brother, he said, " Stuart, I sought you to converse about a subject, upon which I have since thought it best to be silent. I have, in fact, then, nothing to say to you; except to request, that when you hear me spoken of as a madman; an ill-tempered, strange, unaccountable being; you will not give credit to the charge, but on the contrary, believe, that I have weighty reasons for absenting myself from the society of my own family;—and yet, think not that I have done any thing to merit the voluntary exile from my countiy, Vol. r. E





which I purpose to make. Promise me, Stuart,— there's a good fellow—promise me," and he tendered his hand, " always to be my friend."

" How now, Talbot! what freak have you taken into your head ? Who are you in love with? What has so discomposed you? A good joke, indeed! because some capricious woman has played you false, to talk of leaving your friends, your country;—really, I always thought you a little high-flown, but this idea is, beyond all comparison, wild."

" Stuart, I am not romantic, nor fanciful, I am only miserable. Remember, I charge you, forget me not, entirely;—think of me as one, who is very much attached to you, and let that thought secure me a return."

" Well, is this all you have to say tome?" asked Lord Stuart, laughing.

" Yes, all."

" Well, then, I must humour you, I suppose, and say, yes. Talbot, to be serious; you





know I have always considered you as a brother; I have both envied, and loved you; but now that you have taken this strange, melancholy fancy into your, head, I must, instead of envying, pity you."

" Oh, yes ! that is just the word for it; and so, to break off this useless conference, farewell—be happy !" and he left the room.

Lord Stuart attempted to detain him, but he was already in the street, and out of sight in a moment.





CHAPTER III.



" How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame

Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,

Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name.

O ! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose !

That tongue that tells the story of thy days,

Making lascivious comments on thy sport,

Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;

Naming thy name blesses an ill report.

O ! what a mansion have those vices got,

Which, for a habitation, chose out thee'.

Where Beauty's veil doth cover every blot.

And all things turn to fair, that eyes can see !

Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege,

The hardest knife ill used doth lose his edge.



Shakspeare's Sonnets, XCV.



It was now, as Lord Surrey hath it in his beautiful verses, the " soote season," not merely for bud and flower, but for balls and revels of every kind; and after much consultation between Lord and Lady Howard, they agreed that the former should occasionally escort their daughter, and lead her among the tribe of damsels, who, all with some pretensions or other, entered as competitors for hearts and admiration, on the arena of life.





Poor Lady Howard!—she was never to see that proudest day for a mother's heart, the world's approval of her child; she was only to hear it through her husband, that Lady Alice Talbot was reckoned the most perfect beauty that had been seen for years.

Many were pretty—the young are always pretty; but the sort of beauty which an artist admires, the air, which is more rare even than beauty's self, and produces an effect, which even the vulgar own, though they know not whence it proceeds,—were the peculiar attributes of Lady Alice, and marked her out as a person altogether different from the other beauties of the day.





A great ball was given, which was said, as all balls are in their turn, to be the finest that ever had been, or ever was to be. Lady Alice, of course, was asked. Though several ladies with old daughters had said that they did not think they should accept, their invitation, since so many queer characters were to be admitted, and that now-a-days, it was no longer a distinction to be invited to such things, where every body who could dress well, was as much noticed as the highest and most renowned of the land.

Every soul, nevertheless, who was asked, hastened to go, and those who were not, spat out all their venom upon the scene, without any other effect, however, except -^hat of rendering the fiSte more talked of, more praised, and more admired than it would have been had it met with no detraction.

Lord Howard paraded his daughter round the rooms and the illuminated gardens, and gathered up the praises he heard bestowed upon her beauty in his heart of hearts.





He was a proud man and a proud father, and he had much reason to be gratified; but some malevolent whisperers occasionally were heard saying, " Oh, you know her mother can't appear, she is not received." And then a closer whisper followed, and then, " Oh ! that is her father, you know, do not talk so loud."

How these few broken phrases, and others of a similar nature more or less offensive, wounded and irritated him! He showed his displeasure in his looks, and he dreaded lest his child should hear them; but her ears were not open as his were, to catch these painful sounds; full of innocent joy and buoyant spirits, she was only longing to dance; and delighted with the festive crowd, all of whom appeared to her as so many objects descended from the spheres, and she would not have supposed these observations applied to herself, even had she heard them, which she did not.





Several of the most distinguished young men in the room asked her to dance, and, above all, some who were not what is termed dancing men, either from laziness or finery, or both, eagerly sought her as a partner. Among these, Mr. Willoughby. She knew he was a friend of her brother's, and therefore she paid him more than usual attention. Besides, he could be exceedingly agreeable, and was much to be liked in a halWoom for his own sake.

Lord Howard could have wished his daughter a more eligible partner, but any thing was a relief in comparison to having her upon his arm, seeing that she attracted all eyes, and excited all the remarks which were so painful to him, and which he was under a constant restraint to endeavour to prevent her from hearing, addressing her always at the moment when such observations were made.





" If this is to continue always thus," he thought, " I should not be able to endure it;" and at last he became so irritable, that several of his oldest and best friends perceived it.

Ah, poor Howard! He was not the man to run his head into the noose; he ought to have known himself better; other folks take these matters coolly, but he cannot, and his daughter is so handsome, that it is impossible she should pass by without comment, and the peculiarity of being always alone with her father, inquired into.

Of all those who appeared to take particular cognizance of Lady Alice, an elderly maiden lady seemed the most persevering. The Honourable Miss Agar had passed from youth to age, unloving and unloved, and yet she was still to be seen at every place of public resort; every body wondered why she was there, how she got there, and what pleasure she could find in such assemblies; but their wonder had to tire and begin again, for there she was, in renewed rouge and wrinkles at every fresh scene of festivity.





" I wish to be introduced to Lady Alice Talbot," said the Honourable Miss Agar to the lady at whose house the present brilliant assembly was held; " will you make us acquainted 1"

" Poor thing! / knew her mother formerly, a hundred years ago," (in a very low whisper,) " she is very like her," (putting up her eyeglass,)—" resembles Lady Howard strikingly, only she is not so handsome as her mother was when Lady Vernon. Ah! it makes me melancholy, I declare, quite so,—yes, to look at that poor thing and think!—but you will introduce me, will you not ?"

The hostess was a matter-of-fact decided person of brusque manners, who never lost time in useless courtesies, or wasted moments in reflection. Actions, not words, was her favourite maxim, so, turning short round, she said to Lady Alice, " Miss Agar desires to be introduced to you."





Lady Alice rose from her chair and interrupted some interesting speech her partner was addressing to her, for which interruption he wished the Honourable Miss Agar at the bottom of the Serpentine.

" Miss Agar wishes to be introduced to you," repeated the lady of the house in a loud voice. And Alice smiled and curtseyed her assent to the painted mummy who stood before her, and the introduction between an angel and a demon, it might be said, was made.

Miss Agar now took a nearer scrutiny ot Lady Alice's person than she had yet done; looked at her with effrontery from head to foot, and continued, though she saw Lady Alice was distressed, to gaze at her with that bold stare which such women as herself acquire in their dark career, and which fastens itself, like a mark made with a burning brand, upon their features.





At all times Lady Alice was timid, and in making a new acquaintance particularly so; but on this occasion she felt the blood mount to her cheeks, and cover her face and neck with a crimson blush of mingled modesty and indignation at such an impertinent survey. For a few moments she stood in silence before Miss Agar; she had not a word to say either of civility or of displeasure. At length she roused herself to defy so rude an examination, and she met Miss Agar's searching eyes with an expression of displeasure, which induced that lady to move towards a vacant seat which was near. Alice too reseated herself, not from any wish to be near Miss Agar, whose manners and appearance





were singularly repugnant to her, but because she observed her father was in deep conversation with another gentleman, and that no other person of her acquaintance was near by whom she could take refuge: they were both silent. At length Miss Agar spake, and in one of those usual phrases, which, like moving the king's pawn at chess, opens the game, she wisely observed,

" How very hot it is, Lady Alice; between ourselves, the dear duchess does not manage the ventilation of her apartments dexterously; she was never famous for dexterity, you know, even in her love affairs—no; even there she failed in the conduct of the story."

Lady Alice replied naturally, " / know nothing at all about the matter, but I should never have supposed the Duchess of Clonmel had ever failed in compassing what she wished to attain."

" I have always heard her cited as the acknowledged beauty of her day, as a devoted wife, as a fond mother, and one on whom every blessing and every gift of fortune had been lavished ; and surely her appearance does not belie this happy fate, for her face bears no marks or furrows of care or sorrow; it is fresher and more placid in expression than many a younger woman's. I do not know a countenance (my own mama's excepted) which pleases me more; it is so contented, so beaming; she is a refreshing object, among all the factitious, painted, discontented faces, that one sees in the world."





Lady Alice did not mean to wound the person she was addressing, though the words had scarce escaped her lips, when she remembered that they were too applicable; but there was not any thing of the nature of spite in her; if she was angry, if she despised a person, she could tell them so; but a passing cut, a stinging by word, or talking at any one, was beneath her. Lady Alice's failing, if failing it is, was enthusiasm, but it can only be termed a failing when it is suffered to act in ungoverned sway, and Lady Alice was too well principled, too really good, to be led away by impulses; still she was warm and genuinely sincere, and in talking to persons of -Miss Agar's character, it was impossible that her sentiments, naturally expressed, should not wound the person to whom they were addressed.





Miss Agar consequently noted it on the tablets of her very tenacious memory, that Lady Alice had meant to affront her, that she was a very impertinent girl, very satirical, and that she should smart for having vented her humour upon her. In the meanwhile, Lady Alice's speech had the effect of silencing her enemy, but not for long. Miss Agar saw that her intended victim was looking anxiously towards her father, and longing that his conversation should come to a close; there Was no time, she thought, to be lost in giving her a pleasurable doubt to dream upon that night, and bending forward, she said in a low whisper, as if she was afraid of being overheard,





" May I enquire after Lady Howard ? I hope she is well. Of course she does not go out, but I trust her health is good; it is so long since I have seen her; it is wonderful if she has retained the original vigour of her constitution after all she has gone through." And while Lady Alice stared in astonishment, Miss Agar added, in a tone that was intended to imply the deepest compassion, " it was to be expected that she should be sadly changed. Ah, dear Lady Alice! pardon me, it was a fearful step she took ; it always makes my heart ache to think of it, and yet, perhaps, I ought not to talk so to you, but I was a great friend of your mama's,

of of both, in short, and I cannot think of

them without infinite regret."

" Both who ?" asked Lady Alice, gasping for breath. " What step ?—to what do you allude ? —you must be under some mistake."





Miss Agar hesitated, paused, smiled again.

" Is it possible," she thought, " they have hid their story from their child till now ? What a triumph \" and the idea filled her with malicious pleasure, to think that she should be the first person to make her parent's crime known to her.

" I can, perhaps, wither that blooming happy looking creature."—Strange, that such a demoniac spirit should dwell in woman's form !— " Why, Lady Alice Talbot, I hardly know how to reply to your question, I have some doubt whether I ought to do so, if you are really in ignorance of the affair. I believe it is not fitting that I should undeceive you; only this much I will say, as a friend, do not sacrifice yourself,—be very prudent, especially when there is any question of marriage ; you will not with your beauty lack lovers; take care that you do not allow them time to be instructed, and strike while the iron is hot!—Good night, fair Lady Alice, remember my words."





" Stay," said the latter, " pray explain yourself. I must entreat you would, and I will beg papa to entreat for me."

" You had better not;—take my advice," and she was moving away, leaving Lady Alice amazed, and even awed, by her unaccountable conversation; but making an effort to recover herself from the surprise and agitation into which she had been thrown, the former implored her to explain the meaning of her allusions, and particularly of that portion of her conversation which had referred to her mama.

" Indeed, dear Lady Alice Talbot, seeing how completely you have been deceived, I regret that I have said so much, and must request that you do not press me on the subject further; you look so good, so pure, it is terrible to give you pain."





" I hate flattery, Miss Agar; I shall feel obliged by your leaving out all unnecessary compliments, and answering my question. What do you mean by both ?—who are both ? What has my mother to do with the nameless person you allude to?"

Miss Agar seemed affected ; she hesitated.

" Do not refuse me, I have a right to know the meaning of a discourse which was addressed to me."

" You are rather wilful, young lady; pardon my frankness, but since you will know, you must ; yet, ere I comply, reflect; and recollect the nurseiy story of Blue Beard's chamber, and the fool-hardy wife, who in defiance of all warning, would look therein, but did so to her cost. You remember that, do ye, lady fair ?"

She spoke in her shrill high voice, for Miss Agar, spite the patent she was said to have acquired for remaining young, was rather deaf. People were obliged to speak loud to her, and she returned the compliment in the present instance much to Lady Alice's annoyance, who was unwilling their conversation should be overheard, but she determined not to quail before her, and bowing her head, she replied calmly, " I am ready to hear whatever you may have to say."





How often do we set the seal to our own fate ! how often do we speak the word which fills up the measure of our destiny!—sometimes unconsciously, sometimes wilfully, which we had better have left, when in the last case, to the Great Disposer of all events; but poor human nature is full of infirmity, full of lamentable mistakes even at the best.

Miss Agar addressed Lady Alice, " Know then, since it is your determination to know, that your mother was first married to Lord Vernon; he was a good husband to her, and loved her; she lacked nothing that his affection and his means could give her. He was very proud of her, poor man ! Ah, pride often comes before a fall. Well, she took to him at first, and conducted herself discreetly, till she fell in love with your father, Lord Howard. Lord Vernon and he were, as is the rule in such cases, you know, my dear, or perhaps, do not know, sworn friends; it was quite en regie. Lord Vernon was the last person to see what the town was talking about and familiar with, as a settled liaison, for months previously.





" Well, Lord Stuart was born ; Lord Vernon was fonder than ever of Lady Howard. She had a long dangerous illness after her confinement ; he nursed her for three months consecutively, scarcely taking sufficient rest for his own health's sake. Lord Howard played the part of second, or rather first nurse. Lord Vernon was in person a plain man, though I am one of those who think he has great charms. The gossiping world, you know, my dear, has amused itself at different times, when there was a dearth of news, by inventing stories about him 'and me; it's all nonsense though, except in the way of friendship, except—" (and Miss Agar's looks belied what she uttered,) she wished they should. " But your father, Lord Howard, was, and is, a beautiful man. Oh ! but nem. con. beautiful. Poor Lau ! as I used to call her, could not resist him, and no sooner did she recover her health than she ran off with him. She was always noble, whether acting right or wrong. I do not meddle with that question at present, but noble she was, for she could not bear to go on living in a state of duplicity under her husband's eyes. I know some folks have made it a question whether it was not better to do so, especially where there was a child in the case, rather than publicly take their partie, and make up their mind to run off. Be that as it may, I leave it to others to decide; Lady Vernon adopted that mode. " I had seen the whole course of the affair,





and I advised her well, Lady Alice, that I did : I said all I could in favour of Lord Vernon; I told her what she would lose by giving way to her passion for Lord Howard, and placing an extinguisher upon herself for life; for though some people manage to get through the business wonderfully well, the finger-post, you know, my dear, is set up, and those who run may read ; but advice to her was like pouring water through a sieve,—she told me herself it went in at one ear and out of the other. Then again, I tried another point of attack ; I named her child, Lord Stuart,—there, do you see him ? —he is crossing the ball room yonder. He is not handsome, like his father, but he is charming ; it was odd enough, however, she did not love him; the reason, I believe, was simply that he was Vernon's child, and so she forsook both her husband, and her child, and a happy home, and a great position in society, for one of mortification and,—pardon me, Lady Alice, (all men are tyrants,) it is said, for a trying enough life with her lover. He is not so easy-tempered as Lord Vernon; besides, it is plain to see Lord Howard does not bear philosophically the slights he receives on his wife's account, nor the award that is pronounced by society respecting the rights and privileges of a divorcee.





" And now my story is done; I have told you all. Do not take it so much to heart: poor child! You are very young, and unused Jo these things, but they are nothing when one lives a few years in the world. One cannot have one's cake and eat it too, that's certain. Remember Lady Howard got her lover, but she could not keep her husband also; and she has two children whom she doats upon, so she is less to be pitied than many others in her situation; really, considering every thing, she is wonderfully well off. She is not poor, nor dragged down out of her sphere among vulgars. The few persons she does see are of her own calibre, —that is a great point; at least, she did not lose her rank in running off with Lord Howard.





" And now, dear Lady Alice, again I pray you to remember, you insisted on my telling you this old melancholy history. I am concerned to have been the person who told it you. May I hope you will not cut my acquaintance on account of this circumstance ? No one, believe me, felt as I felt for the wrong Lady Vernon did herself, for, after all, it is the poor foolish woman in these cases who suffers. No one told her such truths as I did;—no one sympathizes with you, dear Lady Alice, as I do; indeed, it has affected me to recount this sad story, and rake up all the past again. The past is always melancholy, and as to the future, I do not like to think of it; the present is all I care about. I hope, therefore, you will not hate me for what you have yourself forced me to say, but let me still see you; I may be useful in your peculiar

VOL. I. F





situation. I should like to see my friend again, some day or another, if Lady Howard felt equal to meeting me. But stay, I have yet one favour to ask; do not, I beg, tell any one that I was the person to divulge this history to you."

Poor Alice ! her tongue clave to the roof of her mouth—she could not command utterance. She listened with a determination to hear every word Miss Agar chose to say without interrupting her; but her heart seemed for a moment to cease its action, and then returned to its functions with a sudden bound, which resembled the striking of a hammer on an anvil.

Miss Agar ceased speaking. She looked at Lady Alice ; she was afraid she would faint, or fall into hysterics, and trembled at the idea of Lord Howard's finding out the cause of his daughter's sudden indisposition.

Miss Agar's nerves, spite of the laudanum she was in the habit of taking every evening





before entering upon her routine of pleasure, were shattered. She began to feel that sinking at the heart, and tottering of the knees, and, • above all, the inward tremor which such a life as hers had been, gives, when it seems to be sliding from beneath the grasp. She could not now bear any agitation, such as the fear of detection produces.

The time was past when the vigour of youth braced her nerves to suit the occasion arid set detection at defiance. She feared a rebuke from the violent tempered Lord Howard. She took Alice's hand; it was icy cold—it felt stiffly in her own; she opened her smelling-bottle,— she offered it to the sufferer, but Alice shook her head. She was perfectly conscious, and in a short time, the blood, which, for a few moments had been stagnated by the shock she received, rushed through her frame again, and bounded in every pulsation. Her hand grew warm in Miss Agar's; she felt the quick throbbing that succeeded to the former suspension of life.





Alice heaved a heavily drawn sigh. That sigh returned in Miss Agar's ears on her death-bed, with the bitter sting of reproach for having caused it so to heave.

" Yes, Miss Agar, I am not angry; it would be unreasonable to be angry. Oh, my God ! how wretched, how very wretched I shall be !" and again her hands fell stiffly on her lap, and she relapsed into silence.

Fortunately, the ante-room in which they were sitting had been forsaken by the crowd, for that, in which the great singer of the day was exhibiting her power.

No 6ne missed Lady Alice. This was odd, considering her great beauty, and the noise her appearance in the world created; yet scarcely so, either, in a London assembly, where one object of novelty after another attracts the gaze of the grown up children who frequent such scenes. Neither was Miss Agar missed ; but that was not odd. Her well known face, like the link-boys at the door, was sure to be at every festive scene, and it continued to be supposed to be there, long after it had ceased to remain above ground.





So then, these two persons, so different in their whole being, were both equally forgotten for the moment by the gay crowd, and not one of those assembled at the Duchess of Clonmell's, on the 15th of May, 18—, knew aught of the misery that was inflicted on Alice Talbot.

Miss Agar, seeing that she did not recover a semblance, even of composed indifference, but remained in a state of torpor, evidently unnatural, said,

" Dear Lady Alice, cheer up: I am excessively grieved to observe how you take this affair to heart. Now receive a word of consolation from the voice of experience.





" Let not this old, gone by affair of your mother's affect your happiness; true, your appearance in the world, introduced by your father, without any female friend, was injudicious, and drew down odd observations and malignant revivals of your mother's history. If Lord and Lady Howard had consulted me, I am sure I should have been happy to have stood in the gap, and to have done what I could -T but some people despise others without sufficient reason for doing so, and very few people know their true friends. However, as I began by saying, do not allow all this to affect your happiness ; it is childish to fret over an irremediable evil. Why should you indulge this idle sorrow 1"

Alice had lifted up her heart in silent inward prayer, though the near sounds of the Prima Donna's passionate love song, together with the loud applauses which it called forth, rang in her ears, she was deaf to them alL She was. as entirely alone as though none of those persons, none of those sounds, had been near her.





It was no irreverence—it was no hypocrisy in her to pray, even in such a scene, and at such a time, for Alice Talbot's heart was a pure and undefiled temple, from whence the incense of prayer might always ascend.

If ever human heart was a fitting altar for communion with Heaven, hers was that heart. She had prayed for power to sustain her under the trial which had thus unexpectedly reached her, and to Miss Agar's worldly consolations she replied,

" Miss Agar, you and I think very differently on this painful subject,—I wish to drop it. Let it suffice that I exonerate you from all intention to wound me, and from all blame in having made me acquainted with the circumstances of my birth. I shall never disclose that it was from you I acquired such knowledge : trust me, I shall keep this conversation secret in my own breast. None shall ever know that I am acquainted with the fatal truth. It may be the means of coming between me and happiness- it may put an end to life itself, but a secret, in as far as it regards me, it shall ever remain. My lips shall never disclose the knowledge of my mother's shame. She shall never be humbled before her child ; do not be uneasy, I will not break my promise. I am sorry, Miss Agar, that our first acquaintance should have been attended by such untoward circumstances; but I must let the matter rest—I must go home;" (she looked at her watch,) " it is late, and I promised mama to be at home early, unless the party was a very pleasant one. It has certainly not been that to me; I have no reason to wish to stay. Good night, Miss Agar."





And the unhappy girl held out her hand kindly to the serpent who had destroyed her peace. The latter felt ashamed to take it. What! receive a token of trust and kindness from one she had so cruelly outraged ? What! take the hand, and press it, of one whom she had rendered so miserable ?





The withered, painted face was convulsed; Miss Agar turned pale through her rouge. Alice was appalled at the sight of the change she saw in her. There is a peculiar horror impressed upon such countenances when the mask of deception drops off.

Miss Agar stood before her like a disinterred corpse; her black eyes, once so famous for their fire and beauty, glared in their sunken sockets with a fixed stare; her whole frame shook; she grasped Lady Alice's arm tightly, or she would have fallen.

The latter was distressed in her turn at seeing the manner in which Miss Agar was struck, on observing the painful feeling of which she had been herself the occasion, and she could not bear that the aged person before her, who ought to have been an object of respect, should become one of ridicule to the young and gay crowd through which she must pass; for Alice Talbot never forgot another's interest, even at a time when her own so painfully employed her thoughts.





" I had not the slightest idea you were ignorant of the story,. Lady Alice," she continued, muttering indistinctly as she moved away, " or I never should have told it to you."

" Oh, no ! I am sure you would not.—Shall I ask for your carriage?"

" Thanks, thanks; I am better now. A few more drops of laudanum than usual when I go home, and I shall be all right again; these rooms are hot."

" Yes, very; but will you not go home, Miss Agar?"

" Home,—no; I hate home ;"' and she laughed an unnatural laugh.





Nothing so melancholy as an unnatural laugh !

" It will not do," she resumed, " its a dull ending to an evening till sleep is ready to shut up shop and thought together. Oh, no, I am quite well now,—quite awake; I must go on yet awhile," and opening a small ivory box she took out of her pocket, added,

" A little of this will varnish the outside of the platter, and as for the in, laudanum will do that. It is a duty to look as well as we can to the last."

Perhaps this was the^only duty which Miss Agar considered seriously worth attending to. Her words and manner revolted Alice, and the late pity she had excited was converted into contempt.

Lady Alice no longer felt called upon to see that she was conducted in safety to her carriage, and coldly wishing her good night, went in search of her father to take her.home* He was in earnest conversation with another gentleman, a great man, one whom Lord Howard was desirous of regaining as a friend, he had been such in former days ; but lately, like most others was estranged from him, he found him on this evening kind, and entertained a hope that if he could prevail on him to come to Howard House, and himself invite Lady Howard in return, it might afford his wife a chance of being again partially, if not generally received in society. This was the great aim of Lord Howard's life.





He was a proud man; he could not bear to find himself sunk in the estimation of the world; above all, he could not bear that his wife should be set apart from her own sex; and however little he had hitherto shewn how much he writhed under this sting, still every one who had been intimate with him in former days, well knew what were his sufferings in this respect, and none knew this better than he with whom Lord Howard was conversing, when his daughter came up to him.





Lord Howard was aware that the gentleman to whom he was speaking, was all powerful in lifting up, or in casting down, and the conciliatory manner with which the latter had received his advances, encouraged him to give him an invitation to dinner, which he was just going to do, when his daughter interrupted him.

The great man wished Lord Howard a good night, and passed to another room, little suspecting the vexation his doing so at that moment caused his friend.

Lord Howard turned angrily to his child, and asked peevishly, " Why are you in such a hurry to go home ? I am not ready yet to do so; go and dance again, Alice, and remember, never interrupt me when you see me engaged in conversation with any one; it is very ill-bred to do so to any person,—to me it is very imper



s tinent. I desire you will go and dance again, and here Alice," whispering to her, " I request you to be particularly civil to Colonel Leicester; he has been looking for you every where, to dance in the next set as you had engaged to do. He is an agreeable, and a respectable man; not like many of the idle dissipated fools who stand gaping at you, Alice. I command you to be civil to him,—remember !"





Lord Howard was a strict man now; well, better late than never, perhaps, but the improvement might have taken place under a better regulated temper. " But where have you been all this time, Alice?" And he looked hard at his daughter. Alice blushed crimson. Her father said, sternly,—

"Well, Alice, answer me, what makes you colour so ? where have you been, and with whom 1"

Her confusion increased every moment; she feared her father should guess that she had learned the history of her mother's divorce, but, nevertheless, truth was natural to her. Principle had confirmed her character in all its lucid beauty, and she replied,





" I have been sitting with Miss Agar, in the blue room opposite."

" Who introduced you to her, pray V

She named the lady of the house.

" I request you will in future avoid further intimacy with her, Alice; she is not an eligible friend ; especially not so for you. Mind what I say."

" Very well, papa, I shall obey you," and she dropped into a chair that was near, so absorbed in her own painful thoughts, that the music sounded like one indefinite grumbling moan, and the crowd appeared like a mist of shadow, among which no one person was distinguished from another.

Lord Howard, on the contrary, was again engaged in eager conversation with the great man, on whose smile he had rested so many bright hopes. He invited him to Howard House, and the invitation was accepted.





" With much pleasure he would wait on Lord Howard," but Lady Howard was not named.

The parties bowed, again wished each other good night, and parted.

" Poor Laura!" thought her husband, " she is as though she were dead; the once envied and admired of all beholders, is now forgotten, except when her name arouses malignity, or awakens pity; and for whom has she incurred this contempt ? for whom does she so meekly bear this life of humiliation and trial ?—forme."

Lord Howard's heart reproached him, as he thought " how often have I been unkind to

n

her ? how often have I taunted her with the fault that was committed for my sake ?"

He almost determined never again to be harsh toward her, but the infirmity of his temper, and even his very love for her, made him relapse into the same conduct. The better a man loves his erring partner, the less can he endure to see her slighted; yet on whom wreak his vengeance ? By what right can he resent the thousand slights to which he daily sees or feels her to be exposed ? Cruel and unreasonable as it is, it is not unnatural that it should recoil upon herself.





Lady Alice felt she should not longer be able to endure the agonizing state of feeling she was in. It was necessary to her, to seek for rest, and self-communion; therefore, she again asked her father to take her home.

" Indeed I am not well, papa; I shall, I fear, make a scene, which you would not wish me to do, unless I am conveyed home immediately."

" Why, child, you have a good colour, you do not look ill! there is something the matter, which you will not tell me."





" Indeed, papa, I am not well; I am in a fever whatever my looks may be, I entreat you to allow me to go home."

" Come along, then," Lord Howard said, taking her arm rather roughly.

Her cloak could not be found.

" Lord Howard's carriage stops the way!" was loudly re-echoed through the hall, up the staircase, from one servant to another.

" Never mind your cloak, Alice; do come along."

Whilst the attendant maid searched in vain, " Lord Howard's carriage must drive off!" was loudly vociferated ; and Lord Howard, who at another time, would not have suffered his darling Alice to stir without being wrapped up, (even unnecessarily so), now dragged her through the drafts of air, which blew in every contrary direction, without any additional covering to the thin dancing dress, in which she was attired; then putting her hastily into the carriage, ordered the servants to take her home, and return for himself.





He did not even reply to his child's " good night." Wherefore ? what cause had he to be displeased with her ? There was, in truth, no cause whatever;—but a concatenation of minor unpleasant circumstances bore upon the one great sore point of his existence, and excited his ill-regulated temper, which vented itself upon his unoffending child.

It was the first time he had suffered his bad temper to shew itself to her, and poor Alice, overcome with the bitter knowledge she had acquired of her mother's past conduct, was ill prepared to endure this harshness from her father. It completely mastered the restraint she had hitherto imposed upon her feelings; and she cried bitterly and sobbed, as she had not sobbed since the day when her childish friendship with Fanny Harcourt was put an end to. The remembrance of the anguish she had suffered then, returned to her memory.





It is often thus present sorrows recall those which are past, and they seem to start up in all their pristine force, when some recent anguish opens afresh the source of former pain; but in this instance, these sorrows were nearly connected, and merged in one, for the reason of her separation from Fanny Harcourt had now become known to her.

" So, then," she thought with that aching throb of anguish which has no name, " my first sorrow was caused by my mother's guilt! She, who has so coaxed and doated upon me, is, in fact, my worst enemy;—so there is an end of my reverence for my parent. I no longer can consider our home as the abode of virtuous love,—no—all the ties which bind us together as a family—which make them my parents—which makes Henry and me brother and sister,—are sinful. We ought never to have existed!—poor, poor mama ! This, then, is the reason she never goes out; this, then, is the reason no ladies visit her, and that my name is so carefully written on the cards which are left at our door. Oh ! how my heart bleeds for her disgrace and humbling; how much more should we, her children, be kind to her; how much more does she require our love;—and papa, too, I wish he were never cross to her; he ought not. to be cross to her; for how miserable it must make her, that he, for whom she forfeited all, should be for an instant harsh. This, then, is the reason of her mournful looks; this, then, is the cause of





her weeping so often—poor dear mama ! "

and Alice Talbot's heart did indeed bleed.

Could Lady Howard have known the spirit in which her child entertained the knowledge of her errors, it would have been the sweetest balm to her stricken conscience ; for the dread of Alice's growing to love her less, when she should become acquainted with the story of her birth, filled the penitent mother with unceasing anxiety and misery; it was that dread which had made her shrink from telling her daughter with her own lips the melancholy secret. She could have bome the humiliation, but the loss of her child's affection—she shrank from as from death.





Every day Lady Howard made resolves to go to her husband and say, " Now—now I will fulfil my task;" but when the day came—when the subject was broached by Lord Howard, as in the instances already noted down in this memoir, she found some excuse for deferring the avowal, or some entreaty to plead for longer delay.

This task was spared to her. Another's lips had tainted her child's ears and withered its heart by divulging her story; and the high-minded, the devoted child, determined that neither look, or word, or change of demeanour, or the shadow of a shade in her respectful affection, should ever betray to her parent that she was acquainted with the fatal truth.





" No," said Alice, as the carriage drove her into the court of Howard House; " all is changed to me, but I am not changed to my dearest parents. This house is no longer what I have thought it to be. I have attained a terrible knowledge. I shall have to blush for the person who gave me being; but love her,—love them one jot less than before —never! I shall be fonder of her than ever."

When Alice entered her mother's presence it was with perfect composure. The first trial of self-command was over; she did not evince the least agitation, though inwardly there was a tremor like the vibration of an alarum; but she did not even say she was unwell, for she knew Lady Howard's keenness of perception, and that a word, under her peculiar state of feeling, might excite her suspicion. The only shade of difference in her manner was, that, when bidding her mother good-night, the pressure of her hand was more fervent, the kiss more lovingly given. And Lady Howard went to rest, pleased that her child should have met the world's applause, and in ignorance of the sorrow and mortification which had been her bitter portion that night.





Alice Talbot sealed her determination of not seeming to know more than heretofore in solemn prayer. She prayed for strength and help to sustain her in the fulfilment of





her duty. She prayed for a continuation of the blessings she had from infancy invoked on her parents' head. She mingled her prayers with the tears of an earnest supplicant. Could such a supplicant plead in vain ? Could such a prayer remain unanswered ?





CHAPTER IV.



" Make me not object of the tell-tale day,

The light will shew character'd in my brow,



The story of sweet chastity's decay,—

The impious breach of holy wedlock's vow !

Yea, the illiterate, that know not how



To cypher what is writ in learned books.

Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks."

Shakspkare's Lucretia.



Some weeks elapsed, and nothing of a marked character occurred, to alter the daily routine of life of the Howard family, till the unexpected departure of Lord Talbot to the Continent brought on the following conversation:— " I told you, dearest Laura," said Lord Howard to his wife, after reading the most touching letter that ever was penned, from their son; " I told you, dearest Laura, that had you only determined to inform him yourself, of what he has now unfortunately learned from a stranger, or at least have allowed me to do so, that you would have spared him half his sufferings, and have avoided knowing that your son is an exile from his country, and may become a stranger to his parents and his home, owing to your injudicious, and, I must add, selfish conduct. At all events, it will be a long time, with his high-wrought and lacerated feelings, before he will return to us. That he should discover the truth was unavoidable; it is only surprising that he should not have done so long ago; had you softened the blow, he would not have felt the humiliation to so great a degree; but to be told by a common acquaintance in a comG2





mon way, that he was the son of a divorced woman "

" Spare me, spare me, Charles, I am sufficiently wretched. Oh ! not from you, those horrible words—not from you, most fatally beloved, —from any lips but yours, let me receive the chastisement due to my crime. • Oh, my son ! could you read your mother's heart, you would not have left your unhappy, doating parents." And Lady Howard passionately wept.

Whatever might be Lord Howard's ill-temper, his wife's tears generally softened him for the moment—and he endeavoured to comfort and soothe her. He contradicted what he had said the moment previously, for he was sanguine by temperament, and prone to believe what he wished.

" Henry will return to us; his first ebullition of anger and mortification will soften down. He may regret that such is our position; but he will not goad his parents with reproaches ; he will not make us more miserable than we are. He will not long absent himself from the sister whom he so loves, from us whose affections are so bound up in him !"





Lady Howard succeeded in composing herself sufficiently to reply,

" I hope so, dearest; God grant that it may be so!—at all events, if I should not live to see it, he will return to you."

Lord Howard looked in his wife's countenance inquiringly.

" You should not live to see it ? what do you mean ? You are a much younger woman than I am a man. You are in health, Laura; why cast such a hopeless gloom over me, as these few words have done V

Lady Howard endeavoured to smile.

" True, it was wrong, Love mine. I did not think of what I was saying. When one is unhappy, one says many idle things; forgive me, and let us think of Alice. Tell me of her success in the gay world; tell me what hopes you entertain of her being happily married."





" Laura, our child is exceedingly admired; but I scarcely know whether such beauty, as hers, is desirable for a girl in her peculiar circumstances."

Poor Lady Howard! even her husband wounded her, constantly, when least intending to do so.

He continued, " Alice's unquestioned regularity of form and feature, the suffrages of artists, and the unbounded and general admiration of men, will excite envy in the greater portion of her own sex; and it must be confessed, that it is upon the latter that much of a woman's peace depends.—If a girl is pretty, graceful, or accomplished, so are a thousand others, and that degree and kind of charm will be readily conceded to them; but if one start up, as there does, now and then, of a peculiar character of beauty, embodying the idealism of poets and painters, she becomes a mark for detraction. Such is our Alice; and not all her ingenuousness, can shield her from danger. But there is one person, whose attentions towards her I have observed, with anxious interest,—I mean Colonel Leicester's. I think I am not mistaken; this is no passing admiration, no thraldom of the fancy; but deep-rooted attachment."





" Alas ! Charles; Lady Margaret Leicester, the proudest, and the most immaculate of characters, will not suffer her only son to ally himself to our daughter. Had it been any one else, I might have indulged a hope of seeing Alice happily established; but Colonel Leicester—never! never ! Do not deceive yourself, Charles; do not attempt to deceive me:— above all, do not allow Alice to engage her affections where, I know, they will only be contemned."

" Your warning comes too late, Laura already Alice loves Colonel Leicester. She is herself ignorant, as yet, of the nature of her preference. But I have watched her, and cannot be deceived. Yet why do you think Lady Leicester will prove so obdurate ? After all, Laura, I do not justify the step we took —how can I ? but we must despoil the gorgon head of half its terrors; and it is in vain to deny, that there are in the world many such cases, and that they are treated more or less leniently, according to the wealth, the influence, the wide-spreading connections of the parties. Now, we being of these black sheep, are among the most fortunately situated in these respects,





and we may hope ."

" Charles, I implore you, speak not so lightly of that which is bowing me down to the very earth. I bore all! I would bear it over again, for your sake !-—but oh, not in a bold spirit of braving the opinion of the world; still less in a hardened frame of mind, which defies the





anger of an offended God. Can I, then, hear you utter, in a moment of thoughtlessness, (but still in thoughtlessness), sentiments which are not the advised feelings of your more reflective hours; and which nothing could excuse my entertaining, even for a moment. No, Charles, it is a false compassion, that makes you speak thus. I must suffer; it is the lot I have chosen. To evade the consequences of guilt, is to incur a more dreadful punishment still—one, that will not end here, Charles ! I have never flinched from anguish; you know I have not! only in this last, worst trial—making our children acquainted with the story of their birth. In this instance, as regards our son, I have judged with a false judgment; but I cannot think the same reasoning will apply to Alice. She is a girl. She is never out of our sight. No one will dare to pollute her ears with the account of her parent's crime. She, at least, is left to me. Charles! Charles ! I beseecli





you, watch over her; let not any malignant tongue whisper the withering truth into her ear."

Lord Howard promised that nothing should be wanting, on his part, to draw the veil between her, and the knowledge which they so much dreaded her acquiring.

A time of comparative happiness ensued, had it not been for Lord Talbot's absence, the Howards would have been, for a while, in peace.

Lady Alice, never betrayed herself one moment ; and it might be, that she was aided in this difficult undertaking, by having a new interest spring up in her heart, which divided the current of her thoughts.

Colonel Leicester was a very constant guest at Lord Howard's table, and several other men of fashion joined their society.

Lord Howard was in high spirits; something like the splendour of former days seemed once more to irradiate the hall of his ancestors; but every now and then some chance word, some distant allusion to circumstances of a similar nature with his own, dashed the joyous feeling, and he shrunk back within himself, silent and unable to join in the hilarity of those around him.





Not one of these changes took place unobserved by Alice. She was swift to catch every, even the slightest word, that bore reference to the subject of her sorrows, and with the tenderest dexterity she warded off' many a random shaft, which would have wounded her parents, had it not been for her anxious love.

The evenings, at Howard House, were passed like those in the country. Lady Alice presided at an old-fashioned tea table, where, as in days of yore, there was opportunity for the exercise of various graces, without any marked display, or apparent pursuit of them.





Women have gained nothing by casting off all domestic cares, and all appearance of taking no part in their household establishment.

There is a peculiar beauty and fitness in women's applying themselves to lend a charm to all the common comforts of life. They know not what power they lose by despising these offices of home-spun texture, but which may, nevertheless, be wove into a web of beauty, and of priceless value to their own best interests.

All men come home sometimes. Many men find their chief delight there; even those who do not lead the most regular lives, still seek for repose, and refuge, under their own roof, and if they find intelligence, good temper, and graceful demeanour, adorning the home scenes of existence, they will gradually be drawn to their fire-sides, not merely as a refuge from trouble and care, but as a delightful arena for the enjoyment of those virtuous pleasures which at once embellish and sweeten life.





These are best practised by women; it is their peculiar province to shine at home, and in the quiet paths- of domestic life their beams blaze brightest, like the fairy glow-worm's lamp, which shuns the glare of the mid-day sun, and in the calm and sober hour of night, lights the weary traveller on his way.

And it was by her parents' side, in the graceful interchange of those minor attentions, which awaken, without wearying affection, that Lady Alice's personal and mental charms shone out in all their lustre. Colonel Leicester had often followed her flying footsteps in the dance, had gazed upon her youthful dignity of deportment in crowds, alike different from the girlish levity and silly coquetry of the generality of those of her own age, as from the affected Juno airs of a few older stagers, and had always felt that she was a creature innately noble, fresh from the mould of nature; but when he saw her in her paternal home, quietly engaged in the service of others, and performing her task as though it were a choice, and a delight, not a command, he thought that those lines were applicable to her, which he had never before felt inclined to apply to any woman :





" Polite, as all her life in courts she'd been,

Yet good, as she the world had never seen."



Colonel Leicester was still a young man, though very young ladies might have called him middle aged; and from having lived some time in hot countries, his complexion was darker than nature had designed it to be, as might be seen from the dazzling whiteness of his forehead. Altogether he was a noble-looking being, and the tone of his voice, that powerful spell to win or to repel, was at once manly and harmonious.





Such was the personal appearance of Colonel Leicester, and his mind was formed of such stuff as heroes love to honour. Yet, was he not harsh, unbending, unchristian ? No; he had a very woman's tenderness in love, and it was difficult, almost impossible, for any unengaged heart to live long in his society unscathed.

As Lady Howard sat at her tapestry work, her husband engaged at whist, Lady Alice sat by Colonel Leicester, turning over drawings and prints, and listening to his inexhaustible fund of conversation; now discussing matters of taste, with the eye of a painter and the knowledge of a philosopher, and then, when pressed by her to do so, touching modestly on those passages of his past life, when his chivalrous bravery had obtained for him the applause of his country, and the marked distinction of every individual who had served with him and under his command.





Was it possible for this sort of intimacy to continue, and not lead to love between two such persons? Both equally superior, both formed for that happiness, as rarely understood as it is rarely found, an entire devotion to each other.

Lady Howard saw this growing attachment with a pleasure mingled with pain. She knew Lady Margaret Leicester's character too well, not to be certain that she would use every argument, every entreaty, to dissuade her son from marrying Alice, and then, what would be the sufferings of the latter, when her affections, already rivetted upon him, should be obliged to be stifled,—uprooted altogether ?

Oh how she dreaded for her daughter's happiness ! yet she dared not hint this fear to Lord Howard^—it would have driven him wild,—still less to her daughter; and to forbid Colonel Leicester the house altogether, she neither could take upon her to do, for Alice's sake or his own.





" Again," she thought, as in every occurrence that befel them, "again my child suffers for her parents' fault. Lord Howard's daughter is a match for the highest and the best, but Lady Howard's—it is disgraceful to form an alliance with."

This sorrow, like many others, she devoured in secret, and only turned in her own mind what would be the best way to separate the lovers, without seeming to do so. There had long been a talk of going to Worthing, on account of her own health, and she availed herself of this excuse to carry her plan into effect.

Lord Howard no sooner heard his wife declare that she felt a change of air to be necessary to her, than he hurried their departure to the sea-side, and, as if there was not a moment to be lost, he ordered his servants to follow, and set off the next day for Worthing.





Alice knew not why, but she felt as if she was leaving every thing she loved, when she left London; and was obliged to recall to mind that her mother had said she was ill, in order to reconcile herself to this departure.

No place can be less picturesque than Worthing; but there is always a buoyancy in the air that comes off the ocean which exhilarates the spirits, and seems to give new life. The vastness, too, of the liquid plain, its continual changes of colour and of surface supplies the place of land scenery, and excites the imagination, even on such a flat and insipid shore.

Alice felt this: and the wonder-working hand of Omnipotence is perhaps nowhere more powerfully acknowledged than on a level sand, where the rolling billows, toss as they may, have their fixed boundary, which they cannot overpass, rage and chafe they never so angrily.





Lady Howard pointed this out to her child, who felt it in all its impressive combination of thought. For several days, Alice found aliment for her imaginative mind, in strolling to and fro, gazing on the ocean, and watching a distant sail, as it were, go down the horizon to another sphere; but as these sights became familiar, her thoughts reverted to the drawingroom in Square,—to the quiet evenings,

so pleasantly employed in sweet converse, and in the loved presence of one whose absence now made her aware of how much consequence he was to her happiness, and she began to think, after all, it is people, and not place, which constitutes pleasure.

In a musing mood, she wandered inland one day in her walk, to look for the last tints of autumn amongst the few trees which grow in the vicinity of Worthing, and having ascended the only high ground immediately behind the town, she reached a neglected place, which had been a gentleman's country-seat, but was now uninhabited, and considerably gone to decay. The remains of a terrace fronted the house, and in the high walled garden, a few flowers struggled among weeds, and emitted that autumnal fragrance which speaks through the senses to the soul, and awakens a pensive melancholy that carries with it a peculiar charm to the imaginative mind.





Alice wandered up and down, full of quaint fancies, and of that vague reverie, which engenders poesy, till at length her inspiration assumed a form, and she wrote in a small tablet which had been given her by Colonel Leicester, the following verses :—

Unbounded ocean ! mighty sea !

Grand image of eternity !

Thy waves outspread, thy dread immense,

Are symbols of that sea, from whence





None e'er return'd to tell the tale,

That o'er it spread death's awful sail;

But from this measureless sublime,

The mind, exhausted, turns to time,

And draws a semblance, meet for man,

Connected with his narrow span.



Thy varying surface is the mien

Of this world's state,—a changing scene ;

As storm and sunshine hold their reign

Alternate, on the fickle main,

So joys and sorrows lower or smile,

Like these o'erwhelm, like those beguile,

For sunny smiles of joy, that shine

On life,—unstable are as thine.

As on thy vast and dread expanse

The scintillating sunbeams glance ;

So pleasure's beams, upon the breast,

Sparkle, but leave no warmth imprest.

And as the Spirit of the air

Darts through the waves its shadows rare,

And changes to an Iris hue,

The ocean's own cerulean blue ;





So many a varying thought that springs

From sad review of human things,

Oft clouds the human face divine,

With shades most exquisitely fine :

But not like those, innocuous pass,

That shoot athwart the liquid glass ;

For these, with many a heavy trace,

Stamp rugged lines, time can't efface.



Why should the elements supply

Such food for mental agony 1

Induce the retrospective eye

To dwell on hours long since gone by ;

Weigh o'er the past, recall again,

To pristine force the latent pain,

And with a useless pang assail,

And withering tears, that nought avail.



Even these images suggest

A harrowing thought to tear the breast;

And as the wind or sighs or blows,

So mutably the life blood flows ;

Rushes along the swelling vein,

Or back recoils, repell'd by pain,





And to the heart's throne gives once more,

Fresh tides of feeling to deplore :

For nature's realm throughoutbestows,

Analogy to human woes.



The scene that now before me lies,

A host of gloomy thoughts supplies;

Whilst thousand idle beings ply

Their happy, dull vacuity.

Why, singled from the general throng,

Should other sense to some belong,

Than that which plods the way of life,

And spares a world of mental strife ?

Why not, like them, contented be,

With mediums and monotony ?



Theirs is a fatal gift of heaven,

To whom a sentient soul is given;

The intonation of whose mind,

Is strung by feelings so refined,

That vibrating at every sound,

A very breath has power to wound.

Yes, those who own this gift on earth,

Have a sad guerdon at their birth.





Destined to cherish, though they mourn i

The sense, by which their hearts are torn.

Now on the smooth and glittering sands,

Pass, and repass, gay motley bands :

Each sex, all ranks, and every age,

In this dull exercise engage.

Some pace the sands to woo the air,

And shattered nerves or frames repair;

The only view, the heaving wave,

Gifted with power to heal or save

That life, which mere existence knows,

Where rapture's tide nor ebbs, nor flows,

But which, serenely dull, rolls on,

Till their allotted span is gone.



But I can see another sight

In them, that hope and vigour blight;

For on thy trackless paths I see,

In fancy's mimic imagery,

Beings by wayward fortunes borne,

Divided loves and friendships mourn ,

Beings, perhaps by sad despair,

To foreign shores for peace repair,





Who find upon thy changing breast,

The record of their woes imprest.

For who, alas! from self can flee 1

That bitterest human enemy.



Oh, if in mute Oblivion's wave

Their sorrows they had power to lave,

How many, then, would quit the shore,

And to that port return no more.

Where wishes, hopes, and terrors reign,

And thousand phantoms of the brain,

That e'en when real ills subside,

All our fond dreams of bliss deride.



Ah, tell me not of golden gain,

That conquest reap3 upon the main :

Ah ! tell me not of battles won,

On waves illumed by glory's sun ;

For in those hoards of wealth I see,

Degrading Mammon's slavery,

And in those brine-steeped laurels I

The briny tears of grief descry.

In life's realities I view,

Much to despise, and much to rue,

VOL. I. H





And gladly, in ideal joy,

Seek what realities destroy.



I think, perhaps, did conquest never

Fond hearts and sweet endearments sever;

Did pride of glory, pride of health,

Ne'er win hy force, or gain by stealth,

The sources of the human soul;

But owning'nature's soft control,

Each man contented on the soil,

Where God first gave his hand to toil,

Dwelt in the lap of lasting peace,

That woes with war and sin would cease.

Then, circled by the ocean's surge,

No more its awful waves, would urge

The melancholy thought to rise,

Nor heave the breast with answering sighs

Nothing beyond its bounds outspread,

Would lure the wandering step to tread ;

Concentred all within our isle,

As often in some precious smile

The whole of life and law resides,—

For bliss in narrow limits bides,—





We should not seek on foreign strands,

One joy beyond our natal lands.

Then could I think old ocean's flood

The guardian angel of all good,

Nor, with dark spirit, gaze, as now,

I meditate its ebb and flow.



But from this self-created world,

Where fancy's banners are unfurled,

I quit the illusory sphere,

To feel that I am rooted here,

Here, where at rest, on prison walls,

The beam of gay illusion falls :

Here, where vile circumstances bind

In ponderous chains the soaring mind,

And where sad truth's effacing hand

Mars all that's traced by fairy wand.

Yet something whispers from within,

" Vain mortal!—to repine, is sin ;"

Perchance were all these fair conceits,

Which thus with harmless cunning cheats,



Made real, then some unknown ill

Would persecute, and wound thee still:

Did pride and luxury never rule,

What would our wayward passions school 1





Humility, the boast, is thine,

By pride's own gorgeous side to shine :

Tis thine, Simplicity, to sport,

Fairest, where luxury holds her court;

And mercy's tears most sweetly flow,

As tributary streams to woe.



By every vice some virtue springs,

And every woe some mercy brings ;

Oh ! let us humbly then believe,

Our wayward wishes all deceive ;

For who that lives and thinks and feels,

Owns not a power supreme reveals ;

That, gifted for a future state,

The clay-encumbered soul must wait,

Till breaking earthly bonds, it flee

To Heaven, for pure felicity.



Lady Alice read her verses aloud to hear if they were musical, and made several alterations, and then read them again ; they pleased her; they were a faithful copy of her. thoughts; " but who," she said, " will care for them





now ? My dear brother, he who used to take such interest in all I did, he is estranged from us, and why ?" Alas ! she guessed the reason too well.

This idea brought on a long chain of thoughts, and turned her every feeling into sadness.

" Henry," she said, speaking half aloud, " Henry, where are you ? you never write to me now; your letters are short and unsatisfactory even to our parents ; but it is too plain you must have heard our miserable story, and your mind, honourable as it is, could not brook the knowledge."

Such were Alice's feelings, half murmured aloud, as she descended the knoll on which the garden was situated, when on looking up, she beheld, to her astonishment, Colonel Leicester. They were mutually pleased, but the surprise was all on her part. He told her when the first words of meeting were exchanged, that he had found London very dull, after Lord and Lady Howard had quitted it; and at last determined to try what change of air would do to remedy the evil.





" The fact is, I believe," he added in an agitated manner, and as if the words forced their way against his will, " the fact is, Lady Alice, I should find all places dull now, where you are not."

This warmth of expression and manner was so unlike Colonel Leicester's usual measured speech and deportment, that it threw Lady Alice off her guard, and she gazed timidly, yet earnestly in his countenance, to know if he were serious or not. There was, as Colonel Leicester interpreted her questioning glance, a degree of reproachfulness in the expression of her features, which made him shrink within himself, and he feared he had said too much; there was a short break in the conversation—both were silent. He spoke first.





" I called at the Steine Hotel on my first arrival on Lord Howard, but he and Lady Howard were out. I then inquired for you, Lady Alice, and—and, though I fear contrary to etiquette,—hearing you had walked this way, I followed."

Still, Lady Alice spoke not; but Colonel Leicester knew she was not displeased at his having infringed this punctilio of etiquette to which he had alluded.

When indeed is it that a man is not aware of the interest he excites ? Unwilling, however, to involve her or himself in a more decided explanation of their feelings, and content with the advances he had made in Lady Alice's favour, he started another subject, and spoke of the insipidity of the country, and the uninterestingcharacter of the Sussex Coast, and of matters irrelevant to any personal feeling.





Still, when two persons are drawn together by those invisible chords of sympathy which certainly do exist in despite of all the arguments of cold-blooded reasoners, nothing they can say, nor any subject which they may start, but brings them round again on the same circle, however extended it may be, to the point from whence they set out. The way back to Worthing seemed to them very short, and both thought they should not have been weary could they have prolonged their walk; nevertheless, neither of them proposed to do so, and Lady Alice retired to her room, having taken leave of Colonel Leicester; and there she questioned with herself of his intentions towards her, and her own feelings respecting him. Her ingenuous disposition did not suffer her for a moment to dissemble with herself; she knew that she dearly loved him, but there was an honest pride of conscious worth which made her turn with scorn from the idea of allowing





him to read her heart till he had first made known the sentiments of his own.

" Did he love her ?—did he not ?" then she recounted, in idea, all the things she had ever said ; above all, every look he had ever looked, and having summed up the whole, she thought, " Yes, he loves me—but not as I love him. He is weighing not me in the balance of his resolve, but my dear unfortunate parents. He is thinking of the Leicester blood being polluted by that of Lady Howard, the divorced. He is thinking of the world's whisper;—the taunt of the insolent,—the sneer of the prudent,—the avoidance of the principled,—and thinking of these things, with the inflexible honour of his mother's instructions engraven on his soul, how can I hope to become his wife ? Impossible ! —it is impossible! But, at least, I will not betray my partiality for him; he shall not suppose I ever indulged a hope that I could win him."





With these resolves, Lady Alice quieted her fears, and resumed the composure which Colonel Leicester's unexpected presence had deprived her of.

She was going to rejoin her mother in an apartment below stairs, which looked on the sea, when her way was completely blocked up by a quantity of trunks, and travelling boxes, that were carrying to the bed-room of some person newly arrived, and immediately followed a lady and her attendant,—the voice of the former, she never could mistake, had she lived a thousand years; it brought back to her the dreadful night, when she learned the secret of her mother's disgrace;—and in another moment Miss Agar addressed her.

Putting up her glass, she said " Bless me ! Lady Alice Talbot! who would have thought to meet you in this place ? Well, I am very glad to have the pleasure of seeing you. I trust you are quite well;—and, is Lord Howard here ?" and then lowering her voice,—" and your mama, is she here ?—in this house ? " should be led to inquire into the particulars of her having made Miss Agar's acquaintance, —and lest, worst of all, they should meet Lord Vernon and his son.





" Papa and mama are both with me, of course."

" Well, I am exceedingly sorry that it should so happen at this moment; but I am afraid it will be out of my power to cultivate your society, as I should have wished, under other circumstances; for you know, my dear," and she put her mouth close to Lady Alice's ear, " I am here with Lord Vernon, so that I could not, without giving offence to my oldest and best friend, visit Lady Howard; but I am glad you told me of this circumstance, for I think. I must look out for other apartments.— Good morning, Lady Alice," and she called to her servant, to give orders about her travelling paraphernalia, during which, Lady Alice made her escape.

She trembled violently, at this rencontre, lest Lady Howard should hear of it,—lest she





It was some degree of relief to her, to hear Miss Agar disputing with the landlady, about the sum she was to pay for the apartments which she had bespoke, and now declared she could not inhabit, and finally, after much wrangling, beheld her get into her carriage and drive off.

Still, Lady Alice knew these persons were at Worthing, a place so confined in extent, and so calculated to make all who sojourned there meet together, that she scarcely dared to hope such a dreaded interview might not ensue. Yet, to whom could she open her heart? To whom express the misery that it was her peculiar lot to bear, in unshared wretchedness ? For the moment, there was a pause—a breathing time; and she availed herself of it to assume her wonted cheerfulness before her mother.





" Have you had a pleasant walk, dearest child, this morning?" said the mother, as she entered the room, where she was sitting.

"Yes, very; and I had an agreeable surprise, mama, in meeting Colonel Leicester."

She tried to still the accelerated motion of her heart, as she spoke; but Lady Howard knew her child too well to be deceived; she would not, however, take any notice of the agitation, which she remarked with all a mother's interest; and more than most mothers' apprehensions for the consequences that might ensue to her, who was dearer to her than her own life.

She had not, however, leisure to probe her daughter's feelings, at that time, even if she had been inclined to do so, for Lord Howard and Colonel Leicester came in together.





" Laura, I have met our friend wandering about, apparently not knowing what to do with himself, and in despite of his many apologies, I have brought him to dine with us."

Lady Howard professed her pleasure at seeing Colonel Leicester, and with the tact so peculiar to women, she put him quite at his ease, and took off all the awkwardness, which he felt, in endeavouring to explain, (which was quite unnecessary), why he had come to Worthing, and why he was not going to make a long stay, and much other gratuitous information, which only served to discover that which he was endeavouring to conceal.

Lord Howard was in high spirits, and even Lady Howard caught some reflection of gaiety from his joyance.

His child too, was for the time happy; nevertheless, these four persons were in their different positions, playing a part; not from any sinister





design; on the contrary, from motives which were in themselves amiable, and even laudable; and yet,- had they laid aside all disguise towards each other, they would have better fulfilled their relative duties, and had a fairer chance of happiness.



r





CHAPTER V.



" Had I a cave on some wild distant shore,

Where the winds howl to the waves' dashing roar :

There would I weep my woes,

There seek my last repose

'Till grief my eyes should close,

Ne'er to wake more.



Burns.



A Few days after the foregoing re-union, a circumstance occurred, which again cast a shadow over the temporary gleam of enjoyment of the Howard family. They were walking on the beach, Alice leaning on Colonel Leicester's arm, and Lord and Lady Howard following them at a short distance. Lady Howard discerned two figures approaching them, at whose sight she turned sick at heart,—her footsteps tottered,—she grew deadly pale.





" What is the matter, Laura ?"

" Nothing, nothing," she replied ; " hut let us join Alice and Colonel Leicester;" and Lady Howard endeavoured to hurry on to a bench, on which her child and Colonel Leicester had just sat down.

The persons she had seen coming towards them advanced nearer,—one moment more, and they must pass close to them. Lady Howard cast a glance at them to assure herself of that which she most dreaded to ascertain. She was not mistaken.

Then that terrible burning blush, which was the reflection of her upbraiding conscience, flushed her cheek and forehead with its scorching glow,'

Lord Howard looked also in the same direction as his wife had done, and immediately recognized the cause of her agitation; he beheld Lord Vernon and his son,—Lady Howard's son,—who were about to pass close by them. Lord Howard turned his back, and pretended to look at a vessel in the offing; Lady Alice spoke eagerly to Colonel Leicester, and endeavoured to take off his attention from her mother; but, unfortunately, both Lord Vernon and Lord Stuart were intimately acquainted with Colonel Leicester, and the latter, in ignorance of Lady Howard being his mother, rushed forward, and eagerly seizing Colonel Leicester's hand, he expressed the pleasure he felt at thus unexpectedly meeting him. Lady Howard looked up at Lord Stuart,—his likeness to his father, mingled with a likeness to herself, and that indescribable yearning of nature towards an offspring, which every mother knows, told her that he was her child—her first-born and forsaken son. Her eyes were involuntarily rivetted on him, but she saw Lord Vemon advancing, and she dared not longer indulge her gaze. She withdrew them, and looked on the ground.





Lord Vernon stared hard at the party on the bench, to ascertain who the persons were his son was speaking to. He immediately recognized Colonel Leicester, and supposing them to be strangers, he too stopped, and addressed the latter.

Poor Lady Howard ! she had not even a veil on, to cover that burning blush of shame which burnt her like a firebrand. She felt ready to sink at Lord Vernon's feet,—at her son's feet— (oh ! what an unnatural humiliation is a parent's to a child !) and implore their pardon; but Lord Howard's presence was a check to her feelings, the only one, perhaps, which could have had power to make her refrain from exclaiming,

" Oh, my son, my son !"





Lord Vemon caught a glimpse of Lady Howard's averted face; their eyes met; and hastily withdrawing his hand from Colonel Leicester's, he walked rapidly past them. Colonel Lei-, cester contrived to lead Lord Stuart to some little distance from the Howards, for he knew too well the unfortunate situation of Lady Howard, and of her being the mother of his young friend ; and with that delicacy of feeling which was so peculiarly his characteristic, he returned a few steps, held out his hand, first to the poor mother, then to Lady Alice, and saying that he had some particular business with Lord Stuart, wished them a good morning; but the latter came forward, as though he were about to request to be introduced to Lady Howard and her daughter; this, Colonel Leicester adroitly prevented ; but Lord Stuart looked hard at them, and bowed as his friend took his arm and led him away. Alice returned the courtesy; she did not wish her mother should think that she was conscious





of any peculiarity in her doing so to Lord Sttiart, more than to any other man.

What refinement of tenderness, guided by presence of mind ! what scrupulous attention to her parent's feeling! But Lady Howard's knees shook under her; she could not return the bow—the bow from her own son !

After this unexpected and terrible meeting she- looked at Alice; she did not betray any surprise at Lord Vernon's abrupt manner of passing by them, or seem in any wise affected by the scene.

Thus had the innocent girl acquired a profound power of dissimulation, the attribute, generally, of hardened characters, and seldom the companion of ingenuous youth. The seed sown by the parent, be it bad or good, multiplies ten thousand fold to the children's children.

" Thank God !" said Lady Howard inwardly, " Alice is yet ignorant of her mother's shame, but both my sons are estranged from me. Henry flies his home, because he knows it is one of guilty love ; and William is not even aware that I am his mother. His manner to me, when chance threw us together, was that of one indifferent person to another. No; he does not even know me when he sees me. Ought I to wish he should ? Vernon, you are revenged ! The iron has entered into my soul!"





There is a feeling excited in the breast of a mother at the birth of her first-born, which is as unlike every other in its nature, as it is permanent and engrossing; and however much after-circumstances may estrange the parties, the exulting pleasure with which the first-born was hailed by its mother, can never be entirely effaced from the memory; and great as was Lady Howard's affection for the two children of the man she loved, nevertheless, when she beheld Lord Stuart, she remembered he was her first-born,—she had forsaken him,—she had injured him, and a long repressed flood of overwhelming tenderness, such as can be felt alone for one that is most dear and most injured, now burst forth, and nature claimed her right.





All these thoughts and feelings, so long to detail in language, so rapid to be felt by the affections, had occurred to Lady Howard during the brief scene which has been delineated.

When she roused herself from the stupor which succeeded these sensations, her first thought was of Lord Howard. She looked round in search of him, but he was gone, and the mother and daughter were alone together.

" It was unkind in Mm to leave me, and at such a moment," she felt, but did not say so ! " Howard ought to have stood by his wife; but no one has done so, save Alice !" and the sensation of desolation bowed her to the earth.

She continued to sit for some time on the bench on which she had fallen, till Lady Alice observed that it was growing late,—that she



t feared that the damp mist which was gathering over the sea would hurt her, and she requested her, in an anxious tone of voice, to go home.





Lady Howard rose without speaking, took her child's arm, and they returned to the inn in silence.

Each had a secret to hide from the other,— each endured that heavy sense of oppression, which weighs upon all who have something to conceal.

When Lord Vernon returned home, it was with a heavy heart and a renewed sense of misery and sorrow, long gone by, but freshly brought again to his endurance. His old friend and cousin, Miss Agar, who had rendered herself so necessary to him, that she had at length succeeded as establishing herself as mistress of his house, was ready to receive him as he entered.

" How now, my lord !" she said, as he walked up and down the apartment," what's the matter ? don't let the blue devils get hold of you. I do not fear the face of clay, but those shadowy monsters must be combated stoutly, or they'll get the better of us."





" Why, who do you think I've seen, Miss Agar?"

" How should I know! some very ugly old witch, one would suppose, by your strange humour."

" I have seen Lady Howard. I have seen Laura Vernon, tha£ was. By heavens! she is still the handsomest woman in England, even now. Laura! my poor Laura! I am sorry to have seen you—it makes all my misery return."

" Bless me, my Lord, is that all!—What! you have seen your runaway wife, and you relapse into lover-like despair, after thirty years of forgetfulness. I pray you, have more respect for yourself—more common sense."

" Poor soul! " Lord Vernon went on to say, speaking as it were to himself; " Poor soul!

VOL. I. I





I fear that proud fellow, Howard, is not as kind to you as he ought to be. Not as kind as I should have been to you. It is hard for a man to be deceived by the woman he doats upon, and by a man calling himself his friend, as Howard called me. Yes, it is a black story,^but the worst of all was, her having had the heart to forsake her boy. Laura ! I could have

forgiven my own wrongs, but my son's ."

And Lord Vernon's heart writhed with thecon_ tending feelings of long-forgotten love renewed, and a sense of injury, coupled with that love.

It is impossible but that an injured husband, who finds the man who sat at his board, eat his bread,' .and lived on terms of the greatest intimacy with him, prove basely false to him, and not for ever entertain a lively remembrance of such treachery; and though Lord Vernon had the spirit of a christian, and proved he had, still he felt as a man,—and he gave vent to





these feelings on the present occasion, and expressed them in all their poignancy.

" My dear Lord Vernon," said Miss Agar, who was beating the Devil's tattoo, with sundry other gestures of impatience, " these ebullitions of wrath and regret are really beneath contempt. Why, you talk like a young boy quite raw and new upon the world. Is it not allowed by^all,—is it not selon les rigles, that my Lord's greatest fnend, is my Lady's lover ? There was nothing new or astounding in your case. Fifty persons are in the same predicament now, so to speak, on the boards of public life.— Some of these affairs are beginnings of future denouements; some are in progress; others nearly completed. These arrangements or disarrangements, or whatever you may choose to call such choices and chances,—always have existed, and do exist; and as to what may be, in future, you and I need not much care. Take my i2





word for it, the greatest crime in the eyes of the world, is to be ridiculous. Hitherto you have escaped that misfortune; do not incur it; rest assured, there is nothing new under the sun, and do not arrogate to yourself the glories of a martyr. Your story is the commonest one in the world—vexatious at the time, doubtless, but more or less so, as you yourself make it. Bonne mine a mauvais jeu, is the wise axiom, and one upon which you will go on well through life; the reverse is a pitiable affair. However, my dear friend, you know I have always stood by you, and will, to the last. I have no great faith in women's friendships, but a friendship between a man and woman, especially when they are not in their first bloom, is one of the surest liaisons I know of."

" Miss Agar, it is true you have often borne with my weakness, if you choose to' call it so, and I am grateful for your kindness, and amused by your many talents. But I will not attempt to conceal from you, that there are some deep-rooted feelings, of which it may truly be said, they are a part of ourselves—and of such are those which are connected with my unfortunate marriage; but not a word more,— here comes Stuart and Colonel Leicester."





It was decided by the Howards to leave Worthing, and proceed to Brighton.

Lord Howard had been in very bad temper since the unfortunate rencontre, and his bland humour had given place to much unreasonable querulousness.

He observed to his wife " That Colonel Leicester, for the last two or three days, had not dined with them as usual," and said " he supposed that vile woman, Miss Agar, had seized upon him, to make up her whist party."

The day before they were to go away, Lady Alice wished to make a sketch of some boats, and fishers' tackle, which lay on the shore, immediately before the bench where she had sat by Colonel Leicester, on the eventful day when she had seen Lord Vernon, and her brother.





She had a fear, and yet a wish, to see the latter once again, and she was desirous, at all events, of taking some remembrance of the day when she had seen him, it might be, for the first and last time.

She went out very early, to avoid the anxious gaze of the passengers, so that she drew undisturbedly, and made a clever sketch,—some bold clouds serving for a back ground, together with the tints of early morning, and the picturesque group of boats in the foreground, lent a tone and character even to the pencil drawing, that gave it almost the effect of colouring.

Having finished, she prepared to return home in time for her father's breakfast hour, when she saw a person approaching, whom she im





mediately recognised as Lord Stuart. She wished to remain;—she wished—she knew not what. But could her mother, or Lord Howard desire that she should make his acquaintance ? Oh no ! they could not;—and hastily scrambling all her drawing materials into a basket, she moved homeward, although unwillingly.

She had not gone far, before she heard some one running behind her, and then her own name, Lady Alice, called repeatedly.

" I beg your pardon, but I believe you have dropped this book," holding up the tablets which Colonel Leicester had given her.

She stopped, and thanking Lord Stuart, had leisure to look at him, and her heart longed to call him brother; while on his part, something seemed to attract him, also, and he endeavoured to lengthen out the conversation, by assuring her that he had not looked at the contents of the tablets—merely taken up the little book that confined them, which, he said, " he concluded to ba her's, as he had seen her for some time drawing; from the bench where he had found them."





She coloured, smiled, hesitated, was embarrassed, and then giving way to an impulse she could not well define, she said, " I have no secrets. You are quite welcome to look at the contents, and not only to look at them, but to keep the book altogether; pray do so! I give it you. Keep it in remembrance of this day!"

Lord Stuart took the gift, with much emotion. He knew not what should make him thus interested in a stranger.

" Will you, Lady Alice, pardon me, if I request to know whether I may not have the pleasure of considering your kind condescension as a permission to call upon Lord and Lady Howard, and cultivate your acquaintance."

" Oh, dear! Lord Stuart, I know not— I





cannot say—I fear not. Oh! do not ask me. I believe your father and mine quarrelled. They can never meet. But do not, as you value my peace, do not say any thing of this our accidental acquaintance. I trust to your honour. In our prayers we may remember each other." And she walked hastily away.

The more she thought of this interview, of her imprudence, in having given way to the wish of her heart, in saying something to her brother,—the more distressed she was, and the more angry with herself; and yet, she could not altogether repent of having left a memorial of her existence, with a relation she might never see again.

On his part, Lord Stuart did not know what to think. He wondered what quarrel could have taken place between his father and Lord Howard. He wondered how Lady Alice Talbot should know any thing of the matter; and still more, he wondered why she had said, " I trust to your honour, not to mention this our accidental acquaintance ;" but on the other hand, he could not think himself bound not to fathom this mystery, and he determined to speak to Colonel Leicester, who he knew was intimate with the Howards.





He did so; and the latter was at first thrown off' his guard, and was just going to say all he knew, when his usual caution checked him, and he replied, " I cannot answer you, Stuart. I believe I have heard, that long ago there was a quarrel between your family and Lord Howard, and that they never met. But I was not in England at that time, I was with my regiment. Only tell me, did Lady Alice give you these tablets?"

" Yes, just as I have related it to you—so was our meeting. But why do you ask that question, with an appearance of so much interest ? Are you jealous, Leicester ?"





" Jealous, no ! — impossible !" he added gravely, " but let me read the lines that are written in them."

" These are not the sentiments of so young a person as Lady Alice, surely," said Lord Stuart. "They appear to be the feelings of one who has suffered much of the pains and realities of life."

" It is not always youth, or age, which ripens the understanding," replied Colonel Leicester, •" and gives force to expression. Some people live more in a very few years, than others do in a long life. I agree with you, in thinking the verses good—better than most women's poetry; but what makes me feel an interest about them is, that they seem to have been written from the heart, and the heart which could dictate them, must have known many sorrows."

" Well, it is very hard I am not to cultivate the acquaintance of a person who appears altogether so delightful. I will, positively, find out what this quarrel was between our parents; and endeavour to break the spell which seems destined to prevent our becoming friends."





Colonel Leicester was at all events pleased that he had not been the person to tell Lord Stuart that his mother was a divorced woman. He had been educated in a very strict school, and the natural bent of his mind was calculating. This did not altogether choke the warmer feelings of his heart, but it very much repressed them; and hitherto his affections or passions had never run away with his judgment.

He began to question himself as to the propriety of continuing on terms of such great intimacy with the Howards, and he asked himself whether he would or would not marry Alice Talbot. He thought of her beauty, of her virtues, of something perhaps which to his own peculiar turn of mind, was more enthralling still,—of that uncommon power of intellect, which always commanded his homage, even when unaccompanied by outward charm, but which, united to youth and beauty, proved a combination as rare as it was irresistible; but then he thought of Lady Howard's unfortunate position ; of his own mother's unbending virtue, and prudence crossed his wishes. He determined to conquer his attachment; to cease from an intercourse which would be as dangerous as it would be dishonourable. But how to break through this intimacy, was his next thought; and he liked to suppose it more difficult than it really was; but all his perplexities on this head were settled by finding when he called the next day, that the Howards were gone to Brighton.





It is astonishing how the wisest and best principled persons deceive themselves. " Gone to Brighton!" he said to the maid servant, who spoke to him at the Steine Hotel; and he turned away moodily, and walked along the shore. At first he resolved to return to town and join his mother in Devonshire; but then he thought " why should I not go to Brighton ? every body goes to Brighton,—my going there can lead to no consequences, can excite no surprise; no busy tongues will be observant of me there; here, indeed, the place is so confined, the society so small, every thing and every body is noticed and commented upon; but Brighton !—who knows what any body does at Brighton ? Besides, I need not to be perpetually with the Howards !" These and a thousand other reasons, which had no reason in them, determined him to follow his own inclination; and to Brighton he went.





The first persons he met were the Howards ; they were coming down Broad-street, just as he was passing it to go to Kemp Town.

Lord Howard, in his kind familiar way, immediately recognised him, and as quickly gave him a general invitation to dine whenever he should have nothing better to do. Somehow or other, he seldom had any thing better to do; and in despite of his good resolves to avoid the family, he found himself living perpetually with them.





Lord Howard seldom or ever went into any of the societies which, that particular year, abounded; and, as his daughter declared she had no wish to join them, he felt at liberty to decline all those invitations that came to him and Lady Alice. But there was one invitation he did wish to have, and that came not. He had written his name down, and his daughter's, at the Pavilion, but no notice whatever was taken of him or of Lady Alice. He felt this bitterly, and there was one person, his friend, the great man, to whom he did venture to express the slight he felt; but from whom he received a reply so polite and unanswerable, that he was conscious he had only to bow to the award. " If," said this personage, " you and your daughter were invited, would it not be the most cruel affront upon you both, since Lady Howard could not possibly be received, and as she is known to be with you here, surely that would wound your feelings more than any thing else could do."





Lord Howard made no reply; something galling met him at every moment when he least expected it, in some shape or other; thus Brighton became detestable to him.

Lord Howard felt himself a marked man, go where he might; but London is large enough even for such a one to escape daily and hourly observation ; there is no place where one is so soon forgotten; it is either the busiest or the most retired scene in the world. Upon the whole, therefore, Howard House was the shelter of refuge best adapted to his circumstances, for his house in the country had. been unfortunately the place they had fled to when Lady Howard left Lord Vernon. Their story was too well known there ; the honest farmer, and the country squire's wife, even to the lowest peasant on his estate, pointed his wife out as a warning to their wives and children. This also was a bitter trial to Lord Howard. He could boast of a long line of unsullied ancestry, and hitherto had had an honest pride in enumerating their deeds and emulating their virtues. Lady Howard had become a blot in his escutcheon ; she was the first bearing that name who was a disgrace, and it was not one of his least mortifications to think that her portrait could not take its place, beautiful as was her outward form, in that long range of peerless dames, in comparison with whom her image would draw down the scornful comments of all beholders.





The particular feature in Lord Howard's character had been a veneration and love for his progenitors; nor was it merely pride that guided this feeling, but an honourable sentiment, which, in recounting their exploits, said, " Go thou and do likewise."





These are thoughts and feelings little regarded in the present day; but it is very silly, nay, worse than silly; it is one of the dark signs of the times, not to busy ourselves about the histories, the conduct, and the characters of our ancestry.

Wherever there is no love of, or care about, those who have gone before us, there is little emulation, or excitement to virtue, or heroic action left; little dread of what is evil, or admiration of what is good. It is a flippant vulgarity, in the character of Charles, in " The Rivals," to make it appear as if it were an admirable trait in him to sell his ancestor's portrait at an auction; as though this were the characteristic of a gay, high-spirited fellow, rather than of a vicious fool: but Sheridan had no ancestors, I believe—he was himself his own ancestor, as an Irish body may say. The scriptures, themselves, even seem to warrant and inculcate an interest in the character of those from whom we sprang, since the promise is made of a blessing even to the thousandth generation of those who love God, and think upon his commandments, to do them—and the reverse.





Although Lord Howard was happy to see his wife's health somewhat restored by their stay at Brighton, and that Lady Alice was generally attended in her rides by Colonel Leicester ; still he was so mortified at being shut out from the court, that he determined to return to town, and after a few weeks was again settled in Howard House.

But how much of happiness or misery may be comprised in a few weeks.

Lady Alice had unconsciously allowed herself to consider Colonel Leicester as a friend, and in despite of all her wisdom, the friend had become a lover.





In gazing at the setting sun, as it sank beneath the horizon, the last night of her sojourn at Brighton, she thought it might never again rise for her with the same gladness; and as though nature itself marked the hour with a peculiar characteristic, for remembrance to dwell upon, the scene was gorgeous in glory.

Every one knows, who is an observer of nature, that the circumstance of the whole interest of a sun-set at sea being exclusively and undividedly confined to the heavens and the ocean, no minor feature of landscape breaks the unity, or draws off the eye to any less sublime object.

It was one of those evenings, when the gold and purple clouds seem like a canopy around the retreating orb of fire, while a thousand tints of palest hue, and of indescribable beauty, form as it were, a soft back ground to the splendid gold of the sun's upward rays. The waves were dark beneath it, save where they caught a stream of coloured light from the reflection above them.





Lady Alice and Colonel Leicester reined in their horses to admire this sight, after a quick gallop over the Downs.

" I never knew," said the former, " how beautiful Brighton was, before. I am quite sorry to be leaving it just as I had learned to taste its charms.

Colonel Leicester observed, with an emotion of voice, which adds so much pathos to words, " It is the sun only, Lady Alice, which produces this magnificent effect;—obscure it, and how dull and uninteresting would this shore become. And so is life—if the sun of our affections ceases to irradiate us, the prospect is dreary indeed!"

Lady Alice made no reply.

Lord Howard called to them, saying it was time to get home, and they pushed on their horses and joined him.—A few more minutes brought them there.

Lady Alice endeavoured to behave as usual, to seem the same; but at dinner, that day, she was abstracted, serious; and when asked for one dish, helped the person to another.





She wished, but feared, to look in Colonel Leicester's countenance, and to read there the purport of what he meant; but she never had courage to fix her eyes steadily upon him.

She felt—for it is a second sense of sight—that he was looking at her, perhaps, with the same intent, and she dared not trust herself to the expression which she knew her heart would make to his inquiring eyes.

This bitter-sweet of love was hers; but he knew every thing that she fancied she was hiding from him.

The fable of " the Boys and the Frogs," is*but too apt an emblem of the passion of love, as it regards women,—it is death to them, but play to their pursuers.





CHAPTER VI.



" From mighty wrongs to petty perfidy,

Hare I not seen what human things could dol

From the loud war of foaming calumny,

To the small whisper of the paltry few,

And suhtler venom of the reptile crew,

The Janus-glance of whose significant eye,

Learning to lie with silence, would seem true,

And, without utterance, save the shrug or sigh,

Deal round to hapless fools its speechless obloquy."



Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage.

Lady Margaret Leicester was sitting in her room, in Grosvenor Street, one afternoon, apparently absorbed in her work, which however required no great skill or stretch of understanding, awaiting the visit of Miss Agar, a person for whom she had no great respect; nevertheless, she paid her that sort of attention which the frivolous sometimes obtain from the profound, the wicked from the virtuous, and the unprincipled from the principled. It is really very difficult to account for this strange fact, but that it is so, no person who has lived long in the world will deny. Is it that the good and the respectable are deceived ? no, it is not that either;—is it that they receive such persons courteously out of a pure spirit of philanthropy, and in the hope of doing others essential service, and reclaiming them ? no, it is not that either. It must be confessed it is rather from that unamiable, but governing spirit which pervades all human character; a spirit of selfishness, that these anomalous intimacies take place for a time, while under the influence of some strong excitement, some particular point of interest they serve. The really superior will, on certain occasions, condescend to hold communion with very doubtful and even reprehensible characters; and so it was with Lady Margaret Leicester, the afternoon in question, as she sat expecting to receive Miss Agar.





The usual note of preparation was loudly given at the door: there is surely something in the knock which announces a visitor, that implies what sort of person they are.

Miss Agar's was short, but peremptory. Certainly it had a great resemblance to herself.

" I hope I have the honour to see you well, my dear Miss Agar; allow my servant to put down your shawl."

" Indeed, Lady Margaret, I am pretty well; quite well is not exactly what I am, or what I should like to say, if I were so. I have a superstition about' quite well.' I never allow any body (I care about, that is to say), to be quite well"

" What a good idea that is ! why, really Miss Agar, when one considers the uncertainty and the brevity of every thing here below, we ought not to speak so decidedly; as you

VOL. I. K





well observe, no body's quite well, or quite good, or quite any thing; that belongs not to our imperfect state."

" My dear Lady Leicester, as for your morale upon the subject, I confess myself not good enough certainly to have meant any reference to it, but merely a propos en Fair,—a fancy, a folly, anything you will, in short."

Lady Margaret drew up, and looked grave, poked the fire, shook her head, which Miss Agar did not observe, and went on to say— " Talking of follies, what do you think 1 Lord Howard was so unwise as to court a rebuff, and a rebuff from the Court too! He took his divorced wife, and his daughter, Lady Alice, under the very nose of royalty;—could any thing be more injudicious?"

" Very terrible, indeed ! people have so little respect for any thing, or any body, that I have ceased to wonder at, although I can never cease to lament them."





" Lament! that is a great word on a small occasion, why you may do nothing then but cry, from the rising up of the sun to the going down of it; besides, there are some actions quite sure to produce certain consequences there is nothing to be hoped or feared about the matter, still less to be lamented; for when a man has married a divorced woman, he knows she cannot be received at court, and at best is only smuggled into society, like a piece of contraband goods; it is pitiable to see poor Lord Howard, striving and striving to edge his wife in, and never succeeding. I am sure I am very sorry, for I declare I think that poor woman is very much to be pitied, and is not half so bad as fifty others to whom we all make our best curtseys every day."

" I beg you will not say all, Miss Agar; I never was, I never will be acquainted with a doubtful character."

" That is to say, not that you know of, Lady Margaret. But pray, are you gifted with the spirit of divination to read people's hearts? You are more terrible than I thought you were. If this is the case, I should not dare to appear in your presence."





"Eh! eh! eh! eh!"—laughed Lady Margaret, or rather tittered, for the peculiar sort of noise she made resembled more a rattle than a laugh.

" You are always witty, always droll; it . is impossible to be angry with you;—but it is one thing to jest—another to be in earnest. —And so the unfortunate Lady Howard was cruelly affronted at Brighton ? No one lived in their society, did they ?"

" Oh ! pardon me, they had plenty of society. Your son Colonel Leicester was never absent from them,—never seemed happy where they were not, that is to say, where Lady Alice Talbot was not."

" You don't say so. What! Leicester frequent their society ? You astonish me !"





"I wonder that you should wonder, Lady Margaret. You and I have lived long enough to wear off all the novelties of life. Wonder is a young fresh sentiment, it suits the inexperienced; but it is very tiresome to meet with a person who goes on through life wondering constantly; however, in this case, even you are deceived, and I suppose you thought your son was always to be tied to your apron string, fulfilling your commands;—when you find the reverse, you wonder."

" I should be exceedingly sorry indeed, Miss Agar," replied Lady Margaret, colouring with anger, " to have ever indulged such a supposition. . George Leicester has too much character to suffer himself to be led by any one,—not even by his mother."

. " Ah! perhaps so; but by a mistress you know that is a different affair; the wisest of men are the puppets of their mistresses. Some said he was in love with the mother,—some said with the daughter. What a lovely creature Lady Howard was when Laura Vernon. I was very intimate with her at that time. I had known her mother, and I gave her the best advice. I told her she would repent of the ;step she was about to take. But advice is the most useless thing in the world. However^ I dare say she will marry her daughter welf. These divorced women always do. I should not at all be surprised to see Lady Alice Talbot become Lady Alice Leicester."





" God forbid!" most devoutly ejaculated Lady Margaret;—" My son ! my excellent son marry a girl whose birth is "

" Make up your mind to it, for I really believe the match will take place, and after all, let me tell you, ho bad match either; her father intends to give her a very large fortune: she has been well brought up, is exceedingly handsome, and "

" Well brought up ! My dear Miss Agar, where theory is not grounded upon practice what signifies all the lessons got by rote of virtue. The girl must know the secret of her mother's crime, and that in itself is quite sufficient to render her wholly unfit to become the wife of my son. No, Miss Agar, George Leicester would not break his mother's heart. But I need not indulge such vague apprehensions ; the thing is I know quite out of the question. Only I pray you just mention the reports which the idle and the envious disseminated respecting his supposed attachment. Really I hate to pronounce the word, it is go inconsistent with every principle that has ever been instilled into his breast."





" I assure you, Lady Margaret, that the fact of your son's living morning, noon, and night with the Howards, first at Worthing, then following them to Brighton, and repeating the same conduct there, was well known to every body, and of course the world supposed that he was in love either with one or other of the ladies."





" The world is very scandalous, very wicked. Alas ! my dear Miss Agar, we are all very wicked, but let us hope that some persons are better than others." And she dropped her eyes complaisantly upon her lap.

" Indeed, I don't hope any thing about the matter; it is quite enough for me to think of myself, and too much too sometimes. But, bless me!—looking at her watch,— I promised to set down that tiresome Lady Crawley, who has no horses, and always makes use of other people's. It is past the hour we had agreed to go to Lady Napier's assembly. Good night, my dear Lady Margaret. I have the honor to wish

you a very good evening. 1 have given her

some nice nuts to crack," she said, mumbling as she hopped down stairs.

That evening, when Miss Agar thought she had thus filled up the compliment of her day's





mischief, and that Lady Margaret sat turning over every possible reason for and against the probability of her son's being enamoured of Lady Alice Talbot; the object of all her maternal solicitude had come to the determination of proving how far Alice would sacrifice the love she bore her mother to that with which he had inspired her. Colonel Leicester's character was not an uncommon one with the male part of the creation; he loved Lady Alice Talbot, but he loved himself better; the idea of being pointed at as the bold man who had ventured upon the daughter of the divorced, made him shudder; but there was one alternative that possibly might reconcile his mother to the match, and make him feel on sure grounds himself; this was, that she should hold but little intercourse with Lady Howard, and that only in his presence. This precautionary measure, could it be strictly enforced, would, he deemed, sanction his marriage with Alice Talbot, in the estima





tion of the most rigid moralists; and exonerate him in the eyes of the world from ridicule, that dreaded evil, which, next to dishonour, he most feared to incur. And yet when Colonel Leicester asked himself " Why should I part the daughter from her mother,—is there any thing now in the conduct or manners of the latter to find fault with ? Is she not a thousand times more pure than many of those who reprobate her ? True, but the crime has been committed, which justly condemns her to be an outcast from society; the example has been set to her daughter; that daughter may follow it; and then, if she were my wife, could I endure the disgrace ? No, I will not marry Alice Talbot. And yet, how good, how beautiful, how ingenuous she is; have I not won her heart ? and am I the villain to break it 1"

The next time he met Lady Alice, and found himself conversing with her unobserved, he thought—now for the trial. " I have heard," he said," a curious and a melancholy story this day, —will you allow me to tell it you ? I think it will have some interest for you."





" Certainly," replied Lady Alice, rather agitated, she scarce knew why, " I am sure it will interest me very much."

He then drew her mother's story, her own position, his feelings and his wishes under feigned names, and wound up all by saying, " Do you think the daughter ought or ought not to have so far given up her mother's society in behalf of the feelings and the honour of the man she loved, or not?"—He fixed his eyes steadily upon her, and she returned his gaze as steadily; nay, with a peculiar expression of haughty disdain, as she replied,

" I know not what that daughter ought to have done, but if I could suppose myself in a similar case, I should say never—never should a child give up its mother for any consideration whatever; parents may be sinful in the eyes of the whole world, but their children can only see in them the



r beings to whom they owed their existence, and the man who could ask such a sacrifice of a daughter, must have been unworthy of the love he sought."





" I had in some degree anticipated your reply, but in this instance we differ."

" We do differ," said Alice, " decidedly."

Colonel Leicester's disappointment was visible on his countenance, as he pressed Alice's hand, and wished her good night; but Alice evinced no expression, save that of a calm dignity, which belied the agony of her heart, for it had been irremediably crushed ; she felt, to hate the man she loved,—can there be a greater pang known to the breast of woman ? * * *

" Nonsense, Laura," said Lord Howard to his wife, " I will speak to Colonel Leicester; the whole town is talking of our child's attachment to him; I hear their names coupled together as a matter of course, their marriage must in the opinion of the world, be the consequence of so great an intimacy as we have permitted to exist for some months past between them. I am asked perpetually when it is to take place 1 People wish me joy, and I know not what to reply; I tell you it is full time that Colonel Leicester should declare his intentions, or else I will ask him what he means, for he has gone further in this affair than I like; further than an honourable, decided man would do. I hope no evil will ensue from my having allowed matters to proceed so long without ascertaining Colonel Leicester's views. By heavens! if he has been trifling with her, if he has been amusing himself merely, I will be revenged on him/'





" Pray, Charlie," said Lady Howard, timidly, " do not be precipitate, wait a short time longer, give Colonel Leicester time to woo and win Alice ; six months is a short space to seek and obtain love ; remember, Charlie, our own love ; it was not the growth of a few months, it required a much longer time to make me love





you."

Lady Howard, forgetting for a moment, the attendant miserable circumstances which rendered that love sinful, smiled as she gazed on her husband's countenance, but she met with no answering smile from him; he frowned, and a fierce expression played around his mouth. In a moment poor Lady Howard remembered the truth; she blushed crimson, and was silent.

" Must you always be talking of that old story, Laura ? I should have thought it was no such pleasant theme to dwell upon, but you are careful to remind me of my folly,—what the deuce has that to do with Alice and Colonel Leicester 1"

" Nothing Charles, nothing, truly. Thanh God it has not. There is no similitude between their case and my own, unhappy one! I forgot, or I should not so have spoken ; but it is very seldom I forget my fault, Charlie, very seldom."





" At that moment I did, I acknowledge I did; and I remembered only the happiness I felt, when I knew you loved me, and I hoped that such might be our Alice's portion. Do not be angry with me, love mine," she said, as the gloom deepened over her husband's countenance.

" Never mind, Laura, I am used to this now; do not fret about the matter -" and Lord Howard caressed his favourite blood-hound, a creature of enormous size and great beauty, which lay on the hearth; but this dog had often caused Lady Howard serious alarm, for, if roused to anger, he was a fearful animal, and of desperate strength.

" Well, Charles; I have only this favour to entreat of you. Do not be hasty," resumed Lady Howard hesitatingly, " in speaking to Colonel Leicester, do not frighten him; do not give him an excuse to change his mind. Oh f above all, do not give our dear Alice pain, by forcing him to come to a decision, which, under such circumstances, might be unfavourable to her wishes—-to all our wishes."





" Pshaw ! women are always so full of contrivances—so wise in their own conceits^so foolish in the great conduct of human life. Leave the matter to me, Laura. I was misled by you once, in not telling the truth to our children: and you know what were the consequences. But in this case I positively will not allow my daughter's name to be coupled with any man's, in the terms of familiarity with which I have heard hers and Colonel Leicester's spoken of. If you are not sick, yet, of notoriety, Lady Howard, I am. I have had ' more than enough of it. We have been sufficiently long a subject for gossips. If that is the only inheritance we have to leave our nn





fortunate children, they will live to curse our memories. I tell you, Laura, if Colonel Leicester cares for Alice, let him declare himself openly, honourably, at once; and if she likes him, let them marry. I place no hindrance in their way. I shall be happy at the event; but let me hear no more on this subject from you, Laura, for I am determined I will not listen to your advice. I suppose it is your own selfish fear of mortification, in discovering that you are the hindrance to the marriage, under the rose, and you are afraid of hearing this truth; which makes you so averse to bringing the matter to issue. So, you would sacrifice your children's happiness, for the sake of keeping a tight hand over them, and having them hoodwinked to your delinquency, and retaining them always in subjection to your will; but it is my duty to do them what justice I can, and do it I will!"





Lady Howard was well schooled in rebukes, reproaches, and angry allegations, from her husband; but as each fresh wound was inflicted, it seemed to her as hard to bear, as though the sorrow were new and strange. She made no reply, however; she shed no visible tear, the life drops of her heart were shed in silence within.

Lord Howard whistled his blood-hound after him, as he turned to open the door; but in doing so, accidentally stepped heavily on the foot of his favourite. The animal instantly sprang upon his master, and seized him by the skirts of his coat. Lord Howard did not dare to move; he knew that if he did so, he would jump at his throat.

Lady Howard rose, with apparent calmness, and struck her husband upon his shoulder; that instant the blood-hound forgot his resentment to Lord Howard, for the injury he had received from him; and true to his trust, faithful to his allegiance, he defended his master, and turned his wrath upon Lady Howard. He sprang upon her hand, slightly grazed it; but at the voice of Lord Howard's command he crouched at his feet —looked at the husband and wife alternately, with a placid self-satisfied air, and returned to his place by the hearth.





Lady Howard now trembled from head to foot; but only said, Charles, that dog is a dangerous animal; be advised in time; send him away."

Lord Howard did not reply for a few moments ; the whole transaction had been so brief, so astounding, that he had not collected his senses. His wife's presence of mind, above all, the imminent risk she had run to save him, —him, her unkind and harsh husband, made him feel ashamed, nay, touched him to his heart's core, and he exclaimed, " Laura! dearest —kindest! you always return good for evil,— you always make me blush for my waywardness ;—will you forgive me this once ? I will never again!—no never ."





" Oh ! yes, Charles—even to the thousandth time ten thousand, will I forgive you; for have I not much to be forgiven?"

" Laura, I cannot bear to hear you speak so; let me look at your hand, I trust you are not materially hurt;—thank God not! but you might have been. Laura! Laura! I shall never forget it. And for me! did you so heroically run the risk of being torn to pieces ? No, there is not such another being alive, as my Laura !" and pressing her warmly to his breast, she forgot every wrong, every wretchedness, for she felt that she was loved.

Lord Howard, shortly after, called the bloodhound out of the room, and determined to send it away directly.

Poor Lady Howard was for the moment happy,—happy in having, at any cost, regained her husband's favour; it was the light of her life. Shame on Lord Howard, to allow his illtemper to vent itself on her ! But such is often the portion of those who, Like Lady Howard, forsake their first husband—their first duty.





No self-elected duty, however well fulfilled, brings with it the blessing and the peace which attends the performance of that which is appointed to us by God.

It is in vain we perform the one, if the other has been infringed upon, or neglected. In vain that such as Lady Howard endeavour to do away their offence by zeal for the object that they love, by a mistaken sense of duty towards one, whom it was not their calling to serve, honour, and obey.

The happiness such service brings, is deceitful. There is a worm that never dies,—there is a fire that never shall be quenched here. Who shall say that this is not the portion of those who forsake their appointed calling? It is an awful consideration, and one which might be thought able to save those who tread in the same dangerous paths. But experience shows us it is otherwise. It is not at the moment when passion leads us headlong to destruction, that any sober reflection can work a salutary effect. There must have been a previous foundation of fixed principle, and religious faith, to enable the assailed to stand fast in virtue, when the hour of temptation arrives.





CHAPTER VII.



" And on that cheek, and o'er that brow;

So soft, so calm, yet eloquent.

The smiles that win, the tints that glow,

But tell of days in goodness spent,

A mind at peace with all below,

A heart whose love is innocent."



Byrov.



While these things were passing at Howard House, Lord Talbot was living at Paris, and frequenting the hotel of Lord and Lady Harcourt, where he was received as one of the family; and the attachment he felt towards them and his play-fellow, Miss Harcourt, was a sort of link that seemed to connect him with his own; nevertheless, the natural gaiety of his disposition, which had, hitherto, attracted so many friends, was almost gone; or, if now and then some lively sally escaped him, he would, unconsciously, check himself suddenly, and the gloomy change of his countenance became the more observable, from its previous expression of gaiety. Every thing, however, went on smoothly, till Lord Vernon arrived, and then he altogether ceased his visits to the Harcourts.





Although Lady Harcourt preferred, of the two, having Lord Stuart as her guest, yet she did not like altogether to lose Lord Talbot, and the first time she met him, she reproached him for having entirely forsaken them.

He excused himself the best way he could; but whilst he was talking to her, Lord Stuart came up to them, and professed his surprise at seeing Lord Talbot; at the same time inviting them to come and dine with him, that very day, at his father's.





" By the way," he added, " It is very odd, but I think you don't know my father. I must introduce him to you. I assure you, though it is not usual to praise relations, he is one of the most delightful persons in the world."

Lord Talbot had not a word to say in reply; even Lady Harcourt felt distressed for him, and to relieve him from his embarrassment, said good-humouredly, " Remember, Lord Talbot, you are engaged to dine with us today." He bowed, and pressing Lord Stuart's hand, walked away, without uttering a single word.

" How very strange !" observed Lord Stuart, looking after him, " what can be the matter with Talbot?"

Lady Harcourt was really perplexed what to answer; she was not an ill-natured woman and

VOL. I. L





she did not wish to shock his feelings. Like many others, she avoided saying a disagreeable thing, and always preferred that an unpleasant truth should be told by any lips rather than her own. She changed the conversation, therefore, as soon as she could, and Lord Stuart was too much engrossed by his own thoughts to press the matter further.

Miss Harcourt was the great object of interest to him, and her mother had observed his growing attachment, with a pleasure she could not conceal; but this pleasure was considerably damped by being aware that her daughter preferred Lord Talbot. Since the latter had absented himself from their society, she had become an altered creature.

The gay Fanny Harcourt " cette charmante Miss Fanny," as she was called, had lost all her gaiety. It was with difficulty that her mother persuaded her to enter into the world, and





when she did go into public, she was so changed, that even the thoughtless acquaintances, who had lately sought her hand in the dance, were for the moment concerned to see her; they feared she was going into a consumption, and some ladies professed themselves unwilling that she should be too much with their daughters, for they said, " that English disease is so catching, half the young English girls are poitrine."

When Lord Stuart was alone with his father, he asked him if he knew the reason why Lord Talbot avoided him ?

" When we met in Italy," he said, " he was so amiable, so gay, so ready to oblige, and ba obliged, I thought him the best fellow I ever knew; but of late he seemed changed, and broke off all intimacy with me. Yet, not that either, for he presses my hand with so much earnestness, and looks so strangely in my face, that I think he must have heard some false report about me. I cannot account for this extraordinary behaviour. I never gave him any offence. Was any of his family ever mad!"





Lord Stuart lifted his eyes to his father's countenance, and saw there a very peculiar expression, of which he could not explain the meaning.

" My dear Stuart, you have asked me the most painful question you could have asked your father; prepare yourself for being deeply wounded. Lord Talbot's mother was once my wife, she was your mother;" and he rose from his chair, and hid his face in his hands.

Lord Stuart was speechless. For a considerable time neither spoke.

" My father, my dear father !" said the former ; " can you forgive me for thus tormenting you?"

" Stuart, I ought long ago to have made you acquainted with this wretched circumstance of my life; but, my son, you can understand why I have not done so; you can feel for me; my life was blighted, but I had nothing to reproach myself with,—no, nothing. Stuart, your mother was the delight of my eyes, the glory of my existence; when she fell from her high estate, I was a lost creature, but the past is past; may the sorrow be only mine now !





" Lord Talbot is, I hear, a most exemplary young man; it is impossible that I should live on habits of intimacy with him, but I place no restraint whatever upon your inclinations regarding him • be to him, what you have always been, since chance brought you acquainted together,—friends."

After this melancholy avowal on Lord Vernon's part, his son was more attached to him than ever. He saw in him, not only all he loved as a parent, but all that he admired as a man; and it was a weight off the mind of Lord Vemon, to think that his son should know who was his mother, and that she still lived, though she was dead to them. This miserable knowledge, drew the father and son in stricter bonds of affection than before; they had both the same sorrow to feel, though in their several ways;— how much more poignant to the father than to the son !—Yet still it was a companionship in wretchedness; and there is none that is more endearing, none that takes such a high and lasting character.





Lord Stuart sought an early opportunity of meeting Lord Talbot alone.

" Talbot," he said, " I know all; my father has told me, but let us still be friends. We have both much cause to lament that we ever came into the world ; but being here, let us not forget we are brothers."

Lord Talbot rushed into his arms, they were more than ever attached.

The brothers felt, however, that there was a





delicacy to be observed in their intercourse in public for their parents' sakes, and they did not wish to become the means of awakening malevolence, and be the objects who would rake up the crimes of those most dear to them.

Lady Harcourt guessed what had passed, and felt delighted to think that the fiero passo had been made without her intervention; for she hated burning her fingers in other people's service ; besides, she could now ask Lord Stuart three days in the week, and Lord Talbot only tWo; this prevented any particularity in her attentions; and as it was evident to her, both were enamoured of her daughter, she thought, " Come of it what may, one or other will be ours; and though I should of course prefer Lord Stuart, we should not be very ill off with Lord Talbot." Thus did she reason and converse with her husband, who was a jolly straight-forward person, and only replied, " Have a care, my lady! remember the proverb; between two stools, one may chance to have an unpleasant tumble andhelaughedheartily;—"for my part, I always think there are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it, and our pretty Fanny will find a goodhusband at all events." Thus did these loving parents settle the affair of their daughter's happiness, without any reference to what her ideas might be on the subject. It is wonderful how old people forget they once were young, and it is very melancholy to observe, that as life draws nearer a close, the love of its pomps and vanities seem always to increase. In youth, there is generally a noble scorn of gold, which most undoubtedly leaves the finer qualities of the mind at liberty to expand : they are not choked by the debasing worship of mammon, which in a thousand worldly shapes exercises a baneful influence in advancing life.





It is so difficult to part avarice from frugality, prudence from cupidity, to maintain a proper forethought, and avoid a restless anxiety about the future. The young seem in their very natures fresher from the hands of their Creator, less polluted by an inglorious greed of gain. Commonly speaking, their affections have a warmer glow, their views of happiness centre in loving and being loved; how far more exalting, how far more pure is this ideal pursuit, (ideal though it too often be), than the acquirement of wealth, the knowledge of the value of money as it is called, and all those enslaving circumstances connected with it, the consideration of which is necessarily forced upon maturer age, and deadens those flights of imagination, those out-pourings of the heart, which can alone produce any thing that is spiritual. But one age steals on after another, so imperceptibly, that the lengthening shadow of life, together with the pollutions we have gained on our pilgrimage, wrap us in a dark mantle of cares and perplexities, from which a higher power alone can free us.





While Lord and Lady Harcourt thought of worldly advantages for their child, she was mourning oyer the absence of Lord Talbot. Very seldom now did he form one of their family circle, but Lord Stuart was a constant attendant. The idea of the relationship, which existed between him and his absent brother, gave him a sort of interest in the estimation of Fanny Harcourt, which she would not otherwise have felt; and she became more intimate with him than she had hitherto been, in order that she might sometimes hear the name pronounced which was so dear to her, by one who knew his worth, and was no niggard of his praise.

For a length of time, Miss Harcourt was blind to the passion with which she was unconsciously inspiring Lord Stuart, and while indulging her own feelings for another, unfortunately encouraged hopes, which she would have been the last person in the world to have done out of a spirit of vanity or coquetry.





Lord Talbot continued to linger about Paris and its environs, not because he found interest in its pleasures, or its many objects worthy of regard, but because it was in the vicinity to his parents and his country; those parents whom he at once loved and condemned, and that country, from which he felt himself exiled by the stain that rested on his birth. Many young men in his circumstances, would not have entertained a sense of their position with such a bitter feeling; but his nature was tuned to that keen sense of honour, which cannot endure the least taint upon its fame. He sought alternately in study and in violent exercise to lose the consciousness of its mortification, which even when he succeeded in blunting its acuteness, sat with a heavy deadening weight upon his heart; but these remedies, which, if taken in moderation, might have been salutary, proved in their excess a deadly poison. He became dangerously ill.





One afternoon, when Miss Agar had come to pass the evening with Lady Harcourt, she said, addressing the latter, and looking at her daughter: " Have you heard that poor Lord Talbot is dying?"

" Gracious heaven !" exclaimed Miss Harcourt, " what do you mean?"

" I mean what I say. Doctor Manchester, who attends all the English, called upon me yesterday, and told me that he thought Lord Talbot was in a rapid consumption. You know, Lady Harcourt, that malady is an inheritance from his father's side of the house. In this instance, the doctor declared the disease to have been much accelerated by the injudicious manner in which he passed his time."

" What!" asked Lady Harcourt, glancing at Miss Harcourt, " is he so dissipated a young man?"

" Quite the reverse—pores over his books till he cannot see, and then rushes out, and rides, like a madman, all over the country, till he returns exhausted, and then begins the same course again."





" I never heard any thing so extraordinary," said Lady Harcourt; "what! he takes his mother's unfortunate story so much to heart ? that is something very extraordinary; indeed I may say quite foolish." '

" Well may you think so, my Lady Harcourt ; he had nothing to do with his parents' delinquencies, and he will inherit his father's titles and estates, and be of as much consequence in the world, as if all were, as it should have been. Very foolish, indeed, to be such a Don Quixote; however, he is in imminent danger, and my dear Lord Vernon, having heard the fact, though he could not openly take any active part, with his usual unparalleled kindness, sent off that other doctor,—what's his •





name ? Kimberly, in whom he has more faith, than in Doctor Manchester, to attend him, in his son Lord Stuart's name. Was there ever such generous kindness ? I am determined the Howards shall know it."

" Has no one written to them," asked Miss Harcourt, " to inform them of their son's danger ? How dreadful!" • " Do not be so precipitate, my dear Miss Harcourt. There was no post to-day, you know; and to-morrow, as Lady Howard's friend, that is to say, as Lady Vernon's friend, I will take that charge upon me."

" Oh ! that is kind, Miss Agar; it is terrible to think of Lord Talbot's being left to die alone!" and unable to conceal her emotion, she left the room.

" Bless me! Lady Harcourt, what a good thing it will be for you, if Lord Talbot does die. Why, it is evident, that your daughter is in love with him." •





"Oh no! you quite mistake," said the latter, colouring, it is only because he is Lord Stuart's brother, that she takes so much interest in him."

" Umph !" ejaculated Miss Agar, " old birds are not caught by chaff. I know quite well, when a thing is new, or when it is secondhand. The first fresh feeling of pretty Fanny, depend upon it, is for Lord Talbot; and, as the other brother is the best parti of the two, for your sake I could not help thinking it would be advantageous, if he walked off. But I should be sorry for his mother, poor soul! I only spoke at random. I have not seen Lady Howard for years; still, I thought, remembering her as I do, Lady Vernon, it would be charitable to inform her, that Lord Talbot is not likely to live."

" And where does the title go to, in the event of his death?"

" To a very distant relation, who never would speak to Lord Howard, since his runaway marriage, and who is represented as a strange miser that lives upon potatoe parings, some where in the north of England."





" That will make a sad change to Lady Howard, indeed," observed Lady Harcourt. " Well, these sort of ladies, who forget themselves," (and she bridled up, and looked virtuous), " never come to a good end."

" That's as may be," replied Miss Agar, " some such are very well off, but then they manage better than the Howards did."

Lady Harcourt, and Miss Agar, found entertainment for their evening conversation, in adverting to the faults and follies of others,—a wide field of interesting matter: but more especially,, they dwelt upon those of the Howards, as being their particular acquaintances.

Miss Agar, with a malignant feeling of revenge, sat down to pen a letter aigre-doux, to her unhappy friend.





She prefaced it by adverting to their intimacy when she was Lady Vernon. And dwelling on all the circumstances of that epoch, which she knew would give her most pain; for she never had pardoned her—never would pardon her—for having been the innocent cause of breaking off an attachment, or rather an intimacy, with Lord Vernon, which she had flattered herself, was to have ended in marriage, but which the young and beautiful, and then innocent Miss De Lacey, put an end to, by his becoming desperately enamoured of, and demanding her hand.

This was, in fact, the crime of which Lady Howard stood most guilty, in her eyes, and from that moment she determined to be revenged.

With a fiendish cunning, she affected an unchanging friendship for her; and when she perceived, afterwards, the growth of that fatal passion for Lord Howard, which was to lay the



r foundation of misery and disgrace to two families, she aided and abetted the intrigue, while she appeared to dissuade the wife, on the one hand, and helped to deceive the unsuspicious husband, on the other; but all the while, she was the intermediate channel .between Lord - Howard and Lady Vemon. Sometimes conveying letters; sometimes presents; and forming parties at her house, to which they were, of course, always invited.





When the catastrophe took place, Miss Agar was the first to fly to Lord Vernon, and with consummate art, pour oil upon his wounds, such oil as the venom of her spite concocted, which lacerated the breast it seemed to soothe.

By degrees, she made herself useful, then pleasant, then necessary, to Lord Vernon. He was naturally an indolent man; had few relations, and those were not agreeable, and did not soothe him, but aggravated his feelings by the severity and cold-bloodedness of their unbending maxims. venge, that she penned and despatched her letter to Lady Howard, and slept the sleep that laudanum procures for its votaries afterwards.





Miss Agar's art, was to appear natural; the very bluntness of her manner, and speech, seemed a warrant for her sincerity. But she was never more aware of the value of what she was saying, than when she seemed least conscious of being so. She had gradually ingratiated herself with Lord Vernon, till she was finally a fixture in his house; and when any one made a joke of this intimacy, she shrugged up her shoulders and said, " a mon age, tout se peut—il n'y a plus de ' Qu'en dira fon;' " nevertheless, she did not despair of yet becoming Lady Vernon. In the mean time, Miss Agar was a sort of Madame de Maintenon, who had all the honours of a wife, and all the substantial comforts attendant upon that character.

It was with this old spirit of malicious re?»





But poor Miss Harcourt never closed her eyes the night she heard of the fatal tidings; and when Lord Stuart called upon her the next day, she took an opportunity to request he would allow her to speak to him alone.

Lady Harcourt was aware that her daughter had something she wished to say in secret, to Lord Stuart, and always deceiving herself to believe what she wished, hoped that matters were drawing to a conclusion between them.

Could she have overhead the conversation, how would she have deplored her complaisance in leaving them alone together.

" Lord Talbot is very ill, I fear," said Fanny Harcourt, trembling as she spoke. " I beseech you, tell me, what is the matter with him ? Is he in danger?"





Lord Stuart felt, from the manner in which she pronounced these words, that his own hopes were at an end. Her feelings betrayed her secret. He who was most interested in ascertaining the truth, could not be longer deceived.

Her agitation, her changing colour, her downcast look, told him that it was his brother she loved.

Painful as this knowledge was, he answered with genuine concern, " That he feared Lord Talbot was seriously ill, but not in immediate danger."

" Thank God !" she said. " Miss Agar promised to write to Lady Howard, informing her of her son's illness. I know not why,—perhaps I ought not to say what I think to you, Lord Stuart, as she is your father's friend; but I cannot like Miss Agar."

" Nor I either," he replied, from his heart, for he had often heard her name his mother disrespectfully: " but in the present case, you feel—you must understand, there was a delicacy which prevented my doing so. I could not, perhaps, without giving offence, be the person to communicate with Lord and Lady Howard; but I took the precaution to beg Doctor Kimberly would write fully and clearly, without disguise."





" Oh! that was right, that was kind ! I shall always remember your kindness."

Poor Lord Stuart! it was something to hear himself addressed thus sweetly, though it was for another's sake.

" Still," she added, after a moment's pause, " I would fain that they had some gentler notice of this misfortune ; I used, as a child, to play with Lady Alice Talbot; we were very fond of each other; how I cried when I was forbade to play with her; surely I might now write to her; gladly would I do so, gladly would I renew my intimacy with her."





" She is a delightful person, Miss Harcourt. I do not hesitate to declare that I believe her to be altogether as estimable as she is captivating, and full of talent, full of genius. An accident brought us acquainted. I cannot say whether she knows our relationship or not, but I fancied from her manner that she did; and see, (shewing the tablets she had given him,) " She gave me these with the verses inscribed on them; she bade me keep them for her sake. Virtuous and gentle as she is, she would not have done so, had she not known of the tie that exists between us; but I feel sure she will never own she does so, farther than this circumstance betrayed her knowledge of our relationship. Will you read this poem ? it will shew you the tenor of her mind. I felt after having perused it, that I had known her all my life."





" Dear Lady Alice !" replied Miss Harcourt, taking the tablets, " I have never forgotten you ! and. everything I have ever heard, has served to confirm my childish affection for you ! Yes, Lord Stuart, I will read these lines with great interest, when my thoughts are calm, and that I am not under the excitement by which I avow myself to be at present mastered; only tell me one thing, shall I write to Alice Talbot ?"

" If you are not displeasing Lady Harcourt by doing so,^ I am conscious you will give my

sis I mean Lady Alice,—great pleasure,

but you know I dare not advise on such a subject. I fear if Lord and Lady Harcourt thought proper to break off your intimacy when you were children, they might feel it a much greater duty to forbid all communication now."

" I will write to Alice," said Miss Harcourt, " I will consult no one, I will write. Remember, I do not ask you any thing about the matter. I do not consult you; the responsibility rests with myself."





" Dear, generous Miss Harcourt! if I do not say more, it is that I feel too much."

Lady Harcourt returned; they interchanged some indifferent words, and Lord Stuart took leave.

" Well, Fanny," said her mother, as soon as he was gone, " do tell me, have you accepted him?"

" Accepted whom ? What can you mean, mama?"

" Oh, dearest child, now don't be so shy, do not hide from your parents that which they have so long expected to hear. Make us happy, my love, even as you are happy,—do tell us of . Lord Stuart's proposal."

" Lord Stuart's proposal, dear mama 1 I do assure you there never was any question of love between us."

VOL. I. M





" Now, Fanny, it is all very well to be discreet to others, but your own mother cannot be blind. Do you mean to tell me that Lord Stuart is not desperately in love with you ? Wo, no, you will never persuade me of that."

" I do assure you, dear mama, that if I had thought so, I should have ceased long ago to receive him as I have done, for I never was and never shall be in love with Lord Stuart."

" Mighty fine resolve, truly! Well; all young ladies now-a-days are so wise in their own conceits, that their poor mamas have no chance of being heard, neither in the way of advice or experience, so take your own way of it, and you will rue the consequences when too late."

Miss Harcourt was so absorbed on the one subject that filled her heart and mind, that she suffered not any other to trouble her, and she quickly dismissed Lady Harcourt's injudicious zeal from her consideration.





Nothing appeared to her worth a thought; but the danger or safety of Lord Talbot; and for the first time in her life she suffered her feelings to run away with her, and without consulting her parents, she wrote to Lady Alice Talbot.

She detailed the circumstances which she had gathered from Lord Stuart, and colouring them with her own apprehensions, she pressed the necessity of Lord and Lady Howard's «oming immediately to join their son.

She was relieved after having yielded to this impulse; she satisfied herself that she had acted according to the dictates of humanity, and done as she would have been done by; she felt certain that Miss Agar never would have executed a kind office, without marring the grace of it by some sharp and unpleasant allusion, making some reference to past sorrows or past errors, that must have wounded and offended the sufferer. Not so her own tender note, to the friend and play-fellow of her early childhood ; it overflowed with love, it soothed, if any thing could soothe, the melancholy tidings it communicated, and it gave so precise an account of Lord Talbot's state of health, that hardly could the statement of a medical man have been more explicit or satisfactory.





CHAPTER VIII.



" Oh ! who art thou who darest of Love complain \ -

He is a gentle Spirit, and injures none ;

His foes are ours—from them the hitter pain—

The keen deep anguish—the heart-rending groan,

Which in his milder reign were never known.

His tears are softer than the April showers

- White-handed Innocence supports his throne ;

His sighs are sweet as hreath of earliest flowers—

Affection guides his steps, and peace protects his bowers."



. Mrs. Tighe's Psycte.



After Colonel Leicester's conversation with Lady Alice, in which he had put her filial love to the proof, he became more attached to her than ever. All his prudential maxims yielded to the force of his passion; and the very coldness which she evinced towards him, was an additional stimulus to his passion.





" Yes," he said, " the person who is such a devoted daughter must make an exemplary wife."

From that moment, he determined to introduce her to his mother Lady Margaret, and he only waited for an opportunity to bring this event to bear; but first of all he had to regain the good opinion of Lady Alice, for she had avoided him, and shewn that she was offended.

One night, at a concert, at which Lord Howard and his daughter were present, the room was crowded to excess, almost to the total prevention of the enjoyment of that entertainment, for which the company were professedly assembled. On a bench, at the further end of the room, sat Lord Howard and Lady Alice.

" Is not that Colonel Leicester," asked the former, " standing in the door-way ?"





*' I cannot see," answered Lady Alice, somewhat jesuitically.

Neither could she at the moment; but she had long before that, watched him, as he remained leaning against the wall, and every now and then raising himself on tip-toe, as ' though to catch a glance at the singers, but, in reality, to look at herself.

" Yes," said Lord Howard; " it is Leicester, Alice, and he looks tired to death. We can • ' very well admit him to a seat between us."

Standing up, therefore, he beckoned to him to approach, and with some difficulty Colonel Leicester made his way through the intervening crowd, and found himself beside Alice and Lord Howard.

" I am afraid I crowd you, Lady Alice."

" It is impossible to avoid being crowded in this room," she replied.

" Shall I go away?"

" Not unless you wish it."





She looked at him, and he remained. What a curious effect music has on two persons who are gifted with a love of it, and who sit together receiving its spirit in their souls! There are many languages besides those which are written or spoken. There is a language in the winds, a language in the waters, a language of the birds, a language of nature,—where is the voice of heaven not heard? but the language of music is, perhaps, the most forcible of any.

-In listening that night to the concord of sweet sounds, without any further explanation, Colonel Leicester and Lady Alice seemed perfectly to understand each other. All was forgotten and forgiven; all prejudice was laid aside; they remembered only that they loved.

" My mother, Lady Margaret, is here tonight," said Colonel Leicester. " Will you allow me to introduce you to her?"

" Few things would give me greater pleasure; but "





" But,—there can be ho but in the case. I feel certain that you must be appreciated as you deserve."

Lady Alice sighed—the concert ended— every body arose. The one-half of the company glad to indemnify themselves from the restraint of silence, under which they had been placed, now burst forth in a general scream, each person talking louder than another. But it is always the most comical thing that can be, to observe how delighted every body seems when music is hushed, and that the music of their own tongues has free scope. Say what we may of entertainment derived from concerts, there is no entertainment half so popular as that which people derive from talking.

Colonel Leicester and Lady Alice smiled, as they made this remark to each other.

Lord Howard requested Colonel Leicester to give his daughter his arm through the crowd, as he wanted to speak to an old friend he saw at the other end of the room, and who was M 5





apparently making his way to leave the house. Thus were Lady Alice and Colonel Leicester left completely alone together. For where are two people, who love each other, more alone than they are in a crowd ?

Lady Margaret, who was standing a considerable way off, fixed her eyes instantly on Lady Alice; and Colonel Leicester rather stopped than accelerated their progress, purposely, that his mother might have leisure to examine her. This examination failed not to produce a favourable impression, and Lady Margaret was obliged to confess, that the outward format least was worthy of her son's love. But the strong prej udice she conceived against her was not to be done away by any personal charm. She could not believe, but that the fact of her being the daughter of the divorced Lady Vernon must have tainted the moral worth of the child. Lady Margaret continued to look at Lady Alice for some moments unperceived by her, as the latter conversed eagerly with Colonel Leicester.





Lady Margaret was a fond, and a proud mother. She thought no woman could be sufficiently perfect to become the wife of her son; but as she observed the beautiful Lady Alice Talbot, and read in the varied expression of her ingenuous countenance, all the innocent love she entertained for Colonel Leicester, Lady Margaret's heart softened towards her; and when she further remarked the evident happiness, which that love had power to confer upon her son, she almost yielded in idea to give her consent to the marriage ; but she thought, " I must know more of her first. I must watch her character, and time must be given to trial. In order to this, however, I will become acquainted with her."

When, therefore, Colonel Leicester brought her up to his mother, and presented her, she received her in a gracious mariner, or one which she intended should be such; but the measured curtsey, the appropriate phrase in which every word was weighed and balanced in the scale of prudence and propriety, chilled the warm response of feeling with which Lady Alice had felt inclined to receive the mother of Colonel Leicester. And her manner of meeting the acquaintance took something of the tone with which the favour was conferred. Perhaps Lady Alice did not lose in Lady Margaret's estimation, for this sense of selfdignity ; and if the acquaintance thus formed lost something of the warmth it might have had under other circumstances, it was not the less likely of laying a sure foundation for future affection.





If there is an inexpressible charm in the glow, which a warm nature sheds over intercourse, there is perhaps a greater security of the permanency of affection in that of less demonstrative natures. Persons who are either naturally colder, or who have learned by fatal experience of treachery, or unworthiness in those to whom they have given up their souls without reserve, to become more chary of their professions, more slow in forming attachments, are of much safer kind, and generally in the end, confer the most lasting happiness. The one is an aroma that inebriates, and passes off as though it had never existed,—the other is a staff and stay, in trouble; a refuge, " what time the storm beats heavy on us." If warmth of manner and stability of purpose are united—a rare but delightful union, which sometimes, but seldom, occurs—then, indeed, that being is half angelic.





Upon the whole, Lady Leicester and Lady Alice were mutually pleased; but on the part of the one there was a doubt, on that of the other a fear, and, consequently, there was as much pain as pleasure in this interview.





When Lady Alice told her mother the next day, that she had been presented to Lady Margaret, the delighted parent thought,

" That is a sure step to my child's happiness. Since Colonel Leicester has himself been the person to introduce her to his mother, and that she was courteously received by her, we may indulge a hope that she will not reject her as a wife for her son."

The first beam of joy that poor Lady Howard had felt for years, now cheered her breast, and she talked the matter over with her husband in all the confidence of hope.

" I too believe, Laura, that this affair will end honourably, happily, for our child. By Heaven ! if I could only suspect the contrary, I would "

" Hush! hush ! I implore you. Do not allow these bursts of temper to make us both ■





wretched, perhaps to overthrow our Alice's prospects altogether."

" Laura, this hoping, and believing, is very well for a time; but certainty is what I expect : and I tell you, that if Colonel Leicester does not speedily ask Alice in marriage, I will know the reason of his delay."

Lady Howard saw and felt that there was nothing more to be done at the present moment —nothing to be gained by reasoning with her husband ; and, for the thousandth time, she repressed her feelings, and bidding them back from whence they came, to that reservoir of internal sorrow, where so much anguish was already stored, she assumed the habitual resignation of her look and manner.

" Laura," said her husband, entering again, with an agitated air, into her apartment, " Laura, be not alarmed"—that dreadful word of preparation for the grief that is to follow—



t " be not alarmed; but Henry has been ill,—" And, gracious Heaven ! he is dying, — he is dead," cried Lady Howard, impetuously.





" Calm yourself, I implore you; here is the physician's letter,—two physicians. He is better: for the present all danger is over."

" Thank God!" cried Lady Howard.

That expression, so often uttered involuntarily, and almost without meaning, was, in Lady Howard's mouth, a prayer of thanksgiving. She rose, and moved mechanically towards the door.

" Where are you going, Laura ? will you not read these letters ?" holding them to her.

" I must go to see him," she said, in a bewildered manner; " you know he must not die before I see him."

Lar' Mice came into the room : she threw herself into her mother's arms, and wept; but said, through her tears, " Henry is better— much better,—almost quite well now. I have got a kind letter from my dear old playfellow, Fanny Harcourt: she will not deceive us,—she tells us the truth;—she writes that he is almost •quite well."





Lady Howard soon recovered composure. She listened to the voice of her daughter,—she was soothed by the caresses of her husband, and suffered the letters to be read to her. They all agreed in the account they gave of Lord Talbot's recovery, and they pacified the anxiety of the parents and the sister.

Lord Howard, however, determined to set off instantly for Paris; and promised his wife that he would either bring back Lord Talbot, or that she should join them there.

This promise hardly satisfied Lady Howard; but when her husband represented to her that there was a chance now, if ever, of their child being restored to them, and of seeing him once more reinstated in their family circle, she yielded the



f point, and consented to remain; providing that in the event of his being unable to travel, she should set off immediately to join him.





This consent, though wrung from her most unwillingly, was somewhat less insupportable, when in the course of the ensuing day she received Miss Agar's letter; which, owing to its being sent under cover to a third person, did not reach her at the same time with the other letters.

Miss Agar, in the most artful manner, and under a seeming kindness of expression, conveyed every circumstance which she thought could most embitter the intelligence of her son's illness to Lady Howard. She praised Lord Stuart openly, and by name, and dwelt on the perfection of his character, as having been peculiarly shewn in his attention to his brother, as she designated Lord Talbot; and insinuated that his malady was chiefly owing to his own imprudence, and the strange life he led : thus





nsinuating that it was owing to idleness, dissipation, or worthlessness that his illness might, be attributed; and then adroitly turning the corner of this assertion, she added, " But, poor dear young man! perhaps these reports are disseminated by the envious, or the malevolent ; for we all know too well that consumption is in the Howard family,—they have every one died of it for many generations back."

She closed this treacherous letter by assuring her, that all Paris had rung with Lord Stuart's amiable conduct on this occasion, and did him ample justice.

Miss Agar closed this mass of spite and malevolence by adverting to the time of their innocent and romantic friendship; which, she said, she always looked back upon with regret, and had often thought of Laura Vernon as the fairest and the best of her sex.

Lady Howard drank the bitter dregs thus poured out by a false friend, in silence, and





committed the paper to the flames: but she could not so get rid of the sting which it had conveyed.

" But what does it matter what she thinks, what she says, so as my dear child be well.— Oh ! grant me but Aislife," she said, "gracious heaven!" and fell on her knees in agony of supplication.

Lord Howard went to Paris. He carried with him a letter from the mother to the son. It was one of deep tenderness, and of deeper humiliation.

" Let me not," she said, " receive my deathstroke from you, Henry: if you separate yourself from your father and me, are you not proclaiming to the world your parents' crimes ? Have mercy upon us—have mercy upon us, my dearest son!—Whatever we may deserve from others, from you, our child, we should not meet with contumely and coldness. Think what a subversion of the order of nature it is for a parent to sue to a child; and I do sue to you, Henry —I do implore you, by all your hopes of happiness, here or hereafter, scorn not the mother who gave you birth,—the mother who loves, and who would gladly die for you. Return with your father, and bless us once again. Remember, your sister, too, requires the support of your presence. Henry, she is beloved by a man of honour; a man who would not ally himself into a family if he despised them. He feels that your pure and beautiful sister is, in herself, a treasure, and overlooks the miserable circumstance of her parent's crime; ought you, our child — our only son, to be less indulgent than a stranger ? and would you not grieve to think that Alice should be married, and you not present at her marriage ? Henry, my pleadings are vain, unless nature pleads for me; unless the love of a child for its parent moves you to seek me, all is vain; and I have





fruitlessly wept, and prayed, and humbled myself to the dust before you. Henry, my son— my son. I cannot believe this possible !

" L. Howard."

The sight of his father, when Lord Talbot once more beheld him as quickly answering the tidings of his illness in person, as he could have done almost by letter, overcame his son; and in his weak state it was some time before he could thank him for his solicitude, and inquire for his mother and sister. Letters were given him from both, but he awaited to be alone before he opened them.

Lord Howard was agreeably surprised at seeing his son. The brilliant colouring — the sparkling eye deceived him, and gave a favorable answer to his wishes.

" Come—come, dear Henry," he said, " you have not been so ill as has been represented to us, or you never could look so well so soon."





" I dare say," he replied, smiling," they have frightened you. In vain did I beseech those wilful doctors to write in such a manner as not to alarm you and my mother; but you know how bent they are upon having their own way."

" In this instance, Henry, I cannot blame them ; it is better to know the worst, than to be lulled into a false security."

The father and son, happy, mutually, in being once more together, and the former wrapped in that very delusion which he said he deprecated, enjoyed the conversation of his child without any alloy, or forgot the cause which had occasioned him to leave his home.

When alone, Lord Talbot opened his mother's letter with mingled feelings of affection and sorrow; but when he read the contents, he was touched to his inmost soul. He blamed himself for having allowed, what he now deemed selfish pride, to have betrayed him into disrespect to the authors of his being, and he came to a better sense of his own peculiar duties, that first of all duties, " Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land;" and he thought too, how nearly he had been cut off in the bloom of his existence; and how dreadful it would have been to die while under the influence of feelings which made him harsh to his parents, and in a spirit of hostility to them, who had never shown anything but the fondest affection towards himself.





Lord Talbot was a changed creature from that moment, and he devoutly hoped that his life might be spared, in order to dedicate it to his parents. A perfect calm succeeded to the irritability which had lately marked his conduct ; and the consequence was, he became rapidly better. He was more impatient even than his father, that they should go back to England, and thought every moment lost that intervened between that and the day fixed upon for their departure. When at length it came at the same undeviating pace at which time always travels, but under such various semblance of slowness or rapidity to those who watch its progress with anxious eye, the father and son left Paris, together with spirits full of hope, and love, and joy, to return to the dear resting place of home.





The first day's, journey however proved too much for Lord Talbot; the symptoms of lassitude returned, and those various melancholy indications of the disease he laboured under, showed themselves afresh. The rest of the journey was made at a slower rate, and Lord Talbot again rallied.

There are moments in life which cannot be related, or even recalled distinctly to the me

VOL. I. N





ruories of those who have passed them. Great happiness, great misery, in their first intoxicating or stunning effects, cannot be analyzed. We pursue the feeling in idea afterwards, but in vain. Why should we rejoice that it eludes our grasp of thought ? We are to change and be changed. The first is a humiliating consideration to the best feelings of our nature, but not unsalutary ; it keeps us humble: the latter, rightly considered, is a consoling;—we shall be changed.

The mother and the son embraced each other; in that embrace they felt a perfect communion, and it may be said, in heart and soul, from that moment they were one.



END OF VOL. I.
