GRACE CASSIDY; 

OR. 

THE REPEALERS. 

A NOVEL. 
BY THE COUNTESS OF BLESSINGTON. 



Some popular chief, 
More nois}- than the rest, but cries halloo, 
And in a trice the bellowing herd come out ; 
The gates are barr'd, the ways are barricado'd : 
And one and all's the word : true cocks o' th' game ! 
They never ask for what, or whom they fight ; 
But turn 'em out, and show 'em but a foe : 
Crj- Liberty ! and that 's a cause for quarrel. 

Drtdek's Spanish Friar. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. in 



LONDON: 

RrCHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON S'J REET 
(successor to henry colburn.) 

1833. 



S^3 



THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER I. 

" Oh ! we do all offend — 
There 's not a day of wedded life, if we 
Count at its close the little, bitter sum 
Of thoughts, and words, and looks unkind and fioward, 
Silence that chides, and woundings of the eye — 
But, prostrate at each other's feet, we should 
Each night forgiveness ask." 

Conjugal life, as all who Ve tried can tell, 
Must bear affinity to heaven or hell. 

Modern Hudihras. 

Mr. BuRRELL was the father of two sons 
and a daughter ; his elder son was pursuing his 
travels previously to his entrance into Parlia- 

VOL. III. B 



2 THE REPEALERS. 

ment, and his second was lately gazetted in the 
Guards. Both were promising young men, na- 
tural and unaffected, fondly attached to their ' 
parents and to each other, and loving their sister 
with all that affection which a handsome and 
most amiable young woman is so calculated to 
excite in the breasts of brothers only two years 
her senior. She had been their playfellow in 
infancy, and was now the object of their fond 
interest and protection. Charles Burrell wrote 
to her detailed accounts of all he saw in his tra- 
vels ; purchased for her all that he thought she 
would like; and William made her the con- 
fidant of all his pleasures and troubles, the 
latter of light import and brief duration — while 
her father and mother looked on her as the 
sweetener of their existence, whose gaiety and 
unclouded gentleness shed all the blessings of 
a perpetual spring and sunshine over their 
lives. 



THE REPEALERS. S 

Mr. and Mrs. H. Vernon and their daughter 
were in the library, waiting the announcement 
of dinner, the mistress of the mansion looking 
over the columns of " The Morning Post,*" 
where she saw the notice of the coming fete 
of Mrs. Vernon, with the programme of the 
intended aAiusements. Her brow curved, her 
eyes flashed, and her cheek assumed a deeper 
red as she perused the paper and recollected 
that she was not bidden to the pageant. She 
was about to express the angry feelings big 
within her breast, when the maitre d^httel 
announcing that dinner was served, compelled 
her to restrain the expression, though she did 
not conquer the anger. 

Mr. H. Vernon was too well versed in the 
temper of his wife not to observe the indications 
of a coming storm ; and his daughter had wit- 
nessed too many, not to have a foreboding of 
an approaching one. The presence of the ser- 
B 2 



4 THE REPEALERS. 

vants imposed a restraint that was evidently 
borne with impatience by the mistress of the 
house, who cast from time to time angry glances 
at her husband, as she saw him help himself 
to some fresh plat, which, she had sagacity 
enough to discover, was done to prolong the 
dinner, and retard the disagreeable scene which 
he anticipated. 

Her patience became exhausted, when, at 
the second course, after scarcely more than 
tasting two or three of the entremets, he com- 
menced mixing sugar, oil, and vinegar, for 
some brawn, and she angrily observed, that 
he seemed unusually disposed to eat. Mr. 
H. Vernon answered, that he was rather hun- 
gry, — and felt his colour heightened at the con- 
sciousness of the want of truth of his reply, 
no less than at the tone of the remark that 
produced it. 

'' You bid fair, to-day," said his wife, with 



THE REPEALERS. 

one of her most spiteful looks, " to rival a 
certain friend of ours, who certainly resembles 
a zoophyte, in having a stomach but no brains." 

This observation Mr. H. Vernon had more 
than once heard his wife apply to his brother, 
and he was thankful she had not, on the pre- 
sent occasion, named him before the servants ; 
but, fearing some more open explosion of her 
anger, he sent away his untasted brawn, and 
became almost as anxious as herself for the 
disappearance of the domestics, — such was his 
dread of any exhibition before them ! 

They had no sooner left the room than Mrs. 
Vernon asked her husband, whether he had 
seen the notice of the fete to be given by his 
sister-in-law ; and, ere he could reply, she 
demanded how long he intended to support 
the cool impertinence of his relations, in thus 
passing them over: for her part, she would 
no longer submit to it ; adding, that it was 



6 THE REPEALERS. 

all his fault for not asserting what was due 
to her, if not to himself, and for not making 
some exertion to extend the circle of their 
acquaintance into the fashionable coteries, to 
which Mrs. Vernon had gained access, and for 
which she (Mrs. H. Vernon) was a much more 
eligible candidate, than her silent, frightened- 
looking sister-in-law. 

She then commented on the hrusquerie of 
Mr. Vernon, the insipidity of his wife, the flip- 
pancy and airs of his daughters, and the in- 
solent nonchalance of the eldest son — " All of 
which,*' calmly observed her husband, " proves 
that we are happy in not living more frequently 
in their society."" 

The anger of the lady blazed afresh at this 
reasonable remark. She said she wanted not 
their society — nay, she hated it, but she want- 
ed to take her proper place at their fashionable 
parties, among the people of high rank who 
frequented them. 



THE REPEALERS. 7 

Long experience had taught Henry Vernon 
the utter uselessness of reasoning with his wilful 
wife, and he rarely attempted a reply, except 
to avoid incurring her increased anger by the 
charge, often repeated, that his silence was an 
impertinent display of contempt towards her. 
He had tried to make her sensible how undig- 
nified it would be for them to show that they 
were mortified by the neglect of his brother ; and 
always recommended the maintenance of a dis- 
tant but civil intercourse between the families. 
Such- representations and recommendations had 
little effect ; he was accused of want of proper 
spirit — a favourite phrase with angry ladies — 
and was constantly forced to bear, or forbear, 
in the angry discussions, replete with bitter sar- 
casms, to which each new grand fete of his 
brother's gave rise. 

Henry Vernon passed in the circle of his 
acquaintance as one who was governed by 
his wife : the men called him hen-pecked, and 



8 THE REPEALERS. 

the women quoted Mrs. H. Vernon as an ex- 
ample of a clever person, who knew how to 
manage her husband. 

It is thus that people often judge : the mar- 
ried individual who has the misfortune to have 
an incorrigible partner, is called weak because 
he submits to what cannot be remedied, though 
his submission evinces his superior strength of 
mind ; while the incorrigible person, who is 
endured as an incurable evil, is called clever, 
because she destroys her own happiness, and 
interrupts that of all around her, by the in- 
dulgence of a bad temper and false view of 
subjects, incompatible with cleverness, in the 
proper acceptation of the word. 

If we reflect on all the examples of hus- 
bands or wives that have been most govern- 
ed, we shall find that the submitting party was 
the most clever, and the governing one the 
most weak; unless, where the latter was so 



THE REPEALERS. 9 

gentle that the sway was not apparent, the per- 
son following the poet's heau ideal of the wife 

" Who never answers till her husband cools, 

And though she rules him, never shows she rules." 

A jealousy of being governed, and a desire 
of governing, are in general most frequently to 
be found in weak minds of both sexes ; and this 
love of rule joined to obstinacy, another charac- 
teristic of feeble intellect, renders such persons 
so incorrigible, that passive forbearance is all 
that remains to a husband or wife, so unhappily 
" paired, but not matched." Let not, however, 
persons so borne with rejoice in the belief that 
they are clever, but be thankful to the strength 
that yields to their weakness. 

Mary Vernon had naturally a quick temper, 

but the painful experience of the evils which her 

mother's violence produced, had taught her to 

correct it, without impairing that sensitiveness 

b5 



10 THE REPEALERS. 

and vivacity which generally accompany quick- 
ness of temper. We have described the minds, 
but not the persons, of some of our characters : 
this latter we must now attempt — and as Mary 
Vernon is before us, we will begin with her. 

She was in her eighteenth year, rather above 
than below the middle size, slight and elegantly 
formed, and possessing that roundness without 
which female symmetry cannot exist. Her com- 
plexion was exquisitely fair — that fairness which 
peculiarly belongs to very dark-haired women ; 
her cheeks slightly tinged with the rose of 
health, and her lips of the rich crimson that 
made her white and regular teeth look still more 
briUiant. Her face was perfectly oval ; her eyes 
a deep blue, shaded by silken eyelashes of 
raven hue, and surmounted by brows whose long 
and jetty arches added beauty to her fair and 
open forehead. Her hair, at a little distance, ap- 
peared to be black, but was of a rich brown, 
possessed of that golden reflection which is as 



THE REPEALERS. 11 

rare as it is beautiful ; her arms, hands, and feet 
might have served as models to the sculptor, 
and finished a form as graceful as symmetry, 
youth, and health could make it. Add to all 
this, a countenance varying and full of ex- 
pression, and Mary Vernon is before you, gen- 
tle or ungentle reader. 

Yet methinks I hear you say, " Why she 
is, then, that faultless monster (of beauty) 
that the world ne'er saw ; for, as yet, all that 
has been described is perfect.'** But, alas ! the 
beauty of Mary Vernon, like all earthly beauty, 
was imperfect; as all her female friends de- 
clared her nose to be nn pea retrousse, and her 
lips a little too full — two faults that none of her 
male friends could ever be brought to admit, 
though often assailed on the subject, with that 
pertinacity displayed by ladies in their love 
of truth, and their wish of making male con- 
verts to the justice of their opinions. 

On no subject is the discrimination of women 



12 THE REPEALERS. 

more visible than on that of female beauty. 
A blemish that might have for ever escaped 
the eye of man, (nay, such is the blindness 
of mankind on such points, might have ap- 
peared to him as something attractive) is at 
one glance detected by the quick perception 
of woman ; and with the kind wish of extending 
her discoveries, is made known to most of her 
male friends. This, which we call her love 
of truth and candour, is, by the ill-natured 
world, stigmatized as jealousy or envy, two 
feelings which we, who know the gentle sex, 
maintain to be foreign to their natures. 

Mary Vernon was a good musician, had a 
clear and sweet, though not a powerful voice ; 
excelled in painting, and possessed a knowledge 
of the elements of all the sciences necessary to 
form a rational and accomplished companion. 

No wonder, then, that with so many per- 
sonal and mental attractions, she was generally 



THE REPEALERS. 13 

admired, and had already refused more than 
one eligible offer for her hand. It was some 
lurking fear of the superiority of her charms 
drawing attention from, or provoking com- 
parisons with, those of his daughters, that 
influenced her selfish uncle, almost as much 
as his false pride, in excluding her from his 
fashionable reunions, — an exclusion that was 
by no means disagreeable to the two young 
ladies, who felt no strong predilection for their 
beautiful cousin. 

There were two people in Carlton Gardens, 
where the town mansion of Mr. Vernon was 
situated, who partook not his or his daughter's 
feelings of indifference to Mary Vernon ; nay, 
who felt for her a more than common interest 
and affection : these were Mrs. Vernon and 
her second son, who had long learned to esti- 
mate their charming relation. The son scarce- 
ly viewed her in the light of a cousin, owing 



14 THE REPEALERS. 

to the restricted intercourse of the families, 
which had produced a more tender, though less 
famiHar acquaintance between them. 

There is nothing so destructive to love as 
the familiarity that is engendered by constant 
intercourse in youth : this destroys illusions, 
and establishes a sort of sisterly or brotherly 
relation, that precludes other sentiments be- 
tween the parties. It is the reverse in more 
matured age : persons so thrown together, form 
attachments that become strengthened by habits 
of intimacy, that render them indispensable to 
each other, even after passion has removed the 
veil which had at first blinded them. Providence 
has wisely ordained, that habit should replace 
other and dearer ties, as a compensation for 
the decrease of passion — that fever of the heart 
and mind, which, followed by re-action, produces 
indifference, and all the somniferous train of 
feelings, or want of feelings, that form such 



THE REPEALERS. 15 

a (Jreary contrast to the brilliant dreams from 
which the heart has awakened. Providence, 
the all-wise director of all, has decreed, that 
each season of life should have its own pecu- 
liar charm, and has given us habit, in our 
more mature age, to atone for the loss of the 
more passionate enjoyments of our youth. 
Habit it is which inures us to what was at first 
disagreeable, softens down what was harsh, and 
makes us feel our own insufficiency, by teaching 
us to depend for happiness on others. 

Ask those who have spent years together, 
perhaps often breaking forth into murmurs at 
their mutual defects, if they would change their 
partners for all the perfection that imagination 
creates to mock reality, and they will say, 
or they will feel, that such a separation would 
be insupportable, as habit, that forger of strong- 
est chains, has riveted theirs too indissolubly 
to be divided, except by death. 



16 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER II. 

What is the aim and end of spinsters' lives, 
But to be made rich, great, and titled wives ? 

Modern Hudibras. 

" It is too ridiculous," said Miss Vernon to 
her sister, " that mamma should make no ex- 
ertion to get us asked to the Duchess of De- 
loraine''s ball. It might be easily managed, 
knowing, as we do, half the people with whom 
the Duchess is most intimate : but mamma will 
do nothing, and papa seems for once paralysed, 
as he is deaf to all the hints I have given him. 
The Marquis of Tadcaster has asked me ten 
times if we go there, and, not liking to own 



THE REPEALERS. 17 

that we were not invited, I gave no positive 
answer. He has lately become more marked 
in his attentions; and this ball might have 
decided something. He is going immediately 
after to Scotland ; and, once there, who can 
say when we shall see him again ?" 

" I assure you," answered Louisa, " that 
I am quite as vexed as you are ; for I see the 
horrid perspective before us of a winter in the 
country, without the chance of forming any 
thing like a desirable alliance ; and, as we have 
now been out four seasons, — that is to say, 
you have been four and I three — it is quite 
time that we were settled. However, I am 
sure I have no chance until you are married ; 
and I must say, that I think you have waited 
long enough for a dukedom, and that it would 
be wise to catch at the first coronet that is 
supported by plenty of green acres, instead 
of doing penance at home.*" 

There was something unpalatable in the 



18 THE REPEALERS. 

observations of Louisa Vernon to the vain and 
irritable feelings of her sister, and their con- 
versations on marriage, the subject that most 
interested them, seldom concluded without the 
excitement of angry feelings. The vanity of 
both prevented their acknowledging the wounds 
inflicted; but these rankled not the less, and 
the young ladies were most anxious to succeed 
in their matrimonial speculations, no less for 
the sake of the splendid establishments they 
contemplated, than from the wish of triumph- 
ing over each other. 

Mrs. Vernon saw with sorrow, that worldly 
feelings had blighted all the sentiments of 
natural affection in the breasts of her daugh- 
ters. In vain she tried to lead them back ; for 
the path of nature, like that of virtue, once 
lost, is difiicult to be regained, and, like it, 
is only discovered with repentance for a guide. 
The generous and affectionate heart of the 



THE REPEALERS. 19 

mother was chilled by the cold and calculating 
selfishness of her daughters ; and they looked 
on her as une bonne bourgeoise, who had little 
knowledge of the world that they worshipped, 
and who could in no way assist their projects. 

As the fite drew near, they felt the necessity 
of bringing their admirers to a decided declara- 
tion, and determined to spare no pains to effect 
so desirable an end. Louisa's experience of 
three unsuccessful seasons had discouraged her 
ambitious hopes, and she had reasoned herself 
into the conviction, that, after all, a person 
might be very happy as a Countess ; a con- 
viction that the attentions of Lord Durnford 
had considerably helped to bring about. 

In the appearance of the Misses Vernon there 
was nothing to distinguish them from any other 
of the good-looking young ladies of fashion 
of the day. They were what might be called 
handsome ; but their countenances were so little 



20 THE REPEALERS. 

expressive of any of the qualities that fix sym- 
pathy or affection, that after one had allowed 
that they were good-looking, and had a certain 
air of fashion, — an air as distinct from that 
which distinguishes high hirth and high breed- 
ing, as is the false diamond from the brilliant 
gem it is made to copy, — there was httle else 
to be said. Beauty depends much more on 
expression than on feature, as all must have re- 
marked, who have seen plain features redeemed 
by that soul-beaming expression, which leaves 
the impression of beauty, or " something than 
beauty dearer," behind, bringing back faces to 
memory, the details of which inight not sup- 
port a strict scrutiny, but the tout ensemble 
of which captivated. 



THE REPEALERS. 21 



CHAPTER III. 

" A fete is one of the many palliatives for that common 
malady ennui, and, like most palliatives, gives but a 
temporary relief, generally followed by a return of the 
disease." 

The long looked-for f^te to be given by 
Mr. Vernon at length arrived, and was ushered 
in by torrents of rain, which poured from an 
early hour in the day, and continued with- 
out intermission, as if to prove to him, a truth 
he had lately seemed to doubt, namely, that 
gold cannot command all things. The tem- 
porary rooms, not formed to " bide the pelt- 



22 THE REPEALERS. 

ing of the pitiless storm," became inun- 
dated ; and temples draped with pale rose 
and celestial blue, ere half the day was over, 
were only fit to receive Naiades, and were 
totally inapplicable to the terrestrial nymphs 
and swains for whom they were arranged. 
Galleries and kiosks crumbled " like the base- 
less fabric of a vision,^' leaving many a wreck 
behind; and had Mr. Vernon contemplated 
the novel exhibition of a Naumachia for the 
amusement of his guests, he might have easily 
contrived to accomplish it, so plentiful was 
the supply of water on the leads, and in the 
garden, where the fete was to have displayed 
its greatest attractions. Triumphal arches lay 
prostrate on the earth, burying in their fall the 
rich and rare plants and flowers imported from 
all the nurseries round London ; and fragments 
of silk draperies, mingled with garlands of ar- 
tificial roses, were seen borne along the yellow 



THE REPEALERS. S3 

streams that urged their turbid course through 
all the walks in this lately beautiful garden. 
Variegated lamps were tossing in the breeze 
on the dripping branches that supported 
them ; and the drenched flowers, half covered 
by mould and gravel, gave an air of desolation 
and ruin, that seemed to warn millionaires how 
soon the elements may dissipate the fruits of 
their riches. 

Mr. Vernon viewed the scene of destruction 
from his dressing-room window, and as he 
saw the snowy and rose-coloured petals of the 
camelia japonicas and the blossoms of the 
other rare plants of his conservatory, hurried 
along by the hurricane, he bethought him of 
the truth of the proverb, that '' riches can make 
unto themselves wings to fly away.'' He mora- 
lized, not on the powers of Nature, but on the 
probable cost which this ill-timed freak of her's 
would entail upon him ; and the dire necessity 



24 THE REPEALERS. 

of receiving the guests of the evening in the 
splendid salons of his mansion instead of, al 
fresco, in the temples and gardens, on which 
he had expended such vast sums, to astonish, 
if not delight the beholder. 

The young ladies were still more annoy- 
ed by the unpropitious storm. They, unlike 
their papa, calculated not the expense, but 
the results of the destruction of the garden. 
They had contemplated all the possibilities of 
well-managed tete-a-tetes with their respec- 
tive admirers; the most judicious modes 
of eliciting declarations : and a fine night, 
and the silver moon shedding her radiance 
over all that luxury and wealth could combine, 
were considered as essential requisites in the 
stage decorations of the act of the comedy they 
intended to represent. An unusual softness 
of manner might be assumed, in a scene where 
Nature is exhibited as Nature is seen in a 
ballet; forced flowers and rare exotics might 



THE REPEALERS. 25 

serve as symbols of tenderness to lovers them- 
selves, the productions of the hot-beds of Lon- 
don fashionable forcing-frames ; and a thousand 
half sentences, " looks, and becks, and wreathed 
smiles," might be given to encourage languid 
admirers, beneath the glow of variegated lamps, 
and on the velvet of a green lawn, that would 
lose all charm in the blaze of the ball-room, 
with the feet gliding over the chalked floor, 
and the eyes dazzled all around by splendour 
and the heart gladdened by gaiety. No ! in a 
ball-room, no role but that of the brilliant 
danseuse could with propriety be played; and 
the only chance left was a stroll through the 
suite of apartments, when the languor of fatigue 
and heat might furnish a pretext for sighing 
for the countr}', regretting being pent up in 
London, and envying the supposed admirer, 
who would be so happy in Scotland, or wher- 
ever else his ennui might tempt him to go. 

Now that they could not sport it on the 
VOL. III. C 



26 THE REPEALERS. 

light fantastic toe in the garden, it would be 
necessary to change the costumes prepared, un 
peu en Berg^re a VOptra^ for something more 
analogous to the gilded salons in which the 
fete would be held. Aigrettes of diamonds 
must be substituted for wreaths of flowers, and 
robes embroidered in pearls, must take the 
place of Diaphane gauze, with bouquets of 
lilies of the valley and roses. 

Mr, Vernon, while his young ladies were at- 
tending to the momentous change of their de- 
corations, was ordering a double supply of wax- 
candles to be scattered through the suite of 
salons, that a blaze of light, emulating the sun 
its'^lf, should illuminate the chef-d'oeuvres of 
art that enriched their walls. 

The company assembled at the usual hour 
— the usual faces, dresses, and smiles, were 
exhibited ; the usual affectation of not being 
pleased shown off, as if each had agreed that 



THE REPEALERS. 21 

it was indecorous, or at least vulgar to appear 
gratified at what was meant to give gratifica- 
tion, (the nil admirari being one of the adopted 
secrets of fashionable non-entity most generally 
followed,) and the usual nothings were re- 
peated. 

Lord Albany joined Lady Oriel and Mrs. 
Forrester, and amused them with his piquant 
remarks on the scene and on the principal actors 
in it. 

" Do you see Lady Danvers ?''^ said he ; 
" she is getting herself up in her role of a 
woman of fashion, but she is not calculated to 
fill the part well." 

'' Is it then so difficult a part .'^" interrogated 
Mrs. Forrester. 

" Cela depend,^'' replied Lord Albany ; " to 
you ladies nothing appears so easy, and nothing 
is so easy ; mais^ Lady Danvers finds it ter- 
rible up-hill work ; she wants to be an in- 
c 2 



28 THE REPEALERS. 

fluential leader, the female Grey, Wellington, 
or Canning, of fashionable, instead of political 
life ; and, helas ! she is only formed to be the 
Billy Holmes, which means the whipper-in ; and 
between a leader and a whipper-in in fashionable 
Hfe there is as great a difference as in political. 
I could give a receipt to make a woman of 
fashion, if I saw a meritorious debutante for 
the part ; but I should as soon think of giving 
Ude's instructions how to dress a salmi de 
becassine to an under-housemaid, as my receipt 
to Lady Danvers; Tieither would do justice to 
them." 

" Pray let us be favoured with your rules," 
said Lady Oriel ; " and as we are going to 
rusticate in Ireland, there is no chance of our 
abusing the favour, by any clumsy attempts 
at the part."" 

" I must again remind you, Mesdames," 
said Lord Albany, " that to give i/ou sl receipt 



THE REPEALERS. 29 

to make a woman of fashion would be ' to 
gild refined gold, or paint the lily ;' but if you 
command me to state what I should recommend 
to others, you shall be obeyed, the more readily 
that my woman of fashion must not be less 
than fifteen years your senior. Suppose a lady 
highly born, and highly bred, (mind, I don't 
say well-bred,) of at least thirty-five years old, 
married to a man of rank and large fortune. 
Beauty is of no importance ; but strong nerves 
are indispensable, as without these sinews of 
war, a leader of fashion cannot succeed. A 
good tournure is highly necessary, and a prac- 
tical knowledge of French and Italian cannot 
be dispensed with. The lady must have na- 
tural vivacity, and acquired self-command to 
control any unseemly ebullition of it ; she must 
have tact without talent, that is to say, she 
must not excel in conversation, writing, music, 
or any of the accomplishments that require 



30 THE REPEALERS. 

talent, as excellence in any of them wovild 
occupy too much of that precious time, which 
her duties as a woman of fashion require. So- 
ciety is to be considered the end and aim of her 
life. Dinners, balls, and routs, the only things 
that come home to our business and bosoms ; 
and all else, as insignificant and unworthy of 
attention. Politics, by which I mean a super- 
ficial view of the feuds of faction, must be 
familiar to her; and she must make up in 
warmth of zeal, for all she wants in real com- 
prehension of the questions agitated by the 
Guelphs and GhibeHnes of our day. A strict 
attention to la mode is necessary ; a lavish 
expenditure on her person, and a prudent 
regard to economy in all other disbursements, 
are recommended. A consciousness of superi- 
ority and power, with a philosophical indif- 
ference to the means employed to obtain it, 
and a stoical disregard to the feehngs of others. 



THE REPEALERS. 31 

is to be cultivated, and the exclusive system, 
that sainte alliance of the haut ton, is never 
to be abandoned. Beauty, wit, and talent, are 
to be voted unnecessary, or de trop ; and power 
is to be retained coute qui coute. All without 
the pale of her own circle are to be considered 
mauvais ton, and those unknown to her as 
being unknowable. She is to cultivate an in- 
timacy with the leading ambassadresses, render 
useful the received Corypheus's of fashion, and 
employ as her creatures the tolerated. One 
or two political leaders must be fixed at her 
receptions, as habitues, and their satellites are 
to be encouraged. Fashion is to be considered 
as the true object of a laudable ambition, and 
all else as accessories of little importance. 
Place this lady in a large and elegantly-fur- 
nished mansion in St. James's, Grosvenor, or 
Berkeley Square, give her a villa near town 
to which she may retire with a chosen few of 



62 THE REPEALERS. 

her clique during the summer, and a fine 
family seat in the country, where she may 
hold her state in the winter, surrounded by 
the magnates of the land, with a sprinkling of 
foreigners of distinction ; dress her head a hi 
Herbault, her bust a la Victorine, her feet 
a la Melnotte, and serve her up, with plenty 
of diamonds and pearls, and you will have a 
woman of fashion." 

The ladies laughed at the gravity with 
which Lord Albany repeated his receipt, and 
agreed tliat it would be thrown away on Lady 
Danvers. 



THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

" Concealment is too frequently the consequence of 
guilt, not to be often mistaken for it." 

Lady Oriel had been talking to a group 
who were looking at a picture, by Titian, in 
the gallery at Vernon House, when the sound 
of a voice familiar to her struck on her ear ; 
she turned to look, and found the eyes of 
Lord Delmore fixed on her with a steadfast 
gaze. The impressions which the sight of him 
conveyed, were so mingled with all of pain and 
humiliation she had ever known, that she felt 
c 5 



34 THE REPEALERS. 

a sudden faintness come over her; but, though 
ready to sink to the earth, she subdued every 
external symptom of emotion; and, affecting 
not to have seen him, walked to another room. 

This was the first time they had met since 
her return to town. She had seen in the 
papers that he had gone to Italy, and hoped 
he would remain there, until time had enabled 
her to lose the poignant sense of her own im- 
prudence which every recollection of him called 
up. She had learned to judge his artful con- 
duct with the same sincerity and severity with 
which she analyzed her own, and the arts by 
which he had so successfully compromised her 
in the eyes of their mutual acquaintances, being 
now unveiled, excited her indignation and 
contempt. 

How did she rejoice that Lord Oriel was 
not with her at this rencontre, as his presence, 
and the consciousness of the scrutiny with 



THE REPEALERS. 35 

which he would examine her countenance, 
would have increased her agitation. She pro- 
posed to Mrs. Forrester to retire ; and, seeing 
Colonel Forrester at that moment enter from 
the House of Lords, where he had been to hear 
a debate, they both requested him to call their 
carriage, and left Mr. Vernon's house. 

Lady Oriel reflected with pleasure that in 
a very few days she should leave London, and 
trusted that she should not again meet Lord 
Delmore. She hesitated whether she ought to 
tell Lord Oriel of the meeting or not ; and, with 
the candour and delicacy natural to her, de- 
termined on doing so ; but, after a little reflec- 
tion, she thought that the mention of Lord 
Delmore's name from her lips would conjure 
up such a host of painful reminiscences in the 
sensitive mind of her husband, that she had 
not courage to introduce the subject. 

Here again the too susceptible nature of 



36 THE REPEALERS. 

Lord Oriel led to mischief, because it was the 
cause of his wife''s concealing from him her 
rencontre with Lord Delmore ; a circumstance 
which, though trivial in itself, and which might 
naturally be expected to take place, he had 
not contemplated, from his believing that in- 
dividual to be abroad ; and though he would 
certainly have been pained at her telling him 
the fact, his was a temper to be deeply offended 
by her concealment of it. 

The first circumstance that leads to the 
necessity of a concealment between man and 
wife, gives the colour to their future happiness. 
How often do concealments proceed from the 
fear of wounding a susceptible mind, or ex- 
citing an irritable temper ! and when once a 
habit of dissimulation is established, the purity 
of conjugal affection is destroyed, though the 
affection itself may continue in all its pristine 
force. A delicate-minded woman, or a sensi- 



THE REPEALERS. 37 

tive man, discovering that even a trivial con- 
cealment has been practised, feels confidence 
impaired, and suspicion awakened ; the real 
motives are seldom examined, for people are 
not willing to believe themselves too suscepti- 
ble, or irritable, and would be offended at the 
supposition were it made to them. But as it 
is easier to act with candour than to conquer 
either disposition or temper, we have no hesi- 
tation in advising all husbands and wives to 
avoid concealment if they wish to preserve hap- 
piness, and not be deterred from a statement of 
facts by the fear of present annoyance, which 
leaves a much hghter impression than is made 
by a future discovery of them. 

There is something repugnant to the delicacy 
of affection in the consciousness that heads 
which repose on the same pillow should be 
occupied by thoughts which they dare not 
utter. Lady Oriel felt this the night of the 



38 THE REPEALERS. 

fete, and affected to be asleep when Lord Oriel 
entered her room, to avoid a conversation in 
which she could not name the disagreeable 
meeting that even then agitated her nerves and 
wounded her feelings. 

" When,^' thought she, with bitterness, 
" will the effects of my folly cease to rise up 
in judgment against me? It is to it I owe the 
susceptibility on my husband's part that ren- 
ders concealment necessary." 

The Abbe de Chaulieu observed of Fonte- 
nelle, that he had the most kindness and the 
least feeling of any man he had ever known. 
This observation showed a profound knowledge 
of human nature; for though it may appear 
a paradox, it is nevertheless true, that persons 
the most remarkable for general kindness are 
those who have the least feeling ; deep feeling 
being always accompanied by an inequality of 
humour, that often precludes habitual kind- 



THE REPEALERS. 39 

ness ; while the absence of feeling leaves us 
masters of ourselves, and ready to show those 
acts of civihty that are gratifying to the re- 
ceiver, and cost little to the giver. 

Lord Oriel was an exemplification of the in- 
compatibility of the two ; for no man possessed 
more feeling, and its excess produced the effect 
of want of kindness, by rendering him irritable 
when he most wished to be kind. A woman 
of less delicacy of mind than his wife, might 
have corrected this exuberant and unhealthy 
action of feeling, by an exposure to him of the 
pain it occasioned her ; but Lady Oriel attri- 
buted his morbid sensibility entirely to her own 
errors, and supported the sufferings it inflicted 
with the patience of a martyr. 

Lord Oriel had intended going from the 
House of Lords to the fete at Mr. Vernon's, 
but, having been detained later than he ex- 
pected, he concluded, from seeing many car- 



40 THE REPEALERS. 

riages leaving Carlton Gardens, that Lady Oriel 
had left it. He stopped at White's to look 
at the evening papers, and was reading one, 
his face shaded partly by the paper, when 
Lord Tadcaster and some other young men 
walked in, and gave a description of the fete. 

" Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester were the 
prettiest women there," observed Lord Tad- 
caster ; ." and so Delmore seemed to think, for 
he never took his eyes off the first, who blushed 
very becomingly when she caught his eyes 
fixed on her face." 

The observations ended here, and it seemed 
to Lord Oriel as if some one had pointed him 
out to Lord Tadcaster, and so stopped any 
farther remark. He felt his cheeks glow with 
rage and shame : at one moment he felt dis- 
posed to call Lord Tadcaster to account for 
having named Lady Oriel, and the next he 
thought, that as nothing positively offensive 



THE REPEALERS. 41 

had been said, such a step would only excite 
fresh scandal, and revive the former. 

He was one of the last to leave White's, 
as he felt too much agitated to confront the 
persons he must pass to leave the room ; and 
in driving home, his mind was in a chaos, that 
made him dread an interview with his wife. 
Would she tell him of the meeting ? To name 
it, would be opening afresh old wounds, that 
both were anxious not to touch ; but not to 
tell him would be still worse, as denoting a 
want of confidence in herself and him too. 

Anxious as he was to ascertain how Lady 
Oriel would act on this occasion, he was re- 
lieved by finding her, as he imagined, asleep ; 
and as he looked on her beautiful face, with 
the silken fringe of her raven eyelashes rest- 
ing on the delicate rose-coloured cheeks, he 
breathed a prayer that no tear might leave 
its trace on those fair cheeks, and laid his head 



42 THE REPEALERS. 

on his pillow, to seek in sleep an oblivion of 
the painful feelings that, during the last two 
hours, had been passing through his mind. 

But sleep pressed not his weary eyelids ; for 
thought after thought, and all connected with 
Lord Delmore, presented themselves. Did Lady 
Oriel know of his arrival in London when she 
proposed the visit to Ireland ? Why was she so 
afraid of meeting him ? Alas ! he was grow- 
ing unjust and suspicious to his own Frances. 
He felt his injustice, but he had no longer 
the power of checking it. If, however, she 
told him, as she would be sure to do on the 
morrow, that she had met Lord Delmore, all 
would be well ; but if not, he dared not think 
of the consequences. 

Little did he imagine that she who occupied 
all his thoughts was as wakeful, and nearly 
as agitated as himself, and from nearly the 
same cause. All her self-reproach had again 



THE REPEALERS. 43 

been excited by the train of thought her inter- 
view with Lord Delmore had called up. His 
presence would revive the former scandal ; her 
husband would again become susceptible and 
unhappy ; restraint would take place of the 
confidence beginning to be re-established be- 
tween them ; and all this was the consequence 
of her past levity and imprudence. She sup- 
pressed the sighs that laboured in her breast, 
lest her husband should suspect she was not 
asleep ; but he, who believed her in slumber, 
gave a free vent to his, every one of which 
struck on her ear as a knell of departing hap- 
piness, and reproached her for being the cause. 
To a refined and sensitive mind, there is 
no suffering that falls so heavily on the heart 
as the consciousness of having inflicted un- 
happiness on those dear to us. Our own tears 
or sighs relieve the grief they spring from ; 
but those we cause, fall back with bitterness 



44 THE REPEALERS. 

on our breasts, and fill us with remorse and 
anguish. To have trifled with our own peace 
of mind, appears light in comparison with the 
complicated guilt of having destroyed that of 
one who loved and trusted us ; and Lady Oriel 
felt, that a woman who has been careless of her 
reputation, thereby wounding her husband's 
honour in its most tender point, can never more 
hope for that uninterrupted confidence which 
forms the only solid basis on which the hap- 
piness of married life can be built. Her heart 
melted within her, as she thought over the 
pangs she had inflicted on the noble and gene- 
rous breast beside her ; and she could have wept 
over him, if she dared, as all the past came 
in review before her. 



THE REPEALERS. 45 



CHAPTER V. 

" Suspicion is a heavy armour, and 
With its own weight impedes more than it protects." 

Lady Oriel left her chamber ere her 
husband awoke, and when they met at the 
breakfast-table, both laboured under a con- 
straint that each endeavoured, but in vain, 
to hide. A consciousness of something to be 
concealed pressed on the spirits of the wife, 
and a knowledge that something was concealed, 
wounded the feelings of the husband. 

Those whose susceptibility or irritability force 
their connexions to the painful necessity of 



46 THE REPEALERS. 

concealment, are precisely those who are the 
most offended by it. With all Lord Oriel's 
natural goodness of heart and delicacy of mind, 
it never occurred to him, that his wife's silence 
on the subject of her interview with Lord Del- 
more proceeded wholly from the excess of her 
affection for himself, making her dread the idea 
of giving him pain. A less refined mind than 
hers would neither have anticipated the chagrin 
which the mention of Delmore's name would 
occasion him, nor have committed the error of 
having any concealment on the subject. But 
here were two people, fondly, warmly attached 
to each other, frittering away their happiness, 
from a too great similarity of dispositions and 
a too great refinement of ideas. A little less on 
either side might have saved them both from 
much misery ; but circumstances had, unfor- 
tunately, tended to increase their morbid sen- 
sibility, and they were now paying the penalty. 



THE REPEALERS. 47 

" How passed off the fete?" asked Lord 
Oriel. " I was on the point of searching you 
there, when I saw so many carriages coming 
away that I concluded you had left. The ball 
was very brilliant and agreeable ?" 

" Nothing remarkable," replied Lady Oriel. 
" On the whole, I thought it went off heavily, 
as the fetes at Mr. Vernon's generally do. He 
walks about with such an air of demanding 
admiration for his house, his furniture, his pic- 
tures, and ail that is his, that it makes one feel 
less disposed to accord it ; and then he seems 
so dissatisfied that his guests are not surprised 
or eblouis by his grandeur, that it makes many 
of them take a spiteful pleasure in affecting 
a nonchalance, even greater than they feel." 

Lord Oriel asked other questions; but still 
Lady Oriel mentioned not Lord Delmore, and 
he felt every moment more discomposed by her 
concealment. At length he arose from the 



4-8 THE REPEALERS. 

table, and affecting a careless air, observed — 
" I heard another version of the fete from Lord 
Tadcaster, at White's, where I stopped to look 
over the evening papers. He mentioned hav- 
ing seen Lord Delmore there." 

Lady Oriel felt the blood rush up to her 
very forehead, from the consciousness of the 
false interpretation her husband might put on 
her concealment of this fact ; and her blushing 
reminded him of Lord Tadcaster's remark on 
the subject. 

" By the by," said he, with an air of pique 
Lady Oriel had never seen him exhibit before, 
" it will be absolutely necessary for you, either 
to give up going into society where you are likely 
to meet him, or to conquer the habit of blush- 
ing at his presence or at the mention of his name. 
Lord Tadcaster commented last night on your 
blushing most becomingly when you caught 
Lord Delmore's eyes fixed on you ; and you 



THE REPEALERS. 49 

must be aware that nothing can be so likely 
to convey a false impression as your betraying 
any symptom of consciousness with regard to 
him." 

There was something in the tone and manner 
with which this was said that deeply wounded 
Lady Oriel. She felt that she was misunder- 
stood ; and her pride and delicacy, but above 
all, her affection, was wounded. 

Lord Oriel left the room, leaving her to shed 
tears, almost as bitter as those he had removed 
from her eyes some months before ; and a sense 
of his injustice mingled with her own self- 
accusations. 

" A few months ago,'* thought she, " I could 
have thrown myself into his arms, and confessed 
the motive of the concealment that pains him, 
without a single mental reservation. But now 
confidence is at an end ; for I have not fortitude 
to bear up against the clouded aspect and 

VOL. III. D 



50 THE REPEALERS. 

evident unhappiness that any recurrence to 
that fearful event in my hfe produces in him. 
The consciousness of my own errors which 
oppresses me, and betrays itself by external 
marks, instead of meeting sympathy from him, 
who ought to understand me, excites only an- 
ger or displeasure. I ought to have left him 
when my imprudence had broken down the 
barriers of confidence ; for now, disguise it how 
I may, we are no longer happy, and our happi- 
ness no longer depends on each other." 

When Lord Delmore found that his visits 
would no longer be received by Lady Oriel, 
rage and mortification took possession of his 
mind. Not knowing the discovery she had 
made of the scandal which his attentions had 
excited, he attributed her door being shut 
to him to caprice, or to the representations of 
some busy, meddling friend. Lord Oriel, from 
what he had already observed of him, he was 



THE REPEALERS. 51 

certain, would not have prohibited them ; 
therefore, the blame must rest wholly with 
Lady Oriel, and this manifestation of her per- 
fect indifference towards him, was most mor- 
tifying to his amour-propre. 

With all his vanity, Lord Delmore never 
believed that he had excited any warmer sen- 
timent than friendship in the heart of Lady 
Oriel, and all hope of this ripening into a 
warmer feeling had long been abandoned. 
But vanity urged the desire of making the 
world think otherwise ; and in proportion as 
he was convinced of her purity, he became 
anxious to convey to the world an impression 
to the contrary — an impression so easily con- 
veyed in the circles in which he lived, where 
idleness and the love of scandal render every 
new tale certain of a favourable reception. 
Positive dislike had taken place of the ad- 
miration he had felt for Lady Oriel, and he 
D 2 






52 THE REPEALERS. 

inwardly resolved that she should suiFer for 
thus casting him off, without a word or a line 
of explanation, after the footing of established 
friendship on which he had been received by 
her for the last few months. 

He appeared at the clubs with a sombre 
air — talked of going abroad, having noiv no 
longer any inducement to stay in England — 
said that Lady Oriel was the most divine wo- 
man on earth, and her lord the most jealous 
of husbands — adding with a smile, that it was 
strange, but true, that husbands never be- 
came jealous until it was too late to prevent 
the mischief they dreaded, and only locked 
the door when the treasure was stolen. 

Innuendoes of this kind continually repeated 
to the men of his circles, with confessions which 
he allowed to be wrung from him by the ques- 
tions of the indiscreet women, soon spread the 
evil reports he was so anxious to propagate. 



THE REPEALERS. 53 

When Lady Annersly and some of her clique 
asked him why he no longer appeared with his 
friend Lady Oriel, and how he contrived to 
exist away from her ? — a sigh, a pensive look, 
and a " Don't talk to me about it ! — Poor dear 
soul, she is to be pitied, with her jealous brute 
of a husband ! — It is really too bad, to have all 
one's comfort broken-up in this way !" implied 
all that he wished them to believe, while it also 
gave them to understand, that he was a most 
attached as well as attachable person. 

When such reports had been whispered in 
the circles of society for a week, and com- 
mented on in the clubs for a fortnight, it is 
no wonder that they soon after found their 
way into the newspapers, and were blazoned 
abroad with all the piquant emendations that 
a maliciously disposed editor could give them, 
until they assumed a form sufficiently pal- 
pable to impress the uninquiring with a belief 



54 THE REPEALERS. 

that what was so publicly asserted must 
be true. 

Had Colonel Forrester been in England at 
this moment, the first statement coming from 
the press would have been checked by a legal 
proceeding against the newspaper in which it 
had appeared, and this would have silenced all 
the others. But he, unfortunately, was absent, 
and the morbid sensibility of Lord Oriel ren- 
dered him totally unfit for taking any of the 
necessary steps to stop statements that filled 
him with indignation and sorrow, the falsehood 
of which he knew, but wanted knowledge of 
the world to know how to refute. 

How many people pass through life \nthout 
having acquired, or having sought to acquire, 
the practical knowledge necessary to render the 
journey less painful ! and how few are so fortunate 
as to be exempt from the circumstances that ren- 
der such a knowledge necessary ! Lord Oriel, 



THE REPEALERS. 55 

shrinking from the publicity which legal steps, 
as he thought, would give to the scandalous 
falsehoods in question, was little aware that 
they were the only means left him of checking 
their promulgation ; and that the impunity with 
which paper after paper published the scandal 
was considered as positive proof of its truth. His 
supine and reprehensible negligence, or pride, 
had kept him from acting as the guardian of 
his wife's honour, and by his morbid feelings 
and want of worldly knowledge, he was now 
equally unfitted for being its avenger. 

Lord Delmore, having excited the sympathy 
of the frivolous and vicious part of the society 
to which he belonged, and the contempt of the 
good and sober-minded, determined on travel- 
ling for a few months. Change of scene, he 
thought, would amuse him, and confirm the 
impression he wished to convey, that he left 
England because he was separated from Lady 



56 THE REPEALERS. 

Oriel. He was as tired of the moors and moun- 
tains in Scotland as he had been before of 
the preserves of the best manors in Norfolk and 
Suffolk : he had explored the Lakes, and found 
them, as a certain tragic dame was reported 
to have expressed herself with regard to the 
" vasty deep,'^ ^' vastly wide and vastly pro- 
found."^ Wales was familiar to him. and, hke 
all familiar things, no longer desirable ; and 
Ireland, with its A\liite-feet and Black-feet, its 
Shanah- vests and Caravats, Captain Rock and 
Agitators, held forth no temptation. To Paris, 
therefore, he determined to go in the first in- 
stance, and, if that failed to amuse him, to 
proceed to Italy. 

By one of those extraordinary chances that 
so often arise in this world of chances, the first 
person he met on entering the steam-packet was 
Mademoiselle La Tour, the ci-devant femme de 
chambre of Lady Oriel. A few questions and 



THE REPEALERS. 5/ 

well-timed compliments elicited from her all that 
she knew, all that she suspected, and all that 
she thought probable about Miladi. " ]\Iilord 
was one shocking bete, Miladi unpeufolhi tout 
a fait exageree, et tous les deux romanesques et 
s'aimant comme les pigeons ou les tourterelles. 
If Miladi have le ban sens, everything so easy, 
because Miladi do what she like with Milord ; 
mais ?ion, tout au contraire. When she told 
Miladi all what le valet de pied de Milord Del- 
more had said, Miladi dropped in one faint ; 
Milord runs in, and begin veeping like von 
enfant ; and malgre she did try to make Miladi 
take de la fleur d'orange pour ses nerfs, or un 
peu de tilleul, Milord did tell her to go away, 
and did stay alone with Miladi, with de door 
locked; and when she came again, they have 
both so red eyes as if they cry beaucoup. Yet 
they were not very angry ; for they did look 
very loving, and Milord kiss Miladi's hand very 
D 5 



58 THE REPEALERS. 

much. And next day Miladi did pay her, and 
give her unjoli cadeau, and say she not want 
her no more ; and so she left her, and was now 
going to set up uiie boutique dans la Gallerie 
de VOrme ; and she hope Milord Delmore be 
one good friend to her, and she be one good 
friend to Milord ; for she counsel Milord not 
keep his valet de pied, Monsieur Henri, be- 
cause he is one havard tres dangereux, pour 
un Monsieur qui a du succes comme Milord.''' 

The whole secrets of Oriel House were now 
explained to Lord Delmore, and he saw plainly 
that the plans he had followed to produce a 
misunderstanding between the husband and 
wife, had only united them afresh and more 
tenderly than ever. He felt convinced that 
all his arts would be unavailing to establish 
himself again sur un pied d'^intimite with Lady 
Oriel, and rejoiced that he had left England, 
as his absence, much more than his presence. 



THE REPEALERS. 59 

would confirm people in the belief that he 
wished them to entertain. 

A liberal cadeau from his Lordship's purse 
found its way to the reticule of Mademoiselle, 
who, while accepting it, remarked that " It was 
not one wonder Milord was so aime par toittes 
les dames, for Milord was le plus joli gargon 
de Londres, et le plus spirit ue I T though, 
when he left her, she could not resist adding, 
" et bete comme tons ses compatriotes : he 
give me iin cadeau when I cannot do him 
one service, and he not give me when I 
could. Aiissi, he not tell me I have de pretty 
eye and une jolie tournure, which prove he is 
one bete.'''* 

Among the Enghsh at Paris, Lord Delmore 
acted the sentimental and serious, but consoled 
himself for this restraint by abandoning his 
naturally gay spirits to uncontrolled indulgence 
in the French circles into which he was admit- 



60 THE REPEALERS. 

ted. Madame la Vi scorn tesse de Beauregarde, 
the most spirituelle of the Parisian elegantes, 
declared him to be tres-bien pour un Anglais ; 
and her manner towards him, even more than 
her words, marked that, me7ne pour un Fran- 
cais, he would not have been considered other- 
wise than tres-aimable. 

He passed his time so agreeably at Paris 
that he thought not of crossing the Alps, and 
was only disturbed from the pleasing routine of 
amusements into which he had fallen by letters 
from England, announcing that his pecuniary 
affairs were so embarrassed that the raising 
supplies became every day more difficult ; and 
urging the necessity of his immediate return, 
for the purpose of adopting some plan of relief. 
He had long had a vague idea that he was 
ruined, but he had always chased the dis- 
agreeable reflection from his mind every 
time it had intruded itself. During a Lon- 



THE REPEALERS. 61 

don season, who has time or inchnation to 
think about his affairs ? and so many shoot- 
ing-parties are made up for the autumn, fol- 
lowed by the hunting season at Melton, that one 
never has a moment to give to disagreeable 
subjects ; so, from year to year, Lord Del- 
more, like many of his contemporaries, had gone 
on, putting off the evil day of examination, 
until a stoppage of the means of prolonging 
his pleasurable pursuits, forced on his mind 
the painful conviction, that examination was 
not only indispensable, but probably unavailing. 

" Well," thought he, " if I am ruined, I 
must only sacrifice my inclinations, and marry. 
This is a bore, to be sure, but there is no 
avoiding it, and," examining himself in the 
glass, " I flatter myself I shall have no great 
difficulty in making myself acceptable." 

He arrived in London only a few days before 
the f^te at Vernon House, and that was the 



62 THE REPEALERS. 

first occasion of his appearing in public since 
his return from Paris. 

On seeing Lady Oriel, his first impulse was to 
approach her ; but, observing the circle around 
her, even he, with all his courage and non- 
chalance, dared not risk the cold reception he 
had a presentiment he should receive from her, 
a reception which would at once serve as a 
refutation to all the evil reports circulated 
about them. He hovered near her, hoping to 
find her alone for a moment, but, when he 
caught her glance, the expression of it con- 
vinced him he had better avoid any attempt 
at addressing her, and he saw her leave the 
room with sentiments much nearer akin to 
hate than to love. 

The good footing on which she seemed es- 
tablished in society was painful to him from 
two motives ; the first, that it seemed as if the 
evil reports relative to him were no longer be- 



THE REPEALERS. 63 

lieved, which was most mortifying to his vanity ; 
and the second, because he wished her to be 
punished for breaking off so uncivilly with him, 
a crime for which he never could forgive her. 

" Your virtuous women are such fools,''^ 
thought he : " now Lady Annersly, or Lady 
Flora Disbrow, or any of the women of that 
clique, would never have dared to cast me 
off, sa?is meuagement, for fear of provoking 
me to say something against them. But this 
lady, who has allowed me to exhibit myself 
as the humblest, though certainly not as the 
most unhappy of her adorers, at every ball, 
soiree, and fete, of last season, until we were 
considered as inseparable as married lovers 
in the first week of the honey-moon, now 
quietly cuts me, without so much as a word, 
look, or smile, totally regardless of my ven- 
geance." 

On leaving the salon, he met Lord Tad- 



64 THE REPEALERS. 

caster, who offered to drop him at Crockford's, 
and during their drive, they talked over the 
fete. Both agreed that old Vernon was a bore, 
and his daughters a little too demonstrative 
in their desire to wear coronets. 

" They will have fifty thousand each, I un- 
derstand,'' said Lord Tadcaster, " and as much 
more at the father's death ; a good fortune as 
times go ; and if I wanted money, I should not 
mind marrying the elder ; but that not being 
the case, I will leave her to barter her plum 
for a strawberry -leaf coronet, the object on 
earth she most longs for. I have no desire 
to give myself a beau-pere in old Vernon, or a 
heaufrhre in my friend and schoolfellow Frank, 
who, I think, is the most disagreeable of the 
family, perhaps because I know him the best." 

The fifty thousand pounds in possession, and 
a similar sum in reversion, sounded most agree- 
ably in the ears of Lord Delmore. To the 



THE REPEALERS. 65 

young ladies he had never paid any attention, 
and hardly knew them asunder. But ri'importe, 
he should take the first opportunity of acting 
Vaimable to which of them he found the least 
disagreeable ; and he doubted not his success, 
provided he could conceal the ruinous state of 
his finances, the dilapidations in which became 
every day more apparent, and rendered some 
speedy relief more indispensable. 

Animated by the cheering prospect of Miss 
Vernon's thousands, of which already he anti- 
cipated the possession, and excited by cham- 
pagne, he sat down to hazard, and after three 
hours' play, found himself minus as many thou- 
sands. With an aching head and soured tem- 
per, he left the splendid salons of Crockford's, 
where the gilding lavished around seems to 
mock the dupes whose gold has paid for it. 



66 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

" She is peevish, sullen, froward, 

Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty ; 
Neither regarding that she is my child. 
Nor fearing me as if I were her father." 

The fete given by Mr. Vernon passed off, 
like the generality of such amusements, un- 
satisfactorily to the host and the guests; a 
thousand faults were found with the arrange- 
ments of it, and chiefly by those who had never 
given, nor were likely to give a fete in their 
lives; the ices were pronounced to be too cold, 
the rooms too much lighted ; and it was dis- 



THE REPEALERS. 67 

covered that a profusion reigned around, which, 
as the guests repeated to each other, clearly 
proved that the giver was a parvenu, a nouveau 
riche, in short, all but a person comme il faiit, 
though decidedly a person comme il en fauty 
as the world now stood, when money is the 
passport to society. 

Mr. Vernon had discrimination enough to see 
that his guests were more disposed to sneer 
than smile, or, if they did smile, it was in stich 
a sort, as left little doubt that satire, more 
than pleasure, produced the risible movement ; 
and he was as angry and disappointed, at what 
he termed their ingratitude, as if their amuse- 
ment had been his sole motive in giving the 
fete, and that an ostentatious desire of asto- 
nishing them, and forcing their admiration and 
envy, had not been his principal inducement. 
People seemed to render him responsible even 
for the badness of the weather, and various 



68 THE REPEALERS. 

comments were made on the absurdity of 
choosing such a night for a fete, as if his in- 
vitations had only gone forth that day. Host 
and guests stood on equal grounds with regard 
to their feelings towards each other, and both 
seemed perfectly to understand their mutual 
estimate. 

The Miss Vernons were the most disappoint- 
ed of all the circle, for neither the Marquis of 
Tadcaster nor Lord Durnford had proposed ; 
though all available arts had been tried to 
draw them to this desired and desirable point. 
The ladies felt that, notwithstanding their ad- 
dress, it was but too evident that the said Lords 
saw the pains taken to entrap them, and this con- 
viction served to render the would-be entrappers 
still more mortified at their want of success. To 
have condescended to use such arts and give 
such encouragement, humiliated them in their 
own estimation only because they had not at- 



THE REPEALERS. b\) 

tained their object. Had they succeeded, they 
would have thought Httle of the means ; as it 
was, they felt as offended and angry at their 
projects being defeated, as if the Lords in 
question had been the wooers, instead of, as 
was really the case, being the wooed. 

The sisters retired to their chambers, discon- 
tented with the world and with themselves, and 
well disposed to vent a part of their ill-humour 
on each other. Before separating, Louisa 
Vernon inquired, " Well, has Lord Tadcaster 
proposed .'*'" 

" No," replied her sister, " and if he had — " 

" You would have jumped at him," inter- 
rupted Louisa ; " though I know you were now 
on the point of telhng me you would have 
refused him." 

A look of suppressed rage, and a sneer, re- 
paid this remark, as Miss Vernon spitefully 
replied, " I do not ask you if Lord Durnford 



70 THE REPEALERS. 

has proposed, as your good temper explains 
the state of that affair ; so bon soir, ma chhre 
saur /*" and, humming an air to conceal her 
mortification, she quitted her sister. 

The family party met next morning at a late 
breakfast, mutually disposed to find fault with 
each other, and equally discontented with the 
fete. Mr. Vernon, as was usual with him on 
such occasions, and the occasions were not un- 
frequejit, expressed his dissatisfaction with Mrs. 
Vernon's too great civility to the guests, against 
the greater part of whom he was very acri- 
monious in his remarks, and then stated his 
displeasure at the too pointed attention paid 
by his daughters to the Lords Tadcaster and 
Durnford. 

The young ladies, little accustomed to be 
rebuked, pouted and looked sulky, and took 
so little pains to conceal their discontent, that 
the angry spirit of their father was kindled 



THE REPEALERS. 71 

afresh, and he demanded with a fiery glance, 
if, after all their advances, the young men had 
proposed ? " No," he added, replying to his 
own question, " they have not, and I could 
have sworn they would not : and so, after being 
bored last winter with them in the country, 
shooting all my pheasants, and playing off their 
fine airs, it has all come to nothing ! Well, 
young ladies, do not frown ; I must allow that 
this disappointment does not arise from want 
of encouragement on your parts."' 



72 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Love wedlock framed in days of old, 

And made the bonds of wreathed flowers, 

But now the chains are forged of gold, 
And Hymen bows to Pluto's powers. 

Lawyers now take poor Cupid's place, 
And goose-quills ply 'stead of his pinions, 

While scarce a sign of love we trace 
In marriage, erst his own dominions. 

But how could Law and Love agree ? 

There 's nought in common sure between 'era ; 
Law thinks of quarrels that must be, 

And Love is much too fond to believe 'em. 

Colonel Forrester found his sister in 
tears, and when she told him the cause, he 
represented to her the absolute necessity of her 



THE REPEALERS. 73 

using the most perfect frankness with Lord 
Oriel, and conquering all fear of offending or 
wounding him by intelligence, that, coming 
through others, would be doubly mortifying. 

" I enter into your feelings, my dearest 
sister,*''' said he, " and admit that it demands 
courage to touch on subjects that one knows 
will give pain ; but be assured, that the ap- 
pearance of concealment is much more likely 
to wound than the mention of a name which 
he must often hear ; and you, by magnifying 
your own past imprudence, betray a conscious- 
ness of it, that will lead the malicious part of 
the world to draw false conclusions. You have 
no guilt to accuse yourself of, and therefore 
ought to be able to meet Lord Delmore with the 
calm indifference of a common-place acquaint- 
ance. Any deviation from this conduct will only 
tend to revive scandal, and confirm evil reports : 
therefore, when you encounter Lord Delmore 

VOL. Ill, E 



74 THE REPEALERS. 

again, bow to him as to any other casual ac- 
quaintance. For the few days we shall be in 
town, it is necessary for you to appear as much 
in the world as possible, lest Lord Oriel should 
fancy that you are staying at home to avoid 
Delmore, or lest others may draw the same 
conclusion. I repeat to you, Louisa, that hav- 
ing done nothing to forfeit your own self- 
respect, you are to blame for the timidity you 
betray, and that, with a husband so extremely 
susceptible as yours is, you must conquer it, 
or else pass your life a martyr to its effects.'' 

When Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester were 
next day entering Kensington Gardens for their 
promenade, they met Lady Mary Tremayne, 
with the Miss Vernon s, escorted by Lord Del- 
more. They stopped to speak for a few mi- 
nutes, and Lady Oriel addressed the customary 
salutation to the latter with cold politeness, 
which he r 'plied to in the same tone. 



THE REPEALERS. 75" 

The advice of her brother had such a good 
effect on her, that she felt she had, on this 
trying occasion, conducted herself without be- 
traying the least emotion, and she was rejoiced 
by this consciousness. 

On riding through the Park, Lord Delmore 
had seen the carriage of the Vernons at the 
gate at Kensington Gardens, and having had 
a levee of duns that morning, with sundry 
hints from his soHcitor and agent, of the im- 
possibility of pacifying them much longer, the 
necessity of seeking Plutus through the road of 
Hymen was more strongly than ever impressed 
on his mind ; and he resolved to lose no time 
in cultivating his acquaintance with the Miss 
Vernons. Knowing Lady Mary Tremayne, 
their chaperon, he joined the party, and find- 
ing Miss Vernon the most disposed to smile 
on him, from the recent retreat of Lord Tad- 
caster, — Miss Louisa still entertaining hopes of 
e2 



76 THE REPEALERS. 

Lord Durnford, which induced her to be more 
reserved to Delmore, — he acted the agreeable 
so successfully, that the Marquis was forgotten 
when they met I<ady Oriel. 

On leaving her. Lady Mary Tremayne, with 
the malice pecuhar to her clique, laughingly 
observed to Lord Delmore, that if this was the 
first meeting he had had with his old friend. 
Lady Oriel, since his return, she thought it 
had passed off very coldly. " Not a blush, 
a sigh, or even the appearance of trepidation," 
added she. " I should have expected, at least, 
a fainting-fit, and had my salts ready in m}- 
reticule ; but it seems Lady Oriel is superior 
to this iveak7iess, though she has been accused 
of others." 

" Oh ! Lord Delmore must have met Lady 
Oriel chez nous,'''' said Miss Vernon. 

At this moment they were passing through 
the gate, when Lord Delmore, with an ex- 



THE REPEALERS. 77 

pressive look at Miss Vernon, replied, that he 
had not seen Lady Oriel at the fete, because 
he had eyes for only one lady there, and who 
could look at any other woman when Miss 
Vernon was present ? 

The young lady was as much gratified as 
surprised at the compliment, and congratulated 
herself on having already so well supplied the 
place of Lord Tadcaster ; who, notwithstanding 
all the encouragement given to him, had never 
said any thing half so warm to her. 

" Their hearts are different," thought she, 
little imagining that the difference was not 
in their hearts, but in their purses, and that if 
Lord Delmore's was only half as well filled 
as that of the Marquis, he would have been 
even more chary of his compliments. 

They parted mutually gratified. Having 
ascertained that they would be at the Opera, 
Lord Delmore pressed the hand of his belle on 



78 THE REPEALERS. 

assisting her to her carriage, and with a tender 
look rode away. 

When the ladies began discussing his preten- 
sions, — a common habit with ladies as well as 
gentlemen when any one leaves their circle, — 
Lady Mary Tremayne observed, that certainly 
Lord Delmore was a very delightful person, 
handsome, clever, and agreeable. " I never see 
him," said she, " without being reminded of the 
compliment paid by Madame du DefFand to La 
Princesse de Talmont's appearance, when she 
said she had ''• Pair distiriguee sans etre singu- 
liere,'''' — the most rare thing in the world. 

Lady Mary Tremayne"*s opinion had great 
weight with the Vernons, merely because they 
knew she was very much a la mode; and con- 
sequently her praise raised Lord Delmore not 
a little in their estimation. Still there was 
enough of the family love of riches in the young 
ladies, to induce them to inquire if he had a 



THE REPEALERS. 79 

large fortune, and sufficient amour pi^opre for 
her order de noblesse in Lady Mary, to en- 
gage her to answer, " Certainly," though she 
was totally ignorant on the subject ; and she 
added : — " not only has he a large fortune, but 
in case his uncle dies without marrying, which 
is very hkely, he is heir to a Dukedom." 

This last piece of intelligence quite achieved 
the conquest of Miss Vernon's head, — for heart 
was out of the question in her case — the only 
proof of her possessing that necessary organ 
in the economy of the human frame, being 
a certain palpitation at the left side after 
dancing. 

Discomfited as she had been by the retreat 
of Lord Tadcaster, without even leaving her 
the prospect of a proposal from him at any 
future time, nothing could be more opportune 
as a salve to her wounded vanity, than this 
new and brilliant conquest. Having left Lady 



80 THE REPEALERS. 

Mary Tretnayne at home, she could hardly, 
during her drive to Carlton Gardens, resist 
showing her triumph to her sister, sundry hints 
of which were given, and as carefully refused 
to be accepted by Miss Louisa, who had 
too much vanity and pretension of her own, 
to bear patiently with the display of her 
sister's. Nay, the insinuations of her conquest, 
so broadly given by Miss Vernon, almost de- 
termined her saur cadet to enter the lists with 
her, to dispute Lord Delmore's preference, and 
influenced her to take even more than usual 
pains in her toilette of the evening, and to affect 
un air empresse towards Lord Delmore, which 
she hoped might distract his attention from her 
sister. 

Mrs. Vernon had accompanied her daughters 
to the Opera, and was astonished to observe 
the vivacity with which they tried to captivate 
the new beau. He, with his usual tact, di- 



THE REPEALERS. 81 

vided his attentions so equally, as to alarm 
Miss Vernon, and give hopes to Miss Louisa, 
rendering both more anxious to secure him ; 
and he was so respectful to Mrs. Vernon, that 
he interested even her in his favour. 

Lord Durnford's entrance to the box changed 
the scene, by renewing Miss Louisa's hopes ; 
and she now devoted her undivided attention to 
him, leaving her sister free to occupy all that 
of Lord Delmore; who, anxious to lose no time, 
plied her with compliments too plain to be mis- 
taken, and too well received, to leave any doubt 
of the final success of the needy cajoler. 

Miss Louisa, finding Lord Durnford's atten- 
tions by no means keep pace with her wishes, 
became indignant at observing the familiarity 
that seemed to have been established between 
Miss Vernon and Lord Delmore since she had 
commenced her conversation with Lord Dum- 
ford. To interrupt it, she pointedly asked the 
e5 



8^ THE REPEALERS. 

latter, if that was not his friend Lord Tad- 
caster in the box at the opposite side? and 
being answered in the affirmative, she spitefully 
observed, that he had been for the last two 
hours so occupied with the lady next him, that 
she had not been able to see who the lady was, 
his head being continually interposed between 
them. 

Miss Vernon felt all the malice of the re- 
mark, and well knew the feeling that dictated 
it : but it only served to make her more anx- 
ious to secure her present conquest, to accom- 
plish which she redoubled her complaisance to 
him. 

On passing through the round room, leaning 
on the arm of Lord Delmore, she was most dis- 
agreeably surprised by finding Lord Tadcaster 
giving his arm to her cousin Mary Vernon, 
to whom he appeared to be paying marked 
attention ; while Mrs. Henry Vernon, leaning 



THE REPEALERS. 83 

on her nephew, stood by her daughter, ex- 
ulting in the admiration her beauty excited, 
and the evident conquest which that beauty 
had achieved ; for Lord Tadcaster's assiduity 
was too undisguised to be mistaken. 

How did Miss Vernon now rejoice, that 
Lord Delmore's attendance saved her from the 
mortifying position of being delaissee ! and he 
who was au fait of the encouragement given t< 
Lord Tadcaster, determined to take advantage 
of the pique his desertion must excite in the 
breast of the young lady, who, he was certain, 
would be now most anxious to prove that her 
affections had never been engaged to Lord Tad- 
caster, by openly displaying a preference for 
himself. 

Occupied as Lord Delmore was in securing 
the prize he sought, he was forcibly struck 
by the beauty of Mary Vernon, and wondered 
not that Lord Tadcaster had found it so irre- 



84 THE REPEALERS. 

sistible. " When do you start for Scotland P'"* 
asked Delmore. 

" I know not," replied the other ; " perhaps 
not at all." And then turning to Mary Ver- 
non, he resumed his conversation with her, with 
an air of interest that betrayed how much she 
influenced the sudden change in his plans. 

Louisa Vernon cast sundry malicious glances 
at her sister, as if she wished to say, " You see 
you have been months trying to retain him, 
and Mary only knows him one day, and the 
shooting-party is abandoned." 

Nothing of all this sisterly intention was 
lost on Miss Vernon ; for those who are the 
most malicious, are the most sensible of the 
malice of others. Her conquest of Delmore 
alone enabled her to meet it " with decent 
dignity." How could she be grateful enough 
to him for saving her from a position so em- 
barrassing to her vanity ? But one way sug- 



THE REPEALERS. 85 

gested itself, and she readily adopted it — that 
of leaving no means untried to convince him of 
the pleasure his attentions conferred. Ere he 
handed her to the carriage, he had made all 
but a positive declaration, and she had done 
all but accept him. 

The next day the Miss Vernons found them- 
selves again at Kensington Gardens, chaperoned 
by Mrs. Murray, a lady whose sole recommen- 
dation was, that she passed for being fashion- 
able ; a distinction due to a large fortune, and 
a fondness for rank, which induced her to sacri- 
fice all her time, and much of her wealth, to 
assemble round her all who could boast it, pro- 
vided they were of the elite. She conde- 
scended to chaperon the Vernons occasionally, 
because they were considered " catches'" by the 
younger sons of many of the Lady Mammas 
of her acquaintance, and it gave her an 
importance with them ; and the young ladies 



86 THE REPEALERS. 

preferred her as a chaperon to many others, 
because she knew everybody, and was past the 
age of pretending to attention for herself. 

Lord Delmore met them accidentally, though 
Miss Louisa's spiteful glance at her sister 
seemed to insinuate that the meeting was not 
one of chance ; and the pertinacity with which 
she engrossed the conversation of his Lordship, 
betrayed her determination to interrupt the 
confidential entretien she supposed her sister 
wished to hold with him. 

Next to forwarding her own personal in- 
terest, was the pleasure Miss Louisa felt in 
defeating that of her sister ; and on this point, 
if on no other, a perfect sympathy existed be- 
tween them. Had Lord Durnford, or any 
other fashionable beau been present, with whom 
Miss Louisa could have commenced a flirtation, 
she would have permitted Miss Vernon to en- 
gross the attentions of Lord Delmore without 



THE REPEALERS. 87 

interruption ; but to be compelled to fall back 
on Mrs. Murray, and leave her sister mistress 
of the field, was out of the question ; so she 
maintained an uninterrupted fire of words, 
smiles, and sallies, that scarcely allowed time 
for her mortified and angry sister's edging 
in a word, and made Lord Delmore ready to 
exclaim, * 

'^ How happy could I be with either ;" 
nay, almost led him to fear, that both ladies 
had made up their minds to share his coronet ; 
an intention which he foresaw would be very 
embarrassing to him. 

Miss Vernon pouted and sulked, because she 
wished her admirer to give some decided proof 
that she was the object of his attention ; and 
this he was too well bred to do in the present 
state of affairs, knowing that such a step would 
make an active enemy of Miss Louisa. 

The party sauntered along the umbrageous 



88 THE REPEALERS. 

walk, unmindful of the beautiful verdure, and 
all that Nature offered to charm them, occu- 
pied with feelings little in harmony with the 
calm scene around, when, arriving at the end 
of the walk, they encountered Mrs. and Miss 
Burrell, escorted by Lord Durnford. The Miss 
Vernons stopped to speak to their aunt and 
cousin. 

Now was the turn of the elder sister to cast 
spiteful glances at Miss Louisa, as if to show 
her, that she observed something more than 
common in the attentions Lord Durnford was 
paying Emily Burrell ; and when, after ex- 
changing a few common-place remarks, the 
parties separated. Miss Vernon observed aloud, 
" that Lord Durnford seemed to be very much 
in love with her cousin,'' though she could have 
seen nothing to justify the opinion in the few 
minutes they had been together, and it was said 
solely from the wish of wounding her sister. 



THE REPEALERS. 89 

We may be told this is not nature, and that 
such characters as the Miss Vernons do not 
exist, they are fortunate who have not met 
such ; but we beheve few are so lucky ; for 
every day's experience proves that society offers 
many examples where the ties of kindred, 
instead of being considered as bonds of union, 
are looked on as fetters that bind discordant 
souls together, and give a privilege to each 
for venting the acrimonious observations and 
ill-natured hints which good breeding banishes 
from mere acquaintances. 

PoHteness, that cementer of friendship and 
soother of enmities, is nowhere so much re- 
quired, and so frequently outraged, as in family 
circles ; Vaimable franchise which near relation- 
ship is considered to warrant, serves as an ex- 
cuse for all the disagreeable truths that enemies 
discover, but that only friends can tell the 
possessor. Friends can see defects with the 



90 THE REPEALERS. 

naked eye, however weak that organ may be ; 
but too frequently require magnifying glasses 
to discover good qualities. 

How strange is it that people should not 
feel, what every hour^s experience must tend to 
prove — the necessity of practising politeness. 
With strangers and acquaintances, all admit 
the necessity of observing it ; but in nearer, 
and what ought to be dearer connexions, it is 
continually abandoned, and the consequence 
is, that all the illusions of life are destroyed, 
and with them much of the happiness ; for we 
are unfitted to receive or bestow it, if we have 
been told of faults or defects, mental or per- 
sonal, the discovery of which destroys our 
self-confidence, and sours us towards the dis- 
coverer. 

By politeness we would not be understood 
to mean the flattering insincerity that too often 
passes current for it, and than which nothing 



THE REPEALERS. 91 

can be more different. Forbearance towards 
errors and defects, and a just appreciation of 
good qualities, joined to mildness and good 
breeding, is what we would inculcate, as the 
surest means of preserving domestic harmony, 
and of promoting domestic affection. Half the 
pains bestowed to conciliate acquaintances, 
might turn relatione into friends ; a meta- 
morphosis more rare and difficult to be accom- 
plished than most people imagine. 

It was Cosmo de' Medici who observed, that 
" we are commanded to forgive our enemies, 
but not our friends," implying that the injuries 
or wrongs inflicted on us by the latter are un- 
pardonable. One thing is quite certain, namely, 
that we have more frequently occasion to for- 
give those who are reputed to be our friends, 
than our enemies, and the injuries they commit 
are more pernicious and lasting in their effects. 

At dinner at Mr. Vernon's, Miss Louisa ob- 



93 THE REPEALERS. 

served, that Lord Tadcaster seemed wholly 
occupied with her cousin Mary the night before, 
a piece of intelligence that seemed to mortify 
her father even still more than it had done her 
sister. " Where could they have made his 
acquaintance ?" demanded the parvenu, as if he 
was the only nouveau riche who received Lords. 
But when his son observed that I^ord Tad- 
caster had asked him, the night of the fete, 
if Mrs. Henry Vernon and her daughter were 
in the room, and showed evident symptoms of 
disappointment at discovering they were not, 
Louisa said, with a bitter smile, " Oh ! then 
I suppose his tendresse for Mary is of some 
date." Mr. Vernon cast a look of rage at her, 
and of contempt at Miss Vernon for having 
been duped into the belief that she was the 
object of Lord Tadcaster's attentions. 

Mrs. Vernon really pitied the mortification 
of her daughter, and felt grieved at the un- 



THE REPEALERS. ^3 

kindness of Louisa, who thus increased it ; but 
Miss Vernon, with an air of affected noncha- 
lance, changed the subject, by telling her mother 
that they had met Mrs. Burrell and Emily, 
escorted by Lord Durnford, at Kensington- 
Gardens, and that he seemed much smitten 
with Emily. 

This completed the ill-humour of Mr. Ver- 
non, who observed, that he should not at all 
wonder if both the Lords proposed to their 
cousins, though he was quite sure no pains 
would be taken to induce them to do so, for 
neither Mr. Henry Vernon nor Mr. Burrell filled 
their houses in the winter with stupid young 
men, as some others were foolish enough to do, 
who after all had their daughters left on their 
hands, season after season ; a reproach that 
deeply wounded the vanity of the young ladies, 
and showed the want of feeling of the father. 



94 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" Love is a passion whose effects are various ; 
It ever brings some change upon the soul, 
Some virtue, or some vice, till then unknown, 
Degrades the hero, and makes cowards valiant. 

" As love can exquisitely bless, 
Love only feels the marvellous of pain ; 
Opens new veins of torture in the soul, 
And wakes the nerve where agonies are born." 

The morning of the departure of the Des- 
mond party arrived, and Lord and Lady Oriel 
joined it with alacrity ; he to be away from 
the possibility of meeting Lord Delmore, who 



THE REPEALERS. 95 

was hateful to him, and she to be removed 
from the busy world, which had become irksome 
to her. Coldness and restraint had subsisted 
between them since the luckless night of the 
fete at Vernon House, but it was not the cold- 
ness or restraint of sated affection or indiffe- 
rence ; it was the forced calm of a too warm 
interest that feared to trust itself to words. 

The contrarieties that had arisen to cloud 
the horizon of Lord Oriel's wedded life, had 
awakened the slumbering energies of his love, 
and the doubts and fears that in general pre- 
cede marriage, had in this instance followed 
it ; for never had either the husband or wife 
been so anxiously alive to their mutual feel- 
ings as at present. They were not happy, 
but they were not indifferent, and we all know 
it is easier to still the waves of passion, than 
to break the dead sea of indifference, which, 
hke the lake Asphaltes, destroys the energies 



96 THE REPEALERS. 

of all that approach it, until, like the birds who 
are said to drop lifeless on its dull surface, the 
heart sinks to rise no more. 

No sooner had the party felt themselves free 
from the confined air of London, and the 
shackles which its conventional modes impose, 
than their spirits appeared relieved as if from 
a load that oppressed them, and cheerfulness 
took place of the former restraint of Lord 
and Lady Oriel. Neither had ever travelled 
the route they were now pursuing ; the objects 
that presented themselves were fresh, and acted 
as a stimulus to their feelings, diverting them 
from the beaten track that had lately and 
painfully occupied them. 

Arrived in Wales, the rural inns, rustic at- 
tendants, picturesque points of view, and above 
all, the Welsh harpers, offered such new and 
piquant attractions, that they expressed them- 
selves charmed with their journey, and when 



THE REPEALERS. 97 

they reached Holyhead, where they found the 
excellent and amiable Captain Skinner on hos- 
pitable thoughts intent, waiting to conduct 
them to his comfortable residence, where a 
good dinner awaited them ; they allowed that 
Irish hospitality extends even to this side of 
the water, and duly appreciated the reception 
which the veneration and aiFection entertained 
for the Desmonds had insured for them. 

They embarked the next day, under the 
auspices of the good and agreeable Captain 
Skinner, and, favoured by propitious gales, 
made a quick and pleasant passage. The Hill 
of Howth, lifting its blue head to the skies, and 
standing forth as a guardian to the island it 
bounds; the Wicklow mountains fading into 
distance, and the beautiful bay, with all the 
picturesque scenery that encircles three of its 
sides, struck them with wonder and delight, 
and they could not resist expressing their sur- 

VOL. III. F 



98 THE REPEALERS. 

prise that a scene so calculated to excite ad- 
miration was so little talked of or written about 
that it burst on them unawares. 

No sooner were they landed on terra-firma 
than they were surrounded by groups of beg- 
gars, all beseeching their charity, love, and 
pity in the various tones of Eastern, Western, 
Southern, and Northern brogues, as rich and 
mellifluous in sound as flowery in sense. The 
Creator, Heaven, the Saints, and Angels, were 
all called in as witnesses to the necessities 
and merits of the petitioners. One declared 
that food had not passed his lips for days, 
though the steams that issued from them bore 
witness that liquids of the strongest quaUty had 
not been excluded — and another averred that 
she was dying, in language that proved it was not 
from inanition. An old woman vowed that the 
last breath of life was leaving her, as a blue 
vapoury smoke emitted from her lips, — proceed- 



THE REPEALERS. 99 

ing from a short pipe stuck in the corner of her 
mouth, and sending forth nearly as much smoke 
as a small steam-engine, — gave signal that the 
mechanical powers which impelled it were in full 
vigour : while a lame man, who hopped with ex- 
traordinary velocity on his crutch, catching the 
halfpence that were thrown amongst them, call- 
ed the saints to witness that he was a poor crip- 
ple who could not move hand or foot, and was 
obHged to pay a creathur to put the snuff into 
his nose. 

" Sure if you are," said a blind man, who 
was near him, '* you can find the way to your 
mouth purty well, without paying any one, 
except the shebean shop/' 

" Arrah what 's that to you, Cupid ?" replied 
the cripple. " I wish I had half as much moun- 
tain dew in my stomach as you have, although 
I 'd then be almost as blind." 

While breakfast was being prepared atHowth, 
F 2 



100 THE REPEALERS. 

the gentlemen strolled through the village, and 
seeing a group standing round a piece of water, 
they stopped to examine what was going on. A 
man was endeavouring to get his dog to jump 
into the water after a stick ; but all his efforts 
were vain, and each failure produced peals of 
laughter from the bystanders. 

" Does your dog often take to the wather ?"' 
asked one of them with a sly look. 

" Yes sure, when there 's plenty of oaten 
or barley-meal on it," replied the other ; and 
the group acknowledged the pleasantry with 
shouts of laughter. 

The blind beggar now joined the party, and 
a wag, who seemed a privileged person, asked 
him — " Well, Cupid, if you had a glass of 
whisky given you, what religion would you 
make it?" 

'' Faith, I'd make it a Protestant!" replied 
he ; " for I 'd take the beads off it anyway." 



THE REPEALERS. 101 

There was something so new to Lord Oriel 
in seeing misery sporting jests, that he could 
not resist giving a shilling to Cupid, who pray- 
ed that his Honour and Grace might, like him, 
never be able to discover that a rosy cheek 
can fade and a sparkling eye grow dim. "And 
sure, your Honour," added the mendicant, 
" that 's more than my namesake Cupid can 
say; for by all accounts, though he's blind, 
he soon finds out a change in beauty, and does 
not much like other people''s mothers though 
he 's so fond of his own."" 

Mr. Desmond was amused with Lord OriePs 
astonishment at the naivete of his countrymen, 
and led the way to the stand of jingles and jaunt- 
ing-cars at the entrance to the town, in order that 
he might see some specimens of the rare genus 
to which the drivers of these vehicles belong. 
They were sauntering about with stockings 
half wrinkled over their legs, great-coats hang- 



102 THE REPEALERS. 

ing over their shoulders, and each with a short 
pipe in the corner of his mouth, whose column 
of smoke seemed to direct its course towards 
the eye that overlooked it. 

A fat Englishman, whose rotundity of person 
spoke more for his good living than for his abste- 
miousness, was endeavouring to make a bargain 
with one of the drivers ; and having declared that 
he would not pay more than eigh teen-pence 
to be conveyed to Dublin, the driver, after 
examining him from head to foot, pulled off his 
great-coat and threw it over the head of his 
horse, and then advancing, offered to assist 
his passenger to mount the jaunting-car. 

" Why, what do you mean by covering your 
horse's head in that there way?" asked the 
Englishman. 

" Main .^" said the driver ; " faith, I main 
that he should not see you ; for if oncet he 
set his two good-looking eyes on that bread- 



THE REPEALERS. 103 

basket of your's, he 'd not stir a step to save 
my life, he 's so 'cute.'' 

They entered the meat-market, and Lord 
Oriel was gratified at observing the cleanliness 
that reigned around, which he had not been 
prepared to expect. A fat, elderly man was 
looking at the meat in one of the stalls, and the 
butcher addressed him, hoping that he would 
become a customer. The man declined, saying- 
he was merely a traveller, who had stopped to 
look around him. 

" Oh ! sure if that 's the case," answered the 
butcher, " will you just do me the favour to let 
me call the buyers and tell 'em you deal with 
me.^ for, as you're in such good condition, 
it will be the making of me." 

The fat man passed rapidly on, apparently 
ill-satisfied with the compliment paid to his 
obesity ; and Lord Oriel observed to Mr. Des- 
mond, that even while transacting their busi- 



104 THE REPEALERS. 

ness, it seemed that the Irish could not resist 
a joke. 

'* It is very true," replied the latter ; " and 
so strong is this tendency to the ridiculous in 
their natures, that it mingles even with what 
is most grave, and renders it doubtful when 
they are in earnest. They are a fine race, full 
of generous sentiments, but volatile, unsteady, 
and inflammable, partaking much of the qua- 
lities of the Lazzaroni of Naples, but more fiery ; 
a distinction which may originate in the dif- 
ference of their favourite beverages, the lemo- 
nade and acqua fresca of the Neapolitan being 
more cooling than the whisky of the Irish." 

When they returned to the inn they found 
a crowd of beggars still around the door ; who 
having discovered that an English Lord was 
among the arrivals, hoped his Lordship's Ho- 
nour and Glory would tell the English when 
he went back, " that they (the Irish) were as 



THE REPEALERS. 105 

quiet as saints, and not to mind the Agitator, 
who was preventing all the grandees from com- 
ing over to 'em, — sure more shame to him and 
the likes of him, who wanted to keep the coun- 
try all to himself and his party."" 



F 5 



106 THE REPEALERS, 



CHAPTER IX. 

" For this the foolish, over-careful fathers 
Have broke their sleep with thoughts, their brains with 

care, 
Their bones with industiy." 

" How quickly nature 

Falls to revolt when gold becomes his object." 

Lord Delmore pursued Miss Vernon as 
her shadow until he had succeeded in exciting 
an interest in her mind, we will not say heart, 
that assured him of his influence over her des- 
tiny. To propose for her by the regular pro- 
ceeding of demanding the consent of papa, would. 



THE REPEALERS. 107 

he was well aware, be a useless measure, as it 
would lead to sundry awkward questions rela- 
tive to rent-rolls, settlements, &c. which he 
knew must terminate in an expose, as little 
likely to satisfy the paternal feelings of a 
cautious father as of clamorous creditors; he 
therefore considered it wiser to engage the 
affections, or rather let us call them, the affec- 
tations of the young lady, and by an elopement 
assure himself of her hand, and trust to pater- 
nal and maternal affection for pardon. 

Miss Vernon had experienced the withering 
influence of five seasons ; a lustre that un- 
fortunately adds no lustre to female charms, 
though it marvellously tends to quicken and 
enlighten the perceptions of spinsters, and, in 
decreasing their attractions, increases their ex- 
perience. She, therefore, determined to accept 
what she considered to be the disinterested 
offer of Lord Delmore, who declared that he 



108 THE REPEALERS. 

loved her too passionately to contemplate " the 
law's delay," and that he dared not on this ac- 
count formally demand her hand of her father. 

What a triumph to a heartless coquette of 
twenty-two was this avowal ! an avowal she had 
been almost tempted to believe would never be 
made, from the ill-natured insinuations of her 
sister, who had proved herself to be Lord Del- 
more's best friend, by appearing to doubt the sin- 
cerity of his sentiments for Miss Vernon. How 
delightful to demonstrate to the world, and 
above all to her sister, that she was sought for 
herself alone ! There was no resisting this 
temptation ; more especially when the lover 
insinuated that her sister had tried to be her 
rival : and she consented to elope with a man, 
who, if his statement relative to her sister had 
been true, was, from disclosing it, unworthy of 
her preference. 

The persons most easily duped are the tho- 



THE REPEALERS. 109 

roughly good, who, unsuspicious of evil in- 
tentions, detect them not ; or the frivolous and 
callous, who pique themselves too much on 
their worldly knowledge and wisdom, to believe 
that they can be overmatched. Miss Vernon 
was of the latter class, and fell a victim to her 
heartlessness. The elopement was judiciously 
planned, and as judiciously executed. 

On returning from the last ball of the season, 
having previously arranged with her femme de 
chambre, she found her moveables packed up 
for flight. When the porter slept, she, with 
noiseless tread, descended from her chamber, 
and, aided by Mademoiselle La Ruse, con- 
veyed the few articles she thought necessary 
to the hall-door, whence Lord Delmore and his 
valet de chamhre assisted in removing them 
to the travelling carriage in waiting; which 
soon whirled the artificial lovers on the road 
to marriage, and — repentance. 



110 THE REPEALERS. 

The first expression of Miss Vernon was — 
" Well, I've triumphed over my sister! how 
angry she will be !" And the apparent compla- 
cency v»ath which this supposition was dwelt on 
mortified the amour propre of the lover, who felt 
as angry as if he was indeed a lover, and as if 
the idea of outwitting the father, mother, sister, 
brother, nay, the young lady herself, had not 
been a principal motive in the aiFair. 

When we are conscious of the selfishness 
of our own motives, we feel the least dis- 
posed to pardon, and the most disposed to re- 
sent, the selfishness of others. As Lord Del- 
more looked on the soulless face of his future 
bride, and listened to the heartless reflections 
she uttered, he cursed the poverty that com- 
pelled him to the step he was taking ; and the 
indifference he had hitherto experienced towards 
her, was turned to loathing. 

Even she was struck with the increasing 



THE REPEALERS. Ill 

coldness of his manner, and tried to awaken 
interest by affected agitation and timidity. But 
it was all too late ! his vanity, the only sensitive 
point in his character, was wounded ; and as it 
was now impossible for her to retract, he was 
careless of other consequences. A runaway 
daughter could only present herself as a wife 
before her angry parents; and, therefore, he 
little troubled himself to conciliate the affection 
of one who was too completely in his power to 
assert her own dignity or independence. 

Gretna Green, that blacksmith's shop where 
chains are forged that often gall for life, was 
at length reached by the worldly-minded pair ; 
and, the ceremony being performed, they set out 
on their return to England, as little like married 
lovers, as if the nuptial knot had been tied 
some fifty years before. A repentant letter, 
announcing the marriage, was dispatched to 
Mr. Vernon from the first English town on 



11^ THE REPEALERS. 

their route, and they gradually pursued their 
journey towards London, as ennuyts as two 
people can be who have discovered when too 
late that they have been duped, and who 
despise the selfishness and heartlessness that 
have mutually deceived them, without reflect- 
ing that each was equally culpable. 

On their arrival at Thomas's Hotel, they ex- 
pected a letter of forgiveness, and recall to the 
paternal mansion in Carlton Gardens ; instead 
of this, they found a cold and austere epistle 
from Mr. Vernon, stating that, as his consent 
to their marriage had never been demanded, 
Lord and Lady Delmore could not feel sur- 
prised at his withholding the provision he had 
intended for his daughter, a provision that he 
had always meant should be conditional on the 
fortune of the husband, and on the settlement 
to be made on the wife. He added, that he 
had no objection to receive Lord and Lady Del- 



THE REPEALERS. 113 

more as occasional guests at his house, but more 
than this concession they were not to expect. 

When Lord Delmore perused this letter, lie 
turned to his bride, and asked her if she had 
anticipated a severity so unnatural, and if she 
thought that firmness or obstinacy were equally 
as strong as the selfishness now apparent in her 
father. 

" I felt quite sure," replied the amiable Lady 
Delmore, " that papa would act as he has 
done. Avarice and ostentation are his ruling 
passions ; he wished myself and sister to wear 
coronets, but to buy them at the cheapest 
price. He would have parted with some thou- 
sands to accomplish this end ; but as I have 
effected it for myself without his assistance, he is 
too happy to save his money ; so that it is pro- 
bable we shall never see a guinea of his. Mais 
riimporte ; you have a sufficiently large fortune 
not to be gene by this, which had I not known, 



114 THE REPEALERS. 

I should not, knowing as I have always done 
the avarice of papa, have consented to the 
elopement."" 

Her words, and the cool, unconcerned air 
with which they were uttered, spoke daggers 
to Lord Delmore. A sentiment of hatred and 
contempt arose in his mind towards her, which 
triumphed over the restraint that politeness 
had hitherto imposed on him. 

'' What will your Ladyship think then,""* 
replied he, " when I tell you that I have been 
for a long time an embarrassed man? You 
may start, and look astonished," observing the 
half-incredulous, half-terrified air of his wife, 
" but it is nevertheless true ; and if your 
father does not assist us, utter ruin must be 
the consequence." 

" Then you did not, after all, marry me for 
myself,'^ exclaimed the angry and humiliated 
lady : " the expectation of a fortune was the 



THE REPEALERS. 115 

inducement ? What a triumph to my sister to 
discover that I have wedded a ruined man !" 

Here a violent passion of tears and sobs in- 
terrupted her utterance. 

" You at least, Madam," said Lord Del- 
more, " ought not to reproach me with inte- 
rested motives, as it appears quite clear you 
would not have eloped with me had you known 
the real state of my affairs. Recrimination is 
useless; we have committed a betise, and all 
that now remains to us is to remedy it as well 
as we can. You must assail your father, and 
try to induce him to come down handsomely, 
for we have no other resource." 

'' If you knew my father as well as I do," 
answered the weeping Lady Delmore, *' you 
would be aware that all appeals to him will be 
unavailing. He is impracticable on money mat- 
ters ; and — oh ! — oh !" (bursting into a fresh 
torrent of tears,) " I, who have been all my life 



116 THE REPEALERS. 

accustomed to splendour, now find myself mar- 
ried to one wh only sought me for the wealth 
he believed me to possess." 

Disgusted with this unrestrained exhibition of 
her selfishness, and venting execrations on her 
and himself. Lord Delmore retired to his cham- 
ber, leaving his wife alone to weep mingled 
tears of mortified vanity and rage. 

She had never loved Lord Delmore, even 
when she believed him rich and great ; but 
now that she knew he was poor, she almost 
hated him. She looked on herself as a victim 
to his arts, though she had been quite as wilHng 
to be the deceiver as he was to deceive. But so 
it is ever : we condemn the faults by which we 
suffer, but rarely pass a just sentence on those 
we commit ourselves, or pity the consequences 
they entail. 

Lady Delmore passed a sleepless night, the 
first she had ever yet known. The more she 



THE REPEALERS. 117 

reflected on her future prospects, the more 
gloomy did they appear. Accustomed from her 
infancy to consider money as the primum mobile 
of life, it had never for a moment entered her 
mind, that a possibility existed of her finding 
herself without it. She felt that the most 
attractive man, with the highest rank, could 
never have tempted her to marry, if she knew 
he were poor : and yet, with this worldly 
wisdom, to be united to a ruined man ; to 
have no means of indulging the extravagant 
tastes with which she had been brought up : — 
there was misery in the thought ! Lady Del- 
more had consoled herself for the coldness of 
her husband on their route, by anticipating 
future splendour. Dreams of her house, equi- 
pages, plate, diamonds, and Opera-box, had 
beguiled the weary hours of the journey ; and 
the triumph with which she should exhibit them 
to the envious eyes of her sister, had added 



118 THE REPEALERS. 

poignancy to the pleasure they aflPorded in 
contemplation. But all these gay visions faded 
away before the fearful reality of poverty that 
her alarmed fancy now conjured up ; and the 
supercilious smiles or mock pity of her sister 
were mingled in all the pictures her imagina- 
tion formed of the future. 

After much reflection she decided, that the 
wiser plan would be for them to conceal their 
embarrassments as long as they could, as Mr. 
Vernon would be more likely to make them 
some advance, the less he was aware of its ab- 
solute necessity. Pride and ostentation might 
induce him to present a portion to the rich 
Lord Delmore, that the needy son-in-law had 
no chance of receiving; for if there was one 
thing on earth that Mr. Vernon detested more 
and pitied less than another, it was poverty. 
He viewed it, not as a misfortune, but as a 
crime, and carefully avoided all contact with 
those he suspected of being stamped by it. 



THE REPEALERS. 119 

" No ! no !'' said Lady Delmore to herself, 
" if he discovers our ruin, we have nothing to 
hope from him ; and my sister will aggravate 
our misfortunes. From my brother I must not 
expect sympathy : my mother is the only one 
in that gilded palace who will feel for me." 

This was the first moment for years that 
an affectionate sentiment towards her mother 
had entered the heart of Lady Delmore. Self- 
ish and worldly-minded herself, all her sym- 
pathies had been with her father ; but now 
that trouble had overtaken her, and poverty 
menaced her with its train of evils, she turned 
towards the gentle and generous being she had 
hitherto shghted and undervalued. 

Lady Delmore attired herself with care next 
day, and stepped into the well-appointed cha- 
riot, emblazoned with the coronet she had so 
long sighed for; and, as the two footmen in 
splendid liveries jumped up behind, and the 
coachman drove off from Thomas's Hotel to 



120 THE REPEALERS. 

Carlton Gardens, she almost forgot her cares in 
the pleasure of exhibiting this tasteful equi- 
page and its aristocratic decorations to her 
sister. 

When the servants at her father"'s house an- 
nounced the Countess of Delmore, she assumed a 
dignified air, as she passed through the file of 
powdered menials, and was sho^vn into the 
library, where she found her father, brother, 
and sister. They received her civilly, but 
coldly : her father, after touching her cheek 
with his, addressed her as follows : — 

" I do not reproach you. Lady Delmore, 
with the indecorous manner in which you have 
accomplished a marriage, that, if suitable in 
point of fortune, could have met with no ob- 
stacle from me, to render such a clandestine 
step necessary. I repeat, I do not reproach 
you, and for two reasons : the first, that it 
would be now useless; and the second, that 



THE REPEALERS. 121 

its consequences can affect only yourself, and 
can be nothing to me.'** 

The new Countess drew up with a hauteur 
which led her father to believe that Lord Del- 
m ore's finances were in a more flourishing state 
than he had been led to imagine, from the 
result of the inquiries he had instituted ; and, 
as Mr. Vernon was one of those who believed, 
judging from his own feehngs, that hauteur 
was a certain sign of wealth, this belief in- 
duced him to show a little more cordiality to 
his daughter, which increased in proportion 
to her airs of affected dignity. Her brother 
and sister went through the same ceremony of 
kissing her cheek. The former carelessly de- 
manded where was Delmore, and she coldly 
replied, that Lord Delmore was gone to call 
on the Premier. 

Having asked for her mother, Miss Vernon 
conducted her to the boudoir, and during their 

VOL. III. G 



122 THE REPEALERS. 

passage to it, made two or three spiteful ob- 
servations, which convinced her sister that she 
had lost none of her ill-nature. 

The reception from Mrs. Vernon was kind 
and affectionate : she embraced her daughter, 
who, as she felt herself pressed to the heart 
of her mother with a warmth so different from 
the reception she had experienced from the rest 
of the family, inwardly acknowledged, that 
goodness and virtue are the only props that 
fail not, even to the erring, when they seek 
them. 

" I am anxious to see your husband, my 
dear child," said Mrs. Vernon, " that we should 
no longer be strangers to each other. If, as 
I trust will be the case, he makes you happy, I 
shall love him as a son.'* 

The new-made wife sighed, as she felt how 
little was her chance of happiness; but she 
tried to look cheerful. 



THE REPEALERS. 123 

Determined to mortify her sister for the 
malicious sneers she had detected on her coun- 
tenance. Lady Delmore remarked, that now 
she was a married woman, she would chaperone 
her when she liked ; adding, that Lord Del- 
more's high and extensive connexions would, 
of course, widely extend the circle of her ac- 
quaintance. With true parvenu bad taste, she 
dwelt on the different Dukes, Duchesses, Mar- 
quises, and Marchionesses, who were the near ^ 
relations of her lord, and with whom she should 
henceforth live ; while her sister sat listen- 
ing, ready to burst with envy and jealousy, 
the effusions of which she could scarcely 
suppress. 

When Lady Delmore arose to depart, she 
asked Miss Vernon if she was disposed for 
a drive, and the latter having consented, with- 
drew to prepare for it. Mrs. Vernon beckoned 
her daughter to her chair, and taking her hand 
G 2 



124f THE REPEALERS. 

with affection, addressed her in the following 
terms : — 

" I have learned from authority I cannot 
doubt, my dear child, that Lord Delmore's 
affairs are in a most embarrassed state. This 
gives me great pain, because your father is not 
likely to behave as generously as circumstances 
may demand. I have concealed this informa- 
tion from the family, trusting that he may be 
induced to give you a portion, before he knows 
how much it may be required ; for, alas ! his 
liberality is more likely to be displayed before 
than after such a knowledge. You may be 
well assured how much gratification it would 
afford me to urge your interests with him ; but 
you know how little influence I possess. Ac- 
cept this gift, which may be useful," (putting 
a little note-case into her daughter's hand,) 
" and recollect, that though my means are not 
equal to my wishes of assisting you, I have 



THE REPEALERS. 125 

always the power, as far as a few hundreds may 
be of use." 

The stubborn heart of Lady Delmore was 
moved by the affectionate consideration and 
soothing manner of her mother ; and when she 
embraced her, a tear — the first one of filial 
affection she had ever shed — was transferred 
to the cheek of her mother, who hailed it as 
a symptom of natural feeling, that promised 
future good. 

" Have you heard of the approaching mar- 
riages of your cousins," asked Mrs. Vernon, 
'' to the Marquis of Tadcaster and Lord Durn- 
ford ? All is arranged. Your aunt Vernon 
is more bustling and important than ever, and 
seems highly elated at the prospect of her 
daughter's being a Marchioness : but your 
cousin is the same sweet, frank, unaffected crea- 
ture as ever. My sister, though with every 
reason to be satisfied with the prospects of her 



126 THE REPEALERS. 

daughter, feels the approaching separation from 
her most deeply, and is only consoled by Lord 
Durnford's promise of spending a certain por- 
tion of the year with them in the country." 

Miss Vernon having entered prepared for 
their drive, Lady Delmore took leave of her 
mother, and affecting an air of protection to- 
wards her sister, they entered the carriage. 

Not a syllable of approbation of the elegant 
equipage passed the lips of Miss Vernon, which 
encreased the spleen of her sister, who revenged 
herself by saying, " So, mamma tells me, that 
Eliza Burrell is to be married immediately 
to Lord Durnford. It 's a famous match for 
her; for he is rich, good-looking, and of an 
ancient family. I saw from the first moment 
that he was desperately in love with her. Your 
meeting with them, I^ouisa, will be very awk- 
ward at first." 

" Not more so than your's with Lord Tad- 
caster,'* spitefully answered Miss Vernon. 



THE REPEALERS. 121 

" Oh, c'est toute une autre affaire,'''' said 
Lady Delmore ; "for as I am married, and 
married first, there can be no awkwardness, at 
least on my side, though he may be suspected 
of being delaisse,'''' 

" I can assure you,'' said Miss Vernon, " it 
is universally well known, that he never had 
the least intention of proposing to you, and it is 
as universally suspected, that you eloped with 
Lord Delmore in anticipation of Tadcaster's 
marriage." 

Lady Delmore felt the blood rush to her 
cheeks, and anger rise in her breast, at this 
speech of her sister's, which she had drawn on 
herself by the wish of piquing that sister, and 
was as deeply offended as if the ill-natured 
observation was wholly unprovoked. 

" Those who communicated such impertinent 
remarks to a sister,"" replied she, " must have 
had a poor opinion of her sisterly feelings." 
Miss Vernon, not knowing what to reply to 



128 THE REPEALERS. 

this severe reproof, affected to be occupied in 
looking at the visiting-Hst in her hand. 

Determined to exhibit her coroneted carriage, 
Lady Delmore ordered her servants to drive 
up St. James's-street, and arrived opposite to 
the formidable battery of eyeglasses levelled 
from ' White's' and ' Crockford's"* just as Lord 
Delmore was descending the steps of the for- 
mer. She drew the check-string, and the 
coachman pulled-up nearly at the door of 
" White's.""* A sentiment of bienseance and 
conveyance in the mind of her husband dis- 
gusted him with the want of delicacy, of her 
thus exhibiting herself in public so recently 
after her marriage, the clandestine manner 
of which had excited such an esclandre; and 
stopping in full view of the formidable bay, 
or rather let us call it beau-Wmdovf , "' the cyno- 
sure of curious eyes," where pretensions and 
reputations are tried by the fiery ordeal of 



THE REPEALERS. 1^ 

high-seasoned anecdotes, racy bons mots, and 
piquant descriptions, the agreeable results of 
the leisure hours of its aristocratic frequenters. 
He anticipated all that would be thought and 
said of the unblushing bride ; and anger at the 
ridicule it would subject him to, was added to 
the other unloving feelings she excited within 
his breast. 

Miss Vernon being seated at the far-ofF side, 
and Lady Delmore stooping forward, he did 
not observe the former until he had uttered — 
" What the devil, Lady Delmore, can make 
you exhibit yourself, like a Lady Mayoress, so 
publicly, and, above all, stop to place yourself 
under the fire of ' Whitens' and ' Crock ford's ?'' 
Remember you are still a bride.*" 

At this moment Miss Vernon advanced her 

head and the tip of her finger towards Lord 

Delmore, who coloured on perceiving that she 

had been a Hstener to his unlover-like address 

g5 



130 THE REPEALERS. 

to his wife ; and the polite inquiries he made 
after her health and that of Mrs. Vernon offer- 
ed a curious contrast to the unceremonious and 
sarcastic speech to Lady Delmore. 

While she was replying to it, two vulgar- 
looking men approached, and, rudely pushing 
by Lord Delmore, requested the ladies to leave 
the carriage, as they had seized it under exe- 
cution. 

" What does all this mean ?" gasped Lady 
Delmore to her husband, whose cheeks became 
nearly purpled with the mingled feelings of 
rage and shame. 

" Leave the carriage," said he with angry 
impatience, irritated almost to madness by the 
consciousness that many eyes were fixed on 
them. 

During this disgraceful exhibition, Lady 
Delmore descended in fear and trembling, over- 
powered by shame and mortification, as she 



THE REPEALERS. 131 

observed the crowd of idle gazers assembling 
round them ; but Miss Vernon declared, she 
would not, could not leave the carriage, as she 
was unprepared for walking. 

Lord Delmore could have annihilated her, 
for the delay this caused ; the crowd was every 
moment increasing ; vulgar jokes were passing 
all around them, and yet she still persevered 
in her determination of not leaving the carriage. 

" I am Miss Vernon, the daughter of Mr. 
Vernon — the rich Mr. Vernon — of Carlton 
Gardens ; drive me to my father's door, and 
I will give you five pounds, and 3^ou may then 
do what you like with the carriage.'" 

" If she be Miss Vernon, how comes she 
in this here carriage .?" said one of the by- 
standers : " Mr. Vernon, I warrant, has more 
crowns in his purse than on his carriage, and 
would never go for to let anything belonging to 
him be seized for debt." 



lo^ THE REPEALERS. 

" Oh ! that there carriage belongs to one of 
them there Lords as never pavs nobody, as 
eTerjbodj knows. I "m certain sure there ""s 
more silver on the harness than in the master's 
pocket.^ 

This witty remark elicited peals of laughter 
from the crowd, and nearly infuriated Lord 
Delmore. The footmen with their canes en- 
deavoured to keep off the mob. wiio were 
pressing on Lord and Ladj Delmore. uttering 
a thousand low comments on her toilette^ which. 
being a costume of la dernier mode de Paris, 
was little calculated for any promenade but 
en voilure. 

" My eyes !*" cried one, *' how smart she 
he's ; I wonder what she calls them there gira- 
cracks I'' — " What nice shoes for the mud !*" 
said another. — ^* And that there chap of a Lord, 
who looks so proud and vexed ; but he was 
not too proud to run in debt, and try to cheat 



THE REPEALERS. 133 

his creditors, for all he 's so proud, and so 
vexed, now that they take his gingerbread 
coach, with all his crowns on it, from him, and 
make his fine lady use her legs." 

•' Will you, or will you not, leave the car- 
riage, Miss Vernon ?" almost screamed Lord 
Delmore. 

'' No, certainly not," replied the 3'oung lad\', 
'•it would be too shocking to walk in St. James"'s- 
street, and papa would never forgive it." 

Lord Delmore seized the arm of his trem- 
bling wife, and hurried her awav from the 
spot, followed by a few of the rabble, who pur- 
sued them to the door of Thomas's Hotel. 
Lady Delmore, on entering her room, sank into 
a chair in violent hvsterics. and her unfeelino- 
husband, having rung for her maid, left her, 
muttering *' curses not loud, but deep," on 
himself, his wife, and her whole familv. 

The bailiffs having consulted together, agreed 



134 THE REPEALERS. 

that five pounds divided between them, was not 
to be rejected; and, having jumped up behind 
the carriage, dispossessing the powdered and 
laced footmen of their places, they drove oflf* 
to Carlton Gardens, followed by the shouts and 
laughter of the crowd, who passed a thousand 
bitter jests on the footmen, who, humiliated and 
angry, pursued the carriage on foot. 

Mr. Vernon was descending from his car- 
riage, when the equipage, which had flattered 
liis vanity two hours before, arrived at his 
door, and the motley effect of two ill-dressed 
men, instead of the spruce footmen, astounded 
him . Though the coachman had driven quickly 
to escape from the mob, many of them now 
entered the aristocratical precincts of Carlton 
Gardens, shouting in triumph at having over- 
taken the carriage. 

Her father'^s servants assisted Miss Vernon 
to alight, and the bailiffs, impressed with re- 



THE REPEALERS. 135 

spect by the appearance of the house, and num- 
ber of servants in the hall, the English-like 
look of Mr. Vernon — that indescribable look, 
which carries " conviction strong as proof of 
holy writ," of wealth — " hoped as how Miss 
would not forget them there five pounds she 
had promised them. They were very sorry 
that they were obliged to stop the carriage ; 
but that same Lord Delmore was a very slip- 
pery chap, and they had been a'ter his car- 
riage and cab a long time. For the matter of 
that, there were fifty executions out against 
his property ; so Miss might see, that if they 
had not nabbed the coach, somebody else 
would ; and so Miss might see as how the law 
must take its course." 

Miss Vernon passed up the steps through 
the crowd, and the hall-door being closed, the 
bailiffs departed with the carriage, and Mr. 
Vernon demanded of his daughter the solution 



186 THE REPEALERS. 

of the mystery, bow she came to be alone in 
the carriage, and where her sister was ? With 
as httle feehng of dehcacy, as of pity for that 
sister, the young lady explained the whole 
transaction, and each word produced increased 
anger on the part of the proud and selfish 
father. 

" And all this happened in front of White's?'' 
said he ; " and you refused to leave the car- 
riage, by which you prolonged the expose, and 
directed the attention of a vulgar mob to my 
house, so that my name will be mixed up in 
this disgraceful business ! Whereas, had you 
left the carriage, and accompanied your sister 
on foot, my name would never have been 
brought forward. You have shown as little 
feeling as common sense in this business, and 
have proved that you are totally incapable of 
acting for yourself without compromising your 
family." 



THE REPEALERS. 137 

So saying, the angry father left the room, 
and sought his wife, to give her the painful 
intelligence, which exceeded even her worst 
fears of the state of Lord Delmore's affairs. 

" Here is a pretty affair, Mrs. Vernon," said 
he; "one of your daughters has married a 
ruined, beggarly Lord — is turned with igno- 
miny from his carriage, in the most public 
street in London ; and the other is such an 
idiot, that instead of going with her sister, she 
persists in remaining in the carriage, and re- 
turns to my door, followed by a mob, and 
escorted by bailiffs. This all comes of your 
false indulgence to them, which I always 
guessed would produce the worst conse- 
quences." 

Mrs. Vernon listened to him in silence, for 
she was well aware how useless any observa- 
tion of her''s would be, and she hoped, that 
if^ he exhausted his anger on her, he would 



138 THE REPEALERS. 

return to kinder feelings towards his unfortu- 
nate daughter. Lady Delmore. At length she 
ventured to insinuate the necessity of taking 
some step to assist to extricate Lord Delmore 
from his difficulties, but was stopped by the 
increased anger of her husband. 

" What !"" said he, " are you so weak and 
absurd as to believe that I will advance a 
guinea to a spendthrift, who has swindled my 
foolish daughter into a marriage ? No ! let 
them starve if they will ; I have done with 
them both. Never name the subject to me 
again :'' and so saying, he withdrew. 

Mrs. Vernon sent for Louisa to inquire the 
particulars ; and she related them without 
sparing a single painful circumstance, from the 
unfeeling address of Lord Delmore to her sis- 
ter, up to the moment that he, as she said? 
pulled her out of the carriage ; and the ma- 
lignant emphasis with which she related the 



THE REPEALERS. 139 

whole, shocked the feelings of her mother. 
Mrs. Vernon ordered the carriage, that she 
might go and comfort her daughter; and, ere 
she had time to ask Louisa to accompany her, 
that young lady excused herself, on the plea 
of having some music to practise — an excuse 
that was revolting to the affectionate heart of 
Mrs. Vernon. 

On arriving at Thomas's Hotel, she found 
Lady Delmore, with pale cheeks and swollen 
eyes, extended on the sofa. Her tears flowed 
afresh when her mother embraced her, and she 
wept on her bosom with uncontrollable anguish, 
while the pitying mother used every endeavour 
to console her. Having succeeded in restoring 
her to something like calm, Mrs. Vernon in- 
quired for Lord Delmore, and was shocked 
at discovering that he had left her daughter 
while she was in hysterics, and had not since 
returned to the room. This unfeeling conduct 



140 THE REPEALERS. 

disgusted her, and she rang the bell to request 
he might be searched for in his room, when the 
waiter, with a look of astonishment, declared, 
that Lord Delmore had set out for Dover 
twenty minutes before, leaving a letter, which 
was now produced, for Lady Delmore, but 
which, hearing that her Ladyship was ill, he 
had not delivered. 

The waiter having withdrawn, Mrs. Vernon 
tried to compose her daughter's agitated feel- 
ings, who, breaking open the seal, read the few 
lines the letter contained, when it fell from her 
trembling hand, and, turning deadly pale, she 
pointed to it, saying, " Read that, mother, for 
you can pity me, little as I deserve it.'"* 

The heartless writer avowed, that he was 
about to desert for ever a wife whom he had 
only wedded for the sake of the portion he sup- 
posed ber to have. He told her she must 
blame her low-born parvenu father for the 



THE REPEALERS. 141 

separation, as, had he given them a suitable 
provision, he (Lord Delmore) would not have 
left England. He added, that on handing her 
from the carriage, a note-case had dropped from 
her hand, of which he had possessed himself, 
and, discovering that it contained Bank-notes 
to the amount of five hundred pounds, he had 
appropriated them to his use, being the only 
price he was ever likely to receive for the coro- 
net with which he had encircled her brows. 
" After the exhibition of the morning,'' he con- 
tinued, " it would be impossible for him to 
appear in London ; and he concluded she would 
of course return to her father, who must con- 
sole her and himself with the ancient name 
engrafted on the parent stock, and support 
her, as it was impossible for him to make her 
any allowance." 



H2 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER X. 

'' The gods in bounty work up storms about us, 
That give mankind occasion to exert 
Their hidden strength, and throw out into practice 
Virtues that shun the day, and lie conceal'd 
In the smooth seasons and the calms of life." 

" I will bear it 
With all the tender sufF'rance of a friend, 
As calmly as the wounded patient bears 
The artist's hand that ministers his cure." 

Mrs. Vernon felt her tenderness for her 
unfortunate daughter redoubled by the pity 
with which she now regarded her ; and Lady 
Delmore, for the first time, became sensible 



THE REPEALERS. 145 

of her past selfishness and folly, and grateful 
for the sympathy and affection of her mother. 
The unfeeling conduct and despicable mean- 
ness of her husband filled her with shame and 
contempt, and she avowed that she merited 
all that had befallen her for having eloped 
with him. 

Mrs. Vernon, though fearful of the reception 
Lady Delmore might meet with from her fa- 
ther, still thought it absolutely necessary that, 
deserted as she was by her husband, she should 
return to the paternal roof, and having given 
orders to the femme-de-chambre to remove her 
mistress's things from the hotel to Carlton Gar- 
dens, she took her daughter home with her 
in the carriage. 

" If your father does not behave as kindly 
as we could wish," said the good mother, '* my 
excellent sister will receive you as if you were 
her own child ; and I can supply you with all 



144 THE REPEALERS. 

the pecuniary assistance you require until your 
father relents, and makes, as I am sure he 
eventually will, a suitable provision for you. 
So pray be comforted, my dear child, and bear 
this trial with patience." 

The reception of Lady Delmore by her father 
was, as Mrs. Vernon had predicted, harsh and 
unkind, and her sister showed nearly as little 
good feeling. Mr. Vernon's ambition and ava- 
rice had deadened all natural affection in his 
breast ; he looked on his children as so many 
available means of extending his grandeur by 
their intermarrying with noble and rich part- 
ners ; but the moment this expectation was frus- 
trated, his dislike became much more marked 
than his affection had ever been for the child 
that had so disappointed him. 

The kindness and sympathy of her mother 
was Lady Delmore**s only source of consolation 
under all the mortifications to which she was 



THE REPEALERS, 145 

continually subjected ; but that kindness had 
operated a total change in her character. She 
learned to reflect on her own errors, and to 
deplore them, to conquer the egotism that had 
hitherto governed her ; and almost disarmed the 
malignity of her sister by the patience with 
which she now supported its symptoms, instead 
of, as in former days, resenting, or provoking 
fresh attacks. 

Happy are they whom misfortune awakens 
to a sense of their errors ! Even the best must 
own that patience and resignation are the pil- 
lars of human peace on earth ; for — 

" How poor are they that have not patience ! 
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?" 

Patience is thrice blessed, giving and receiving 
good ; it disarms anger, or enables us to sup- 
port its stings and arrows, and we feel after 
each trial, through which it has supported us, 
VOL. in. H 



14(3 THE REPEALERS. 

an internal satisfaction that carries balm to the 
heart. 

Mrs. Vernon rejoiced in the change in her 
daughter's character, but deplored the unfortu- 
nate marriage that led to it ; yet, can anything 
be deemed unfortunate that leads to such re- 
sults ? — and Lady Delmore often told her mo- 
ther, that perhaps without the rude trial that 
opened her eyes to her own defects, she might 
have continued as selfish and frivolous as be- 
fore. When Mr. Vernon and her sister pointed 
out to her the satirical notices in the newspapers 
of the arrest of the carriage in St. James's- street, 
and the flight of Lord Delmore for the Con- 
tinent, commenting on them with severity, and 
blaming her as the cause of all, she meekly 
acknowledged that she was, and added with 
humility that she should never cease to remember 
her error with sorrow. Even the obtuse father 
refrained from reproaching her, and by degrees 



THE REPEALERS. 147 

began to treat her with something as like kind- 
ness as his harsh nature was capable of; and 
her sister forbore taunting her when she found 
her taunts unanswered. 

It was not without violent and unceasing 
efforts over her naturally irritable temper that 
Lady Delmore had achieved this conquest of it. 
Religion was called in to her aid ; and when 
was religion ever invoked in vain, if sought with 
humility of heart ? 

" True religion 
Is always mild, propitious, and humble ; 
Plays not tlie tyrant, plants no faith in blood, 
Nor bears destruction on her chariot-wheels. 
But stoops to polish, succour, and redress." 

Lady Delmore made it the guide of her actions 
and the regulator of her thoughts; it led her to 
judge others with indulgence, and herself only 
with severity. 

Mrs. Vernon now found that she had re- 
h2 



148 THE REPEALERS. 

covered a daughter when she had least expected 
such a blessing, and by means the least likely, 
according to human experience, to accomplish 
such a change — the marriage of that daughter 
with a dissolute man of fashion. The ways 
of Providence are inscrutable, and out of evil 
is good often produced. 

The day that Mrs. Henry Vernon came to 
invite her broth er-in-law''s family to be pre- 
sent at the nuptials of her daughter, an invita- 
tion which she determined on giving in person, 
that she might enjoy the malicious pleasure of 
seeing their mortification, was indeed a trying 
day to Mr. and Miss Vernon, who were as jea- 
lous, and envious in heart, as even Mrs. Henry 
Vernon could desire. She apologized for not 
having come more frequently to see them lately, 
particularly knowing the annoyance they must 
all have had in the very unfortunate marriage of 
their elder daughter — hoped Louisa would be 



THE REPEALERS. 149 

more fortunate. Apropos to Louisa : the jewels 
Ordered for their cousin, Miss Burrell, were 
only inferior in splendour to those presented 
to her daughter, by the Marquis of Tadcaster. 

Louisa became pale with rage at this mal- 
apropos drawing in of the marriage of Miss Bur- 
rell, as apropos to her. She felt all the malice 
of it, and her aunt rejoiced that she did so. " I 
have been so occupied,*" said the spiteful Mrs. 
Henry Vernon, " in receiving and returning the 
visits of all the Marquis's family, that I have 
not had a moment to myself. To be sure, they 
are delightful people, though perhaps I am 
partial in my judgment of them, as .\iey are so 
kind and attentive to me, that I should be 
ungrateful if I did not highly esteem them. 
The Duchess of Montressor is to present my 
daughter, the future Marchioness of Tadcaster, 
at Court, and it is expected that her diamonds 
will be the finest of the season."" The parvenu 



150 THE REPEALERS. 

lady, talking of diamonds as she would of green 
peas ! " The family jewels of the Marquis are 
esteemed among the finest in England, and he 
has made considerable additions to them lately. 
My daughter wished to prevent his doing so, 
but he was obstinate ; and a young man of sixty 
thousand a year, and in love for the first time, 
may be allowed to be a little extravagant on 
such an occasion. Certainly my daughter has 
reason to be flattered by his preference, when 
one thinks of all the young ladies that were 
trying to attract him," (fixing her eyes on Lady 
Delmore's face, who felt herself blush, not 
with anger, but shame, as she remembered her 
efforts to entrap him.) *' But," continued the 
loquacious lady, " he declares he never felt 
the slightest preference before ; indeed, the 
Duchess of Montressor tells me the same. Mr. 
Henry Vernon wished to make a splendid 
present to our daughter, a present worthy a 



THE REPEALERS. 151 

Marchioness, and probably a future Duchess ; 
but as among the Marquis's family jewels, 
there are suits of rubies, emeralds, sapphires, 
pearls, onyxes, opals, and turquoises, we hardly 
knew what to do ; so I luckily thought of 
having a Marchioness's coronet in diamonds, 
which we have ordered, and a river of dia- 
monds for her neck. Part of the trousseau 
is coming from Paris, and the rest is from 
Howell and James's, in Regent Street. The 
pocket-handkerchiefs cost ten guineas each ; 
the coronets are embroidered in dead gold, and 
have a beautiful effect; indeed, I like a Mar- 
quis's coronet so much, that I shall be almost 
sorry when my daughter changes it for a ducal, 
though ' Your Grace' does sound very well." 

Mrs. Henry Vernon scarcely allowed time for 
a word from any of the family, and w^as elated 
at observing the depression of their looks ; 
" Would you believe it," said she, turning to 



152 THE REPEALERS. 

her sister-in-law, " Mr. Henry Vernon, instead 
of rejoicing in our daughter's making such a 
splendid marriage, is quite in low spirits at 
the idea of her leaving us. I tell him that this 
is much too absurd, for surely no one wishes to 
have his daughters left season after season on 
his hands," (giving a spiteful look around her.) 
"But what is more extraordinary is, that my 
daughter, though very much attached to the 
Marquis, bursts into tears every time that 
her separation from us is referred to : this 
comes from the folly of Mr. Henry Vernon, 
who has always accustomed himself and her to 
be in a great degree dependent on each other 
for happiness, just as if they could be always 
together, and now they can't bear parting." 

Having exhausted all the bavardage, with 
which she came freighted, she prepared to de- 
part, and once more inviting them to the nup- 
tials, she added, " But if it would be too pain- 



THE REPEALERS. 153 

ful to Lady Delmore's feelings to witness a 
marriage, so soon after her own unfortunate 
one, I will not press her to come ; though, 
to be sure, a marriage by special licence, the 
ceremony performed by an archbishop, and in 
a splendid drawing-room, could not be like a 
Gretna Green wedding." And so saying, she 
hurried away, declaring she had a thousand 
things to do, but paused at the door of the 
boudoir, to tell Miss Vernon that she need not 
be afraid of meeting Lord Durnford at the mar- 
riage, as, out of delicacy to her feelings, they 
had not asked him ; and like a Parthian she 
fled, throwing her arrow behind. 

The rage of Mr. and Miss Vernon broke 
forth the moment that she who had excited 
it was out of hearing, and there was no 
term of reproach that they did not bestow on 
her. They forgot all the provocations they 
had given the narrow-minded and spiteful 
h5 



154 THE REPEALERS. 

woman ; but Mrs. Vernon and Lady Delmore, 
who remembered them, were less surprised, 
though equally pained by her obtuse indelicacy. 
Mr. Vernon declared his decided resolution of 
not attending the marriage himself, or allowing 
any of his family to go : a resolution which he 
adhered to, and which gave his unamiable 
sister-in-law the opportunity of telling her 
confidential friends, that the jealousy and envy 
of the Carlton Garden family were so great, 
that they could not support being present at 
the ceremony. The satisfaction of propa- 
gating this belief, amply consoled her for their 
absence from the nuptials. 



THE REPEALERS. 155 



CHAPTER XI. 

" Dublin, I love thee, though with spires ill crovvn'd, 
But hate thy joy-bells' melancholy sound, 
And loathe the ill-dressed, idle, brazen crew, 
That prowling through thy unswept streets I view, 
Ripe for rebellion, spurning order — law ; 
The maddest, wittiest wights the world e'er saw." 

From Howth to Dublin the route excited 
the admiration of Lord and Lady Oriel. Fine 
points of view presented themselves at every 
fresh turn ; and the sea spreading out as a vast 
mirror to reflect the beautiful coast, added to 
the charms of the scene, which was sadly con- 
trasted by the uncountable shoals of beggars 



156 THE REPEALERS. 

that assailed the carriages at every side, cla- 
morous and persevering beyond all that they 
had yet experienced. The}^ were struck with 
the beauty of the streets ; but were not pleased 
with the pedestrians that filled them, a race 
new to English eyes, appertaining neither to 
the upper nor lower class, and affecting a 
swagger and air of idle impudence, that de- 
noted they belonged not to the middling class, 
which is in general the most truly respectable 
in all nations. 

"What are those people?" asked Lord 
Oriel of Mr. Desmond. " Are they professional 
men ? — though no ; their appearance indicates 
that they are not." 

" A dozen duels would be the inevitable 
consequence of your question," replied Mr. 
Desmond, " if any of the worthy individuals 
who have excited it, heard you. They call 
themselves Irish gentlemen, have a noble con- 



THE REPEALERS. 157 

tempt for business, and for the drudgery it en- 
tails, and occupy their leisure-hours in attending 
political meetings, each individual being per- 
suaded that, under the auspices of the Agitator, 
he may aspire to representing some county 
in Ireland in a British Parliament ; ' as sure 
his cousin Jack, or his friend Bill, has got 
into the House of Commons, and why should 
not he ?' Those who formerly bounded their 
ambition to some of the liberal professions, 
the church, the law, physic, or commerce, 
now despise such avocations ; and to be an 
M. P. seems to them a distinction too easily 
attained, not to be sought ; this has therefore 
become the end and aim of all their pursuits. 
They look on the Agitator as the Corypheus 
who is to lead them to glory, and are too short- 
sighted to see that he is destroying the country 
he affects to protect. Poor Ireland is indeed 
fallen ; and the specimens she sends over to 



158 THE REPEALERS. 

England to sow the seeds of dissension in the 
ParUament, and to reap the harvest in the 
fields, prove alike her degradation. When I 
last visited the House of Commons," continued 
Mr. Desmond, " I could not name half-a-dozen 
of the new Irish members. I looked in vain for 
influential men of property or station, men 
whose grandfathers or fathers were known to 
me, or whose names at least were familiar to 
my ear ; but I could see only O'Blarney and 
his proteges, ready to vociferate against Eng- 
land, and endeavouring to arouse the turbu- 
lent to assist them by appeals to their pas- 
sions." 

The party found apartments ready for them 
at Morison's Hotel, and were gratified by the 
cleanliness and comfort of the house, and the 
attention of the master and his assistants. 
Having left their names at the Castle, an in- 
vitation to dinner was sent them for the next 



THE REPEALERS. 159 

day, and a select party of the elite of the 
Dublin fashionables were assembled to meet 
them. 

The Marquis of Mona, undismayed by all 
the misrepresentations so industriously circu- 
lated to decrease his popularity in Ireland, 
continued to discharge his duty there with a 
courage and calmness as remarkable as that 
he evinced when, after the memorable and 
glorious battle of Waterloo, he submitted to 
the operation of amputation without wincing, 
showing that he was no less distinojuished for 
mental than for bodily courage. Lord Oriel 
observed to Mr. Desmond, that with all his 
preconceived opinion of the high courage and 
generosity of the Irish character, he thought 
it would have been impossible for the Go- 
vernment to have chosen a nobleman more cal- 
culated to suit them than the Marquis of Mona. 

The most agreeable part of the Dublin so- 



160 THE REPEALERS. 

ciety is that to which strangers, making a short 
stay, have the least chance of being admitted. 
It consists of the gentlemen of the Irish bar, 
who are as remarkable for their wit and other 
agreeable qualities as for their hospitality ; and 
the few families to whom Mr. and Mrs. Desmond 
presented Lord and Lady Oriel, gave them 
a most favourable impression of that circle. 

They found Lord and Lady Abberville con- 
stant visitors at the Cr.stle and the Phoenix 
Park ; the noble lord intruding his opinions 
on the Vice-^roy and Secretary, unmindful of 
the little attention they received, and my 
lady trying to make herself useful to the Mar- 
chioness of Mona, whose dignified mind shrank 
from the intriguante with instinctive dread, and 
whose ears were closed to the innuendoes, scan- 
dalous stories, and malicious tales, she sought 
to instil into them, against all whose recep- 
tion she wished to preclude. 



THE REPEALERS. 161 

" And so, after all," said Lady Abberville to 
the Marchioness, " Lord and Lady Oriel are 
living together. Well, some men can bear any- 
thing, and he must be wilfully blind. She really 
must have good nerves to present herself so 
unblushingly, after her affair with Lord Del- 
more ; and the Desmonds and Forresters, for 
moral people, are very indulgent.'" 

Lady Mona changed the subject, with a 
coldness of manner that marked her disap- 
proval; and the wily Lady Abberville, who 
quickly saw she had done wrong in attacking 
Lady Oriel, dexterously shifted her ground, 
by observing, that she had been out of Eng- 
land all the time, and only heard of the affair 
through the papers, and from the letters of 
Lady Welborough and Lady Nottingham, who, 
she must say, were a little disposed to be 
spiteful on such occasions. For her part, she 
had always liked Lady Oriel, and thought her 



162 THE REPEALERS. 

a very charming person, and therefore she 
should pay her all the attention in her power, 
especially as her dear Lady Mona was a friend 
of hers. 

The Desmonds and Colonel Forrester were 
astonished to see the courage with which Lady 
Abberville advanced and seized Lady Oriel's 
hand, and proclaimed her delight at seeing 
her in Ireland ; trusted she would spend some 
time with Lord Abberville and herself at their 
seat ; for though Lady Oriel would find no 
place in Ireland like Oriel Park, still if she 
could be content with more homely accommo- 
dation, they would make up in the heartiness 
of their welcome, for what they wanted in 
splendour. She said, she had felt delighted 
at the marriaoe of Colonel Forrester to their 
charming neighbour; it was so gratifying to 
have an English person settled at Spring- 
Mount ; one who would certainly do much 



THE REPEALERS. 

good ; for poor Mr. Desmond, though the best 
man in the world, was a Httle obsolete in his 
notions, and could not enter into the true cha- 
racter of the Irish people. She had made the 
Lord Lieutenant au fait of the real state of 
the country, and he had profited very much 
by her suggestion ; but still he seemed strangely 
opposed to the building a barrack in their neigh- 
bourhood, the only plan that could tranquillize 
the country, and which she trusted Colonel 
Forrester would aid her in getting carried into 
effect. 

Lady Oriel was only relieved by the arrival 
of the gentlemen from the dining-room, when 
Lady Abberville left her to go and assail the 
Marquis of Mona, whose good-breeding was 
put to the test by the tiresome and persevering 
efforts of the manoeuvring lady, to carry her 
point of the barrack. There was not a country 
gentleman present of whom Lady Abberville 



164 THE REPEALERS. 

had not a request to make. Presentments to be 
passed, canals to be made, barracks to be built, 
and markets to be removed to some village 
of her Lord's, to force said village into a town 
— these were the subjects of her conversation 
to each ; and they seemed to dread her ap- 
proach as something that would draw them into 
present ennui and future trouble. Her legs 
seemed to be as active as her tongue, for she 
was to be seen as well as heard in every corner 
of the room ; and it was not until the car- 
riages were announced, that she ceased to en- 
treat, suggest, or cajole, whichever best suited 
the person addressed, on every point on which 
she required assistance. 

Lady Oriel, who had only seen her in Eng- 
land as the creature of the patronesses of the 
exclusive clique^ was surprised to view her in 
her new character : but the motive of her 
actions in both were the same — self-interest. 



THE REPEALERS. 165 

" If all Irish ladies were like Lady Abber- 
ville," said Lady Oriel to Mrs. Desmond, 
" how I should dread them ! There is no re- 
treating from her, and it is equally disagreeable 
to be treated by her as a friend or enemy."" 

" She is an odious person, I must admit," re- 
plied Mrs. Desmond, — " wwe V7'aie intriguante, 
deterred by no feelings of delicacy, and guided 
by no principle, save self-interest, in the pur- 
suit of her egotistical plans. I consider her 
vicinity to Spring-Mount its greatest draw- 
back ; but luckily, she only comes to Ireland 
when driven by necessity. Then while she is 
here, no post arrives that does not waft her 
over all the tittle-tattle of the clique she has left 
behind, and the harmless and silly niaiseries 
of her friends. Lady Welborough and Lady 
Nottingham are quoted to us, seasoned by the 
malice of the quoter, until they assume a mean- 
ing much more palpable than the ladies with 



166 THE REPEALERS. 

whom they originated ever intended they should 
bear ; for nothing passes through the mind or 
lips of Lady Abberville, without being tainted 
by the mechancete of her nature. She does 
so much mischief, that I cannot speak of her 
with the forbearance I wish to use ; and she is 
the only person in female form that Mr. Des- 
mond has an antipathy to." 

The party were invited to Marino, the beau- 
tiful residence of Lord and Lady Castelmont, 
the former the worthy successor of his noble 
and excellent father, and the latter as peerless 
in reputation as in beauty, offering a bright 
model of perfection in female virtue and love- 
liness. They passed a most agreeable day at 
Marino, and allowed that all they had heard of 
the charms of Irish hospitality exceeded not 
the reality. 

Their next visit was to Kilruddery, the fine 
seat of Lord Leath, beautifully situated near 



THE REPEALERS. 167 

Bray, where the beauty of the park, the solid 
elegance and comfort of the house, and the 
amiabihty of the owners, called forth their 
warmest approbation, and realized all they 
had imagined of the bon-hommie, and ease of 
manner of the Irish nobility, who unite all 
the advantages to be derived from other 
countries to the cheerfulness and warmth of 
heart peculiar to their own. 

An invitation from the Duke and Duchess of 
Cartoun, to visit Cartoun, was too tempting to 
be resisted ; and they were delighted with the 
frank and cordial reception that welcomed them 
from the excellent and patriotic Duke and his 
truly amiable Duchess. 

" What a delightful place Ireland would be 
to reside in," said Lord Oriel, " if the country 
was only tranquil ! And surely, the presence 
of all the Irish nobility, if they resemble the 
three families we have visited, could not fail 



168 THE REPEALERS. 

to have the happiest effect on the habits and 
minds of the people. I must say, that I blame 
the absentees for much of the mischief that has 
occurred ; though you, who have had more 
power of judging, look as if you differed from 
me. 

" I,^' replied Mr. Desmond, " look on ab- 
senteeism as a consequence, and not as a cause, 
of the troubles that have been so long and 
so loudly attributed to it. I know districts 
where the landed proprietors have constantly 
resided on their estates, doing all the good 
in their power ; and yet no sooner did the Agi- 
tator wave his sceptre, and his satellites work 
on the minds of the ignorant peasantry, than 
they shook oft* their allegiance to their old and 
tried friends, forgetful of years of benefits re- 
ceived, and unmindful of all, save the excita- 
tion of the moment. One of the noblemen we 
have visited, who has been a constant resident 



THE REPEALERS. 169 

on his estate, and who might serve as a model 
for landlords and neighbours, has had the mor- 
tification of seeing his son (a most amiable and 
enlightened young man) defeated in an elec- 
tion for a place he had represented honourably 
and conscientiously, and where his constituents 
could have no doubt of the zeal and honesty 
with which he would advocate their interest. 
There must be a reciprocity of benefits between 
landlord and tenant, to make the tie that unites 
them advantageous and lasting ; and if a land- 
lord knows that, notwithstanding years of kind-* 
ness and forbearance on his part, and apparent 
content on that of his tenants, any popular 
excitement may turn them against him, he 
has but little encouragement to remain in a 
land where a sense of duty is the only incite- 
ment. Nothing can tend so much to injure 
a country as the dissemination of dissensions 
between landlord and tenant, artfully leading 
SOL. in. I 



170 THE REPEALERS. 

both parties to suppose that their interests 
are separate; yet those who profess to be 
the friends of Ireland have invariably pur- 
sued this system, and its baleful effects are 
but too visible. You, my dear Lord Oriel, 
like all who judge of Ireland without a per- 
sonal knowledge of it, are disposed to think 
harshly of absentees; but few reflect on the 
misery of residing in a country where laws are 
trampled on, and murder and rapine stalk 
abroad in open day. An outcry is raised at 
every attempt that is made to coerce the law- 
less and turbulent, and to check them in their 
fearful career of crime. We hear that the 
liberty of the subject is violated — that a death- 
blow is aimed at the British Constitution ; but 
those who make this outcry forget, or at least, 
mention not, that not only the hberties, but the 
lives, of the respectable and peaceful subjects 
in Ireland are attacked every day, and that. 



THE REPEALERS. 171 

to preserve the liberty of the lawless — to leave 
them the power of slaying, flogging, and burn- 
ing, the respectable part are enslaved, and 
tremble under the reign of terror establish- 
ed by the infuriated people, who, goaded 
on to madness by the inflammatory speeches 
and letters addressed to their passions, com- 
mit the most fearful crimes. For myself," 
continued Mr. Desmond, " though abhor- 
ring the crimes of these infatuated people, I 
cannot abhor themselves — ' I love the off*enders, 
but detest the offence f and all my anger is 
against those who excite them to such deeds. 
Patriotism, love of liberty, devotion to country 
— sacred words, that ought never to be profaned, 
are the watchwords, the war-cry, to lead this 
unhappy people to murder, pillage, and de- 
struction ; and those who are compelled to vote 
for a political measure, which the exigence of 
the times demand, an exigence brought on by 
I 2 



172 THE REPEALERS. 

evil counsels, are denounced, by those who have 
reduced Ireland to this fearful crisis, as her 
worst enemies and enslavers, and pointed out 
to the vengeance of the misled populace. No 
country can be a fit residence for independent 
and honourable men, where the worst of all 
tyranny is established — that of brutal force, and 
where those who most love and worship liberty 
are forced to support measures that seem to 
assail it, in order to arrest the crimes com- 
mitted in her name. The Bill about to be 
passed in Parliament, furnishes ample subject 
for the attacks and reproaches of the faction 
who have rendered it necessary ; but if it did 
not pass, what would be the fate of the re- 
spectable and well-disposed class of the people 
in Ireland ? The question is, are the well- 
conducted and orderly to be left to the tender 
mercies of the infuriated miscreants who have 
taken the law into their own hands, or are 



THE REPEALERS. 173 

measures, strong and illegal as they may be 
considered, to be taken to protect the good, 
and check the bad ? Look at the run made 
on the banks for gold ; you see how soon the 
hint given on this subject was taken, and the 
unthinking people reflect not on the inevitable 
consequences which must draw an accumulation 
of distress and misery on their heads by de- 
pressing the markets, and deteriorating the 
value of the produce they have to sell. Every 
reaction following events of this kind is 
fraught with misery, and the senseless people, 
instead of opening their eyes to the cause, look 
only at the effect, and blame Government for 
the inevitable consequences of their own folly. 
The Irish have been accustomed to look up to 
the English as lovers of liberty and protectors 
of the oppressed ; this opinion, and the respect 
it produced, it has been the study of the faction, 
who have convulsed Ireland for the last few 



174 THE REPEALERS. 

years, to destroy, and the reason is obvious. 
If the sober-minded and influential class in 
England have opposed themselves to this fac- 
tion, as it was clear from the beginning they 
would, it became necessary to depreciate them, 
and extirpate all sympathy between them 
and the Irish, to prevent the latter seeing 
the real state of public opinion in England, 
with respect to their self-constituted rulers. To 
explain to the ignorant multitude why the 
Enghsh rose not en masse to support the Irish 
demagogues, it was necessary to misrepresent 
the nation, and have it imagined that, as they 
would not countenance murder, rapine, and all 
the excesses of licence, they no longer wor- 
shipped liberty." 



THE REPEALERS. 175 



CHAPTER XII. 

" Erin, thy verdant sea-girt shore 
Was never meant for slaves to tread. 
Though dimm'd are now the days of yore 
When monarch s for thee fought and bled, 
When know^ledge open'd her fair page, 
And glory wide her flag unfurl'd, 
Thou wert the boast of a past age, 
The bright gem of the western world. 
But faded is thy glory now. 
Nought but thy courage rests with thee ; 
A reckless courage that, I trow, 
Has led thee on to misery !" 

While visiting the beautiful environs of 
Dublin, Lord and Iiady Oriel remarked to each 
other, that it was strange so fine a city and so 
beautiful a country drew so few travellers to 
visit them. 



1T6 THE REPEALERS. 

" We English are strange people," said Lord 
Oriel. We should think it a reproach not to 
have seen every city in France and Italy, and 
not to have made ourselves familiar with the 
fine scenery of other countries. But how few 
of us are acquainted with Ireland ! and had we 
not been tempted by the desire of visiting our 
friends, we most probably never should have 
seen the romantic and fine country now before 
us, which, we must admit, is more worthy of 
admiration than many of those places which 
the wealthy and the idle travel thousands of 
miles to admire. 1 think this indifference to the 
beauties of Ireland, on the part of England, 
has done much to keep us in ignorance of the 
real state of the country, and consequently to 
prevent our having reflected on the best means 
of ameliorating the grievances under which she 
has loncp crroaned." 

«' I agree with you,"' said Mr. Desmond, 



THE REPEALERS. 177 

" for 1 have often deplored the ignorance of 
the members in both houses of Parhament 
on the subject of Ireland, — an ignorance which 
makes them listen ^vith disbelief to many state- 
ments founded on fact, and with credulity to 
too many founded on falsehood. That Ireland 
has long suffered from misrule, one must be 
sceptical to deny; that she has many griev- 
ances to complain of, it would be more than 
folly to refuse to believe : but, instead of 
searching to discover the original malady, and 
to remove it, anodynes and palliatives have 
been applied, which have only yielded a tem- 
porary relief, and the disease has burst forth 
with renewed force from the slumber it had 
taken. Opium can still and blunt the sense 
of pain ; but it removes not the cause, and 
the remedies applied to Ireland have been 
opiates from which she has awakened with in- 
creased excitability, the sense of suffering ren- 
I 5 



178 THE REPEALERS. 

dered more acute by the re-action arising from 
the temporary relief. It is not want of good-will, 
but want of knowledge, of which the persons 
who have treated the maladies of Ireland, are to 
be accused. They have not studied the idio- 
syncrasy of the country, which demands a 
knowledge and reflection that few of those 
who are capable, are disposed to give it. That 
Ireland has for centuries been mis-governed, 
no better proof can be given than the facility 
with which she yields to every ignorant and 
designing charlatan who wishes to try expe- 
riments on her : like the wretched invalid who is 
ready to submit to the remedies of every quack 
who prescribes for him. A sound constitution 
and healthy state would preclude such dan- 
gerous experiments ; and, instead of blaming 
the political charlatans who have practised 
on Ireland and fatted on her diseases, we 
should blame the supine negligence that has 
allowed the disease to make a progress so 



THE REPEALERS. 179 

appalling, as to throw the country into such 
hands. Had Ireland been properly governed, 
there would be no agitators, for without 
grievances they could not exist ; but hitherto 
the original malady has been overlooked while 
finding remedies for the dangerous symptoms ; 
and even now, the bill that arrests the pro- 
gress of murder, does nothing towards re- 
moving the irritation that gave the agitators the 
power of increasing the crime. Such conduct 
is like that of allowing a brain-fever to pursue 
its ravages on a patient, while we are content 
with confining him in a straight waistcoat ; we 
may prevent the effects of his own madness from 
bringing destruction on others, but we do not 
prevent the disease from destroying himself. 
The bill must therefore, be followed by mea- 
sures of wisdom and justice, and they can only 
be administered by a knowledge of the causes 
of the original evil. Ireland has had some of 
the most able and willing statesmen that Eng- 



180 THE REPEALERS. 

land could boast, as her secretaries, who, had 
they arrived in Ireland with only half the 
knowledge and experience relative to it with 
which they left it, might have done much 
to relieve the burthen under which she has 
writhed so long ; but certain peculiarities, the 
result of her grievances, render it more diffi- 
cult to acquire a correct knowledge of the true 
state of the country than can be imagined by 
those who are accustomed to plain and open 
dealing. Misrepresentations, taking the hue 
of every political faction, come pouring in on 
the Secretary on his arrival ; his ears, habituated 
to the matter-of-fact details of business of the 
veracity -loving English, are ill calculated to sift 
the grains of truth from the vast chaff of false- 
hood in which they are confounded ; and finding 
himself continually deceived, his credulity be- 
comes metamorphosed into its opposite extreme, 
and he who believed too much, learns to doubt 
too largely. Disgusted with the prevarications 



THE REPEALERS. 181 

and cunning he meets — which, by the by, are 
the invariable consequences of ill-treatment on 
weak and ignorant minds, — he learns but too 
often to despise those whom he had come to 
pity and to serve, and to consider their defects 
as the cause instead of the effect of their 
troubles." 

After a stay of ten days in Dublin, the 
party proceeded on their route to Spring- 
mount, and were much gratified by the beauty 
of the country through which they passed : hill 
and dale, and those beautiful mountains, clear 
streams, and rapid rivers, peculiar to Ireland, 
continuall}' called forth their admiration. The 
excellence of the provisions at the inns at 
which they stopped, surprised them ; and Lady 
Oriel declared that the butter was more de- 
licate and finely flavoured than any she had 
ever before eaten ; it looked and tasted as 
if the cows had fed only on buttercups and 
primroses. The slim-cake and hot griddle- 



182 THE REPEALERS. 

bread, luxuries to be had only in Ireland, 
met with great success ; and the newly laid 
eggs were pronounced to be so good, as to 
verify the Irishman's boast, that " sure it was 
only Irish hens that ever laid fresh eggs." 
The crimped salmon, with its white curdy 
veil, letting its rose-colour appear through, 
was allowed to be far superior to any English 
salmon they had ever tasted ; and the speckled 
trout, fresh from the water, was pronounced 
matchless. 

The air of cordial welcome with which the 
Desmond family were received at all the inns, 
might have led a satirical observer to recol- 
lect the lines ending with, " The warmest 
welcome always at an inn ;" but the present 
party attributed it, as in truth they ought, 
to the respect and regard entertained for 
them, and the " Och ! sure, 'tis we that are 
proud and contint, to see your honors back 



THE REPEALERS. 183 

again in the poor ould counthry," had a 
warmth that carried conviction of its sincerity. 

On passing over a common. Lady Oriel was 
surprised and shocked at seeing a flock of non- 
descript birds, resembling geese, but without 
feathers, trembling beneath the chill breeze 
that was wafted from the mountains. Being 
in a light open carriage, she called out to the 
postilion, " Pray, what are those birds .?" 

" Sure, plaise your honour's ladyship, they 
are geese, and they play h — 11 with 'em in 
this counthry, seeing as how they sell the 
clothes off their backs." 

There was no resisting this answer, and 
Lord and Lady Oriel laughed heartily at it, 
though the postilion added with a grave face, 
" Faith, it' s no laughing matther for the poor 
geese any way :" — a truth they were by no 
means disposed to doubt. 

Arrived at Capoquin, the beauty of the 



184 THE REPEALERS. 

scenery induced them to remain a day or two 
there, that they might explore it ; they had a 
boat to convey them over the limpid and 
rapid Black-water river, a misnomer, as the 
water is peculiarly clear, but which is said to 
have been so called from its banks having 
been once so thickly wooded that the dark 
trees threw a deep shadow over the river, 
nearly excluding the light — hence it was called 
black-water. 

They stopped to view Drumana, the ancient 
and beautiful seat of the noble family of Gran- 
dison, the last of whose earls resided there 
in a style of princely hospitality, and attracted 
many guests by private theatricals, to enact 
which he fitted up a very tasteful theatre. 
Our present King, then a midshipman, spent 
some days at Drumana, and entered into its 
gaieties with all the spirit and vivacity pecu- 
liar to his age and profession, leaving behind 



THE REPEALERS. 185 

him an impression that even still exists of the 
frankness, good humour, and condescension of 
Prince William Henry, as the old inhabitants 
still call his Majesty. Various anecdotes and 
bons-mots are repeated relative to this memo- 
rable visit, all highly flattering to the illus- 
trious visiter; and the persons who remember 
him, declare that they are quite sure that his 
Majesty, even though he is a king, does not 
forget the happy days he spent at Drumana, 
as a gay and frolic-loving reefer. 

" Och ! then, wasn't it a grand sight,"' said 
an old woman to the party, " to see a king's 
son, born and bred in palaces, sent to sea just 
like the child of any private gentleman, and 
treated no better, and just laughing and play- 
ing for all the world as if he had never 
seen any greater grandeur? Sure, we always 
thought that such great people never laughed 
or played themselves, but only kept others to 



186 THE REPEALERS. 

do it for 'em. But, faith. Prince William 
Henry showed us the contrary, for he was the 
first in every frolic, and long as it is since 
that happy time, I think even now I see him, 
with his rosy cheeks and laughing eyes, as 
gay as a summer's morning, with something 
kind to say to every person that came near 
him." 

" Ay, and something kind to do, too," inter- 
rupted the husband, " for I well remember he 
snatched a kiss from you, Peggy, which made 
me jealous enough at the time, though now I 
think it 's a great honour that my poor old 
woman should have been kissed by a king." 

" Don't be bragging, Davy," said the wife, 
" for sure the ladies can't believe that such a 
poor ould woman as I am, ever had so great an 
honour." 

" Ay, Peggy," said the husband, " sure the 
whole country round knows that you were the 



THE REPEALERS. 187 

prettiest girl in the barony, and what's more, 
the most modest and dacent; and there never 
was any grand company at the great house, but 
what the good Lord and Lady used to send for 
Peggy to show 'em an Irish beauty." 

" Well, Davy," said the old woman, " there's 
no remains of that now. It's only the heart 
that rests the same, and sure that 's for all 
the world Hke a large sound nut in a withered 
shell, where it hasn't room." 

" Never mind, my ould woman," said Davy, 
patting her on the shoulder with a look of in- 
effable affection ; " I wouldn't give the ould 
shell for the freshest and greenest husk that 
ever covered a filbert in the brown woods of 
Drumana." 

Nothing can be more picturesque or beautiful 
than Drumana. The house stands boldly on 
an eminence, commanding a view of the fine 
river that winds along its banks and almost 



188 THE REPEALERS. 

washes its base, and the woods around are 
crowned by mountains that give sublimity to 
the whole. Mr. Desmond had ordered a dinner 
peculiar to that part of the country, to be pre- 
pared in the grounds. It consisted of salmon 
caught for the occasion, and cut into large 
slices ; a fire of wood was kindled on a stone, 
and each piece of salmon on a long wooden 
skewer was stuck in the earth round the fire, 
and occasionally sprinkled with salt and water, 
and turned until roasted ; potatoes dressed a 
r Irlatidaise, and Black-water cyder, as sparkling 
as champaign, formed a repast that the English 
visiters declared to be one of the most delicious 
of which they had ever partaken ; and Peggy 
and her husband who superintended it, were 
delighted with the commendations it received. 

They returned to Capoquin to sleep in rooms 
breathing of lavender, it being the common 
custom in many parts of Ireland to keep quan- 



THE REPEALERS. 189 

tities of this fragrant flower dried in their 
presses and drawers: and the murmuring of 
the pellucid stream flowing under the windows 
of the inn soothed them into slumber. 

The next day they proceeded to Lismore, 
the whole route passing along the banks of 
the Black-water, and off'eriug the most richly 
wooded and romantic points of view. 

Perhaps there is nothing in Ireland more 
beautiful than the entrance to Lismore. The 
fine bridge, and picturesque castle above it, 
which overhangs the river at a height that 
makes the head grow dizzy to look down it ; 
the woods and mountains around, and the 
velvet lawns of the grounds of Mrs. Scott, 
off*er a picture rarely equalled, and never sur- 
passed. In this castle was born Robert Boyle, 
the celebrated philosopher, a circumstance that 
adds much to the interest with which it is 
viewed, and excites speculative surmises as to 



190 THE REPEALERS. 

how far the sublime and beautiful scenery 
around might have influenced the turn of his 
mind, even at the early age at which he left 
Lismore, to pursue his studies at Eton. 

The union of such powerful genius and 
talent such strong rehgious principles, sim- 
ple habits, and affectionate disposition, had 
always endeared the memory of this celebrated 
man to the persons who were now viewing the 
place where he first saw the light, and there 
was almost a religious reverence in the feelings 
with which they examined the venerable ruin. 
The present owner of Lismore, the Duke of 
Devonshire, is deservedly popular there ; he 
has expended large sums in improvement, and 
resided some months on the spot, where his 
kindness and extensive charities have left a 
warm sentiment of gratitude and attachment. 

The party arrived at Springmount on a fine 
summer's evening, when the sky and earth 



THE REPEALERS. 191 

wore their brightest looks, and the Oriels were 
charmed with the romantic beauty of the spot. 
Springmount was a castellated mansion, stand- 
ing on a gentle eminence, commanding a fine 
view of the river and adjacent country, and 
nearl}' embosomed in woods, surrounded by 
high mountains, losing themselves in the clouds. 
The fine and picturesque mountains in Ireland 
never fail to attract the admiration of those 
accustomed to the tamer scenery of England, 
and add peculiar beauty to the landscapes. 

The apartments at Springmount were spa- 
cious, and fitted up with a due regard to 
comfort and elegance. Pictures, statues, and 
vases, collected during the travels of Mr. Des- 
mond, who was not only an amateur, but a 
connoisseur in the fine arts, ornamented the 
salons; and an extensive and well-chosen li- 
brary offered resources of no ordinary kind 
to studious visiters. The principal rooms 



192 THE REPEALERS. 

opened on a terrace of tesselated marble, whence 
flights of steps descended to the pleasure- 
grounds, through which the limpid and rapid 
river hurried along its impetuous course, never 
pausing to admire the beauties it reflected on 
its glassy surface. A stone bridge of one arch, 
finely proportioned, and ornamented with a 
light balustrade of marble, was thrown across 
the river, and a pleasure-boat was moored near 
a picturesque boat-house for the amusement 
of the guests. A sunk fence of wide dimen- 
sions divided the pleasure-grounds from the 
deer-park ; but in wandering through the mazes 
of the former, the beautiful animals that 
sported free as air were visible, and gave a 
wildness and animation to the scene. Thrushes 
and blackbirds innumerable enlivened the um- 
brageous shades, and sent forth their notes 
of joy ; and the lonely Philomel, at eve, was 
heard to warble her melancholy song, while 



THE REPEALERS. 193 

the russet corn-creak, hopping like a partridge 
over the velvet lawns, repeated her clear, shrill 
cuckoo, which was echoed around till it died 
in distance. 

A repose reigned round Springmount that 
was delicious to those who had been shut up 
in the confined atmosphere of London. There 
is a peculiar lightness in the air in Ireland, 
whicli — whether it be attributable to the moun- 
tains, or to the Atlantic, we leave casuists to ex- 
amine — brings healing on its wings to the over- 
excited mind, as well as to the exhausted body ; 
and the visiters felt this benign influence, as 
with elastic spirits they arose, the morning after 
their arrival, to wander through the grounds, 
and admire the taste and judgment with which 
they were laid out. 

They entered the breakfast-room as the bell 
summoned them to that repast, and found a 
table plentifully piled with all the luxuries 

VOL. III. K 



194 THE REPEALERS. 

that Ireland can furnish. Honey, bright and 
sparkling as topaz, raspberry jam that might vie 
in tint with the ruby, fruit of every descrip- 
tion, and cream and butter such as Erin alone 
can produce, graced the board. 

After breakfast Mrs. Desmond and Mrs. For- 
rester proposed driving through the park, to 
show Lady Oriel the finest points of view ; and 
Mrs. Forrester requested that they might pass 
the gates and extend their drive to the cottage 
of Grace Cassidy. 

" You have shown us some good specimens 
of English peasantry," said Mrs. Forrester, 
" and I am impatient, dear Lady Oriel, to 
show you our choicest sample in Grace Cas- 
sidy." 

We pass over the drive through the really 
fine park, which had the usual quantity of 
stately trees to be found in old parks, but a 
very unusual inequality of ground, presenting 



THE REPEALERS. 195 

hill and dale, and lawns intersected with groups 
of trees, with the river winding through them, 
and glittering beneath the sunbeams, like a 
vast azure-coloured serpent, coiling itself along. 
Lady Oriel was delighted with the views and 
the country, and confessed that henceforth she 
should find all scenery tame that had not 
mountains to diversify them, so much did they 
add to the beauty of the landscape. 

Mrs. Forrester was gratified by the admi- 
ration her natal residence excited; and acknow- 
ledged that, much as she liked England, she 
always, while there, felt the want of her native 
mountains, and hailed them on her return as 
old and dear friends. 



K 2 



196 THE REPEALERS, 



CHAPTER XIII. 

" Now let us thank th' eternal Power ; convinced 
That heaven but tries our virtue by affliction : 
That oft the cloud which wraps the present hour, 
Serves but to brighten all our future days." 

When the landau stopped at the little gate 
of the rustic paling that inclosed the garden of 
Grace Cassidy from the road, she arose from 
her spinning-wheel, and came forth to receive 
the ladies. She wore her dark hair combed 
back from her high and open forehead, leav- 
ing her long and jetty brows uncovered ; a 
small mob cap, neatly plaited, and white as 



THE REPEALERS. 197 

snow, gave an almost Quaker simplicity to the 
character of her head ; her kerchief crossed her 
fair bosom, and the ends were confined by an 
apron, that nearly covered the pale blue cali- 
manco quilted petticoat, and left her small 
ankles and well-formed feet exposed. Her gown 
was of flowered chintz, the sleeves coming only 
to the elbows, and was open in front, so as to 
leave the petti'Joat in sight, the waist long, and 
the skirt plaited with fulness. A small collar of 
narrow black velvet lent additional whiteness 
to her fair throat, and black mittens half con- 
cealed her roundly-turned arms. She wore blue 
stockings, and silver buckles in her shoes ; and 
from her waist hung a silver chain to which was 
attached her pincushion, scissors, and key. 

Such was the holiday suit of Grace, who, 
anticipating the probability of the ladies passing 
by her cottage, and stopping to speak to her, 
had dressed herself in her best clothes, to do 



198 THE REPEALERS. 

honour to their presence. The delicacy and 
grace of her slim figure, the piquancy and ani- 
mation of her countenance, joined to her pic- 
turesque attire, rendered her a most attractive- 
looking person ; and Lady Oriel accused Mrs. 
Forrester for not having prepared her to ex- 
pect so much beauty ; declaring in French, 
to spare Grace's modesty, that she had " never 
beheld so pretty a peasant." 

" Och ! my honoured mistress and my dear 
young lady, what a happy day it is for me to 
see you back again ! My very heart jumps for 
joy." And seizing the hands held out to her 
by the two ladies, she pressed them to her lips. 
— " Sure, I could not close my eyes last night 
for the gladness I felt at the thoughts of seeing 
you this blessed day, and I thought to myself 
that joy can drive away sleep as well as grief, 
which I never suspected before." 

The naivete with which this confession was 



THE REPEALERS. 199 

made, excited a smile from the ladies; and Lady 
Oriel, in French, requested that they would 
encourage Grace to talk, for her mellifluous 
brogue and simple shrewdness highly amused 
and interested her. They entered the cabin, 
or cottage, as it deserves to be called, and com- 
plimented Grace on its perfect neatness and 
good order. Every thing was in its place, and 
an air of comfort pervaded the whole, that 
was highly gratifying to her visiters. The per- 
fume of the flowers from the garden was wafted 
through the open casement, and freshly-gathered 
nosegays adorned the dresser and the window 
sill. 

When the ladies were seated, Grace pointed 
to the clock and said, " Och! dear young lady, 
that is, Mrs. Forrester I mean, for sure, though 
you're still a young lady, it's not proper for me 
to be calling you so, just as if you were not 
married ; every time I look at that elegant 



200 THE REPEALERS. 

and beautiful clock, I think of you, and bless 
you ; and sure the blessing of even a poor sim- 
ple creature like me, coming from the heart, 
can't but do good. There never was anything 
that puts serious and blessed thoughts into the 
head like a clock ; when I am alone here at my 
work, it seems such good company to me, that 
I almost consider it like a living creature ; and 
when I hear it go tick, tick, sure it seems as if 
it was reminding me that time is passing swiftly 
away, and that I must not waste it. Then 
there's its hand, pointing always to the coming 
hour, like hope, and only pausing a moment at 
that hour, and then advancing to another; it's 
like the time it marks, always passing yet still 
the same, for it's us that change, and not time. 
Sure there's eternity in the thoughts a clock 
puts into the mind ; there it stands, showing us 
all the hours we pass, each one of which brings 
us nearer to the last hour of hfe. But sure I'm 



THE REPEALERS. 201 

forgetting myself, to talk so boldly before such 
grand company." 

The ladies encouraged Grace, and she pro- 
ceeded, " Well then, ladies, I declare that some- 
how or other, that clock makes me think as I 
never thought before I had it — of how quick 
life is passing away — our hours and minutes 
are counted, even as are counted the hours 
by the steady hand advancing round the dial ; 
and it makes me reflect on the necessity of 
preparing for that hour when, though we 
can no longer trace the warning hand of the 
clock, it will still remain to convey the same 
lesson to others. Och ! what fine thoughts 
are to be found in simple things, if one had 
the gift to express ''em as one feels 'em. The 
flowers that spring up delight us, and fade 
even while we are enjoying their fragrance. 
The trees, lately the pride of the fields, whose 
leaves wither and die, all seem intended to 
K 5 



202 THE REPEALERS. 

remind us that every thing must perish, to re- 
concile us to the same fate, and to prepare us 
for it." 

There was a solemnity in Grace's look and 
manner, that not even her strongly Irish accent 
could impair ; and I.ady Oriel felt a sympathy 
for her, that no person of her class had ever 
before excited in her mind. 

" How is your husband, Grace ?" asked Mrs. 
Forrester. 

" Indeed then, ma'am, it 's finely he is, and 
quite come to his senses again, and stays at 
home at nights, and minds his work by day, 
just as he used to do before he ever heard 
of them poor foolish Repalers. Perhaps it 's 
all for the best that he took that mad turn, 
though it did make one miserable at the time, 
for, sure, I was not sensible enough of my hap- 
piness, until I thought it had left me ; and now 
it is come back, I feel as if I never could be 



THE REPEALERS. 203 

thankful enough to God. We are sad ungrate- 
ful creatures, and go on from day to day enjoy- 
ing all the good that Providence sends us, just 
as if we had a right to it, but when misfortune 
comes, we then begin to know the value of our 
past happiness, though it only makes us more 
discontented with present troubles. How few, 
like me, have had the blessing to recover what 
they had lost ! and this makes me remember 
every hour with gratitude what I owe to the 
Almighty," 

The blue eyes of Grace became suffused with 
tears, and as she wiped them with the corner of 
her apron, she observed, with a smile, " There 
are tears of sorrow, tears of joy, and tears of 
thankfulness. Mine are the last, and they 
refresh me as the dews of heaven refresh the 
earth, and lighten my heart when it is weighed 
down by the sense of my own un worthiness and 
the goodness of God.'' 



204 THE REPEALERS. 

" Grace, I have been telling Lady Oriel of 
the delicious buttermilk you used to give me to 
drink," said Mrs. Forrester ; " have you any 
at present ?" 

" Och ! it 's myself that has," replied Grace, 
" for I churned this morning at the peep of 
day, thinking ye would be passing this way, 
and have kept the can of buttermilk in spring 
water in the dairy. Sure, if the lady would be 
so condescending as to taste it, I M be mighty 
proud, and if you 'd all of ye just eat a bit of 
my griddle-cake and kirkime,''^ it 's a favour, 
and an honor too, that I 'd never forget." 

The ladies accepted Grace's offer; who, 
spreading on a table a cloth as white as a snow- 
drop, made of the yarn of her own spinning, 
placed a wooden piggin, equally white, piled 
with kirkime in the centre, a griddle-cake at 
one end, and a jug of buttermilk at the other, 
* Eggs boiled hard, and chopped in fresh butter. 



THE REPEALERS. 205 

with small piggins for the ladies to drink out 
of, and wooden knives for the butter, — the 
Irish being as particular to use wooden knives 
for butter, as the higher class of EngUsh are to 
use only silver. Grace waited on her guests 
with an alacrity and delight, that proved the 
gratification she felt at the occupation; and 
Lady Oriel declared she had never partaken of 
a more delicious repast. 

Grace wished to present the ladies with nose- 
gays, and for this purpose would have plucked 
half the flowers in her garden ; but they pre- 
vented her, reminding her that they had such 
abundance at home, that they preferred seeing 
them in the garden. 

The party drove away, followed by the bless- 
ings and grateful curtsies of Grace, who re- 
mained at the door until the carriage had 
vanished from her view, and then entered, 
repeating aloud to herself, " ^Vas there ever 



206 THE REPEALERS. 

such dear, kind, good ladies ? No pride in 'em, 
and so pleased with every thing in my cottage, 
when, sure, every thing I have I owe to them. 
How I wish Jim could have seen ^em, seated 
round that table, praising every thing, and so 
condescending to me. But, och ! sure, I quite 
forgot to tell 'em about poor Mary Mahoney 
and her husband. This was very thoughtless 
of me, and shows the truth of the old saying, 
that when one is happy oneself, one forgets 
those who are unhappy. Well, sure, I '11 go 
and see poor Mary to-morrow, an^ then go to 
the great house, to tell 'em all about her, for I 
know she depends on me. What would she 
think, the poor dear creature, if she knew how 
I have neglected to speak about her ?" 

When Jim returned from his work, Grace 
told him of the visit she had received, and 
dwelt with delight and gratitude on the kind- 
ness of the old mistress, the young lady, and 



THE REPEALERS. 207 

the sweet manners of the beautiful young 
English lady. 

" Is she as handsome as Mrs. Forrester ?'' 
asked Jim, " for, according to my notions, she 
is the biggest beauty of a lady in all Ireland. 
I say of a lady, Grace, bekase I know one that, 
in my eyes, is twice as handsome, and not a 
hundred miles off at this moment. Faith, you 
bkish, Grace ma-colleen, just as if you knew 
who I mean, though sure I have not told you 
her name." 

" Och ! Jim agrah, I wouldn't be making 
comparisons between the two ladies, but what 
the difference between 'em is, I could tell you. 
Mrs. Forrester looks as if she had never known 
trouble, and that tears had never filled her 
eyes, though she's one that, if the trouble 
came, would bear it nobly, for she's full of 
feeling. She 's like a fresh rose in full bloom, 
before the sun or the wind has faded it. But 



208 THE REPEALERS. 

the other lady looks as if tears were no stran- 
gers to her eyes, for all they Ve so bright, and 
that they had looked up to Heaven so often 
when troubled on this earth, that they stole the 
soft blue of the sky when she is letting fall the 
tears of night. One would like to tell Mrs. 
Forrester all one's happiness, for one knows she 
would feel it, and rejoice at it ; but one would 
choose that English lady to tell all one's griefs 
to, because one sees that she has learned to pity 
others, by having suffered herself, great, and 
grand, and beautiful as she is. Mrs. Forrester, 
Jim, gives me the notion of an angel, and the 
other lady that of a saint." 

The husband of Mary Mahoney had been 
tried and acquitted of the charge brought 
against him ; but he returned to his suffering 
wife with ruined health, the consequence of a 
gaol-fever, and totally incapable of working. 
The poor woman, too, had never recovered her 



THE REPEALERS. 209 

premature confinement, and continued in a 
languishing state ; both unable to make any 
exertion for their support. Grace and her 
liusband assisted them to the utmost of their 
power; but the broken constitutions of the 
luckless couple required many comforts which 
the Cassidys lacked the means, though not the 
inclination, to give them. The Repealers in 
the neighbourhood, looking on Mahoney as a 
political victim, wished to identify his cause 
as their own, and made a subscription between 
them, amounting to a few pounds, which they 
sent him, with an inflated letter, expressive of 
their sympathy for his situation, their hatred 
of the tyranny and injustice that had led to it, 
and their determination to support and avenge 
him. This epistle was signed by the most 
prominent of the faction, with " Repealer" 
added to each name ; and the subscribers were 
known to be the most lawless and ill-conducted 
men in the parish. 



210 THE REPEALERS. 

When the letter and money were delivered 
to Mahoney, he was in the greatest distress, 
undergoing all the privations that poverty can 
impose, with a beloved wife pining in languor 
before his eyes, and whom proper nourishment 
might restore to health. The poor man read 
the letter, and then laid it on the table, casting 
a wistful glance at the money, and then at the 
pale cheek and attenuated person of his wife ; 
the purse which contained it seemed to him as 
if it held the elixir of life, and his affection for 
Mary almost triumphed over his principles; 
but a second perusal of the letter restored him 
to himself, and he determined to return the 
money to the donors. 

Mary watched the changes in his countenance, 
and asked him what the letter was about ; and 
when he read it to her, and told her his de- 
cision, she left her chair, and approaching 
the one he reclined in, pressed her lips to 



THE REPEALERS. 211 

his forehead, and a tear fell on his face at the 
moment. 

" God be praised ! cuishlamachree,'" exclaimed 
she, " that you have had courage to resist this 
temptation ! I know it was for me that you 
looked so wistfully for a moment at that purse ; 
but heaps of gold could not give me the happi- 
ness that the certainty of your good principles 
has given me." 

" Och, Mary, ma-vourneen,'" replied the poor 
man, " poverty is a frightful thing, for it leaves 
a body open to such temptations, and he who 
would remain honest ought to keep away want, 
or pray to have a friend like you to prop up his 
tottering good resolutions when he is tempted. 
I have had enough of Repalers, and wish I 
might never hear the name again ; but their 
money shall not pay the price of our broken 
health and broken hearts — no; I'd rather die 
than touch it ! You see they don't give it, as 



212 THE REPEALERS. 

good neighbours, to a poor and suffering man 
and woman, but they want to make me pass for 
a victim to tyranny and injustice, when I 'm 
only a victim to my own wilful folly, in not 
listening to your advice, and attending to their 
wicked and pernicious counsels. It is true, I 
was not guilty of the crime laid to my charge, 
and, God be thanked ! my innocence was 
proved; but had I not been in the habit of 
going out at night, and, at all unseasonable 
hours, of attending their meetings, I could not 
have been suspected ; so that all my sufferings 
have been brought on by myself, and what 's 
worse, my own dear Mary, all yours." 

" Never think of mine, cuishlamachree,'^ re- 
plied Mary ; " sure, now that your eyes are 
open, and that our thoughts are the same, I 'm 
a happy woman ; and if 1 saw you once more 
in good health, I 'd have nothing on earth to 
desire. '"* 



THE REPEALERS. 213 

The purse was returned to the Repealers, 
with a candid exposition of the altered views 
and feelings of Mahoney, who was voted by 
them a turncoat and a coward, and strongly 
suspected to be a spy ; a suggestion that only 
one of the faction had the good sense to doubt, 
and who made the simple observation, that a 
spy would not have declared his dereliction 
from them, as Mahoney had done, but would 
have imposed on them to the last. 

From the moment that Mahoney refused the 
aid of the Repealers, he became a marked man 
with them ; his horse was houghed, his cow 
maimed, his pigs killed, and his garden, that 
spot which had been the pride and pleasure of 
poor Mary, was uprooted, the paling destroyed, 
and every plant, flower, and vegetable, was 
scattered over the road. Mr. Disney, the vene- 
rable and worthy pastor, came to the assistance 
of the unhappy couple, and relieved their wants. 



214 THE REPEALERS. 

A few of the gentry in the neighbourhood sub- 
scribed to buy them a cow, and allow them a 
weekly stipend until they were able to work ; 
but this protection only drew fresh attacks of 
violence from the misguided men who had vow- 
ed his destruction, as Mahoney was now looked 
upon as the protege of the anti-repealers ; and 
each act .of aggression committed on him was 
meant as an attack on the persons who were 
charitably relieving his wants. Threatening 
notices were found nailed on his door ; his 
humble friends and neighbours were warned 
not to assist him or enter his house ; and a very 
iew days saw the cow given to him sacrificed, 
like the former, to the brutal rage of the vin- 
dictive rabble, leaving the poor couple nearly 
heart-broken by such a fearful system of per- 
secution. 

Luckily for the poor Mahoneys, the family 
of Springmount arrived at this critical period, 



THE REPEALERS. 215 

and Mr. Desmond having heard of the tyranny 
exercised by the lawless depredators over this 
unhappy couple, determined to protect them. 
Grace Cassidy, who had never deserted them, 
in defiance of all threats, proceeded to their 
cottage the morning after the visit of the ladies 
from Springmount, taking with her, according 
to her usual custom, a basket of provisions. 
Even since the last visit, only four days be- 
fore, fresh depredations had been committed, 
and the air of misery and desolation this once 
cheerful spot wore was painful to witness. 
The broken paling of the garden lay scattered 
around, dead flowers and plants were pro- 
strate on the earth they lately decked, and the 
effluvia of putrified vegetables tainted the air. 
The windows were all broken, the parasitical 
plants that nearly covered the cottage torn 
down, and drooping their withered leaves in 
death. 



216 THE REPEALERS. 

" And this/' thought Grace, " is the work 
of the friends of Ireland, the Repalers, who 
are ever to be traced by the ruin and destruc- 
tion that marks their path. What will be 
their next act of oppression and cruelty to 
this unhappy couple, to whom they have left 
nothing but a little life? Is there no law to 
save us from such terrible scourges ? Och ! 
if the humane English knew only half what 
the quiet and dacent people are exposed to, 
they would make some effort to save us." 

Grace entered the cottage, and was shocked 
at the scene that presented itself to her. The 
poor couple were sitting on the floor, with 
disease preying on their exhausted frames, 
every article of their furniture broken in 
pieces and strewing the floor, and all their 
provisions trampled under foot. The same 
miscreants who had hitherto been persecuting 
them had broken into their cottage the night 



THE REPEALERS. 217 

before, and completed this work of destruc- 
tion by breaking and smashing every thing in 
the house; Mary was half dead with fright, 
having expected every moment, during the stay 
of the Repealers, to see her husband and child 
massacred ; for it had been debated whether 
he should be killed or not, when her passionate 
entreaties to spare his life had touched even 
their obdurate hearts, and they departed 
leaving the wretched couple exhausted with 
suifering, their household gods shivered at 
their feet, and their only child nearly in con- 
vulsions from excessive terror. 

Grace, Uke a ministering angel, tried to 
comfort and assist them: she made them par- 
take of some of the provisions she had brought, 
and cheered them by the intelligence of the 
arrival of the dear good ould master, and all 
his family, at Springmount, who would soon 
help and save them. 

VOL. III. L 



218 THE REPEALERS. 

While she was yet holding out this hope 
to her poor friends, Mr. Desmond and Colonel 
Forrester, who had heard of the attack on the 
Mahoneys the night before, came to visit the 
cottage, and amply realized Grace'*s promises; 
for, no sooner had they witnessed the destruc- 
tion around, than Mr. Desmond declared he 
would remove the Mahoneys to Springmount, 
where they should have the protection of his 
own roof, and left the family overpowered by 
their gratitude, while he returned to send a 
conveyance for their removal. 

" I well knew he would," said Grace, " for 
sure there 's not his match in the world for 
goodness ; and now, dear friends, you may look 
on your troubles as being over, when once you 
are lodged under his happy roof. Sure, Mary, 
you must let me make you a little dacent to 
meet the ladies ; and you too, dear cousin, 
pray tidy yourself a bit : though weak enough 



THE REPEALERS. 219 

you are, my poor boy, good nourishing food, 
a good bed, and an aisy mind, will, with the 
blessing of God, soon set you and Mary right ; 
and as for the dear child you '11 see how soon 
he '11 get well/' 

" Och ! Grace, ma-vourneen, it's yourself that 
always has words of comfort, and pleasant 
tones to spake 'em in, and looks of kindness 
too," said Mary ; " may you never require 
the services that you have so often rendered 
me ! But if you should, och ! Grace, it's myself 
that would be a sister to you, for I feel as if 
it was the same warm red blood that set both 
our hearts a beating, and put loving thoughts 
in 'em. I never, as you know, Grace asthore, 
had the blessing of a sister, and you are in 
the same state ; often and often have I grieved 
for it, for sure one seems to be incomplete, 
and to be but half one's self, when one has 
not the other half in a sister, who has drawn 
l2 



THE REPEALERS. 

life from the same source, slept on the same 
pillow, played in infancy the same plays, 
prayed together to God, and for each other, 
and grown into womanhood side by side like 
two roses on one stem. Let us then be as 
sisters, dear Grace ; for much as I have to love 
in my husband and child, I want to extend 
my love still wider. Sure God has filled our 
hearts with affection, and happy are they who 
have objects to share it from their birth, but 
us who have not sisters or brothers, the na- 
tural links in the chain of love, we must forge 
'em for ourselves, and be to each other what 
Providence has denied to us — sisters." 



THE REPEALERS. 221 



CHAPTER XIV. 

" Some fiery fop, with new commission vain, 
Who sleeps on brambles till he kills his man, 
Some frolic drunkard, reeling from a feast, 
Provokes a broil, and stabs you for a jest." 

The cold-hearted and calculating Lord Del- 
more hurried from London, without one feeling 
of pity towards the wife, even yet a bride, that 
he was deserting, nay, whom he had plundered 
of her mother's gift. He recoiled from the re- 
membered instances of her selfishness and fri- 
volity that had come under his notice, as if he 
were free from such defects, instead of being 
pre-eminent in them, and soiled by actions, in 



THE REPEALERS. 

comparison to which the errors of his wife ap- 
peared as virtues: thus verifying the obser- 
vation, that the less goodness we have, the 
more do we require in others, and the less are 
we inclined to overlook their deficiencies. No 
compunctious reflections visited his breast at 
having marred the happiness of a young and 
pretty woman ; and if any feeling was excited 
towards her, it was one of distaste. 

He pursued his course to Paris with rapidity, 
anxious to lose the sense of the humihating ex- 
hibition he had made, vis-d-vis to White's ; and 
forgetful that one of the advantages derived 
from our boasted march of intellect is the 
celerity with which scandal and gossip are 
conveyed from one capital to the other. The 
march of intellect is often confounded with 
the gallop of frivolity, and may sometimes 
be called the halt of reason ; and if we reflect 
on the avidity with which personal scandal. 



THE REPEALERS. 

private anecdotes, and mysterious innuendoes 
are sought after and propagated, we can 
hardly flatter ourselves that the " march of 
intellect,"' or " general spread of knowledge," 
have made us wiser or better. 

It is the fashion to decry certain newspapers, 
and to hold up their editors to reprobation for 
the personalities in which they indulge. We 
believe ourselves moral, religious, and good, 
when we declaim against such publications ; but 
we forget that it is we who give the taste for 
them, and the editors only administer to our 
appetites. If the taste existed not, we should 
have none of the publications alluded to ; but 
we never blame ourselves, being content to 
blame others. 

The notice of Lord Delmore's ruin arrived 
at Paris in a very few days after himself, and 
being copied into Galignani's paper, " Le Vo- 
leur," and " Figaro," drew on him an atten- 



224f THE REPEALERS. 

tion much less flattering, though more marked, 
than that which he had hitherto excited in the 
French capital. He found himself much less 
recherche, though more stared at ; and was 
oftener invited to Le Salon des Etrangers, 
than to the English Ambassador'*s. Finding 
his time hang heavy on his hands, he by de- 
grees accustomed himself to pass much of it at 
Le Salon, and risked the greater part of the 
sum so dishonorably acquired at Rouge et Noir, 
with the general result of such experiments, the 
loss of it, and with it his temper ; a union 
of no unfrequent occurrence in the life of a 
gambler. 

An impatient, and equivocal ejaculation, in- 
stigated by the fate of his last stake, offended 
a French officer ; who, in return, applied an 
epithet to him that admitted of no doubt of 
the intention to insult him. Angry words suc- 
ceeded, and a rencontre was arranged for the 



THE REPEALERS. 225 

next morning in the Bois de Boulogne, which 
terminated in the death of Lord Del more, who 
fell pierced through the heart by the ball of his 
adversary : thus incurring his doom through the 
means of the theft committed on his wife, as 
without that money he would not have played 
at Le Salon, nor have had the quarrel which 
led to his duel. 

Lord and Lady Abberville soon made their 
appearance at Springmount : the former full of 
les dernier s " on dits"" of the underlings at the 
Treasury, which were attempted to be passed 
off as extracts from private letters from the 
ruling powers ; and the latter " big with the 
fate" of female reputation, and sending forth 
insinuations and implications of no doubtful 
import, had the ears that received them been 
at all akin to the malicious tongue that uttered 
them. Her malice was so generally known, 
that when the mode of wearing bracelets in the 
L 5 



THE REPEALERS. 

form of serpents first came out, Lady Abber- 
ville was one of the earliest adopters of it, 
which gave rise to two lines that were very 
generally repeated in the circles in which she 
moved, the individuals composing them, con- 
sidering that next to the pleasure of hearing an 
enemy attacked, is that of hearing a friend. 
The lines were : — 

" Of Abberville now you need feel no alarm. 

The serpent has fled from her tongue to her arm." 

" I have heard to-day from Lady Notting- 
ham," said Lady Abberville, " who writes that 
Mr. Henry Vernon's daughter is to be married 
to the Marquis of Tadcaster. What a mci- 
alliance! it is really shocking. Such a vulgar 
family of parvenus, mais ' Qui suit se faire 
aimer n''a pas besoin d'aieux f and the girl, I 
must admit, is very handsome, though her petit 
nez retro rssc is somewhat objectionable. Lord 
Durnford, also, is about to be married to some 



THE REPEALERS. S27 

citizeness of credit and renown, and of fortune 
I'll be sworn ; for a man of fashion rarely goes 
into the city, except to his banker, or to search 
for some one who will entitle him to have a 
banker." 

•■' But Lord Durnford is already rich, and 
can have no temptation to marry," said Mrs. 
Forrester, " wholly for money." 

" Qui salt, ma chhe dame ?" replied Lady 
Abbcrville. " Men may have large estates, 
and green acres, but there is a certain board of 
green cloth, in the purlieus of St. James's, 
that has discovered the secret of sweeping them 
away * at one full swoop,' or dismantling them 
so rapidly, that the wand of enchantment never 
accomplished a transfer of property with more 
celerity. It was to this great modern alche- 
mist, that a ruined frequenter of his verdant 
table asked, in the agony of losing his last 
stake, ' What ! will you not leave me a tree 



228 THE REPEALERS. 

to hang myself upon ?' the whole of his woods 
having disappeared during the season. Now 
1 know that Lord Durnford was a constant 
frequenter at this transmuter of metals, and 
therefore I think it probable he has found it 
convenient to marry a rich wife: besides, 1 
know that few men marry except for money," 
stealing a spiteful glance at Colonel Forrester, 
" and I rejoice that I was an untochered lass, as 
I could not bear to be married for my fortune, 
a fear that must always enter into the minds of 
rich ladies." 

The whole party felt the malice of Lady 
Abberville's insinuation, but it fell harmless 
on them ; and they were more inclined to pity 
the inherent spitefulness that led her to wound 
those whom it was her interest to conciliate, 
tbnn angry at the attempt. 

" Of course you have heard of Lord Del- 
more's extraordinary marriage, and desertion 
of his wife,''' resumed Lady Abberville. " His 



THE REPEALERS. 229 

history is a curious one altogether. I was much 
in his confidence," (looking at Lady Oriel,) 
" and he has told me some very amusing anec- 
dotes." 

The mischief-loving Cancanniere was disap- 
pointed at seeing Lady Oriel show no symp- 
tom of embarrassment at her insinuation, and 
therefore changed the subject. Lady Oriel 
had previously seen in the newspapers all the 
particulars of the marriage, and anticipating 
the malice of Lady Abberville, had schooled 
herself to conquer every symptom of uneasiness, 
should the subject be referred to. 

Having exhausted all her scandal, the inde- 
fatigable lady returned to the end and aim 
of all her present speculations — the barrack 
to be built, and declared that she " had an 
architect ready to commence the building, as 
she was sure that, as soon as it should be 
erected, the government must see the neces- 
sity of purchasing it. The country was be- 



^30 THE REPEALERS. 

coming every day more troubled : without the 
means of accommodating a large military force, 
it never could be tranquillized; but strange 
to say, the Marquis of Mona seemed to be 
ignorant of the actual state of affairs, though 
she had endeavoured to enlighten him. The 
barrack was the only means of terrifying the 
lower classes, and civilizing the middling ; she 
had made herself thoroughly acquainted with 
all the intrigues and plots of white-feet, black- 
feet, agitators, repealers, and conservatives, 
and knew more of what was going on, and 
likely to go on, than any magistrate in the 
country, or all the magistrates put together." 

Having finished her tirade she withdrew, 
much to the relief of the circle at Springmount ; 
and Mr. Desmond observed, that to her might 
well be applied the remark made by a poet on 
the gifted Madame de Stael, " that she excelled 
more in monologue than dialogue, never allow- 
ing any one to speak but herself, though," added 



THE REPEALERS. 231 

he, " it is profanation to compare an intriguante 
to a woman of genius." 

When Lady Oriel had recovered from the 
fatigues of her recent journey, Mr. and Mrs. 
Desmond proposed their making a tour to the 
Lakes of Killarney ; and the party set out, de- 
termined to be amused — a determination that 
we recommend to all parties about to undertake 
that perilous adventure, a party of pleasure — 
the progress and termination of which are ge- 
nerally as little pleasurable, as though a spell 
was cast over the individuals composing it. 
Such parties in general commence in idleness, 
and end in ennui, leaving aught but agreeable 
impressions of the sights seen, or of the persons 
with whom they have been seen. And why is 
this ? it is because people expect too much, and 
will not bear with too little. A bad day, or a 
bad inn, can eclipse the superficial gaiety of in- 
dividuals tired of themselves, and depending for 
amusement on external sources; and in the frame 



THE REPEALERS. 

of mind or humour such discomforts produce, 
the agreeable companions of the day before, 
agreeable from the exhilarating effects of sun- 
shine and good accommodation, are looked upon 
as disagreeable and tiresome, because we are 
conscious of being both ourselves, when we 
draw the uncharitable conclusion. 

The party from Springmount had predeter- 
mined to find bad inns an amusing novelty, and 
bad weather a bearable evil, in their own agree- 
able society ; and, consequently, the expedition 
had little chance of ending like the generality 
of parties of pleasure. As they travelled with 
Mr. Desmond's horses, they proceeded not as 
rapidly as travellers in search of amusement love 
to do, as it seems to be an understood thing 
that pleasure and rapidity of movement are in- 
separable ; people gallop through countries they 
go to examine, and leave them with a confused 
jumble of ideas, in which scarcely a distinct 
notion is defined, the recollections being hke the 



THE REPEALERS. 

trees, hills, and mountains that they flitted by, 
one succeeding another, and all vague, dreamy, 
and confused. 

They rested the first night at a country inn, 
and were more amused than disquieted at ob- 
serving the bustle and agitation their arrival 
produced. 

" Bill, Bill, arrah ! where are you, Bill ? 
Can't you run and get the bellows to blow 
a spark of life into the fire ?" said or rather 
screamed the master of the inn : " Sure the 
ladies will die of the could any how.*" 

" Is it the bellows you main ?" said Bill, 
(thrusting his fingers into the uncombed locks 
of fiery hue that hung in wild disorder over his 
head,) " sure it has lost it's nose, and its no use 
thrying it; sorrow's the breath it will give."" 
And so saying, he knelt, and supplied the place 
of the bellows with his mouth, until he pro- 
duced a blaze from the turf that sent forth 
sparks of light as red as his own locks. 



234 THE REPEALERS. 

" Run, run for your life. Bill, and see what's 
in the larder," said the landlord, walking off at 
the same time to give his instructions. 

The ladies had retired to examine the bed- 
rooms, the windows of which looked into the 
yard, and saw the indefatigable Bill, aided by 
a bare-legged girl, in active pursuit of some 
poultry, whose cries bore witness to their alarm. 

" This, I suppose,'"* said Lady Oriel, pointing 
to the yard, " is the larder, and before us is our 
dinner." 

'' Them devils of ould cocks is as cunning 
as a fox," screamed the panting Bill, " they'll 
never be caught ; thry the ould hen, Biddy, 
she's not so cute, say something civil to her, 
and she'll come to you." 

" Chick, chick," said Biddy, with her most 
insinuating smile. But smiles were vain ; the 
ould hen was as wary as her male friends, and 
nothing remained but for Bill to hunt them, 



THE REPEALERS. 

and pelt them down with stones, hitting with a 
dexterity that surprised the ladies, each stone 
bringing down a wounded bird. 

" Arrah ! stop, Bill, are you mad, you fool of 
the world ?"" screamed Biddy, " sure you were 
only to kill two, and there you've kill'd four." 

" Fve a mind to kill every mother's soul of 
'em," said Bill, " for giving me all this bother- 
ation, instead of letting themselves be caught 
quietly at oncet, when they know they must be 
caught at last." 

The wounded birds were seized, their flutter- 
ing pinions broken, and their heads wrung by 
Bill, who desired Biddy to run into the lough, 
and pull him out two of them ducks. 

" Can't you do it yourself. Bill ?*" said the 
gentle Biddy, " and bad manners to you." 

"Arrah ! how can I, woman," says he, " now 
that I've got my stockings on ? Go in, Biddy 
agrah, and I'll give you a glass to warm you." 



2S6 THE REPEALERS. 

" Here goes," said Biddy, tucking up her 
garments as high as decency would permit, and 
rushing into the green slimy pool, designated as 
the lough by Bill, in which sundry ducks were 
enjoying their verdant bath, which, as Bill often 
observed, was meat, drink, and washing to 
them. She seized a struggling duck in one 
hand, and placing it under her arm, whence it 
sent streams of liquid mud over her garments, 
she grasped another, whose screams and strug- 
gles seemed to excite her anger, instead of 
moving her pity, as she said, " Well, divil mend 
your taypots, now I have ye in spite of yeVe 
teeth, and the English lords and ladies will 
know what ye're made of before ye''re two hours 
oulder." 

" Success to you, Biddy agrah," cried Bill. 
*' Sure yourself is the girl for bringing 'em to 
raison." 

Mrs. Forrester made the gentlemen laugh 



THE REPEALERS. 237 

when she attempted a description of the scene 
she had witnessed; and the ladies confessed, 
that not even their disgust at the cruelty the 
feathered tribe had suffered could subdue the 
laughter that Bill and Biddy had excited. 

The dinner was served in a much shorter 
time than could have been expected, and the 
quantity could not have been blamed, except in 
its excess, whatever might be said of the qua- 
lity. A salted shoulder of mutton boiled, and 
called corned mutton, served up with cab- 
bage, graced the top of the board ; a piece of 
roast-beef confronted it at the bottom ; two 
broiled ducks smothered in onions flanked one 
side, and a spatch cock, which means a broiled 
fowl, faced it ; the interstices of the table being 
filled with potatoes and pickles that seemed to 
have " fallen into the sear and yellow leaf." 

Bill seemed as astonished as grieved that 
neither the ducks nor fowls were touched, and 



^38 THE REPE.iLERS. 

could not resist recommending them, as being 
elegant and mighty tinder, an observation that 
called smiles to the faces of all the party. 

Hearing Lord OrieFs remark to Mrs. Desmond 
that the beef was more highly flavoured in Ire- 
land than in England, but much less fat. Bill, 
with a bow and a pull of one of his elfin locks, 
begged their lordships' pardon, but the raison 
that bit of beef on the table was so Ia?ie was, 
that it was from a piper's cow, who had danced 
away all her fat. 

The second course consisted of the three 
remaining slaughtered fowls, fried eggs and 
bacon, buttered greens, roast potatoes, apple- 
dumplings, and cream-custards ; and again Bill 
strenuously recommended the fowls — " Sure, 
if they 'd only taste 'em, they 'd find 'em beau- 
tiful; there wasn't finer in all Ireland, and a 
body might travel from Cork to Dubhn and 
not meet with their match any how." 



THE REPEALERS. 239 

Bill had a motive for urging the guests to 
demolish the fowls, which was, that he had 
been scolded by the host and hostess for killing 
four instead of two, and was afraid of another 
lecture, if they returned untouched. " Sure, 
my lords, I'm greatly afeard yourselves and 
the ladies, saving their presence, aren't quite 
continted with the dinner, for ye have eat so 
little." 

Bill was re-assured by the commendations 
bestowed on the repast ; and his appetite being 
excited by the dainties before him, he mentally 
promised himself to partake a portion before 
they were restored to the pantry of the hostess. 
On removing them, aided by the active Biddy, 
he dissected, or rather tore the limbs from the 
ducks and fowls; and having piled up a py- 
ramid of wings and legs of ducks and fowls on 
a plate, covered with onion-sauce, he concealed 
it, pour le moment^ in the place next at hand. 



240 THE REPEALERS. 

which happened to be the bed-room designed 
for Lady Oriel ; and the savoury mess was put 
under her ladyship'^s bed, breathing odours the 
least likely to charm a fine lady, though pecu- 
liarly attractive to the olefactory nerves of Bill 
and his friend Biddy. 

" By the powers, Biddy my girl," said Bill, 
'' we'll have an eligant supper when they're 
all gone to their beds! and I'll just lave the 
plate under the bed, till we've an opportunity 
of slipping it safe into some hole or corner. 
But the divil's in the misthris, she's always 
poking her nose everywhere, and smells the 
taste of a rat, if one has only got a morsel hid 
in a corner; sure many's the comfortable bit 
and sup I 'd share with you, Biddy my dear, 
but that I've no place to hide 'em, and am 
obliged to swallow 'em up, at the risk of 
choking myself, bekase the ould woman is 
always after my heels." 



THE REPEALERS. 241 

' When Bill descended into the kitchen with 
only the carcases of the ducks and fowls, the 
hostess screamed out, " Well, if this does not 
bait out Ban and Bansigher ! — ten wings and ten 
legs all gone, and nothing left but the poor 
bodies of three fowls and two ducks ! Talk of 
aiting, sure it 's them English lords and ladies 
that have the stomachs, and could ait twice as 
much as the Irish gentry ! Faith they must be 
charged double price to make up for it; and 
if they dhrink as much as they ait, they '11 have 
a purty long bill to pay !"' 

" Indeed then, misthriss, you're right enough, 
they're the very divils for swallowing— wing 
after wing, and leg after leg disappeared ; sure 
I thought they 'd never stop, they kept playing 
away at such a rate !" 

While Bill was speaking, Biddy entered with 
the plates, on which were the fragments of the 
small morsels bf beef and mutton, the only part 

VOL. III. M 



242 THE REPEALERS. 

of the dinner touched by the guests. The 
hostess looked over the plates, and then, turn- 
ing to Bill with one of her most fiery glances, 
" Arrah, you tief of the world ! you gor- 
mandizing rogue ! did the English lords and 
ladies swallow the bones as well as the flesh of 
my elegant wings and legs ?" 

" Faith and they picked 'em clane," said 
Bill, " and threw 'em in the fire ; that 's what 
they did;' 

" I '11 never believe you, ye rogue of the 
world !" cried the enraged hostess ; " sure such 
genteel company would never do the like ; and 
if they did, wouldn't I smell it all over the 
house?" 

At this moment the valet-de-chambre of Lord 
Oriel descended, followed by a footman bearing 
the pyramidally piled plate, which he placed 
on the table ; and the valet angrily complained 
that her ladyship's room had been infected with 



THE REPEALERS. ^43 

the abominable smell of the onions, and that 
having tried to discover whence the smell came, 
Mrs. Marsden, her ladyship^s femme-de-cham- 
bre, had found the plate hid under her lady- 
ship's bed, and was now burning eau a bruit to 
get rid of the dreadful odour. 

The cheek of Bill assumed a crimson tint, 
one shade darker than his locks, he saw that 
denial was vain, and was stupified by the detec- 
tion of his guilt ; Biddy disappeared, and the 
hostess, having thanked my lord's body-servant, 
as she called him, for causing the elegant wings 
and legs to be restored to her, turned to the 
culprit, and shaking her head at him, said, 
" No wonder, you carroty-headed rogue, you're 
so fat and plump, when this is the way you're 
robbing, and pilfering, and backbiting grand 
company, by making me believe they're aiting 
me out of house and home ; no wonder you kill 
four fowls, you cruel-hearted baist, instead of 
M 2 



g44 THE REPEALERS. 

two, when it' s all to put into your own hungry 
mouth ; I Ve long suspected you, and looked 
after you sharply, but now you're found out, 
and here" (holding up the plate) " are the 
bones that you said the grand company picked 
so clane, and then threw into the fire. Sure, 
if they knew that 3^ou wanted to make 'em pass 
for porpoises and giants in regard to aiting, 
what would they say to you ? If you had stolen 
the beef or mutton, I wouldn't blame you so 
much, but my elegant ducks and fowls, I'll 
never forgive you." 

The inn was so small, and the partitions so 
thin, and the landlady's voice so loud, that all 
her harangue had been overheard by the p^rty 
from Springmount, who were not a little amused 
at this characteristic scene of Irish manners; 
and when Bill came up with tea, looking ashamed 
and afraid, they could hardly conceal their 
laughter. 



THE REPEALERS. 24t5 

" How odd !'' said Lord Oriel, " that the 
landlady should make such a distinction in 
theft, as to be furious at his stealing poultry, 
and to say that, had he taken the beef or 
mutton, she would not have blamed him. 
Henceforth Bill will conclude that beef and 
mutton may be stolen with impunity, and that 
poultry alone is forbidden. Strange people ! how 
difficult it is for strangers to understand them/' 

Arrived at Killarney, they found the princi- 
pal inn nearly filled by visiters, and had to 
take up their abode in, the less-frequented one, 
a circumstance which, though offering worse 
accommodation, promised to afford them a bet- 
ter opportunity of judging of the national cha- 
racter in its native garb, than in the Anglicised 
hotel, where all was, or affected to be, a V Ang false, 
with bowing, curtseying, and obsequious host 
and hostess, mincing waiters, and smirking 
housemaids. 



246 THE REPEALERS. 

The whole party were enchanted with the 
scene, which far surpassed all their expecta- 
tions. The magnificent woods, fine mountains, 
and admirable lakes spread out like vast mirrors 
reflecting them ; and above all, the arbutus, 
with its flowers and fruit, which here flourishes 
so luxuriantly, called forth their warmest admi- 
ration. Lady Oriel contrasted her present po- 
sition and feelings with the painful ones that 
weighed down her spirits, when, a year before, 
she visited the Lakes of Cumberland, tete-a-tete 
with her husband, shrinking from contact with 
former acquaintances, lest she should encounter 
the mortification inflicted on her by the heart- 
less Lady Abberville. 

Supported now by the presence of two ladies 
who were considered models of every female vir- 
tue, her husband nearly restored to his former 
peace of mind and confidence, how much had 
she to be grateful for, and with what true 



THE REPEALERS. 247 

humility did she return thanks to that All-mer- 
ciful Power that had vouchsafed to save her 
from the consequences of her imprudence ! 

The day after their arrival at Killarney, Co- 
lonel Forrester encountered the Marquis of 
Tadcaster, who had arrived from England a 
few days before with his wife, on a tour through 
the South of Ireland. He informed Colonel 
Forrester of the death of Lord Delmore, and 
the circumstances that led to it ; and, while 
commenting on the profligacy and dishonour 
which marked the conduct of Lord Delmore 
up to the last moment of his life, he stated 
the good feeling and good sense with which 
Lady Delmore had conducted herself under 
such very trying circumstances, and added, 
that though her worthless husband neither had 
made, nor intended to make a provision for her, 
yet by the settlements made by his father, 
she now found herself in possession of a suit- 



i 



248 THE REPEALERS. 

able jointure, which his creditors could not 
touch, but of which she immediately resigned 
three parts to the creditors, sorely against the 
advice and wishes of her father. 

" My excellent father-in-law and her uncle," 
said Lord Tadcaster, " was so gratified by the 
the whole of her conduct, that he has settled 
ten thousand pounds on her, so that she is 
now independent of her selfish father ; but she 
continues to live under his roof for the sake 
of being near her amiable mother, to whom 
she devotes all her time and attention.'" 

Lord Tadcaster asked permission to present 
his wife to the ladies, and Colonel Forrester 
returned to inform Lady Oriel of the death 
of Lord Del more, to prevent her betraying any 
emotion on hearing it publicly announced. 

When the whole of his conduct was laid 
open to her by her brother, how did she shud- 
der at the idea that this was the man for whom 



THE REPEALERS. 249 

she had once entertained sentiments of good 
will and friendship, and towards whom she 
considered her husband had been unjust ! 
" How could I have been so deceived?"" asked 
she of herself. And this question led to a train 
of reflection, that ended by her consciousness 
that it was vanity, and the gratification his 
flattery and attentions afforded to that vanity, 
which had blinded her to the defects of this 
unprincipled man. 

How many of the finest qualities are eclipsed 
by this one passion, which, like Aaron's serpent, 
swallows up the rest ; and how many sacrifices 
of principle, honour, and happiness, are daily 
off^ered up at its shrine ! If there be a passion, 
which more than all others leads its victim 
into danger, it is vanity ; and against its in- 
dulgence every effort should be made in early 
youth, ere it has found its unfailing reward, 
vexation of spirit, shame, and ridicule. 
M 5 



250 THE REPEALERS. 

Lady Oriel, Mrs. Desmond, and Mrs. For- 
rester, were so much pleased with the Mar- 
chioness of Tadcaster, that they invited her 
and her lord to join their party, and stay some 
time with them at Springmount, — a proposal 
that was cheerfully accepted ; and having seen 
all that the romantic and beautiful country 
round Killarney could boast, they set out on 
their return to Springmount, highly gratified 
by all that they had seen. 

At this period it was announced that Lady 
Oriel was soon likely to increase her family ; 
intelligence which delighted her husband, and 
afforded the utmost gratification to her friends. 
Lord Oriel had long sighed for this addition to 
his happiness, as it had been a source of pain 
to him to think that at his decease his ancient 
title would become extinct, and his fortune pass 
into other hands. 

The death of Lord Delmore seemed to re- 



THE REPEALERS. 251 

move the last trace of Lord OriePs uneasiness. 
That heartless man could now no longer 
cross their path, to awaken dormant retro- 
spections and forgotten scandal; and seeing 
his wife beloved and respected by all around 
her, he ceased to remember that she had ever 
been exposed to slander ; or recollected it only 
to rejoice that she had recovered the place 
in society, to which her many virtues so fully 
entitled her. 

The persecution that Patrick Mahoney ex- 
perienced from the Repealers disgusted Jim 
Cassidy more with them than all the repre- 
sentations of his wife and friends. He declared 
he never would attend another meeting, and 
that henceforth he would stand aloof from them 
— a declaration which filled the heart of poor 
Grace with joy and thankfulness. 

" Och ! Jim dear, this was all that was 
wanting to my happiness,"' said Grace, " and 



252 THE REPEALERS. 

at what a blessed moment does it come ! Sure, 
it was wrong of me, and unloving too, to doubt 
you after all I've seen of your good sense 
lately, but somehow or other I was afraid the 
speeches, and the cunning way them people 
have to make one believe black was white, 
might get you back into their hands, and sure 
that would have been the death of me, and 
not only of me, but one more precious, dear 
Jim, for I 'm in the way to be a mother.^' 

" Then God be thanked, my own Grace,'' 
said Jim, embracing her, " and you '11 see I '11 
never vex or bother you any more. Och ! you 
rogue," kissing her again, " why didn't you 
tell me before ? Sure you ought to know how 
glad it would make me. I hope, Grace a- 
vourneen, the child will be like you, for then 
I '11 love it twice as well, as I know it will 
be a blessing." 

A look of tenderness unutterable repaid 



THE REPEALERS. 25S 

Jim's affectionate declaration ; and he vowed 
henceforth to be the best boy in the parish, 
and save every halfpenny he could, now that 
he was to be a father. 

" I never tould you, Grace, how often I was 
vexed at our not having a child,'" said Jim, 
" bekase I thought you might take it ill ; but 
sure it 's a bitter thing to think that a couple will 
be growing ould, with no one to love, no one 
to save for, and no one to shed a tear for ""em, 
when God takes 'em to himself. But now all 
this fear is over, and I '11 be as happy a father 
as any other poor man in the country." 

Trouble ever follows quickly on the foot- 
steps of joy. The day after the scene we have 
described, Jim Cassidy was torn from the arms 
of his distracted wife, and lodged a prisoner 
in the same gaol where he had formerly visited 
his friend Patrick Mahoney. His former con- 
nexion with the disaffected and lawless men 



254f THE REPEALERS. 

in his neighbourhood had rendered him an 
object of suspicion to the police, and the recent 
acts of violence in the vicinity of Cologan had 
awakened their vigilance, and led to the arrest 
of many who were less innocent of the oiFence 
with which they stood charged, than was Jim 
Cassidy. 

Unfortunately for Grace, her husband's arrest 
took place during the absence of the family 
of Springmount at the Lakes of Killarney, and 
she suffered all the anxiety and alarm such a 
circumstance was likely to produce until they 
returned. She had gone to Jim every day, 
and stayed with him in prison until the gates 
were closed, and all visiters excluded. The 
first evening, this separation was a dreadful 
trial to them both; and poor Jim wept like 
a child when the turnkey led Grace to the 
door and locked the heavy chain that secured it. 
But she conquered her own grief to administer 



THE REPEALERS. 255 

comfort to his ; and smiling through her tears, 
said, " Well, dear Jim, sure v/e 're like two 
foolish children, crying because we are separated 
for a night, when, to-morrow, the moment the 
doors are opened, I '11 be here to stay with you 
all the day, and every day, till the dear mas- 
ter comes back, when you may be sure he 11 
soon open those iron gates, and send you home 
with me ; and we '11 both smile at all the trou- 
bles that 's now frightening us, and making 
us cry." 

Grace's situation increased the grief and anx- 
iety of Jim ; he trembled lest her alarm might 
endanger her safety, and reproached himself 
bitterly for ever having laid himself open to 
suspicion by his former imprudence. Patrick 
and Mary Mahoney, though both ill and suf- 
fering, had themselves conveyed in a car to 
the prison to comfort their friends, and it was 
a touching scene to behold the four mingling 



256 THE REPEALERS. 

their tears together, but the women smiling 
even through theirs to comfort their husbands. 

No sooner had Mr. Desmond returned to 
Springmount than he procured the release of 
Jim Cassidy, who from that moment became 
an object of suspicion and dislike to his former 
associates. He was pointed out as an informer, 
— a term of reproach the most ignominious that 
can be applied in Ireland, and the most Hkely 
to draw down vengeance on the unhappy per- 
son who is the object of it. Not all Grace's 
confidence in the goodness and power of Mr. 
Desmond could tranquillize her mind for the 
future safety of her husband, and she trembled 
every time he left her presence. 



THE REPEALERS. 257 



CHAPTER XV. 

" Oh ! could I worship aught beneath the skies 
That earth hath seen or fancy can devise, 
Thine altar, sacred Liberty, should stand, 
Built by no mercenary vulgar hand, 
With fragrant turf and flowers as wild and fair 
As ever dress'd a bank or scented summer air." 

Jim Cassidy had only been a few days 
released from prison, when Larry Macswiggan 
came into his house one evening, and with 
evident symptoms of alarm announced that he 
had stolen away from the Cat and Bagpipes 
to inform them that the disaffected faction 



25S THE REPEALERS. 

assembled there, were violent in their threats 
against Cassidy, and that he feared they would 
put them into execution. " They say you are 
an informer, a turncoat, and a spy, in the pay 
of Mr. Desmond, and his Sassenach son-in-law, 
and that they will have vengeance on you and 
Patrick Mahoney. I 've often seen 'em mad 
and foolish ; but this time they bait out Ban 
and Banagher, and Ballinisloe into the bargain," 
said Larry, " for they have the very devil in 
their heads, ay, be my troth, and in their hearts 
too, and God only knows where they will 
stop." 

" I '11 go to the Cat and Bagpipes this very 
minute," said Jim Cassidy, " and confront 
'em, for no man shall say that I 'm a turn- 
coat, a spy, or an informer;" and the honest 
blood mounted to the face of the indignant 
man. 

Grace seized him by the coat, and with an 



THE REPEALERS. 259 

appealing look and a face pale as marble en- 
treated him not to venture amongst them. They 
are all intoxicated/' added she, " and incapable 
of listening to reason ; go not near them, Jim 
dear, but if you wish to clear yourself of their 
vile charges, wait ""till they are sober, and seek 
them with one or two quiet steady friends." 

*' Sure I '11 go with him myself," said Larry, 
" and be spokesman, and the schoolmaster 
won't refuse, I 'm sure, to give 'em some more 
of his Greek and Latin to help him out of the 
scrape ; but at this present moment they are 
too tipsy and violent to listen even to the 
Agitator himself if he was on the spot." 

Jim Cassidy yielded to the entreaties of his 
wife, and Larry began to relate the th roubles, 
as he called them, that were disturbing the 
neighbouring counties. " Faith, things get 
worse and worse every day," said he, " and 
the run on the banks has given the finishing 



260 THE REPEALERS. 

blow to the poor people. The cattle and pigs; 
are driven back from the fairs unsold, not a 
bill will be discounted, if it was signed by the 
Lord Liftenant himself; and them that are suf- 
fering from all this, haven't the sense to see 
that they have brought it on themselves, but 
get more desperate in their folly. If you heard 
the wicked threat'nings of the people at the 
Cat and Bagpipes ; they swore they 'd burn 
the house over the heads of Mr. Desmond and 
his family, and set fire to his woods !" 

" Och ! Larry dear," said Grace, " do you 
think they are serious in this ? and och ! why 
didn't you tell us before? Let us go, Jim, 
without losing a moment, and put the family 
on their guard." 

" There 's no danger this night any way, 
Mistress Cassidy," said Larry, " of that, I 
promise you, for they have not sufficient men 
to undertake an attack on Springmount, but 



THE REPEALERS. ^&. 

that they intend such a measure I have not the 
least doubt, and think Mr. Desmond ought to 
be informed of it to-morrow. Little, he that 
has thrown the spark of fire amongst these mad 
and wicked people, imagines the mischief he 
has caused, and if he had heard what I did to- 
night, he 'd tremble to think what he has done ; 
but gentlemen little know of what different 
stuff the minds of the poor ignorant people are 
made, and that though it 's aisy enough to drive 
'em mad, it 's no aisy thing to bring 'em back 
to their raison ; they are for all the world like 
the elephants that Dick Mulligan tould me 
they have in Ingee in their battles, who often 
turn round and thrample on those that drove 
'em on, doing more harm to their friends than 
their enemies. Sure they may say what they 
will, but I '11 never believe but what it gives 
many a heart ache to the laider of the Re- 
palers, to see and hear the cruel murders and 



262 THE REPEALERS. 

wicked things they do; but he can't stop 'em, 
though he can make 'em do anything else. I Ve 
seen him, and known him, and believe him to 
be a humane man, for God never gave the gift 
of fine thoughts and words to a narrow or a 
cruel heart ; therefore I wish he was now on 
the spot to hsten to the mischief that 's plotting, 
and to see, that while he is thinking of liberty 
as a fine, grand, and elegant thing, that's to 
bring blessings, and peace and plenty, on poor 
ould Ireland, but to get which some mischief 
and danger must be gone through, they are 
thinking of it as a something that will give 
every idle fellow amongst 'em the power of 
plundering the rich, living without work, and 
having no laws, and that the mischief incurred 
to gain it, is only a foretaste of that they will 
have to keep it. This is the difference between 
a gentleman's view of liberty, and the view of 
a poor ignorant man. Their laider knows this. 



THE REPEALERS. 

but he knows it would be useless to attempt 
making them feel as he does, and therefore tries 
to use them as means of carrying his point, 
hoping to be able to correct them after he has 
succeeded, which he has little chance of." 

While Larry was yet talking, shout and 
yells, from a distance, struck on the ears of his 
auditors. " They come, they come,'* cried 
Larry, " and if you wish to save your lives, let 
us fly from the house." 

A look at Grace, and the recollection of her 
situation, decided Jim to adopt the advice of 
Larry, and snatching up a cloak, which he 
threw over her shoulders, the two men hurried 
the trembling Grace through the back door of 
the cottage, and by a short cut across the fields 
that led to Springmount; which they had 
hardly reached, when they saw a column of 
fire ascend the air, and heard the shouts of 
triumph of the infuriated rabble, as the flames 



264 THE REPEALERS. 

spread wider and wider, embracing the paling 
and trees close to the cottage. 

Tears burst in torrents from Grace, as she 
beheld her cottage, the quiet, happy home 
where she had passed such blissful days, enve- 
loped by the lurid blaze, and she felt as if her 
happiness was destroyed with the home that 
witnessed it. 

" Och ! Jim dear,*" sobbed the poor woman, 
" our beautiful cottage, and all the nice fur- 
niture that I was so proud of; our garden and 
lovely flowers, all — all destroyed ! And to think 
that in a few hours no trace will remain of all 
that was so fair and flourishing an hour ago — 
och ! it 's too cruel !" and she wept in agony on 
the shoulder of her husband. 

Jim tried to console her, and observed how 
happy it was that they had fled, for that other- 
wise their lives would have fallen a sacrifice to 
the wrath of the incendiaries. " We 're safe 



THE REPEALERS. 265 

and together, Grace a vourneen," said Jim ; 
" and the same good friend that provided us 
with the cottage, can give us another ; so don't 
be unhappy, and you'll see, Grace, you'll 
never have any fretting in the new house, 
as you had in the ould, on account of my 
folly." 

They gained entrance at Springmount, and 
Mr. Desmond being informed of their arrival, 
and the cause that led to it, summoned Colonel 
Forrester and Lords Oriel and Tadcaster to 
consult on the best measures to pursue. After 
much consultation, it was agreed that to go out 
and meet the rabble, now that the mischief they 
had intended was perpetrated, would be un- 
availing ; but it was decided that the park-gates 
and lodges should be guarded by armed men 
for the night, each of the noblemen, and Mr. 
Desmond, and Colonel Forrester, presiding at 
the four gates : and Mr. Desmond wrote off to 

VOL. III. N 



266 THE REPEALERS. 

Dublin Castle an account of the whole trans- 
action. 

Lady Oriel and the Marchioness of Tad- 
caster were exceedingly alarmed at the danger 
to which they fancied their liege Lords exposed ; 
but Mrs. Desmond and Mrs. Forrester, who 
knew Ireland better, tranquillized their minds 
by the assurance that the passionate efferves- 
cence of the insurgents would evaporate with the 
fire they had kindled, and that when they had 
exhausted their fury, they would return to their 
homes. The courage of the mother and daugh- 
ter, as displayed in the confidence with which 
they saw their husbands depart for their separate 
guard stations, was even more convincing than 
their words ; but the English ladies, while sub- 
mitting to the emergency that required such a 
sacrifice of comfort on the part of their hus- 
bands, made elaborate comparisons between the 
comforts of England and Ireland, which satis- 



THE REPEALERS. 267 

factorily convinced themselves and those who 
heard them, that a residence in Ireland was 
like Rochefoucault's opinion of marriage, — 
" sometimes convenient, but never delightful." 

The ladies sent for Grace Cassidy, that they 
might gain confidence from her unsophisticated 
account of what she had witnessed ; but the 
pale face, curved brow, and Pair abattu of 
Grace, were little calculated to reassure them. 

" How good you must be, my dear Mrs. 
Desmond," said Lady Oriel, " to live among 
a set of people on whose stability of opinion 
you cannot calculate for twenty-four hours. 
To-day they love you ; to-morrow they loathe 
you; and the change arises not in what they 
see, or know, but in the insidious dictate of 
some rancorous demagogue." 

" Och, my Lady," observed Grace, who 
overheard the observation, " do not hate and 
condemn us, although appearances are against 
N,2 



^68 THE REPEALERS. 

US. The same people, who have laid in ashes 
my happy home, would sacrifice days and nights 
to repair the mischief they have done, when 
once raison comes back to 'em ; I hate their 
actions when they are wicked, but I cannot 
hate them, for I know they act before they 
reflect. Sure it is difficult for an English lady 
to understand this, and to make allowance for 
'em. But if you knew, my lady, what good 
there 's in their hearts, you 'd forgive the mis- 
chief that's in their heads. I would not be 
afraid to go before five hundred of 'em, if my 
husband was not exposed to their fury, for they 
are tender-hearted, though their heads are so 
fiery ; and when they see a weak woman before 
'em, they will listen to her with more respect 
than to a regiment, ay, my lady, than to ten 
regiments ; but I 'm a coward for my husband, 
and tremble for him, when I 'd disdain to fear 
for myself." 



THE REPEALERS. 

" How sorry I am, my good Mrs. Cassidy," 
said Lady Oriel, " that your neat cottage is 
destroyed ! It was only yesterday that I was 
telling Lady Tadcaster how nice it was, and 
we intended going to see 3'ou to-morrow."" 

" Sure your ladyship was good and kind, 
to think of such poor people as us, and 'twas 
an honour we can't forget ; but I 'm consoled 
for our loss when I think that this spite on 
the part of the Repalers widens the breach 
more than ever between them and my husband, 
and proves his innocence of the charges brought 
against him of being one of them. No blessing 
comes without its price, and I bow with thank- 
fulness to the will of God, happy that I have 
preserved my husband safe from all the dangers 
that threatened him." 

When Grace retired, the two English 
ladies dwelt with warm commendation on her 
beauty and simple purity of character, and 



270 THE REPEALERS. 

agreed, that Grace Cassidy and Mary Mahoney 
were as original as they were amiable, and of 
a more elevated nature than the female pea- 
santry in England ; commendations that were 
highly flattering to Mrs. Forrester, who was 
so partial to her protegees. When morning 
dawned, the gentlemen returned to their wives, 
and despatches were sent off to the neighbour- 
ing towns, to inform the commanding officers 
of the act of violence of the night before. After 
breakfast, they all proceeded to the still burn- 
ing ruins of the lately neat and picturesque 
cottage ; where they found Jim and Grace Cas- 
sidy weeping over the destruction of their 
household goods, and carefully collecting frag- 
ments of the destroyed articles of predilection 
as souvenirs for the future. Mr. Desmond 
assured them, that they should have a cottage 
even more convenient and pretty than the one 
they deplored, and supplied with every article 



THE REPEALERS. ^71 

suited to their comfort; and Grace, while 
thanking and blessing him, in the honest 
warmth of her heart, only prayed that their 
new residence might look on the river and the 
mountains, for somehow she had got so used 
to them, she could not be happy without 'em. 
This request Mr. Desmond kindly promised 
should be attended to; and Grace and Jim 
returned to Springmount with lighter hearts 
and more contented minds. 



272 THE REPEALERS. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

" Now for our Irish wars : 
We must supplant those rough, rug-headed kerns, 
Which live like venom, where no venom else. 
But only they, have privilege to live." 

The destruction of the house and property 
of the Cassidys appalled the peaceable part of 
the inhabitants of Cologan, and excited the tur- 
bulent to still greater violence. Notices and 
threatening letters were posted up at every side, 
and the Mahoneys and Cassidys were denounced, 
and those who harboured or protected them 
menaced with vengeance. Troops were sent 



THE REPEALERS. 2^7$ 

from Waterford to preserve the peace, and Mr. 
Desmond called a meeting of the magistrates, 
to take into consideration the most effectual 
method of quelling the spirit of insubordination 
that raged around him. A copy of the resolu- 
tions of the magistrates was sent to the Cat 
and Bagpipes, and, instead of producing the 
desired effect, only increased their turbulence 
and disaffection. 

" It is now coming to the point," said 
Rattling Bill ; " we must conquer them, oi 
they will conquer us : once rid of ould Des- 
mond, and his English faction, we shall have it 
all our own way ; and sure the best way to 
be rid of him is to burn Springmount. Are 
we to let him take up those turncoats, spies, 
and informers, the Mahoneys and Cassidys, as 
if he protected 'em purposely to spite us ? No ; 
let us make short work of it, and burn the 
house, and all that 's in it, to ashes." 
N 5 



^74 THE REPEALERS. 

" But what will our laider say to it, he that 
sets his face against killing and burning ?" said 
Gavin. 

"No matter what he says to it," replied 
Rattling Bill ; «' Onc't the job is done, it will 
be no use his preaching to us after. Besides, 
I don't see why, if we are to agitate, and kick 
up a row to please and serve his turn, we are 
not to kick up a row sometimes to please our- 
selves ; so I 'm all for making a bonfire of 
Springmount." 

" Yes," said another, " and as we are about 
it, let us burn the new barracks that ould mis- 
chievous woman Lady Abberville is building." 

" Ay, and her house into the bargain," said 
Bill, **■ for she 's a rael bad one, that runs with 
the hare, and hunts with the hounds." 

It was agreed that these misguided men 
should assemble at night on a certain spot ; first 
proceed to Lord Abberville's, to begin the work 



THE REPEALERS. 275 

of destruction, and then set fire to Springmount : 
and all this deliberate villainy was resolved with- 
out a feeling of compunction in themselves, or 
pity for those they had doomed to death. 

" Now that we Ve slept on it," said Rattling 
Bill, " I 'm glad that Grace Cassidy escaped 
last night, though IM have been glad her 
shilly-shally husband had been broiled on his 
own hearth, as all turncoats and informers de- 
sarve to be. But she 's a decent woman, and 
a purty woman, ay, and a modest woman too, 
and 'twould be a pity to kill her. When I went 
home and got to bed, the fumes of the whisky 
in my brain, and the recollection of the crack- 
ling flames and smoke in my memory, sure 
I had a quare dream : I dreamt we were all 
around the burning house, preventing the in- 
habitants from getting out of it, when the roof 
fell in, and I saw Grace Cassidy rise out of the 
smouldering ruins, and float in the air, with 



276 THE REPEALERS. 

bright wings to her shoulders, and a glory 
round her head. Grace has always a purty 
smile, just as if she smiled to please others 
more than herself; for it's melancholy like, 
though it 's so sweet. But in my dream it was 
ten times sweeter, and she said, ' Och ! boys, 
boys ! you 'd destroy me, but I 'd save you ! 
Turn from your evil courses, and repent, and 
I '11 be your guardian angel !' Sure with that 
she smiled again, and waved her wings, and 
a perfume finer than the finest flowers filled 
the air, and music, the softest and grandest 
too that ever I heard, came by on the wind, 
and I awoke — and awoke to think with horror 
and trembling, that she was burned. I 've 
seen blood shed, more than I ought to see. 
God forgive me ! But if you beheve me, the 
thoughts of this innocent creature, destroyed on 
her own hearth, and by her own neighbours, 
shocked me more than all I Ve ever seen : and 



THE REPEALERS. 277 

the big drops of perspiration burst from my 
forehead, and I seemed to hear her voice in 
every breeze. When I got up, and was tould 
she was safe at Springmount, I hugged the 
person that tould me, and I 'm determined now 
that a hair of Grace Cassidy's head shall not be 
harmed: so mind, boys, that every mother's 
soul of you keep a sharp look-out for Grace, 
that no mischief comes to her, happen what 
will ; for my dream wasn'^t sent me for nothing ; 
and as long as she's safe, IVe a notion, as 
the dream said, that she'll be our guardian 
angel." 

" Well, who ever expected to hear Rattling 
Bill minding dreams like an ould woman ?" said 
Gavin ; " sure nothing will surprise me after 

that r 

" I would not advise you to be after making 
comparisons about me,*" said Bill, warmly ; " if 
I mind dreams, it is bekase I know that in 



278 THE REPEALERS. 

sleep we 're more under the influence of God, 
than when we 're awake ; for our evil passions 
are not tormenting us ; and he that dare doubt 
my courage, or compare me to an ould woman, 
should not live an hour after." 

" You mistake me, Bill," said Gavin, " I 'm 
not such a fool ; sure I might as well doubt the 
daylight as doubt your courage; so shake 
hands, my boy." 

" There's many a man here," said old Tim 
RafFerty, "that's as brave as Bill, no dispa- 
ragement to him neither, that has had dreams 
and warnings, and those are fools who slight 
'em, so I 'm for following Bill's advice, and 
not hurting a hair in Grace Cassidy's head. 
But let us not attack Springmount, unless 
we have a sufficient force, for them English 
lords and their servant, with the Curnel, and 
the servants of the house, make a great body 
of men." 



THE REPEALERS. 279 

" I 'm for letting the whole of 'em escape," 
said Rattling Bill, "and merely burning the 
house, for then we '11 get rid of 'em altogether 
without bloodshed." 

" Och ! sure if it's only the bloodshed you 
dislike," said Gavin, with a fiend-like smile, 
" there '11 be none of that, when they '11 be 
burned instead of being kilt." 

" You're always for the killing, Gavin," said 
Bill, " more shamp for you ; but in this case 
we '11 be guided by the votes of all the party 
when we assemble together." 

The family at Springmount and their 
guests, unmindful of the danger that threat- 
ened them, were consulting on the best mode 
of allaying the irritation in the neighbourhood, 
which the protection afforded to the Mahoneys 
and Cassidys had so powerfully excited. Lord 
Tadcaster offered to give the Mahoneys an 
asylum in England, by appointing the husband 



280 THE REPEALERS. 

gatekeeper to one of the entrances to his park, 
and Lord and Lady Oriel declared they would 
establish the Cassidys at Oriel Park. 

" This willingness to oblige is very amiable," 
said Mr. Desmond, " but recollect if we accept 
your proposals it will have the appearance of 
yielding to the system of intimidation these 
misguided men have been so long aiming to 
establish." 

" But, dear Mr. Desmond," said Lady Oriel, 
" even an apparent concession is better than 
risking the lives of the two poor families, 
and exposing yourself to the resentful fury of 
the people." 

" Let us wait a few days before we decide on 
any thing," said Mr. Desmond, ''as I am in 
hopes the presence of the military will deter 
the ill-disposed from any violent measures." 

While they were yet consulting, Lady 
Abberville was announced, and entered the 
library with all the bustling importance that 



THE REPEALERS. 281 

marked her movements. After the custo- 
mary salutations, she began, '' Eh Men, Mes- 
sieurs et Mesdames, will you now acknow- 
ledge that the country is in a state of open 
rebellion ? I have been telling the Govern- 
ment so for the last two years ; but they are so 
obstinate that they will believe nothing till the 
mischief arrives. I know, Mr. Desmond, that 
you have considered me as an Alarmist, but the 
events of the last few days prove that I have 
been right, and you wrong. All this comes 
from not having barracks ; I always said what 
the inevitable consequences must be, but I 
must say I have been very ill supported by 
the gentry in my neighbourhood," (looking 
spitefully at Mr. Desmond and Colonel For- 
rester,) " but now they are attacked in their 
own houses, they must open their eyes to the 
necessity of keeping up a sufficient military 
force on the spot, which cannot be done with- 
out barracks. Since I saw you, I have ad- 



282 THE REPEALERS. 

vanced rapidly with my building, the masons 
have gone on surprisingly, the barrack is now 
two stories high ; I've been almost continually 
on the spot, and have been scarcely an hour off 
my horse ; the fatigue has been overpowering, 
but when the country is in danger it is the 
duty of every one to exert himself, and I know 
this barrack will be the saving of it, for hongrt 
malgre, the Government must buy it. Lord 
Abberville has written an official account of 
all the recent transactions to the Premier, for the 
Viceroy seems so absurdly incredulous, that it is 
useless writing to him ; and this morning, on 
hearing that your house had been attacked last 
night, we sent off a detailed statement, as we 
considered it the duty of Lord Abberville to 
send the first account." 

" You have been somewhat premature,''' said 
Mr. Desmond, " for my house has not been 
attacked, as my friends Lord Tadcaster and 
Oriel can certify." 



THE REPEALERS. 283 

" Well, that is very extraordinary,'' said 
Lady Abberville, with angry warmth, " as we 
were positively assured it had been. But if 
it has not, it will be, I dare say, which is 
a-peu-prh la mime chose, for my information 
is in general too correct to admit of my doubt- 
ing it, so prenez garde, mes amis, and don't 
count on your popularity, for I assure you, 
this is not the moment to remain quiet, when 
danger is at your door. I must be off to 
look how my bariack is going on, for the 
masons idle if I am not looking at them ; I 
make them work extra hours, which keeps 
them out of harm's way, and I hope a few 
weeks will soon finish the building. My stupid 
steward has been trying to persuade me that 
it will not be fit for occupation for some months, 
but this is all nonsense; I shall have it plas- 
tered and whitewashed the moment the walls 
are run up, and shall certainly advise its being 



284 THE REPEALERS. 

filled with soldiers as soon after as possible ; 
and you, my dear Mr. Desmond, must assist 
my project with the Government. Adieu, 
adieu, mes amis /' and away went the in- 
triguante. 



THE REPEALERS. 285 



CHAPTER XVII. 

" In thy fair brow there's such a legend writ 
Of chastity, as blinds the adult'rous eye ; 
Not the mountain's ice, 
Congeal'd to crystal, is so frosty chaste 
As thy victorious soul, which conquers man, 
And man's proud tyrant, passion." 

Lords Tadcaster and Oriel looked at each 
other with astonishment, when they heard the 
tirade of Lady Abberville ; and when she had 
withdrawn, they mutually congratulated each 
other, that England was free from such women. 

" What a nuisance she must be in a neigh- 



286 THE REPEALERS. 

bourhood !" said Lord Oriel to Mr. Desmond : 
" with all that extraordinary activity, mental 
and personal, that she possesses, turned to 
one account, selfish aggrandizement, — I cannot 
fancy a more disagreeable voisine ; then her 
effrontery is so glaring, her want of veracity so 
remarkable, and her system of jobbing so odious, 
that she makes one forget she is a woman.^' 

" Thirty years ago,'' said Mr. Desmond, 
" she would be httle disposed to pardon this 
oblivion of her sex ; for I date a dislike to me, 
which even her policy cannot prevent her from 
occasionally showing, to my neglect of the 
charms of the woman — for, strange to say, she 
once had charms — a neglect which originated 
in the disgust excited by the manoeuvres of 
the intriguante. I was to have been ruled, as 
she had ruled all the rest of her neighbours, by 
blandishments or diplomacy ; but both schemes 
failed, and the consequence is, she has never 



THE REPEALERS. 287 

forgiven me. Every time I see her approach 
my wife and daughter, or the wives and daugh- 
ters of my friends, I think them profaned by 
her society ; knowing, as I do, the vileness 
of her character, and the mechancete of her 
nature. All this is universally allowed by all 
who know her, but by the assistance of sheer 
impudence, she has established herself in a forced 
position in society, though she is as generally an 
object of dislike as of dread to all who come in 
contact with her. Of her may it be said, 

" With that dull, rooted, callous impudence, 
Which, dead to shame, and every nicer sense, 
Ne'er blush'd, unless, in spreading vice's snares, 
She blunder'd on some virtue unawares." 

A poor girl, who acted as bar-maid at the 
Cat and Bagpipes, and to whom Grace Cassidy 
had shown kindness on more than one occasion, 
having overheard the threats vowed against 
Springmount and its inhabitants, thought it 



288 THE REPEALERS. 

right to apprize Grace of them, and stole out 
to give her the information. The dream of 
Rattling Bill, which made a deep impression 
on the superstitious mind of the girl, was not 
omitted. Grace having learned all that she could 
from Judy Mulvany, hastily dismissed her, and 
betook herself to a consultation with Mary Ma- 
honey on what steps it was best to pursue : the 
delicacy of both was deeply wounded at the 
idea of exposing their benefactors to such 
danger, and they agreed that this reflection was 
the most painful of all the sufferings inflicted 
on them. 

" We ought no longer to stay beneath their 
roof,'' said Grace, " for never should I know 
a happy moment, if any misfortune occurred 
here, of which the protection afforded to us 
was the cause. Dearly as I love Cologan and, 
God knows, its mountains, woods, and river, 
are, as it were, a part of myself, I would rather 



THE REPEALERS. 289 

never see them again, than expose this dear 
good family to the risk of danger." 

" But where shall we go ?" said Mary Ma- 
honey, whose energies, weakened by bodily 
and mental suffering, were no longer capable of 
resisting as formerly the outrages of fortune. 

" No matter, dear Mary," said Grace, " any- 
where, provided that we draw not troubles on 
others." 

" You are right, Grace ma-vourneen," re- 
plied Mary, " we ought to go away, for it 
would be too cruel to have our benefactors 
suffer for us." 

" But how to skreen them from the danger 
that threatens at present," said Grace ; " if we 
tell the Master, he will have all the soldiers 
here, who will fire on, and kill the half, if not 
the whole, of these misguided men. Och ! it's 
terrible to think of, but something must be 
done, and done quickly." 

VOL. III. o 



290 THE REPEALERS. 

After a few minutes' pause, Grace said, 
" I '11 go myself to the meeting, and speak to 
'em ; but this must be kept a secret from Jim ; 
for he would either insist on going with me, 
which would spoil all, or prevent my going." 

" Och ! Grace a-vourneen, I tremble for you," 
said Mary Mahoney, " exposing yourself to the 
violence of these intemperate men. If I could 
go with you, I should be less afraid." 

" Fear no., my dear Mary,'' said Grace, " I 
shall be in the hands of God, and being alone, 
and totally unprotected before 'em, their pity 
will be more excited than their anger. My 
only fear is, the not being able to work on their 
feelings, but for myself I fear nothing." 

" Let us pray to the Almighty, in whose 
hands is the issue of all," said Mary, " for He 
alone can touch the hearts of these stubborn 
men." The two women knelt and prayed to- 
gether, with a fervency known only to those, who 



THE REPEALERS. 291 

have no hope but in prayers, and both arose with 
calmed feehngs, and increased confidence, in 
that Power which alone can save. 

A thought had suggested itself to Grace. 
The dream of Ratthng Bill, which seemed not 
only to have made a deep impression on his 
mind, but on that of some of his partisans, as 
related by Judy Mulvany, might be turned to 
good account. Might not a deviation from 
truth, on such a momentous occasion, an occa- 
sion when the lives of so many of her fellow- 
creatures were at stake, be pardonable.? and 
yet, with the purity of her unsophisticated 
mind, she shrank from a falsehood, even to 
work good. 

" Och ! sure it 's like play-acting," said 
Grace, to herself, "and I don't like it; but 
what 's to be done ? I have no other means of 
saving 'em all, so God must forgive me, for 
taking advantage of Rattling Bill's dream." 
o 2 



292 THE REPEALERS. 

Judy Mulvany having told her that the 
party were to assemble at a field near the Cat 
and Bagpipes, at twelve o'clock, Grace deter- 
mined to go there, and, as soon as her hus- 
band slept, to proceed on her perilous em- 
bassy. 

It may well be imagined, that the remainder 
of the day passed not without agitation to 
Grace ; and when she retired to rest, she 
counted with impatience the moments, until 
the heavy breathing of Jim should assure her 
that he slept. He fell into a doze, and she 
was on the point of stealing from her couch, 
when, at the first movement, he started from 
his slumber, and muttering, " Grace, Grace 
dear, donH leave me," grasped her arm. 

She trembled with emotion. How strange 
that he should wake at such a moment ! and 
still more strange, that he should ask her not 
to leave him ! But in a few minutes the 



THE REPEALERS. 293 

heavy breathing of Jim assured her that he 
slept soundly, his hand relaxed its grasp of 
her arm, and she gently, and with noiseless 
step, left her bed. 

The moon-beams shed their light in the 
chamber, and Grace, ere she had courage to 
leave it, paused, to cast a parting look at her 
sleeping husband. " What if I should never 
see him again V thought Grace — and the blood 
froze at her heart! at the possibility — " Och, 
no, no ! God is good,'** cried she ; and, murmur- 
ing a blessing on the sleeper, and a prayer for 
herself, she left the room, and sought a closet 
near to it, where she had arranged the clothes 
in which she meant to attire herself. She put 
on a white dress, and wrapped a dark blue 
cloak over her person ; and, having let herself 
out of the house by the servants' offices, with 
trembling steps and a beating heart, repaired 
to the field pointed out to her by Judy Mul- 



294 THE REPEALERS. 

vany, stealing along by the side of the hedge 
for concealment. 

She found many persons already assembled, 
all armed, and a quantity of combustibles, 
heaped, ready for their wicked purpose. The 
sight of so many armed men, and~ the preci- 
sion with which they went through the differ- 
ent evolutions, at the command of Rattling 
Bill, aided by the reflection of her own utter 
helplessness, awed poor Grace, and she trem- 
bled as they approached her place of conceal- 
ment. But when Rattling Bill addressed them, 
every word of his speech thrilling on her ear, 
and increasing the pulsation of her heart, as 
she listened in breathless suspense, her terror for 
those so dear to her conquered all fears for self. 

"It is decided, boys," said Bill, "that 
Springmount is this night to be burned to 
the ground, but it is not yet decided whether its 
owners, and the Sassenachs who are with them, 



THE REPEALERS. 295 

are to share its destruction : I have proposed to 
leave their fates to the votes of you all, so let 
those who wish to save them, cry ' yes,"* and 
those who doom them to death, cry ' no." " 

A silence as of the grave reigned for a 
moment, it was as if each felt the fearful re- 
sponsibility of his deliberation; hope arose in 
the breast of Grace, but it was only to be 
chilled the next moment. As the cry of death 
struck on her ear, the moon-beams fell on the 
face of Rattling Bill, and Grace remarked 
that an expression of sorrow and disappoint- 
ment paled his brow. 

" Do I hear right ?" asked Bill ; " do ye 
doom the family and their friends to death ?" 

" We do," was the reply, and her heart 
sank within her as she heard it. 

"Now then," thought Grace, "is the mo- 
ment ;" and, casting off her cloak, she rose up 
before the party, the moon casting its silver 



296 THE REPEALERS. 

radiance on her snowy drapery, and giving 
almost a celestial expression to her pallid face. 

" Boys, boys, you 'd destroy me, but I 'd 
save you. Turn from your evil courses, and 
repent, and let me be your guardian" — angel, 
she could not bring herself to add. 

" ^Tis her, 'tis her, just as she appeared in my 
dream !" said Bill, " and she shall be heard."*' 

A number of the men opposed her being 
listened to, and made cutting remarks on her 
presence ; — " She 's a play-actor,'' said one — 
" Och ! she knows well enough what she 's 
about," said another. 

But the personal friends of Rattling Bill, 
and they were the most numerous, insisted on 
her being heard ; and Bill, with deep reverence, 
led her amongst them, forming a group of his 
most influential friends around her. 

" Why have you come here, Grace C as- 
sidy .?" asked Bill. 



THE REPEALERS. 297 

" The Almighty has put it into my heart," 
answered Grace — '' Who amongst you, friends 
and neighbours as you have been to me since my 
infancy," said Grace, " ever saw me forget the 
modesty of a woman, and come before you thus 
boldly even in the Hght of day ? then may you 
well believe, that I would not now, in the dead 
hour of night, venture alone, and unprotected 
before you, were I not commanded by a Power 
that quells fear. You stand on the edge of a fear- 
ful precipice, and can I, your own countrywo- 
man, your friend, and neighbour, do otherwise 
than try to save you ? I forget that you 've left 
me homeless, and a dependant on charity for 
a roof to cover my head ; I forget that you 
have stamped names of infamy on my husband, 
who has done nought but yield to my prayers of 
abandoning you — but who would never betray ; 
I forget that you are about to destroy those 
who have sheltered us in our hour of need ; 
o5 



298 THE REPEALERS. 

I forget all, but that you are my friends and 
neighbours, and that I am commanded to save 
you. The troops are arrived, and are within 
call of Springmount. The family are on their 
guard ; any attempt to attack, or set fire to 
the house, must end in your total destruction. 
Be warned, and rush not on your ruin." 

" She is right!" burst from several voices ; 
" it's no good attempting it ! Sure, she's sent 
here by God to warn us ! Doesn't this prove 
there was sense in Rattling Bill's dream ?" 

Grace smiled at observing how well her plan 
worked on their superstitious feelings ; and Bill, 
no longer master of himself, cried out, " Look 
at her, look at her ! — I '11 swear there she is, 
standing just for all the world, barring she has 
not the wings to her shoulders, as she appeared 
in my dream, with just the same smile, and not 
a step will I or my friends take against her 
advice." 



THE REPEALERS. 299 

*' That we won't, that we won't !'' was echoed 
around. But Gavin, and a few more of the 
most discontented of the party, murmured 
that it was hard to have come there for no- 
thing ; and that, " after all, ould Desmond and 
his Sassenach son-in-law were their enemies, 
and ought to be punished."" 

" You know not what you utter,"' said Grace ; 
" but if you knew the goodness, the mildness, 
and the mercy of the master and his son, as 
I do, ye would lay down your lives to serve 
him, instead of being here at this hour plotting 
to destroy him. Whom did he ever injure, and 
whom is it that he has not served ? You have 
all turned against him, because ye are ashamed 
to look at his noble face and grey locks after 
your ingratitude. Boys, boys ! where are the 
fine manly, honest Irish hearts that were an 
honour to the country — hearts that were full of 
love and loyalty ? — and what has Mr. Desmond 



300 THE REPEALERS. 

done to turn ye ? Tell me one single example 
of tyranny or bad usage that ever he has been 
guilty of? No, you cannot; but how many 
acts of generosity, charity, and mercy could 
I bring to your minds ! I repeat to you that 
I am commanded to warn ye. I have done my 
duty, let the rest be on your own heads. I 
call God to witness that neither the family at 
Springmount, nor my husband, know that 1 
am come amongst you ; — oh, let me not have 
come in vain ! " 

They consulted for some time together, and 
the voice of Bill and his friends were heard, 
drowning those of Gavin and his adherents. 
A dozen of the former, headed by Bill, ap- 
proached Grace, and addressed her in the fol- 
lowing terms. 

" Grace Cassidy, we believe, and we have 
private reasons of our own for it, that you have 
been marked out by Providence to save us. 



THE REPEALERS. 301 

We will follow your advice — no injury shall be 
done to Mr. Desmond or his property — and 
you may return, with the happy thought of 
having saved many lives.'' 

A smile of joy and gratitude illumined the 
face of Grace ; and Bill again cried out, " There 
she is! with just the same smile, and all, bar- 
ring the wings, just as I saw her in my dream ! " 

Bill and his friends conducted Grace to the 
entrance at Springmount, with as much re- 
spectful deference as if she was the mistress 
of that mansion ; for, in addition to the respect 
her virtue, modesty, and courage excited, was 
now joined a superstitious reverence, attached 
to her in consequence of Bill's dream, and her 
appearance and words so exactly corresponding 
with it. 

When Grace found herself once more safe 
beneath the roof of Mr. Desmond, she threw 
herself on her knees, overpowered by the 



S02 THE REPEALERS. 

various emotions she had gone through, and 
filled with joy and gratitude at having been 
made the humble instrument of saving the 
family, she poured forth her thanksgivings to 
the Almighty power that had guided and pro- 
tected her. She arose from prayer with calmed 
feelings, and having sought the pillow of the 
watchful and agitated Mary Mahoney, pressed 
her hand, and whispered, " I am safe, and we 
are all saved, God be thanked ! Breathe not a 
word of what I have done to mortal ! " and she 
glided from the chamber to seek the repose her 
exhausted frame and spirits so much required. 

She found her husband asleep, unconscious 
of her nocturnal ramble ; and as she pressed her 
pillow, she again thanked the Almighty for the 
security with which she could now court repose. 

When Bill and his friends left Gavin and 
his discontented associates, they looked at each 
other with bitter mockery. "And so, after 



THE REPEALERS. SOS 

all," said Gavin, " we 've come on a fool's er- 
rand, and there '11 be no burning ; and all 
bekase Rattling Bill is turned out a dreamer, 
and Grace Cassidy comes here with her palaver 
to turn us from our work. Be my soul, this is 
what I call quare goings on ! I was thinking, 
all the time she was preaching to them fools 
that minded her, that I 'd like to shy a stone at 
her and stop her potato trap for coming to spoil 
our divarsion." 

" We must not go against Rattling Bill," 
said another of the party. 

" No, no ! " was repeated around, " we will 
not go against him ; and you may say what ye 
will, but the dream was a mighty quare dream, 
and Bill did right to mind it." 

" So he did," repeated several voices, " and 
we'll stick to Bill." 

'* But isn't it too bad for us to go home like 
fools," said Gavin, " without having done any- 



304 THE REPEALERS. 

thing ? Sure, I know a nice bit of mischief we 
could do, if we set off before Bill and the boys 
comes back, and there 's no dream to prevent it/' 

*' What 's that ? Tell us at onc't," cried a 
dozen voices. 

" Well then,'' said Gavin, " let us go and 
burn down the new barrack that ould cat Lady 
Abberville is building; she that's making the 
poor masons work extra hours, but never gives 
'em an extra halfpenny. Ay, ay, my boys, let 
us be off, and to work ; for sure it would be a 
pity to let all our iligant materials for setting 
fire be lost." 

The desire for executing this new project of 
mischief spread like lightning among the party, 
and ere five minutes from its being first pro- 
posed, they were on their road to put it into 
execution. 

Having kindled the flames at every side of 
the barrack, "Sure," said Gavin, "it's a pity 



THE REPEALERS. 305 

we don't burn the house over the heads of 
the ould jobbers ; the bloodsuckers, that 's been 
living on the plunder of the country for years — 
ay, and often set us on to mischief too, by 
underhand encouragement, just for her own 
ends." 

" Yes, yes, let us set fire to the house," cried 
all the party; and they quickly proceeded to 
Lord Abberville's, and as quickly set fire to 
different parts of the house and offices, which 
soon sent forth a blaze, which was hailed with 
joy by the incendiaries. 

The flames increased every moment, and em- 
braced every side of the mansion, before the 
inmates were aware of their danger. The ser- 
vants rushed through the burning doors, utter- 
ing piercing shrieks ; but no one thought of 
rescuing the unpopular master or mistress, who 
awoke not until all retreat by the stairs was im- 
practicable ; and they appeared at the windows 



306 THE REPEALERS. 

frantic with terror, and demanding assistance 
with cries of distraction and anguish. 

Gavin mocked at their sufferings and mi- 
micked their movements, and when some of his 
less ferocious companions proposed saving them 
by putting a ladder to the window, he would 
not permit it. 

A few minutes more must have been fatal 
to them, when a dozen men rushed forward 
with ladders, and the one who led them placing 
four at their base, and six to guard an open 
space, two mounted the ladders and rescued 
the agonized Lord and Lady Abberville from 
their perilous position, amid the cheers of some 
of those who, a few minutes before, would have 
equally cheered the destruction of the persons 
now saved. Such is the mobility of the natures 
of this inconstant people ! 

Having seen Grace Cassidy safely housed at 
Springmount, Rattling Bill and his associates 



THE REPEALERS. 307 

were returning to their homes, when the lurid 
flames of the barrack mounting towards the 
sky, attracted their attention. 

" What can it be ?" said one. " Sure, it 's in 
the direction of Lord Abberville's," cried ano- 
ther. " Let us go directly," said Rattling Bill, 
" and help to extinguish the flames. " 

They rapidly pursued their course across the 
fields, and arrived only in time to see the crum- 
bling walls of the barrack totter and fall to 
the ground, and the mansion of Lord Abber- 
ville blazing in the distance. They flew, rather 
than ran ; and having seized the ladders in the 
garden, placed them against the burning walls 
of the house, and assisted the terrified Lord 
and Lady to descend. Rattling Bill was the 
hero on this occasion, and without his services 
the owners of the burning pile must have min- 
gled their ashes with those of their residence. 

All their personal property was lost. They 



308 THE REPEALERS. 

had not even garments to cover them ; and the 
wretched couple, covered with the great coats 
of the compassionate peasantry, sat on the steps 
of the green-house, sending back reproaches 
to each other. 

" Eh bien, Milor/' said Lady Abberville, 
" you see what your obstinacy has brought on 
us ! I always said your continued betises could 
not fail to draw mischief and trouble on us.'" 

" You forget," said Lord Abberville, " how 
unpopular your eternal intrigues and manoeu- 
vres have rendered you ; and I dare be sworn, 
that the dislike of the peasantry to i/ou, and 
not to me, is the cause of this fearful outrage." 

" Par exemple,"*^ said the angry lady, " 1 give 
you joy of this new discovery ; but you always 
were bite, and bite you '11 continue to the end 
of the chapter." 

The irritated Lord, provoked beyond en- 
durance, cried out to the crowd, " Tell me, 



THE REPEALERS. 309 

boys, whether you have been instigated to fire 
my house by your disUke to me ?'*' 

" No, no!'' was repeated by nearly all the 
persons present. 

" I told you so," said Lord Abberville, turn- 
ing with an air of triumph to his wife; " so 
you see. Lady Abberville, it was their dishke 
to you that prompted them.*" 

" No, this I will never believe!" said Lady 
Abberville, " for I know they despise you. 
Tell me," said the angry lady, " what led you 
to the injury you have done us ?'"* 

" Why then, if you must know,"" said Rat- 
tUng Bill, " it was contempt of your husband, 
and dislike of yourself. We have looked upon 
him as a weak fool in your hands, but we Ve 
considered you as something worse — an artful, 
designing rogue.**' 

The rage of both may be easily imagined : 
that of the husband was the more concentrated ; 



310 THE REPEALERS. 

but the anger of the wife evaporated in spe- 
culations of the claim this outrage would give 
them on the Government. 

" Mind, Lord Abberville," said Miladi ; 
" that you swear all my diamonds, ' the family 
diamonds', were destroyed : few people know 
that they were melted long ago, and that paste 
supplied their place ; you must, therefore, talk 
of their value, with a lengthened face, and a 
woful shake of the head. The plate, the ' fa- 
mily plate,' too, must figure in alto relievo in 
our schedule of losses : you must dwell on the 
quantity and massiveness of it ; you cannot say 
too much, for recollect you are only making 
a substantive of what was merely a participle ; 
and between plate and plated there is little dif- 
ference, except to the buyer and seller. If 
you play your cards well, we may turn this 
night's adventure to a profitable account, and 
a burned house may prove a richer argosy than 



THE REPEALERS. 311 

we have ever yet freighted. Our picture gal- 
lery, (with half-a-dozen vile copies,) our library, 
(with a hundred or two bad novels,) may be ad 
infinitum swelled into a collection of splendid 
pictures, as unique from their quantity as their 
quality ; and the books, the combined re- 
searches of generations, of the literature of all 
countries. Our furniture, (the ruined heir- 
looms of our ancestors,) unseemly to sight, and 
unfit for use, may be magnified into the most 
costly and elegant meubles, uniting the splen- 
dour of the reign of Louis Quatorze, with all 
the convenience of modern refinement. I hope 
our remise and ecuries are burnt down, for that 
will allow of our adding the splendid establish- 
ment of horses, (consisting of two hacks, and 
a pair of spavined carriage-horses,) to the list 
of our losses, with the elegant carriages, for 
which Lord and Lady Abberville had long 
been distinguished." 



3i2 THE REPEALERS. 

Heartless as was Lord Abberville, he shrank 
from the calculating coldness of his wife, who, 
in a few minutes after her escape from a fear- 
ful death, was plotting the falsehoods, most 
likely to render the danger she had escaped 
from, profitable ; but the intriguante had as 
completely lost sight of past danger, in her 
plans of rendering it advantageous to her fu- 
ture prospects, as if it had occurred years, 
instead, of a few minutes before. 

The moment the roof fell in with a crash, 
Gavin and his friends shouted in triumph, and, 
the work of destruction being now completed, 
retired from the scene of action. Little did 
they imagine that the mistress of the burning 
ruins hailed their destruction with even more 
joy than they did ; had they suspected it, their 
triumph would have been damped. 

A servant was dispatched to Springmount 
to announce the catastrophe that had taken 



THE REPEALERS. 313 

place ; and in due time a carriage, laden with 
pelisses and great coats, arrived to bear the 
Lord and Lady to the hospitable roof of Mr. 
Desmond, where they experienced all the kind- 
ness to which their circumstances, rather than 
their merits, entitled them. i 

Before leaving his dressing-room next morn- 
ing, a letter was delivered to Mr. Desmond 
from Rattling Bill, in which, with the frank- 
ness that characterised his nature, he detailed 
the intentions of the Repealers to set fire to 
Springmount the night before, and to sacrifice 
its inhabitants to the flames. He stated that 
to the courageous conduct of Grace Cassidy 
they owed their safety, and that, knowing the 
modesty of her feelings, a sense of justice pre- 
vented him from allowing the part she had taken 
in the last night''s adventures to remain con- 
cealed. 



*VOL. III. 



314 THE REPEALERS. 

" Grace Cassidy has opened my eyes,*" wrote 
Bill, " to the delusion I have indulged in, 
when I believed you, honored Sir, to be our 
enemy. The veil has dropped from my sight, 
and I deplore my errors ; but, having violated 
the laws, I fly from Ireland, to seek in Ame- 
rica that peace which my own folly has de- 
prived me of here. Before I go, I have exacted 
a promise from those over whom I had in- 
fluence, never to harm you or yours ; I know 
they will be faithful to it, and I also know 
that you will repay the pure and fearless wo- 
man who has saved your lives, and preserved 
from crime, 

" Your now faithful Servant, 

" Bill Donovan.'' 

Mr. Desmond sent to Grace Cassidy to meet 
him in the library, as soon as he had perused 
Rattling Bill's letter, and when he saw the diffi- 



THE REPEALERS. 315 

dent looks and bashful countenance of Grace, 
as she presented herself before him, he could 
hardly believe that it was this timid woman who 
had braved the presence of a riotous rabble 
the night before, to save him and his family. 

" Grace," said Mr. Desmond, taking her 
hand, " I know all that you did last night, 
and I shall never forget it." 

" Och ! dear master,"" said Grace, her cheeks 
becoming suffused with a tint that rivalled the 
rose, " who tould you ? Sure it was nothing 
at all, for what was a life like mine compared 
to yours, and the dear Mistress and Mrs. For- 
rester's ? and then it was worth while risking 
twenty lives to show these poor misguided men 
that they were wrong. Excuse my freedom 
for daring to speak so boldly before you, 
honored Sir, but after my husband and your 
dear blessed family, sure I feel my next duty 
is to my poor misguided, but always dear 



316 THE REPEALERS. 

countrymen. The most insignificant person 
may serve his country, as the mouse gave 
liberty to the lion by gnawing the meshes of 
the net that entangled him, and therefore I took 
courage to speak the truth to thosel love." 

" Come with me, my good Grace, to the 
breakfast-room," said Mr. Desmond, " that all 
the company may know to whom they owe 
their lives." 

*' Och ! please. Sir, to excuse me," said 
Grace, " I only did my duty, and, above all, 
my husband does not yet know that I left 
his side last night, and I beg, honored Sir, 
you will not mention it till he knows it." 

Mr. Desmond sent for Jim Cassidy, that he 
might have the pleasure of telling him of the 
heroism and admirable conduct of his wife ; 
though Grace blushed a rosy red, when the 
master lavished on her the epithet she so well 
deserved. 



THE REPEALERS. 317 

But no sooner was Jim made sensible of 
what she had done, to the details of which 
he listened with open eyes, ears, and mouth, 
than he ran to Grace, and falling on his knees, 
while the tears coursed each other down his 
cheeks, he exclaimed, his voice broken by sobs, 
" Yes, Sir, she's a blessed woman, and a guar- 
dian angel to all she loves ; but I, I 'm not 
worthy to belong to her, and I know it, I feel 
it, for all she's so loving and kind to me." 

Grace, unrestrained by the presence of Mr. 
Desmond, threw herself into the arms of her 
husband, and, while pressing him to her heart, 
said, " Don't say so, dear, dear Jim, for if 
there 's more good in my heart than in the hearts 
of other women, it's the warm love for you that 
has brought it out, just as the sun brings out 
the flowers of the earth." 

Mr. Desmond insisted on leading Grace to 
the breakfast-room, where he briefly informed 



318 THE REPEALERS. 

the party that, if they were all assembled there 
in safety, they owed it to the heroism of Grace 
Cassidy. The compliments and commenda- 
tions she received on all sides, deeply embar- 
rassed her ; but the warm shakes of the hand 
of the dear ould Mistress, Mrs. Forrester, and 
Ladies Oriel and Tadcaster, encouraged her. 

Lady Abberville interrupted their commen- 
dations, to reproach Grace for not having saved 
her house and property, instead of allowing her 
diamonds, plate, furniture, pictures, library, 
horses, and carriages, to be consumed. 

Mr. and Mrs. Desmond looked at her with 
astonishment, at hearing the recapitulation of 
this catalogue raisonnee of her losses, having 
frequently observed the paucity of even the 
common comforts of life in her mansion ; and 
both felt inclined to smile, as .ae speculation 
of the intriguante was exposed to them. 

Mr. Desmond and Colonel Forrester fixed 
a comfortable annuity on Grace Cassidy, her 



THE REPEALERS. 319 

husband, and their future offspring : and the 
Lords and Ladies Tadcaster and Oriel sub- 
scribed a considerable sum to be vested for her 
use. But, when Grace heard of it, she en- 
treated that it might be appropriated to the 
wants of Patrick and Mary Mahoney, charged 
with a small provision for Larry Macswiggan. 

This generosity encreased the admiration 
the whole party felt for her ; and though her 
wishes of providing for the Mahoney s and Larry 
Macswiggan were carried into effect, her bene- 
factors insisted that the sum they had sub- 
scribed for Grace should be appropriated 
wholly to her use. 

Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester, in due time, 
gave birth to sons ; Lord Oriel's restored hap- 
piness soon banished his too great suscepti- 
bility, and ht is now considered to be one 
of the happiest husbands in England, as is 
Lady Oriel one of the happiest wives. 

Lady Tadcaster is pronounced to be as fault- 



320 THE REPEALERS. 

less a wife as daughter, and her friends rejoice in 
her happiness ; and Lady Delmore is once more 
on the point of approaching the hymeneal altar, 
with better prospects of happiness, being led to 
it by the good Duke of Bridgenorth. Grace 
Cassidy has given birth to a daughter, to whom 
Lady Oriel and Mrs. Forrester stood sponsors. 
and the village of Cologan looks, and is, more 
flourishing than ever. 

Repealers are no more heard of; they have 
died a natural death : and the Union between 
England and Ireland bids fair to become everv 
day more indissoluble, by the strengthening of 
the strongest of all bonds of union — favours 
conferred, and gratitude excited. 

THE END. 



LOKDON : 
PRINTED BY SAMUEL EENTLEY, 

Dorsel-Etreet, Fleet-strett- 
