WOMAN;



OR,



IDA OF ATHENS.



ATHENS.

IT was the feast of the great Bairam! A dervise had asserted, according to the most tremendous dogma of his religion, that the Bairam of 17—was Fated to be a celebration of uncommon festivity. Not a mussulman in the empire but evinced his faith in the prediction, by his individual efforts to corroborate its truth; and never, since the day of Mahomet II, when Greece resigned the last breath of that splendid existence which excited the wonder and admiration of a world, had the city of Athens been animated by a scene of such joyous revelry as the rites of Islamism now presented in its streets. "It is so written in the book of fatel" exclaimed the devotees ; and evinced the fervor of their piety in celebrating the festival of their prophet by the violation of one of his wisest laws. Rude music reverberated on every side; peals of artillery were thundered from the citadel; and Nature, emancipated from the curb of Prejudice, borrowed from Superstition a temporary licence for the indulgence of her own enjoying propensities. The Greeks, who resemble their beautiful statues, which, though injured, defaced, and mutilated, still preserve the exquisite traits and delicate touches of supreme genius; the Greeks, who are only dcbasfd be. ause they are no longer/rre, and who have rescued from

B





the virtues of which tyranny had despoiled them that exquisite sensibility with which nature has peculiarly endowed them; stunned by the boisterous carousals of their imperious masters, had retiied within the solitude of their houses, after having paid that personal tribute which, at the festival of the Bairam, gives them so painful a remembrance of their long-endured captivity.*

An English traveller, who had but just arrived at Athens, and whg had taken up his residence in the French convent of Capuchins, had vainly endeavoured to fly the deafening noise of those zealous votarists who so " rudely thanked the gods amiss," where taste directed, where curiosity impelled: still it pursued him, amidst the ruins of the temple, the gloom of the mosque, and the -privacy of the church. Pre-existing causes of discontent had left the mind of the traveller nerveless, and rendered him incapable of supporting with patience a circumstance, which, under another tone of feeling, would have afforded him matter for amusement. H« loved the ludicrous under all the various aspects, in which the folly and error of man exhibit it; but here the passion slumbered over its subject, and, attracted by the deserted air of a Greek coffeehouse, he turned round, entered its kiosk, and called for some refreshment. But no sooner had he flung himself on a mat, and raised to his lip the cup of mocha coffee presented to him by the host, than a band of janissaries assembling before the door of the vaivode (or governor') added their discordant strains to the accompaniment of instruments, shrill, stunning, and untunable. The delicately organized Greek dropt the salver he held to the ground, and placed his hands on his ears; the Englishman



* "During the Bairam,"* says De Tott, "the Turks newly clad, thoroughly absolved, and always well armed, think they may perpetrate every thing with impunity, and exact what they thim< proper from the unhappy Greeks." From the age of fourteen the Greeks annually pay a poll tax at the Bairam, and many of the Greek Turks drink freely during its celebration,

* The Bairam answers to the Easter of the Chrotuuu.





"•

started from the mat, threw down a piastre, and rushed out of the house: to his distempered mind, to his heated imagination, the horrors of the wildest superstition of remote antiquity seemed revived. Bacchantes, animated with Orphean fury, slinging their serpents in the air, striking their cymbals, and uttering dithyrambics, appeared to surround him on every side. Peevish from disappointment, overcome by heat, distracted by noise, he half meditated an immediate return to Venice, from whence he had but just.arrived; and, as his only resource, determined on shutting himself up, during the rest of the loveliest day the lovely climate of Greece ever produced, in a gloomy closet belonging to the convent of the French Capuchins. What a retreat for one of the most profound, of the most taseful voluptuaries in the world!

The Englishman held a diplomatic situation at Venice, and in a moment of that depressed relaxation which in ardent characters so frequently and so fatally succeeds a more than ordinary tension of feeling and spirit, he sought a temporary change of place in the hope of effecting a permanent change of sentiment; and the exaggerated details of Carlo Stamati, a ^oung exiled Athenian, with whom chance hud associated him in Italy, lured his steps to Athens.

The taste of man is not to be governed by his will, or directed by his judgment; it is from those passions of his nature which have been nurtured and cultivated by the habits and associations of his life, that his taste will receive its predominant tone. A classical education will not alone inspire enthusiasm for classical pursuit; and the ideas or the objects analogous to our manner of contemplating, or feeling, are those which must still awaken our interest, attract our research, and fascinate our attention. Stamati, the young exile, adored his country like a Greek,* and

* The Greeks, in the midst of slavery, never leave their country but on urgent business, and return to it with eager fondness, as the only p'.nce capable of yielding true enjoyment."

See De Gufs Voyage literairedefa&KCf.





praised it with the eloquence of an Athenian. The Englishman, who loved character, and was amused by traits of national vanity, smiled at his enthusiasm, and listened patiently to Ins endless details of ruined temples, truncated columns, and mouldering aqueducts. But when he climaxed his animated recital by describing the effects of that delicious climate which renders existence itself a blessing; that delightful region, which presents so frequently those lovely forms elsewhere but ideal ;* forms from whose exquisite and unrivalled expression the genius of Apelles and of Zeuxis drew their inspiration; then the delicate chord of a predominant passion was touched in its finest point of vibration: the devoted man of pleasure, the elegant voluptuary, extended mere attention to anxious e.squiry: and he who was not to be induced to breathe the air which Socrates hart respired, or to visit the tomb where Menander reposed, luxuriated in that enjoyment which Ionian gales might still bestow, and an Athenian Aspasia might stiil possess.

The Greeks love to madness. Stamati was a lover and an exile; and he ascribed to his country-women all the witchery of loveliness he had fell in the beauty of his mistress. The next day the Englishman embarked on the Adriatic for the continent of Greece, and arrived at .the Piixus on the first day of the Turkish festival of the great Bairam.

It was a grey, gloomy morning; massy clouds from jnount Hymettus spread towards the shore; and the skiron, whose breath is stupefaction, sighed along the coast. A solemn silence, a gloomy desolation, reigned



* "The testimony of modern travellers confirms the evidence ct antiquity, that the shores and islands of the Archipelago produce mote elegant and liberal forms, and features more animated and expressive, ivith fewer individual imperfections and more of general nature, than * an be found in ihc other divisions of the world."

. Gillies' Greece, Vol. 2, Chap. 3,

"They might still be compared,-"' says Olivier "from their features and their forms, to the most beautiful models that antiquity has transmitted us."





over that once splendid, celebrated, and crowded emporium. The mean warerooms of some French merchants, the solitary Greek convent of the monks of St. Spiridion, with a few ruined columns and scattered fragments of ancient architecture, were all that now met the eye of that Piraeus, to whose beauty and splendour the judgment of a Themistocles, the profusion of a Cimon, and the taste atid magnificence of a Pericles had contributed. That Piraeus, where the spirit of Sylla had breathed its destructive influence, and where-the classic enthusiasm of Caesar submitted to the decrees of a barbarous policy, and suffered him to retrace those steps of Gothic spoliation which his ravaging predecessor-had itnpressed.

The traveller stood before the door of a wretched mengilkane, or post-house, while his horses were preparing: he looked around him; then thought of Stamati's descriptions; remembered the proverb of the Grteca Jidcs, and smiled at his own credulity. Regardless of the tcaibs of Menander and Euripides that lay on his road from the Pirsean gate, he hastened to deliver his letters of introduction to the superior of the Capuchins.

Disgusted with the monastic gloom of his new residence, he hurried to the city; but narrow streets, ill-built houses, poor churches, mean oratories, gloomy mosques, and dervise convents, were scarcely endured, for the sake of those matchless and beautiful monuments of Athenian grandeur and Athenian genius with which they were indiscriminately mingled > while the riotous carnival of the Turks distracted attention, and frustrated every<observation which curiosity (even independent of enthusiasm) might have.been induced to make. t

The Englishman, scared from the kiosk of the Greek coffee-house, directed his weary steps towards the convent of Capuchius.—A mind, devoured by discontent and apathy; a mind now immediately tinged with disappointment and disgust, threw its shadows upon every object. As he proceeded througlvthe temporary bisesteen erected in the Bazar for the sale of trinkets, jewellery and refreshments, an Italian renegade advanced, and offered to be his giide. —" Lead me," said the traveller, with.a sigh, " lead me to the ruins of the Temple of .Venus;" and they proceeded, the one detailing his merits as a ciceroni, the other unattending and silent, until they reached a mean-looking church, and the guide exclaimed, "There is the site where the temple stood; it is now consecrated to the Panaghea, or blessed Virgin."—He crossed himself devoutly as he spoke. The traveller shrugged his shoulders, gave him some money, and dismissed him. "And this," he exclaimed, "this is the renowned and splendid city, once the region of the graces; where the arts deified the passions in personifying them; and where the most brilliant fancy received its glowing imagery from the most perfect model of human beauty!" At that moment a figure of singular appearance approached : it was a Turkish girl, who, availing herself of the protection of her veil, stole from the vigilance of her Kiaya Gadun,* to witness the festivities of the Bairam. The veil, of a thick and impenetrable texture, descended from the head to the feet: it defined no proportions, it marked no form; two apertures made for the eyes were covered with a black gauze; all was graceless and undistinguished. What an object to one whose imagination was full of the beauties of the Anadyomine! Negligent of the Carte-du/iays, anxious only to escape the heat, the noise and tumult of the streets, peevish, disappointed, and unheeding, the English stranger wandered in an opposite direction to that which led to his convent. Already had he passed the ruined aqueduct of Adrian, and reached the stupendous columns of the temple of Jupiter Olympius, ere he bad discovered his error; but the blue waters of the Engia still gleamed before him to guide his steps, while its fresh breezes tempering the ardours of the glowing season seduced him to its shore. Amidst the still beautiful, still matchless ruins of the temple of Jupiter, the traveller paused, wrapt in wonder and admiration. Independent





The Kiaya Cadun. the intsnJante, or chief gemvernantc of tfce





of every association of ideas, the gigantic height of the pillars, the beauty of the architecture, the harmony of the parts, the strength of the relievos, and the extent to which the fragments still spread, fascinated his attention and excited his amazement; till the ardour of the sunbeams reflected from its columns, and the dust of its ruins, which a transient breeze dispersed in circling eddies, obliged him to seek the shade of a little grove, which stood alone and unparalleled amidst the unvaried sameness of the surrounding plain.

The olive grounds, which still form the opulence of the Athenians, were to be seen to the north, spreading their shade till their grey foliage blended its sober tint with the mists of distance; but the grove, whose luxurious bosom opened to shade the fervid brow, revive the drooping senses, seemed like a beautitul exotic blooming in a soil foreign, but not ungenial, to its nature. It was so young, so verdant, it might yet be deemed little more than a plantation; and though it declined towards the Engia, yet a pure and brilliant stream, drawn from the exhausted source of the classic Ilyssus, bathed the roots of its trees; or, lodging in little rocky cavities, trickled from its recesses with a murmur that at once allured and chased repose, that soothed the mind without lulling the imagination. This grove seemed to assemble whatever was most delicious, most worthy of admiration in the eastern and western world; and the produce of the rich soil of oriental Turkey mingled their gay and blooming beauties with the more vigorous offspring of European Greece. The flowers of the spreading agnus castus mingled their fragrance with the pomegranate of Shemlek; the Asiatic andrachne reared its smooth, red trunk; and blossoms of brilliant scarlet, amidst the dark green of the lofty Turkey oak, and the golden clusters of the eastern spartium, gleamed amidst the fragrant foliage of the cedrat, the most elegant shrub of the Levant;—while to sounds of discord and tumult succeeded the chirping chorus of the summer locusts, or the sweet note of the Aidoni or Natolian nightingale. Man is so much the creature of situation, so d€pendent on the tone of his natural for the enjoyments of his mental being, that the scene which glows, the odour which intoxicates, the sound which ravishes, have each a power no strength of intellect can resist; and sorrow is soothed, and bliss exalted, as external objects play on the imagination, or influence the senses.





Already the susceptible Englishman had deferred his return to Venice by another day, when the haunt of his delightful and delighted wanderings, changing its aspect without losing any thing of its charm, seemed to smile into a luxurious garden. Sheltered by the fragrant summit of Hymettus towards the east, commanding a view of the savage rocks and towering fortress of the Acropolis to the west, and bathed by the incursive witters of the Engia, it surrounded a building of some extent; but of so detached and irregular a form as seemed to mark the different stages of architecture, and lo unite, without blending, the different orders as they arose in Egypt, and terminated in Rome. The main body of the edifice was concealed by the intervention of the plantain and orange trees; but, emerging from their delicious shades, the antique Corinthian portico, the modern Grecian vestibule, and spiral Turkish kiosk, displayed their different forms, erected of the finest specimens of the school of Phidias.* Pillars, that haply supported the consecrated roof of-a temple of Venus ; beautiful metopes, that ornamented the frieze of the unritulled Parthenon, and mutilated statues which at once marked the exquisite beauty of the model, and the supreme genius of the artist, were disposed of and mingled with a judgment that attested the supreme taste of the possessor, and left no regret for a spoliation productive of an effect so charming ;—a spoliation, which rescued the most exquisite specimens of the ancient genius of the Athenians from the depredation of domestic barbarism;



* "Every where," says Stuart, "are to be met fragments of ancient

marbles, pieces of ruined sculpture, and architectural ornaments,

Nous y en vimes," says Spon, "dans les jardins et memes dans les





and secured on their native soil the wreaths of ruined grandeur from the elegant enterprise of foreign taste; capable, as willing, to purchase the acquiescence of venal ignorance and Gothic rapacity.

Curiosity, wonder, admiration, engaged the mind of the Englishman. Was this the retreat of some Athenian archon, led away by the passion so fatal to his unreflecting countrymen; who, indulging themselves in their hereditary taste for sumptuous villas, hold out a lure for Turkish avarice, which too frequently the life, as well as the property, of the imprudent Greek, is forfeited to gratify J* Or was it the harem of some Turkish officer of state, of the vaivode who governed the town, or the disdar-aga who commanded the Acropolis?

Without resigning ^imself to the vague influence of conjecture, without calculating on the danger of enterprise, the Englishman advanced Jowards the portico that had first fascinated his attention. It was supported by fluted pillars of the Corinthian order, its frieze was a bas relievo of the ancient Greek dance of the " liorai," or seasons ; the lovely forms of the Greek youths wreathed with the ivy and the vine, their arms interlaced, their brows crowned with the oak leaf and rose, seemed still to celebrate the return of the sweetest of the seasons. This exquisite fragment might have been the work of a pupil of Phidias! Oh! it was impossible to dismiss the idea: it might have been the exquisite effort of Phidias himself. The portico only formed the entrance to an apartment, which on one side was screened by a gilt lattice-work, thickly interlaced with Arabian jasmine; that at once diffused a mysterious obscurity and a delicious odour. The traveller gently drew aside the flowery shade, and the interior of the apartment lay exposed to his view. It was divided in the centre by a drapery, partly drawn aside; the

» "The Greeks when they have the favour cf government, and think they may trespass against the laws, generally begin in the particular of building; in that case they know no bounds, but indulge their passion for a sumptuous palace, as the highest method of gratification." Dc Gvfs Viyage liwaire,





remote division was a bath; its bason, of Parian marble; was supplied by a fountain, which poured iis waters in a murmuring sound over the aquatic plants which crept round it; it was sombre and cool, and formed a relief to the exterior room, which was simple, though luxurious; the floor was covered with Egyptian mats; a few antique urns (such as are frequently to be found in the fields of Attica), filled with fresh flowers, and a small tripod and sopha, were the only articles of furniture it contained. The sopha, raised to a little height by a platform covered with Persian carpet, was placed beneath a canopy, whose drapery of muslin softened, without excluding, the reflection of the sun; and shaded from its ardors, the recumbent form of a sleeping girl. She resembled, as she lay, the beautiful personification of Bafhfulness by Corradini; for an air of vestal innocence, that modesty which is of soul, seemed to diffuse ifself over a form whose exquisite symmetry was at once betrayed and concealed by the apparent tissue of woven air which fell like a vapour round her. There was something so delicate, so ideal in her form, that the very drapery that veiled it seemed to partake of its aerial character ; and her gjently languid respiration alone, spoke her not a thing which fancy only had embodied. It was impossible to mistake the bella reposa. —It was an Athenian girl, who, having recently taken the luxury of the bath, was indulging in the repose which forms so delightful a necessity to the preceding pleasure; breathing the fragrance of a perfumed atmosphere, enervated, but not oppressed, by its glowing warmth. The dream of her slumber, as it was reflected on her countenance, seemed to steal its charm from the delightful sensations that preceded it; sensations only to be known in those climates where the enjoyment from whence they spring is at once a necessity and a pleasure; when refreshed, invigorated, yet involved in gentle lansjuishment, a new consciousness of existence diffuses itself through the soul; while the fancy, delicate and pure, wanders through imagined worlds of bliss the realities of countless ages could not purchase.





Nature, always dictating ease, is always graceful. The unstudied attitude of the Greek was curved in the true line of beauty; the arm which was thrown back to support her head, crimsoned the cheek that pressed its snow: —the arm that was thrown carelessly round her bosom was half covered by the redundancy of her black and shining hair.* Even in sleep a shade of sadness hung on the dark arch of her expansive brow, and seemed to extend its softness to the smile that played round her halfclosed lip; languishment and repose breathed round her. Yet, even in the passive tranquillity of profound sleep, on her countenance was still effused the deathless expression of intelligence, feeling, and sensibility. At the foot of the platform sat a little black boy in the habit of a slave, and faintly waving- in his hand * a fan of peacock's feathers, which wafted the air on the face of his sleeping charge, and diffused around the odour which he sprinkled at intervals from a ewCr of rose-water; till at length, participating in the repose he had assisted to dispense, his head drooped, his eyes closed, and the fan fell to the ground. Light as was the echo of its fall, it chased the spirit of repose from the brow of the Greek; her arm, liberating itself from its tender office, restored the crimsoned cheek to the pillow's swelling pressure, while her languid eyes, resisting the brilliancy of light, was shaded by the white hand now thrown across ker brow. Changing her attitude from grace to grace, as indulgence dictated, or ease impelled, the variety of her gentle motions might have presented to the statuary the most beautiful, the most difficult, models for imitation; while the delicious indolence of doubtful sleep seemed still to struggle with the renovating energy of awaked intelligence. Happy state of indefinite existence? how perpetual the formless but delicious visions which live and die with you! —At length, weary even of repose, she raised her reeumbent form on her elbow, and holding back the dark tresses that shaded her face and neck, fixed her large, dark eyes on the face of the sleeping boy. A tender smile played over her features; some words of caressing fondness murmured on her lips; and, with an air of affectionate solicitude, she let fall the drapery of the couch around his form. There was, amidst the graces that accompanied this little act, an air of goodness" which gave that perfect indication of heart, without which in woman no loveliness can exist.



* " Those of the Greeks," says De Tott, " who are sufficiently opulent to imita'e the Turks, are accustomed to sleep in the afternoon, while a stave wafting a fan of feathers renders the air cool and refreshing."





At that moment a door, concealed by the curtain of the bath, slowly opened, and an elderly female, dressed in the matron habit of Athens, the garment of blue cloth, the high pointed cap, and yellow buskins, cautiously entered the room. The Greek girl stretched out her arms to her with an air of childish, of infantine fondness, calling her, " her dear paramana *," in an accent that explained the tenderness of the epithet. The matron kissed the hands extended to her, and presented a pair of little slippers; then drew a drapery across the lattice work to exclude the sun: the drapery excluded, also, the dazzled gaze of the English traveller.—The beautiful vision vanished! After the scenes, the forms, he had previously

witnessed, could it be more than a dream! * * *

#.* *»** * * *

"Oh! Stamati, thpu art no Greek! Far from possessing the high colouring eloquence of thy country, thy detail was lifeless, thy description cold !—What a creature even in the torpid stillness of sleep what a countenance, what innocence, what decency, breathed round her, while pleasure and modesty might equally have caught a charm from her vestal form."—The Englishman checked the rein of heated fancy; he dared not trust himself to dwell on an image that tantalized his feelings, and rendered him the dupe of his imagination. He endeavoured to dull its powers by reverting to the Turkish incognita, and

* Paramana, or, "second mother," the name given to the nurse, who is still in Greece a person of great consideration in the family shr serves.





his meditated return to Venice; but the effort was vain, and he continued his apostrophe.—" Her beauty is not perfect, but It is at once luxurious and ideal; it is a form of fancy, a thought, an impulse; it blends the charm of woman with the airiness of a sprite. Here, then, is the mystery of Attic genius revealed; and if the Greek artist surpassed those of all other nations, it was the power of the exquisite beauty by which he was surrounded which, operating on the senses, the soul, and the national activity of spirit, inspired the superiority of his genius. It was thus that those of their lovely compatriots who first served as models to their art were afterwards worshipr ped in their statues as the objects of their adoration: it was thus they gave the finest tone to their taste, the warmest enthusiasm to their devotion. Apelles! Pi^xiteles! it is to Phryne you owe that immortality with which your Gnidus and your Anadyomene have crowned you."

The philosopher would have found the genius of Greece in her study of nature every where revealed, every where unrestrained: the patriot would have sought it in the freedom of her government, and the happiness of her people; the man of pleasure believed it existed only in the beauty of her women.

The Englishman had reached the extremity of the grove, and continued his reflections as he walked through the pathway meadow which led to the portico of Euminicus. Admiration of the Athenian girl gave way to conjecture as to her circumstances and situation; she was evidently not the appendage of a Turkish harem, she was probably the wife, mistress, or daughter of some Greek archon. He smiled to think of the profound ignorance which probably accompanied this intelligence of beauty, of the want of that talent, that brilliancy, that feeling energy of character which (from an early association of ideas) he had always sought in a mistress, and would always have feared in a wife: he ascribed to her all the indolence, the inanity which so frequently distinguishes the characterof Oriental women; but still there was such a fan

c





ciful charm breathing round her, so much of spiritual beauty, so much of the luxury of human loveliness, that he would not have given her a charm more or less than she possessed if he had been endowed with the power. Animated by that reviving spirit of gallantry which had lately suffered a suspension, and which habit rendered necessary to the happiness of his existence, he already speculated on the possibility of discovering his admiration to her who was its object, and of pursuing his adventure with advantage. Obstacles presented themselves but as stimuli; and the image of the sleeping Greek grew with increasing influence on his fancy, as difficulties were opposed by his fears to the accomplishment of his hopes. Less attracted by the ruined portico of Euminicus, than engaged by the secret speculations of his heart, he was proceeding under the hill of the Acropolis to the convent of the Capuchins, when a person rushing from beneath the arch of the Propylea seized him in his arms: it was the young, the ardent Stamati. The Englishman was overwhelmed with salutations of kindness and of joy; a frenzy of pleasure seemed to involve the feelings of the animated Athenian. "Your felucca," he exclaimed, " had scarcely weighed anchor when a letter of recal reached me from Athens ; it was the exertions of my kinswoman the archondess, Ida Rosemeli, with the French consul (who governs our vaivode) that procured my pardon and permission to return to Athens. Good heavens! I thought I should never have arrived !—what perverse winds !—what a miserable voyage !—You hud not left Minglekhane ten minutes when I landed. Holy panaghea, what a moment! My mother, my old uncle the ephore, with my beautiful kinswoman Saphyra, met me near the hill of the Museum. Oh! better be a slave in Athens than a king elsewhere!—What a tide of joy rushes through my veins!—Yet I am the most miserable of men !—Jumcli, my beautiful Jumeli! my lovely, faithless Turk, her whom I adored with my whole soul, she has fled in my absence, fled with my heart's best friend. No, no: 'tis false as hell; 'twas her father who





propagated the talc, that miscreant disdar-aga, who has since paid the forfeit of his crimes with his life. It is a long story—another time you shall know all. But, Jumeli, thou wast sacrificed to the embraces of a tyrant; even now haply thou gracest the harem of the grand seignor." Tears gushed to the eyes of the enthusiast Greek. The Englishman attempted some words of consolation, and endeavoured to conceal the smiles these strong traits of national characteristic excited: that precipitant order, of feeling which ever precedes reflection, that fervor of imagination which sways its possessor to the most opposite extremes of conduct and disposition, as the impulse of the moment governs, or the vision of the fancy directs.

"Well, well," added Stamati, drying his tears, and cordially pressing the hand of his friend, "this is no time for sorrow; I have been seeking you every where. I thought to have found you amidst the ruins of the Parthenon; 'disappointed, I was flying to the theatre of Bacchus; when it was my good fortune to meet you here. Come, you must dine with me: my mother is an Italian; you shall fancy yourself at dinner at the hotel Fran5013 at Venice." He then twined his arm in that of tjic Englishman, and they proceeded into the town, the Athenian fluently detailing his feelings, and hailing every spot as he passed it; the Englishman no longer annoyed by the tumult of the Bairam, and wholly devoted to the lovely subject of his recent meditation.

The father of Stamati had been a Drogueman; this circumstance, together with his mother being an Italian, had introduced in their domestic regime a style of living seldom found in Greece or Turkeys except in the houses of foreign consuls or foreign merchants. The drogueman had died rich, and had left his son in comparative affluence, which the interest of his mother and the exertions of his friends had secured from Turkish rapacity, even when banishment had been decreed against him by the chief magistrate of Athens, for a part actively taken in a recent political commotion of the Greeks, supposed to have been instigated by the intrigues of the Russians.





If the Englishman had sometimes been mistaken in the true object of enjoyment, his researches to obtain it had been unwearied, and his judgment, founded upon practical experience, was seldom at a fault; he praised, therefore, with sincerity, the delicacies of Stamati's table, and found another way to the good graces of his mother besides that of speaking her native language with elegant fluency, and praising her native country with animated enthusiasm. The popularity which Stamati had obtained 'among his unhappy compatriots would have crowded his house with those whose timid hearts in secret hailed his return, but the Bairam of the Turks in licensing unbounded insolence to the Greeks, confined the latter within their houses during the festival; and the restless Stamati, anxious to indulge his heart in the congratulation gf his friends, proposed that the Englishman should accompany him to the house of a kinsman whose villa lay nearer the shore. The presence of Stamati's mother had hitherto checked the solicitude and curiosity which eternally prompted the Englishman to seek that information relative to the sleeping Greek his heart panted to obtain; and he gladly embraced the offer of Stamati, as the most probable mode of forwarding views, to whose actual tendency he was as yet himself u stranger. Horses were ordered; and, in the mean lime, the impatient Stamati paced the terrace of his garden, wandering from subject to subject of the most opposite import with unwearied garrulity, till the arrival of the. horses led him to speak on that which was the object of their visit.

"It is but just," he exclaimed, " that the archondessa Ida Rosemeli receive the first offerings of my gratitude; her, to whose exertions I an* indebted for my present happiness."

"Is she young and beautiful ?" interrupted the Englishman, eagerly.

"That is nothing, my friend! nothing in Greece! but she is the wonder of Livadia; surely all the world has heard of Ida of Athens." The Englishman smiled and shook his head. "Her extroardinary learning,—" con





tinued Stamati; the smile of the Englishman disappeared. It was impossible to associate the idea of a " learned lady" with the beautiful, the indolent, the pleasure-breathing Greek; and Stamati, as they rode towards the shore, continued uninterrupted,—" her love of country, and her unequalled endowments! Oh she is a rare creature! Her father, my kinsman, Jani Rosemeli, is of the *archontic family of Benengeles, which, with the exception of the house of the Lembona, is the most ancient and illustrious in Athens; he is, therefore, since the banishment of the last archon Lembcna, (who was a true Greek) the first man in Athens; he has several vessels on the t Black Sea; he trades all along the shores of the Levant, and rents a petty government in Thessaly. All this was well while his friend Achmet the late disdar-agar, and his stupid brother Mastapper, the vaivode, governed. But things are changed in Livadia; and it is to be feared the prosperity of the archon is but the prelude to his destruction; he has, however, still one resource, the property of his daughter, which, though small, is secure in England."

"In England!" repeated the traveller. "It may appear singular, but so it is; you will be amazed to hear her speak English as well as you speak Italian, and you will he dazzled by the brilliancy of her talents, and the extent of her learning. Ah! my dear, my faithless, little Jumeli, thou didst not know a letter in the alphabet; and yet all the sages of the earth would say less in a thousand volumes than thou hast told me in one glance of thy large, black eye."

"Then, doubtless," returned the Englishman, smiling,



* The families styled archontic, are eight or ten in number, and mostly on the decline. According to the accounts of all modern travellers, they are the most haughty and the proudest persons in the world.

t The Greek merchant trades into all the neighbouring seas, but, says Sonnini, " hi gives himself up only by stealth to the speculations of commerce; and if they make any display through too great sue"cess, he trembles for his fortune, sometimes even for his life/'

Voyage in Grece, p. 77,





"the abilities of your kinswoman have operated as a counterpoise to her charms, and her knowledge of the •alphabet has saved the heads and hearts of half the young men of Athens."

"Pardon me, not exactly so; the sudden revelation of her charms at one time, procured her a crowd of admirers. It was one day that, to save the life of an unfortunate, (he was my friend, the friend of Athens and humanity,) she flew to the mekkemc, or court of the disdar, and pleaded but loo well before the aga. Her veil had fallen off'; and a crowd of young Greeks witnessed more charms than those her persuasive eloquence betrayed. But she resembles her native Hymeuus, round whose purple brow a thousand insects hover, but are deterred from a too close approach by th« too exquisite perfume its flowers exhale."

"And is there nothing," demanded the Englishman r.arelessly, "nothing in Athens that resembles your own Jumeli, whose large, black eyes tell a sweeter tale than all your poets ever sung: and who does not retemble your Ida or your Hymettus, and deter, rather than seduce, by its superlative excellence." "I know oLnething," sighed Staimti, with a desponding air.

"Nothing along, this shore hidden from the world by ihc.suspicious jealousy of a Turkish lover, or an Athenian husband; Oh, Stamuti! nothing!"—." A little farther up the coast, indeed," said Stamati, "near the promontory of Zoster, lives my kinswoman Zapphira, a young and blooming widow ;• you may probably see her at the archon's." "'And as piobably we may not, Stamati, the promontory of Zoster is of no great distance." "True, and the gymnasium of our women is always free of access to travellers and kinsmen."

They had .now reached a projection of the coast which abruptly gave them a view of the archon's house; irregular in its form, and partly concealed by trees, it stood in the center of a selvage of turf, of a beautiful sea-green, which equally harmonized with the tint of the distan^ waves of the Ergiaj and the verdure of a grove that rose behind it, resembling that which in the morning had seduced thij steps of the traveller. Hymettus rose in full reliei to the east; its conic summit crowned with odoriferous herbs, whose perfume the breeze wafted toward the shore; its sides bung with the fantastic drapery of the vine, which already displayed its purple clusters beneath a spreading foliage; numerous little bays urging their waves in foaming eddies on the land; formed several miniature peninsulas, protected by masses of dark and shining rock,on which the rose-coloured nerit and verdant alia-marina were embossed ; while clusters of the spreading rock-rose and cietan pink seemed to owe their cultivation, to other hands than those of nature, and mingled their fragrance with that of the orange-flower and pomegranate.





"This place," said Stamati, as they approached the house, "was the retreat of an English philosopher, the kinsman of the archon, and is now in the possession of the archon himself. It resembles an Eden in a desert, and owes its singular beauty less to its natural capabilities than to the taste and care of its successive owners. There I trace the original designs of the philosopher; on this side the bold ideas of the 'son of his soul;' and on that the delicate taste of the archondessa Ida. Oh, there is nothing like it in all Livadia."

"No!" returned the Englishman ; " but there is something that surpasses it, the paradise of a Mahomet inhabited by the loveliest of his houri." Stamali turned round tor an explanation, but a slave appeared to take their horses; and they proceeded to the house.

"It is necessary that I should announce you," said Stamati, as they entered a vestibule ornamented with some beautiful relics of Grecian architecture. "You will find Rosemcli the best fellow in the world, when the pride of the Athenian archon, and the timid caution of the Greek merchant, are discarded. Remain here: I return in a moment/'

Stamati then disappeared, leaving the door of an interior apartment open as he passed it. The Englishman amused himself in looking at the columns and inscriptions with which tlie hall was surrounded, till attracted bv.the flowers and fruits painted on the walls of the adjoining room, according to the Turkish taste. The room was terminated on one side by a door of Venetian glass, which, opening into the gymnasium, gave to his view the archon Rosemeli, surrounded by his family. The stranger gazed, unobserved by the interesting objects of his admiring contemplation.





The first salutations of kindness and affection had already passed between Stamati and his friends; and though they had resumed the respective stations his entrance had disturbed, their looks were still rivetted on his figure with all the cordiality of a joyous welcome, while they eagerly hung on some narration he was rapidly pronouncing in modern Greek. The archon was lying on an ottoman, enjoying the pleasures of the hookah; its amber tube* was placed in a crystalline vessel filled with rosewater, which murmured to the rising smoke, while its ft'agrance mingled with the odour of the sweet gums and aloes, which burnt on a little brazier near him. His picturesque dress contributed to the interest his truly Grecian form anflTeatures excited; and, though advanced in years, his quick black eye and marked expressive countenance betrayed the sensibility of character which distinguishes his nation, even under the stupifying influence of tyranny and oppression. Two boys, beautiful as the winged genii of poelic fiction, with no other covering than simple tunics of white muslin, lay on a carpet at their father's feet: the one had been engaged in stripping a heron's wing, with which the other feathered his fairy arrows. Their work was now suspended, and their eyes were eagerly fixed on Stamati. The paramana, seated on a'cushion at a respectful distance, was winding some gold

• " The Greeks," says De Tott, "betray a mixture of Greek and Turkish manners; a little lamp burning before the Panaghea, or Virgin, shed:, its light at the same time on the young slaves engaged in preparing offices of indulgence and indolence for their luxurious masters.''





thread off the hands of a little black slave for the embroidery of her lady; that accomplishment anciently so prized, and still so indispensable in the education of a Greek girl.

The archondessa herself, leaning over her frame, and sometimes interrupting her cousin by a few words softly pronounced, was seated with her back to the door; and even her figure, shaded by the drapery of her veil, left all to the imagination of the spectator; until turning round her head to caress a Sicilian dove that nestled on her shoulder, the Englishman again beheld the beautiful profile of the sleeping girl. The pulsation of his heart quickened: he rejoiced that a moment was afforded him to recover from his surprise, to conceal his joy; and Siamati, advancing at that moment, led him into the gymnasium.

On the entrance of the stranger, whom Stamati had announced as an Englishman of high birth, holding a diplomatic situation at the court of Venice, the domestics were dismissed; and the archon, rising with respect to receive him, welcomed his guest with all the courteous giv.ces so natural to an Athenian, and addressed him in Italian, sufficiently interspersed with French phrases to evince him master also of a language which was becoming that of the world. Then leading him towards his daughter, said, "My beloved, salute the illustrious friend of our dear kinsman." The archondessa arose; a shade of pensive sadness seemed to pass like a thought of sorrow over her brow, but her smile was not the less sweet, her blush the less warm: the bashfulness of habit evidently mingled its reserve with the graces of an elegant nature. Her glance, retiring, yet intelligent, was raised to the face of the stranger; and, bending her lip to the rose that bloomed on her bosom, she presented the flower thus enriched to the stranger, accompanied by the simple salutation pronoanced in English, but with the accent of an Athenian, "You are welcome."

The Englishman unconsciously held the flower in his hand, his eyes still pursued the form of her who presented it. She had returned to her embroidery, and he was seated by the arch on. He replied to the numerous questions of the inquisitive Greek, who incessantly addressed him; he returned the caresses of the playful boys, who clung fondly round him; but his thoughts, his glance, still rested on Ida.





Her form, her countenance, seemed to have assumed a new character since he had last beheld her. It was still nature, charming nature! but it was nature at once more awakened and more restrained. The beautiful proportions of her figure were no longer defined by a drapery of air; yet they were neither disfigured nor distorted by the snowy tunic, which, in veiling her shoulders and bosom by the simplicity and grace of its folds, gave to her perfect form the air of a fine antique statue; nor by the veil, so delicate and so dear to modesty, which even coquetry herself ever assumes with effect. No art was visible, except such as was interesting and curious from being a national custom, sanctioned by a classic authority; for, like Aurora, the extremities of her delicate limbs were rosed with flowing hues; and her little foot, as it pressed its naked beauty on a scarlet cushion, resembled that of a youthful Thetis, from its blushing tints; or that of a fugitive Atalanta, from its height and delicate proportion.

The Englishman gazed, till every ssnse seemed concentrated in one; till fancy tinged the object of his contemplation with something more than human, with that ideal charm which warms the poetic vision of the enthusiast, but which the most perfect reality of loveliness so seldom possesses. Mean time the charming Greek, with all a woman's delicate intuition, who always guesses more of the admiration she awakens by what she observes than by what she hears, betrayed her consciousness of the stranger's idolatrous gaze, with a modest naivete that added a new charm to her beauty. The colour varied in her cheek; her eye, though downcast, was unfixed: now she raised her fine turned arm to chase away the Sicilian dove that rested on her shoulder; and now, dipping her rosyfingers in a ewer of perfumed water, she plyed her needle with redoubled vigilance, evidentlv confused, but obviously not displeased. Her veil, now suffered to fall over her face, now impulsively flung aside, seemed indicative of her vacillating feelings, which the natural modesty, *nd equally natural vanity, of the woman alternately influenced.





Mean time, the Athenians conversed with a vehemence and fluency, that left them no room to remark the silence of the Englishman, to whom they politely and frequently referred, but by whose decision they seldom abided. The grievances of the existing administration, the cruelly, the rapacity, of the Turkish government in general, and 'he tyranny of the vaivode, and aga of Athens, in particular, were canvassed and condemned with imprudent freedom. Stamati spoke like a young man, whose patriotism was more influenced by his feelings than by his judgment; the archon, like an old man, who felt more as a partizan than as a patriot, and who had the good of his country less at hear.t than the success of the faction to which he had attached himself. The traveller, little versed in Grecian politics, but deep in the study of human passion, alternately sided with each, and with a certain ambigu of expression, that flattered the opinions of both without ever seeming to oppose his own to either; while he smiled at the romantic enthusiasm of the one, and detected the intriguing spirit of the other. Mean time, he trembled lest the learning and cleverness of Ida should betray themselves in the course of the political discussion, lest an axiom should b.tnish a grace, Of an argument disfigure a feature. Genius, feminine genius, the offspring of warm feelings and brilliant fancy, he adored in woman, but at pedantry he shuddered. He was soon relieved from the hope of the one, from the fear of the other; for Ida, silent, or engaged in playing with her dove, or her brothers, spake in gentle whispers; and the Englishman, forming his estimate of female talents from the brilliancy which he adored in the French, and the cleverness which he feared in the English, smiled at the idea which the simple Athenians entertained of a woman of genius; and, independent of her beauty, saw only in the intelligent and animated countenance of Ida the vivacity of the Greek, and the naivete of the recluse.





The sun had now sunk in the Engia.—The archon arose, and led his guests to the kiosk, whose light and Eastern architecture the Englishman had admired in the morning, as he viewed it through the rows of the trees: it hung over the gulf, and admitted on every side the fresh gale of the ocean. Stamati pointed out to the stranger the views most interesting in the prospect, while the beautiful children of the urchon gathered round their father, with all that graceful indication of fondness so natural to the Greeks, with whom parental authority is but the influence of an ardent affection.* 'The boys played at his feet; and Ida, kneeling on a cushion beside him, her hands clasped in his, made those tender and solicitous enquiries after his health which his delicate appearance seemed to sanction. Slaves now appeared, bearing on salvers a slight repast, which was placed on the tripod that filled the centre of the kiosk; mocha coffee' of the highest flavour, sherbet that might have passed for nepenthe, delicate caimac and cream, with the perfumed wines of Naxos, and the fragrant malmsy of mount Ida, filled the bowl; while the archon's sons, presenting a faithful image of the train tfam'iur of other times, served round the delicious honey of Hymettus; grapes newly gathered from the vineyard, and oranges, as yet unwedded from the flowery branch that bore them. Fresh perfumes were scattered on the aii;, and fresh aloes were burnt on the brazier, to revive the hookah of the archon.

It was now that the character of the traveller, like the flower of the arbor tristis,seemed to expand with the shades of evening. Intoxicated by the air he breathed, animated by the wines he quaffed, enchanted by the objects he viewed, the torpor of a first surprise, of a new born admiration, was banished.—/^ man of the world, a man of pleasure, and a man of talent! more master of the passions than of the heart, he blended in his manner elegant festivity, delicate panegyric, refined irony, and polished address. The winning smile, the admiring glance, the minute attention, the ridicule, which amuses the present with the follies of the absent; and the flattery, which is always certain in its aim because always oblique in its application, were all his own. Every word tended to awaken that love, or satisfy that passion, for pleasure inherent to human nature, and every equivocal expression soothed the foible at which it secretly pointed. Aware of the Rational vanity of the Athenians, he sought, amidst the few classic treasures he had preserved frornhis academic studies, for instances of the former splendor of Greece, the number of its heroes, the beauty of its women, the genius of its artists, the wisdom of its philosophers; and, while he lavished a boundless eulogiuni on the country he then inhabited, he artfully detailed whatever was reprehensible or ludicrous in the manners and customs of those nations where he had hitherto resided ; while circumstances of ridicule, images of whim, or anecdotes of humour, passed rapidly before his awukened fancy ; and, while he spoke with fluency in a language the most musical, the admiration he excited became at once the reward and stimulus of those shining talents and social qualifications so artfully and so eminently displayed. But while his eye appeared unfixed as his thoughts, its secret glvince sought in the countenance of the young archondessa for the impression he had made on her mind. The freedom of her attitudes, her unguarded looks, and clqquent countenance, betrayed even more than the penetration of the ^Englishman could pursue or comprehend. At first,kilent, and wrapt in ardent attention, her blushes and her stniles alone evinced her admiration, till sometimes a few words, timidly pronounced, seemed to assign a cause where the Englishman had only dwelt on an effect.—SorKetimcs an idea full of Attic finesse shewed by its delicate application, fhat even his tallies were rather Immorous than witty; and, more than once, a repartee



'"National and filial affections are virtues still subsisting without diminution in Greece,' says theabb6Sewin ; and De Guy adds, "Domestic scenes are to be met with in Greece, only to be found among the patriarchs. How cold, how superficial, are our manners to theirs'"





D





full of simplicity, while it delighted, intimidated, and sometimes prevented him from hazarding anflther propos, dazzled by a playfulness of fancy he so little expected 10 meet, and which he felt was even superior to his own. But again she bluslicd, was silent, and resigned herself to the infantine and indolent'manner which peculiarly characterised her air and gestures; reposing her head on her father's knee, she caressed the hand that played with her tresses,' and, not unfrequently, a shade of thought passed her brow, as if, though gay and happy from nature, she was pensive, and reflective from habit. Mean time, the goblet began to circulate with increasing freedom ; the Greeks, still intemperate, and fond of drinking to excess, reverted to political discussion, according to their usua^custom when under the influence of inebriety*. The grand seignior was deposed, the kislar aga beheaded, and the Greeks restored to their former political consequence in Europe.

Ida took a hint of retreat, from the sparkling eye and kindling vehemence of her father and kinsman. She arose, and, for a moment, turned her timid looks on the stranger with an eloquent glance, which seemed to arraign that intemperance which prevented her enjoying the society of one whose conversation had afforded her so natch pleasure.—Her glance was not lost, it was understood, it was felt: tiie Englishman also arose, he ventured to take a hand, which instinctively recoiled from the pressure ofliis; and, presenting her a Turkish guitar which lay on a sopha, said, "In the region of the graces, where every thing around me recals the days of Pericles, let nothing be wanting to complete the illusion."—Ida blushed her consciousness of the classical allusion, yet gently repulsed the instrument, and, taking her brothers by the hand, was retiring, when her father exclaimed, "Beloved of my soul, we cannot dispense with thy society: come, I pr'ythee, touch the lyre, and give me the song thy father loves."

"The Greek in his cups," asserts Habesci, "is lively and enterprising, always ready fb dethrone the Ottoman monarch, that he may restore the empire to the Greeks and Christians."





Ida sent for her lyre—It was a simple instrument, but of sxifficient compass to assist the voice, with an accompaniment. "1 pr'ythee, archondessa," said Stamati, " let us have the charming little ode in which Snppho depicts the vigilance of her mother; I remember you melodized it before my banishment."

'He presented her the lyre: she tuned it, but with some little hesitation, then struck a few low chords, and cast round a timid glance.—She sung; her voice was scarcely louder than a sigh, and her accompaniment was only an harmonic chord, swept at intervals.* It is supposed, that something of the ancient Greek song is still to be traced in the popular airs of the modern Athenians.

Ida knew little of music as a science, but as a medium of sentiment, she h,.d made it her study. Ignorant of its material part, its spirit was still het*own; and, unpractised in that indefinite and rapid combination of sounds which pl;iys on the sense, without reaching the soul, she possessed that power which gives a specific and individual expression; and, rendering tin image or a sentiment in all its force, compelled the heart to hear the voice of nature, rather than the ear to follow the intricacies of art.

This was not tiie style of music on which the judgment «f the Englishman had been formed; but he thought the song, like the songstress, was in a class by itself; and there was in its feeling, in its originality, a charm which his heart and senses acknowledged, though he understood not the means by which either had been touched. His applause was that which a delicate mind delights to receive ;. it was registered in his countenance, it was eloquent in his silence. Ida presented the lyre to StamalJ, who sung, at once, a little scoliec or drinking song,* which he accompanied with the artless and unskilful manner ot" a Greek, but which he sung like one who had resided in Italy. He was then, according to the custom at all modern Greek festivals, joined in a lyric catch by the archon; and song and wine were still circulating when Ida, unobserved by all but the Englishman, glided out of the kiosk, and appeared no more during the night.



* Polyb'ms ascribes the tnist extra rdinary effects to Greek music so late as a century before Christ; even still the art is not wholly lost in Greece. Olivier extols the musical powers of a young Lesbian, Petraki Tangros, whom he met with in Lesbos; and Savary, speaking of an improvisator!, whose performance delighted him in the neighbourhood of mount Ida, adds, "His mournful and melancholy music imitating the accents of romance, excited in the mind a powerful feeiing; his performance was greatly varied, and some of his passages, which were extremely tender, compelled both the heart and the ear to listen ty his melodious tones." Letters stir la Grece, p. 271.





It was midnight before the intemperate Greeks could be induced to relinquish enjoyments but too congenial to their social character, and luxurious propensity. The JEnglishnn:n v^is rather the guide than the companion of the inebriated Stamati, who•insisted that he should become his guest from that night; and who rather declaimed than conversed on the miseries of his country, its superiority over every other nation, the infidelity of Jumeli, and the charms of his kinswoman.

,... "Charming, too charming Ida, thou art all that womaa ,'should be. lovely, tender, gentle, and obedient; nature in thee knows no restraint, nature in thee knows no severity; thy voice is passion, and thy song is love; in thee there Js no chilling prejudice to vanquish; in thee there are no rigid principles to encounter; thy mind is soft and lovely* as thy person: and the pleasure that animates thy every look, the indolence that possesses thy every faculty, declare the object of thy being. Thou, the pupil of a philosopher, A woman of strong mini!, and capable of great exertion for thy captive country, a banished friend! Ah, Ida! if either are destined to be thy debtor, it is to the.influcnce of thine eyes and not to the power of thy eloquence their gratitude is



* The modern Greek festival, according to De Guys, never finishes without an epigrammatic song or catch, accompanied by a lyre, v. hich resembles that of Orpheus as described by Virgil. That the ancient as well as modern Greeks knew nothing of singing in ] arts is supposed by Barretti, Rousseau, and Burney, bat ignorance i.f counterpoint is no preventive of catch singing The scolia, by some ascribed to Alceus, and by some to the poetess Praxyla, were anciently snug in one joyous chorus, and sometimes by turns, and at regular intervals.





due. Yet, whence that transient beam of bright intelligence that lights thy glance and points thy words? Whence that effusion of genius that, for a moment, dispels the infantine simplicity of thine air and manner? Whence that shade of pensive thought that clouds thy countenance, speaks a creation reflective as sensient? Oh! 'tis but the natural and exquisite sensibility of thy nation, that betrays its influence even amidst the ignorance and error of slavery:— 'tis but the delicate organization of the Greek, that gives the seeming charm of mind to the Woman."



THE PROSPEcT.



THE next day, the Englishman having sent his servants and horses to a khan, or Turkish inn, became the guest of the hospitable Stamati, and no longer fixed a day for his departure from Athens. Stamati, restless and agitated by the joy of an unexpected return to his country and his friends, proposed that his guest should accompany him through the town ; but, little occupied by the speculation of the antiquarian or the general views of the traveller, he was framing an excuse (under the plea of the still existing confusion of the Bairam), when the archon Rosemeli entered the kiosk whete they were taking their coffee. . *

With those manners so natural in their elegance, and still so peculiar to the Athenians, he paid them the compliments of the morning, and mentioned that the purport of his visit was to invite them to spend that day at his house. "It is the festival of my patron saint," said he, "and I always celebrate it in the midst of the friends I most prize." Stamati, who had a thousand schemes in his head for the morning, excused himself till evening: the Englishman, with a little hesitation that concealed his joy, promised an early attendance. The two greeks then sallicrl forth together lo the bazar or market-place; and the Englishman, under pretence of wilting letters, reniained behind. Although the ardent climate* of Athens is tempered with the cool breeze of the sea, and softened by the shade of iis lofty mountains, the Englishman found in its warmth ;:n excuse for again visiting the delicious shades of the grove, to which a happy chaiice hud iiheady guided him. He dared not trust himself with analyzing the precise views of this premedilated ramble, but he resigned his imagination to the most boundless hopes. He again passed near the pillars of the temple of Jupiter, and giving his horse to his servant, struck into the same path as had conducted him the day before to the portico of the bath. Already its marble columns, refracting the sunbeams, gleaned through the encircling trees; and now the gilt lattice-work of the adjoining apartment presents itself; his heart throbs with feverish violence ; he pauses, smiling at the excess of his uncontrollable emotion. The sound of voices reach his ears: he approached the latticework, and again availed himself of his former ingenuity. Ida is seated on a little tripod in the centre of the room, her brothers are at her feet stringing zechinos; while, from a book she holds in her hand, she reads to them a history of Greece composed with great simplicity in the Italian, which she expounds to them in the vulgar Greek when their ignorance of the language rendered translation necessary ;t her paramana is employed at a little distance, with her distaff. The ap; the countenance of the charmIng preceptress seemed to have changed with her avocation; her playful features were invested with the dignified solicitude of maternity; her reproof was but tender gravity j her reward a more tender kiss. She fascinated childish attention by lures thrown out to youthful fancy; and when she described to them a feat of heroism, to fix the idea in their mind by an image conveyed to their imagination, she offered to shew them the scene consecrated to its performance; and, resuming her little slippers, and drawing down her veil, she advanced to the portico with her pupils, followed by her paramanu.





* "L'airde tout le pays,estbon," says Spon, "et particulierement, celui d'Athenes ce qui étoit la cause quelle produisoit desesprits subtiis, ct propres aux sciences, comme le dit. Ciceron; et quioque les Atheniens, ne s'y apphqueiu, que tres rarement, depuis qu'ils sont lumbers dans la domination othuman. on ne laisse pas de remarquer, en eux, vine politesse d'e'sprit naturelle, et beaucoup d'addresse, dans tout les afl'aires qu'ils emreprennent."

f " La langue, des Grecs d'Athenes, est plus pure', qr.e celui, des, isles de 1'Archipelago, on il y a plus d'ltalienne mele." Spon, p. 254.

The intercourse with the Venetians contributed to introduce and fix Ike Italian language among the Atheniwjs.





So interesting, so touching was the character in which the Greek girl now appeared, that the Englishman almost blushed to feel a disappointment which a new-awakened feeling of admiration could not dispel. Purposely throwing himself in her way, he affected the most obvious confusion, when Ida perceived him leaning against the pillar of the portico. The natural children hailed him with delight; Ida, no less natural, scarcely appeared less pleased; and the confnsijn of her manner passed off with the blush of surprise that accompanied it, and the reserve of seclusion gave way by degress to the frankness, the naivete of . an ingenuous and cordial nature. "The shade of the portico," she said, "is cool and pleasant, let us not disturb you."—" The shade of the portico is cool and pleasant," lie returned, " but to be permitted to accompany you would be pleasanter still."—" It is to that mount which forms a part of the acclivity of Hymettus we are going; its prospect is extensive, and I would point out to my brothers the ruins of the monument raised to the memory of the virtuous Herodus by the gratitude of his compatriots."* —" Allow to me thus, albo, the happiness of becoming your pupil. Every thing in your country awakens curiosity and inspires interest; the mind, rushing back through ages, dwells on the events that constituted the glory of Athens, and the imagination eagerly seeks to identify the spot where Demosthenes harangued, or Pericles com

• Near the stadium. See Spon's Travels into Greeee.





manded."—" If such," exclaimed Ida, passionately, "if such be the interest "felt by a stranger, what must they feel who, born and reared amidst the wreck of their country's greatness, behold in the multitude of its splendid ruins the testimony of its former glory; behold, in the slavery of its people the proof of its existing misery!"

There was an energy in the manner of this speech more than in its matter that amazed the Englishman. The chord of enthusiasm thus awakened, he attempted to perpetuate its vibration; and, as they proceeded on their way, sometimes with affected, sometimes with real, ignorance he continued to propose questions, which Ida, animated by the desire of satisfying his curiosity, and by the national vanity of extolling her country, replied to with earnest simplicity, or with eloquent enthusiasm.

They had now reached the summit of the mount; and the Englishman, either feigning or feeling the liveliest admiration at the scenes which spread around him, broke forth in rapturous exclamations of delight. The elated Ida, charmed by a sympathy so little expected, exclaimed, " Oh! to feel all the interest of Athenian scenery one should be born an Athenian citizen; fancy should receive its glow i'rom national sensibility, and we should feel for the country we admire!" Then, pointing to the south, she added, " Behold that beautiful and fertile plain, it is the plain of Mesogia: you perceive it is scattered with poor arid wretched villages; it is from huts such as those that the enslaved Athenians contemplate the monuments of their ancestors' glory. Oh! happy are they whose ignorance is uniilummed by education, and who, toiling for daily subsistence, make no estimate of the present by the brilliant recollections of the past, or gloomy fears of the future!" She paused abruptly, and blushed for the digression into which fancy i^nd feeling had seduced her j as such her auditor had considered it.

"She is a charming visionary;" he exclaimed; " her mind is stored with images of classic interest, and her heart is witness to circumstances of national grievance; this is the true patriotism of woman." He then pointed





to the summit of Hymettus, and remarked the beautiful effect of those thick masses of clouds, of shining whiteness, which hover around its brow. "The vapours of Hymettus," she replied with a smile, " afford endless omens to the superstition of the modern as of the ancient .Greeks. Interesting mountain! Who can contemplate your flowery summit with indifference! With what interest fancy endeavours to ascertain the site where once the thicket bloomed that sheltered the tender Frocris; where once the pure streams flowed which refreshed the wretch* ed Cephalus. Behold, where the sun-beam gleams on the distant spire of St. Cypriani; it is the spot tradition hr.s consecrated to their sorrows .and their loves."—i "Their sorrows and their loves!" repeated the Englishman, fixing his eyes on the face of Ida: " W.hy. oh! why should that connection be almost always inseparable! Ida fastened her eyes on the earth ;. the mutabfe colour of her cheek changed its hue; the pure and vestal expression of her countenance seemed to condemn the ardour of her feelings; she blushed, that the love which spoke in her languid eye should have found an existence on her modest lip. She could not support the admiring gaze of the Englishman; and she endeavoured to relieve her confusion by turning hii attention to different features of the scenery.—

"You perceive," she continued, "near the foot of the greater Hymettus the ruins of a fountain, which still preserves the memory of the beautiful Callirhoe, to whom it was dedicated; and a little more to the north, even at this distance, you may behold the taste and magnificence of the first conquerors of Greece in the fragments of that noble aqueduct, which owed its existence to Adrian, and the liberality of his successor. Ah! the monument, which the conqueror erects, but marks the period of degradation to the conquered; but it is there the eye and the heart of an Athenian find relief." And she directed the observation of the Englishman to the hill of the Acropolis, which, brightened by the lustre of the meridian dun, rose in full prospect on their gaze.—" Behold!" she exclaimed with enthusiasm, " a spot sacred to the divinity of Athenian genius and Athenian \alour, which was once filled with monuments of Athenian glory, and displayed within its limits all that the opulence, the art, or heroism of Greece could effect*, in. spite of the depreiiations of time, and barbarous conquerors! How splendid,how beautiful, are the columns of that Parthenon, which once contained the divinest effort of the genius 01 Phydiasf! while to the north of this master-piece of Grecian architecture, p.irt of that beautiful doric temple is still visible \vhich the statues of the fair and virtuous daughter of Erectheus adorned. You perceive also the temple of Victory, so conspicuous for the whiteness of its marble, and where the golden shieldof conquest \vas so often suspended bv the hand of the laurelled conqueror." "And that ediiicQ which spreads to the west?" demanded the Englishman. "Was erected to the heroes of Marathon, and is woif.y your particular attention. On the frieze o! the fic.de the feats of Theseus (to whom the temple was dedicated) are represented in bas-relief, and with an exquisi, e delicacy of workmanship, that attests and sanctions all that has been said of the perfection to which the arts were once brought in this now desolated and enslaved country: that beautiiul temple is now converted into a Greek church."





"If an enjoyment of fancy could silence a feeling of the heart," suid the Englishman, "we should scarcely regret the traces of Tundsh power which surround your sacred Acropolis: behold that Turkish cemetery which hangs %n its rugged brow; the high pointed minaret of that iittle mosque; and the drooping cypress, which spreads its grey {/Jiutge around it."—-' Yes, it is charming," replied the Greek, with emotion. "Alas! how often have 1 gazed on it amidst the purple shadows of evening, the grey mists of the dawn!" She sighed profoundly, and, for a moment, paused; then added: "But,

* It was described in fiftee" books by Heliodorns.

t The ivory statue of Minerva.





extend your eye to that aspect of the Acropolis which opposes iiself to Hymettus; it is the site of the theatre of Bacchus, and is still sacred to the memory of Eschylus, of Euripides, and Sophocles, whose statues were placed there. What an exquisite sensibility to genius did the Athenians possess* when the gratitude of a nation erected statues to its divinity, and placed the images of their bards in the temples of their gods!" Then, after a long pause, while her eye beamed brighter, her cheek flushed warmer, and all the fire of enthusiasm and sensibility illuminated her expressive and beautiful countenance, she turned her eyes from the interesting objects that had fascinated their guze; with a gentle sigh, seemcf) to recover herself from the warm dreams of national pride; and raising her timid glance, with all the habitual modesty of her manner, to the face of the Englishman, she said, smilingly, " I weary you, and the sun is becoming too ardent; let us seek the shade of the grove." The Englishman made no reply; he dured not hazard the expression of feelings which were confused and overwhelming. He feared by a word, by a iook, to dissipate a bewitching confidence, which was every moment vancinishing habitual timidity; and he silently offered her his arm as they descended the mount. She took it without hesitation till observing the cautious and timid descent of her nurse, she exclaimed, with tenderness, " Pray, assist my poor paramana!" and flew down the mount with her brothers, who had hitherto hung upon her words with ardent attention. The Englishman smiled at his situation as he supported the arm of the feeble and unwieldy matron.

When he reached the bottom of the hill, Ida was already seated beneath an olive-tree; the boys had thrown themselves on the grass at a little distance; and the paramana, always watchful and vigilant, placed herself within a prudent view of her charming nursling. The Englishman took his place beside Ida. Not a beam could penetrate the foliage that canopied their heads; but the fajnt gale that blew from the sea, and mingled its sigh





with the delicious emanations of the orange-flower and laurel-rose, pl.iyed amidst its leaves, and at once cooled and perfumed the ardour of the atmosphere. The languid eye of the Athenian seemed half to close beneath the oppressive softness of the ^ir< the bloom of her cheek was less vivid; and an inclination to indolent repose breathed round her. The imagination of the Englishman was eloquent, but his voice seemed<o deny all expression to his feelings: he endeavoured to lull the rapid pulsation of his heart; he sighed profoundly, and passed his hand across his throbbing brow. Ida had observed the motion. "You are not well," she exclaimed \vith solic'uide; "you are not able to support the ardour of a climate which is to us so delightful." "Oh, pardon me; your climate, like some of the creatures whom it forms, is but too delightful, but too dangerous ; it deprives the mind of energy, it deprives the faculties of power: but we breathe a new existence in ils delicious temperature ; a finer zest of enjoyment is given to the senses ; a more delicate vivacity is communicated to the imagination ; capabilities of pleasure seem to multiply around us; and if the thoughts become more spiritualized, the feelings are not the less ardent, the fancy less glowing."—" It is thus I often feel," returned Ida, with simplicity; "a mere creature of the atmosphere, my enjoyments are regulated by a sun-beam or a cloud. In a moirtem cool and soft»as this, delighted with existence alone, I sigh to communicate to every thing around me the p'ure and lively happiness I myself experience."—" You, Id;i! to communicate the happiness you feel, do you also sigh to assuage the sufferings you excite?" The insinuating Englishman kissed the drapery of her veil as he spoke, and concealed his luce in its folds. "It is a crime of which I am innocent," she replied ; " if my life has not been useful, it has been at leasi guileless." —" It should have been blissful!" added the Englishman, passionately. "At one period it-was," returned Ida with animation, while a deep blush suffused her face. "And at what period was that?" demanded the Englishman, thrown off his guard by the dangerous softness of her manner: "Was it in such a moment as this? Was it when youth, and love, and fancy, in these delicious shades where we now repose, amidst the intoxicating atmosphere which vrtf now respire ?"—"- It matters not when, or where," interrupted Ida, rising in agitation, " since it is fled for ever:" and, averting her countenance from the Englishman, she Approached the children, as if to sooth her feelings by contemplating their innocent calm, as, wearied and oppressed by the heat, they slumbered on the grass. She stooped to kiss their glowing brows; and having brought forward the branches of a plantain-tree to shade them as they slept, she returned to the amazed, the disappointed, but more-than-ever enamoured Englishman. Innocence and pleasure had again diffused their sweet expression over her countenance. She seated herself; and the Englishman fearing nothing so much as to banish her from his side, sought to win her attention by praising the beauty of her brothers. "They are perfect loves!" he ex.claimed, " such loves as Praxiteles produced, and Alcman drew."—" Of all the genealogists of love," said Ida, smiling, " Alcman was surely the truest; since he traces his existence to Zephyrus and Flora; and a sigh and a rose gave birth to the most mutable and charming of the gods."—" Ah>! is love then with you the roost charming and least permanent of passions? and, oh! Ida, speak you in both instances as you fancy, or as you feel? Has a tender vision of an ideal lover warmed your dream, or have you loved, been faithless, or betrayed I" He fixed his searching eye on the face of the Athenian. Her whole soul seemed to rush to her countenance; its expression was strong, variable, and eloquent; her cheek blushed and paled in the same mometit; the fire of her eye, now dissolved in languor, now saddening into tears, and now smiling proudly through the impulsive testimonies of her weakness, seemed to say, " Love is the most delightful but most unstable of the passions. Woman is created to feel it in all its sweets, and dread extremes; she has no resource against its tyranny, but in that delicacy of sentinfent, which at once enables her to exalt its biisses, and





K





triumph over its vicissitudes; to cherish its joys in the hour of mutual sympathy, but to limit'the duration of its feelings the moment when that sympathy is no more." Then, gently waving her hentl as she averted it from the gaze of her companion, she half suppressed a sigh, and drew her veil over her face. So perlectly had her countenance imaged the successive emotions as they rose in her soul that the Englishman believed himself possessed of her secret, believed the innocence of the recluse had not secured the feelings of the woman, and encouraged rather than intimidated by the conviction mentally observed, according to an axiom in his code of gallantry, 'It is easier to find a woman who has never loved, than one who can love but once." While as the interest she excited assumed a freer character, that admiration the. delicate reserve, the innocent purity, of her manners had at first awakened lost its sentiment of awful respect ; and the spiritual loveliness, the ideal beauty which had at first charmed his imagination, gave way to an interest of a less refined nature, at once more consonant to the laxity of his principles, the habits of his life, and the ardour of his feelings.

A pause of many minutes ensued to that question to which the eloquent looks of Ida had replied. Lost in pensive thought, her attitude half recumbent, she supported her head on her left arm, her right was thrown on the grass; her downcast eye was dewed with a tear, and a glimpse of her profile was visible through the disorder of her veil. Again that beautiful character of countenance, that pliant grace of figure, which had captivated his fancy the preceding day, presented itself to his view. He took the hand whose whiteness was rendered so conspicuous by the verdure on which it reposed. "You resenjble," said he, "at this moment a creature, who, unsuspectingly, unknowingly, has fixed the destiny of one whose heart was formed for love, and whose life has been its victim. Disease of mind, and something of classic curiosity, drove him to Athens: he sought for instruction, and those who could have bestowed it added not to> the benefit that charm his sickly feelings called for; he sought amusement, but savage riles of superstition opposed his wishes. Disgusted, he meditated an immediate departure, when chance conducted him to the contemplation of an object imaged eternally in his heart, in his fancy, in his brain! It was a woman, young and beautiful, glowing in the sweet repose which the refreshing luxury of the bath precedes. She slept; but, oh ! in her countenance what capacity of expression, what an obvious indication of a heart alive to the greatest, susceptible of the tenderest, emotions! Her recumbent Torrri \vas indeed that of Mahomet's houri, but her dream seemed the soul-born vLion of a Lesbian Sappho." "Ah !" interrupted Ida, " it was my cousin Zaphyra Perouli." "No," returned the Englishman,"" it was her cousin, Ida Rosemeli."—-"- And the person?" demanded Ida eagerly, and covered with confusion,—" Was he, Ida, who now seeks the misery of a life in the enjoyment of a moment. Oh, Ida! pardon the temerity of an imprudent, who already expiates iiis foily by his experience of its fatal consequence; but the hour, the ardent hour, that drove me to the shade of your grove, the beauty of the portico it sheltered, the tempting fragility of the flowers that screened the couch of your repose; my charming, my dangerous friend, reprove me not for my temerity, but give me your applause for a self-denial more than human; for Ida, I did but gaze, adore, and fled! Bat still my heart, my imagination, ag-.,in sought the new-formed idol of their worship, and pretence was not wanting, chance was not unfavourable. The spell of my detention is hid from the world; 'tis not the works of Phidias that will no\v detain me in Athens; 'tis that which formed the inspiration of his genius, 'tis that which, in giving him a model for divinity, caused the deity it represented to be forgotten."





He ceased: Ida betrayed not in her countenance what passed within her mind; for she had drawn her veil more closely round her. She arose in silence; she pulled a flowering branch of the agnus-castus, and gently touched her brothers' cheek- They awakened; she caressed them: they wem joined by the paramana, who busilyarranged their tunics, and the folds of Ida's robe. The picturesque group spoke to e•ich other in the vulgar Greek; Ida. and her new friend, had hitherto conversed in pure Italian. At that moment the archon and another Greek approached them; he welcomed the Englishman with cordiality, and invited him to tiike the bath before they dined: the children joined their father, and the archondessa and her paramana returned towards the house. The Englishman pursued her figure with his looks; a thousand vague ideas fluctuated in his mind; and he with difficulty replied to the attentions which were lavished on him by the courtesy of his host.





The table of the archon Rosemeli displayed all the luxurious delicacies the mountains and shores of Attica produce. The game, the fish, the fruits, were exquisite; the wines were racy and perfumed*; and traces of his connection with an English family were visible in the comfort and regime of the entertainment: but the banquet was not sweetened by woman's smile, the goblet sparkled not to the reflection of woman's glance; and the Englishman (though alive to every species of the savoir •vivrc} praised, without enjoying, the luxuries which were spread before him. He was scarcely struck by the phlegmatic taciturnity of a Turk, who listened to the garrulous details of an old Greek ephore with an exhaustless patience, or amused by the affected -virtu of a young French consul, who disputed on the order of the portico Poikili with a travelling antiquarian. He thought the gaiety of Stamati annoying, and the Athenian courtesies of his host intrusive. The repast at last finished, and he thought only of Ida.



* The Greeks, still devoted to luxury, as far as it lies within their limited power of acquisition, are still apt to imitate the refinements of other nations. See Monsieur Savary's account of an entertainment he was invited to in Crete, and Baron de Ton's dinner with a Greek Drogueman.*

• "Dinner was served in the French style, a iircular table with chairs round it, spoons Had forks, in short, nothing: was wanting but the habit of making use of ttem." Vol. l,pagt I'M.





And now the sound of the tympanum, the double-pipe, and viol was heard in the adjoining vestibule. A company of buffoons and dancers, whom the Bairam had brought to Athens, were announced; and the restless Greeks,- always eager for change of place and dissipation of mind, rushed to the vestibule. The Englishman sought a higher gratification with equal anxiety; and again the form of Ida was restored to his searching eyes: she appeared in the painted room which led from the vestibule to her gymnasium; reclined on an ottoman. Her arm was thrown round, the neck of a young person who greatly resembled her, and who wanted only the fire, the intelligence of her countenance to be equally lovely. The harmony of their forms, th.e ease, the grace, the beauty of their attitudes and drapery gave thcnj the appearance of nymphs, which poetry has visioned, and sculpture finely modelled. Two female attendants* stood behind them; the one held a small casket, which usually contain the jewels of the Greek women when they visit; the other supported a gilt ewer, from which she had sprinkled the apartment with rose water. The paramana with difficulty bridled the boys, whose solicitude for the commencement of the revels was pictured in their countenances; and the slaves and domestics of the arclion were endeavouring to catch a glimpse of the performance from behind the pillars of the portico and the doors of the vestibule.

The Englishman at last arrested the eyes he so anxiously sought; their glance, timid and abashed, were instantly withdrawn, -and fixed on the earth,: a soft confusion overspread her countenance, but it was still tiie delicate emotion of modesty, not of displeasure. Her companion observed the stranger, and, with her eyes still fixed on him, •f



* "No woman of any character in Greece/' says de Guys, "goes out alone; she must at least have one servant wi'h her; those who ;e vanity induces them to make an ostentatious display of rheir grandeur have many slaves to attend them:" he adds, "that the jewels of a Greek lady, are carried by one of her attendants, and never put on till she arrives at the house where her visit is to be paid." This is an an(Sent custom, and more than once alluded to in Terence's plays.





whispered Ida.—Ida smiled, and raised her glance: the Englishman met the smile and the glance that accompanied it, and was in a moment at her side.

"It is my cousin, the archondessa Zaphyra Pcrouli," said she, "who wishes to be known to you." The Englishman bowed his sense of the distinction, but, as the archondcssa only spoke the vulgar Greek and linguafranca, his conversation was of necessity confined to Ida. While the attention of her kinswoman became intentively rivetted on the pantomimic dance, which was now begun with some degree of grotesque humour and agility, observations on the entertainment (in which Ida, with all the susceptibility of youth to pleasure, soon became interested) precluded the conversation of the Englishman. He spoke of the entertainments of his own country, and described in glowing terms t'he united effect of poetry, music, and painting; of just declamation, splendid costume, and brilliant lights.

The attention of the archondessa was withdrawn from the dancers only to be rivetted more ardently on him. Her eyes found no charm like that splendid imagery he conveyed to her fancy; and, laying her hand impulsively on his, she exclaimed, with all the naivete thatdistinguishher manners, "Ah! how cultivated must be your taste, how barbarous must ours appear!" The Englishman imprisoned the hand thus so innocently devoted to him; it struggled in vain: the brow of Ida became slightly shaded, yet its gentle severity was scarcely deepened to a frown; her cheek crimsoned, and her tunic trembled to the increased throb of her bosom. "Loveliest of human beings !" murmured the Englishman, "one moment of indulgence, one moment of pity, and then I have done for ever. Let me for an instant fancy this hand reposes in mine in perfect confidence, let me for an instant think your attention voluntary. Oh! Ida, I shall leave you, and on earth I shall find nothing that resembles you; but I shall leave you resentful and offended, and my misery will be supreme. Yet while I remain in your interesting country, drive me not from your presence, put my





forbearance again to the test, and punish me by withdrawing your confidence if I again betray it." He then voluntarily released her hand, and joined the archon, while Stamati took his place beside his charming kinswoman.

The dancers had now wearied the spectators; the archon and his guests adjourned to the kiosk to partake of the pleasures of the hookah, and to drink coffee and sherbet. The women, accompanied by the children, retired to the gymnasium.



THE EPICUREANS.

* NEITHER the topography of Livadia. the ruins of

Athens, nor the state of society hi the Turkish provinces, afforded to the mind of the English traveller that interesting subject of analysis and observation which he found in the character and person of the aashon's daughter. He returned to the house of Stamati, an*a thousand recollections of Ida accompanied him; he had not yet discovered from her conversation a single trait of mind that did not harmonize with the deligiuful softness of her air and person, or that responded to the reputation she had gained in her own country as a person of great mental endowment, exertion of conduct, and energy of character.

He naturally supposed that that reputation had found its relief in the profound ignorance and devoted indolence of her countrywomen; and that, though opposed to the inanity met with in a Turkish harem, or the unintelligent naivete of a Greek gymnasium, the accomplishments of Ida must appear above the level of general acquirement in Athens, they would be deemed far beneath it in the polished circles of a more polished country. In the local information which she had displayed during their ramble, sensibility o£ heart and brilliancy of fancy were most dis cernible; but these lovely qualities were neither of them f





the inseparable concomitants of strength of mind, or severity of principles; and though her acquirements, relatively consideredwuslonished and delighted him, they dissipated no hope, they raised no obstacle ; and he still found in the archondessa all he wished in the woman and expected in the Greek.

But he perceived, that even with the simplicity of a character so ardent and so naif, something of delicate ma» nagement was necessary; an exquisite sensibility of soul was eternally betrayed in the fire of her eye, in the mutability of her complexion, in the enthusiasm of her manners, in the tender and caressing attentions she lavished on her father, her brothers, her paramana, and even in her mode of receiving, the oblique testimonies of his own insidious homage. But that sensibility which, from its ardour, might prove the most dangerous, the most seductive lure to her innocence, would also, from its sensitive delicacy, become her protection, if his conduct was not commensurate in its finesse to the romantic refinement of her feelings. He believed, with the vanity of a man whom success had inflated, that the modest reserve with which his declarations had^een received, arose less from their being disapproved than that they were too prematurely and too unguardedly made to be acknowledged with that pleasure they secretly communicated ; and he determined, that the experience he had obtained in the hours he had already passed with the susceptible Greek, should be the guide of his future conduct with the cautious woman.

For two days he avoided the house of the archon, and gave himself up with real curiosity, and seeming enthusiasm, to visiting the beautiful ruins with which Athens abounds. The French consul overwhelmed him with attentions; the travelling antiquarian, anxious to obtain a witness of his profound erudition, was his constant associate; and his brain was confused, his mind distracted, by terms of art and observations of hypercriticism. The orders of architecture were traced from the Egyptian pyramid to the Tuscan column; architects were numbered, from Dorus of Achaia to Palladio; and mutules, metopes, tiiglyphs, and dentiles, were talked of, till no other words seemed registered in his wearied memory—Here the opinion of Vitruvius on the difference between the Corinthian and the Ionic was detailed with accuracy; there the arguments of Piranesi on the volutx was detected to be erroneous; the modules of columns were ascertained; the minutes of capitals were reckoned; and sentiments of taste were every where regulated by laws of geometry and principals of art. The Englishman sighed, and thought of Ida and her descriptions, where moral interest was not for a moment lost in technic observation, and where so much sentiment and so little pedantry had been displayed.





The absence of two days now seemed like the privations of so many ages, and he was preparing to reward his selfimposed restraint when the archon waited on him to chide his absence, and to renew his hospitable wishes that he would consider his house as his own. The talents, the manner, the flattery of the Englishman,"had seized on all the feeble points of his weak but subtle character; and he urged his invitation with a cordial sincerity his new and insidious friend determined should not be unavailing.

Again, the Englishman sought and was received into the gymnasium of the archon's lovely family. He came loaded with trinkets for the children, with presents to the paranv.uiH, and such tributes to the taste and talents of Ida as a lew French and English authors and some Italian music afforded. Every slave, every servant of the houses partook of his bounty; and, believing that an application to the self-interest was the medium to the good-will of mankind, he reduced his theory to practical experiment, and bene:d himself in its result surrounded by friends. He had speculated deeply on the probable reception he should meet with from Ida ; but he found, that though not equal to his wishes, it at least surpassed his hopes :—he was welcomed with a blush and a smile; and his adoption of a manner at once respectful and famili ir, dissipated the little shadows of reserve with which an apparent bashful consciousness at first clouded her air and conduct. He found her in her gymnasium, surrounded, as usual, by her" domestic circle, and engaged in making a drawing from the fragment of a beautiful metope, which represented the battle of the Centaurs and Eapithse, at the nuptials of Pirithous and Hippodamia.* "Another talent !" exclaimed the Englishman, seating himself beside her. "It was that in which the friend who educated me excelled," she re•piied ; " it was that which circumstances and the scenes by which I am surrounded almost forced upon my acquisition." "Charming talent, imd interesting scenes!" exclaimed the Englishman. "Oh! why should their description, why should their eulogium ever flow from other lips than those which first gave them to my imagination with so many charms of moral and poetic interest?" He then, delicately alluding to the descriptive powers she had displayed on the mount, reverted to the persons with whom he had visited the ruins of Athens for the two last days; imitating their manners with matchless powers of mimicry, giving to his detail of their respective peculiarities the most ludicrous air, and betraying his passion for the ridiculous with an influence so epidemic that even Ida caught the infection ; and while her ready smiles and playful laugh evinced the amusement his admirable caricatures produced, a few pointed sallies of delicate humour escaped her lips, and betrayed her but too sensible to 'every sense of thingfs.' •' But," said the Englishman, as he concluded his description. " while I permitted them to lead me to the facade of Augustus, to harangue me in the Tour di Vento. and point the whole force of their -virtu against my ignorance in the lantern of Demosthenes, I would not suffer them to conduct me to the site of the gardeiv of Epicurus, that would have hern sacrilege; my hopes pointed to a more delightful guide." "From the kiosk,'' said Ida with animation, throwing down her pencil and leading the way, " from the kiosk, when the day is bright and clear, as this is, we can at least behold the spot where those gardens were supposed to bloom." The next moment they were both in the kiosk.—Ida with all her awakened enthusiasm glowing warmly round her, exclaimed, as slie pointed towards the road thwl led to Eleusis: •' A little further on, towards the b.ise of mount Parnes, lie a cluster of ruins ; they are supposed to mark the site of the Ceramicus and the academy; and, you recollect, that it was on the road to the academy that the *ardens of Epicurus spread their luxuriant shade." She paused for a moment; the Englishman's eyes were fastened on her face; her's were strained towards the subject of her research—He beheld the kindling humiliation of her vivid fancy diffusing its light over her countenance, and animating her ardent expressions, as she continued, "I think I see those beautiful gardens spreading on my sight; I behold the striking, the interesting form of the elegant sage who sought the secret of true enjoyment in their shades."—-' And think you that he found it, Ida?" "It'nature was his guide, how could he miss it ?" ohe replied with animation. "Nature! repeated the Englishman, in pleasurable surprise; "Are then the doctrines of Cpicjirus the dictates of nature? and do you acknowledge, Ida—" "I alwa; s acknowledge," she returned with simplicity, "what i believe to be the truth: when Epicurus throws the stole of the graces over the form of philosophy; when he shews that true enjoyment is only to be possessed on the bosom of temperance; when he restores the senses to their dignity, by placing them as the instruments of one gratification only as they are the pupils of our reason; when he paints happiness to be the object of man, and pleasurable propensities, in a natural sense, guided, corrected by social duties, in a relative one, the medium; in a word, when he inspires virtue by the utmost severity of example; when he teaches it by the sweetest persuasion of eloquence; when he dictates frugaiity, public love, firmness of soul, enjoyment of life, and contempt of death; virtue and happiness are then surely the principles of his doctrine, and nature is its sole inspiration."





* The metope here alluded to, is. now in the possession of the earl of Elgin.





The Englishman listened, wondered, admired, but was mortified, was disappointed. The young, the lovely woman whose heart he sought to interest, wnose feelings he sought to awaken, undertaking the defence of his own principles in commencing the eulogium of a philosopher whose disciple he boasted himself, was but too flattering to his wishes, but too accessory to his designs: but when he beheld his ignorance of the doctrine he professed in her exposition of its laws; when he heard her preaching the pleasure she was calculated to bestow, yet inseparably connecting it with the virtue she was calculated to inspire, he was overwhelmed, he was silent; and he, whose sophistry had confounded, whose wit had dazzled, so many women of greater acquirement, stood vanquished by a creature who, simple and inexperienced, referred to nature for every opinion she had formed, as for every feeling she indulged. It was not till after a pause of some minutes that the Englishman recovered the power of addressing her.





"I perceive," said he, smiling, " that the Epicurus of Athens is not that of England, and that the doctiines promulgated by his lovely disciple are in direct opposition to the feelings she awakens."—" And what are the doctrines of your epicurism?" asked Ida seriously. "Charming Ida! to pursue pleasure in all its views, and to live but , to enjoy."—u That is the doctrine of nature," she returned with simplicity; "but so finely has she regulated her laws, inseparably blending the selfish gratification with the_soci;.il good, that the intemperate pursuit of any enjoyment, while it injures the community to which we belong inevitably re-acts upon ourselves. It is politically illustrated in my dear, my native country; where the tyrant lives in daily iheiid of the slave he oppresses. It was morally illustrated in the life of my beloved preceptor, who enjoyed the purest pleasures .iccording to the wisest laws."—" But pleasure should have no law, my sweet Ida! impose on it a restraint and it ceases to be pleasure."— "Let us refer to nature," said Ida, "who places no boundary to enjoyment but what its own excesses create. Let us refer to society, which, imitating nature, retributeoa the individual the injury he has done to the community. Vice, which is only the greater predominancy of the selfish over the social passions, may escape in a particular instance, but must suffer in a general sense. Enjoy, is the law of nature; restrain is the law of society; it is the perfect harmony of both that bestows felicity on man." *'





At that moment a young beccafico flew from a neighbouring fig-tree into the kiosk. Ida forgot her argument; pursuit of the bird seemed to occupy her whole being; all the eagerness of a child displayed itself in her exertions. The Englishman was earnestly invited to assist her; she laughed at his awkwardness, and redoubled her own activity. Now the bird panted in her hand, fear of hurting it again produced its release; now it got entangled in her drapery, and the Englishman was destined to effect its emancipation: at last it flew towards her bosom, and Ida imprisoned it with her veil, and lavished on it the most tender caresses with the most infantine expressions of fondness. She kissed its head, she smoothed its plumage, she wished there was no cruelty in detaining it; and then (but with reluctance) approached the side of the kiosk and gave it liberty, watching its course as it flew towards Hymettus, her hand resting unconsciously on the arm of her companion till the bird disappeared: then, with a sigh and a smile, she said, " I wish I was a'bird, do not you ?"—" A moment buck I did," he replied, gazing passionately on her—" But to what purpose be placed in heaven if insensible to its joys! Oh, Ida! had that bird no instinct to receive your caresses, to be admired, to be cherished by you, and yet to fly, to forsake you!" The first part of the Englishman's speech covered the face of Ida with blushes, without banishing the smile that revelled in her eye and dimpled her cheek; the last chased those blushes and the smiles that accompanied them. The Englishman observed without perfectly understanding her changeful emotion; he believed it the efl'ect of thut thrilling sensibility which eternally betrayed itself in every look and gesture. He attempted to take her hand: surprized and delighted, he felt that it was voluntarily abandoned to him; he raised his eyes to her countenance, and he thought he observed kindness towards himself, mingled with some latent feeling of pride, of resentment, of which he could not and did not believe himself the object. He raised her hand to his lips, and it trembled without struggling in the clasp of hjf; they both remained silent, and a feeling of indefinite but exquisite delight was chased by the approach of the archon and his sons. Ida flew to kiss the hands of her father, and left the kiosk.





The power by which the Englishman concealed every feeling in the profound depths of his heart, scarcely enabled him to hide his emotion from the shallow penetration of the archon; he complained of a violent headach, of the intense heat, and awakened only interest where he trembled to rouse suspicion.

* *** * * * * * *

# *** ******

Had the conversation of the kiosk ushered in the dawn of the Englishman's acquaintance with the Athenian girl he might have wondered, he might have admired, but he never would have loved: the prejudice of his habits was against what he termed strength of mind in woman; the passions of his character were all in favour of her weakness. Ida had stolen on his heart through the medium of his imagination. In the pleasure-breathing form of the elegant and sensuous Greek he saw nothing but incitement, and from her yielding, tender mind he expected nothing but compliance. But her character, as it gradually unfolded, bade defiance to the calculations of an experience founded upon general principles, and established upon general success; the various, the opposite qualities of which that original and interesting character was composed seemed to elude his observations ; and the delicate mutability of her seducing and innocent manners alternately awakened hope, restrained presumption, increased his esteem, without diminishing his love.

The Englishman was born of the younger branch of an illustrious family. He was impressed with an extravacant sense of the value of rank, because rank in the early part of his life had been his sole possession. Ardent from nature, luxurious from education, he pursued the path to opulence merely as the medium by which pleasure (in its common acceptation) was to be obtained; he pursued it like a man of elevated notions in political career, and pursued it with a success no less the result of his talents than of his fortune. The evil chances of education had given him many faults, but they had also left him many virtues; the leading traits of excellence which illuminated his character were all his own; and the leading vice which shadowed its brightness owed its existence to the influence of woman. Of an ardent, an impetuous, and affectionate character; at an age when the receptive powers of man are so eager for impression, and so fatally capable of rendering that impression decisive; his heart had been first touched, his passions had been first awakened, by one who, with more art than beauty, more ability than principle, and more passion than sentiment, charmed his imagination by her brilliancy, his self-love by her ardour; and deceived his hopes and betrayed his confidence by that train of conduct which depraved feeling and vitiated habits inevitably produce in woman. She was an accomplished foreigner, no longer young, but still bewitching: he was in the spring of life, susceptible, generous, and confiding. She charmed even while she betrayed, and he loved even when he ceased to esteem. The impression was decisive; it was followed up through a series of years by a line of conduct in which his passions sometimes found their account, but his heart never; he felt at first, but could not define the nature of the >vant that ached there; till habit rendered that routine of life a necessity, against whose pursuit, impulse, sentiment, and even principle frequently revolted. It was a tie formed in Venic'e that was now the primary cause of his visit to Athens, for satiety still hung upon success; and his Venetian mistress, sufficiently coarse to pursue the benefactor when she had lost the lover, stooped to upbraid, and banished from her presence by importunity, him whom she could no longer enchain at her feet from sentiment. With a general and passionate admiration, united to a total want of esteem for women, his opinion of ihe sex was founded on the first impression given him by an individual: he had therefore never married, and never intended to marry. He laughed at the man who voluntarily threw his honour into the keeping of a being who (drawing the inference from his own experience) he believed so seldom capable of preserving her own 5 he .laughed at the man who voluntarily hung a chain over his pleasures, and devoted himself to anxiety at home, while enjoyment solicited his acceptance abroad; he believed that the woman whom prudence would induce him to many, his taste would impel him to decline; and that her whom he would adore as a mistress, he could never depend on as a wife. Beauty was his idol, talent was his spell; but the line of demarkation between the good and fair traced by the erroneous judgment of a fatal and early experience was irradicable. Thus his first love became the guide of his subsequent attachments; his prejudices fortified by his passions, and his principles by his habits, were not to be vanquished by a partial experience of their fallibility; and woman frequently became the victim of those errors of opinion, of that laxity of morals, of which woman only had been the cause.





He was now no longer young; and though he had seen much of the world, though he too generally took his sentiments from the high, but frequently false, tone of the circle in which he lived, yet something of the untarnished gloss of nature still remained. The ardent feelings of his being frequently deposed the factitious principles of his character; and the warm impulse of a moment sometimes overthrew the artful system of a year. Although he hud observed much, he had reflected, he had combined but little; and his life, gay and polished as his manners, while it pointed his wit, while it sharpened his shrewdness, rendered him more alive to a foible than observant of a quality; more attracted by the " living manners at they rose," than attentive to the human passiorrs





as they unfolded themselves under the pressure and influence of human events.

It was thus, therefore, that the character of Ida found no parallel in his experience, and eluded with delicate subtility all the powers of his quick but not always just penetration; while he seized at once the leading features (without their leading causes) that formed the character of her father. He saw him restless, weak, and sanguine , proud of his birh, vain of his opulence, amiable in his domestic feelings, and factious in his public conduct: the one less from sentiment than natural sensibility; tha other less from principle than disappointed ambition. "Phe archon, therefore, was but a piece of mechanism in his hands, which he worked with a skill proportionate to his wishes. Ever ready to do the honours to the self-love of others, he purchased the gratification of his own by his well applied acquiescence in theirs; and while his heart led him daily to the gymnasium of the archondessa, his visits had always the air of being anxiously solicited by the father, or tacitly wished for by the daughter. At night he drank with the archon, smoked from his hookah, abused the vaivode and aga, and prophesied the future glory of the archontic families of Athens, the downfall of the Ottoman power, and the revival of the Grecian empire. But, during the day, he was conducted among the ruins that surrounded her father's villa by the archondessa. He read to her while she sat at her embroidery; he hung upon her words, as if inspiration dictated their utterance; he guzed on her countenance, as though a spell lurked in its expression; and sympathised in her feelings, as if one soul informed their respective characters. But while love was chased from his lips, even his silence was animated by its ardours; while the delicacy of sentiment was panegyrised, the eulogium was still made in the eloquence of passion ; and if ethic theories were canvassed, or natural sensations described, it was still in the seductive language of pleasure, or with a reference to its pursuits. Thus, even when he failed to_touch the feelings of his auditress, he generally succeeded in awakening her imagination, and, while he fascinated her attention, contributed to her amusement, and occupied her thoughts, he inevitably rendered himself necessary to the enjoyment of her existence:—this was the point he panted to attain; this was the object which, after the intercourse of a month, he believed he had reached. Yet so fearful wus he of losing the precious immunities he enjoyed, of frustrating by a word that success which time or accident might best effect; that he still delayed the open avowal of his sentiments, the candid declaration of his vi^s, even though he believed the secret of his passion VW3 known to her who inspired it ; even though he ielt that it could not be disapproved as long as he was not discarded. But while every moment increased the ardour of his love, while her person, her genius, and even her virtues, threatened to fix into a strong and lasting attachment what had been at first encouraged but as a passing admiration, the character of her who had awakened it still bade defiance to his experience, gave birth to suspicion, inspired fear, and rendered him jealous before he was certain of being loved.





Sometimes he doubted whether he was not the most artful or most artless of human beings; whether she did not trifle with his feelings, while he fancied he imposed on hers; whether he was not less the seducer than the seduced; or whether her playfulness was not levity, and her confidence in him but the supplement of a greater confidence placed in another; yet when he distantly hinted that her heart had'not been a stranger to love, it covered her with a delicate shame, that seemed less the proof ot consciousness than the effusion of that modest reserve which trembled to betray her sensibility to a passion she was so adequate to inspire, so reluctant to experience; while it redoubled towards him those sweet and fatal attentions which captivated every sense, while they repelled presumption ; as if she strove to evince by the chaste endearments of friendship her absolute, incapability tt> Cherish a less pure or less gentle sentiment





He observed with delight which inspired new hopes, that the confidence of Ida increased in proportion as his attentions elicited his gratitude; and that his superior powers of giving pleasure and exquisite susceptibility to receiving it, at once awakened her admiration and stimulated the exertion of her talents. The soft and secret sadness that seemed sometimes to shadow the native brilliancy of her spirits, alone dissipated to the influence of his elegant pleasantry and delicate humour. The enthusiasm, the energetic feelings of her character, seemed to find a respondent in the impassionate ardour of his; and the most spiritualized and fanciful of human beings appeared intimately to associate her mind with that of him who was of all human beings the most material and least visionary in his ideas, his principles and conduct. Sometimes, during the tete-a-tete of a morning's walk she betrayed by her artless interrogations the most profound ignorance of wordly forms, and the liveliest anxiety to learn the modes, the manners, and habits of what is deemed polished society; while the simplicity of the recluse was frequently succeeded by that deep intelligence which was alone drawn from nature, by habits of intense reflection which mastered every spring of human actionj and often traced the most remote effect to its remotest cause. Sometimes, resigned to the unguarded enthusiasm of her ardent nature, she was involuntarily led to the discussion of the most dangerous and delicate subjects, which her persuasive eloquence was calculated to enrich, but which her natural modesty instinctively relinquished. Sometimes, with the pure spirit that ennobled the patriotbosom of a Theban Tirnoclea, she detailed the wrongs her country had endured, or wept over the wounds with which her country bled. While frequently devoted to a constitutional indolence, she gave herself up to the soft indulgence of a languishing repose, amidst the fragrance of those sweet flowers whose breath she delighted to inhale; or, impelled by a playful simplicity, was carelessly led away by some inconsequent pursuit, and relinquished a metaphysical theory, or flung down a classical author to play with a child or a bird, to trifle with a rose or a song. Meantime, anxious to sound the depths of that unguarded, natural, but incongruous character by other means than those his own single observation afforded, the Englishman alternately applied to Stamati, to the archon, and to the guests whom he had met at the archon's house; but with Stamati (always giddy and unthinking), she was still the wonder of Livadia, and the most learned of human beings; she had a crowd of adorers, but no one dared to love her. With her father she was perfection, save on those points where her intelligence clashed with his own prejudices; with the travelling antiquarian, she was clever, considering her situation and country, but he did not believe she knew a Greek rethon from an Etruscan vase, or a plinth from a capital; with the French consul, she was Jolie comme un ctrur el fietrie de talent. And the Englishman, again forced back upon his own observation, was pleased that others could not even guess at that character which seemed to reserve all its most delicate and attractive charms for him alone; and, with the blind idolatry of ancient superstition, he worshipped in proportion as he feared, and adored what he could .not comprehend.





THE FESTIVAL

GOVERNED by the impulse of the daily wish without the power of fixing the moment of his departure, or of obtaining the object of his delay; forgetting that worlcl which had so long tyrannised over his opinions; forgetting that life whick had been so long consonant to his pursuits and habits; the hours of the Englishman fled lightlyon, varied only by that vicissitude; of feeling, of hope, and doubt, which even the happiest love is destined to sustain.

It was after an evening passed in listening to the tones of Ida's lyre, in hanging on the melody of Ida's voice, that her softness, her gaiety, the modesty, the pleasure that breathed round her, animated his wishes, excited his hopes, and determined him on seizing, in some favourable moment, all the former dictated, all the latter inspired. He sought her the next day, in that hour which had first given her to his view in all the charactery of innocence and pleasure:—the hour was ardent, the bath was cool! He calculated on the probable necessity of its enjoyment, and dwelt in rapture on the possible success of his arrangement.

With steps as cautious and a heart as palpitating as ivhen he first sought the portico, he now approached it; and, without waiting to glance through the lattice, he stole into the apartment of the bath with noiseless steps; but the room was unoccupied, and the smooth and downy couch had evidently not yet been pressed. A gentle noise from the bath caught his attention ; with a trembling hand he drew back the silken drapery, but he saw only the bird, whose flutterings had met his ear, and deceived his hopes. Disappointed, he returned to the portico, where he perceived, in a new made path, the track of a little foot that sou Id be no other than Ida's: he pursued the mystic guide. it led to the profoundest shade of a grove, where, amidst the shelter of the droopirtg cypress, the roses of Persia and of Greece diffused their bloom and fragrance, their luxuriant flowers an antique stela * reared its lumns; at its base, and leaning against its shaft, sat Ida The Englishman rushed forward with an impetuosity commensurate to his feelings; he threw himself beside Ida, and took her hand.—-She started, turned round her hitherto averted head, and beheld him with a smile, but her face was bathed in tears; and her sadness,though soft and tender, seemed hallowed and dignified. Surprise and disappointment chilled the hopes of the Englishman.





"I sought you," said he, " in the temple of your pleasures, and find you near the monument of death."— "And this also," she replied, " is the temple of my pleasures; of pleasures which memory restores and sorrow consecrates. Alas! all feelings of regret and sufferings are not so safe, so sweet in their indulgence! This stela," she continued, after a short pause, "so beautiful in its execution, once distinguished the tomb of a sage, whose virtues it describes by one of those epigrammatic sentences in which Attic sentiment loved to comprise itself; which the legislator sometimes adopted to convey his precept,the lover to express his feeling,and the mourner his affliction. It was found prostrate in the fields of Livadia; it is now raised to the memory of one whose character resembled that which the marble preserves: perfect in itself, yet indulgent to others; capable, from its knowledge of the human heart, to dictate those precepts which tepd to the good of mankind, but contented with the gentle admonition, the tender persuasion, which concealed while they betrayed his own superior excellence." "And by whom was the pillar raised, sweet Ida! and to whom did that perfect character belong?"



* Stela, or pillars, on which the names and families of the deceased were inscribed, together with the tributary effusions of friends or relations, were common to every monument of distinction. Errine, the poetess and cotemporary with Sappho, celebrated for her beauty, her talents, and her untimely fall, alludes to those pillars in her affecting elegy to a departed companion.

"Say ye cold pillars, and thou weeping urn,

And sculptur'd syrens that appear to mourn—"



De Guys and other modern travellers assert, that many of those stels now form the ornaments of the Greek and Turkish gardens.





*' It was raised by me," she returned, weeping, " to the memory of him who was my soul's dearest friend; he was your naturalised countryman, he was my kinsman, too. But what are ties of consanguinity, if habit associates not their influence round the heart; if sentiment blends them not with all its feelings? 1 never visit the spot but memory rushes back through each sweet interval of early life, when I felt, yet knew not what felicity was mine ; or that ascending the higher scale of feeling, associates his idea with scenes of deeper interest, with emotions of profounder bliss, that had their sad reverse of suffering." Ida paused, and wept more bitterly.

The Englishman perceived that her sorrows were not only those of the heart but of the nerves, that her mind was depressed, and her spirits sunken. He had almost as often seen her plunged in despondency as exhilarated with joy; and looked upon the extremes and diversity of her feelings as the result of the fine, the delicate organization of her frame, and a strong natural sensibility of heart, rendered more acute by habits of education.

He attempted some words of endearing solace; and added, "Sweet, interesting mourner! why court ideal woes when real joys await thee? Why chase the smile that charms for the tear that avails not?"

"Alas!" said Ida, ,'.' while the conduct is referable to prudence, how banish from the heart the sorrow it cherishes, or the joy that transports it?"

"But, dear, susceptible girl! 'tis thy spirits that are oppressed, and not thy heart that is afflicted; some little domestic shadow has passed across thy mind."

"It is true you have seen me happier than you now behold me," she added: " a threatening, message fiom the vaivode, whom my father daily irritates by some new imprudence, and the failure of some commercial speculations in which he too incautiously engaged, have thie day reached us; and a thousand anxieties throb at my heart tor the objects so dear to its feelings." . " And not one tor yourself, Ida?"





"Ah! the lite of woman is wrapt up in those she loves; 'tis through them she suffers, through them she enjoys—."

"My sweet Ida! to epitomize the sex in yourself is to form a very charming but a very false estimate of its character; 'lis by much to over-rate its worth."

"There are women, I believe," returned Ida, "in whom feelings of nature are suppressed by an education which takes art only as its guide.—Such was she to whom the early sorrows of my uncle owed their origin, from whom his character received its tone :—that amiable character! It is poetically illustrated by the comminglement of those roses which he loved, with that cypress which he planted. His mind, woven of the finest texture, was shaded, but not darkened by melancholy; and his feelings, though they had lost much of their native ardour, retained to the last their native sensibility, like those flowers whose fragrance survives their beauty and their bloom." She gathered a faded rose as she spoke, and sighed as she inhaled its pertume and gazed on its decay.

"I'aiicifui and charming creature!"'exclaimed the Englishman, raising her hand to his lips; and added, vritn an expressive tone, " Oh, Ida! I sometimes fear that tne brilliant visions of your imagination have absorbed the warmer feelings of your heart, and that, possessing the genius of a Sappho, you are yet destitute of her tenderness and her passion."

Ida raised her melting eyes to his face; a deep flush passtel like the tint of an iris across her cheek, and her counteu aice was eloquent in the expression of ardent feelings. He still clasped her hand, and drew her gently towards pirn; while nis feelings, calmed and tranquillized oy the pensive tone of theii conversation, by her tears and sensibility, gave her to his imagination as a creature





who awakened an holy interest rather than an impassioned wish.

"My brothers," she faintly said, "are playing near us, let us join them." They arose; the Englishman waved his head, and smiled.

"Ida!" he said, "enchantress! I am nothing but as you would have me." Ida unasked, took his arm; she looked at him with innocence, and some little conciousness of the power she had obtained over him triumphing in her eyes, which, though still humid with a teaj, were cheering into smiles.

"My father," she said, "will ask you to dinner, and you must refuse; he is spell-bound in your society, and business of importance demands his undivided attention; neither must you come to-morrow, nor even the day after."

"Nor the day after, Ida! You may as well bid me not live!"

"I only bid you suspend life that you may enjoy it with more pleasure," she replied, smiling: " three d iys hence we celebrate the festival of the seasons, and dance the dance of Ariadne; the former my uncle revived among us, the latter i.s frequently performed even by our peasantry. While she spoke the children joined them; they all- accompanied their new friends to the entrance of the grove where his horses waited; and the Englishman reluctantly departed, again frustrated in his immediate views, and urged by increased love to their completion.

•That a woman who truly loves is capable of every sacrifice for the object of her tenderness, was an axiom the Englishman had established on his own individual experience; but he reflected not that the seduction of simple ignorance, or the acquiescence of elegant depravity, were less the proofs of a tender sacrifice than a fatal error in judgment, or a confirmed laxity in principle; and the vanity of the man did not suffer him to perceive that the selfishness of the mistress was often more intimately considered than the happiness of the lover. Mistaking, therefore, gallantry for affection, and imprudence for at





'

tachment, he applied his general rules to a particular instance, nor suspected that their fallibility could be ascertained by the test. Aware of the ardent character of the Greeks, he scarcely suffered himself to doubt that his eloquence, his tenderness, and professions of unalterable love would not induce I da to. accompany him back to Italy, to proceed with him to England, and to reign the mistress of his heart, of his fortune, and his fate. Eminently possessing feloquence du billet, he had written to her frequently during his two days' enforced absence. In the morning a note accompanied the fresh flowers, to whose perfumes he had added (according to the custom of her country) a foreign odour. In the evening it enwrapt the curious coin, the precious medal, or costly trinket, purchased from some Jewish or Armenian merchant, and delicately offered, merely as curiosities worthy of her taste, rather than her acceptance.

At hist the evening of the festival of the seasons arrived, and the Englishman eagerly sought the temple of its celebration. Above the path which led to the portico the branches of the trees were artfully entwined, and formed a refreshing shade; which was at intervals thrown aside to admit the abrupt view of the ocean, the majestic ruins of the temple of Jupiter, or whatever object lay within its prospect, and was attractive from its natural beauty or moral interest. In approaching the verdant expanse which surrounded the portico the scenery assumed a richer, a more definite character; the trees, crowned with garlands, supported on their branches the implements of husbandry which the respective seasons required; and the pandeun pipe, the sylvan flute, the reeds, the tabor and the lyre, were suspended from the oak, the palm, the olive, and the pine, by wreaths of winter-ivy, of spring blossoms, of summer roses, or autumnal flowers; while the orange tree and pomegranate interlacing their luxuriant branches formed themselves into natural arbours, above 'whose flowery arches the sycamore and broom pine spread their dark green foliage, adding coolness to fragrance, and shade to beauty. The portico had assumed the character of an





t.

ancient temple by the addition of some beautiful fragments of architecture artfully mingled with the original edifice, which formed the area, and which, with classical precision, contained the marble vase of pure water requisite for the performance of the lustration. The exterior room of the bath answered to the naos ; and the dark, the. cool, the mystic bath itself, formed the adytum which the eye of the profane was forbidden to dwell on. The Parian columns of the temple were wreathed with the damask blossoms of the mimosa, or blushing garlands of the great Persian rose; their tints were reflected on the snow of the marble, and their odours mingled with the incense which burned on the altar of the temple. The sun, though declining in the Engia, was still ardent, and shone with a mellowed lustre on the temple which seemed dedicated to his divinity: the moon,.already gleaming like a silver vapour, rose above The purple clouds which rolled from the summits of Hymettus, shedding from their bosom the soft dews that glittered on the flowers and refreshed their beauty; while the Etesian* winds breathing at intervals gave delicious languor to the air, and died away with the softness of a sigh suppressed: strains of sylvan music floated on the gale, and were sometimes discovered to proceed from a satyr who reposed beneath the shade of a tree, or of a love half hid in its branches, who neglected his arrow for his tabor and pipe.f—At last the



* The Etesian winds blow from the east during the period of the canicular days.

f" Auretour du printemps dans tonte I'Attique a Sparte dans 1'Arcadie, les adolescens, et les vierges, tin couronne de chene et des roses, le se'm pare des fieurs nouvelle et vetus a la legere, couroient dans les bois, informant des danses pastorelles."

G.znwy sur les dances Grecqucs.

And " the present Greeks," says De Guys, " often exhibit an exact image of the ancient choir of Greek nymphs, when with their arms interlaced thj«ance through the woods, and recal the memory of those descriutoons the poets have left us."

"About twenty young girls," says Savary, in his Letters on Greece, "dressed in white, with flowing robes and braided locks, entered the apartment, led by a youtn wlp pla\ed on the lyre, which he accompanied with his voice; they ranged themselves in a ring and invited me to dance; the circle they made was singular from the manner in which it was formed." • Lettre 16, vol. 1.





celebration of the festival commences:—two choirs of nymphs advance from the dark shade of the grove towards the area of the temple, in the spring of youth, beautiful as the vision of poetic fancy, abandoned to the innocent sensations of the purest joy, the liveliest plea. sure; the snow of their tunics, which shade without concealing the harmony of their motions, is symbolic of the chaste simplicity of their souls; the glow of the roses which bind their brows is emblematic of the ardour of their fancies and the freshness of their feelings; with a step that crushes not the flowers whose loveliness they resemble they divide as they advance, and form themselves into bands, under the guidance of the divinity of each of the seasons.—They approach the temple; the perfumed water is sprinkled round with rosy fingers ; the treasures of the circling year, the berries of winter, the blossoms of spring, the flowers of summer, and the fruits of autumn, are offered within the naos of the temple; clouds of odorous vapour ascend towards its dome, and fling their perfumes on the air amidst.Hhe choral hymns which rise like spheral strains, and sigh: away to silence: —they rush from the~temple in all the playful inebriety of innocent gaiety. It is evidently a true festival of Delos: their gratitude ascends to the god of fire, but their emotions are inspired by the deity of chaste delights; while the twins of Latona propitiating their rites, mingle their beams to .adorn and consecrate the scene of their celebration; blushes like their own rose colour the vapours of their atmosphere, and rays pure as their thoughts silver the foliage that embosoms them. But if the joy of youth and the grace of ease diffuse their charms over the lovely representatives of the hours, it is the deity of the' summer to whom the soul rather than the senses resorts. —The form of Ida, draped in a vest light as 'feathered snow,' and confined only by the roses of thtfteeason they





represented, for the first time appeared to the eyes of her new friend in all the mutable graces of awakened and varying motion; light, springing and elastic, her movements, like her thoughts, resembled not the mechanical evolutions of her companions, whom youth only animated and joy inspired; as fresh in youth as they, as gay in spirit. Nor youth, nor gaiety alone animated her bosom; images of poetic illusion floated on her fancy, visions of classical elegance recurred to her mind; and the consciousness that the benefits of nature were acknowledged in all ages (though with various rites) by the gratitude of the heart and the homage of the feelings; that everywhere even the error of superstition was tleducible from the sentiment of true religion, touched the emoiions of her soul and the character of her countenance with a consecnited expression, an almost holy interest.—Oh! what is that religion that imitates not the nature of that goodness from whence its gratitude arises! When the universe in its arrangement, in its produce, and intent, breathes only love and harmony, should the feelings of man return no sympathetic response? And while the Deity of all good pours round him the rich abundance of the choicest gifts, should human homage ascend in forms and sentiments whose ffloom, privations, and insensibility, can only suit the principle of evil?

And now, divesting themselves of their emblematic ornaments, and simply crowned with flowers, the lovely Athenian youth again .tppear emerging fiom their fragrant shades, and, formed into bands, are led by Ida through all the graceful intricacies of the dance of Ariadne ;* imitating in their circular and oblique motions the harmonious movement of the spheres themselves; resembling in their light and playful forms the horae of

* The peasants of A-hens perform the dance of Ariadne yearly, at the conclusio of the vintage, joining their hands, and preceded by mules aud asses laden with grapes , panniers. »

The Phyric dance is also performed bv the Spalnots. or natives of the hills of Sphihi in Crete, which hey dance in the ancieut dress.

See Belon, Savary, and other moJern traveller} in Greet*. Bathycles, as they appeared in ihe temple of Amycla t« the wondering gaze of the delighted Spaitans.





But the eye while it wandered over their changeful motions still returned to the Ariadne who seemed at once their inspiration and their guide; twining round her hand the tutelary clue, she appears to lose herself in a thousand gentle turns and graceful wanderings. Sometimes, concealed in the thickening shades, she vanishes from the intense gaze of admiration; sometimes she seems to glitter with her nymphs through the opening trees like a beautiful ideal phantom, her undulating form resembling the pure flame which the air wafts from its aspiring direction; the hues of her complexion, now deepening from exercise, now paling from langour, appearing more mutable and evanescent than even the movements which awakened them; sometimes, with a quickened step, a rapid flight, and glowing smile, she darted like an herald Iris through the intricacies of the grove; and sometimes assuming the spirited dignity of a young Diana (as on the banks of the Erotus she led the mazy dance, accompanied by the nymphs of her train) she moves in a slow and gentle languishment, that betrays even in weariness an animated and soul-inspired grace.

And now the dance is finished the charming group disappear as if lost in the profound depths of the labyrinth, while they sought in fact the shade and repose of the grove; where the fruits of the season, light and perfumed wines, coffee and sherbet, were presented to them by their mothers and matron relatives, who were the sole spectators of their graceful exertions, with the exception of the arclion. Stamati, and the English traveller, who had in the commencement of the evening thrown himself apart from the others on a bank near the area of the temple. The fancy of Mahomet as it wandered over the paradise of his own vivid creation could not have been more entranced; the vision of his seventh heaven scarcely more extulic. Ida not unfrequently sought her inspiration from, his eye, which pursued her through all the mazes of her dance; and beheld in the whole arrangement of the charming spectacle the classical elegance of her taste, the poetic character of her fancy. While her lovely companions were reposing under the shade of the trees, the stili unwearied Ida appeared the Hebe of the feast; and pouring the sparkling sherbet from a golden ewer into the goblet, she presented it to the Englishman. With a modest confidence in the triumph of her talents, she spoke of the representation to which her graces had as materially contributed in the execution, as her genius in the plan. The Englishman, who could so profoundly flatter (even when there was but moderate cause for praise), excelled in the eloquence of eulogium where he could scarcely speak with exaggeration. After boundless expressions of delight and gratification pronounced with rapture, he added, "Living in a world where art for ever reigns, sentiment and taste become as sophisticated as opinion and habits; luxury is esteemed the offspring of art and opulence: we perceive not that neither the one nor the other possesses a single pleasurable resource but what nature supplies, and that she alone is the elegant voluptuary that affords us models, presents us indulgencies, administers to every sense, and gratifies every faculty."—" And not more the benefactress of our fleeting pleasures," interrupted Ida, "than of our permanent happiness; she makes moderation the purchase of the present enjoyments and of their future recurrence, and renders those alone pure, lively, and lasting, which are enjoyed without injury to others, yet with satisfaction to ourselves; in a word, which are derived from nature, and which she only dictates. What are the languid pleasures, the factitious luxuries of the court of our emperor, to those which -a pure air, a brilliant sky, a rich odour, a tree, a fountain, a flower, bestow upon these his Greek slaves; who, violating no feejing, opposing no law of nature, are worthy to receive the pleasures, the enjoyments, nature only can bestow? It was thus that the ancient Greeks, while they adhered to her precepts, beheld themselves the most glorious of people; while the popular religion stole its attributes, its fascinating ceremonies, from her dictates and example. While the goyernment and the laws were influenced by her feelings and her dictates, the world bowed to the supremacy of their genius and their power: but when nature was banished, national felicity fled with her; the rights of man were trampled on by the tyranny of barbarous conquerors; the sentiment of religion was annihilated by the forms of a cruel fanaticism; and the glory of Greece expired when the influence of nature was abandoned."





The Englishman gazed and listened; it was the lips of a Hebe which pronounced the sentiments of a philosopher. "And this too," he said, "is nature! Nature has made her lovely: in studying nature she has become intelligent." Ida had now advanced to her other guests, presenting the nectar she poured from her golden ewer with the air of an Hamadryad: so ideal was her form, so graceful was her attitude, so innocent, so animated was the character of her eloquent countenance.

At that moment Stamati approached the Englishman, and presented him a packet his servant had just brought from Athens, and which had arrived by an Italian vessel that a few hours before anchored in the Piraeus.

The packet contained public dispatches intimating a change in the British cabinet, and his recul to England. It also contained letters which informed him of his succession to the title and fortune of a deceased and distant relative, to whom, by the sudden death of an intervening kinsman, he had become the lieir.

The transition of feeling, of sentiment, of circumstances, and thoughts, which the perusal of this packet awakened, was such as the life of man seldom presents. In gardens where Phrto might h.ive enjoyed, and Epicurus revelled; surrounded by forms that seemed scarcely more than illusio^is of creative fancy; involved in ceremonies, witnessing rites, which plunged him back in the days of antiquity, in the joys and pleasures of the golden age; with the habits, the prejudices, the pursuits of his past life, lost under the influence of his novel situation, the whole series of hi>. sensations, the whole system of his mind was now reversed; he was again carried back to





that world for which alone he had hitherto lived: the narrow, puerile, intrigues of modern politics, which sacrifice the good of a people to the prejudices of an individual, or the welfare of a state to the interests of a party, usurped and agilated his thoughts. His accession to that rank which carries with it such sway (though but a sound of air), in a country governed by factilillls sentiment, roused, the latent ambition of his character, and gratified its desires while it confirmed its influence; and that opulence which, had hitherto been the precarious result of political labour, or varying interest, now possessed almost beyond the extravagance of his wishes, opened to his view the free and changeless power of unbounded enjoyment. Such was the state of mind in which he perused and reperused the* packet. As he first glanced his eye over it, a conviction of its unexpected tidings flashed on his mind, and awafened a perturbation he had not the power to conceal or to suppress; he arose therefore unobserved, and glided through the portico into the bath-room, and throwing himself on the couch where he had first beheld the sweet repose of Ida, he gave himself up to reflections in which, for the first time for many weeks, Ida had no part. His consequence in the world of rank, the political influence attached to it, the senatorial fame that awaited him, the extensive domains and luxurious palaces of which he was become the master, the power he should now have to realise his tasteful speculations, to give the tone to popular taste, and cast the fashions of the times, were the splendid dreams of his ambitious mind, which his arrival in England was instantly to realise.

But that character .must be complexionally cold, that heart must he habitually hardened, and those fc'lings frigidly regulated, which, even amidst all the factitious passions the corruption of society engenders, resists the influence which nature at intervals awakens, hills her pulse of tenderness, bids defiance to her pare emotions of delight, and remains insensible to those sweet admonitions she bestows on the heart, the senses, and the fancy. To a mind not wholly governed by art, to feelings not wholly subjugated to interest, nature will speak in the midst of the world, its prejudices and its passions, and nature will be heard.





The dews of night, and the soft mists that usher in her dawn, were now refreshing the atmosphere and veiling its brilliancy; the lovely groups that had revelled in the train of Ariaifle had retired with the last beam of that cloudless Suit, whose genial warmth still survived his dazzling effulgence, and was moderated, but not chilled by the unfrequent gale that breathed from the ocean. To the gay tumult of youthful voices a voluptuous silence succeeded :—it soothed the thoughts, but lulled not the fancy. A thousand flowers combined their delicious emanations, and mingled their odours with the air, which the open lattice-work of the bath admitted; the moon, bright and unclouded, darted her rays through the clustering foliage, and formed the sole termination of the simple, silent, luxurious 'apartment. The lyre of Ida lay on a. tripod; and a breeze, as it rushed over the chords, awakened a faint and sweet vibration. The Englishman started at the sound; he saw from whence it proceeded, and his feelings vibrated like the lyre, as the chord of their association W«is tliUS effectually touched. The diadem of rank the applause of a senate, the power of opulence, the influence, the prejudices, the habits of artificial life, fled like the idle pageantry of a feverish dream. Nature resumed her influence over his being, and Ida rushed to his imagination, possessed herself of his heart, and reigned alone over his thoughts. "Fatal creature I" he exclaimed, " If. in the first flush of my vaulting ambition, your image thus dissipates the influence of my new roused and long latent propensities, how will it tyrannise when the world shall pall; when amusement shall weary and pleasure satiate; when you will return to my imagination with all your seducing graces; when you will recur to my mind with all your native intelligence; when you will twine round my heart with all your natural endearments; When I shull vainly seek in others that pure and lovely nature I found in you alone; and, when I shall lament the pride, the prejudice, the principles, that now forbid my rendering your situation as estimable in the eyes of the world as you are dear to my senses and my soul! But it must not be, sweet Ida! the world is a terrific umpire; I have made it the judge of my actions, and furnished it hitherto by my precepts, by my axioms, und example with arms that would now turn against myself. Ida! my wife thou canst never be; but if thy national character is—" He abruptly stopt his half articulated soliloquy; he perceived a white and shadowy form moving among the trees; emerging from their shade, it glided towards the portico. From the pliant graces of its movement it could be no other than Ida: her left arm supported the elbow of her right, on which her cheek reposed; she walked slowly; languishment and gentle weariness hung upon her motions, and touched her figure with a pensive softness. She paused as she approached the bath-room, and gazed on the delicious scenes around her, on which the sweet repose of nature seemed to hang. She turned her eyes towards the bath, and seemed tempted by the luxury it presented; she threw^side her veil to breathe a freer air. She approached The bath, and raising the scarlet drapery of its curtain, held it for some with a doubtful and hesitating air; then, unbinding the roses that drooped on her brow, she approached the couch and beheld it already occupied. Her first impulse, from surprise, from confusion, was to fly; her next was regulated by the simplicity and innocent confidence that always characterised her manners. She suffered the Englishman to detain her by one hand, while with the other she was engaged in gathering up the letters her wreath . and her veil, as she threw them on the sopha, had displaced. "Ah !" said she, with a smile, "you were lost in meditation, and I have disturbed you; Stamati told me you had received packets from your native country; the intelligence charmed me, and I forbore to approach.—To be in a strange nation, and to receive tidings from one's native country! Good heavens! what feelings, what' recollections must agitate your bosom! We thought you gone





long since, but you are here alone, and enjoying the dearest feelings of nature. I suspected not this, und came to seek repose and coolness while Stamati and my father enjoy the hookah, anil quaff the malmsey of mount Ida in the kiosk: but I will leave you. Who can pardon intrusion when the heart is so full?" "Ida!" exclaimed he, drawing her towards him, and seating her on the sopha, "do not leave mel I also came here to seek repose and coolness, but found them not; perhaps we may find them together: but, oh, Ida! distant from you, the one I shall never know. My heart is full, you say; dearest Ida, receive then the overflowings of its wretched confidence!" —and, falling at her feet and clasping her hands, with an energy and softness of voice and nu.nner more impressivej more touching than the words they accompanied, he continued; "Ida! I am no longer an Englishman, I am no longer a being of the world! I am an Athenian, I am a creature of sentiment, of passion, whose character you have new moulded, whose feelings you have new cast! Heaven cotild not have created for you an associate more sympathetic in ils affections to your own than him you have created ftr yourself; yet with this character, which belongs only to that delicious region where you exist, and is wonhy only of those over whom you reign, I am banished from you, and for ever! The letters you behold, recal me instantly to England; with the dawn I shall embark for Italy. Oh, Ida! give me at least your pity; let tiiat soft sijiU confirm my hope of your compassion. I leave your country, iis ruins, and its scenes of classic interest with a regret but too lively; I relinquish its delicious air, its pure, luxurious atmosphere, with a reluctance not to be justified. But, oh, Ida! 'twas not its ruins, its scenes, its atmosphere, or g-iies, that bound me here; they charmed, but cuuld not fi\; they were lovely, but something lovelier still became my spell, my tyr.nt, and my ruin. It wjs Idu, the fatal Id.i! who has wrapt me in an elvsium, subversive of my habits, dangerous to my interests, and inimical 10 my duties; with whom duys fled like hours, and hours iike minutes; who has reversed the whole sys





tern of my being; and who, in depriving mcrof my former resources in giving me anew sense of felicity, has become accountable for the future happiness of my existence. Yet I leave her, and for ever! I leave her among those who cannot understand, much less feel and worship, her character as I do;—I leave her, only to be thrown upon a world myself where I shall live an alien, an outcast; for there is now but one world for which I am adapted, and that is the magic sphere which Ida's presence creates around me. You weep, Ida, and those tears for me! God of heaven ! is it credible, that a few hours shall pass away and we shall have parteoUfor ever; that for the first, and oh ! for the last lime I shall have folded Ida to my heart!"

The hour, the silence, the air, had ail touched the imagination and influenced the feelings of the susceptible Greek; the sudden appearance of the Englishman, the abrupt intelligence of his departure, his eloquence and his tenderness, overwhelmed her with confusion, and diffused through her soul and frame a softness, a regret, characterised in the mingled kindness and anguish of her countenance. But the glowing fold, that left nothing to the dream of fancy, to the purity of delicate affection, awakened ancl supported her. Released and free, she stood before him ; the ardour of her feelings glowed on her cheek, but the purity of her soul illumined her eyes:—she stood, her sex's lovely emblem ; nature and sentiment, tenderness and virtue, commingling their emotions in her mind, and blending their emanations in her countenance.

The impress of a celestial origin was stumped with the traits of human affection in her pure and eloquent look; all that nature had formed her, all that society required of her, spoke in the softness of her air and the resistance of her action, at once awful and seductive. Virtue or love might have taken her for their model, and the perfect harmony of both been illustrated in her character and person.

The Englishman stood abashed! not more at his own unprecedented timidity than at her superior powers; while, after a long pause, she leaned over the tripod, and,

H





covering her face with her veil, wept in silence. Her tears reanimated the Englishman: he threw hfmself at her feet, and, taking the hand that hung at her side, he said, " Ida! I love you to idolatry, to madness!—-the whole earth contains nothmg half so precious, so necessary to my happiness! I cannot, and I will not exist without you! Ida !—enchantress!—woman! can you hate the man who lives but to adore you?" Ida uncovered her face; she looked at him with a sweet and tender smile; she blushed, and averted her head. The Englishman seized her trembling hand, but his own trembled with an emotion that rendered its clasp nerveless. Ida disengaged herself; and the Englishman leaned in silence against the sopha. While pacing the room with an unequal step, and broken sighs, Ida seemdi endeavouring to collect some scattered thoughts, to suppress some poignant feeling, to vanquish some delicate reluctance. At last, calm, assured, and dignified, she approached; and, leaning opposite to him on the tripod, said, "Be composed, and hear me!" She paused ; the moon-beam, as it feel on her cheek, betrayed its paleness, and the tear that glittered on its snowy surface. She held on her bosom the drapery that fell in folds over her sylphed form; her attitude was recumbent, but her eyes were thrown up:—nothing more dignified, nothing more touching, than the expression of her whole form. At -last, with a faint and melancholy smile, and a gentle wave of her head that seemed to arraign her inability to give an adequate expression to her emotions, she said, " Where is the eloquence that can speak the feelings of that woman who is true to nature, yet governed by education; whose ardour is of heaven, and whose manners are for society; whose sensations are inspired by God, and whose conduct is regulated by man; whose sensibility trembles through her whole being, and whose reason governs her whole life; who is created to love, and who blushes, even to herself, to confess her destiny?"—She paused: a delicate and sensitive bashfulness seemed to cover her with a confusion that sought to conceal its lovely effects in the deeper shades of obscurity. She withdrew





towards an ottoman, where the beams of the moon scarcely touched the extremity of her robe ; and continued, in a voice still more murmuring and soft,—" Yet while her conduct towards man is regulated by the nicest dictates of social duty, why,oh! why should she blush to acknowledge her capability to feel a passion which the Deity himself inspires?— by which he governs and supports the universe; which is the soul of his law, and the spirit of his work; which is the great and only spring of all human virtue, of ail human effort, of all human felicity; which makes the lover a deathless bard, the citizen an immortal hero! For what is genius? it is the fine excess of sensibility.—What is heroism? it is the deed of a great soul, capable of a great passion. Yet woman, created only to love, acknowledges her deHghtfuf destiny by timid stealth ; and trembling, blushing to own the influence of nature, veils within her heart the doubt, the anguish, and the bliss of passion."—Again she paused; reposed for a moment her head upon her hands, and sighed profoundly; then continued,—" I am the child of nature, and I feel it; I am the member of a community, and I know it; I am a womjm, I am a Greek, and I have loved—fervently—not fortunately! The tumultuous sentiment had its day of empire; and its object was not unworthy, but unstable. He-is forgotten, he has been long forgotten ;—no, not a single shadow of the dream remains behind to wander in the brain, disturb the fancy, or agonize the heart. She is not worthy to love whose heart can pine in solitary, unrequited passion: it is love alone can cherish love in woman's soul, and in the moment that she is resigned, that moment is she free. But who can paint the cold sad interval that follows love's bright hour? It is the heart's wild desolation, the dearth of feeling, and the sad and flat reality of life; the fancy then is visionless, the mind is stagnate, and all is dull repose and torpid ease; it was thus for nearly two long lingering years I lived and languished, uninterested and uninteresting; scarcely understanding, and, oh! understood still less; my affections, not my feelings, exercised; my tone of mind not even guessed at; my energy of being uncalled on and





declining. Amiable Englishman! you came and found me out. I was understood, I was appreciated, I was awakened! My life again was touched with something; that at least resembled the swee't illusion of my younger happier days; again the morning brought with it some charm of sympathetic intercourse; again the evening gave some spell of pensive feeling. I felt the heart, though withered once, might huply bloom again; nor thought its infant buds of hope should thus so soon be blasted. You leave me—you depart, and for your native country, sooner than I expected; much sooner than I •wished!" She arose; a sad and tender emotion was diffused•over her countenance. She approached the Englishman; she passed one trembling hand across her humid eyes, and presented him the other: he carri^l it passionately to his lips—he drew her gently towards him— he fell at her feet. Something like a convulsive soh burst from his lips. Ida fixed her eyes on his, and observed they swarn in tears. "It is too much!" she faintly exclaimed, " fiitewel!" She would have'arisen, but he prevented her; yet still he sighed " Farevvel!" And still he saw the tender Greek, the pitying woman, the child of feeling, and of fancy, influenced by every thing around her. "Go!" faintly sighed Ida, "since I can never be yours."—'•' Ida, Ida !" he exclaimed, " drive me not mad i you are., you shall be mine—you were created for me— and no human power shall now divide us!"

"Alas!" said Ida, weeping, " you surely rave; you forget that your rank is splendid, that you are a minister of the government of your country, devoted to its service, and bubject to its customs and its laws: I am the native of a poor, a strange, and distant land; bound to it by every tie of duty, love, and pity. Oh ! no, amiable Englishman, eternally your friend, Ida of Athens can never be your wife!" "Oh! from souls like hers for ever distant be that cold and languid tie!" returned the Englishman, passionately; "that tie which nature never imposed, which cold, erroneous policy invented, which interest or ambition may adopt for narrow, selfish views, but which





the nature Ida \vc /ships, the love she breathes and feels, can never submit .o. For her a sweeter, gentler destiny is formed, the secret union of two douting hearts; the sacred, soft community of souls; the tender, mystic, unknown union, whose tie of bondage is the sway of passion, the wish the license, and the impulse law: where the necessity of deep concealment, dictated by the prejudice of man, gives an eternal zest to stolen bliss; where all is delicate and decent form; all hidden and exkaustless happiness. It is true I am a slave to fatal circumstances, and now I could not, if I would, make thee in wordly form my wife. But if, in one instance, I am a wretch, is-vmy misery to be without relief, or hope, or bounds? Am I, from a prejudice contemptible as unnatural, to part with happiness and you forever ?—and are you violating the laws of that nature you adore, to oppose a partial prejudice (for it is a partial one, disowned by more than naif your lovely countrywomen*) to her sacred dictates? Are you, worthy to be the idol of a free and polished people, unrivalled in your native genius, brilliant in your acquired talents, to waste and languish all your rich and sweet perfection amidst the ignorance of slaves in dull, unknown obscurity? Oh! sweet Ida, deceive not yourself, destroy not me! Italy awaits to crown you with its applause ; England shall acknowledge and worship yoijr talents and your charms! The world in which you shall appear a sparkling meteor shall confess the sweet supremacy of Attic talent and Ionian beauty. Let others ravish from your country the ruined fragments of its former glory, but for me, oh! be it still re-' served to bear away a nobler prize, and shew the lovely inspiration from whence Athenian genius drew its splendour! Ida ! adored, beloved ! this hour is ours and love's! the next may be devoted to misery and to despair—may consign to everlasting suffering the man who loves, and to everlasting obscurity she who is beloved! If not as a lover, fly at least with me as a friend; confide in my in

* The Greek Turks. tegrity, if not in my affection. I have come hither by the Engia, my boat waits at the shore; your father revels, suspicion slumbers. In an hour we shall be at Piraeus; before dawn we may. have reached the shores of the Morea; and favouring gales in a few days shall convey us safe to Italy!"





The Englishman paused. It was in the countenance of Ida he sought to trace the influence of his sophistry over her inind; he believed her ambitious, he knew her tender; he perceived her influenced by a lurking resentment towards another; he observed her dissolved by a growing partiality for himself; he thought the pre-existing feelings of the pleasure-loving Ariadne, -the sudden intimation of his immediate departure, the hour, the air, the very place, all-favourable to a proposal, which was not aimed at the strength of her mind but at the weakness of her character. He mistook the tender languor of national manners, the unguarded vivacity of an innocent and animated character (ignorant of, and uninfluenced by the forms of that world in which he lived, and whose licentiousness and decorum are so intimately and so frequently united); considering only systematic morals, he believed that those of an Athenian could not be very rigid; and that her talents in the ambition they awakened would have been advocates in his favour, which even her affcetion for her family could not have withstood. In a word, the character of her manners had misled him as to the force and the principles of her mind, and her exquisite susceptibility to every existing impression was his assurance that her capability of resistance was by no means proportioned to the nature and strength of the temptation now, and perhaps for the first time, thrown in her way. In her mutable and eloquent countenance a thousand varying expressions were alternately registered; she had listened to him with her head drooping on her -shoulder, yet, with a motion almost convulsive, frequently thrown back, or gently waved. She blushed when he described a union which love only sanctioned, and averted her face; her eye sparkled when he described the effect her genius and her charms would produce in a country whose applause she would have considered immortality. But before he ceased she had covered her face with her veil, and a long silence ensued ; the Englishman trembled between hope and fear at a deliberation that awakened both. At last, Ida withdrew her veil, and fixed her eyes on his face: he could not support their glance, they seemed to penetrate his soul ; yet their beam was moderated by an expression of tender pity, such as the error of man inspires in the bosom of benevolent philosophy. Her calm and innocent smile appalled him, and she thus addressed him.





"It is a profound ignorance that regulates the manners of the world by the limited experience of an obscure individual; had a Turk addressed me in your words, he would have spoken according to those manners and laws which (however erroneous) are those of his country and his habits, and he would have been heard more in pity than in anger; had a Greek so spoken, he would have offered insult and indignity, and he would have been abandoned in resentment and contempt. But you are an Englishman; I am a stranger to your country, to its manners, to its morals, but not to its laws or the forms of its religion: but if, according to the existing system of the former, you neither attempt to insult nor to mislead me; according to the dictates and influence of the latter, you stand yourself accused, and are yourself misled. The nature that breathes love into the soul of man when it is first quickened, regulates the impulse to his felicity; makes it the great bond of social happiness, dictates to the law that governs him, and to the religion he worships, the sweet necessity »f limiting the vague propensity of idle passion to the hallowed object of a pure and undivided tenderness; raises the roving lover to the citizen-husband and the patriot father; and consecrates the mistress with the holy character of wife and mother. Thus nature dictates, and nations still obey, under, indeed, various laws and various modes; yet nature still preserves her right, and, even violated, still beholds their retribution.* However the manners of your country vary, in England as in Greece the law and the religion dictate wedded love. In every age of civilized society, however dissolute the people, or depraved their morals, the sage philosopher, the poet, and philanthropist, have taught how much the happiness of parent, child, and kindred, hung on the consecrated tie of legal, licensed tenderness. It is among slaves unsanctioned love alone prevails; but in free and polished states, those who hold a part in the community, who form a link in the great social chain, stand to that community, not accountable for themselves alone, but for the offspring they enrol beneath its banners; they are citizens, they may be patriots; but how can they be either, who blush to own the child of hidden love, orj hear the ilear and sacred name of husband? Oh, no! deceived perhaps yourself, me you cannot blind; my woman's fondness and my woman's pride tell me more eloquently than ever you can speak, the first great proof which man can give of love to wo-• man is to acknowledge her to ull the object of his choice and preference; to glory in his dear election; to claim for her the world's high sanction and the world's esteem; and still lo hold her up the intimate associate of his being, his life's companion, and his bosom's friend. Who offers less may glow with passion, but knows not what it is to love; who less receives may know a transient dream of bliss, but solid happiness or lasting peace can never be hers. Society, still jealous of its rights, will first abandon her; and, when the lover follows, that heart must be depraved and lost to every natural sense of happiness that breaks not in the trial. Stranger, amiable and dangerous, I forgive you."





* The religion and laws of the Turks restrain them to four wives, the fii-it of whom governs the others. "I had an opportunity," says Baron De Tott, " of personal information from my Turkish friends, that, except in the instance of some new slave who may excite curiosity, the harem inspires them only with disgust."

Preliminary Discourse, p. 23.

It is thus wherever a law is made contrary to nature, she is sure to counteract its effects and to assert her own rights.

t " A little child of about four years old, with naked feet, and wretchedly clad, ran to kiss the hands of Murad Mollach. The Mollach caresses him calls my attention to the child, and asks him, "Who is thy fa her!" "You!" replies he with animation. "And what ,s thy name?" "Jusuf." "But who is thy mother?'' "Kalidge."—'- Ah! Katidge, indeed !" says the efiendi to me, " I did not know him." '<How ! d'> you not know either vour own children or their morhers? If your heart is a stranger to such feelings as these, what is there can interest it!"

De Tott, p. 83.

The baron De Tott adds to the enumeration of the miseries attendant upon the libertinism of the Turks, that even the brothers and sisters, being of different mothers, differ in no respect from slaves collected in the same house, and are occupied by a jealousy which constantly animates them against each other.





She paused, and for a moment her firmness forsook her; wounded ptide, wounded delicacy, had their period of feeling, the tears chased each other down her cheek, and she continued—'t I love my country in proportion as I phy it; I love my family in proportion as I am necessary to it; my tender friendship for you (for as vet it is not more), my love of polished society, my vanity, and my ambition, all lead me to your wonderous, to your free, your grent, and prosperous country; but ties of duty and of heart bind me here. You go, and, haply, never more shall I meet one to equal you; your character, indeed, resembles not that which elicited my youthful heart's fond homage; but; it stiil possessed such qualities as found their sympathies in mine. Less perfect than my love's first idol, it was charming in its errors and dangerous in its faults; its influence might have increased: I tremble at the possibility, and behold you depart with less affliction. Go !—you are the native of the first, the happiest country upon earth; your services are its due. I am the native of an oppressed land, and my affections are its claim. I forgive you; I will endeavour to forget you. —Farewel!"

She pressed the hands of the Englishman to her forehead and to her eyes; he endeavoured to catch and hold her to his heart, but she escaped from his embrace; his arms were held out to detain her, but she had fled: he followed; but she was already beyond the power of pursuit. Overwhelmed, bewildered, distracted by a thousand conflicting passions, with a wild and hurried step he walked towards the house. As he approached he beheld Stamati and the archon in the kiosk; they were both intoxicated; and though it was midnight, appeared to have no intention of concluding their orgies. He fled from the house in the apprehension of meeting them; he wandered along the sea-coast in a perturbation he was unable to subdue. Pride and mortification, love and disappointment, agitated his heart; profound chagrin at the consciousness of his deficient penetration into a character, which, though so versatile, so unguarded, was yet so prudent; the check which his vanity received at the moment he believed his hopes touched on the point of their consummation; the suspicion that a lingering love for another influenced her rejection of his well-timed and artful pro





^posuls; irritated his mind, debased him in his own opinion, and rendered Ida equally the object of his resentment as his love. But little inured to reflection, and litile capable of supporting the vicissitudes of hope, he sought to soothe his mortified feelings by the belief that her resistance was less theresult of her virtue than of her art; and that if she decidedly and scornfully rejected the offer of becoming his mistress, it was in the secret expects inn of triumphing over his prudence by becoming his wife. This belief alone determined him to oppose art to art, not to suffer himself to become the dupe of an inexperienced girl, whose brilliant talents dazzled rather than convinced him; and who, though she had made him a convert in sentiment, had not yet the power to conquer his habits, to change his pursuits, or destroy the influence of those maxims and opinions which had hitherto governed his actions and influenced his life.

But to calculate on the result of what time might effect, perseverance produce, and artifice accomplish, was equalI1r unavailing, when a few hours only were allotted him to





remain in Athens. Views of ambition might have been postponed—affairs of a private nature might have bt en delayed; but before the urgency of public business, of official dispatch, all considerations of an individual nature gave way. This consciousness, added to the certainty that he already neglecied the serious duties of his station by his lengthened residence at Athens, irritated every feeling, deprived him of all temper, and destroyed at once the transient calm into which self-love had soothed him. He had now reached the boat, und found his rowers slumbering on their oars, when he suddenly recollected he had left liis letters and papers behind him in the bath-room. Thither he returned; his heart beat with all its wonted ardour of pulsation as he approached the spot where some of the most powerful emotions of his being had been *.' called into existence. A faint hope that Ida might still be there added to his perturbation; he reached the portico, its shining pillars were still hung with the wreaths her hands had woven, were still hung with the ornaments her pure and classic taste devised. He looked round him; the dewy grass was even yet scattered with the flowers she had gracefully flung on its surface, during the air^mazes of her poetic movements. The deity of summer, the tutelar guide of Theseus, was again present to his view in all the bloom of beauty and harmony of motion. He turned towards the bath-room, and paused as he entered, to gaze and to remember. It was now obscure and empty; but the couch remained where lie had first beheld her, blending in her form and countenance the attributes of innocence and pleasure, of feeling and repose; that couch, where with eloquence and truth sh« had preached the virtue which nature inspires, which the reason and well-being of society confirm. He threw himself on the sopha, and doubted it was possible he could shed those tears that dewed the pillow where the head of Ida had once reposed, and which now relieved the painful throbbing of his own. The unfrequent guests, as they rose in his eyes, called forth the indignation of his humbled mind; he could scarcely credit a weakness thar.





found no precedent in his recollection, and that appeared to him the mere romance of school-boy feeling rather than the passion of a man. The conviction of his own debility was too painful, too mortifying, to be supported; he arose, and hurried through the gardens to the shore. He threw himself along a bench in the boat, arraigned the fatality that had led him to the shores of the Engia, and envied the feelings of the poor Greek slaves, who plied their oars with thoughtless gaiety, and cheered their labours with a hymn to the sacred Panaghea, or a tale of the feats of Lambro Canziani.





WOMAN;

OR,

IDA OF ATHENS.



JL O him who has been reared in the school of indulgence, whose success has been proportioned to his exertions, and whose life, if not distinguished by a dazzling prosperity, has been unvaried by striking vicissitudes, the disappointment of a dominant passion, the extinction of a cherished hope, awakens a feeling of unqualified anguish, proportioned less to the consequence of the event than to the tone of the unpractised feelings on which it acts.

The mortified, the disappointed, and still enamoured Englishman could find no resource within himself to combat the passion and resentment which the Athenian girl had awakened. It was in vain that he was busied during the night, in giving orders to his servants, relative to his departure the next day; in writing letters of thanks to the urchon Rosemeli, to the French consul, and the superior of the French convent of Capuchins; that he wooed the power of indifference, or courted back the faded dream of ambition: Ida, for ever loved; for ever lost, still rose to his imagination; and, unable to resign the lingering hope his mistaken sentiment of her character had given birth to, yet unequal to vanquish a prejudice which had so intimately associated itself with every idea of his mind, which had so long regulated his feelings and governed his life, he sat down to write to her in that delicate, equivocal, and ardent style of which he was peculiarly the master, which, without ascertaining his precise intentions, seemed to breathe the conversion of his sentiments to hers, and to point out her

Vol, n. A





flight with him to Italy as the first step towards the accomplishment of an event, pregnant with felicity to both. All that sophistry could urge, or passion dictate, animated a production on which his last hopes rested, and which, couched in seductive eloquence, aimed itself at her passions, her ambition, and her heart. It was sent with the dawn by a trusty servant, experienced in the embassies of his master's love. With a dispatch unexpected as desired, he returned within an hour; his breathless master snatched the packet he presented, he burst the seal, and found his own letter. It had been opened; on its cover was written the following sentence: " There can be no individual happiness but that which harmonizes with the happiness of society; there may be virtue without felicity, but there can be no felicity without virtue. Your letter has a thousand charms! but your arguments carry not a single conviction; they are untrue to nature, and must be false to reason! Again farewell, interesting, but deluded stranger; consult the natural feelings of your heart, and they will correct the errors which prejudice has instilled into your mind. Farewell! depart, and forget me.—Ida."

In the coldness of this little address, the Englishman might have traced the wounded feelings of a pure and delicate soul, indignant at an insult offered, 'where tenderness had been lavished, and esteem expected: but, biased by opinions formed on the experience of sophisticated and corrupt habits, he saw in the severity of Ida's sentiments only the indifference of a coquette, who had made his feelings the victims of her own vanity and ambition. Wounded on the very nerve of his predominant weakness, piqued, mortified, and self-abashed, he tore his letter, and the lines traced on its cover, exclaiming with a smile, " Yes, my sweet Athenian, you shall be obeyed, and must be forgotten;" and taking an abrupt farewell of Stamati and his mother, hurried to the volik that awaited him at the Pirasus. As it receded from the classic coast of Livadia—as its keel cut the blue wave of the Engia, and its sails were filled with the soft and fragrant breeze of Ionia, the Englishman, with tne sigh of sorrow, that lifts itself slowly from the oppressed and disappointed heart, and hangs lingering and broken on the breath, fixed his eye on the little verdant promontory, which, darting into the gulph of Engia, seems to'steal from beneath the shelter of that beautiful grove, for ever sacred, in his imagination, to Ida and to Love. He thought he perceived the snowy pillars of the portico, gleaming to the sun-beam through the intervals of the trees that embosomed it; and fancy, animated by tenderness and regret, extended his gaze to that simple and delicious apartment, where at that very hour he had first beheld the archon's daughter, and where the bliss-respiring form of the yount;, the lovely Greek gave birth to sentiments, and awakened views, her mind, her virtue, and her reason had proved fallacious. Feelings of irritation gave way to sentiments of tender sorrow. The world, its cold and heartless maxims were arraigned, and Ida, at once true to nature and to virtue, stood acquitted and approved. He called to his recollection the innocence and utility of her life, her love of country, and devotion to domestic duty; the unstudied graces of her artless manners, the ardent feelings of her tender heart, the warm enthusiasm of her character, which, apparently alive to every pleasure she inspired, setmtd capable to sacrifice every pleasure she felt, which lay unguardedly exposed to enterprize, yet seemed always endowed with an unvanquishable power of resistance!— "Lovely and unequalled Ida," he passionately exclaimed; "creature of sentiment and of love, child of reason and oi' pleasure, how is it that in thee alone the elements of intellect and sense are so deliciously blended, that, alive to every impulse of nature, you establish the dictates of reason upon her suggestion; and, created equally to enjoy and to resist, are the most virtuous of women, only because you are the most natural of beings?"





To those who resort not to the light of nature as the origin of truth, who see only through the medium of a timesanctioned prejudice, and regulate their ideas by the rule of a popular opinion, who establish their faith on the documents of man, and neglect the intelligence which is equally bestowed on all by God, the character which defied the comprehension of the Englishman may appear incongruous and unattainable! It is by tracing the progress of its formation, under the influence of philosophy and nature, that its feelings and its qualities may be found reconcileable to both.





The youngest of two sons of a Smyrnian factor, becoming the early possessor of liberal independence by the bequest of an opulent and deceased relative, was, according to the will of his benefactor, sent to England to receive his education. Alienated from his birth, by the partiality of his parents to all elder son, he was suffered to remain in the cottage of the Natolian peasant who nursed him, till he had attained his thirteenth year. Brought up amidst the lovely scenes and lovely forms which the enchanting shores of Asia Minor so frequently possessed; witnessing the felicity of a natural and happy people, who united to the richest gifts of bounteous nature that liberty so seldom found beneath the tyranny of the Turkish empire*; the impulses of an ardent nature, the pursuits of innocent pleasure^ had alone occupied his being. Neither compelled to work nor obliged to study, the free, the joyous sports of youth were only interrupted by a constitutional propensity to indolent repose and pensive meditation.

The young Smyrnian brought with him to England an imagination deeply impressed with the scenes and imagery of his early life; he brought with him a character already formed upon an eastern model; gentle, ardent, mild, yet energetic, of an exquisite sensibility, and of a passionate yet melancholy temperament.,

Unhappily, he also brought with him an eastern constitution, on which the sharpneps of a chill northern climate begun an early ravage. An alien in the native land of his parents, committed to the fe^i-e of strangers, unrestrained and unguided, while his memory was stored by the routine of public education, his heart was, suffered to cultivate its

* The •wealth of several individuals at Smyrna maintains a system of independence in its environs, which is increasing its progress every day. ErTaft, vol. If, 366.





own feelings, his reason to ascertain its own faculties, unclouded by the prejudices of officious and ignorant friends, whose mistaken affection and blind self-love are so careful to propagate the errors by which they are themselves estranged from reason and from truth; his affections exhauste'1 -under the influence of unrestrained feelings, and his mind firm, independent, and inquiring, pursued nature, and found in her the principle of love, of wisdom, and felicity.

His early estrangement from his parents left them no claim on his affections. His property rivetted him to England; and he soon became bound to it by a stronger tie than that of interest. His mind devoted to the philosophy of nature, his heart formed for the generous feelings of friendship, and the whole force and energy of his being tending towards the most overwhelming passion of the human heart, estranged from general society by delicacy of constitution, by habits of study and reflection, he became the most generous, the most affectionate of friends, to a man of brilliant talent, who had been his preceptor at college; he became the most passionate, the most devoted of lovers tp, a woman, who found her way to his heart through the medium of his compassion! It was the power of relieving the difficulties of his tutor that first made him the friend of the man, whose benefactor he afterwards became. It was in rescuing the parent from impending distress, that he found himself enamoured of a lovely daughter, whom he afterwards made his wife. With the woman he adored, with the friend he loved, in literary pursuit and rural retirement, a few years of more felicity became the purchase of a sad reverse of fate. Deceived by her he loved, betrayed by him he trusted, abandoned by both, he found ingratitude and perfidy the reward of love and confidence. He pursued not the fugitives; sensibility of soul, delicacy of constitution were unequal to the shock; he sunk beneath it. Sickness and debility preyed upon the very principles dF life: time amended but could not recover his health. His physicians advised a milder climate, and his feelings, rather than his inclination, led him to adopt their counsel; he was prepared to die—but to live in England was impossible! and eight years were passed in travelling through the southern countries of Europe!





To whatever direction he turned his steps, the misery and error of man met his eyes; everywhere he observed the existence of physical evil, produced by the outrages committed on nature; and moral disorder, everywhere produced by the prejudice and corruption of society. "It is," said he, " from the harmonies and conformities of nature, that man should borrow his political and moral adaptions, and learn from the Legislator of the Universe those beneficent laws, which should form the social compact of mankind. Whenever the institutions of government shall tend to excite and develope the natural sensibility of man, the happiness of the state will be effected, for virtue itself is but composed of the affections; and the maxim of wisdom, or the exertion of art, proceeds only from that secret impulse, by which nature urges man to enlighten and to cherish his brother man. Nature has only given us desires, whose gratification is enjoyment; but society, in its gradual estrangements from her dictates, engenders passions which become the scourge of those who cherish them; man, naturally beneficent, becomes a tyrant; man, naturally free, becomes a slave; and religion, which is of nature, conveyed through the senses to the soul, awakening its gratitude, and commanding its adoration, becomes an incomprehensible dogma, propagated by cruelty and fanaticism; disfigured by human invention on every side, breaking the tie of human sympathy, scattering discord and disorder through nations, founding its merits upon earthly privation, and imposing its belief by eternal terrors. In every religion may be traced the arrogant faith of its own infallibility, and in the breast of every fanatic sectarian is established a secret inquisition by which the opinion of others is tried and condemned on every side. Virtue and felicity are of nature! on every side vice and misery are of man."

It was thus he spoke: yet he remembered the wisdom and happiness of ancient Greece, and he looked forward to *he enlightened felicity of modern Europe. "Man," he said, "in his gregarious and social, resembles man in his natural and solitary state; and society in its progress is still propelled towards the perfection of that nature which governs its earliest infancy, and which to recover, and to imitate, is but a simpler term for the combinations of genius, the inventions of art, the intelligence of wisdom, and the supremacy of virtue." He already beheld the hand of philosophy stealing from nature the veil by which prejudice had obscured her light; and the nut ions of Europe first among the nations of the earth to hail the glorious beam, that dispelled the gloomy illusions of tyranny and fanaticism, and shone brightly on the sacred truth, that natural and moral liberty are the inheritance of Man from God!





With such feelings, with such opinions, the amiable sage bade adieu to Europe, and sought his beautiful and native country. Arrived at his paternal abode, sorrow and disappointment received him at its threshold: his parents were-dead; his brother had gone to join a merchant's house in Constantinople; and an only sister had married an Athenian archon, and resided with her husband in his native country. With a thrill of delight he believed himself incapable of feeling, he embarked on the Archipelago for Athens—that region of genius! of heroism and the graces! whose government had once been the wisest, whose people had once been the happiest, because its laws and its religion tended to confirm the impulses of nature to liberty and pleasure, to preserve the sacred rights of humanity, to diffuse equally the privileges of denizaiion, and to distinguish the citizen only by the benefits he conferred on the community. ,

"Amiable and enlightened nation!" he exclaimed, as he caught a glimpse of the splendid ruins of its Acropolis; "ii from the victor arms of Rome empire extended his sway, and gave birth to slavery and crime, it was your patriotism and genius that gave birth to freedom, and polished while they enlightened the world!" *

Arrived at the house of his brother-imlaw, his welcome was as animated as surprize and pleasure could make it, and kind as Athenian courtesy could render it; but his sister was no more! She had died in giving birth to a daughter who was then in her second year, and whom he found in the arms of a tender and caressing parent. The archon, suddenly called away, left the child on the carpet of the kiosk, where his brother was taking refreshments, and threw it sweetmeats and flowers to occupy its attention till his return; this little art harmonized with the feelings and ideas of the stranger. The child partook of the sweetmeats, inhaled the breath of the flowers, and smiled as she gazed on their beautiful and vivid hues. "Such," said he, "are the simple wants and simple pleasures of infant nature! Here are the early desires and early enjoyments of our being; where are the passions that disfigure, and the vices that degrade, our after existence?" The child now extended its cherub form on the carpet, with the grace so peculiar to infancy: no ligatures restrained the formation and the growth of those beautiful proportions, which nature only perfects, and art can only injure. All children are charming! their calm and innocent countenances seem stamped with the impress of a celestial origin; they are so fresh from the hands of their Creator, that traits of human defect are not yet visible in their expression. The Greek children are peculiarly beautiful, and the daughter of the Athenian archon was singularly beautiful even for a Greek. Her kinsman gazed on her with the eye of a painter and a poet, but with the heart of a philanthropist, and the mind of a sage. "Such," said he, "was the exquisite beauty with which a liberal nature gifted the happy native of this happy latitude, and which long preserved its character, under a government which, far from cramping or withering its charms, by ridiculous restraint and Gothic laws, deified its nature and its influence*. Lovely infant! thou hast drawn thy first breath in a climate, whose delicious temperature produces impulsions to the mildest virtues, and tendencies to the most delicate pleasures: born amidst the splendid wreck of thy country's ruined grandeur, surrounded by scenes of native loveliness, by objects of ruined magnificence, the first impressions conveyed by thy senses to thy mind will be tinged with the beautiful, or stamped with the sublime; thy first feelings will be of love and admiration, and thy first sensations of pleasure and delight. But with what pains will these charming and natural traits be eradicated from thy character, what restraint will be imposed on thy feelings, what errors communicated to thy judgment, and what prejudices implanted in thy mind!





* According to Winkleraan, the native Grecian countenance is distinguished by the calm and serenity of its features, and by its expression of benevolence and genius. It however lost much of its beauty under the influence of monkish severity, of oppression, of suffering, itnd of slavery.





"Yet—oh, no!—it shall not be, if I can prevent it. I have felt the fatal power of thy charming sex! and I know its potent influence on society: in every stage of life that influence is asserted;—it is the mother that gives the first impression !—'tis the mistress that awakens the first feeling !—Woman! it is to you the destiny of man is committed I 'tis you who govern the strongest impulse—the greatest passion of which his being is susceptible; and yet what pains are taken to efface the traces of nature from thy mind, and substitute art and prejudice and error in their place! Oh!" he added, kneeling beside the child, who stretched itself towards him with the smile of a seraph, while he forced it to his bosom,—"oh, woman! I have found thee in thy purest state; I have found thee formed of the mildest elements; I have found thee formed under the happiest clime! Thy respiration is of Heaven's purest breath, thy first glance drinks its purest light. I have found thee surrounded by forms and scenes, where every thing harmonizes with that brilliancy of imagination, that sensibility of feeling, that innate tendency to ideal beauty, and that native disposition to passionate emotions, which naturally distinguish the children of your beautiful country, when moral causes do not counteract the blessed gifts of Providence. Thus have I found thee; and if it were reserved for me to watch the progress of thy growing charms! to guard, to guide, but not to restrain thy lovc; nature"





At that moment the archon appeared, and found his love ly infant in the arms of his brother. With enthusiasm, with energy, he repeated to the archon his thoughts, liis wishes, and his hopes!" You will marry," he added, like the rest of your countrymen: you will look forward to a numerous progeny*; the sons of another marriage will weaken the interest now felt for the only child of a former union, and the mother you will give her will but ill supply the place of her she has lost. I have no children, I have no tie, and the still warm feelings of my heart call for an object to receive its tenderness. I have a small independent property, and I would bequeath it as my heart should dictate: give me then this charming infant as the child of my adoption. In being the idol of my care, she shall still remain the object of your love and observation. I have sold my property in England, I have deposited in the hands of a London merchant a sum, which will leave independence to your daughter, beyond the power of Greek extravagance or Turkish rapacity to injure; with the overplus, I shall purchase an estate in Livadia, which at my death shall become your possession: I have nothing more to urge."

A proposal which was at once so reconcilable to his interests and feelings, was accepted without hesitation by the archon. He thanked his brother-in-law with all the florid eloquence of a Greek; and added, Ida then is your's. In a little time I should have made her over to the care and instruction of a diakof, a stranger and a hireling, whom sordid interest would alone have actuated; what a happy reverse! I resign her to the tender arms and sage instructions of a friend and kinsman.



* "The Greeks," says de Guise, " look forward to a numerous progeny, who shall at some future period recover all the territories the Turks have ravaged from them."

t The diako is a preceptor (generally a kind of ecclesiastic) tantamount to the abbé in the old French regime t in all Greek families ot high respectability, the young females are committed to the care oi'? diako.





To a warm, but disappointed heart—to an unvitiated and active mind, there is always an unspeakable charm connected with the cultivation, the improvement and correction of that spot, which is to be the last home of our human repose; where, in the evening of life, we seek rest for our wearied being, and find a haven for feelings long agitated, and faculties long exhausted: when passion has had its hour, and ambition its days; when the mind turns to reflection for enjoyment, and the senses to repose for pleasure; then a natural instinct draws us back to natural scenes; and the farm of Cincinnatus is sought for, or the Laurentinum of Cicero resorted to.

It was in the irregular edifice of an opulent and deceased Turk on the shores of tthe Engia, the ancient Sea of Saron, and at a small distance from the fort of the chain of Hymetlus, that the amiable preceptor of Ida Rosemeli retired from the world with his infant charge. While the philosopher, who, retiring to the cave of mount Pelion, drew after him, in the poetic language of the day, " the muses, the graces, and the loves," fond of agricultural improvement, his well cultivated farm gave subsistence and employment to the indigent and laborious; and the Albanian slave* possessed, under his protection, the comfort and independence of the English peasant. Devoted to picturesque and scenic beauty, his taste and care assembled round him the beautiful exotics, which, drawn from the neighbouring isles and neighbouring shores, mingled their florid, glowing beauties, with the hardier offspring of the more rigid soil of Athens; while the ruins of splendid temples, and elegant facades, supplied his portico and bath with that inimitable architecture, to whose perfection modern genius has not yet attained. All around him breathed the pure and rich enjoyment nature dictates, the simplicity and moderation which wisdom orders.

But if the cultivation and adornment of his sweet retreat varied the simple and interesting pursuits of his life, amus

* The agriculture of Livadia is entirely committed to the peasantry of Albania, who are poor, brave, and industrious.





ed his fancy, or employed his taste, it was the education of his lovely charge that engaged the feelings of his heart, that awakened the energies of his mind, that commanded a livelier admiration in his soul. For the operations of nature, and the beautiful moral effects of which they are productive, he had adopted no system, he had laid down no method; he knew that " to teach the young idea how to sfwot" was more poetical in sound, than just, or practicable in application; and he saw that nature brought with each day her own progressive, perfect plan of education: he watched the senses, gradually correcting, by hourly experience, the natural errors of a first timid experiment, and communicating to the intellectual power those images from, whence ideas spring, which, under the influence of moral sympathy, form their associations, and again expand themselves to new combinations; and he thought with a sigh of the folly of man, that forces on the memory of childhood a premature information, which the senses have not yet experienced, and the mind is incapable of comprehending.

He knew that feeling preceded intelligence; that our wants render us affectionate before our perceptions make us rational; and that consequently self and social love are the first great springs by which nature actuates and impels mankind.

Ida, therefore, impulsively clinging to those whose kindness formed her felicity, had not her warm and tender feelings thrown back upon herself by duties enforced beyond the ability of childish performance, by the severity which awakens terror rather than conviction, and by the privation of the present joy, the threat of a future punishment, which renders fear the medium of that virtue which should be imbibed from peace, and love, and joy.

Considering the imagination as the mirror of the senses, which, though frequently transposing, is incapable of forming any image absiracted from the sensible impressions it has received, he saw the necessity of estranging from its pure and brilliant surface those equivocal or distorted objects, which, untrue to nature, are but the phantoms of error, of ignorance, or superstition. Yet, knowing the potent influence of this bright mimic faculty of human intellect, he placed within its sphere such objects as were only incentive to the purest pleasures; such as awaken enthusiasm for deeds supremely great, or inspire a love for high ideal beauty; still drawing a moral inference from physical taste, still pursuing a sentiment in every object of sense.





While feeling and intelligence thus expanded together, the perceptions in their progress generalized the result of their experience, and proceeded from the observation of the elementary parts to the great arrangement of the universal system; and in the spirit as in the forms of nature, the moral or material world, the awed, the ardent, raptured soul still traced the power of a superior mind, and saw in all adaption, harmony, beneficence, and love. It was thus that the religion of Ida blended with every sense and sentiment of her existence, formed its evidence in every object of the creation that surrounded her. It was no abstract idea which sophistry might dispute; it was a sensible feeling, arising from the testimony of her senses and the inference of her mind. It was not a system established upon the faith which supports what it does not comprehend, which the theologist may vary, the philosopher oppose, and the sceptic deny; it was the pure, inevitable result of all she saw, of all she felt.

She beheld, and she adored; she enjoyed, and she was grateful! yet, while her preceptor detailed to her, in simple terms, the various religions of the earth, and the various sects of each religion, he pointed out the necessity of supporting that decent respect for the popular religion of her country, which the wisdom of a Socrates and a Plato thought not beneath them to adopt for their's, as a concession to those errors which the natural weakness of man brings with it*; while beneath the various forms, ceremonies, and errors which the ignorance and superstition of man, or his estrangement from truth and nature, had invented as the medium of faith and proof of adoration, he convinced her that the religion of the heart was everywhere the same.



* Every one has a right to pay a decent respect to forms innocent in themselves, and instituted by the government under which he lives; but the individual perception of truth is not to be aSected by the belief of others; the reason of each must be paramount to all other VOL. II. B





The morality of Ida was also like her religion, the result of her perception, and the inferences of her feeling. Happiness was the object of man, and, according to the harmony and adaption of the moral as of the physical laws by which the universe is governed, virtue could be the sole medium. But, with Ida, virtue was no abstract term, ideally conceived or vaguely understood: as for every natural blessing she enjoyed she referred to Heaven, so every action she performed she referred to society; and the necessity of moral rectitude was evinced, as the inseparable connection between self and social love ascertained itself by the inevitable conviction, that whoever injures another lays a precedent for an injury towards himself! while a delicate sense of moral justice (even independent of a consequent retribution from any direct violation of moral law) was borrowed from that obvious benevolence, which the Creator in all his works has displayed towards the created. The amiable preceptor of Ida had laid the basis of her education in an observance of the laws, operations, and forms of nature, and in the beneficence, wisdom, and power of Providence. What depended solely on man to teach, he communicated with caution: considering, that from a too great cultivation of memory* resulted a native barrenness of intellect; that the mind which has resorted most to the thoughts of others, can have fewest of its own; that the



authority: all may not be competent to form a just opinion, but a profession of faith must be an act of private judgment, which no authority can controul. But a right so imprescriptible and sacred, bigotry denies to the aggregate of society, though exploded superstitions furnish sufficient arguments against the pernicious influence of existing intolerance.

* "Le treVgrand esprit ne suppose pas toujours la tres-grande memoire t 1'extreme étendue de lu'n est toujours exclusive de 1'extreme eiendue de Pautre."





supremacy of genius is the inspiration of nature, and the mediocrity of talent, the imitation of art. The books he presented to her study were few and select: the history which the philosopher had dictated, or the patriot recounted; the poetry which draws its sentiments from the heart, and its imagery from nature; and the biography which awakens a passionate admiration for great characters, an ardent enthusiasm for great deeds, or a noble ambition for high renown. ,

But while she perused with curiosity, and with that insatiate love of knowledge which her early habits had inspired, the history and laws of other countries, it was the history of her own, its heroes, its patriots, its philosophers, and its artists, that engaged her mind, interested her feelings; that warmed her imagination, and influenced her enthusiasm.

The simplicity, the elegance of its ancient manners; the delicate connection of grace and strength, of heroism and feeling, of pleasure and of patriotism, distinguishable in the habits, the minds, and conduct of its people; tho(p institutions which tended to develope and increase the sensibility of the heart, to rouse the ambition of genius, and the emulation of talent; that religion so brilliant in its illusions, and so natural, so touching in its ceremonies; and that harmonious language, so rich in its expressions, so capable of painting the most delicate shades of feeling, of realizing the most evanescent forms of thought or fancy; all commanded a national admiration, a national pride, lively, pure, and enthusiastic; all was deducible from an adherence to nature, in a government whose basis was liberty, whose legislature cherished that moral elevation which is so remote from a tame submission to idle prejudices, and gave to the ardour of generous passions a brilliant and useful direction.

With that flexibility of organs and aptitude to learn languages, so peculiar to the region of which she was a native*, Ida, under a master who was himself, from the cir



* In the Ottoman empire many persons speak Greek, Hebrew, Armenian, AVallaehian, German, French, English, Itahan, Hungarian, cumstances of his life, a perfect linguist, acquired with facility several languages; and though all were spoken with the accent of an Athenian, her English and Italian were pure and correct: while the insatiate passion of her country for music and dancing was supremely her's, and simply acquired from inclination and example, without rule, without method; but always with sensibility and grace, the natural endowments of a woman and a Greek.





As the preceptor of Ida considered simplicity as the order of nature herself, equally necessary in a subject, an image, or term, as a perfection relative to the weakness of the human mind, and necessary towards the gradual acquisition of its intelligence, his instructions were conveyed in terms simple, clear, and expressive of the qualities they were meant to define; while he sought to occupy, without fatiguing attention, and as frequently proposed the pursuit of pleasure as the acquirement of information. Convinced that the gratitude of Ida still pointed to Heaven, as did her conduct to society, he gave her up without reserve to the influence of those pleasurable enjoyments, which nature so eloquently dictates, and which invariably characterize her sex, her years, and her country. The odour of a perfumed atmosphere, the emanations of delicious flowers -\vere inhaled; the luxury of a refreshing bath, the repose of a downy couch was enjoyed; and while the sufferings of others, whose destiny was less fortunate, was beheld with lender sympathy and generous relief, the cheap and guileless pleasures of nature were enjoyed with that moderation which nature herself is sure to dictate.

Yet, lovely as was the character, perfect as was the education of Ida in the eyes of her doating preceptor, it yet had not escaped that taint of imperfection to which all things human are invariably subject. It indeed left her natural, yet intelligent, tender, yet strong, with feelings at once regulated and impassioned, at once true to nature and to



Russian, and Sclavonian. « There are men, women, and children," says lady M. \V. Montague, "who have the same compass of words



in fivp nr six lanoniaerAc"





virtue; but it left her vain! it left her ambitious: for in the midst of her country she stood alone!!

She only of all her countrywomen had learnt to think for herself; she alone had the benefit of an education that rendered her distinguished and unrivalled; she alone, by a singular coincidence of circumstances, and a perfect developement of feeling and intelligence, had been awakened to a lively sense of the former splendour of her country, and its existing degradation. Possessing, in an eminent degree, that charming talent of narration, peculiar to the Athenians*, she was wont, at the celebration of a festival, or in the repose of her domestic shades, to assemble round her her young compatriots to detail to them the ancient glory of their wondrous nation, and all its arms achieved, and all its genius compassed. She repeated to them the biography of those eminent persons, of either sex, who had distinguished themselves by their wisdom, their virtues, their talents, and their patriotism. It was a Sappho—it was an Aspasia in the midst of her beautiful disciples! But it was a Sappho whom passion had not bewildered; it was an Aspasia, innocent as beautiful, and virtuous as intelligent!

Bursting from the ancient glory of her country, she would frequently touch on its existing miseries, and paint the sufferings which arose from a want of patriotism in the people, and the exercise of tyranny in the government, with all the feeling pathos of a woman, and all the graceful eloquence of a Greek. The old heard her with wonder, the young with delight! and Ida observed her influence, and triumphed in her powers. Athenian vanity had recorded the charms, the genius, and success of their still celebrated Irenef. In the youthful archondessa they again beheld her: the fanciful charms of her character delighted their delicate imagination; the beauty of her person charmed their senses; and her patriotism, already betrayed in the eloquence of her conversation, in several little songs and poems, written in the vulgar Greek, and distributed by the vanity of her father to his friends and kindred, called for their esteem, solicited their amazement.



* " Charmans conteurs, avides des romans comme les Arabes du desert, les Grecs ont toujours une fable prete, et vous retrouverez ces moeurs, cette disposition de 1'esprit, chez les Grecs modernes."

Garncry.

t Irene', a young Athenian, born of noble but obscure parents, . raised to the throne by the charms of her mind and the graces of her person: she set no bounds to her ambition, and was dethroned by Necephorns.





Yet the patriotism of the young Athenian was all a woman's sentiment. Had her country been free, had her country been prosperous, its political state would have awakened no interest in a mind, whose elevation, whose sensibility could never assimilate with the narrow views of a party, the low intrigues of a cabinet, the remote speculations of commercial interest or legislative ambition. But the former glories of her country had captivated her imagination, its present sufferings had touched her heart. Timid, nervous, and delicate, she could never have been an active partizan in its cause; but, tender, ardent, and enlightened, her talents and her feelings were devoted to its interests and its felicity. She sung its virtues; she defended its errors; she lamented its sufferings; and she deplored the false policy of its rulers, whose intolerant bigotry embosomed in their state a host of repining subjects, while the power was still their's to enrol beneath their banner a nation of grateful friends*.



THE SLAVE.

The days of Ida and her preceptor flowed on in peace, characterized by a patriarchal simplicity and a polished intelligence: their duties were to succour their compatriots, to relieve the unfortunate, to enlighten the ignorant, to dispel error,. to vanquish prejudice, and to promulgate truth: their pleasures were the discovery of a ruined fragmen^the revival of an ancient festival, the introduction of a French or English custom, the successful vegetation of their trees and flowers, the arrival of new books from Italy, or an occasional tour through Livadia, where every spot possessed a classic interest. Their society, adapted rather to the simplicity of their habits than to the enlightened elegance of their minds, chiefly consisted of the family of the old drogueman .itamati, who had retired from Pera to the little promontory of Zostor, where he lived in the midst of his family, secure of the favour of the porte, and looked up to by his countrymen with respect for the high station he had once filled.



* The intolerance of the mussulmen towards the Christians is only to be equalled by the intolerance of the christians towards each other. The religion of a Greek alone is sufficient to exclude him from all participation in the rights of citizenship. "A Greek lady," says Bisanni, "returning home through a crowd of Turks, one of them exclaimed in the hearing of my interpreter, ' Oh, how I should like to blow out the brains of that infidel!'"





The kindred of the archon Rosemeli, and occasionally the families of the foreign consuls, all looked up to Ida with wonder and admiration; all regarded her preceptor with a respect that bordered on awe. Scarcely known by any other name than the diako, or preceptor, all who approached him seemed more anxious to become his disciples than worthy to be his friends. Ida, frequently the visitant of her father's house, but generally the resident of her preceptor's villa, resigned herself to the tenderest respect, the liveliest gratitude, the most ardent affection for those who alone had made any claims upon that heart, so sensible, so warm; while the esteem, the admiration, which the amiable and gentle character, the elegant and philosophic mind of her uncle awakened, lessened not the natural love her less gifted, but endearing parent had inspired. The archon marvied; and the event caused no interruption in the domestic harmony of his family: he lost his second wife, and his children found a mother in the daugher of his first. He had allied himself by ties of interest to the then chief magistrates of Athens, Achmet, the disdar aga! and Mustapha, the vaivode! His trade was prosperous ; and his rank, though unconnected with any influence, was distinguished. The exquisite sensibility of Ida, therefore, as yet lay dormant; and its solicitudes and its fears had not yet been roused for herself or others, except through the mer





her uncle's delicate and precarious health. One solitary event alone hud varied the gentle calm of her plar.nl life: it was hke the gale which sighs on the bosom of the deep; it breathed on the surface of her feelings, faintly moved their calm, and died away in peace! She was scarcely fifteen, and resembled most one of the ideal forms of Piato before its incarnation, when he painttd it as enjoying the presence of the Creator, and contemplating only unchangeable ideas of truth and of perfection; she was so fair, so light, so pure, and so intelligent.

It was during one of the seasons that the tender bienteance of duty and affection obliged the preceptor and his pupil to pass at the house of the parent and the brother, that, stealing an hour from the endearments of domestic intercourse, they went to visit the temple of Serapis, to seize from the increasing depredations of time and gothic barbarism some of those features of the august genius of ancient Athens, which the pencil alone was now able to perpetuate or preserve. They were followed by the female attendants of Ida, and preceded by a little black slave, who carried their port-folios. The temple of Serapis lies to the left of the bazar or, market-place, which nearly forms the central point of the city; and Ida and her preceptor were surprised, as they passed through it, to find it so early in the morning occupied by a crowd of Turks, and a still greater number of Greeks. Ida drew her veil more closely round her, and hung back timidly on the steps of her friends, who inquired from a Turk the cause of so unusual a concourse. He replied: " The law awards a recompence to him who brings into the bazar the head of a wolf*; a ferocious animal has infested the neighbourhood of the city, and has done much injury: it has defied our best archers hitherto, but there lies its head."

"And who claims the recompence?"

"A mere boy, but an expert archer; he stands near the fountain, with his head uncovered."

* This law is of a very ancient date, and still preserved by the mo. dern Athenians.





Ida pointed her glance in the same direction with her uncle; on the steps of the marble font lay the bleeding head ot the wolf, grim and savage as the lingering traces of ferocity and pain could render it; at a little distance stood its destroyer.

It was a figure of singular interest, of singular beauty: it seemed to personify that charming aera in human life which vibrates between the lovely graces of adolescence and the strengthening energies of manhood; the muscles were still rounded, the cheek was still carnationed, and the limbs were still light, flexible, and pliant: but energy was already stealing something from the curving line of grace, and vigour from the fragile bloom of beauty. Yet the springing stature seemed still to grow on the eye; and the careless, playful indifference of boyhood still betrayed its happy thoughtless character, in the expression of the beautiful countenance.

The youth was dressed in the habit of a slave, his quiver was thrown over his shoulders, he leaned gracefully on his bow, and his eyes weretturned from the victim his dexterity had immolated, as if his delicate senses revolted from the deed his skill and courage had effected. A bustling Greek now busied himself in collecting the usual contribution; and the preceptor and his charge had so closely approached the youth, that when the Greek presented his cap to the former, as he dropped a piece of money in it, he addressed himself to him for whom the donation was made.

"We are all your debtors," he said; " for an act of public good, however trivial, deserves the gratitude of every member of that community for whom it has been performed."

While he spoke, Ida had untied from her bosom a little amulet; and while her modest eyes supplicated from her preceptor a sanction for the transient violation of her wonted delicate reserve, she presented the amulet to the youth, exclaiming, with smiling enthusiasm, "And I, too, am an Athenian !" The extension of her hand as she presenttd it disordered her veil; it fell on her shoulders; her vigilant paramana instantly replaced it, trembling lest the eyes of a Turk should profane her face. But the transient beam of its loveliness had flashed on the ardent gaze of the boy; he stood breathless, amazed, and overwhelmed; the amulet trembled in his still outstretched hand; he was silent. Ida and her preceptor had passed on; the money was laid beside him. The crowd was dispersed; but those of the spectators who passed the bazar in half an hour after, beheld the youth on the spot where they had left him, still supported by his bow, and his eyes still pointing their absent glance towards the path that led to the temple of Serapis.





The ruins of the temple of Jupiter Olympius, from its exposure to the sea, and the refreshing breeze that plays among its stupendous columns, afford a cool and sheltered walk, where the inhabitants of Athens frequently resort. There the Greeks and Turks mingle promiscuously; and even their women, under the sanction of their impenetrable veils, assemble there to breathe the sea air, or witness the skill of the archers, who frequently make its fragments the object of their aim, or fly their»arrows from its shade. It was on the evening of the day in which Ida had bestowed her amulet on the young slave, that she accompanied her young relative, the archondessa Zaphyra, and her preceptor, to enjoy the air in the temple of Jupiter Olympius.

On their way they were met by a young Greek peasant and his family. Symptoms of suffering and of joy were so mingled in their countenances, that their tears and their smiles left the feeling heart of the susceptible Ida doubtful whether it should sympathize in their affliction or their felicity. Under one of those sweet impulsions of benevolence" and cordiality which so often influenced her actions, she flew towards the Greeks, and inquired if they were unhappy, and if she could relieve them. She was answered with simplicity and gratitude, the Greek had committed some petty crime, to which the distresses of a mother and two brothers had urged him; he was brought before the cadi, who committed him to prison. A sum of money would have purchased his safety and release, but he had k not; for his family was perishing with want. A person. however, who had witnessed the distraction of his mother as she followed him to the prison, presented them a small purse of piastres. The acquittal of the prisoner was easily purchased, and the happy family were now returning home to their hut in the plain of Mesogia. Ida gave them some money, promised to befriend them, and inquired the name of their generous benefactor, whose benevolence had harmonized so sweetly with her own feelings. "Ah! he is there!" replied the woman eagerly, " 'tis he who now shoots the arrow!" The eyes of Ida and her party were now turned towards a group of Turks, who stood beneath the peristyle of the temple, and were aiming their arrows at the broken fragment of a column. The column was at a considerable distance; many arrows were directed at it; one only reached it, and it flew from the bow of the young slave who in the morning had obtained the premium in the bazar! He stood smiling and triumphant amidst the Turks, resembling in his form and attitude the boy of Phidias, as he appeared at the foot of the statue of Jupiter Olympius, his glowing brow circled with the wreath of victory won at the Olympic games*.





Ida gazed, blushed, and moved on; her cousin admired the beauty of the youth, and her preceptor, giving them both into the care of their attendants, joined the archers.

The Turks continued the exercise of their bows. The boy, satisfied with his evident superiority, threw his quiver over his shoulder, and walking to a retired part of the ruins which faced the sea, leaned over the broken shaft of a column in a pensive attitude, and fixed his eyes on the distant waves. Thither the preceptor of Ida followed him.

The youth blushed, rose, and recognized him by his expressive looks and graceful salutation.

"You have acquired considerable skill," said the diako, "in archery; and leave the best of our Turkish archers far behind."

"So I ought," returned the youth with animation; * for I am a Greek!"

* In the 86th olympiad.





"But a talent is only to be estimated by its utility; and the recent service your's has effected deserves the applause which society always bestows on its benefactors."

"I have done nothing yet," said the boy emphatically; "but I,too,am an Athenian!" and he blushed as he seemed involuntarily to repeat the words his ear had caught in the morning from the lips of the archondessa.

•'Who and what are you?" demanded his new friend with increasing interest.

"I am a slave!"

"A slave! and you release prisoners and bestow benefactions!"

The youth changed colour, and looked surprized.

"That was nothing!" he replied. "You saw how the money became mine: it was not sufficient to purchase my ransom, and I had no other use for it."

"You throw a new lustre on the generosity of your conduct; and you awaken a new interest in my heart, of which you are the object. I would be your friend."

"Indeed! that is strange; you are only the second person that ever expressed that wish."

"And who was the first I"

"A caloyer monk of the convent of St. Cypriani."

"Did he prove himself your friend?"

"To the utmost of his power: he reared me tenderly from my fifth to my fifteenth year; he taught me to read Homer in the ancient language of my country; he taught me that song of Alceus, which I shall never forget: 'Your glory shall last for ever, Harmodius and Aristogiton, for you slew the tyrant, and procured equal laws for Athens.' He made me acquainted with the lives of Pericles and Alcihiades; with all their valour effected, and all their genius compassed; and he instructed me in archery and the use of arms!"

"Astonishing! this is not the education of a monk of the order of St. Cypriani! Of what country was he?"

"He was an Athenian; but I have heard him say his birth was obscure. I was a foundling; he obtained me from the person at whose door I had been laid, and reared me in the convent as his child."





"And what is become of this inestimable friend?" "Alas! I know not. He took me with him to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land; but when we had got a few leagues from Athens, he turned towards the southern provinces of Turkey. We entered a revolted province which had joined the Russians. My friend threw off his monkish habit, and fought against the Turks. In the battle, I was still at his side. Fora moment we were divided: I lost sight of him! The Turks were victorious; the pihqvince was given up to pillage and to slavery, and I beheld my friend no more!"

The you*h passed his hand across his eyes; he sighed; and, after a short pause, added, "I became the property of an old bashaw-bey; he died, and I was sold to Achmet, the nephew of the kislar-aga. I had meditated an escape, and a return to Athens; but the kislar-aga had appointed* his nephews, Mustapha and Achmet, to the civil and military government of Livadia. -The certainty of revisiting my native country endued me with patience: I returned to it. The life I lead is easyt; but is ease enough to render life supportable I"

He ceased: his new friend had hung with a deep and ob-vious attention on a recital told with so much simplicity and so much fire. A mutual silence ensued. At last the preceptor of Ida, pressing his hand with cordiality and kindness, said, "Farewell; we shall soon meet again: you have lost the guardian of your early days, but you have

* The kislar-aga has always the appointment of the Athenian magistrates.

-f- "As to slave-boys," says a modern traveller, "they are instruct. ed in such accomplishments as are proper for young Turkish gentlemen. They are generally well clothed and fed, sleep upon excellent beds, and their vvhole service consists in waiting in the anti-chambers , $4t carry in pipes, coffee, sweetmeats, and sherbet"—See Habitable iVorld Described, vol. 2, p. 212.—Lord Baltimore asserts, that if '• these young slaves are handsome, they are excessively proud,

hty, and obstinate."

V OL. II. C





found a friend who will interest himself for your future life. Where are you to be met with? and by what name are you known I"

"At the Acropolis, where the disdar-aga resides, and they call me Osmyn."

"'Tis enough; farewell."

The preceptor turned away; the youth followed him a few paces: some wish, some solicitude, some request, seemed to hover on his lips; but, either too timid or too proud to give it utterance, when his new friend turned round and observed him, he hastened abruptly away.

The next morning the diako went to the Acropolis, called for the superintendant of the aga's slaves: his wish was to inquire into the possibility of purchasing the enfranchisement of the youth who had so deeply interested his feelings; but his hopes were at once blasted; his benevolent intentions at once frustrated; the young slave, Osmyn, had that morning fled, to avoid the punishment of the bastinado, which he had incurredI

"And what was his crime?" demanded the diako.

"Insolence, indolence, and faults innumerable," replied the chief slave of the aga. "In the olive ground he would not work, in the apartments he would not serve; he was frequently absent; always amusing himself with the bow; commanding the other slaves as if he was their master, or

inciting them to resist my orders, who am Once his

temerity went so far as to lead him to the mabin of the harem, though now past the age of being admitted there; but his faults were overlooked in consequence of his beauty and his accomplishments; for though he learnt music and the languages in common with the other slaves, he soon surpassed them all."

Ida was now of an age, of a character, which realizes the most perfect idea of the most delicate pudicity; every feeling trembling at its own expansion; every emotion shrinking back upon itself; instinctive modesty mingling its effusions with a new-born conscious bashfulness; and the sensitive delicacy of maturing youth correcting the careless impulses of innocent childhood. Brought up, according to the custom of her country,*in a total seclusion from the other sex, a few elderly relatives were the only men who had made any claim on her attention, and her father and her diako the sole objects who had interested her affections. She therefore reflected with amazement on the temerity of an action which had betrayed her face and person to a young stranger, and with confusion on the enthusiasm of feeling that had led her to address, and pursue him, with a token of her approbation!





She was pleased with him; she was displeased with herself: and this incongruous feeling awakened emotions in her bosom that were new and undefinable : it was a mingled thrill of pleasure and disquietude.

The fanciful form of the stranger, his air of superiority, had seized on her. susceptible imagination; yet she wished not to behold him again. But the anecdote of benevolence, which again introduced him to her observation, sanctioned the admiration she had hitherto nourished upon so slight a basis; and the simple recital of his life, repeated to her by the diako, excited a profounder interest for a character that seemed tinctured by that simplicity and romance which distinguished her own.

She sighed to think that a mind so free should be united to a personal bondage; and, without knowing the benevolent intentions of her uncle, secretly encouraged the belief, that a mind so noble would inevitably become its own destiny.

The next morning Ida arose at an early hour; she took her lyre, and ascended one of the kiosks of her father's house, which, hanging over an open road, commanded a view of the Acropolis. The stupendous columns of the Parthenon were tinged with the red beams of the rising sun; while the barren rocks of the citadel were still involved in the mists of the dawn. Ida opened the lattice of the kiosk; the air was pure as her soul, and sweet as the sigh she breathed!

Sigh of indefinite pleasure! how delicious is the emotion irom which thou stealest thy transient birth!

Ida tuned her lyre, and struck a few chords: the sound of voices beneath the kiosk induced her to stop the vibration! Two Theban ipilors, on their way to the Pirxus, were singing a ballad in the vulgar Greek, which celebrated the fates of Limbona Canzianni, their heroic countryman. Ida, pleased with the air, more pleased with the subject, caught the notes on her lyre; repeated the words, improved, aj^, sung them; till wearied, though charmed by their repetition, in the gay restlessness of her happy age, and in the vacillating feeling of a new-born sentiment, she threw by her lyre, to tie up the Arabian jasmine that drooped through the wires of the lattice.





Amazement and confusion hurried her from the lattice; for nearly opposite the kiosk stood the young slave of the disdar-aga: he was leaning in an attitude of profound attention; his head was thrown back, and his eyes were raised to the casement. The impulse which hurried Ida away again drew her back. With a little artifice, that was almost an instinct, she affected to engage herself in drawing to the lattice, which, wafted back by the air, seemed still to resist her feeble efforts. The youth drew near; a look, a movement of respectful entreaty, was animated by a glance of passionate admiration r he touched one knee to the earth; he drew from his bosom the amulet which had once hung upon Ida's; he pressed it to his heart— to his forehead—to his lips! Ida drew back, overwhelmed with emotion; a few murmured words reached her ear; but those'which she alone distinctly heard, were, " And I, too, am an Athenian!" - She sunk on a sofa, and covered her face with her veil, as if to hide her blushes, even from herself. Some minutes elapsed: with a timid, cautious step she approached the casement;.no object presented itself to her view: she advanced still nearer; but the youth was gone! She leaned out of the casement; she threw her eager glance in every direction. At last she perceived him, with the swiftness of pne of his own arrows, flying towards the road which leads Hb Marathon and Thebes: the next moment an angle in the, road concealed him from her view!

Early in the day the diako and his pupil returned to their sweet retreat on the shores of the Engia. And Ida learnt the intentions of her benevolent friend, and the cause of





their frustration. The flight of the young slave was in perfect consonance with the elevated ideas of the diako and his pupil.

"The youth," said he, " who receives a coarse and brutal punishment for having committed a moral error, receives a lesson of debasement, of cruelty, and cowardice; whose impression will long survive the fault and the suffering that caused it.

"This wondrous boy has doubtless marked out for himself a fate superior to any I could have procured him: his character seems animated by that passionate enthusiasm, without which there is no elevation of soul or conduct. It is in this complexional ardour the source of genius and of heroism is only to be found. But if the higher virtues, the more splendid qualities, find it nutritive to their perfection, and indispensable to their growth, it feeds no moderate vice, it leads to no puny crime; the great extremes in good or evil will be still its object; it will depend upon its first impression, whether it produces a Scylla or a Brutus, a Cato Or an Aristippus, or blends the great extremes of all in Alcibiades! ,

• "This boy has already fought for liberty by Friendship's side; but he has passed some of the most precious days of his life in the luxurious shades of a Turkish harem: he has the eye of a hero; but his smile! (and I marked it, as triumphing he stood amidst the Turks in the Temple of Jupiter, and caught the praises of a group of females who were the witnesses of his superior skill)—his smile is that of a young Persian satrap. It is now his unformed character vibrates in its feelings between pleasure and virtue! It is now impressions will become decisive!"

Ida assented, with timid acquiescence, to the opinion of her unclel She was busied at her embroidery at the time; but she thought of the eye of the hero, of the smile of the satrap, of her own amulet, so tenderly treasured, of her own words, so emphatically repeated ! The colour that deepened on her cheek, the fire that brightened in her eyes, were cold and faint to the glow that seemed to circulate with equal warmth through her mind and frame; and, with the sigh that sorrow cannot claim, she said, " 'Tis now impressions will become decisive I''





It is only under the influence of a corrupt education that the passions take an early flight. It is only when the imagination receives an early taint, that the feelings are forced into premature growth: nature is slow and delicate in unfolding their influence; they gradually expand with the ideas and the mind; and sentiment and love awaken together in the pure and tender heart of youthful susceptibility.

The young and innocent Ida, unsophisticated and artless, saw no lover in the image of her fanciful meditation; she saw only a creature whose character corresponded in some instances with her own, whose fate was singular, and whose ideal beauty of person charmed her elegant and picturesque fancy! and, flattered by the interest she had so obviously awakened, the latent vanity of self-love for a long time preserved, in her secret thought, the memory of him who had gratified a feeling so interwoven with all the strength and all the weakness of human nature. But, by degrees, the subject of a frequent reverie became but the splendid phantom of her imagination, till the vision softened, faded, disappeared, and left no fear, no hope, and no regret behind!

Two happy tranquil years succeeded to those which had already flown so lightly over the head of Ida. Time, as yet kind and bounteous (and who bestows with a liberal hand, what with a chill one he reclaims), had added to the treasures of her mind and person; and the dawning feelings, the budding beauty of the child, had ripened into the rich sensibility and attractive loveliness of the woman! Her love of country, her talents, and her charms, had obtained her a celebrity which excited admiration, but distanced love; and living in seclusion, or in the midst of female friends, the archondessa Rosemeli received the homage of deity, rather than the devotion of a woman!

Superior in her ideas, in her feelings, in every trait of her character, her person, and her mind, to those who surrounded her, she yet assimilated her habits totheir's; and carefully avoided shocking that popular taste and popular opinion, which are always supported by a zealous bigotry, more intolerant to the violation of its minutis, than to the infringement of morality itself.





To appear for the first time at the public bath, is always an epoch in the life of a young Greek, similar to a debut in the fashionable world of a more polished and refined society. Ida, who loved the simple manners and ancient customs of her country, and loved them the more for the lingering traces they still retained of classic forms, suffered herself to be introduced to the public bath with the usual ceremonies. The day was passed in those innocent revelries, which, upon that occasion, form the chief festival of the Athenian women; and Ida, as she returned from the bath, glowing in health and beauty, animated by the simplest gaiety in which she had participated, fresh as the Anadyomene of Apelles, lovely as the Gnidus of Praxiteles, but characterized by a timid modesty which was wanting to the perfection of either, glided through the streets of Athens, shrouded in a veil transparently favourable to her charms, and pursued on every side by the admiring gaze of those who passed or those who followed her. But while Turkish gallantry and Greek devotion breathed their passing homage on her ear, a person in the habit of an Armenian, who had followed her more closely than the regime of Athenian politeness admits of, was alone silent. He sought her observation by the singularity of his deportment; he eluded it by suddenly disappearing amidst the ruins of a temple. Thither the next moment Ida and her attendants were obliged to hasten for shelter against a sudden shower; but they had not reached it in sufficient time to save her veil from being penetrated with the rain. While one of her women was engaged in replacing it by her own, the downcast eyes of Ida perceived the drapery of the Armenian's robe almost touching her's: she started, and raised her eyes; but he had turned away, and had advanced towards the entrance of the temple, as if to leave it. At that moment an old and feeble Greek, bending beneath the weight of years and poverty, slowly approached the ruins, and crossed, as he passed, a party of armed janissaries, inebriated with opium, and the consciousness of their own supremacy. One of them, with wanton cruelty, struck at the old man, who, with the lingering irritation of national spirit, raised the stick that supported him to the head of the assailant: this was enough. "This day," said the Turk, " I have promised our prophet the head of an infidel, and thus I fulfil my vow*." His shining zatigan was instantly raised at the neck of the unfortunate, but fell in a thousand shivers to the earth. Ida shrieked, involuntarily • stretched out her arms to the tottering sufferer, and beheld the Armenian (whose interfering valour saved his life) surrounded by a danger greater than that from which he had preserved the aged Greek.





With the club with which he had broken the zatigan of the janissary, he still defended himself against the attacks of his companions, whose intoxicated fury left their arms almost powerless; he leaned with his back against a pillar. His cap had fallen off; and, in the midst of the horror, the confusion of Ida's feelings, while she still supported the old man on her arm, she recognized that countenance, that eye, which could only belong to the young slave of the Acropolis!

The next moment she saw him overpowered by numbers; several Turks had increased the party of the janissaries, one of whom had been struck by the Armenian to the earth, and lay bleeding on a heap of ruins. Had the champion of humanity been a Greek, he would have suffered an instant and a dreadful death; but as he was supposed to be an Armenian merchant, his probable opulence held out a lure to Turkish rapacity, which aven Turkish cruelty could not withstand. "Away with him to the Acropolis," cried the capidilgar keayasseyt, who was deep in the interests of his master, the disdar-aga: " he has escaped the fury of an injured janissary; let us see if he can escape the bowstring."

The young Armenian was now surrounded; he made no resistance: but he would not suffer himself to be dragged

* Historical.

t Captain of the guard.





along. "Lead on," said he, haughtily; "you see I cannot escape you." Ida rushed forward; he observed, and turned towards her: he saluted her with reverence; a melancholy smile softened for a moment the haughtiness of his countenance; he extended his arms towards heaven, and then towards her. His guards grew outrageous, and he proceeded to the Acropolis, where at that moment Achmet the disdaraga held a military mekkeme, or council.

Ida remained in the attitude in which amazement, horror, and compassion had stiffened every limb; her hands were clasped on her throbbing bosom; her eyes still pursued the lof'.y form of Osmyn as it towered high above the crowd that surrounded him, and her ear caught the broken sentences of a few timid Greeks, who had witnessed the affray, and were still trembling with apprehension. "What a pity," they exclaimed, " that so noble a youth should suffer! Doubtless they will first put him to the torture to discover if he has any money; and then they will give him the bow-string. Poor youth! he is a stranger! he has no one to plead for him! he must die! and die in our cause I"

"Merciful God of heaven !" exclaimed Ida; " die in our cause! and no one to plead for him!" She looked for a moment wildly round her; no one appeared who could give her any hope. Osmyn and his accusers were already at the Acropolis. Fear and reflection fled the soul of Ida; she abandoned herself to the influence of feeling, to the sway of enthusiasm! With a velocity that distanced all pursuit, she flew towards the Acropolis! She passed through the two first gates unobserved; the guard who stood at the Propyleum perceived her not, so rapidly she advanced to the residence of the aga! and, guided by the crowd on the outside, entered the hall of the mekkeme.

The disdar-aga was noted for his devotion to all the pomp and ceremony of Islamism; he was seated on his tribunal, surrounded by the insignia of his dignities. Three tails waving over his head, marked his rank as a bashawbey; his tchorbadgi (or colonel of the guards) was seated at his feet; a row of spahis, with their red habits and long staves, surrounded him. The prisoner and his accusers stood on one side; on the other appeared a crowd of janissaries, and castriani, or soldiers of the citadel; and the bottom of the hall was filled with Greeks.





The aga was a man who owed his professional rank to his military talent; he was a strict disciplinarian; his temper was obstinate and severe, not often excited to cruelty; but, when once roused, his thirst of blood was insatiable.

In the Armenian, who was now presented before him, he discovered a refractory and truant slave, and a daring innovator of military law. The prisoner stood therefore condemned, not only by the law*, but by the private feelings of the interested man, and the confirmed prejudices of the severe soldiers. The rapacious avarice of the Turk alone militated against both, and delayed without preventing the execution of the sentence, which the unfortunate criminal had incurred!

"I'll hear no more 1" exclaimed the aga, passionately, and interrupting the slow and tedious details of the accusing janissaries; "he stands accused equally by the law and by the prophet!"

"Strike, then!." cried Osmyn, boldly advancing towards the centre of the hall; "strike! but let not the dying privileges of Greece be wholly lost for want of courage in an individual to assert her rights!"

"Bear him away to the bow-string, instantly!" exclaimed the aga, enraged by an audacity so little expected; "'tis a truant slave! an infidel! a rebel! Let him die this moment!"

"No, no!" exclaimed a voice, shrill and piercing as it was sweet and plaintive; " he shall not, he must not die!" and the disdar beheld at his feet the prostrate form of a beautiful Greek girl. The lightning of her eye was quick and variable as the fleeting colour that alternately rosed and paled her cheek; her veil had fallen oft', and the disordered drapery of her panting bosom was remedied by the luxuriant profusion of black and shining hair, that fell in clustering tresses over it. The harmonious regularity of her

* To strike a janissary is death, according to the laws of Turkey.





features was lost in the wild, the eloquent, the soul-beaming expression of her countenance. Her white and rounded arms, glittering with jewels, were raised and clasped, and her whole form and air were those of the splendid phantom which for a moment glows on the imagination of poetic genius, but which defies the power of human talent to realize or perpetuate its charms.

"No!" continued Ida, touched to transport with the force and energy of her feelings, " he shall not, he must not die! Die! gracious God!—for what?—for defending the rights of nature, of freedom, and humanity. It was a Greek, a poor compatriot, he saved! it was age and feebleness he succoured, it was bigotry he struck at, and tyranny he opposed! He now appears before you, not to receive death, but to demand retribution. He stands before you, the representative of his injured country, violated in her dearest privileges; denied her dearest rights; oppressed, debased, and wounded. 'Tis to you he appeals; to you! of whom 'tis said, that your rank is the result of your abilities, and whose mind has shown itself superior in toleration and intelligence to that of the aggregate of your countrymen! If you are just, 'tis now the hour to prove it; if you are merciful, 'tis now reserved for you to evince it; if good policy is the principle of your ministry, the occasion now calls for its exertion; if the interest of your master lies at your heart, extend and cherish it, by making those the subjects of his affection who are now but the slaves of his power; if you are a man. true to nature, and to nature's dictates, refer to the feelings of your own heftrt, it will tell you, that he who loves his country succours the injured, protects the aged, relieves the oppressed, and opposes the tyrant; is, in all countries, under all laws,and all religions, the friend of human nature, and the benefactor of mankind!

"No! he must not die! You dare not so openly criminate yourself! you dare not be at once unjust and cruel! —dare not!—oh! you could not! you will not! In saving his life you preserve and sanctify your own. The Turks, whose countryman you are, will revere you; the Greeks,





whom you govern, will adore you; you will wear about you the attributes of Heaven itself, justice and mercy! You will be the bond of peace between an injured nation and their ill-advised rulers; you will have saved his life, whd risked it in his country's cause; and your example, followed and admired in all its happy consequences, will bring prosperity to Turkey; to Athens, gratitude, and peace, and happiness. Noble aga! 'tis the daughter of an Athenian archon, of your friend Rosemeli, who thus at your feet supplicates your justice and your mercy, in your own behalf, as well as that of Athens, and this stranger!"

Ida ceased; exhausted, breathless, she sunk on the cushion which supported the aga's feet: she still clung to his robe, which she had taken during the latter part of her speech; and her eyes, her soft, her melting, supplicating eyes, were still raised to his!

Amazement, and something more, rivetted his glance on her's. A silence, like that of death, ensued. Osmyn, spell-bound, imtnoveable, remained in the attitude he had assumed when Ida had appeared. The guards waited the orders of the disdar. Every eye was turned on Ida. All was suspense, and doubt, and expectation. The disdar himself was the first to interrupt a scene so new, so extraordinary, in the court of a Turkish tyrant.

He arose with dignity, yet with a confusion he vainly endeavoured to conceal; he spoke in a low voice to the tchorbadgi, and^he hall was immediately cleared: Ida, the prisoner, the Accusing janissaries, and the captain of the guards, alone remained. The disdar-aga then ordered the prisoner to be carried to a square tower in the arsenal of Lycurgus, till further orders should be issued; and Ida read his safety in the softened looks of a judge no longer obdurate. Osmyn was led away, but his eyes, full of an indefinite expression, still lingered on Ida; her's were fixed on the earth, abashed and overcome by a glance she could neither support nor understand. He disappeared. She turned round with a tender sigh, and found herself alone with the aga. He drew her gently towards him, and placed her by his side on a cushion. He gazed on her in silence, and Ida then recollected, that, for the first time, she had appeared unveiled before a crowd of Turks. She endeavoured to recover her veil; the effort increased her confusion; and the timid bashfulness, the vestal modesty of her looks, while it added to her beauty, formed a striking contrast to the energy, the enthusiasm, of her recent appearance. The emotion of the Turk became obvious; feelings of an opposite character struggled in his bosom. Ida's firmness had fled with the exhausted spirit of her enthusiasm; she trembled, and was silent. "Why do you tremble I" said the aga, taking her hand: "you at least can have nothing to fear!"





•' But what have I to hope?" said Ida, timidly.

"You have only to ask," said the Turk. "What would you have?" •

"That you would spare the life of that youth!"

"You love him, then?"

"I have never loved," returned Ida, burying the confusion that glowed on her cheek in her bosom: "the youth is a stranger to me; this is only the second time I have ever seen him, the first I have ever heard the sound of his voice!"

"Astonishing! and what risks you have encountered for him!"

"'Twas a common cause, not an individual interest!" said Ida, blushing still deeper.

The Turk hesitated for some minutes, and then said: "Beautiful Greek, in saving the life of this criminal I endanger my own; but you command it, and I do not hesitate. Yet in Athens he cannot remain; and, though I mayprevent his public execution, 'tis money only can purchase his private safety: an offended janissary is only to be appeased by blood or bribery."

Ida shuddered; she looked at the jewels which glittered on her arms; but she trembled for the inference which the aga might again draw from her intercession. With a presence of mind almost incompatible wLh the vivacity of her feelings, she replied, " I know not the circumstances of the stranger; but perhaps he is not destitute of friends in Athens!"

VOL. II. D





"I doubt it," said the aga: " he came here my slave; my claim is still good upon his services, and can only be purchased at a considerable price." Ida was silent: she knew the benevolence of her diako, the opulence of her father, and the resources her own jewels afforded her; yet still she was silent; and, after a short pause, arose and said, " I have your word, that for the present his life is safe: on this I repose; and for this I have only gratitude to offer!"

She then saluted him according to the manner of her country, and would have retired; but the Turk seized her hand : "Nothing," said he, " but gratitude!" And he gazed earnestly at her; a thousand varying emotions succeeded each other in the expression of his strong and marked countenance; his mind seemed agitated by conflicting passions; prudence, and that habitual duplicity, which a Turk can always practise, to effect a favourite purpose, finally triumphed. Ida had cast down her eyes in timid apprehension; she raised them again with innocent confidence to his face, and beheld all there calm and tranquil. "Well, then," said he, "gratitude be it;" and he released her. Ida kissed ihe hem of his robe in token of acknowledgment; and having ordered his attendants to convey her home, he conducted her himself to the gate of the propyleum: a ceremony as respectful as it was unusual.

At the outward gate of the Acropolis Ida was met by the <]iako; that firmness which she had never before seen moved, no longer supported him: he was pale and trembling; he had heard the adventure in which Ida had acted so conspicuous a part represented under a variety of aspects. The archon, whose interest with the aga was considerable, was absent on commercial business in the Morea, and would be so for some weeks. He trembled for the unfortunate Osmyn; but, above all, he trembled for the lovely, the imprudent enthusiast, who, with whatever success she pleaded, either with respect to the tyrant or the slave, must have pleaded with danger to herself. She had now thrown herself into his arms; she kissed away the tears that gathered in his eyes; she cheered him with her words, and with her smiles.





"The aga is just," said she; " he is merciful! Athens is not yet wholly lost! She has a magistrate willing to allow her rights, and a hero ready to defend them." As she pronounced the last words, her face was covered with blushes, and with a profound sigh she looked towards the square tower of Arsenal. "I have saved his life," she added; "but it remains with you to effect his liberty."

She then repeated all the aga had said, and remotely hinted at the jewels for which she had so little occasion. The diako heard her with a smile, accompanied her home, and returned to the residence of the disdar-aga.

To every description of persons in Athens the character of the diako was known; his wisdom, his virtue, his benevolence, the peace and tranquillity of his life, and the opulent independence of his circumstances, obtained for him a respect, a security, which belonged to better times, and a better state of society, than those in which he lived. He had met the aga at the house of the archon, and was personally, though distantly acquainted; at once admitted to his presence, he used such arguments in favour of the young slave, as were most likely to influence the Turk, the magistrate, and the man; and lie soon found that the terms of Osmyn's safety and enfranchisement were, a large sum of money, and his absence from Athens.

To one only he could reply; and, permitted by the aga, he hastened to the prison of Osmyn, to obtain his promise of the other. He found him with a spirit uncontroulable as his person was restrained; loaded with shackles but unsubdued in mind. The sudden, the unexpected re-union of two persons, whose last interview had been so touching, who were so unequal in years, yet drawn together by such delicate ties of sympathy and mutual admiration, was interesting and affecting. The diako unfolded at once the nature of his"mission; and delicately hinted his own intention relative to the enfranchisement of his young friend, which his flight two years before had frustrated.





"No!" said the prisoner, "it would be impossible to purchase life on these terms; to become so deeply your debtor, yet to be deprived the pleasure of living near you to testify my gratitude; to be banished my country, like one who had proved false to its cause, and unworthy of breathing its air. Oh! to what purpose live, if every feeling is to be wrenched from the heart; if the views, the projects that ennoble life, are to be blasted in their bloom; if we are not permitted to serve our country, and live for those we love? But under a corrupt and tainted government every thing is to be purchased; every crime has its licence, every vice its sanction; even virtue may secure its privileges, if it can but meet the price of rapacious avarice. The money demanded for my enfranchisement is double that of my original purchase, and the bribe demanded for the janissary is indeed exorbitant; but another bribe shall purchase my residence in Athens." Then throwing himself at the feet of his friend, he added: " Yes, I am your slave! the interest you have taken in my destiny, your prodigal generosity in my behalf, all bind me to you for ever! It will be easy to represent to the aga that you wish to retain me in your service until you can refund yourself by disposing of me to another: his justice, in this instance, may be purchased, as in every other. And I promise, while I remain in Athens, to be guided, to be governed by your wisdom and your virtue: but while the spirit of the obligation I owe you remains in full force, the form of it must, need no longer exist: for oh! most generous of friends! I am no longer wholly thrown upon your bounty; I am no longer wholly destitute."

And he drew from his bosom a small packet, and, presenting it to his friend, continued: "You will find here in jewels and money more than will even answer the rapacious expectations of the Turk. Another time you shall know how it became-mine; but to the eyes of my enemies it must appear that my safety and enfranchisement are purchased by that liberality which has been so generously devoted to my interest." i>





He ceased. The diako had listened to him with emotion and amazement. He perceived that the vivid spirit of the youth was so corrected by the bold reflections of the man, that it was in vain to oppose any argument to an obstinacy of determination, founded in the principles and affections of a generous and ardent nature. He saw that Osmyn was determined not to receive any pecuniary obligation; and convinced that, though reason may overrule the errors of judgment, it is always unequal to vanquish the influence of sentiment, he laid aside the dictates of his own cautious prudence, and, adopting the resolutions of his protege, hurried away to realize his hopes, and execute his desires.

The sun had not yet sunk in the Euxine, when Osmyn, free and unshackled, issued from the gates of the Acropolis, like the genius of ancient Athens, rising from the midst of its ruins, from the midst of the trophies of its former grandeur, and promising to Greece the revival of its ancient glory. The news of his unexpected safety and liberation had spread through Athens; in whatever light the event was considered, it was looked on as a prodigy, and as an omen of future prosperity to their country.

As he proceeded from the Acropolis, he was met by . groups of Athenians, who hailed him with stifled murmurs of applause, while their animated looks spoke all their timid hearts trembled to reveal. Triumph, like a ray of divinity, played round the brow of Osmyn. Lofty and dignified, he passed on followed by an accumulating crowd; he spoke to some, he bowed and smiled to others, and an a'ir of condescension mingled itself with his familiarity. Every one lost sight of the slave; and the champion of Athens received that homage so grateful to a high, a noble, and an ambitious mind, conscious that it is respected for itself alone. He had now reached the temple of Jupiter, on his way to the villa of the diako, who had offered him an asylum during his residence in Athens, and who had already returned thither by water; he contemplated the august ruin with an emotion finely correspondent to the tone of his pre-existing feelings: his soul swelled; he turned round to those of the Greeks who still followed him; he pressed his hand to his heart, he raised his eyes to heaven, and saluted them with an expression of air and countenance which was understood; they threw up their caps, and gave an animated cheer. He replied by a look, a gesture that gave assurance to their hopes; he waved his hand, and, again saluting them, proceeded: the Greeks returned to Athens.





Osmyn was received by the diako as a tender father would receive a son rescued from an imminent danger, and newly restored to happiness and safety. Osmyn threw himself at his feet with all that vivacity of feeling and emotion so natural to his youth and the character of his country; yet still his air was troubled and abstracted, his expressions of gratitude were confused and broken, and his eyes still sought some object his heart required.

At last, unable to suppress his solicitude, his impatience, and anxiety, he exclaimed: " Yet, great as is the sum of all I owe you, there is another to whom my homage is supremely due!" He paused, the colour rushed to his cheek, and he trembled; then added in a lower tone of voice: "I understand that it is your niece, and the daughter of the archon Rosemeli, to whom I owe my life. Oh, precious life, to be so preciously preserved! She who is her country's idol! whose beauty and whose genius, whose eloquence and—" He paused abruptly, confused, abashed at the vehemence of his feelings and the force of his expressions.

"I believe," said the diako, " the intercession of my niece had some influence in the determination of the disdar-aga. She aimed at the feelings of nature, which may be dormant, but are seldom wholly extinguished in the heart of mun; and she succeeded: besides, her family is the most powerful in Athens, and her father the friend of Achmet."

"And will it not be permitted me," said Osmyn, casting down his eyes, " to express my gratitude?"

"My niece," said tiie diako, " usually resides with me; but in the absence of her father she devotes herself to the government of his household. Besides, she considers her intercession made less in your, behalf than in the common cause of nature and humanity."





Osmyn sighed, and was silent. ."

"Yet if you wish to write to her—" said the diako.

"Write !" repeated Osmyn, starting: " I dare not.

"Then an opportunity may soon occur," said the diakoj "of expressing to Ida those grateful feelings by which you seem oppressed."

"Ida," repeated Osmyn, passing: his hand across his face, to conceal the tender smile, to stifle the still more tender sigh, which accompanied the faintly murmured repetition of her name, now heard for the first time, " Ida!!!"

"It is not a common, but an ancient name, in Greece," said the diako, " and was borne by the wife of Lycastus and the mother of the Cretan Minos*."

Osmyn blushed to have been over-heard, and suffered his heart alone to repeat again the sweet and simple name of "Ida."

During a repast which was now served, Osmyn, with all that spirit, that simplicity, and fire which equally characterized his manners and his words, briefly related those incidents of his life, which had occurred since he had last beheld the diako in the Temple of Jupiter.

He had fled from Athens, to avoid the disgrace of an ignomimous punishment; an accidental circumstance (and he the colourer, as he remarked it) directed his steps towards Thebes, where he understood* the heroic Lambvo Canziani then wasf: his arrival proyjsd the error of his information. Canziani was then an officer in the Russian service; but his friend, and one who had lately served with him. were t.hen in Thebes, and secretly employed in distributing manifestoes from Russia, then again on the point of renewing the war with Turkey, after a twelve years' peace. Osmyn songht the friend of Lambro, and found in that friend the caloyer monk of the convent of St-, Cypriani.



* Sec Meursius' Dissertation on the Island of Crete.

t Lambro Canziani was by birth a Theban; his poverty and inclina'ion equally urged him to a sea life. Intimate!) acquainted with the coas's of Greece and the Peloponnesus, he distinguished himself even while a common sailor by the intrepidity of his spirit, his love of country, and his hatred to the Turks. He was yet young, when he was adnvtted as an officer in the -;ussian service, and was crowned vvivh laurels at the sieges of Coron and Tschesme'. ' The empress, always alive to merit, gave him the rank of colonel, and held out to him i he hope of playing a great par' in his na'ive country. He believed 'ha- the Greeks, mused ar the name of liberty, would, with rhe assistance of the Russians, combine against the Ottoman force, and, with the assistance of the Greek patriots, he fitted out twelve small vessels. But the Russians, obliged to suspend the war against the Turks, found it more expedient to check the progress of the French revolution than to restore liberty to the oppressed Greeks; and L,ambro, after many heroic feats and important captures, was necessitated to disperse his little fleet.





He had escaped from slavery, he had fled to Russia, been received into its service, and availed himself of its interest and influence to forward the views his heart had long cherished in favour of his own unhappy country; his secret agency in Greece favoured also his solicitude and anxiety relative to the destiny of the son of his adoption; he had in vain caused every inquiry to be made after him; he had in vain revisited the revolted province where he had lost him. The first intelligence he received of him was that obtained in the moment which restored him to his arms. Osmyn remained in Thebes with this beloved friend for near three months, receiving his instructions, assisting his endeavours, and sharing the fatigues and dangers of his situation. He found the Greeks everywhere ripe for revolt, everywhere oppressed, and everywhere watched. The imprudent ardour with which the two Athenians exerted themselves in a cause so dear to their feelings and their principles, at last awakened the vigilance of a Turkish aga. The Athenians were attacked, surrounded, and owed their escape to a valour increased to supernatural efforts by desperation. They baffled and escaped the Turks; but the elder Athenian had received his death-wound in the combat. It was in the pass of Thermopylae that, vanquished by loss of blood, by weakness and fatigue, he fell from his horse, and was received in the arms of Osmyn, who bathed his wounds with his tears, and hung over him in agony.





The Athenian looked round him; a smile of triumph beamed on his' features. "I die," said he, "in the pass of Thermopylx. I die in the arms of an Atheman, of my son; not the child of my adoption, but my own and onjy son. Fly to Canziani, he will give you a casket, it will explain all. Swear to save your country, or die in its defence; but betray not your name until you have obtained the esteem and confidence of your compatriots for yourself alone." Osmyn had always suspected that he was the son of the caloyer monk, and every feeling was now involved in that of poignant and filial affliction. The Athenian expired in his arms, amidst the gloom of a profound solitude, and tire horrors of a stormy night. Osmyn watched by the remains of his father; the next day, with the assistance of some Greek peasants, he consumed the body by fire, and buried the ashes on that spot long sacred to the manes of Grecian liberty and Grecian valour! He pursued his long and perilous course, and at last reached *****, a frontier town of European Russia, where Canziani was stationed. The Theban received him as the son of a patriot, and his friend; he would have procured for him a commission in the regiment of which the empress had made him colonel; but Osmyn declined the offer, and preferred serving as a volunteer: it left him more free to act; and he was only bound to Russia, as it betrayed itself the friend of Greece. For sixteen months he remained beneath the eye of Lambro Canziani, at once his friend, his counsellor, and pupil.

The rumour of a war with Turkey again arose in Russia; many Greeks of consummate talents had entered into the service of a power so friendly to their cause, so hostile to their tyrants. Already the celebrated Greek SoUiri* had undertaken to disseminate the Russian manifestoes in Albania; and Osmyn, led to Athens by a thousand impulses, offered his services, through Canziani, to the governor of the province, and found them thankfully accepted. He

* In 1789-90.





knew the danger he incurred by returning to Athens, where Achmet-aga might still reign; but he encountered it with an ardour proportioned to its imminence. He soon lost sight of all personal danger, of all personal consideration; he resigned himself wholly to the natural feelings of hij heart. Russia disappeared—Greece filled his mind! Athens free! Athens happy! alone filled his soul. His youth, his inexperience, his romantic character, and patriotic enthusiasm, left him no power to calculate on the jmprobability of hopes so ardently cherished. Athens had once been free, been glorious, and been powerful. He thought of Aristogiton and Harmodius; and he repeated those words, engraven on his heart by a power stronger even than that of patriotism itself,

"And I, too, am an Athenian!"

He arrived at Athens in the character of a young Armenian merchant, on the morning when Ida had first appeared at the public bath. He fancied he recognized, through the envious veil, the beautiful phantom that had flashed on his gaze near the fountain of the bazar. Anxious to ascertain the truth of his suspicions, he had followed her; and an adventure occurred, into which he had been led by an ardour of feeling, which had nearly proved fatal to the cause by which it had been excited. He ceased.

"And the casket in the possession of Lambro Canziani," said the diako, eagerly, " its contents of such moment to you—"

"Pardon me," returned Osmyn, " I am not 'yet worthy of betraying them. I would place my life in your hands; I would devote it to your service; but the commands of a father are sacred, and my hour is not yet come: suffice it now to say, the casket contained some jewels and a sum ot money, the wreck of a noble and extensive property." "'Tis enough," said the diako; "all that should render me your friend I know! You love your country ! you obey your father! you encounter danger! you protect the oppressed! you are therefore loyal, duteous, humane, and brave; these are the virtues to claim toy esteem! But you are imprudent, chimerical, rash, and impetuous; these are failings to awaken my solicitude: it is of these two sentiments that friendship is composed; the feeling cannot live without esteem, and it becomes languid without anxiety; but, in the balance of the affections, the former should preponderate; when the latter is pre-eminent, the sentiment loses its character, and regret and pity alone remain of that pure and exalted feeling, which those alone can feel, and those inspire, who still prefer the useful virtue to the dazzling feat, who owe their self-distinction to their social service. Friendship is but the concentration of philanthropy, and we still love mankind in him who best promotes its interest and felicity:





"Caesar, victorious, had no friend;

"Brutus, vanquish'd, boasted two."



The diako ceased, smiled, and stretched out his hand to the youth, whose countenance expressed deference and love. He threw himself at the feet of his friend; he pressed his hands; his words breathed obedience and respect to superior wisdom, while his sparkling eyes indicated a soul not formed to brook restraint. Their figures, their air, their countenances, and their attitudes, gently touched by the rising morn, presented an eloquent and charming picture.

Painting might have seized it as its happiest model, and given the charming effort to the world, as a youthful Alcibiades laying aside his soul's ambitious views to catch the mild philosophy of Socrates.

They now separated; the diako, as usual, to an early couch. Osmyn, still restless, still agitated, wandered to the portico. The sea breeze produced a gentle vibration from a lyre that hung from one of its pillars. Osmyn took down the instrument; he swept its chords, and wandered on; he thought; he felt; and the lyre seemed to return a too pensive sound, and seemed to echo back hia feelings and his thoughts. Ah! he exclaimed, if it could indeed respire them!





The temper of the day had been ardent and oppressive; the events it had witnessed had been extraordinary and unprecedented: fatigue of spirits, weariness of mind, agitation of feeling, brought not with them a consequent and necessary repose to Ida's tender bosom. For the first time she vainly pressed a couch, where hitherto the spirit of repose 'tself seemed cradled; for the first time the recurring incident of the day chased the bright vision of the nightly dream; for the first time her bewildered senses became the dupes of a tyrannic fancy. Still she was in the mekkeme of the disdar-aga! unveiled, exposed, surrounded by the incongruous multitude. Still she beheld, opposed to the lowering, sullen mein of tyranny, •and years matured, the Elysian spring of youthful manhood. Still she saw contempt of danger, resistance to oppression, the eye of the hero, the smile of the satrap, and the form of a young Athleta, o'er whose bold structure the harmony of fine proportion shed its softer graces.

To forms which fancy strongly imaged, succeeded feelings of hope, of fear, anxiety, and doubt; and Ida, " not so happy, yet much happier," than she had ever been, yet not so tranquil, yet more pleased with agitation, left a restless pillow, to breathe the freer air and cooler atmosphere!

It was in the silence of a tender meditation; it was in the silence of one of those delicious nights, at once so common and so peculiar to a Grecian summer, that a melting voice, accompanied by a lyre, ascended towards the casement where Ida enjoyed the odour and the freshness of the midnight breeze. She started, drew forward the drapery of the casement, and retired. Again she approached, and listened: she knew the air, she knew the words. 'Twas the air she had played, the words she had sung, when, opposite to the casement where she then stood, the young slave of the Acropolis had appeared an unex • pected and delighted auditor. It was now twice repeated, with an additional verse, which alluded to the circumstance, and terminated with this sentiment simply expressed:





"'Tis for man to perform great actions;

"Pis for woman to inspire them."



The heart of Ida throbbed with feverish palpitations; she drew back, and sunk on a sopha. A profound silence ensued, and the mild tranquillity of the night gave to her ear a sigh, broken and lingering as the unfrequent gale that faintly sobbed on the stilly air at distant intervals. Again all was silent. Ida arose! she wished not to banish, though feared to detain; her wish and her fear were reconciled by woman's always delicate and tender ingenuity. She arose; with a trembling hand she removed the crystal lamp that burned dimly in an adjoining room. She placed it on a tripod in the centre of the kiosk, and placed her sylphid form before it; the graceful shadow was pictured on the turf beneath; the archondessa therefore had not yet retired to rest, and must have been the auditress of the feigned Armenian's song. She placed herself behind the half-opened lattice of the casement: the lyre was again struck; but it was with a trembling hand: the voice was again raised; but it was scarcely louder than the sigh that had preceded it; and the song (though not unknown) no longer told the feats of Lambro Canziani. Oh! no, it was a sweeter, a more fatal strain: it was Sappho's deathless song of love, breathed in the Lesbian's own inspired language, and softly flowing through all those finer shades of sound, which can alone betray the subtilty and delicate vicissitude of ardent, tender, timid passion: the song, the sentiment, the words, the air, all spoke a soul which love had deeply touched; which died, yet trembled to reveal its homage. At last, the lyre was heard no more: the:Voice was gone, the breath was lost; silence perpetuated the feelings which language could no longer express, and the most ardent, the most tender, the most susceptible of human beings, were awakened in the same moment to the influence of the most powerful,-the most delicate, and the most sacred of emotions.

It was not yet a sentiment, but it was that exquisite and indefinite glow of feeling, which may and must be transient

VOL. II. E





in duration, but which concentrates in its little moment the sum of bliss which ages might bestow. It was the intrusion of the tender, careful paramana which waked the visionary, the happy Ida, from a dream so brief and sweet.

"Ah!" she exclaimed, " 'tis as I suspected; why, lady, archondesa, Ida, sweetest! what, drooping on thy sopha, and not to rest yet? Sacred Panaghea! what does this bode? Ah! if I heard not the sound of a double-pipe, or dervise flute, beneath the casement, my name was never Kyra, and I am no Sciorian. Well, this it is to risk one's life for a young Armenian, to show one's face unveiled at a mekkeme?

"So, now, we shall have nothing but wreaths over our doors, and dervise flutes and lyres beneath our windows. Thus it was before I married good Joaniki. Would that the archon had never gone to Corinth!"

The tedious garrulity of Kyra gave time to Ida to recover from that illusion of a " fancy trance in bliss," into which, with all the susceptibility of a Greek, and a woman, she had plunged by sounds and sentiments but too consonant to the tone of her Character. She arose, and approached, as if to draw the drapery of the lattice; her quick glance fell on- the form of Osmyn, plainly distinguishable by the brilliant beams of a full and cloudless moon. He knelt, and held towards the casement the ribbon from which was suspended the treasured amulet, presented to him in the bazar. Ida drew back; but, as she retired from the casement, she let fall from her bosom a sprig of melissa, the emblem of her chaste and tender feeijngs*. Sweet and simple arts, which love and nature teacli! Osmyn caught and pressed the flower to his lips. ,

"Why, archondessa!" cried the impatient Kyra. "I come, good mother," sighed the reluctant Ida; and, taking up her half-extinguished lamp, followed the kind but teasing paramana to her chamber.

* The melissa, or honey .flower, was dedicated to Diana, and was remarkable for its healing qualities.





GREEK GAMES.

It was in the evening succeeding to that day so dreadful in all its circumstances to the young Athenians, that Osmyn, unable to command his attention to the Xenophon his friend had put into his hands, and agitated by feelings the most consonant to the impetuous ardour of his passionate nature, flung by the book, and was suffering himself to be led, by a tyrannic impulse he neither could nor wished to resist, towards Athens. Osmyn loved like a Greek*, but he also loved like one in whom ideas of glory blended with every sentiment of passion. But the feeling had as yet assumed no definite character. He would have thought it almost impious to call it love, for the archondessa Rosemeli was to him " a thing inskied," to be worshipped as a deity, rather than to be loved as a mortal. But she had distinguished him in the bazar; she had pleaded for him at the Acropolis; she had given him the amulet she had worn round her neck; she had bestowed on him the flower that had lived on her bosom; and when he had made the passionate strains of Sappho the medium of his own artful feelings, they had been at least listened to without displeasure, in whatever manner they had been construed. It was thus the first emotions of a timid, doubtful, reverential passion, found sanction, and support, and hope, from the high and conscious pride of a proud, ambitious, but a noble mind, "If (as 1 feel) I am not worthy of her love," he cried, " who, in all Livadia, dares pretend to be so? Whom did her sentiments inspire? Whom did her song conduct? Who dares do all I dare for her and Athens?"

At that moment, while love and glory mingled their pure and sacred fires in his bosom, a Greek approached him, leading by the bridle an Arabian horse, richly caparisoned. He saluted Osmyn with respect, and presented to him in the same moment the bridle of the horse and a letter. Osmyn received them with surprise; he opened the letter, and read as follows:



* The love of the modern Greeks, like that of the ancient, is, according to de Guise and other travellers, a frenzy rather than a pas





"The freedom of Greece is fleil, her glory is no more, but her spirit is not wholly extinct, and her sensibility survives. Athenian! you are understood! Proceed, you are surrounded by compatriots, not unworthy of following the path your patriotism and courage have marked out."

Thrice did Osmyn peruse this billet; the blood boiled in his veins, his heart throbbed with uncontroulable emotion; visions of glory floated in his brain; already he beheld himself the chosen leader of his countrymen. The impatient neighing of the noble animal, whose bridle still hung upon his arm, roused him; he raised his eyes, the person who had presented him the letter had disappeared; he sprung on the back of the beautiful Arabian; its unbroken spirit seemed to resist his power, it tore up the earth, and tossed its head on high; but its bold and dauntless rider managed and subdued it with equal skill and strength. Thus engaged, he perceived the diako walking towards him; his delicate and bending form, supported by a long white staff; his countenance, interesting from the delicacy ill health shed over it, shaded by the grey hairs, time alone had not bleached! What a contrast to the young, the vigorous, the animated Athenian. Osmyn dismounted, led the horse, and with triumph glowing in his eyes, and a smile, approached his venerable friend.

"And to whom does that beautiful animal belong," said the diako, " you manage with such grace and skill?"

"'Tis mine," returned Osmyn, and presented him the letter which had accompanied the gift.

He read, and returned it in silence, and Osmyn saw nothing in his tranquil countenance that added to the triumphs which beamed in his own. A domestic at that moment approached them, and the diako desiring him to take charge of the horse, accepted the arm of its new master, and they walked on.

"You do tiot think, perhaps," said Osmyn, " that I should accept of that animal?"





"On the contrary, it is a merited tribute of national gratitude, and should be valued in proportion to the sentiments with that it was bestowed; but the letter that accompanies it should be considered with more thought and circumspection. The power which opposes itself to a superior force, however pure the spirit by which it is warmed, must still depend on chance or prudence for success: 'tis not the motive that insures the victory; and those who rush on peril, to save a sinking country, should weigh with caution, whether the daring effort may not plunge that country deeper in affliction!"

"But can its safety or redemption be effected by tame submission to its wrongs?" returned Osmyn. "Is tyranny to be subdued by timid caution, or cold calculating prudence? Divest the mind of energy and passion, and if it injures not, it cannot serve society. Oh! surely, 'tis this conscious spirit of resistance to all that is base, vile, and slavish, that renders us so estimable to ourselves, before that opportunity occurs that bids us claim the admiration and esteem of others; that brings us glory, and secures us fame!"

"That brings us glory! and secures us fame !" returned the diako, and smiled, and gently waved his head: " this is the language of ambition; philanthropy and patriotism breathe another sentiment: they teach us to deserve, not to command esteem and admiration; they teach us to disdain, the glory that is not purchased by the good we have effected. 'Twas love of country warmed his soul, who, rushing from the field of Marathon, lived but to breathe the story of her freedom, and died exulting. It was ambition fired his breast who was the conqueror at Marathon, and yet betrayed the country he had fougfit for."

"But may not," interrupted Osmyn quickly, " may hot the sentiment which warmed the bosom of the harmless patriot, be blended with the love of glory, which led Themistocles to deeds of deathless fame 1"

"It is to be devoutly hoped," returned the sage.





"It is more," replied Osmyn with enthusiasm, "it is to be devoutly felt!" and he pressed the hand of his friend to his throbbing heart.

"I do believe it, amiable young man! If I endeavour to render you suspicious even of yourself, 'tis for your country's sake; if I would restrain your spirit, 'tis for the good of that cause, to whose welfare and success prudence, time, and caution are no less requisite than vigour, courage, and enthusiasm. 'Tis the unanimity of the oppressed should make the oppressor tremble; but who will answer for the unanimity of those, whom slavery has long debased, whom religious prejudice divides, whom faction agitates, and interest rules! Many there are I know among them, whose spirit and whose sensibility recall the virtues of their glorious ancestors*; and many more who cherish hopes of freedom and prosperity to Greece: but ere you trust and risk your country and your life, know them, try them, study and observe them! then build your confidence upon a sound and firm experience, then rest your hope and views upon a pure, disinterested, and sacred motive. Let not fame only actuate your life:

"The patriot's glory is his country's good!"

You have already distinguished yourself; the eyes of Athens are turned on you! It Will soon be understood you are my friend, and the resident of my house; and you will mingle in society under circumstances peculiarly favourable to your cause. Meantime, remember that a conduct regulated by the nicest caution can alone render you the friend of Athens, and shroud^ you from the vigilance of the disdar-aga."

Again the young enthusiast promised adherence to his friend's advice, gratitude and tenderness for all the kindness he received.



* " II existe encore dans la Grece qnelques hommes capables de rappeler la memoire de leurs ancetres." Chaiseuil, Voyage Pittoresque.





The beauty of the evening, the nature of the climate, the ruins by which they passed, and the ancient and present state of Greece,- beguiled the time, and lengthened out a conversation, which every moment became more interesting; till, without perceiving the distance of the walk, they had already reached the western gate of the Acropolis. The shades of a soft and glowing evening were already veiling the faded glow of the horizon, from which the sun had disappeared; nor had the moon yet risen to dispel the obscurity, which scarce a single star illuminated. Still the diako did not wish Osmyn to advance: he feared lest, if he were recognized, his close approach to the disdar's residence would seem defiance; and they were about to return, when two of the attendants of Ida, followed by a slave, saluted the diako as they passed on to the gates of the citadel. He inquired for the archondessa.

"She is at the Acropolis," returned one of the women; "we are going to attend her home."

The diako expressed his surprise.

"It is the feast of the Donalma*," returned the woman; "in honour of which, the lady Jumeli, the disdar-aga's only daughter, gives an entertainment in her father's gardens. She came herself to invite the archondessa, who is gone thither with her paramana."

"Then we will wait to convey your lady home,"'said the diako: "you will find us near the Parthenon."

Osmyn and his friend proceeded towards the temple: already the castriani were sending forth from the battlements the deep holloa which proclaims the vigilance of their nightly watch. The diako expressed some solicitude for his niece, some surprise at her visit to the citadel.

"It was one," he said, "of those little imprudences into which her love of society, of pleasure, a certain facility of disposition (that resigned itself too easily to a compliance with the wishes of others), frequently led her."

* The Duualma, or rejoicing for the birth of the grand seignior's children.





"She," said he, " who, upon great occasions, is always great, is too frequently careless of the minute observances on which the safety and happiness of private life, and frequently the tone of public estimation, so much depend."

Osmyn returned no answer; he walked with a rapid pace, to which the debility of the diako was unequal, and who sat down amidst the ruins of the Parthenon, while Osmyn, with folded arms, and eyes strained towards the residence of the disdar, paced before the temple with long and hasty strides. In a few minutes the light form of Ida was perceived moving towards the pronaos of the temple; she observed her uncle, hastened to join him, and dismissed her attendants; and placing herself at his side, with that charming talent of description which brings an image so strongly to the fancy and the mind, she was recounting to him the festivities of the evening; the brilliant illuminations of the gardens; the beauty of the disdar's daughter, and the graces of the young Turkish and Grecian women, who composed the society; when Osmyn, who had not before approached, with a timid air and lingering step advanced towards them.

"It is your protege," said the diako, " who has accompanied me hither, and who is anxious for an opportunity to express those feelings the interest you have taken in his fate awakens."

Ida was overwhelmed with confusion and surprise; she half arose, and again seated herself by her uncle. Osmyn pressed his hand to his heart; he advanced a few steps, bowed, but spoke not, and leaned on the fragment of a column, near which the diako sat. A silence of some minutes ensued; the thoughts of all seemed engaged in contemplating the splendid, the beautiful, and awful ruins that spread around them; for their eyes at last wandered over the marble wonders, on which the moon now arose in cloudless brilliancy. Before them lay the mouldering temple of Erechtheus, immersed in shade; to the right, the snowy, shining pillars of the temple of Victory formed a dazzling contrast; and the mighty altitude of the Parthenon's matchless columns* was measured in its shadows on the shining surface of the earth; immense fragments of ponderous architecture, which had been shattered in the Venetian warsf, lay on every side, mingled with pieces of jasper and porphyry, with which the taste of mussulman piety, and christian devotion, had at distant intervals ornamented the heathen temple, as it alternately served as i mosque for the Turks, or a church for the christians. The diako was the first to interrupt a silence that was not without its charm.





"Splendid wrecks of former glory!" he exclaimed, "wondrous relics I that eloquently speak the extent of human genius, and the fragility of human power! what lessons of humility might not the ambition and the pride of man receive from your prostrate columns!" " What lessons might not the tyranny and ignorance of man receive from monuments like these !" exclaimed Osmyn, with enthusiasm. "It is here the hero should receive his spirit; 'tis here the legislator should form his code, and kings learn how to govern! The air we breathe is that which Pericles respired, when his munificent spirit devoted the spoils his valour won to the erection of this monument of Athenian grandeur: the cypress of Egina, the marbles of Pentellicus are still in being; but the spirit that animated the block, that opened the cavern's sparkling veins, that cherished the genius of Plato and of Demosthenes, the spirit of patriotism! of freedom! is no more !*'

"And lives and dies," said the diako, "with the government which takes the laws of nature for its basis. The genius and virtue of a nation are not the qualities of a peculiar atmosphere; they are the result of that kind of legislature which blends the interest of the individual with the general good, and guards the moral and the natural freedom, which heaven has made the birth-right of mankind! The natural man is still the same in Greece. It is evil policy that leaves no Phydias and no Pericles in Athens!''



* Forty-six in number; forty-two feet high, and seven feet and a half in circumference. The temple is of the Doric order, t In 1687.





"But tyranny," cried Osmyn, "must, by its own re-action, retribute its injuries. Slavery, to its extreme point, touches on the spring of freedom; nature, opprest to her utmost bearing, rises to assert her rights; and the slave who is driven mad by his wrongs, soon ceases to be vile under his injuries."

Osmyn now cast a glance at Ida; he perceived her eyes raised to his; her look sunk to his soul, and mingled a passionate tender feeling with the sublimity of the ideas that occupied his mind: he thought that look would prove his inspiration ; but it left him silent and intimidated: it checked reflection; but it awakened sensations sweeter than all reflection ever gave: he perceived she had suddenly withdrawn her modest eyes, and again directed her wandering glance to the grand and touching features of the scenery.

"Behold," said she, to her uncle, "the charming effect of those architraves and bas-relievos, as they are now partially betrayed and veiled, by the broken masses of light and shadow which the grand disorder and wondrous extent of the mighty edifice produce; as it here excludes, and there wooes the slanting moon-beam. The contemplation of these ruins, which seem to inspire the eloquence of others, leaves me touched, yet speechless, with feelings suspended between rapture and melancholy; emotions which, when they mingle, defy all power of expression."

"It is," said the diako, with a smile, "because the tender disposition of woman is always more inclined to sentiment than to reflection; because she rather loves to feel than to reason. Man draws an inference from scenes like these, and argues while he contemplates; but woman feels, or fancies, while she views them. Her heart or her imagination still directs her eyes, and rules her mind."

"I must confess," said Ida, '• there is at least to me a charm or spell in the aspect of a temple august as this, to which historic record lends its interest, poetic genius its enchanting vision, distinct from all political consideration. Even now, as I look aruund me, imagination clears the space of near three thousand years; and this temple, rearing the columns of Us former grandeur over scenes of existing desolation; speaking of the. past, witnessing the present, and pointing to the future, connects within my mind those eras so remote, which time has severed by such distant links, and' awakens in my soul emotions of such pure sublimity as mingle thought and feeling with eternity itself." Ida here addressed her uncle; but her eyes had glanced at Osmyn, and seemed to ask, "and do we feel together?" while the reply which Osmyn's emanated awakened in her bosom that delicious thrill, so sweet to feel, but impossible to delineate.





The diako now arose; Ida took his arm; 'he accepted of Osmyn's, and they conducted the archondessa to her paternal home, which was at no great distance from the citadel.

It was during this walk that the diako inquired into the motive of her visit to the disdar. "Pleasure," said Ida, with animation, " simply pleasure. Besides, the beautiful Jumeli is not unknown to me; we have met at the bath, and there is nothing more graceful than her attractions."

"And the disdar-aga?"

"Oh! he did not appear; no men were admitted."

The diako felt assured, and sought not to dispel her innocent confidence.

Osmyn breathed mgre freely, yet could not understand the self-denial of theT^irk.

They had now reached the archon's house.

"Remember," said Ida, with a smile, as she bade them farewell, "to-morrow is the festival of the Chelidonia: you may expect us early."

"To-morrow is the festival of the Chelidonia: you may expect us early," murmured Osmyn to himself, and continued to repeat the sentence at intervals, until they arrived at the villa of the diako.

Those charming ceremonies, which were in other times instituted by the religious gratitude of the ancient Greeks, are not wholly lost in modern Athens. They are so true to nature, and to nature's feelings, that even the corruption of an enslaved people has not been able to extinguish them; and many of their interesting forms and poetic rites still survive the sentiment and the faith that once inspired them. The return of summer is always a subject of congratulation to man; and the young Athenians still celebrate the revival of Zephyrus and the Rose, by the innocent gaieties of the festival of the Chelidonia, or "the Swallow."





The amiable sage of the Engia delighted to assemble round him, on these occasions, the young and charming Greeks. There is something so grateful to the fancy and the heart in the careless gaiety of youth; so much of hope, and joy, and fearless pleasure mark the brief era of unpractised life, that the voluptuary and the sage, the philanthropist and the philosopher, must contemplate with almost equal satisfaction the sweet and innocent enjoyments, the bounding forms and sporting smiles of thoughtless, happy, early youth. For, after all, man's truest happiness must be to contemplate the happiness of man.

It was on the soft selvage of green turf, that flowed in an undulating line from the villa of the diako to the shores of the Engia, that for many summers back the festival of the Chelidonia had been celebrated. And when the ardours of the sun had abated, the voliks, or pleasure boats, of the charming votarists appeared rowing towards the little bay tiiat fringed it. As they approached, a chorus of sweet shrill voices, accompanied by the lyie and the tympanum, sung the ancient song that usually ushered in the festival:

Behold the chirping swallow soars,

And summer's lovely day appears;

And Zephyr breathes his perfumed sigh,



And roses blush thro" sparkling tears.

The first boat that touched the shore was that of the old drogueman from the promontary of Zoster; his wife, his son Carlo Stamati, and his lovely nieces, Zaphyra and Nanno, orphans, and natives of the island of Scio.

The next was that of an old ephore, a relation of the archon, and his numerous family of children and grand-children.

The last was the volik of Ida.

She had indulged her classic fancy in assuming a costume purely antique; such perhaps as Aspasia wore when Pericles dictated the laws of an empire from her boudoir, or when Socrates imbibed his eloquence at her feet.





Her drapery, pure and light as drifted snow, resembled in its folds that of the priestesses who form the procession in the Metopes of the temple of Minerva; a thousand shining jetty curlsavere drawn through the ancient cekriphale, or golden-net, that enclosed her luxuriant hair; the simple anadema bound its wreath across her snowy forehead; and the astropeplon, or embroidered scarf, caressed her neck and shoulders, or floated lightlywi the passing gale: she touched at intervals the cythera, W» which she leaned, and blushed, and smiled, and glowed, in all the charming conscious triumph of youth, of beauty, and inspiring love. \ Her infant brothers, resembling new-born blisses, played at her feet; other children, frolic and full of hope aftd pleasure, filled the volik; and beside the archondessa sat the disdar-aga's charming daughter. The loose dualma^ the folded turban, the caftan, and the veil, formed a contrast between the ancient Greek and modern Turkish dress, marked as the difference of the times and characters, marked as the difference of the respective wearers: yet they were both young, both charming: Jumelt was handsome, Ida was lovely: the one represented material, the other intelligent beauty: the one wasj:o I5e formed in a class with a thousand, the other formed a class by herself: they were both the objects of intense admiration. As they landed, Jumeli coquettishly^bt fall her veil, and affected a confusion that resembled nothing less than modesty: for her wandering eye refused its testimony to her blushmg cheek. Ida wore no veil, but the always chaste and delicate pudicity of her look shed over her retiring graces the air of a consecrated vestal!

She presented Jumeli to her uncle, and Osmyn was the only one of the society to whom she did not address some playful folly, or delight with that piquant badinage which then eminently distinguished the atticism of her manners.

The susceptible Stamati at once attached himself to the handsome Turk, whose veil obscured not the brilliancy of the large black eyes that sparkled through its apertures.

VOL. II. F





The young girls, and younger boys, danced to the sound of the double-pipe and tympanum; the elders of the happy family took refreshments in the kiosk, and played at panguelo. Ida stole a moment to hear the sequel of the history of the slave of the Acropolis, which her uncle related to her apart from the rest of the company; and Osmyn alone seemed insensible to all that passed around him. He leaned beneath the umbrage of an olive-tree; his soul beamed in his eyes, and his eyes everywhere pursued the form of Ida! £

Nor was he undistinguished; his adventure had already acquired him a universal celebrity: the young Greeks beheld him with admiration, the old with curiosity and interest, but no one addressed him; there was in his air, his look, a lofty and conscious superiority, united to an evident reserve of manner and absence of thought, that distanced even the courteous familiarity of the frank and gay Athenians. Yet when the playful girls passed and repassed before him, with sly and bashful looks, and arch and stifled laughs, the dangerous smile of the luxurious satrap softened the haughty glance that beamed in the hero's eye. How often did the timid looks of Ida hang upon that dangerous smile! how often did she shrink beneath that darkling, but impassioned eye, as leaning on her uncle's arms she walked near the spot where Osmyn stood, and listened to the tale of which Osmyn was the hero! ^

And now the old ephore descending frdm the kiosk, with the gay authority of cheerful age, insisted on their dancing the Ionian dance, in which he had, he said, himself excelled when he resided in Asia Minor*. «

Ida, light as a zephyr, began its gentler windings, followed by her train of sylphs; she seemed to frolic on the air, rather than to touch the earth; and her scarf, as it floated on the breeze, sometimes enfolding her form, sometimes her brow, and sometimes waving in a thousand ways around her, was still less undulating and less graceful in its folds, than her pliant flitting form, in all its mazy movements.

* The Ionian dance is still performed in Asia,





Fatigue and gay confusion terminate the frolic dance; the panting girls, strangers to form or etiquette, seek repose on the velvet turf. One laughing girl hides herself amidst the clusters of the fragrant rose; another presses the balsamic dittany. Ida seeks the shelter of the spreading oak, around whose trunk the scarlet berries of the rich mimosa hung their vivid wreaths; nor, till she had pressed the moss that carpeted its trunk, perceived how close beside her leaned the form of Osmyn.

His eyes were bent on her, her's on the earth; and though so near that each could catch the sigh the other breathed, yet neither spoke, for all was still the mystic transport of a first, pure, ardent love.

The sun had now sunk in the Engia; and the breath of the declining evening was more delicious than the freshest breeze of the summer dawn: the air was impregnated with a mild effervescence, which awakens that sense of rapturous existence to be felt only in an eastern climate; the condensation of a thousand breathing flowers communicated to the vital element a taste, an odour, which intoxicated the senses, and rendered each pulsation of the heart an enjoyment in itself. All felt the beauty of the evening; but in the scale of hnman feelings what different degrees! What is the mere, the natural sensation, to that refinement on its simple bliss which fancy, love, and genius only give!

Ida and Osmyn, so separate, yet so near,breathing an air with which their sighs commingled, thrilling with sweet emotions less understood than felt, touched on the purest, the most blissful moment of their lives.

And now a soft and drizzling shower, which came embalmed with all the perfume of Hymettus from its vapouring summit, collected the scattered party beneath the shelter of the portico.

Refreshments were handed round, and the old ephore, who assumed the tone of the master of -the revels, proposed a game of mangala: the dice and osselets were instantly produced, and the young Greeks gambled for fruit and flowers, which Ida divided in equal portions among them. Osmyn, less than ever disposed to join these gay, but, to him, senseless sports, could not refuse the bunch of flowers and the fruit, which the blushing, smiling Ida laid beside him; and he was about to occupy a place to which the eyes of Jumeli invited him (who listened to Stamati, but who gazed on Osmyn), when he missed from the bosom of Ida a rose that more than once had attracted the envy of his stolen glance. Under the influence of the little watchful jealousy which accompanies even the first dawn of passion in a delicate soul, the eyes of Osmyn sought in the nosegay of Stamati and the young sons of the ephore for that rose the touch of Ida had consecrated: he sought it amidst their flowers, but he found it in the centre of his own.





He could not be mistaken ;• for how can love's true instinct be deceived? Oh, no! the rose breathed more of Ida than itself: it drooped, and Osmyn smiled to think what gentle ardours had decayed its freshness. In all its bloom, it had been the object of his secret envy; and, fragrant still in death, it was more grateful to his soul and senses than all the odorous blossoms that Hybla or Hymettus ever bore.

He let fall the other flowers; his triumph was too dear to be concealed: he pressed the precious rose to his lips and bosom, and sought the eyes of Ida; her bashful, tender, half-reproachful look, enchanted, yet reproved. He arose, and left the portico; and Ida staid, and played, and soon became a bankrupt.

The misty shower had now passed away, and mingled with the evening dew upon the trees. The restless youth were again abroad, breathing the balmy freshness of the air, and the tender anxious parents observed the gathering mists of night, and hurried them away. Jumeli, with all the false timidity that belonged to her education, feared to trust herself at night upon the water, and returned to Athens in a carabat*, which had been brought for her by her attendants. •

It had been previously agreed on, that Ida and her infant brothers were to remain that night at the villa. But

* A Turkish carriage, open at the sides.





t

Ida could not refuse the solicitations of her charming cousins, Nanno and Zaphyra, to accompany them a little distance on the water; the night was so sweet, the air so fresh, and the bosom of the Engia so placid! It was proposed therefore by Stamati, that he, Osmyn, and her paramana should follow in her own volik, that the two latter might accompany her back to the villa: the heart of Osmyn palpitated at the arrangement, and the smiling eyes of Ida did not oppose it. And now the drogueman, his nieces, and Ida, in one boat, Stamati, Osmyn, and Kyra, in the other, embark on the Engia. Osmyn, at the request of Stamati, who had received a previous hint from Ida, sweeps the chords of a lyre, and the stilly silence that hangs upon its fainting tones 0s only interrupted by the splashing of the oars, a sound in itself not discordant.

Osmyn attempts a popular and simple air, whose words referred to rural occupations, and to rural strains; but he was unable to finish it: his voice and his lyre, like that of the Teian bard, could vibrate only to the inspirations of a passionate and enamoured soul; the burning sentiments of Sappho only were adequate to express those ardent, impetuous, but tender feelings, which agitate his breast: again he abandons himself to the respiration of that passion she only could paint, and which his rich and mellow accents best could breathe; again he is lost in the influence of a strain to which every pulsation of his heart throbs in consonance.

In the first verse, his full rich tones depict the abandonment of enthusiastic admiration. In the second, the trembling fluctuations of his voice express the tender distraction which increasing love betrays; he pauses, the lyre is touched with a disordered hand; and the sentiments of the third verse die away in sweet but inarticulate sounds. ~~ His charmed auditors feel the magic of his song, and express their applause with all the vivacity that belongs to their country. Ida alone is silent. 'Tis in vain they press her to sing. She is relieved from their importunities by the prudent caution of her paramana, who reminds her of the distance they have already gone, and the lateness of the hour. The boats moor in a little creek. Ida returns to her volik; Stamati joins his party; the boats separate, and glide in opposite directions; the charming Scionians wave their veils in the air; Ida returns the salute with her scarf, and projecting -rocks soon conceal them from each other.





The paramana had seated herself at the further end of the boat, to tell her beads undisturbed. Ida sat near the helm, and Osmyn, with folded arms, stood beside her. It was a night favourable to all the most delicious feelings of the soul. It was an hour dear to genius, sentiment, and love. The waning moon, faint and tender in her beams, shed round a vapoury twilight. The air, perfumed by the odours of the flowery shore, swelled at intervals to gentle sobs, and died away in sighs. The still, blue bosom of thd§ deep but faintly reflected the lucid fires shed from the sparkling wings of the neveis ant*, or the twinkling fairy ray of the evening star.

A silence that inspired soft meditation and delicious melancholy, was only interrupted by the moan of the Sicilian attagen, as it skimmed the wave, or the hoot of the gabbian, as it fluttered on its surface. At a distance from the volik a boat was visible, to which the lamp and trident of the Athenian fisherman gave a poetic character; sometimes the rising breeze caressed the chords of the lyre; and sometimes the rowers, resting on their oar, suffered a profound and breathless silence to mingle with the soft and tender gloom of the fresh yet fervid hour.

Delicious season of the most enchanting climate! what was your influence on hearts so sensible, on frames so finely organized, as those of the young, the innocent, but sensuous Greeks?

Osmyn stifled not the sighs that bespoke the various tremblings of his heart; and Ida, as she faintly echoed them, betrayed a consciousness of their mutual feelings.

Osmyn was the first to interrupt a silence, that had its source in sweet and inexpressible emotion!



* The sea-ant, so frequently seen on the Ionian seas. Its wings resemble the lapis-lazuli.





"If," said he, " we might speculate on heavenly joys, we should attribute to them such an influence as moments such as these awaken. Heavens! what is language to a soul that feels? What words, what tongue, what looks can give the heart's emotion utterance? Lady, you saved my life! Oh, more! you gave me new existence! And yet, even now, in moments such as these—so near you too— so unobserved—I dare not—must not—cannot speak my feelings!"

"And wherefore need you?" returned Ida, with a timid smile; "moments like these are few and sacred, and should not be profaned by idle words; all breathes a silent and delicious melancholy; the soul is tranced in visionary bliss, and lesser faculties lie dormant."

"'Tis true, and sweet as true!" said Osmyn sighing; "and I have always thought that nature gives to all her dearer joys, riches, and beauties, an air of touching, tender, soul-pervading melancholy! Smiles are the harbingers of moderate happiness; but 'tis no moderate bliss the sigh exhales!

"Behold these flowers!" he added, and drew from his breast the faded mclissa and the rose; "it was your hand bestowed them! it was on your bosom they expired! Was it a smile acknowledged the dear distinction they conferred? Oh, no! charming flowers! precious gifts! the sigh with which my heart would now resign you might indeed be less delicious, but could not be more profound, than that with which you were received."

Osmyn drew neaier; he ventured to seat himself by Ida: her he.-d was averted; and Osmvn, in a lower tone of voice, continued:

"Reared to arms, to enterprise, and danger, they told me nothing of the peril I might encounter from a woman's eye, the influence a woman's genius might assume, not on my feelings only, but on my life, pursuits, and conduct. They told me not what hopes would spring, what bold presumption rise from favours lavished by a woman's hand! Sweet, d tngerous favours! And were ye lavished by a woman's hand? Humanity alone might lead her to a Turk's mekkeme; but was it chance or kindness made these flowers mine? If it was chance indeed, thus I restore them! If it was more than chance, they may be mine again! the bliss, the joy may not be doubtful or illusive!"





Ida felt the flowers on her hand, which lay extended on her knee. Her heart beat wildly. She cast round a timid and a fearful look; her colour fled; she gazed at the blossoms: the rose was love's own flower; the melissa was Diana's; and both combined expressed a chaste though lender feeling. 'Twas less than love, if more than friendship and nature triumphed; but it was still a doubtful triumph! She cast down her troubled glance; she blushed, grew pale, and Osmyu again received the faded emblematic flowers.

But not the flowers only; for the first time he pressed the soft and lovely hand that now bestowed them.

"Lady! archondessa! Ida 1" he exclaimed in broken accents: not daring to press his lips to a hand so loved, so trembling, he raised and held it to his eyes; that hand those eyes for the first time bathed in love's delicious tears.

Moment of a pure and exquisite emotion! in the life of man you can find no parallel; you are known but once; yet, once known, can you ever be forgotten?

The boat now anchored in its flowery harbour; the sailors flung down their oars; the pious paramana, who had slumbered over her beads, suddenly awoke and approached her charge. The4dream vanished; but the feelings it inspired during its blissful trance sunk to the heart, and became there a n. vv but prominent sensation.

Osmyn offered his arm to Ida; silent, conscious, and abstracted, they walked towards the villa; while the bustling Kyra, close beside her lovely nursling, talked of the sea air, of maresquino cordial, of Cyprus malmsey, and of some cold roast kid fed on the brow of the lesser Hymettus.





FIRST LOVE.

h

To please and love form not alone the destiny of woman! If, in the brilliant flush of health and joy, man seeks her as the agent of his best felicity, in sickness and in sorrow, in care and anguish, he turns to woman's tenderness for comfort, and finds his truest, dearest solace there. The mother, sister, mistress, wife, and child is still the fondest, tenderest, and most anxious friend which nature gives to man in all the sad vicissitudes of life.

By a mild and scarce perceptible decay the amiable diako of the young Athenian was stealing from a world where so very few resembled him. His walk with Osmyn to the Acropolis had been fatiguing beyond his strength to bear, and his exposure to the evening air, and the exertions he had made the following night, had considerably added to his delicacy. Since Ida had resided at her father's house, he had felt the loss of her endearing cares, in a thousand different respects; and when, the morning after the feast of the Chelidonia, she observed his loss of appetite at breakfast, his haggard looks and sunken eyes, she lavished on him those caresses of tenderness and pity so sweet from those we love, and offere.1, though with a blushing timidity that had never before accompanied such proposals, to remain with and watch over him till her father's return.

The offer was too grateful to the weakness and the wishes of the diako to be rejected; and Ida, with an indefinite and mingled feeling of self-reproach, of pleasure, and confusion, beheld herself the inmate of a house where Osmyn was the guest It was in vain she busied herself in attentions to her infant brothers, whom she seldom suffered from beneath her eyes, in the tenderest solicitudes for the uncle, whom she adored, or in her usual simple avocations with the vigilant Kyra. Still her thoughts were perturbed and wandering; still she sought the form of Osmyn; still she avoided his society. She endeavoured perpetually to recal his name upon the lips of others, but dared not trust herself to breathe it. Sometimes she shuddered to think that she had violated all pride, all delicacy, in the too obvious interest she had taken in his destiny; sometimes she strove to reconcile her feelings by exaggerating the merits of that object who had thus disturbed their calm. Anxiety, delight, timidity, and hope filled up the measure of an existence so different in its character to what it once had been. A perpetual vacillation between delicacy, tenderness, pride, and sentiment, which woman's bosom only knows, agitated a breast to whose pure tranquillity the wild vicissitude of passion was hitherto unknown.





But Ida was a Greek, and her country was Love's region. She was a woman, and her soul was his throne. The charactery of her person and her genius alike breathed predisposition to a delicate and ardent sentiment, which should resemble her own rose and the melissa that entwined it; which should be at once pure and animated; whose vivacity should be of the imagination, and whose tenderness of the heart; whose nature should seem rather an affection of the soul than an impulse of the passions. Now, for the first time, she had found an object worthy of her bosom's secret sympathy; now, for the first time, that sweet and sensuous melancholy, which blends so deliciciously with all our liveliest pleasures, and associates itself so intimately with our purest joys, circulated its mild and subtile influence through all her natural and moral being.

Ida profoundly felt, but trembled to ascertain the precise nature of her new and sweet emotions. Hitherto she had been deemed (and deemed herself) insensible. Hitherto the Athenian youths, who had proffered their vows through the usual medium of some kind proxenetes, had found their love returned with pity only, a sentiment so rarely linked to love.

It was not the moderate virtues, the passive qualities, to which the heart of Ida could resign its ardent feelings: with her, admiration only was a " kindred sound to love." It was superior energy and genius only could wake the latent spring of passion in her bosom; and in the lover of her heart she sought and found the hero of her fancy and ambition.





Meantime the conduct of the slave was regulated by the manners of the archondessa; his whole being seemed informed by a soul which she alone had created for him; he looked in her eyes; he caught her faintest word: he hung on her smile; her steps, her attitudes, her movements, and his feelings were restrained and indulged by her who at once governed and inspired them. He doubted that the same dwelling roofed their heads, and shuddered to risk the loss of the least of his delicious immunities by an incautious word, or thought, or look. He doubted the temerity with which he nourished a growing, fatal passion, and asked himself how he dared to love her. She was to him pure and ideal as a vestal's thought; and her genius and her form resembled in his imagination the bright etherial flame which sheds its light through the transparent beauty of a crystal vase.

The more he witnessed of her life, the more respect to awe was blended with his passion: her virtues soothed the feelings which her charms had waked, and her fanciful and simple character chastened while it warmed his wild imagination.

Stamati, devoted to the cause in which Osmyn had embarked, courted his society, and sought to win his confidence, and occupy his hours; and much of the morning was employed in secret meetings, with the boldest, bravest youth of Athens, in making themselves acquainted with the feelings and dispositions of the peasantry of Livadia, and arranging plans and forming views, which only time and opportunity could ripen.

But in the heart of Qsmyn passion was now opposed to passion; the mornings were to him tedious and irksome. He sought to sanction his change of feeling by the cautions given him by the sage diako, who still preached prudencef moderation, and confirmed experience of the characters to which they linked themselves.





But what were the evenings that succeeded to these irksome days? Climate of Greece! their fragrant beauty belonged alone to you: spirit of love! your's were their higher bliss! the walk that never wearied; the book so seldom understood; the music that intranced; the glance that sought the soul; the sentiment the heart embodied; a flower exchanged or given; the twilight's pensive pleasures; the tender gaiety, the more delicious sadness; the timid, stifled sigh; the soft, malicious smile; the thrill, the hope, the fear, each in itself a little bliss, or blissful pain; evenings of love's first era, these were thy pure delights!

The charm which springs from moral excellence; that rare and lovely accordance between the perfect form and perfect mind; the calm delight, the. pure felicity of each day beholding the object of a secret, sacred passion, filled up their whole existence: the past was lost; the future was not thought of. The tendency, the consequence, the fate of feelings, so enchanting, and so new, was never considered: each thought their secret safe, and revelled in the pleasures their mutual, fancied prudence still produced. Their love was like the mystic union of pure and spotless souls, which cloisteral superstition dreajns of. The timid, awed respect of Osmyn, the daily intercourse and conscious purity of Ida, restored to her bosom and her manners those sentiments of confidence and freedom, so natural to her ingenuous character. Sometimes, smiling and playful, she flung round the neck of Osmyn the wreath her hands had woven to please and twine her infant brother's. Sometimes, as she frolicked near him, she maliciously dispersed the plumage of the badadgie eajh, with which he strove to wing his now neglected arrows, or snatching up his bow, aimed at his heart with that arch air of conscious beauty, which pointed out a meaning in her playfulness; and when he ran to snatch her arms, she threw herself on the diako's bosom, and blushed and laughed, and slily dared a vengeance, never hazarded but in his presence or her paramana's; while Osmyn, charmed with freedoms so bewitching, yet tantalized as charmed, scarce knew what hope or fear to cherish, so intimately did the girlish playfulness of youth and innocence blend with the woman's fond and tender feelings.





One shade alone darkened the bright horizon of a maturing passion: the friend, the relative, the adored preceptor of the young Athenians grew daily worse. Aware of his approaching fate, he sought to lengthen out the joys of those he loved, by concealing from them the truth, so fatal to their happiness; not only as his life influenced their feeling towards himself, but towards each other.

He had penetrated into their mutual sentiments of admiration t he observed the predisposition of their feelings to a passion, which both were so calculated to inspire, so worj thy to experience. But he no longer considered the sentiment of love in that hypothetic point of view, in which the fiction of romance may depict it, but which, in life or nature, it is-so seldom to be found. He considered it in its actual and relative influence, as a natural passion, refined or debased, according to the sentiments by which it was accompanied, and the minds and characters on which it operated. .He looked on it in this sense as the invariable concomitant of virtue and of genius: since the one is the result of the regulated, and the other of the ardent affections. He looked on it in its best sense, as a sentiment alone, capable of purifying the passions, of subliming the soul, and inspiring that elevation of thought and idea which leads to great actions, and awakens a love for all that is grand and noble. But in the excellence of the passion he saw not an inevitable duration as to its object: he believed that the influence it produced in its first experience gave the predominant tone to the after views of the mind, and coloured the leading traits of the future conduct; that he who had once loved nobly erected a standard in his heart, to whose test the merit of succeeding objects would constantly be brought. But he did not believe that in that heart whose first hopes were blasted the source of sensibility was to be for ever dried. Thinking, therefore, like one who had studied the operation and tendency of the passions, not in books, but by a close observance of human nature, in all its various relations, in whatever view he considered the innocent loves

VOL. II. G





i

of Osmyn and Ida, he saw no fatal circumstance arising from their result. As yet, indeed, it had assumed no strong1 and definite character: it was a bright and sweet illusion, a pure and delicate flame. The shadow of the vapour which exhales its fragrant sigh to heaven, was not more subtile, more light, or transient; but should reason, passion, nature, dispel the seraph-dream; should prejudice, and pride, and interest, rush between felicity and love, even then he saw not despair and misery unalterable, clouding the future destiny of hearts so formed for love and love's delights. He knew the active soul, the ambitious spirit, and heroic views of Osmyn; and he knew that passion-could be combated by passion only, where reason failed and prudence was contemned. He knew the regulated mind of Ida: he knew that in her bosom a pure but yet unlicensed passion would ever be subordinate to pride, to delicacy, and, above all, to those social laws which knit the bonds of human happiness, and consecrate the feelings which nature gives.

But should their infant passion ripen to confirmed and ardent love, the haughty archon might be swayed to blend the destinies of creatures so superior, so unequalled, so worthy of each other. Eventually, however, its present in^ fluence was to both an unknown but afi actual blessing: the dearest tie which sentiment and habit had twined round the feeling heart of Ida was now near,being for ever wrenched away. Another only, consonant to her unfolding sensibility, could supply its place, engage her thoughts, and solace her regret: that other could alone be love!

Osmyn, influenced by ideas, by sentiments whose association and confirmed influence were now unvanquishable by argument or by reason, had embarked in a cause noble in its object, but dangerous, uncertain, and even fatal in its enterprise. No change in Greece could be for the worse; but he saw not the views of Russia in that aspect. The ardent Osmyn had considered them; he knew the instability of Athenian feelings; he knew the power and cruelty of the Turks; and though he wished not to extinguish the pure and noble spirit which animated the soul of Osmyn, he wished for some counteracting influence to the impetuous and unguarded conduct that" spirit would eventually actuate: but to the dauntless enterprise of wild, romantic, unavailing valour; to the haughty dictates of fierce, untamed ambition; to the consciousness of self-superiority, of high endowments, and commanding genius; what so softening, what so restraining, what so ennobling, as the influence of a pure and tender.passion! It is in the indulgence of this mild, delicious sentiment, that man, drawn back to nature's dearest dictates, feels the inefficiency of all the cold and artificial passions which the corruption of society gives birth to. He who has once felt the ecstasy of finding a warm and tender heart, finely responsive to his own, in all its feelings, sympathies, and intimations, laughs at the senseless bustle of mankind; ambition, avarice, the rage of battle, and the pomp of office! What are they to him who loves, and is beloved? Factitious passions may engage, may gratify; but it is in the actual feeling which nature only gives, when two accordant souls touch in all points, when an entire coherence in every feeling, passion, thought, and act, is felt and cherished, that true and pure felicity alone is known. Man mars his views of happiness by the indulgence of artificial passions; nature restores their harmony and concord by love alone.





While the amiable diako hourly felt within himself that increasing progress of decay which boded a speedy dissolution, Ida, deceived by his hopes, and equally deceived by her ignorance of a disorder so illusory in its last and fatal symptoms, was unremitting in those attentions which sooth and sweeten, if they do not prolong, the last stages of existence. The spirits of her beloved and tender friend seemed daily to rise to a finer tone, without losing any thing of their original gentleness. An eye brightening into the purest lustre, a cheek glowing with the deep tints of a hectic influence, all imposed on the fond wishes of the inexperienced Ida; and she readily mistook the last stage of a consumptive disorder for the precious symptoms of returning health.





Nor did her friend seek to undeceive her: he wished not to fling an unnecessary shade upon that life, which, though now bright and smiling, was human, and therefore liable to many future clouds, and storms inevitable. He wished not to give the false colouring of a disordered imagination to an event so infinitely less awful in itself than in the gloomy drapery with which the errors and the prejudice of man have dressed it. Death was to him no unexpected circumstance, replete with terrors. It was the repose, long promised, from the care, and pain, and sorrow, and all the ills •which " flesh is heir to."

His life had been his death's preparative: no selfish indulgence, no peevish plaint, no idle ceremony, no debasing forms, shadowed the 'last bright hours of a life which softly declined on the horizon of existence, like the mild repose of the sun as it fades amidst the balmy beauty of an autumnal evening.

Aware that it was not by the few and feeble moments that remained, his eternal destiny could now be influenced, but by the tenor of that life gone by. he sought not mercy through the intercession of others, or his own: he strove to deserve it, by devoting his last exertions to the.happiness and virtue of those he left behind him. He exclaimed not to his young and tender friends, in all the ostentation of a self-supposed perfection: "Come, and see how a Christian should die!" but by the example of his innocent and useful life, by the last documents of his fading breath, he taught them how a christian should live, how merit the reward which death brought'with it to the good and virtuous! He spoke not in axioms or in dogmas: to the last he was mild, enlightening, and persuasive: he knew the weaknesses of human nature, and he shaped his admonitions to its pride. Surrounded by the young and lovely, by those of whom we are told heaven's kingdom is itself composed, a few affecting sentiments, relative to the conduct of life, were delivered with simplicity and tenderness, and always relevant and interwoven with the general tone of conversation!

The susceptible Zaphyra repeated to him with tears, and dwelt in raptures on the virtue and fidelity of a young Sci





onian, who was dying of a broken heart, in consequence of the infidelity of her lover, who had married another.

"The best that can be said," he replied, smiling, "of such a conduct is, that it betrays an amiable weakness of character." He fixed his eyes on Ida, and continued: "Love is an involuntary affection; it resists the law of volition, and deprives the mind of that free agency which distinguishes it under the influence of other passions. Every one loves as long as he can; but the sentiment is not to be commanded into existence, nor is the period of its duration to bi defined. It argues a profound ignorance of human nature to expect eternal fidelity in a lover; and the woman who lives only to lament an inconstant, mistakes weakness, and want of pride and of reflection, for sensibility and virtue. But inconstancy, so frequent, and perhaps venial in unwajched lovers, beco.mes at once fatal and criminal in those who stand accountable to society and each other for the observance of a tie formed by natural affection, and consecrated by the laws and religion of their country: their sentiment is nourished by duty; their interests are blended with affections; their constancy in love becomes a positive virtue, from the harmony and social concord it preserves; and the lover, still "enamoured of the wife, the mistress still devoted to the husband, present to the happy'offspring of a passionate and holy union an example of love and virtue that seems symbolic of that pure beatitude which faith and fancy image to the soul as the reward of every human trial and mortal excellence.'.'

Stamati joined their little circle one evening: his countenance flushed with the pleasure he felt in having relieved a poor Albanian peasant, whom a cadi had condemned to some heavy fine for a trivial offence; and he expressed his satisfaction in terms proportioned to the animation of his character.

"Yes," said the diako, " pleasure and virtue are so nearly allied, that it is wonderful they should be ever separated. They are the incomprehensible dogmas with which morality is loaded; they are the confusion of terms and diversity of relations in which it is considered, that render its

•





laws so difficult of comprehension, and sometimes so impracticable in performance. Refer to nature, and you will find nothing more simple. Self-love teaches us to be virtuous for our own sakes, social Jove for the sake of others. It is a union of both that at once refers to human weakness, and produces the perfection of human virtue."

The fear of death was spoken of by Osmyn as an emotion incompatible with true greatness of soul.

"But greatness of soul," returned the diako, " is sometimes affected by those who are led away by a false glory; and sometimes by those who only labour for their own elevation in life. True greatness of soul is, so to serve society as to deserve its applause, without making that applause the sole object of our exertion. The fear of death, however, is incompatible with a life of virtue, with reason and experience. We all know that generations press after generations towards eternity, and that in the last hour of existence, when the factitious passions appear divested of all their gaudy covering, appear in all their original folly and meanness; it is then that the affections and sentiments of nature cling to its last struggle, and the dear consciousness of a useful and benevolent life comes, like an angel of comfort, to sooth and solace us for the loss of ties death only severs. It was thus that Pericles, a victorious warrior, and a successful legislator, dying in the arms of his devoted friends, smiled and owned that not all the trophies his valour had won, and patriotism erected to the honour of his country, and the defeat of his enemies, not even the glorious reign of forty prosperous years, brought to his life's last hour a joy so pure, as the conviction that no act of his had ever thrown a mourning robe upon the shoulders of a fellow-citizen.

"Oh, yes, virtue is but an abstract term for positive affection towards our fellow-creatures. Let us not injure the interests of society, by a selfish indulgence of transient propensities: let us love (and act as if we loved) the species to which we belong: let us consider that life is so fleeting, it is not worth risking tht hope of an immortality for the indiligence of a moment's impulse. We shall then lead the life of the virtuous, and die the death of the blessed."





It was thus he continued to promulgate sentiments so true to reason and to nature, amidst the charming circle that generally surrounded him.

Though weak and debilitated, he still aimed at cheerfulness and exertion: he received not his young guests amidst the gloom of a darkened chamber, a sepulchral silence, a pent-up atmosphere, and all the deep and solemn sadness which gothic gloom hangs on the last moments of existence, and which, from association, form so great a part of the horror we experience in the hour of death; but amidst scenes of high sublimity, of fragrance, and of beauty; sometimes in his garden, sometimes in the kiosk, sometimes in the portico, but always where the view of nature's works, so sweet and so refreshing to the sickly frame and weakened mind, was to be enjoyed and tasted ; and his couch, like the urn of Philopiemen, was covered with flowers and wreaths, less grateful for their odours, than dear to him from the hands that gathered and wove them for his enjoyment.

Sometimes he would say with a smile to Ida, "I think, with Anacreon, the rose is pleasant to the sick, and grateful to the dead." Another time he would add: " I do not agree with the English Euripides, that,

, The herbs that have on them the cold dews o' the night, Are strewings fitt'st for graves.'

I should prefer the amaranth that blushed on the tomb of Achilles, which is the flower of lender recollection. If the friends I leave behind plant a cypress at my grave, let roses mingle with it."

It was thus he sought to blend images, so agreeable to the gay emotions of youth, with feelings of regret the heart so naturally indulges in for the loss of an object dear to its affections. He knew that a sentiment of morality, round which a correspondent pleasure entwines itself, will ever be more impressed on the mind; than the document which can never be referred to without the accompaniment of a sad and melancholy recollection. It was thus in consideration of all human weakness he sought to make the senses in some respects the conductors to the reason, and to secure the memory of his precepts in the heart of those who, if they turned to them with tender sadness, would still find a pure and pleasurable remembrance associated with their regret.





Already had three weeks, crowned by love, by friendship, and instruction, enriched by poetry, by music, and by sentiment, flown away, like the flowing days of infant pleasure, towards the goal of time; when one evening, as Ida sat by the feet of her diako, plaiting for him one of the tresses of her hair into a ring, and chatting playfully over a labour so simple and affectionate, while Osmyn hung over a book into which he never glanced, a letter was delivered to the archondessa, which announced the arrival of her father from the Morea, and his command that she should instantly return home. Ida read, and turned pale; Osmyn, whose eyes were fixed on her, grew paler still. It was not the nature of the command that only struck the heart of Ida; for she dearly, tenderly loved her father. It was the manner, so cold, so imperious, so unlike the kindest man and fondest father. She gave the letter to her uncle, and turned away in silence towards the lattice of the kiosk: she beheld the carabat that was sent to carry her away, and she covered her face with her veil.

"Ida!" said her uncle, in a faultering voice. She turned round, and beheld the emotions of his venerable countenance. She knew not all its cause; yet she sought not to aggravate it by betraying her own. She tried to smile as she approached him; she took his hand, and seemed to engage herself in placing her ring on his finger; but her full heart could not suppress its powerful feelings, and the hand that trembled in her's was bathed in her tears, even though she smiled.

The diako strove to reflect back her smile; but an involuntary tear mingled with her's. He gazed at the ring; he pressed the hand that bestowed it. "This little ring," said he, " is an appropriate gift: its circle is symbolic of eternity. I shall part with it and life together. Dearest Ida, whenever it shall be restored to you, you shall receive it from one whose tender sympathy in your sorrow shall sooth and solace your regret."





The secret omen that lurked in this speech struck on the soul of Ida: she had no longer any power to check her emotions; she threw herself on her preceptor's neck.

"And must I go?" she exclaimed, weeping: "must I leave you, my last and dearest friend, at a moment that you require those cares your child, your Ida, can alone lavish on you? No, it is impossible; they shall not take me from you:" and, sliding from his arms, she sunk at his feet, and pressed his hands to her lips and forehead. "And when did Ida learn to sacrifice a duty to a sentiment ?" returned the diako with an air of mild reproof. "The nature of her father's letter shows the necessity of her immediate return to Athens. If it assigns not the cause, his long absence requires a child's endearing welcome to hail his return to his home and country. Nor am I so selfish or so ill as not -to spare for some few days those tender cares which Ida indeed alone can lavish, when higher duties call her from me. Ida did not always weep when thus she left her friend to share her fond affections with her father."

The tears dried on the burning, blushing cheeks of Ida. She felt the delicate inference that lurked in this address. She had endeavoured to conceal from herself that anxiety for her friend's precarious health, which, though it was the paramount feeling, was not the sole cause of her regret. One glance at Osmyn, who stood the image of despondency, immoveable and speechless, convinced her it was not. Neither had ascertained the extent of their passion till the moment arrived which separated them from its object: and to the delicate feelings, the susceptible spirits, the tender heart of Ida, her anguish for her uncle's Danger, her sudden privation of all the sinless joys, and hopes, and bliss, of first-felt ardent love, and the harsh severity of her father's unkind letter, came with a force her nature, as yet unpractised in suffering and anxiety, was unable to resist.





Yet her delicacy afforded a relief against her feelings her reason could not have suggested. She chased away the tears that lingered on her cheek; she arose and embraced her uncle.

"I go," said she, with a stifled sigh, and melancholy smile; " I go, since you desire it: but I shall inform myself of your health; and its amendment alone shall prevent my instant return to your arms: no, it is not sentiment alone that should fix me near you; 'tis duty also."

The diako embraced her in silence: a slight convulsion passed across his countenance; and the effort he made to suppress his emotion produced a smile of agony. Ida perceived it not, for her head lay on his bosom. Osmyn observed his struggles, and flew to his assistance. At that moment the children and the paramana entered to take their leave. The neighing of the horses at the door of the kiosk expressed their impatience.

"Come," said the diako, taking the offered arm of Osmyn, and making an effort to rise, " here are Joachimo and Petrarchi, impatient to behold their father." The children smiled, and frolicked before him. At their age, whatever makes a change makes a pleasure also.

Meantime, the bustling Kyra had thrown the veil and scarf over the head and shoulders of Ida; and the expression of her countenance was but faintly perceptible through the gauze that covered it

The diako, feeble as he was, would accompany them to the door of the kiosk. The children and the paramana were already in the carabat. Ida lingered by her uncle's side, and Osmyn supported him.

They paused for a moment at the door of the kiosk. The sun was setting in melancholy splendour; heavy masses of clouds received the deep gold of his beams; the tide murmured on the shore, and died away in lessening moans; the air was perfumed, but fervid and oppressive; and the character of the surrounding scenery was of the highest tone of sublimity.

The diako gazed around him; he withdrew his arm from that of Osmyn, and, twining it round the form of Ida, he seemed to present her to that heaven towards which his other arm was now extended. A religious triumph beamed in his eyes; a holy enthusiasm involved his figure; a rapt etherial mildness diffused over his countenance and person, resembling that which fancy gives to sainted excellence in the moment of its transfiguration. The veil of Ida had fallen back; she seemed to participate in the religious inspiration of her friend; the purity of her soul was effused over her countenance; her feelings and her thoughts were mingling with eternity. The grand consciousness of future immortality filled her whole being; her





'heart whispered her, the moment shall arrive when, reunited to those you love, you shall part no more. Delicious

- tears swelled to her eyes; a human affection mingled with an eternal hope. She sunk on the bosom of her beloved friend; their arms interlaced, and their tears mingled. Osmyn, at a little distance, with an involuntary impulse bent one knee to the earth. A sacred emotion thrilled through his heart, resembling that divine love by which an amiable fanaticism blends a mortal feeling with religious adoration. At last Ida, trembling for her uncle's weakness, disengages herself from his embrace, and turns her eyes on Osmyn. He flies towards them; he receives her uncle from her arms; he has no power to express what passes within his own soul, but Ida, by a single glance, reads it in his eyes: their looks mingle, and the languages of the earth would have proved inadequate to the translation. It is by looks like those that the idea of the immediate influence of celestial grace can be best formed, or best conceived.

At last Ida is placed in the carabat: it drives swiftly away; her looks still linger back. Osmyn supports his friend; their eyes follow the carriage; the arms of the diako are stretched out; an angle in the road conceals them; and Ida is spared the shock of beholding her beloved friend fall lifeless in the arms of Osmyn.

It is the destiny of nations, when they have attained to a certain pitch of exaltation or oppression, to seek, by an irresistible impulse, a contrary state. The Turks already felt the re-action of their impolitic tyranny. The islands o! .ae Arrlnpelago afforded to Russia some of the most able of her seamen; and partisans to her cause were to be found in the heart of her enemy's country. Athens, from the well-known factious character of her sons, and still more from the intolerance and oppression which, as• a distant province, she laboured under, became an object of suspicion to the porie; and the kislar-aga, who always retained the power of nominating her magistrates, gratified his family interests, while he acted under the suggestion of a wily policy, in appointing his nephews to its government.





In placing the civil power in the hands of Mustapha, a timid, luxurious, and inactive character, in fixing Achmet at the head of the military department, he efficiently, though not apparently, changed the government of Athens; and while a nominal official influence was supported by ..the vaivode, the disdar-aga governed by military law, and held the Athenians in a subjection, supported mid preserved by the cannons mounted on the ramparts of the Acropolis, and the troops which, scattered through the province, could be in a few hours assembled round its ancient walls. Against a people whom mildness could have subdued, coercive measures were eternally pointed; and the national sensibility of the Athenians, neither understood nor consulted, was daily irritated by those unavailing insults against which the weakness and the dignity of human nature equally revolt.

Achmet-aga united in his character the vices and the virtues of his nation, in the extremes of both: firm and dauntless in attack, a steady resistance intimidated and repulsed him; tyrannical and oppressive where force alone was sufficient to sanction injustice, he was pliant and submissive where dissimulation was required to obtain a desired object. Brave to intrepidity in the field, in the cabinet he was timid and undecided; and, always fearing the re-action of his own tyranny, the slave whose life he commanded could by a look make him tremble for his own.

In his early life he had been a member of a medrassa, and had obtained the degree of a solitas, or mature student*. But the mind, vitiated by education, though rays of learning may be effused over its surface, resembles those colours which absorb the light without reflecting back its lustre: as the diseased organ of human vision contracts in proportion to the quantity of rays poured into it. It was thus that the character of Achmet became more dark, more self-concentrated, from the reputation of those talents, which, though only estimable by comparison, gave him a decided superiority over the ignorant and the prejudiced: 'but, however faint the luminations which intelligence bestows, it still brings, with it a comparative refinement of sentiment, even where benevolence of feeling forms not its concomitant; and the mind of Achmet-aga frequently sought in love for that super-added enjoyment, which all the beauty of his crowded harem could not bestow. His first, or chief wife, had been one of the Egyptian alms, whose graces and brilliant acquirements (the peculiar attributes of her profession) had rendered her the object of his admiration. He had purchased her at an immense price, and married her according to the laws and religion of his country. She was now no longer young; she had never been beautiful; yet she retained, by the superiority of her talents, an influence over his mind from which his passions and his heart equally revolted.





The aga was in the prime of life; he was handsome, and affected an air of European gallantry, which assorted not with the eastern manners, and the sullen grandeur of Islamism, so obvious in his grave and lofty mien.

• Curiosity alone sometimes brought him to his harem, which the arrival of a new slave awakened; but he entered it without interest, and left it in disgust. Those forms, so fair but so insipid; those characters, so tame and so unintefesting; those manners, so coarse yet so submissive, still left his feelings calm, his heart disappointed; and he sought relief from satiety in the amusing narrations of his Egyptian alma, whom he considered rather as a sybil than a mistress; and whose person.now more resembled the former in its character than the latter in its charms.



* A medrassa is a description of college. The solitas, or mature students, arrive at the first dignities in the state. One of them obtained a distinguished reputation for having read the Koran over twenty-four thousand times.

VOL. II. H





But what were the still-lite beauties of his neglected harem, the professional abilities of his withered sybil, to the intelligent loveliness, the animated graces, the persuasive eloquence, the energy, the feeling, the soul, that shed their divinity over that beautiful and perfect form he had beheld prostrate at his feet in the mekkeme; that form which contounded itself with all his thoughts, with all his feelings; which had taken possession of his brain, which could not be banished from his imagination! That she was a Greek; that she was the daughter of his friend, of an archon, was an equal stimulus to his love and to his interest. For the first time he had difficulties to encounter: he had prejudices to vanquish, ties to loosen, affections to win. Would the archon consent to give him his daughter? Would the daughter consent to become his wife? and would it be possible to force or to induce her who now bore the title to submit to divorce? He knew the christian and the Greek would never consent to terms both lawful and honourable in a mussulman and a Turk; that he must make the archondessa his wife accoiding to the rites of the Greek church and the christian establishment; and he well knew that, in this instance, force and power availed him nothing*.

There was, therefore, but one solvent before which all these difficulties could melt away: it was the love of the archondcssa herself; and, arguing from the uncontrouled violence of his own passions, could he but possess himself of that, he believed himself secure of the accomplishment of every other wish; but, even for thatjftime and opportunity were requisite, and the one was as incompatible with his impatient ardour, as the other was difficult in obtaining. The reputation of Ida had reached him before he beheld her; but so carefully do the Greek women exclude themselves from the Turks, that, though he visited frequently at her father's house, he had never seen her till she had appeared in all the lustre of beauty and enthusiasm at his feet in the mekkeme of the Acropolis. Capable of the most profound dissimulation, he had induced his daughter to visit Ida, and to obtain her promise to attend the feast of the Uonalma. It was then that, disguised as a slave, he had an opportunity of minutely considering her charms. It was from his hands she received her fruit and sherbet; it' was on- his assiduous attentions she lavished smiles of gratitude and condescension; at last, when she retired to an arbour to avoid the glare of a sun-beam, that prevented her looking at the dancers, he followed her, and with a tone and manner full of humility begged she would inform him of the destiny of a youth who had been his fellow-slave, and whose forfeited life had been saved by her humane and powerful mediation.



* "The despotism of the grand sultan," says de Tott, "cannot seize the person of a young Greek girl, whatever passion she may have excited in his heart. And though," he adds, " we still find among the Greeks the same beautiful forms as served Praxiteles with his model, the Turkish annals furnish no example of such an enormity."





Ida, though surprised, though deceived, was guarded by her native delicacy of feeling; she betrayed no emotion at the name of Osmyn, and she answered with truth and seeming indifference; she had neither seen nor known aught of him since she had beheld him in the mekkeme of the disdar. She was then about to quit the arbour, when the audacious slave seized and pressed her hands with ardour to his lips.

Ida released herself and fled. This temerity offended, shocked the delicacy of her nature; and her wounded, her indignant modesty prevented her mentioning to her preceptor an incident that even in recollection covered her with shame and confusion. -She knew not how to account for the conduct of the slave, but by supposing the ardour of his gratitude for his friend's salvation had urged him beyond all boundaries of respect or prudence.

Yet even this consideration, though it taught li^tr to forgive, lessened not the disgust and shame the unexpected incident awakened; but that incident, so wounding to the sensitive feelings of a character so pure, so chaste, so inviolate as Ida's, awaktfned a new pulsation of love and hope iu the heart of the aga. His credulity and shallow penetration reposed in confidence on the reply which the delicacy of Ida had returned to his artful interrogation; he beheld in his quondam slave the object of a humane and tender pity lie could not understand, but did not discredit; and the vanity of self-love taught him to wonder that he could for a moment dread a rival, even in the proudest Turk of Athens, much less in the obscure Greek slave, whom by a word he could annihilate!





But it was this conscious power, it was this self-supposed superiority, that rendered him blind and insensible to the influence of Osmyn, and careless of urging his departure from Athens. He was also influenced in the mildness of his conduct by his wish to secure the gratitude'of Ida, and the esteem and good opinion of her uncle: so true it is, that a virtuous woman, in the most ardent sentiment she inspires in the most licentious bosom, mingles with the vehemence of passion a respect, if not a love, for what is good and excellent. It was, however, with a poignant feeling of mortification, of disappointment, and regret, that he learned the tidings of Ida's removal from Athens to her diako's villa; and while he was brooding over the probable means of her removal, an insurrection in a neighbouring province called him on military and official duty from Athens, and private feelings were obliged to slumber under the pressure of public exigency. It was after a fortnight's absence, that, on his return, he learned that Ida and Osmyn were still associated beneath the diako's roof. It was then that, with aggravated feelings of love and jealousy, he dispatched a letter anonymously addressed to the archon, informing him of his daughter's danger, and the bold presumptuous hopes of a truant rebel slave. He knew the boundless pride and haughty spirit of the archon's character; he knew the irradicable horror of Grecian superstition respecting unequal marriages; afld, profoundly artful when his own interests were in question, he played with the passions and prejudidices of the Athenian, the father, and the man, with the consummate policy of one who had studied human nature





sufficiently to render its weaknesses subservient to his own purposes, though wholly incapable ot" generalizing his experience, or extending his knowledge beyond the limited circle of his own narrow views*.

The avchon received the letter, devoured its contents, was touched upon the nerve where all his weakness lay; and, supposing that line of conduct always romantic which did not assimilate to his own established train of confined ideas, attributed the misfortune with which he was threatened to what he deemed the romantic sentiments of his brother-inlaw, and hastened back to Athens to save his daughter while he believed safety was yet practicable.

For the first time Ida beheld her paternal home without pleasure, and advanced to meet her father with timidity and apprehension. When the heart is absorbed by a great passion, every feeling, every emotion of our being blends itself with its influence; the remotest circumstance finds a connection with it; we fear no misfortunes with which it is not associated; we indulge no hope but what it regulates. The conscious Ida trembled lest some unknown .power had discovered to her father the secret of her soul; and she, who sought to conceal from herself how much she loved, shuddered to conceive under what a variety of prejudices and passions the object of that love would be considered by a man to whose errors of judgment and opinion she was indulgent, but not unconscious. Over the birth of Osmyn a mystery still hung it was impossible to dissipate; but the nobility of his soul, his sentiments, and actions, held its patent from a higher source than the power or discretion of man could bestow. Besides, she loved him; and love, true to nature, knows no inequality but that which is marked by nature herself; yet these reflections awakened Ida, for the first time, to the probable consequences and destiny of a passion which was now inter



* " The Greeks," says abbe Sewin, "behold unequal alliances with sovereign contempt, and the shame is reflected on their oflspring. The modern Greeks call the children of such marriages ' the children of a slave," and exactly observe the ancient precept, 'if you marry, marry an equal.'" . - ^





weaving its influence with every thought of her present existence, and every prospect of her future life. Her father met her with a coldness into whose cause she had not the courage to inquire: timid and conscious, she hung on his bosom; and her confusion and awakened feelings giving an unusual tenderness to her caresses, the susceptibility of the father and the Greek was unable to resist.

Ida beheld and triumphed in the success of those affectionate impulsions, which emotions of love, of shame, and fear, equally with filial tenderness, had influenced; and, in reviving the usual tone of her father's kindness, she sought to forget herself, and to teach him to forget that it had ever known an interruption. She spoke with tears of the apprehension her uncle's delicate health gave rise to, and heard with equal fear and pleasure that her father intended visiting the villa the following day. She trembled to thfnk what might be the object, and what the result of that visit, and retired early to her own apartment, with that ardent desire to be alone which the mind feels when, distracted by the novelty and force of its internal emotions, it seeks to escape that observation which checks or opposes their indulgence.

The next morning Ida beheld the departure of her father for her diako's villa with a heart that vibrated between its hopes and fears; she dreaded, yet longed for his departure; she equally feared and longed for his return. It is in this suspenseful state that we feel an equal restlessness of the corporeal as of the mental faculties; and that change of place or change of objects still appears to offer no relief against anxiety, and still mocks our expectation in its result.

Ida had heard that Jumeli had frequently sent to inquire for her during her absence from Athens; and this little attention sanctioned a visit to the disdar-aga's daughter, which would relieve the tedium of her present existence, and afford her an opportunity of adverting to the festival of the Chelidonia: that festival, whose recollection was always associated with the most delightful moments, the most enchanting feelings of her life.





As she passed through the area of the citadel, followed by her attendants, she perceived the disdar-aga surrounded by his officers; and it did not escape her observation that his eyes recognized and pursued her figure. Jumeli received her with her usual cordiality of manner, in which there was always a selfish kindness. Every thing that interrupted the tameness of her life assumed the character of a pleasure merely because it wore that of a variety; and she was flattered in the idea, that she was the only Turkish fair with whom the celebrated archondessa Rosemeli' associated. Ida admired in Jumeli her beauty, her cheerfulness, the indolent softness of her manners, and the apparent kindness of her disposition, which, though more the result of climate than principle, had at least something of that air and goodness which is always admirable and endearing, even to those who do not themselves possess either the reality or appearance of the virtue. A common observer would have said that the uninformed Jumeli must have been more true to nature than the intelligent Ida; but can an ignorance of nature's laws and forms render us more alive to her feelings and impressions? Jumeli, in fact, though ignorant, simple, and unenlightened, was sophisticated and prejudiced. In the few ideas and opinions she had acquired, she saw every thing through a false medium, she felt every thing through a wrong impulse; she had no precise ideas of wrong and right, but what an adherence or neglect of the forms, the ceremonies, and manners of her country inculcated. Her natural passions were equally inflamed by an indulgence.and restraint equally erroneous; her talents had been cultivated only for the senses. She sung, danced, and played the tympanum and Turkish guitar: with a little modification of manner, she would have fully answered for the brilliant circles of another world than that in which she lived, and where she would have found so many who resemble her; who amuse but do not charm, who know not how to enjoy pr how to resist.

But Ida was not formed for a circle governed by arbitrary forms: her thoughts, her ideas, her feelings were generalized and blended with the universe. She could enjoy. she could resist with a power which borrowed its capability from the necessary alternation of that denial and that fruition from which wrong and right proceed and diffuse their influence on society.





Yet, though so different in character, there were certain sympathies in the dispositions and manners of the lovely Turk and lovelier Greek, which rendered the society of each grateful to the other. They both held the most distinguished rank in their respective classes; they were both young, tender, gay, and social; and they both held a secret influence over each other by the association of those ideas formed under the impressions of an infant passion; for it was through the medium of Ida that Jumeli had first beheld Osmyn, the beauty of whose person had captivated her light and fickle fancy*. While she encouraged the homage of Stamati as a tribute grateful to her vanity, every thing about the Acropolis, its ruins, its towers, its governor, and even the governor's daughter, entered (by a principle of association) into the love of Ida for the object of her first, her delicate, and timid passion. It was at the Acropolis she had witnessed that noble intrepidity of soul, that contempt of danger, and love of country, by which a slave opposed the power of a tyrant. It was there she had acquired a sacred interest in a hero's life, by having aided in its preservation; it was there that look of gratitude, respect, and passion had sunk to her heart, which awakened its profoundest feelings, and taught her first to feel the bliss of loving and of being loved.

In the mind of woman there is no association of ideas so powerful in its influence, as that which is linked by the feelings of her heart. It was thus that the disdar-aga and his daughter acquired an influence in the heart of Ida, which neither their characters nor acquirements warranted. In the apartments of Jumeli every thing breathed luxury; but satiety, rather than enjoyment, was every where visible: mind was still wanting to give poignancy to the pleasure of sense; and in that hour of the day, when the animal spirits are most .awake, and the faculties most active, Ida found Jumeli slumbering on an ottoman, rather in a state of torpidity than repose, from the want, not from the fatigue of imagination, which leaves so many brilliant, tender visions to the dream that follows its exertion. Jumeli found the presence of Ida a charming relief against herself; a thousand questions were asked, a thousand attentions were offered; flowers, fruits, sweetmeats, and sherbet were served. The public bath, the Donalma, the Chehdonia, were subjects of endless discussion; yet both remained silent on the only subject both longed to touch on, Jumeli from art, Ida from delicacy; the lip of the one hung upon the discovery of her passion, the sensibility gf the other forbade its revealment; and both blushed when an unguarded word risked the discovery of her secret to the other. In the midst of this little tete-a-tete some one was heard to pass through the mabin-odassa, or anti-chamber of the harem.



* According to Habesci and others, the infidelity of the Turkish ladies, and their want of delicacy in affairs of the heart, are notorious.





"Ah!" exclaimed Jumeli, " it is my father! it is the disdar! This is his hour for visiting me, and I forgot to lay my slippers outside the door*."

Ida lowered her veil; and the disdar-aga entered.

When the heart of woman is occupied by a particular object, she becomes insensible to the influence and interest which usually exists between persons of a different sex, even independent of any particular sentiment or prepossession.

Ida, therefore, received Achmet-aga without confusion; she'saw only the man who had done her the most material kindness a human power could effect; who had been influenced by her eloquence, and governed by her wishes. She now seized on an opportunity, so little expected, of testifying her gratitude; and her manners and expressions were tinctured with a fascinating warmth, which the Turk, delighted and deceived, mistook for more than gratitude!

"And this slave," said Achmet, "for whom your bene

* This ceremony always prevents intrusion; and it is a point in Turkish gallantry to observe it with deference and respect.





volence was interested: has your kinsman yet disposed of him?" "He is still, I believe, in my uncle's house," replied Ida, concealing the emotion this question awakened, in the folds of her veil; and, endeavouring to change the tone of conversation, addressed herself at once to the selflove and literary vanity of the disdar, whose reputation as a solitas was not unknown to her, by inquiring after an Arabian bard, whose works she understood were in his possession. This innocent flattery had its effect. The disdar (the extent of whose erudition was limited to a frequent perusal of the Koran, a little knowledge of the Aristotelean philosophy, and a few stanzas of the Arabian poets committed to memory) was gratified; and he spoke ot the beauties of the author she alluded to with what might be deemed enthusiasm for a Turk. "It is through the medium of his genius," said Achmet, "that a Turkish lover so frequently vents his passions. It is thus, when our own words fail us, we address the object of our secret passion:" and taking the hand of Ida, he repeated the following stanzas:

"At thy approach, which charms my heart, 1 fancy, 'tis the zephyr which brings with it so sweet an odour, after having passed over fields full of a thousand scented flowers."

Ida, confused, endavoured to release her hand; but, pressing it still closer, he continued:

"Extreme is the pleasure he feels on hearing thy footstep, ardent as he is to behold the only object of his wishes, after a thousand languishing moments of fainting hope."

The manner in which these words were uttered, the looks that accompanied them, filled Ida with amazement; and the sudden retreat of Jumeli, whom a look from her father directed, overwhelmed her with shame and apprehension. She arose, and attempted to follow her. "Stay» beautiful Athenian," exclaimed the Turk, detaining her by her robe; and taking from his bosom a tulip formed of precious stones, he endeavoured to force it on her acceptance. "Receive it," said he, " it is the emblem of love. Its black petals indicate a heart consumed by passion*, its

* Flowers alwavs furnish a Turkish lover with a medium for his ruby leaves, the burning ardour which you have inspired." He seized her hands and kissed them; and the trembling Ida recognized in this act, in the look that accompanied it, the audacious slave of the Donalma. A sudden conviction struck her mind, she was an object of passion to the most powerful Turk in Livadia. Breathless and terrified, she flew to the casement; it was open: the Turk followed.her, and she beheld Osmyn standing beneath it. At' sight of her he walked hastily away before the Turk perceived him.





"What is it you can have to fear from love?" exclaimed the Turk, attempting to draw her from the casement.

"Nothing," said Ida', trembling, yet animated by a'sudden presence of mind: "I fear nothing; but I hope every thing from that goodness, that generosity I have already experienced. It is by a conduct which they regulate the approbation of a virtuous woman is to be obtained. Release me now; restore me to my attendants, who wait for me in the mabin odassa, and count on the gratitude of her whom you will have thus a second time made your debtor."

The disdar-aga listened in emotion to an appeal so seldom made to feelings he so seldom betrayed.

"Charming archondessa!" he replied, " I seek only to possess your love. I know not by what means you have obtained this influence over me. It is doubtless my fate: God wills it, and I bow to my destiny, as a true believer should. Go; my wishes only shall oppose themselves to your departure: but remember, I expect your's will again lead you to the harem of my daughter."

Ida, released and free, gave but a momentary reign to the pleasurable conviction of her safety, or rather to her liberation from an oppressive and disagreeable feeling. A sentiment more'congenial took possession of her soul, and Osmyn was its object. He had followed her to Athens; he had hung watchfully on her steps; he was that moment near her; and he had braved an imminent danger to obtain that enjoyment. The heart of the tender Ida thrilled to convictions so delicious and so grateful to its secret feelings. She proceeded through the Acropolis with a lingering step: her eyes, no longer fixed on the earth with their usual expression of downcast timidity, sent round their searching glances in every direction. The aga, the fears, the surprise he had excited, were already forgotten; and the tender impatience, the timid anxiety of love alone remamed.



passion, and a nosegay is frequently the only interpreter between an enamoured mussulrean and his mistress until she becomes his wife.





At last she beheld Osmyn at a distance, gliding among the ruins of a temple. His eyes meets her's; she raises her veil and smiles. He returns this cordial recognition with a salutation at once cold and respectful; yet he approaches not, and the heart of Ida sinks within her bosom. The first pang of love blends itself with its first joys: and Ida, who had not yet dared to ascertain how much she was beloved, now trembled to believe she was not adored. She drew down her veil, and quickened her pace, when a step, which seemed to echo the fall of her own, apprpached still closer, and Osmyn himself addressed her.

"I perceive," said he abruptly, " you have no male attendant but that little slave. Suffer me to offer my services. It is the eve of a Turkish festival. The Turks crowd the streets to catch the first glimpse of the new moon, and protection may be found necessary beyond the walls of the Acropolis; Heaven grant it may not be necessary within them!"

Ida assented with a bow to his request. Her bosom was agitated by a tender emotion, yet she observed the point with which Osmyn made his last remark. She understood not its allusion, though she felt its justice, and she made no reply.

"We have also a storm to fear," continued Osmyn. '" I observed last night that the vigilix set over the greater Hymettus amidst vivid corruscations; and the clouds which now invest-jnount Parnes are equally portentous of a sudden change of weather."

While he spoke, the clouds, which almost descended or. the hill of the Acropolis, partially discharged their heavi





I ,

ness in large drops of rain, and a flash of lightning hurried the timid attendants of Ida to seek for shelter, while Osmyn, occupied by the care of their mistress, conducted her to the Parthenon. .

The air had now thickened into an impenetrable mist; sudden gusts of wind drove along the dark descending clouds, till they appeared to roll like the agitated billows of a troubled ocean. The atmosphere, charged with sulphureous particles, was ardent and suffocating. The order of nature seemed inverted; the darkness of a gloomy night shrouded the brilliancy of the noon-day season. All might be said to resemble that elementary conflict which preceded the subjugation of chaos, before the creation had subsided into order, harmony, and beauty. Experience had taught the Athenians to tremble at omens such as these.

"It is the plague!" exclaimed the terror-struck attendants of Ida, and plunged into the deepest recesses of the temple.

Ida and Osmyn stood beneath the pronaos. No fear of personal danger could assail hearts so touched, so rapt as theirs: but their susceptible feelings, their lively senses, their warm imaginations vibrated to the impression of surrounding appearances. The spirit of Osmyn seemed to grow with the increasing storm; his high and elevated soul seemed to assimilate with the great sublimity of its awful features. The heart of Ida, rather entendered than intimidated by its effects, felt for the first time how dear that danger becomes which throws us on the solace and protection of those we love.

They were both silent as the brooding sullen spirit of the tempest^which as yet had declared itself to the eye alone, in all the terrific majesty of clouds and darkness. Ida leaned against a column of the temple; the hand of Osmyn pressed against the column also, and his arm formed an arch above her head, without violating by a touch the gauze that veiled it.

The tempest now burst into all the open war of element. Objects of terror are not they that carry the most intimidating influence to the soul of man. They are sounds;

VOL. II. I





those sounds that speak of eternity in their awful vibration; that seem to breathe the law of nature through the deepest recesses of the earth; that carry with them that character of awe, and terror, and command, which penetrates through every pore, thrills on every nerve, and at once sublimes the nature of man, and renders him more alive to his own inconsequence, by thus opposing it to the omnipotence of creative intelligence itself.

The thunder's deep and distant murmur came rolling loudly on: sometimes it died away in distant regions, sometimes, expiring in all its mighty force of sound, it terminated in a tremendous crash above the temple of the Parthenon, sending a deathless echo amidst its wide and vaulted space, its avenues, and mighty columns; while the clouds, whose electric conflicts spoke in accents so terrific, opened their dark and gloomy bosoms to emit the lightning's flame, which sometimes darted in winding streams through the atmosphere, sometimes flowed in sheets of living fire. The mouldering ruins of different temples which crown the Acropolis were now lit tip by the sudden flash, were now wholly involved in impenetrable obscurity, and frequently gave way in detached pieces to the influence of the hurricane, while the masses of stone, as they fell, mingled their noise with the deeper tones of the distant thunder. The awful Parthenon alone bade defiance to the storm: it stood firm and august, amidst the surrounding desolation, the mighty monument of human genius and human virtue, still bidding defiance to time and destiny. It was still worthy to shelter two beings in whom genius, virtue, and love were united; whose pure and elevated souls, whose tender hearts and thrilling senses, were now blended in one common sensation, in one common feeling. The ruins, the temple, the storm, and the lovers, finely harmonized with each other. But while Osmyn contemplated around him, with a sentiment of awful rapture, Ida, swayed by imagination, and influenced by the delicacy of a frame the atmosphere oppressed, gave herself up to those timid fears which the tenderness of woman instinctively cherishes in the presence of him she loves. Slight shudderings crept through her bosom; her respiration grew short; the thunder's tremendous peal conveyed to her soul ideas of annihilation itself; she trembled and was faint. Osmyn suffered the arm which had protected her head to fall gently round her form. An earth-shaking clap of thunder impelled her closer to him; the lightning's dazzling flash shrouded her head in his bosom.





Osmyn trembled; the storm raged, but it was not the storm that shook his nerves; he had fronted it unappalled. Ida grew fainter, and he became less capable of affording her support. He bent one knee to the earth, and received the sacred trust which love committed to his protection. For the first time hearts so capable of every higher, finer, dearer feeling throbbed with responsive wildness against each other's palpitation; and sighs, profoundly breathed, as sweetly mingled. The thunder rolled, the lightning flashed; the temple of the Parthenon was shaken to its foundation; and the emotion which seemed to agitate the creation, appeared to assimilate and mingle itself with that of love and nature.

Ida was pressed still closer to the heart of Osmyn, and, for the first time, their feelings found a language they had so long and so vainly sought. That timid, gentle, trembling pressure, which virtue consecrated, and love so sweetly understood, conveyed to each an unspeakable sensation, as if a beam from heaven had passed through their frames, and left some of its divine warmth behind it.

"Oh! my sweet friend," softly murmured Osmyn, "what have I done that I should survive this moment? Oh! Ida, I die, and death is a blessing!"

"Live," faintly returned Ida.

"And for thee, Ida?"

"Osmyn, for me i."

The storm expired with all the abrupt grandeur that had characterized its existence: the clouds dispersed; the heavens smiled in pure and bright serenity; the air breathed a delicious coolness; the aromatic emanations of balsamic plants renovated the languishing senses; and the bright beams of a cloudless sun cheered the drooping spirits. All before had spoken the awful omnipotence of a deity, all cowbreathed his benevolence. Osmyn knelt at the feet of Ida: one of her hands was clasped in his; the other, leaning on the column, supported her head while it shaded her bashful eyes. A happiness pure as it was new, a joy incapable of satiety, a bliss inspired by the reposing confidence of conscious, of acknowledged love, filled their hearts; a certain home-felt tranquillized felicity occupied their souls: their silence seemed to say, " We love and are beloved; then what have we to fear I" This is the purest, dearest point of all human affection. Doubt, fear, or jealousy has not yet shadowed the new-born confidence of revealed and sanctioned passion: the past and the future are alike given to oblivion, and the present moment resembles an eternity.





The attendants of Ida had now crept from the cell of the temple, where they had hurried on the first approach of the storm, and observed with delight that their mistress was safe, and under the protection of the young Greek, whose lame was not unknown to them. They congratulated each other on their mutual safety, and on the return of sun-shine and cool air. Ida and Osmyn, equally alive to the delicious influence of the pure and subtile atmosphere, scarcely regretted the storm to which it owed its beauty. The remembrance of that storm had associated itself with some of the profoundest and most delightful feelings of which their souls were susceptible; and they left the temple occupied by that new sense of happiness, which a conflict of the elements themselves had assisted to develope. Nature appeared to their eyes in a new and more delightful character: they observed in her aspect beauties they had not before discerned, and they felt within themselves faculties of happiness they knew not they before possessed. They proceeded tor some time in silence. That lovely bashfulness, which is so inseparable from the first avowal of a first tenderness; that delicate timidity, which fears to encroach on indulgences already voluntarily lavished, created a little tremulous confusion between the tender mistress and her ardent friend, which gradually faded away before the anxiety of each to be informed of all that concerned the interest and happiness of the other.





Osmyn eloquently described the feelings with which the departure of Ida had distracted his heart: that miserable night passed in restless agitation; the emotion with which, for the first time, he caught a glimpse of her father; the rapidity, the fears, the hopes, with which he rode to Athens, in the faint expectation of beholding her, though but for a moment, during the absence of the archon; his having learnt from a slave her visit at the citadel, and the torture that seized his heart, when he beheld her in an apartment of the aga's harem.

Ida tenderly expressed her unconsciousness of having acted in a manner to give rise to any jealousy, of which the aga was the object. It was love alone which rendered her so indifferent to others, and so careless of forms, which had been construed by love itself into inconstancy of affection, and volatility of conduct. But man has too little delicacy, and too much selfishness, to feel and understand this. And Osmyn, charmed with that persuasive eloquence, which induced faith rather than imposed conviction, listened and smiled, and believed what he did not understand, while he extorted a promise (extorted it with a vehemence almost tyrannical) that Ida would never again visit the citadel, or speak to its governor. Ida betrayed not the resolution she had already made, and the circumstances that had given rise to it. She took pleasure in appearing to submit solely to the command of Osmyn, as if his will alone was the only influence of her conduct. Sweet deceptions! ye are not the faults, but the minor virtues of love.

They neither thought nor spoke of the future destiny of their loves. To obtain means of a present communication, to receive intelligence of each other's growing tenderness, was all they now looked for, was almost all they now desired. By means of the window of the kiosk, letters could be received. They would sometimes meet at the villa of the diako; and while the pride of the haughty Osmyn, the delicacy of the tender Ida, forbade even the mention of the archon's name, whose prejudices they both knew would be





186



Woman; Or, Ida Of Athens.



opposed to' their happiness, they both agreed that their loves should remain as secret as they were sacred. It was this secrecy which would give the highest zest to a stolen intercourse of pure and animated affection, which it was in vain to discover, since they knew not of one by whom it could be understood: a secrecy which would alone secure the happiness that could no longer exist, when once discovered to the world.

It was at this point of agreement that they arrived near the entrance to the archon's gardens. For the first time they had felt and understood the bliss of that delightful con-* fidence, which springs from the sensibility and consciousness of a perfect union; and their parting, though tenderlyreluctant, was not sad: it was sweeter, it was more gracious to their feelings and their hearts, than any former intercourse had ever teenj&ve that which had united them amidst the war of elements, amidst the ruins of antiquity.
