CHAPTER I.


I'ostquam altos vcnturn in montes atque

Lustra—:fiilsere igerca

Summoque ulularant vertice Kymphc.

Vueiu

" YES, yes," said Montgomery, after a

long conversation with De Courcy, " yeg;

no doubt you intend to act honourably;

but intentions are always the property of

the owner, and actions are the property of

the public. Are you acting honourably—

now—now—at this present time?"

" I wish it were any but you that asked

4

me that question," said De Courcy, for the

first time starting and striding away from

Montgomery ; his giant figure, burning


cheek, and flashing eye, though half avert-

ed, enough to intimidate all but those who

love danger for its own sake.

" And what answer would you return

to him ?" said Montgomery, calmly.

" Would you wish to hear?" said De

Courcy, stopping short.

" Yes ; for I would be glad to hear what

answer would satisfy your own conscience.

Of course, you would not presume to jus-

tify yourself to others by means that would

not justify you to yourself." "

De Courcy stopt in his haughty strides.

He threw himself against the chimney-

piece with a violence that shook the room,

and terrified Montgomery. He remained

rocking for some moments in the strong

spasms of masculine agony, and then tears

forcing their way through his closed fingers

WOMEN. 5

and thick hair, that he had vainly dragged

over his eyes, he sobbed audibly.

" De Courcy," said Montgomery, timid-


ly ;" De Courcy," he repeated more audi-

bly, but without venturing near him.

De Courcy held out his damp, twisting,

convulsed fingers towards him almost un-

consciously. Montgomery started up, and

caught them eagerly. " De Courcy, I

saved your life once."

" Yes; you saved it once, to render it

miserable for ever!" said De Courcy, sul-

lenly,

" No : So judge me, God!—No, De

Courcy, your happiness is as dear to me

as your life. If either be dear to you, fly

from this woman."

" Fly from her ? and what then will be

left to make life supportable ?"

" Oh, De Courcy !" said Montgomery,

retreating aghast, " are those your words,

and is it gone so far ?"

" It is," said De Courcy. " Till I knew

o WOMEN.

her, I never knew any thing. She fflls all

my mind, my thoughts, my imagination,

my heart. She is capable of filling all my


faculties; she is worthy of employing all

my feelings. I would sacrifice all the re-

mains of existence for one moment in her

presence. I would exhale the breath of

life, if I could, in one sigh at her feet. Her

beauty—her graces—her talents—her vir-

tues—Yes; look not so incredulously, she

must have virtues! Oh, Montgomery, don't

look at me—don't speak to me. I am lost

when I remember—I am more than lost

when I forget her!"—

Montgomery burst into honest, and, as

he thought, useful indignation. " You are

raving, De Courcy; raving worse than you

did in your fever. I almost wish" you were

in it again. A brain-fever, a typhus-fever,

any fever for me but that of the heart.

Her beauty—-the beauty of a Parisian, a

continental toilet, rouge and pearl-powder.

Her graces.-4he graces of a green-jroonr or

a theatre. Her talents—her talents"——

Montgomery paused, and muttered to him-

sel£ " Yes, I cannot deny her—no one c^w

deny her talents. Her virtues—ay, let us


come to the chapter of virtues. I admire

her cambric handkerchief virtue, always

in tears pr in declamation. What act of

honest, disinterested, unequivocal virtue

(putting religion quite out of the ques-

tion, as I believe it must bp put in her

case) has she ever shown ? She is here

a single woman. Do we know any thing

of her conduct to her parents, to her hus-

band, to her children, if she ever had any ?

Fashion and her great talents, which it

would be absurd to deny, have brought

her into distinguished notice. But is noto-

riety and talent (dramatic talent) the foun-

dation on which a man would wish to rest

his happiness ? If he does, the man who

built his house on the sands might be a So-

lomon to him. Such notoriety, sw?h di%-

* WOMEN.

tinction might do well to glitter round a

mistress, and elevate a man's vanity and

vices at once; but Could I recommend a


mistress to you, De Courcy ? I who ho-

ped"— (and- Montgomery's former hopes

rose to his recollection, and worse, they

rose to his throat, and producing a sensa-

tion he always despised himself for, and felt

more painful for the contempt he bestow-

ed on himself)—" De Courcy," he added,

with an effort almost convulsive, " I thought

you ought to be—I hoped you might be

the happiest of men. I sacrificed my own

happiness to you, but I cannot bear to sa-

crifice the happiness of another."

" What do you mean ?" said De Courcy,

starting, and turning on him with newly-

awakened consciousness.

" Nothing—nothing. Don't let us quar-

rel. I have risked my life for you ; I will

never risk it against you. I will not speak

a word against that woman—that Zaira.

WOMEN. <)

But what brought her here ? Why did she

come to make you miserable ? You were

happy before she came."


" Happy !" said De Courcy, with a look

of contempt, which the indignant beauty of

his features rendered sublime. " Happy—

in the cant of a conventicle—orin MrWent-

worth's gloomy parlour listening to his ex-

tempore prayers, half technicalvhalf borrow-

ed, addressed to three servants fast asleep

on their knees.! I tell you, Montgomery, I

felt a sensation of resentment, of oppression,

of indignity I cannot express, the first night

I ever was in a meeting-house. The peo-

ple may be good, the preachers may be

good, the doctrines may be good, but is it a

life that man can support, who wishes

I know not what I wish—except—except"

(he added, with furious boyish desperation)

" that I were dead—nothing but" and

he paused, shocked at his own vehemence.

Montgomery remembered that this was

A 2.

10 WOMEN.

the man who, but a few months before, was

actually on the verge of the grave, worn to

a shadow, beyond all reach of medicine,


from the force of hisfeeKngs. He felt at

once that emollients, not corrosives, were

to be administered; and he felt also, with

the bitterest anguish of conviction, that this

kind of periodical paroxysm was purely

constitutional, and that De Courcy, ima-

gining himself its victim, would sacrifice

others to it who were innocent, and whom

he felt to be so.

" I allow," said he, in almost a tempori-

zing tone—" I allow that Mr Wentworth's

habits are not conciliating, and that you

must have admitted an unfavourable view

of men and things through the distorted

view that has been presented to you. You

do not know the real worth, the happiness,

the excellence of religious people."

" I loathe it all," said De Courcy, rising

impatiently; " my very soul loathes them.

WOMEN. 11

Their prayer-meetings—their psalm-sing-

ings—(I beg their pardon)—I mean their

%z»»-singings—their dinners—their break-


fasts—their hot cakes and hot disputes—

their vulgarity—their violence—their pre-

tended retirement from life to carry all its

worst passions into their barren naked re-

tirement—Oh, Montgomery! it is to me

like Tasso's mad-house, without the geniua

that made its horrors supportable.**

" My dear De Courcy," said Montgo-

mery, grasping at an illusion for safety;

" was it not misplaced passion that sent

Tasso to a mad-house ?"

" Yes—yes," said De Courcy, sinking

back into his chair; " and I shall soon be

there. Oh, she is so much above me—she

js—-oh, she is so much beyond woman !—

So much beyond!—Yes, Montgomery, I

believe you have foretold my fate ; I must

go to a mad-house."

, ** Well," • said Montgomery, trying to

12 WOMEN.

smile, " before we go to the mad-house,

suppose we go to Dominick-Street ? you

know you promised to breakfast there." '


" Yes," said De Courcy, starting up, for

the mention of an engagement happened

that day to operate with punctuality on his

associations ; " yes, but I promised first to

call at Zaira's, to ask, whether she intended

to make the excursion she talked of into

the county Wicklow to-morrow ?"

" Well, well," said Montgomery, u we

will go to Zaira's, as you call her, first."

" It is a delightful name," said De Courcy.

" Yes, a very delightful name," said Mont-

gomery. " And we will call on the lady

with the delightful name first; and then"—

" And then to breakfast with what appe-

tite I may," said De Courcy, in an accent

that bespoke no appetite for the breakfast.

They called in Sackville-Street, and then

went on to Wentworth's. The fates seem-

ed to have picked out the society that morn-

ing with malice prepense. Breakfast was

half over, but Wentworth, Macowen, and

the Babe, were all steeped in controversy to

the very lips. The muffins had been swal-


lowed wholesale, the eggs scarcely tasted,

(though Macowen was a very good judge

of eggs), and the tea drank scalding hot, hi

the rage of debate, and still it raged1. Mrs

"Wentworth sat at her knitting, at safe dis-

tance from the field of battle, and Eva pour-

ed out cup after cup in silence. Macowen

had been pressing the new convert for a test

of his faith ; for he had no idea of a man's

having any religion unless he could specify

it under a particular denomination, and sig-

nify his creed by a kind of free-masonic

sign, technical and decisive. This the con-

vert refused, it seems; and as the young

men came in, he was bellowing, with a cup

of tea in his hand, which he was spilling in

the trepidation of his rage,—" No, sir—

no, sir—never, never. I will neither be

14 WOMEX.

Catholic or Protestant, Anninian or Calvi-

nist."

" Don't put Arminian first" said Mr


Wentworth.

He went on.—" Neither Trinitarian or

Arian—neither Universalist or Particular-

ist. No, sir.—Sir, I will be a Christian.—

Yes, I will be a Christian, (foaming with

passion). I will—I will be a- Christian."

And his voice was actually a roar, and he

thumped the table in the fury of his vocife-

ration and the eagerness of his orthodoxy.

" Good God !" said De' Courcy to him-

self.

Eva had retired to the window and taken

out her work. He followed her, and gazed

on her as she sat. On her celestial coun-

tenance there was not a trace of earthly

passion. Her calm eyes turned now and

then on the disputants when a word or

tone of unusual harshness or loudness struck

her ear with unavoidable dissonance, and

then reverted to her quiet employment.

WOMEX. 15

De Courey looked long on her tranquil,

modest, sacred loveliness, like that of some

" Youngest virgin-daughter of the skies."


With her religion seemed to be an instinct,

a part of her pure nature ; with the rest it

seemed but a name. But as he looked, he

thought he could trace something like a

shade over her beautiful features, a depres-

sion of the eye-lids, a pensive and colour-

less relaxation spread over the whole coun-

tenance ; an expression that indieated sighs

suppressed, and the thought wrung him

with anguish. His eyes filled with invo-

luntary tears ;—he could not bear his feel-

ings. Thus a morbid sensibility is always

sure to avenge its excesses on itself; but

it is not always the weapon that has wound-

ed that can heal us, and we may shed ton-

rents of tears without being able to dry one

that we have drawn from the eyes of others.

16 WOMEN.

Mrs Wentworth silently observed them

both. " Open that window, De Courcy, if

you please ; this day is intensely close."


" And very dark," said Eva, looking up

wistfully at the darkening window, as the

elouds rising far above the verge of the ho-

rizon shewed themselves over the tops of

the opposite houses.

" How still, and dark, and close, every

thing is," said Eva, rising, and then sitting

down suddenly.

" Was that a carriage passing?" said

Mrs Wentworth; " I don't see one in the.

street."~

" No," said De Courcy ; " it was a dis-

tant peal of thunder, I believe;" and he

leaned far out of the window to watch the

appearance of the clouds.

Eva grew very pale. " Are you alarm-

ed at thunder ?" said De Courcy lightly to

her.

" I am very much—'tis the fatal invin-

WOMEN. 17

cJble habit of childhood, the result of a fear

impressed by servants ;" and, smiling faintly

at her own weakness, she was quitting the


room.

De Courcy tried to detain her ; strange

to say, he was pleased at this discovery of

her weakness. " Suffer me to go," said

Eva ; " why should I torment others with

my infirmities ? I have struggled with it,

but cannot subdue it—Why should I, by

exposing it, run the chance of perhaps com^

municating what I feel to some other ti-

mid person, and make two wretched in-

stead of one ?"

" But, stay ; and I will reason or laugh

you out of your fears—Believe me, dear

Eva, they cost you too much, when you

suffer them to deprive you of a spectacle

at once so beautiful and awful—Oh that

I were on the summit of a mountain

now !"—And he tried to engage her atten-

tion and imagination, by describing those

18

regions whette-treveUers see

bursting beneath their fqet.

"I will stay," sjajd Eiva, " to convince


you that my fears are not artificial, an<J

that I never yielded to them without the

utmost struggle I was capable of."

She was interrupted by Mr Went-

worth's loud, harsh, untuneable voice,

" crooning" ove? some lines, of Watts,

proper to be recited^ during a thunder-

storm :—

" We shout to hear thy thunders roll,

And echo to our father's voice."

—And, as he was shouting in loud echo,

leaning magnanimously against the win-

dow, a strong flash of lightning struck di-

rectly across his sight, and, clapping his

hands before his eyes, with an exclamation

little short of profane, he hurried out of

the room.

WOMEN. 1£

Wentworth, without any exclama-

tion or hymn-singing, or display of super-

natural confidence, half-theatrical, half-af-


fected, had gone to her own apartment to

prayer; she felt the solemnity of the hour,

and wished to improve ifc.

The storm came on indeed! De Courcy

tried to interest Eva by the comparative

descriptions of Thomson and Bloomfield.

Thomson's barren generalities she listened

to without any increased emotion; but

when he came to Bloomfield's vital, taken

on the spot lines—

•

" With doubling danger low the tempest bends,

And thick and strong the sulphurous flame.descends/'

shuddering, she implored him to stop.

In a short time, her terrors were indeed ber

yond all reach of poetical consolation, and

quite beyond the reach of De Courcy's

sympathy or comprehension. The pitiless

elements were putting her constancy to

9ft WOMEN.

the proof, and beyond the proof. She sat,,

for she had promised De Courcy to sit

and bear ft; and perhaps she thought that


this effort (which it was agony to her to

make,) might restore her some portion of

his alienated feelings. She sat with white

closed lips, eyes fixing in their sockets,

and a rigid, featureless contraction of the

face, which seemed to border on convul-

sion.

Between the deep-resounding peals of

the thunder, not a sound was heard but

the sudden intermitted vehement rushing

of the rain, that forced down in sheets,

smoked along the streets, or clattered on

the drenched flags like showers of pebbles,

and the rapid rush of a solitary carriage

that was driven furiously along, the blind-

ed and terrified horses testifying their in-

voluntary horror by the speed with which

they flew. Sometimes a passenger was

seen—a hardy foot-passenger, pacing with

WOMEN. SI

?esolute, desperate quickness ; hat flapped,

head bent down, eyes fixed on the ground

to avoid the glancing lightnings. Even this


soon ceased; and as the storm increased,

the storm alone was heard and seen; the

lightning not frequent, but with interval

enough to allow fear its full gasp of antici-

pation ; blue and malignant, fearfully glan-

cing through the darkened room, and ob-

viously lingering with short quiverings on

the metallic substances it encountered. "i

Eva marked her gradations of agony on-

ly by grasping De Courcy's hand closer and

closer. The dews into which her own seem-

ed dissolving -, the increasing rigour of the

contracting muscles round her lips, and

the short intense vibrations of her frame,

made him feel hers were no affected fears,

•and his own increased every moment. He

tried to whisper comfort to her; he en-

treated her to listen to the faint receding

sound of the last peal. " It murmurs," said

-he, " as if the ehidings of the Almighty

£2 WOMEN.

were pa^t, and the still small voice of his

hiercy was about to speak to us."

This appeal to her habitual feelings seem-


ed to calm her; but as he spoke, the ele-

ments, as if in mockery, seemed to collect

all their fury in a parting peal, and dis-

charged it with an explosion that shook

the house—4he thunder literally seemed

like artillery discharged from the roof over

their heads. Eva, jflirinking, contracting

'herself almost into nothing, clung to De

Courcy, and buried her marble, convulsed

features in his bosom.

He trembled, as he felt her damp cling-

ing hands, but m a moment tenderness

Succeeded to terror; he remembered, that

thus pale, thus cold, helpless, inanimate, she

had clung to him the night (that myste-

rious night) he had saved her life. He

felt «ven grateful to the elements, which

a moment before he could have depre-

cated.

Her long, light hair (of a different co-

WOMEN. 23

lour from Zaira's) diffused its golden luxu-

riance over his bosom; her white slender

fingers gs&sped Ms with the fondling help-


lessness of infancy, and twined their waxen

softness round and round them ; her pure

hyachith fcfeath trembled over his cheeks

and lips. In clasping her closer to his heart,

he Mt something within his rest; he drew

k ottt; it was the •flower Zaira had given

him %he night before, and which he had

placed there; it was withered; he flung it

away. " Eva, Eva, my love—speak to nie

—the storm is over—'Speak—>dont be so

terrifted—see the clouds are dispersing—

denote tremble no, 'tis not the lightning that

Is gleaming round yon—ISee, my Jove—st

is the sun breaking through the clouds-

Raise yottr head*--n®, don't raise it—re-

cline it still *m my breast-^still—for ever,

ted ffeir ever—*Oh, wry kwe! that terrible

paleness of your lips, your cold hands—

Speak to wje, E*a, wry love, my only, early,

only love!"

24 WOMEN.

Eva heard him not: Her fears, derived

from a feeble constitution, and aggravated

by forced resistance, were too strong for


her reason in the moment of trial—per-

haps her heart had some share in those

struggles that proved too powerful for her

intellect. She was delirious 4 but the ima-

ges that were always present to her mind

prevailed in this moment of its alienation,

and she uttered words that thrilled De

Courcy to hear. " They say he will for-

sake me," she murmured ; " but you will

not—no, you will not"—

" Desert you—never, never—May the

lightning strike me first!—Forsake you—

never, never—Eva, my beloved—beloved of

my soul—Yes, warm your cold cheek on

mine; yes, rest your dear, dear head on

my bosom ; do not let its beatings startle

you—Yes, twine your lovely fingers in

mine—It is a heart that loves you, your*

is prest to; it is a hand that soon will be

•••

WOMEN. J6

yours you clasp—Why do your fingers

wander so wildly among my hair, my love ?

one ringlet of yours is worth all that ever


And how often has this hair," he

continued wildly, " been damp with des-

pair ? how often has it been torn in an-

guish, since I knew Zaira !"

Eva revived, and her pure feelings act-

ing instinctively, she started from his arms,

and, still pale with terror, she tried to faul-

ter out an apology for her terrors.

" No," said De Courcy, pursuing, and

kneeling at her feet, " no, you must not

fly me. This is a decisive moment—a mo-

ment that must end many struggles. Eva,

already are you cold, already silent ? Is it

only in terror and danger you cling to me ?

Is it only in the terrible intervals of pa-

roxysm and insensibility that I am ever

doomed to feel your arms twined round

me, to hear your lips utter my name ? Al-

ready I see your countenance averted from

VOL. U. B

26 WOMEN.

me, the moment it has the power to give a

conscious look."

And so it was; for Eva, trembling at the


recollection that her arms had been thrown

round him, sat abashed and confounded.

" Eva, I call on you passionately, solemn-

ly. This is the crisis of both our destinies.

Speak—tell me that you love—love me as

I wish, as I demand to be loved. Bind

me to you by an irresistible confession—

Make me yours for ever. One word, one

penetrating word of fire. One word of the

language of the heart. Utter it, and bless

me."

Eva, struggling between her timidity

and her passion, tried to comply with his

wishes. She searched her feelings, for

something that might correspond with his.

It was in vain; her pure heart had not

one image that reflected the ardour of his.

Her lip knew no language that could an-

swer him. Distressed and perplexed, she

sat with distress and perplexity increasing,

WOMEX. 27

anxious to give him some proof of her sin-

cerity, but unable to give one that would

satisfy him.


" Eva, speak, do you love me ?"

" Have I not said so ?"

" Oh! when we love, it is so easy to pour

out the proofs with an overflowing sensibi-

lity •, the heart luxuriates in those proofs of

its being deeply touched; it is oppressed by

its own fullness, and delights to communi-

cate what it cannot bear undivided. If you

loved, Eva, love itself would inspire you

with involuntary testimonies; your very

silence would be eloquence, nor would I

have to kneel at your feet for a word in

vain."

" What can I say ?" said Eva, his doubts

becoming too strong for her fears; " is pas-

sion to be mistrusted, because its power ren-

ders us speechless ?" And trembling at her

own temerity in uttering these words, she

became silent.

Was De Courcy satisfied with this de-

28 WOMEN.

claration ? We know not; for it is certain

that there is an exaggerated sensibility, a

sensibility that doubts its own truth, and is


better satisfied with words than with things.

It requires to be paid in its own coin, and

would rather hear a florid sentiment than

accept of the most perfect sacrifice. It is

certain, however, that he was quite satisfied

the next morning when he joined Zaira's

party on an excursion into the county

Wicklow, of whose beauties he was asto-

nished to hear her speak with the accurate

fidelity of an eye-witness. But astonish-

ment, and every thing else, was lost in the

gay tumult of preparation :

" There was saddling and mounting in haste,"

-

barouches and four wheeling round in

proud parade;—the impatient horses biting

the tight reins, and stamping with quiver-

ing hoof on the pavement; and the drivers,

proud of their impatience, manceuvering to

WOMEN. 29

shew it off while they affected to restrain

it; and there was young Longwood, proud

of his elevation to the box of his mother's


carriage, and eager to display his four-in-

hand glories, and hurry along his scream-

ing sisters, careless of their necks, or his

own, at a rate that cleared the road to right

and left for miles, and marked his track

with a cloud of dust as long as a comet's

train. And there were the female party,

white-robed, in the light elegance of morn-

ing costume, standing at the windows,

which, reaching to the floor, displayed their

graceful forms leaning over the flowers with

which the balconies were filled, to gaze at

the beauty of the horses, or utter their

conjectures on the weather. Montgomery

was there too, calm, sober, and watchful, as

if he had been at one of Mr Wentworth's

quiet parties, reining in his horse, saying

to himself,—" The event, the event; let

me wait the event!" And, without a

trace of disinterestedness or feeling in his

80 WOMEN.

countenance or his manners, suppressing

the emotions of a heart whose pulses now

beat only for the happiness of others. He


was particularly anxious that day for De

Courcy, for he saw the homage paid to

his vanity, and felt that it was more than

enough to intoxicate a firmer head, and

feelings less susceptible. His elegant

graceful figure, displayed to full advantage

on horseback—the mixture of skill, spirit,

and courage that he exhibited, perhaps

not without consciousness, in mastering a

proud, fiery, beautifully-formed animal—

the audible praises of the females, and the

silent eloquence of Zaire's looks, as she

gazed on him, and him alone, made Mont-

gomery feel how trifles decide on the most

important events of life, almost without our

concurrence ; and as De Courcy displayed

his graceful length of youthful limb, and

the firm nerve of his vigorous arm in mana-

ging his spirited horse, he wished him any

WOMEN. 81

where else, " to witch the world with noble

horsemanship."

" Was it not," said Zaira, " from Alex-


ander's subduing Bucephalus, that his fa-

ther pronounced him capable of subduing

the world ?"

" Put me in mind, Caroline," -whispered

Miss Longwood, " to look out for Bucepha-

lus in the Mythological Dictionary to-mor-

row."

The party set off, in the usual whirl-

wind of dust, wonder, suffocation, heat, and

self-elation. Zaira smiled at the idea of a

rural excursion undertaken under such aus-

pices ; but the noise, bustle, and velocity of

the outset took away from her all thought

but for De Courcy's safety. Elated by his

feelings, by every thing around him, con-

trasting his former monotonous existence so

strongly, and proud under the eye of Zaira

of displaying that kind of courage which

, stakes life on a feat of dexterity ; he rode

32 WOMEN.

with the boldest, and seemed, by exposing

Ids safety, to shew already that contempt

for it with which his embittered and dis-


tracted feelings had inspired him.

In a short time they were in the coun-

try, and it was then that Zaira proved her-

self as superi or amid the simplicity of na-

ture, as she was amid the refinements of

art. Her mind, like a fine-formed instru-

ment, had room in its range for the touch-

ing melody of a ballad, as well as for the

scientific combinations and ambitious beau-

ties of a bravura.

De Courcy and Montgomery, who rode

beside her carriage, listened with involun-

tary subdued delight. It was indeed such

scenery that she was qualified to enjoy

and to embellish—to enrich it by literary

allusion, and illuminate it by a brilliant

and delicate sensibility. The simplicity

and fertility of her mind; the natural good-

ness of her heart, that seemed alternately

WOMEN; 3S

to receive and communicate happiness, and,

like the statue of Memnon, to utter music

when touched by the light of Heaven,


made every step of their progress seem

like the approach to Paradise. The placid,

sylvan beauties of Bellevue, that seems

like a young fostered darling of the moun-

tains, that crowd around it to watch and

cherish its loveliness—the wild and moun-

tainous sublimity of Luggelaw, which De

Courcy compared to the description of the

happy valley of Johnson's Rasselas—all

the magic of the Irish Tempe, the vale of

Ovoca, passed before their eyes, with that

rapidity which perhaps increases our sen-

sibility, by reminding us that the pleasures

of existence are as momentary as those of

sight.

They arrived on their return at the

Dargle. Its deep wood (skirting a brawl-

ing stream, forcing its way through rocky

banks, feathered down to its verge by trees,

B2

34 WOMEN.

whose picturesque shelter sometimes dis-

played its dark fretted waters, and some-

times veiled them in its drooping luxu-


riance) revived classical imagery in the

minds of those who had leisure to recal

it, and combined in Zaira's those national

recollections which redoubled their associa-

tions, and deepened their delicious melan-

choly.

The party dispersed in different groupes;

the paths are very steep, broken by intru-

ding roots of trees, bare of earth and mos-

sy, and by masses of stone, that every mo-

ment remind one of their vicinity to the

mountains.

The arms of all the gentlemen were

soon in requisition to aid the faultering

steps of the ladies ; and the party were

soon divided by the thick interposition of

the trees, the favourite points of view, the

anxiety of some of the charmers to catch

a view of Bray-Head or the Killina Hills

WOMEN. 33

through the intersecting branches, that

they might show their pretty necks in all

their playful, partial, captious bendings,


and of others to hang shuddering over the

rocky channel of the river, clasp their

white hands over their eyes with affected

giddiness of terror, and lean on the ready-

offered arm of some one to bear them

away.

All this soon broke the company into

detached parties, and Zaira and De Cour-

cy were alone. He listened to her, while,

her full melodious voice rising with her

sentiments which expanded amid the love-

liness of nature, she poured forth that elo-

quence of feeling that rested at the bottom

of her pure heart; that eloquence, which,

combining poetry with divinity, makes in-

animate forms the interpreters of Divine

beneficence, and teaches man to look up

from Nature to Nature's God.

She had never spoken thus solemnly be

fore, perhaps because always surrounded

SO WOALKN.

by triflers; but now, with Heaven and

Nature alone around her, and De Courcy

at her feet, the deep resources of her soul


were awakened, and its sublime fertility—

its elevated sympathy with the loftiest

imagery, astonished De Courcy. It is cer-

tain, that when Nature is made the inter-

preter of Heaven, we listen to its oracles

with a devotion that resembles instinct;

and to see God in clouds, or hear him in

the wind, to feel this theology of the heart,

was not only congenial to De Courcy's ima-

gination, but formed a delightful contrast to

the gloom, the dogmatism, and the techni-

cal phraseology of a conventicle, and a sen-

timent of pride mingled with his deep feel-

ing of attention, as he said to himself, " And

this is the woman whom they believe to be

a Being of this world—to be unsusceptible

of that depth of sentiment that must be

the foundation of true religion in every

heart!"

Zaira, surprised at his silence, ventured

WOMEN. 37

to enquire the reason. De Courcy almost

involuntarily answered from Milton—

The angel ended,


And in Adam's ear so charming left his voice."

—The voice of an angel could not be more

delightful to Zaira's ear than these few

words, borrowed as they were, common-

place perhaps, and uttered with the trem-

bling accent—the diffidence—the blush-

ing passion of youth, blushing at its own

emotion.—Oh! how much more delicious

is the first inarticulate murmur of love,

with all its feebleness of expression—its

poverty of words, and eloquence of blushes

—its feelings, that disdain the medium of

language, and trust their rich secret to the

respiration of the eyes;—how much more

powerful is its silent expression, than all

that language can utter, or volumes con-

tain !

Zaira thought so, and, happy and de-

3S WOMEN.

ceived, (as all who imagine themselves hap-

py probably are,) she trusted every thing

to time, on whose operation, (trusted be-


cause unknown), both hope and fear are

compelled to repose. She had little time

for the indulgence of her delusion; for

the Miss Longwoods came running down

the hill, and announced the approach of a

storm.—More of the party gathered round

them with the same intelligence; the at-

tention of all fixed on the ominous appear-

ance of the sky. It was ludicrous to hear

the selfish expression of regret, and some-

thing like reproach, as if Heaven was pled-

ged for the happiness of the party, or as if

the loss of one day's enjoyment forbid the

hope of one more happy hour in life. The

clouds, rising slowly above the Killina

hills, soon spread far south; Bray-Head

was enveloped from its summit to its base;

and the long sweeping folds of leaden-co-

loured vapour passed from hill to hill south-

ward, like giant spectres gliding over their

WOMEN. 39

• summits, and leaving the folds of their my-

Sterious mantles lingering and darkening

on the track of their progress. Sometimes


they were suddenly withdrawn ; and the

startling gleam of sudden sun-light that

broke on the green summits, made even a

frightful contrast to the darkness that was

blackening and deepening in the back-

ground; the Sugar-loaf-Hills, alternately co-

vered and concealed for some time, were

at last completely hid, and the ascending

clouds hovered in a thick mass over the

woods of the Dargle. The wind sunk;

the trees were motionless; the birds flew

low ; and a few thick drops pattered among

the upper leaves with a melancholy sound.

The Moss-house of the Dargle afforded

them shelter, till their carriages could be

summoned; but at the first peal of thun-

der, the Miss Longwoods declared they

would rather die, nay, they would die on

the spot, sooner than encounter the short

walk to the gate, while there was thunder,

40 WOMEN.

or even a shadow of thunder, in the air;

So they all paused to learn their fates from

the elements. The gentlemen looked grave


and anxious ; the ladies crowded together,

pale, with up-glancing eyes, and murmurs

of terror; among which the fate of pelisses,

bonnets, and kid-leather shoes, had honour-

able mention and audible share.

Soon all these pretty murmurers were

hushed. The thunder, that had rolled among

the distant hills, burst in peals over their

shrinking heads, prolonged, redoubled, ag-

gravated by the echoes of the mountains ;

the clouds, that had flung their fairy pic-

turesque shrouds over the surrounding hills,

now formed a dense, livid-coloured mass

just above them, pausing in undischarged

fury, more terrible from the suspension ;

and the rain came dashing in, in fierce ob-

lique torrents, through the open pillars of

the hut, driving the shrinking females to-

gether, whose screams became more and

more audible, as the strong red lightning

WOMEN. 41

flashed in broad sheets above and around

them, giving a terrible tinge to the woods,

which, a few moments before, slept in their


dark-brown solitary depths, which it ap-

peared no light could penetrate.

The alarm of the drenched, terrified fe-

males became distressing even to those who

affected to ridicule their fears. It was at

this moment that the soft superiority of

Zaire's character made itself manifest, with-

out affected consolation of terrors she must

have despised, or a vain display of her own

indifference to them. She attempted to

reason, where reason would be listened to,

and to sooth, where it would not; and,

on finding both efforts impracticable, she

calmly advanced, with the hope of calm-

ing them, to the very entrance of the hut,

and spoke with gentle, graceful confidence

of the superior terrors and dangers of storms

on the continent, which she had often wit-

nessed ; and she spoke of one in particular

42 WOMEN.

at Rome, where the thunder-clouds, long

suspended over the city, and streaked with

lurid tinges of red, blue, and yellow, cast


their terrible reflections on the ghastly up-

turned faces of the crowd, and made them

appear like the faces of demons or spectres.

She went on, and, excited by the attention

of a literary man, was soon engaged in a

discussion on electricity ; and as she watch-

ed the varying effects of the clouds while

they collected, burst, and dispersed, her

graceful movements, feminine amid con-

scious superiority, recalled to De Courcy's

memory the image of the " presiding an-

gel," shedding beauty on the storm it di-

rects.

It was a fatal contrast for Eva, shrinking

from terrors far inferior to what Zaira was

voluntarily exposed to ; yet was Eva, with

all her constitutional timidity, less interest-

ing than Zaira, whose steady scientific

glance was dissecting the rays of the flash,

from which Eva had shrunk for refuge into

WOMEN. 43

insensibility ? He had not leisure to ask

his heart, for Montgomery was near him,

with well-meant, officious kindness, defeat-


ing the very purpose it laboured to effect,

and forcing De Courcy to become the cham-

pion of the object thus elaborately, super-

fluously depreciated.

" There she is," said Montgomery, " quite

a female Plato on the promontory of Su-

nium, lecturing away amid a storm that

terrifies every other female; look at that

old, ugly fellow she is telling the story of

Richmann to"—and Montgomery internal-

ly wished that Zaira might encounter the

fate of the venturous scientific Richmann

himself. " See how she extends her arm,

with daring affectation, to mark the track

of the lightning, while every female about

her is trembling with fear." De Courcy

looked, " Oh, woman, woman !" apostro-

phized Montgomery, " true to the last,

•whom not even fear can make sincere, as

vain and full of self in a storm as in a thea-

44 WOMEN.

tre, and enjoying the rage of the elements

that might crumble her to ashes, provided

its terrors are pressed into the service of her


vanity!"

" You are as incapable as unworthy of

judging her character," said De Courcy, in-

dignantly. " By heaven ! there is a mean-

ness of detraction about you that will make

me hate you."

" Hate, but hear," said Montgomery,

patiently.

" Oh, had you heard her!" continued

De Courcy, " had you heard, but a few

moments past, the purity of her heart, the

sublimity of her religious feelings,—that

divinity of Nature, not of books, which is

so profoundly felt, and yet so easily under-

stood"—

" Divinity !" echoed Montgomery, with

coarse derision,—" Divinity! yes, I like

to hear of the divinity of an actress. I beg

your pardon, De Courcy, I mean of a wo-

I

WOMEtt. 45

man of genius. These women of genius,

how they love to wander from the paradise

of religion, and lose themselves in the desert


of metaphysics. Oh, De Courcy, can you

be imposed on by that mixture of intoxi-

cated sensibility, and theatrical eloquence,

that such women call religion ! I like such

religion. They can fling themselves into a

fine Madona attitude, hands clasped, hair

dishevelled, streaming over their bare shoul-

ders, tears of sensibility (it is a pity they

are not tears of penitence) sparkling in a

fine La Valiere style, in their black, blue, or

green eyes ; but do they care a straw whe-

ther it is before a cross or a crescent, a Vir-

gin Mary, or the Lama of Thibet, that they

prostrate themselves before in their mock

beauty of holiness ? Oh, yes! I believe

they would prefer the cross, from the pre-

scriptive becomingness of nun-like costume.

And can you be imposed on by this religion

of attitude* ? Put her to the test. Let he*

46 WOMEN.

declare what sacrifices it has ever exact-

ed from her, and whether they have ever

been fulfilled ? Has it obtained from her


the sacrifice of one moment of her light,

pleasure-loving life ? ' She who liveth in

pleasure is dead while she liveth.' Has it

extorted from her the sacrifice of one in-

stance of personal vanity, in the decoration

of her person, or the display of her talents ?

Has it induced her to sacrifice the gratifica-

tion of her false sensibility (to give it no

worse name) in her attempts to engage the

affections of a man, whom she knows, who,

she has been told, is engaged to another ?"

" Your religion is always a religion of

sacrifices.—Your deity is quite a Moloch,"

said De Courcy, peevishly.

" And her diety," retorted Montgomery,

" I'll warrant, is the deity of Pope's infidel

universal Prayer, "Jehovah, Jove, or Lord,"

as the case may be; and her religion has

but one easy duty,' to enjoy is to obey.'—

WOMEN. 47

Oh, her religion !—Yes; put her to the

test."

" I will; and you shall be convinced


against your will, unworthy as you are to

be convinced."

" And of what consequence," said Mont-

gomery, too tenaciously, " of what conse-

quence is it to you or me what her religion

is, or whether she has any religion or not—

cui bono ?"

" And if we are for ever asking that

question," said De Courcy, " will we not

ask it at last of life itself?"

The storm had dispersed, and the Miss

Longwoods came gilding towards them in

tittering levity, just as absurd in their levi-

ty as their fears, and De Courcy felt relie-

ved by theirfrivolity, that spared him Mont-

gomery's documents. They would have

given him no pain, had he not feared them

to be true, and felt an ulterior meaning in

what he said. His mind, agitated by perpe-

tual comparisons, began to hate the trouble

48 WOMEN.

perpetually forcedon him of making them.

The image of Zaira was sufficient to give

him delight, and on that he was satisfied


to rest; yet he thought, he felt, that Eva,

shrinking, and pale, and clinging to him for

protection, was a more interesting being

than Zaira, steadily observing, and calmly

reasoning on the storm. He had little lei-

sure for further comparison; the party were

hastening back to Bray, where they were

to dine; and the Miss Longwoods, per fa-

vour of their terrors, had chained De Cour-

cy to then: barouche as fast as if his pre-

sence was a conductor.

When they arrived at Quin's Hotel, the

crowd and bustle of the cavalcade com-

pletely filled the street; and the tumult of

waiters, servants, followers, and beggars,

.scolding, supplication, orders, and menaces,

threw the weak girls into the most extra-

vagant delight.'

De Courcy, glad of trifling to escape,

from his own heart, increased their merri-

WOMEN. 4§

ment, by reciting Preston's mock-heroic

description of an arrival at an inn :—

" We rode up to that castle gate.


And knocked both load and high,

The cook, -with face as red as blood,

Came out immediately.

" ' What -want ye here, ye ladies fair,,

And knights, so bold and brave }'

' We want our dinner, we did say,

And dinner we must have.

" ' Set on, set on your largest pot.

And broach your ale and wine,

For in this very town, God wot.

We mean this day to dine."

1

" Oh, dreadful sound! at which each goose

And turkey there did shake!

Of chickens in the coop, or loose,

The hearts it made to quake." *

"Loud and long laughed the fair hearers ;

and their laughter was extended to an

Homerical, inextinguishable length, whetf,

VOL. ir. c

50 WOMEN.

lo! among the groups that sturdily kept

their place amid all the expostulations and

angry jostlings of servants and waiters, and


pressed their rags and wretchedness close

on the averted eyes and shrinking forms of

belles descending from their barouches, and

beaux flinging themselves from their horses,

a figure presented itself that checked their

laughter in a moment, and weak and af-

fected as they were, sobered them into real

terror. It was a woman of gigantic sta-

ture ; her rags descending in shreds to the

ground, but retaining, amid the utmost

wretchedness, something like a picturesque

arrangement; her feet and arms bare, and

some green leaves fantastically, and not

ungracefully, twined among the coarse red

handkerchief that bound her head, but did

not prevent her long grey hair from stream-

ing in lank ropes on her sun-burnt neck.

She was a beggar, yet she did not beg—

she did not say a word. Her ragged com-

petitors gave way on every side as she

4

WOMEN. 51

stalked among them, with a look in which

disdain, a wild humour, carelessness, and

obvious insanity, were strangely mingled.


The Miss Longwoods made a precipi-

tate, ungraceful retreat into the hotel at

the sight of this singular object.

De Courcy was rivetted to the spot. It

was the woman, the very woman, from

whom he had rescued Eva but a few

months past, on that eventful night that

seemed every moment more and more to

have the power of agitating, if not of go-

verning his destiny. The appearance of

this woman at this moment; the myste-

rious hovering recollections of that night,

half lost in the delirium that had instantly

followed it; her spectral figure and move-

ments ; the faint recollection of her terrible

prophecy that night,—all rushed upon him

at once. He trembled as he gazed on her.

She passed him rapidly; and placing her-

self before Zaira, who was just entering the

hotel, offered to tell her fortune.


WOMEN. 53

smooth boy will tell it to you better than

I; ay, listen to him, listen to him ; sweet

as he looks, and soft as he speaks, his tongue


is on fire with lies. Oh, the hearts that

heed him will be wrung one day ! Joy is

on you both, like the summer now, and

the grass is green under your feet; but

mind the time when no bird will sing for

you, when you will wander like me over

bog and mountain, the earth for your bed,

and the stone for your pillow; and them

that follow you not letting you rest, and

the sky dark over your head for ever and

ever !" Her voice sunk in hollow mutter-

ings, then she burst into wild madness of

mirth—" I must not speak, then J will

sing. They cannot hinder me from that

I have sung to them that screeched to me,

and the wind has been hushed to hear us."

She began some words of a ballad in

Irish, with a querulous, strained, eager

voice, that if not musical, was melancholy.

At some of the words she stopped with

54 WOMEN.

a sudden agonizing start, as if a serpent

had stung her ; but burst out instantly in

Ene-lish—


English—

" Oh, some they love for life, for life,

And some they love in death—

—But they love well

That love in hell.

And wed with their parting breath.

" A bride has flowers to bind her hair,

Of red, and white, and blue;

But the wreath that is tied

Round the locks of that bride,

Shall be dyed with the sulphur's hue.

" Now wed her, wed her, thou gay bridegroom,

For the devil has toll'd the bell;

Now long be your kiss,

And lasting your bliss,

For your bed is ready in hell."

A wild laugh of horrible congratulation

finished this epithalamium, that might have

suited the union of fiends and witches,

WOMEN. 55

or the more terrible nuptials of Incubi

with their victims ; then, with exaggerated

frantic spirits, she shrieked, " Neither my


song nor my fortune-telling will please

them now—Well, I'll try what my dan-

cing will do—and yet ifs all true—all

true."

He verting to the subject of her wild

song, and lifting up her hands and eyes

to the window, where Zaira stood trans

fixed.—" Often I dance when I'm mad—

and often I dance when I am saddest; and

I'll dance for you now, as I do for them

that sing for me when you cannot hear

them, and grin and grind their teeth in my

face when I have done, as you will do."

And, with incredible force and activity,

and a wild mixture of self-derision, burst-

ing through the miserable, conscious, de-

graded majesty of insanity, she twirled

round and round ; her gestures not wholly

ungraceful, yet fearfully desperate and me-

nacing, like the ecstatic dance of the Der-

56 WOMEN.

vises, or the Eblis invocation of the Sorce-

ress in Thalaba;—her long hair streamed

out; her rags whirled round her horizon-


tally ; her meagre, muscular arms beating

the air.

De Courcy gazed immoveably—Zaira

shuddered, but continued to gaze as if held

at the window by the force of fascina-

tion. Young Longwood, who was in the

room, was the first to break the spelt.

Cracking his long whip, with a sound that

made the females start, he exclaimed—

" She was a famous old quiz—the best

thing he had seen that day;" and, leaning-

across Zaira far out of the window, he called

on her loudly for another song, and threw

out a handful of silver to enforce his peti-

tion.

The offer of money seemed again to ope-

rate with forcible punctuality on the asso-

ciations of the maniac: She stopped in-

stantly ; threw up a terrific glance of scowl-

ing indignation at the window; and re-

57

tiring, seated herself sullenly on a stone op-

posite.

The other mendicants eagerly gathered


up the money, and surrounded her with

importunities that she would collect more

for them—She was silent. The stragglers

of the town then collected round her, some

teazing, some abusing, some pretending to

condole—all trying to shew that miserable

superiority over the mad woman, which

those who have the least share of intellect

are always proudest to display. With stoi-

cal immoveability; with the silent, jealous

cunning of madness, always exposing it-

self superfluously, but sternly refusing to

be exposed, she continued silent, sitting;

her withered hands, with their thick dis-

tended veins stretched over her eyes; her

figure rocking in the restless vacillation of

insanity ; her naked discoloured foot beat-

ing time to some unheard tune, which her

mousing lips seemed to be forming, but

not uttering.—No insult, no persecution^

c2

58 WOMEN.

no solicitation, could draw from her a sin-

gle sound, or induce her to change her

posture, or raise her head for a moment.


The mob that had gathered round her,

half in malice, half in curiosity, grew wea-

ry in time of her stern patience, and at

length left her alone. Then she slowly re-

tired—often casting back a look, not in

fear but in wild inexpressible passion, on

the place where Zaira and De Courcy re-

mained. The shouts, hisses, and stares of

her persecutors, she seemed not to regard ;

the feeling that had extinguished her rea-

son, but still governed her existence, seem-

ed predominant even in her last stage of

degradation and misery, when she had

been the laughing-stock of stable-boys and

grooms; for, after tottering to some dis-

tance from the town of Bray, the mad-

woman was seen by some gentlemen to sit

down by the side of the road, and take out

from among her rags many pieces of gold,

which, after counting over often, she gnaw-

WOMEN. 59

ed furiously, as if to revenge on them the in-

curable wounds of her mind, and then hi-

ding them, passed on.


The party at the hotel mean time went

on like other parties, the ladies were full

of their pleasures and their terrors. " It

was the most delightful day they had ever

passed, and the thunder was the most ter-

rible they had ever heard. They would

give any thing to pass such another day;

they would not take any thing, and under-

go again the terror they had suffered in the

Dargle—Oh such thunder, and at so early

a season of the year !"

Zaira was unusually silent, and De Cour-

ey, whose mind was every moment recur-

ring to the circumstances of real terror

under which he had first met that extraor-

dinary female, was pronounced that day, for

the first time, to be " the most uninterest-

ing abstracted creature that ever was—not

at all fit for an excursion of pleasure—look-

60

WOMEN.

ed as if he was always THINKING of SOME-

THING,"—a crime which it may be pre-


sumed his fair accusers thought more hei-

nous, from their being totally innocent of

it themselves, no such allegation having

ever been brought against them by the

most malignant of their traducers.

The calm lustre of a lovely moonlight

evening, was now inviting them home.—

The events of such a day are very like the

image of life; there was less bustle, cla-

mour, and tumult, and no expectation in

their preparation for returning ; there was

less anxiety for enjoyment, and more dis-

position for reflection. The minds of the

majority of the party had little room for

such a disposition; it found its place in

those of Zaira and De Courcy. As the

carriages wound slowly up the Killina

hills, the beauty of the evening tempted

the travellers to alight, and ascend the

Obelisk hill on foot, while the carriages

WOMEN. 61

proceeded by the road. Some of Zaira's

servants, placed at the bottom of the hill,

had musical instruments, and their sound,


floating on the sea-breeze, and accompanied

by the still rushing of the waves, seemed

as if melancholy " poured through the

mellow horn her pensive soul." It was a

grateful contrast to the tumult and giddy

gaiety of the day, and Zaira and De Cour-

cy seemed to respire for the first time as

they ascended" the hill together. The laugh,

the clamour of the party below lingering

at the foot of the hill, or ascending to a

short distance, and then giddily retreat-

ing, gave them only that pleasing disturb-

ance, that faint reminiscence of distant

existence, that those feel who have escaped

from the conflicts of life, but sometimes

pause to listen to the distant sound of its

strife, and its pleasures.

Both of them felt the pressure of a se-

cret heavy at their hearts, and both felt

that kind of confidence in Nature, as if her

62 WOMEX.

silence could disclose what their own lips

could not utter to each other. There are

situations in which we thus implore Na-


ture to become our interpreter; but does

she justify the confidence we thus repose

in her ?—It was a scene that seemed in-

deed to invite to profound confidence;

and when they reached the summit of the

hill, they involuntarily paused, as if they

felt the influence of the place. The moon

had risen, but her light was still very faint;

it seemed like a bark, dimly seen in the blue

depths of heaven, tracking its way with

slowly-spreading light, and emerging on

soft successive tides of cloud; the whole

scene was as aerial, as if those who viewed

it no longer stood on earth. Beneath them,

to right and left, lay the bays of Dublin

and Killina, still as if in the first moment

of their creation, before they had felt the

rush of the breeze, or the ripple of the

tide. The low murmur of the waves, that

scarce reached their ears, seemed to send a

WOMEN. 63

voice of deep, lonely tranquillity to the

heart, where its tones were 'addressed. It

seemed to say—" Listen to us, and be at


peace." The grey hill, smooth to its sum-

mit, the rude obelisk against which they

leaned, and which appeared rather like a

thing placed there by Nature than by man,

all around them seemed to mark the bound-

ary between the world of Nature and of

man. They felt themselves alone, and they

felt, what those who love alone can feel, that

such moments of abstraction are moments

of the most exquisite enjoyment. Zaira,

whom the view of Nature usually rendered

eloquent, was profoundly silent, and De

Courcy's heart was too full for speech.

There was no need to speak, had but the

simple feeling of passion that filled both

hearts required utterance, but with both it

was complicated with many others. Each

dreaded, that a word uttered by either

would decide their destinies; each felt rea-

dy to sacrifice the world for the other, but

64 WOMEN.

trembled to demand that sacrifice from any

but themselves.

As they turned with inexpressible agita-


tion to look on each other, to ask from the

eyes that mercy which the lips refuse to

give, the eyes of both were filled with tears.

It is easy for the eyes of lovers to discover

that humid brightness which tears give,

and which they prefer to all the brightness

. of the orb that is drying up their exist-

ence. " And you weep," said Zaira; " this

beautiful scenery," she added in a hurried

voice—" this solemn light—how many re-

collections it revives t"

" No, Zaira—no—these tears—for I feel

them—I cannot repress them—they are

not drawn by recollection—-present suffer-

ing presses too strongly on my heart to

leave room for memory there.—Yes—I

must—I must be sincere."—

" Sincere!" repeated Zaira, her cold hand

shrinking from his touch.

" Oh, Zaira!" cried De Courcy in his

WOMEN. C5

agony—" Why, why is there no language

but that of words!—There is something

at the bottom of my heart—something


that scorches me when I feel—that chokes

me when I would utter it—I know not

what to say—I must—must—marry—

and "

" I knew this before," said Zaira, with

unaffected calmness; " I heard yoxi were to

be united to a beautiful innocent girl—I—

have prayed for your happiness—You will

be happy."

Her broken voice contradicted her words.

At this appearance of emotion, De Courcy

lost the little self-command he had—He

would have thrown himself at her feet; at

her feet he would have renounced Eva for

ever that moment. Zaira, herself the most

agitated internally, tried to calm him.—

" Dear De Courcy, spare yourself—spare

me—I would wish that she who has had

the happinesst the distinction of casting a

66 WOMEN.

passing light on your hours, should not see

that light set in grief—Your wife will not

deny me a right to your friendship—I will


dare to say it to the purest ears—/ will me-

rit it—I will merit hers, if she will honour

me with it—Oh, cease! cease, De Courcy!

—Your burning tears deluge my hands—

they deluge my heart—Listen to me—we

have one opportunity of speaking to each

other calmly;—in friendship, let us seek

eur consolation, and we shall find it—if—

if," and Zaira's voice gradually lost its firm-

ness, but retained all its 'expression—" if

the most earnest—what shall I say—wishes

for your happiness, your distinction, your—

if my prayers, my tears—yes, my tears !—

They are flowing fast, and warm as yours—

feel them—do I not feel them /"

" And must those tears—those tears,

(which I curse myself for drawing,) be all I

feel?" said the wretched intoxicated boy,

twining his arms round her receding form.

WOMEN. 67

" Then, take this, and this, and this,"

answered Zaira, pressing her cold lips to

the hands that she adored; " and let this


spot, this stone against which we lean, tes-

tify, that here a friendship was formed,

without one delusion of imagination that

could flatter it with hope, one impulse of

the senses that could degrade it in the eye

of its sole witness—Heaven !"

The solemnity of her appeal could not

subdue the burning pulses of De Courcy.

He retreated from her, and pressing his

lips, which he felt at that moment were

unworthy to touch her hand, to the cold

base of the obelisk, and pressing his fore-

head too against it to crush its burning

throbs, he called it to witness their ever-

lasting friendship—(How soon broken !)

As they descended the hill, De Courcy

saw before him as plainly as ever he beheld

68 WOMEN."

r

an object in his life, the figure of a female

in white at the foot of it, approaching ra-


pidly, with a gliding motion; so rapidly,

that, in a few moments, she passed him.

Her dress was white, but not like any

dress usually worn; her face, as she pass-

ed him, was pale, colourless, and corse-

like ; the eyes and lips were closed, but

the features were those of Eva. He trem-

bled from head to foot at this figure, whicn

appeared to him at the moment as distinct-

ly as that of Zaira, whose arm he was hold-

ing ; but she, trembling from other causes,

did not notice his increased agitation.

Once again he saw it. It was while he

was assisting Zaira into her carriage; it

then appeared lying in the dust under his

feet; so obviously under his feet, that he

started away to avoid trampling on it.

Zaira then perceived his emotion, and en-

quired the cause of it; but he made some

slight answer, or evaded the question.

That evening Eva had found herself vm-

WOMEN. 69

usually oppressed; so much so, that Mrs

Wentworth pressed her to lie down on the

couch after dinner, and shortly she fell into


a heavy sleep. She had heard, in the course

of the day, of this excursion, and it filled

her mind even while she slept. She dream-

ed that she followed them to the country,

but the scene soon changed to a desolate,

bleak moor, where she wandered, her feet

sinking at every step, catching faint glimp-

ses of their figures through mist and rain,

and calling after them, with a voice that

sounded in her own ears so feebly, she felt

it never could reach theirs. Suddenly she

saw them at the top of a hill, on which the

moonlight fell; she attempted to ascend

it; and at last, with those heavy efforts so

common in dreams, succeeded; but when

they met, she felt herself compelled to

glide past them, without saying a word.

The rest of the dream was equally con-

fused and dreary. At last, one distinct

image of inconceivable distress occurred to

70 AVOMEN.

her. She thought she was lying in a road,

over which carriages and horses were pass-

ing rapidly, without her having the power


of getting out of their way. At last, De

Courcy appeared at full speed approaching

her; she struggled to move, but could not.

The agony of her dream then became un-

supportable, and she awoke, exclaiming—

" Do not let him trample on me!"

It is singular, that the date of her dream

should be precisely the same with that of

the appearance of the figure which De

Courcy saw on Killina.

WOMEN. 71

CHAPTER II.

L'amitie est l'amour sans ses ailees.

Zaira, her heart full of joy and fear,


wrote the next day to Madame St Maur.

" Congratulate me, dear Delphine, on

the conquest I have obtained, not over an-

other, but over myself; the only conquest,

perhaps, on which we have a right to be

congratulated.

" My mind, since the discovery of the

loss of my only child, the only hope that

sustained my existence through years of

unexampled struggles and sufferings, seem-

ed to wander through a dreary vacancy,

without ground to rest on, or light to di-

rect it. The dove was sent forth from the

7J WOMEN.

ark, but there was no green leaf to be found,

and she returned to her prison. Is it in

this sterility of the heart, that the imagina-


tion becomes unusually fertile ? or are we,

like the hero of the Arabian tale, for ever

opening the thousand doors of hope, one of

which expands instinctively when another

closes ? I have certainly felt something to

interest me in life, at the moment I be-

lieved its interest to have ceased for ever.

I have met with a youth, timid, beautiful,

and possessed of talents of which he is un-

conscious ; of feelings, of which I shall ne-

ver teach him the consciousness.

" How often ! oh, how often ! gazing on

his perfect form, have I wished, that, if it

were possible, such had been the child I

lost, such were the child I found! It is

impossible, I feel, for the heart long to be

vacant. One image filled mine for many

years, arid the very length and intensity of

those feelings created a habit of the heart,

which it might have been fatal to my ex-

WOMEN. 73

istence, or my reason, not to have indulged.

I feel that something also is owing to my

talents;—talents suppressed prey on the


mind like misfortune. For many years

their public exercise, excited by brilliant

success, and sustained by the delicious hope

of procuring for my child a noble inde-

pendence, supported me from a motive,

which, if mixed with pride, was yet not

wholly illaudable.

" All this hope ceased at once and for

ever!—I shall never appear in public again;

and those powers would now become a bur-

then to me, unless they were exercised for

the improvement of some interesting indi-

vidual. I feel, Delphine—already I feel

how delightful it is, instead of performing

before a crowded, tasteless audience, who

applaud from prescription, and who would

as soon kill me, pottice verso, if fashion gave

the signal,—instead of this dazzling, dull

existence, whose monotony I have felt at

my heart, even when my ears were stunned

VOL. II. D


WOMEN. 75

shall not decline the privileges with which

it has invested me. My misfortunes have

all arisen from my acting compulsorily by


the will of others. I will try to obtain hap-

piness by acting purely from my own.

" The friendship, which will be the charm

of my future existence, will be purified and

ennobled by the certainty that the object

of it is devoted to another, to whom he

will shortly be united ; and the security

which is enough to satisfy my own heart,

I do not hesitate to offer to the world,

careless whether it will accept or reject

it.

" But if the world could ever read a heart,

the innocence of mine would astonish and

convert it. At this moment, my whole pile

of future happiness rests on the foundation

of theirs—Yes, of theirs. To see two beings,

equally amiable, equally beloved, enriched by

my fortune—improved by my talents—and

elevated by the distinction which I have

8

76 WOMEN.

not dishonourably attained, would be not

only beyond all I have ever enjoyed,

(alas! that has been but little hitherto,)


but all that I have even conceived. I shall

feel like the happy genius, who construct-

ed a palace of gems for the favoured Alad-

din and his bride, and then was seen no

more.—Pure benevolence is the pleasure

of angels, and my benevolence is certainly

pure.

" ZAIRA."

Madame ST MAUR'S Answer.

" My beautiful Zaira,—Hark, whisper, a

whisper (thanks to letters) may travel from

Paris to Dublin—You are in love, Zai-

ra—in love—Believe me, love always ap-

proaches in a mask; I forget what mask

he approached me under when I married

first; tut I know the mask was soon

WOMEN. 77

thrown aside—and—I saw no Cupid be-

neath. The ancients painted him sometimes

disguised under the helmet of Mars, lie


seems to be stealing on you under the a?gis

of Minerva; but under whatever disguise

he comes, remember he is an impostor !

" You talk of the security which your mu-

tual circumstances give you—tutul, fruitless

security—no woman ever talked of the

security of circutHstatices, till she felt the

want of security in her own feelings and

principles. This is a mere ranting sacri-

fice to Jupiter Pistor, when you have not a

loaf of bread more in the garrison. You

are in love, Zaira; in love \ I pronounce it

by all the deadly, indelible symptoms of

that most deadly of diseases. You speak

of the sentiments of the world with con-

tempt already. Alas ! friendship never in-

spired such heroism. Why should a wo«

man despise the world ? I never knew

one who began by despising the world.

78 WOMEN.

who did not end by being despised by it.

The world, after all, is generally very much

in the right; and till another can be found


to live in, (which is quite hopeless since the

death of Archimedes, who offered to move

it if he could find another place to stand

on,) I am quite content to abide by its

decisions. Oh! my charming Zaira, recal

yourself from this fatal enthusiasm; love,

under the name of friendship, has broken

more hearts, than love in its own name has

ever made happy!

Your talents want employment—Well

—Establish les Enfans trouvees at Dub-

lin—Visit it—Comb all the children's dirty

hair on your knees every morning; wash

their faces; hear them their prayers, if they

know any. Exhaust your sensibility any

way but on love. Ah ! my charming Zaira,

I am as jealous of your sensibility, as Ma-

dame de Sevigne ever was, or pretended to

be, of her daughter's beautiful figure, when

she was so angry at her lying-in twice in

WOMEN. 79

two years.—Do any thing—every thing to

employ your mind; and believe me it is

better your talents should slumber from ex-


haustion, than that a heart like yours should

ever be awakened.

" You know I speak disinterestedly. M.

de Viosmenil has seen you—and lives.—

Adieu !•!—I hear the rap of Maman's cane

for her coffee. No news from Paris, ex-

cept that the Empress has been heard to

call the Emperor " Mon amour!"—that

the king of the Romans is the most beau-

tiful creature in the world—and that the

hats are higher than ever—absolute ba-

loons!

ft We hear nothing of politics, nor ever

shall perhaps, till we hear them from the

mouths of the cannon of the allies,—the

last vehicles of public intelligence which I

should wish to attend to. There are evil-

minded persons, who pretend to say we

shall hear them soon. When they talk

80 WOMEN.

thus, I shrug my shoulders, and " apres

nous la deluge"

" Adieu,


" DELPHINE Sx MAUR.

" P. S.—The hats are a little lower since

I began to write, and the flowers worn a

little more to the side. What can this

mean ?—but I am not fond of tracing ef-

fects to causes."

For many days Montgomery had been la-

bouring, with laudable jealousy and pardon-

able malignity, to commit Zaira, if possible,

with De Courcy ; to trace some sentiment,

or shadow or penumbra of a sentiment, that

would alarm or revolt him; or, better than

all, to lead her by conversation to expose

herself. Montgomery was sure she was an

Atheist in heart, and a Latitudinarian in

life ; and, confident that she would at some

time or other betray herself as either, or

both, he spared no pains to expedite the

WOMEN. 81

consummation he so devoutly wished for ;

but there was no such discovery to be made,

and if there had, Montgomery was not the


man to make it. To do him justice, he

spared no pains ; he tried to pique her lite-

rary prejudices and national character, as

he believed, by the most lavish abuse of

the foreign writers, particularly the French.

" If any thing ever made that woman sin-

cere," said he to himself, " anger will."

Not the orthodox John Knox himself

ever held a more merciless inquisition on

the beautiful Mary, unmoved even by the

tears of royalty and beauty, than did Mont-

gomery. With honest spleen, and unmiti-

gated perseverance, be read day and nfght

works that he hated, and came armed to

the controversy with all the thorough know-

ledge of an author that zealous hatred alone

can give. And he spoke (and Montgomery

could speak well) of the detestable gourman-

dism and heartless apathy of Madame du

Deffand—of the frantic vanity of Rousseau,

82 WOMEN.

who imagined, like mad Dennis, that sove-

reigns had nothing to do but to conspire

against him;—of his novel, the hero of


which has no better proof to give of his pas-

sion than a resolution to drown his mistress

(A pity he did not, said Montgomery, inter-

rupting himself,)—And of his heroine, who

had no better proof to give of her Christiani-

ty than to reject the assistance of a clergy-

man in her last moments, and finally die

drunk; and of D'Alembert and Diderot,

and many more authors, " whom the devil

confound;" and at last he came to the par

triarch, the great Voltaire.

" Oh, for words big with the fiercest force

of execration," as Mason says, to paint how

he spoke of Voltaire ! He detected sundry

errors, obvious enough, in his Dictionnaire

Philosophique; he impeached his veracity

as an historian, derided his genius as a poet,

and scoffed at his presumption as a com-

mentator on Newton, even with Madame

du Chatelet's name in the firm. Then he

WOMEN. 83

passed on to his private life, (he had Grimm

off' by heart;) his persecution of the young

actress; his mean frauds on booksellers ; his


implacable enmity against the most candid

of his critics; his vanity, selfishness, and ar-

rogance; his intolerance of religion, more

disgusting than the bigotry of its most in-

tolerant professors, obtruded with such

causeless, witless, impolitic frequency on

his hearers, that, as Moore observes,—

*' Men grew more weary of his stale jests

against Christianity than of the dullest ar-

guments in its support." On he went, and

•would never have stopped, but to witness

the effect of this tirade on Zaira. Hoping

to see her either confounded or incensed,

he " checked his thunder in mid volley,"

and paused, believing that her silence was

only the suspension of a long-gathering

storm.

Zaira was not long silent; she spoke,

and to his utter confusion, adopted com-

pletely his side of the question. She spoke

84 WOMEN.

with honest, virtuous, English indignation,

(as Montgomery would have called it, had

it been expressed by another) of the foreign


authors, and especially of the French;

speaking of them, her sentiments, her lan-

guage, her very prejudices appeared Eng-

lish. She spoke of their vices, their vanity,

their sciolism, their presumption, their in-

fidelity, thinly disguised under the mask of

fiction or of metaphysics, its broad hideous

features (like those of Virgil's enlarging

Alecto) for ever bursting and spreading be-

yond the ill-adapted, and worse-worn mask.

She spoke of all this with an eloquence that

amazed Montgomery, well as he knew her,

and with a sincerity that amazed him more.

Her wit, a thousand times more brilliant,

and her satire infinitely more caustic than

his, she turned the whole force of her keen

and polished severity against the philoso-

phical assembly at Sans Souci, and exposed

to just derision a number of men affecting

to be the moral and intellectual legislators

WOMEN. 85

of Europe; and when they met, engaging

in such low squabbles, such mean jealousies,

such degrading and disgusting contentions,


(disgraceful to the dignity of a palace, and

to the honour of literature,) as must have

exposed them to the ridicule of all Europe,

and to the everlasting hatred of each other

—Philanthropists, philosophers, reformers,

all Daniels come to judgment, as they were,

assembled to determine on the future des-

tiny of mankind, and the regeneration of

the world, they departed ridiculous, exas-

perated, and degraded, heaping shame on

themselves by mutual hostility, and agree-

ing in but one thing, their hatred to Christi-

anity, to which their opposition thus became

an honour and a support.

Montgomery was struck dumb for some

moments, then he rallied and said to him-

self, " this is all hypocrisy ; no woman dare

openly avow her preference of Atheistical

writers ; she either does not think at all on

the subject, or thinks that not being able to

86 WOMEN.

make tJie worse appear the better reason,

she may as well adopt the better; or she

thinks it will please that intoxicated De


Courcy—or she thinks-—curse me, " said

Montgomery, swearing with irrepressible

vexation—" if I know what she thinks, or

what to think of her !"

He was resolved, however, not to shrink

from the combat. There had been no com-

bat yet, indeed ; but lie determined to force

her to one, if possible. Her moral taste was

unimpeachable ; something might be gain-

ed by impeaching her literary taste. He

was as weary of hearing that taste perper

tually called classical, as ever the Athenian

was of hearing Aristides called just.

So, on the ancients he fell with redoubt-*

able, repeated blows, slaying them, like

Sampson, by thousands, hoping that every

blow went to Zaira's heart. He was by no

means destitute of classical taste or sensibili-

ty ; but feeling the high moral advantages of

the moderns over the ancients, derived from

WOMEN. 87

the power of revelation, he, in that point of

view, hated the ancients with a hatred pass-

ing that of critics. He could not bear to


believe that Christ, Confucius, and Socrates,

were all to be named in a breath ; and his

views of preference, perhaps, extended to

the neutral, innocent subjects of literature.

In this spirit he spake, and no one could

stand before him ; and, concluded a vigo-

rous philippic against ancient literature,

philosophy, morals, with a round alarming

assertion, (not the less true), that he thank-

ed God he lived in days when Horace would

have been hanged, and Juvenal, he hoped,

at least, have stood in the pillory.*

The company who were present, whether

they understood his allusions or not, certain-,

ly understood his strongly expressed indig-

nation, and all were clamorous in defence of

* Mille puellarum, puerorum mille amores, and pas-

WOT.—For Juvenal, vide the advice given in the sixth

Satire.

88 WOMEN.

the classics in a moment. Zaira placidly

interposed, with intelligence superior, and

self-command still more superior to them


all. " But ought not every culprit," said

she, smiling, " to be tried by a jury of his

peers ? The ancients certainly have a right

to challenge their jury, when Mr Mont-

gomery is the foreman. The ancients want-

ed that which the moderns may boast of,

though the boast should rather increase our

humility than our pride."

„ What is that ?" said Montgomery,

eagerly hoping, since she had escaped him

in the open stream, to catch her in the

eddy.

" The Bible" said Zaira; the calm re-

splendence of thorough self-conviction gi-

ving a lustre to her expression, beyond

all that even the homage of theatres had

ever, or could ever enlighten it with.

" Wanting that, the ancients must have

wanted, not only the sources of the pro-

foundest sentiment, but the language of

r WOMEN. 80

the subKmest poetry. That book, which

opens to man new relations between him

and the Deity, opens to him new relations


in society also. The beam of divinity

trembles over the existence of man, and

though life presents nothing more than a

succession of dark tumultuous waves, their

ridges, (under that glorious dispensation),

as they successively rise and disappear, are

tinged with a light from heaven."

After a long pause, she added, reverting

to a subject of obvious comparison, " In-

stead of Spartan matrons, with blind and

brutal ferocity, sacrificing their children to

the preservation of a miserable, illiterate ex-

istence in a few acres of ground tilled by

Helots, we now have Christian matrons

devoting their children to God and their

country, for the interests of humanity and

religion; with more extensive views on

earth; with sublimer hopes in heaven, than

ever those unhappy beings could have

known."

There was something of the sublimity

of the sentiment she was developing which

90 WOMEN-

communicated itself at this moment to her

looks and her voice. " Instead of,"—she was

proceeding with numerous instances which


comparative history could amply have fur-

nished her with, when the apprehension of

its being too like a studied theatrical effu-

sion struck her. She felt, too, there was

not the same allowance for the superiority

of females in conversation in Ireland that

there was on the continent, and she paused

in the parallel.

De Courcy cast an eye of proud and bril»

liant triumph on Montgomery.

Montgomery was silent. His own en-

gines had recoiled back on himself. He

knew not what to say or think ; and Zaira,

who appeared to feel that much depended

on this moment, pursued the subject, and

her memory supplying her as rapidly with

appropriate quotations, as her fancy with

images, she opened INJilton's Paradise Re-

gained, and read that sublime passage, in

which- a comparison is made between the

history, the poetry, and the theology of the

WOMP-N. 91

Jews, and those of the Ethnics, (a compari-

son for which Milton deserves some credit,

as his attachment to the literature of the


ancients must have formed nearly a balance

in his mind to his favourite theology) ; and

she passed on to Johnson's splendid testi-

mony to the necessary superiority of mo-

dern writers on certain topics. " The an-

cient epic poets, wanting the light of reve-

lation, were very unskilful teachers of vir-

tue ; their principal characters may be great,

but they are not amiable. The reader may

rise from their works with a greater degree

of active or passive fortitude, and some-

times of prudence ; but he will be able to

carry away few precepts of justice, and

none of mercy."*

Some female friends of Zaira's came in at

this moment, and De Courcy and Mont-

* Johnson's Life of Milton.

92 WOMEN.

gomery walked to the other end of the

room.

" Now!" said De Courey, his eyes adding


volumes to the monosyllable.

" And now" retorted Montgomery, with

untimely, unsalutary roughness; " what

has she said but what all conversant with

literature, as she is, might say ? But mark

me, De Courey, it comes from her head,

not from her heart. To make Scripture a

canon qf criticism, is one thing, and to make

it a rule of life is another. The apostles

were enabled to extort, from the devils

they expelled, an acknowledgment of the

power of Christ, but they were also desired

not to rejoice that the devils were subject

unto them."

" Devils!" cried De Courey, with eyes

of uplifted, unfeigned horror; " Gracious

Heaven, may I be possessed by any devil

but the stubborn unexpellible daemon of

religious malignity."

" There are daemons who assume the

WOMEN. 93

forms of angels of light," said Montgomery,

" but they are not the less mischievous,"

" Mischief!" echoed De Courcy—"Oh,


look at her, and connect, if possible, the

idea of evil with her form ! There is a mo-

rality in her very beauty, for the sight of

her irresistibly fills one with benevolence

and the love of the human species. Look

at the smile with which she bends to-those

insipid women ; the exquisite motion of her

figure as she turns to speak to them. Oh,

it is heaven to be near her ! the very atmos-

phere around her is softened by her pre-

sence, the air is happy that she inhales."

" She is dazzlingly beautiful indeed!"

said Montgomery with a sigh.

" And yet when she speaks," cried De

Courcy, " I forget her beauty in the mu-

sic of her voice. Listening to her, I for-

get even that in the melody of soul that

flows from her lips—She lives only to al-

ternate delight-—a statue with her form

would almost be a companion; but when

9

9* WOMJiN.

she unveils the sanctuary of her mind, even

her beauty seems but as the porch of the

temple to the worshipper—such loveliness


inclosing such genius seems like Homer

in the splendid casket of Darius"

" What will she be next ?" said Montgo-

mery, sneeringly; " She has been a god-

dess ; a temple; and a scroll of paper, in

the last speech."

" Her next change will be into an angel!"

said De Courcy with fervour; " a minister-

ing angel, while thou liest howling !"

" She is fitter for the houri of a Maho-

metan paradise," said Montgomery; and,

as he spoke, the loud declamatory voice

of one of the visitors prevented any reply.

She was telling a long story, with thea-

trical vociferation and action, all to the

honour and glory of a dear friend of her's,

mixed with frequent appeals to Zaira for

her praises. Her friend, the widow of a

late dignitary of the church, had been left,

it seems, with a large family of children in

WOMEN. 93

very narrow circumstances, and had reso-

lutely refused the offer of a wealthy rela-

tion, who was a catholic, to provide for


two of her sons, under the apprehension

that they might be induced to adopt the

catholic persuasion, though she had been

solemnly assured no such attempt would

ever be made. " There, Ma'am," said the

lady, proud of her friend, and proud of

herself—" there is what I call religion, and

virtue and conscience—and all that—that

is what I call" and she paused for want

of a word to complete the climax.

" I am convinced," said Zaira, " that

your friend merits every eulogium—but I

do not understand distinctly"

" Don't understand, don't understand,

Ma'am ? why, Ma'am, they would have

brought them up catholics."

" And can no catholics then he saved ?"

said Zaira, with naivete. The lady was

silent, aghast. " I cannot conceive," said

Zaira, mildly, " that any parent can carry

96 WOMEN.

her feelings for her child beyond its fu-

ture destination. If she really believed that

its future happiness would be forfeited by


its becoming a catholic, I fear she merited

the reproach, which she would be ready to

utter against catholic bigotry; if she did

not, what danger in indulging the hope,

that she might recognize her children in a

future state of happiness, though they might

reach it by paths nominally different from

her own ?"

" Pray, ma'am," said the lady, (she was a

very grave, stiff old lady, dressed in black

silk, whose thick folds rustled like a storm-

at every motion); " pray, ma'am, may I

ask of what religion you are ?"

" A Christian, I hope," said Zaira, mild-

iy-

" Catholic or protestant ?—No offence, I

hope; I trust I am giving no offence,

ma'am, by the enquiry."

" Not the least—neither, ma'am."

" Presbyterian, then, I presume ?"

WOMEN. 97

" I have said I profess the Christian reli-

gion ; its various denominations, I con-

ceive, are wholly unimportant."


De Courcy sighed; Montgomery now

threw triumphant glances in his turn.

" Pray, ma'am," said the old lady, with

the air of an inquisitor, "may I ask what

place of worship you frequent ?"

* I believe there is no place of worship I

have not visited."

" Churches, and chapels, and presbyte-

rian meetings, and evangelical preaching-

houses," said the old lady with increasing

emphasis of horror, her voice almost rising

to a scream.

" Churches, chapels, and meeting-hou-

ses," said Zaira calmly, repeating the words

after her, with all the docile simplicity of

a child who was learning its catechism—

" in many of them I have heard eloquence

and genius; in all of them religion, as pure

as we can expect to hear it from the lips of

man." _...;: ., .

VOL. II. E . . , •

98 WOMEN.

" It is a pity there is not a synagogue

in Dublin," said the old lady, collecting

the vast volumes of her immeasureable


skirt around her, and seating herself three

feet further from Zaira on the sopha.

" It is a pity there is not," said Zaira

calmly; " it is a proof of the poverty of the

city."

" Good God, ma'am," said the old lady,

losing even her hardly-retained politeness

at the retort, and in her trepidation scat-

tering her ample pinch of snuff over the

sopha of velvet—" Good God, do you re-

gret the absence of Jews from Dublin—

Are Jews Christians, ma'am ?"

" They are human beings," said Zaira.

" Human beings—Oh, yes ! that is the

favourite language now, whenever any one

is speaking of what ought not to be consi-

sidered human beings at all—There are

people who will talk that way of Jews, and

Negroes, and Papists, and—oh, God bless

me! is that a flash of lightning ?"

WOMEN. 9§

" No," said Montgomery, raising one

of the window-blinds, through which he

had long seen a light reddening, spread-


ing, flashing, and subsiding—" it is," said

he, hesitating, " a fire, I fear."

He looked out again, and saw half the

horizon in a blaze; " it is indeed a fire,"

said he, starting from the window, and

catching up his hat.

" A fire, a fire.'" cried the old lady, in a

voice that might have alarmed all London

in the worst stage of the great conflagra-

tion—" a fire; great God ! how shall I get

home^—in what direction is it—how shall

I get to my carriage!—Oh! Madame Dal-

matiani, why do you live in Saekville

Street r

No one cared much how she got home;

but De Courcy, naturally humane and

feeling for age, had her carriage called,

and put her into it, with assurances that

the fire was evidently far distant, and

100 WOMEN.

could not within the limits of possibility

extend to Merrion Square, where she lived.

The old lady heard him not: She strug-


gled into her carriage with eager paralytic

tremblings ; and when the door had been

twice closed on her black silk skirt, and

twice opened to release it, she screamed

out for her snuff-box, her gold snttff-box,

that she had left on the sopha where she had

been sitting', but her cries, inquiries, and

lamentations, were lost in the speed with

which her carriage whirled away.

De Courcy, as he rushed up • stairs for

his hat, met Montgomery, and Zaira on

his arm, at the landing-place. " Will you

permit me to accompany you," said Zai-

ra ; "I will not render myself troublesome

by my fears ?" and De Courcy felt the dif-

ference between her and a female render-

ed troublesome by her fears.

" I have known," said Zaira, as they

walked on quickly together, guided by

WOMEN. 101

the horrible light that increased every mo-

ment,—" I have known important assist-

ance rendered on these occasions by mere


presence _of mipd, without any physical

force."

Montgomery felt involuntary respect for

her that moment; he could not but value

her magnanimity, but still he sighed. They

were soon on the spot.

It was the dreadful fire that broke out

at the druggist's stores in Castle Street;

crammed with combustibles, and as closely

crammed on every side with buildings,

whose every room contained a family. The

best of it was, that it was not yet eleven

o'clock; the watch were all awake; the

police pn the alert; the military in the

neighbourhood, so near the Castle; and

the families in, the street were not retired

to rest. All was life, though it was the

hour of repose ; and all was light, terrible

light, though the sky was as dark as De-

cember midnight. They attempted to as-

102 WOMEN.

cend Cork-hill; that was rendered impos-

sible by the crowd; and winding another

way through lanes, of which the reader


may be spared the names, they got into

Fishamble Street. Many fearful intima-

tions of the danger struck them there—

The hollow rolling of the fire-engines, so

distinct in their sound ;—the cries of " clear

the way," from the crowd, who opened

their dense tumultuous mass for the pas-

sage, and instantly closed again;—the tramp-

ling of the cavalry on the wet pavement,

threatening, backing, facing among the

crowd;—the terrible hollow knocking on

the pavement, to break open the pipes for

water, which was but imperfectly suppli-

ed ;—the bells of all the neighbouring

churches, St John's, St Werburgh's, St

Bride's, and the deep tremendous toll of

Christ-church, mingled with, but heard

above all, as if it summoned the sufferers

to prepare, not for life but for death, and

poured a kind of defiance on the very ef-

WOMEN. 103

forts it was rung to invite them to. All

this came at once on them, as they entered

Fishamble Street, from a wretched lane


through which they had been feeling their

way. They emerged from it; and when

they did, the horrors of the conflagration

burst on them at once. The fire, confi-

ned in the sphere of its action, amidst

warehouses thickly enclosed, burst in ter-

rible volumes above the tops of the houses,

and seemed like a volcano, of which no one

could see the crater.

On the steps of St John's church, a num-

ber were collected. They had snatched the

furniture from their miserable lodgings;

piled it up in the street, where the guard

were watching it, and now sat patiently in

the open air to see their habitations re-

duced to ashes, unknowing where they

were to rest their heads that night.

All the buildings in the neighbourhood

were strongly illuminated by the fire, and

104 WOMEN.

still more strongly (though partially from

time to time) by lights held out by the in-

habitants from their windows, from the


shops to the attics, six stories high; and the

groupes below flashing out in the light,

and disappearing in the darkness, their

upturned faces, marked with the shifting

traces of fear, horror, defiance, and des-

pair, presented-a subject for Salvator. No

banditti, in the darkest woods of the Ap-

pennines, illuminated only by lightning,

ever showed more fearful wildness of ex-

pression, or more picturesque distortion of

attitude. Just then the flames sunk for a

moment, but, rising again, instantly pour-

ed forth a volume of light, that set the

whole horizon in a blaze. There was a

shriek from the crowd, that seemed rather

like the cry of triumph than despair. It is

certain, that a people like the Irish, whose

imagination is stronger than any other of

their intellectual faculties, can utter cries

WOMEN. . 105

of delight at the sight of a splendid con-

flagration that is consuming their dwel-

lings.


The last burst of flames produced a sin-

gular effect. The buildings in Castle Street

(below the range of the illumination) lay in

complete darkness—darkness more intense

from the surrounding light, and the tower

and spire of St Werburgh's, (it had then a

fantastically elegant spire,) by their height

in the horizon, caught the whole effect of

the fire, and appeared like a fairy palace of

flame, blazing and built among the clouds.

They had learnt by this time that there

was no danger, and little probable loss.

The premises had been insured ; and those

in the neighbouring houses had time to

effect their escape, and secure their goods ;

and Zaira, freed from all apprehension on

account of the sufferers, and feeling her

imagination strongly excited by the scene,

was comparing it with the fires at Constan-

tinople, where the terrible sound of "yangen-

E2

106 WOMEN.

vor," is echoed by .the clattering of the

iron poles of the guard on the pavement;

and she had got on to the description of that


dreadful fire, which, acting in a semicir-

cle, gradually drove the sufferers towards

the sea, and enclosed them between the

two elements; so that they were scorch-

ed by the flames, while actually immer-

sed up to their necks in the water to

escape them, when she was startled by

Montgomery's exclamation—" Good God i

and even amid a fire she can go on with

literary allusions and, description, and such

stuff." The words were not intended to

reach her ear, but they did; De Courcy

heard them too, and, trembling with in-

dignation, scarce could repress it, when

a figure appeared that suspended every

other feeling in a moment. It was that

extraordinary female whom De Courcy

»nd Zaira had met before under circum-

stances so singular and different; the fe-

male from whose power (as it seemed) he

WOMEN. 107

had rescued Eva; the female who had en-

countered them at Bray, in despite and in

defiance of the police and magistrates, who


opposed and remonstrated ; of the guards,

who threatened and presented a formidable

but vain obstruction; and of the crowd,

who threatened her with suffocation at

every movement she attempted to make.

She burst, scrambled, struggled, and tore

her way through all, and succeeded at last

in planting herself on an open spot nearly

opposite to Zaira.

She was, as usual, in rags, and as the

strong light gleamed on her hoary stream-

ing hair, her wild features, and her wilder

attire, she seemed fit to act the prompting

and exulting fury who stood by Nero when

he surveyed from his tower Rome in flames,

which his own orders had kindled, and

which his own orders (it is said) forbid to

be extinguished. She began her usual wild

dance, regardless of the crowd, and of the

terrible cause of their assembling, and min-

108 WOMEN.

gled, from time to time, exclamations in a

voice between recitative and singing, that

seemed modulated to the music of invisible


and infernal spirits. It was very singular

of this woman, that though her accent was

perfectly Irish, her expressions were not so;

her individual feeling seemed to swallow up

and overwhelm her nationality. Wherever

she was, she seemed perfectly alone—alone

alike amid the mountains of Wicklow or

the multitudes of Dublin; all times, cir-

cumstances, and persons seemed to yield ta

the single, mysterious, undefinable feeling

that always governed and inspired her; and

while it made her an object of supreme ter-

ror to all others, made all others objects of

supreme contempt to her. After twirling

rapidly round for some time, (a motion

that would have deprived any one else of

all recollection, but which seemed necessary

to give it to her) she stopt, and shrieked

out—" Ah, ha, you are flying from the

fire, but there is a fire coming that

WOMEN. 100

of you can fly from,—the fire that burns

for ever, and ever and ever! Where will

you turn when that seizes you ?—How will


you look when that scorches you ?—This

fire burns red and hot, but it will be hotter

when your eyes are melting in their socki-

ets; and your bodies will be like red-

hot iron, hard, and burning, and never

to be cooled, and never to dissolve, like my

brain, my brain /".—She screamed in sudden

agony, clasping her hands on her withered

and seamed forehead, and sinking on the

ground in a paroxysm of desperate insanity;

and while sitting on the stones, she rocked

and muttered to herself—" Ay, ay, save

your children if you can; but you can never

save them from that fire. I could not save

mine. There is not a bit of your gold, or

your goods, or all you have risked your

lives to save this night, that will not be re-

paid you a hundred-fold in drops of .fire,

on your bare scorching skulls below. Poor

wretches ! your worldly goods are all you

110 WOMEN.

think of. See," she cried, starting up,—

" see how the churches are all lighted up ;

see them, they look as if they were burn-


ing at the day of judgment; and you do

not see those who are in the dark church-

yard ; and you do not hear them who are

calling from their graves to you,—if they

were alive again, is it this fire they would

be flying from ? Is it this trash," (pointing

to the heaps of furniture, &c. that had been

brought out into the street)—" Is it this

trash they would be thinking of saving ?—

Oh! no, no, ye fools and madmen, and

blind! they would call to you to save your

souls, though the world was burning. Lis-

ten to them, they are speaking to me.—

Well, well, God help us! we are all sin-

ners—all sinners," she cried, bending her

ear to the ground as if she were listening

to voices that issued from it,—" Ay, we

are all sinners, either guilty here, or pu-

nished there—no difference between us but

this" (and she stamped on the ground em-

WOMEN. Ill

>

»

phatically.) " Rest, rest, poor wretches!


Trouble me no more; or if you speak,

tell me when I am to be at rest with you !"

She seemed now sinking into a kind of

sullen torpor, when the sudden clattering

of an engine, and the fearful hissing of the

flames as the water played on them, ap-

peared to rouse her. As the water fail-

ed, the flames burst upward with terrible

strength, sending their long flashing vo-

lumes across the darkened air; the stars

twinkled dimly far above, and gave one

the idea that it was a kind of lower infer-

nal heaven that was alternately blackening

and reddening so far below their pure fires

and temperate aspect. The beldame start-

ed up ; the horror that struck her appeared

to be involuntary; she screamed out—

" It was the day of judgment!" and rush-

ing forward, and flinging herself on the

ground before Zaira and De Courcy, she

cried out,—" And these are angels, two

angels come to judgment—see, they are

112 WOMEN.

fire, I touch them and they bur n me—Ora-

te pro nobis /"—(and she caught hold of Zai-

re's dress,)


" Oh, protect me from this woman!—she

terrifies me. I remember her," said Zaira,

shrinking back and clinging to De Courcy-.

De Courcy interposed, and attempted to

extricate her from the grasp of the maniac,

as he believed her.

*' Have you no touch of nature in ye ?"

said the woman, suddenly and fearfully al-

tering her tone, and clinging close and

closer to Zaira. " Do you know who

(whom) it is you drive away ?—Have ye no

touch of nature in ye ?—Oh, these hands

are withered, but how often they have clasp-

ed you round that white neck !.—Oh, these

hairs are grey, but how often have you

played with them when they were as black

and as bright as your own !—^Sorrow for

you has turned them white. Oh, look

upon me,—look upon me on my knees. I

don't know your name now, but you should

WOMEN* IIS

never have forgot mine. Oh, have ye no

nature in you, and. I kneeling on the cold

stones before my own /"


De Courcy now with difficulty succeed-

ed in tearing Zaira from her, but when he

had done so, he found Zaira had fainted.

He assisted in conveying her home; she

was silent; she appeared shocked and over-

come, more than the casual ravings of a

maniac could overcome a woman of her

self-possession ; there seemed to be an ul-

terior cause for it. This sense of mystery

was now becoming a source of provocation

to De Courcy; he felt that the sentiments

with which she had inspired him, gave him

a kind of prescriptive right to her confi-

dence. JLove may not always be repaid by

love, but it always requires to be repaid by

sincerity; and when we surrender our

hearts without reserve, we certainly de-

mand an unqualified avowal of the secrets

of the heart to which ours are devoted.

Perhaps this latent irritability of D$

114 WOMEN.

Courcy's feelings was not diminished by

the public character of Zaira ; a woman so

admired, so conspicuous, might, must have


had admirers; and perhaps this woman,

wretched as she was, remote as she appear-

ed from the possibility of the most distant

connexion with Zaira, might have in her

power something that would elucidate the

mystery that obviously hung over Zaira's

character and circumstances; young, beau-

tiful, unprotected, disengaged, a foreigner,

and yet claimed (as it seemed) by a beg-

ging maniac in the streets of Dublin.—

" Have ye no touch of nature ?" rung in

his ears still, as his feverish burning head

sunk on the pillow. As slumber stole on

him, the voice seemed to speak to him in

another tone. ' The voice appeared to con-

tinue after he slept, and he dreamed of

Eva. A vision hovered before him in his

sleep all night. A dim discoloured figure,

something like Eva, but tinged with that

melancholy light and indefinite darkness,

WOMEN.

with which objects appear to the sick or the

unhappy in their troubled dreams. He

imagined himself still amidst that dreadful


fire, and one figure (not Zaircfs) was still

stretching out its helpless hands to him

at a distance, which, when he approached,

began to stretch out immeasurably. He

struggled in sleep, but vainly, to follow ;

then he thought he saw Zaira on the top

of the burning buildings grasping Eva in

her arms. The maniac was there too, and

still the cry sounded in his ears—" Have

ye no touch of nature in ye ?"

116 WOMEN.

CHAPTER III.

Shall I live

To wrong that tender-hearted virgin so ?


*****

I see you go, as slily as you think,

To steal away, yet I will pray for you.

BEAUMONT AND FLITCHEK.

THE exertions which De Courcy had

made at the fire, in assisting the sufferers

to remove their furniture, had exhausted

him completely. His constitution, natu-

rally feeble, and much impaired by his ra-

pid growth and premature sensibility, was

now giving proofs of an early decline. He

had excited himself to an unusual degree

the preceding night; prompted first by his

humanity, and afterwards (unconsciously,

WOMEX. 117

perhaps, but not unnaturally) by the loud

praises bestowed by the bystanders on his

strength and stature ; for the lower orders


of the Irish, like all uncivilized people, are

warm admirers of physical superiority ; and,

finally, he was impelled and supported in

efforts far beyond his strength by the pre-

sence of Zaira. " Ah si ma dame me voy-

oit," never was felt or uttered by chivalric

knight with more devotion than by De

Courcy that night.

The result was, that he was confined to

his bed for several days ; during that time

Zaira's messages of enquiry were at his

door every hour •, and Wentworth's grave

servant, as grave as his master, called just

once every day to know how Mr De

Courcy did.

This period, however, was very favour-

able to Eva. Her image was more asso-

ciated with the feelings of a sick-bed, and

a dying man, (for most young people, when

6

118 WOMEN.

they are ill, think they are dying), than

that of the brilliant Zaira.

Their figures were perpetually hovering


before his feverish sight; and Zaira, beau-

tiful, elated, sparkling, seemed a vision that

dazzled and tortured him. He closed his

burning eyes to shut out her form, and he

tossed from side to side of his feverish bed

to keep her image away ; and still the thea-

tre blazing with lights; the boudoir re-

sounding with voices ; the glare, the eclat

of her appearance, always bright, promi-

nent, conspicuous ; the " troops of friends;"

the splendour of her apartments; the bravos

that followed her songs; the murmur of

delight that drowned every sentence she

uttered, pursued him even in his dreams.

Sometimes he thought himself on the stage

acting with her; sometimes he thought

himself in Hell, and that these ministers

of pleasure were suddenly become ministers

of torment; and that the faces, which a

6

WOMEN. 119

moment were smiling with pleasure, and

brightening in applause, were suddenly

transformed into visages glaring with ma-


lignity, distorted with derision, or scowl-

ing with vengeance. " Then came by a

shadow like an angel." Eva appeared to

him ; and her image seemed like the cool-

ness of the nights in Upper Egypt, where

the heat of the day would be insupportable

to the traveller, were it not followed by a

refreshing dew.

He stretched out his arms in his feverish

sleep, and blessed her. ~No excitements, no

agitating, disturbing, dazzling images, came

along with her's. She appeared to him in

his delirium employed as she was in life,

without parade or publicity. He saw or-

phans surrounding and blessing her. Her

figure, which, contrasted with Zaira's, ap-

peared like the snow-drop compared with

the rose, now refreshed him by the contrast.

The hymns, which he well remembered her

to have sung, no longer grated on his ears

120 WOMEtf.

with the nasal dissonance, the twang of a

conventicle. He heard, he hung on, he

attempted to join in them. His quiet even-


ing walk with her and Mrs Wentworth to

Bethesda Chapel, which he had loathed so

lately, seemed now like a path to Paradise^

He cried out repeatedly, " Let me go with

them; they are going to Heaven !" Then

suddenly he imagined that Zaira's splendid

equipage, hurrying to the theatre, crossed

him ; that he was dragged along, bound to

its wheels. He called out to be released;

he struggled, and exclaimed, " that he was

kept down, chained to earth, while Eva

and her friends were leaving him behind^

leaving him for ever !" Then a wild mix-

ture of play-houses and meeting-houses ;

of Zaira's wearing a clergyman's gown, and

preaching Eva's funeral sermon in a chapel,

where Mrs Wentworth sat weeping, and the

maniac dancing and howling in the aisle;

and of Eva's rushing on the stage of a

crowded theatre, and his vainly dragging

WOMEN". 121

her back, and only grasping a shroud, which

she flung off, and threw at him ; and then

a thousand other images, equally wild, but


singularly connected, wandered through his

tlreams, and he started and awoke.

Montgomery, the faithful Montgomery,

watched by him; never quitted him; heard

every word of his significant ravings; mark-

ed them, and never, even to De Courcy

himself, repeated a syllable of them. He

was rejoiced {silently rejoiced), however, to

find that the first day De Courcy was able

to quit his room, he proposed to visit at

Mr Wentworth's,

** Tkey have been very attentive," said

De Gourcy ; " they have sent every day to

enquire about me."

" They ?" said Montgomery to himself-—

'•And is that all?"

As they went down stairs, one of Zaira's

servants in a splendid livery was waiting

with enquiries from his mistress. Mont-

gomery silently cursed him by all his gods,

vol. II. P

122 WOMEN.

and stood on the stairs " gnawing his bit-

ter nail;" while De Courcy, at the sight

of the well-known livery, rushed forward,


and, without listening to the enquiries the

man was directed to make, began over-

powering him with questions about Zaira.

Montgomery, with a desperate effort for

him, sprung after him, and ^caught him by

the arm as he was speaking.

Montgomery was not a man for nice con-

junctures ; not a man to watch the ebbs

and flows of eelings, to sail with the tide,

and tack with the change of the breeze.

Montgomery, with the best possible inten-

tions, was always doing the worst possible

things, and this abrupt and forcible inter-

ference seemed to De Courcy like a pre-

sumption on his enfeebled health, and sent

him in a kind of reluctant, humiliated state

to Mr Wentworth's.

There, all appeared exactly as he had left

it One could swear to the position of

every chair in the room, if they had not

WOMEN. 123

visited the house for a month. Life or

death seemed to make no change in this

family; .yet De Courcy, prepossessed, alie-


nated, abstracted, as he was, could not but

be struck, be gratified, amazed to rapture,

with the eager but silent delight with which

Eva at his appearance started from her seat,

flung down her work, and half-extended

her hand in speechless fondness towards

him.

Before he could touch it, she had recol-

lected herself, resumed her seat, resumed

her work, and, but for her blushes, no one

could have imagined that she felt, and con-

demned herself for daring to feel. But

after this first effort, so soon recalled and

suppressed, Eva had no power of sustain-

ing a protracted tone of feeling in those

whom she inspired with it; she could not

diversify passion by the resources of imagi-

nation, nor make one sentiment .assume a

thousand disguises and charm in all. Her

feelings always gave love the trouble of a

124 "WOMEN.

search to find them, and then did not al-

ways reward them for the toil; and in the

silent timid girl, intent on her work, and


only betraying her emotion by her trem-

bling hands and broken respiration, one

must have had a kind of intuition to dis-

cover the deep and hidden workings of a

heart whose resources were yet unknown

even to its possessor. There were, indeed,

ik>wers under the snow, but one was chill-

ed in the effort to bring them to light; and

De Courcy's age was that which required

developement, instead of being capable of

bestowing it

De Courcy bent over her for some time;

the glow of meeting had faded away, and

Eva had not one ray of intellect to rekindle

its lustre. De Courcy forced himself to

think, over and over again, of the transient

flush,—the evanescent "brilliancy of her

look,—of her motions (when he appeared)

to make himself believe that she loved him,

and perhaps to remind himself that he still

WOMEN. 185

loved her. " This was the very spot on

which you sat the last time I saw you,"

said he at length; " you were employed


at the same work ; I believe it was the very-

same chair you sat on; at least I am sure it

was just in this corner of the window it was

placed. Nothing changes its place here—

you never feel a wish for a change."

" My life is monotonous, very monoto-

nous," said Eva, plying her work with in-

creasing, unskilful, agitated industry;—

" very little interesting to any one but

myself."

DeCourcy's heart swelled at these words;

this avowedly " monotonous" life,—this La

Trappe existence, without the enthusiasm,

the devotedness, the refined selfishness that

makes us delight in self-inflictions when we

hope to purchase a remission of future pu-

nishment by anticipating it here; this Al-

Araf,* without a glimpse of heaven; this

-.-•-... . . . . - - • •'

* Vide Southey, from D'Herbelot

126 WOMEN.

voluntary suffering without cause, merit;

or excitement (for he knew Eva's creed

disdained the thought ofmerify—all rushed


on his feelings and overpowered him ; yet

the emotion that seemed to deny him words

(by a mental paradox not uncommon) in-

spired him with eloquence, and he painted

in dangerous colours-, and with uninten-

tional seductiveness, the charms of the world

she was resigning without a knowledge of

it.

He ceased, and Eva was silent, not be-

cause she was unable to answer him, but

because her habitual diffidence, and per-

haps the very depth of her feelings, render-

ed her incapable of expressing them. Straws

float on the stream, but pearls are found in

the gulph, and they require the art and pa-

tienee of the diver to bring them to the

light. After Eva had tried vainly to re-

duce her " simple thoughts" into the form

of argument, she gave up the attempt, and

resting her strength on the force of an ap-

WOMEN. 127

peal, she turned her eyes with unconscious^

but resistless expression, on De Courcy.

" Why," said she, in a voice that seemed


to faulter at its own sound—" why do you

wish to agitate me with the love of the

world?-—There is no further room in my

heart but for the love of God and of you!"

De Courcy was silent; the language of

her innocent heart seemed like prayer, and

he dreaded to interrupt its aspirations;

Some other recollections crossed him at

that moment; De Courcy, like most young

men, had never been accustomed to pray ;

with him it had been a paroxysm, not a ha-

bit; he remembered having prayed, during

his frequent illness, in short, feverish ejacu*-

lations; he had prayed too, prayed from

the bottom of his heart, the night after he

had parted from Zaira at Bray, and called

on God to sanctify their friendship, and re-

concile it with his union with Eva. At this

moment, he felt such egoistical dramatic de-

1S8 WOMEN

votion was a mockery ; Eva's habitual lan-

guage seemed to be prayer, and her coun-

tenance, like the breast-plate of the Jewish


high-priest, reflected the will of the Deity

at a look. They were both silent, and for

a long time; then Eva, who had been for

•weeks preparing for this effort, and to

whom, when it approached, it seemed like

the approach of death, determined on speak-

ing about Zaira. The moment was come—

her hands were convulsed;—she laid down

the work, which she no longer saw—she

cleared her throat repeatedly, but felt, when

she attempted to speak, as if her voice was

gone for ever. At length, with an effort

that astonished her as much as if she then

exercised the faculty of speaking for the.

first time, she said,—" Do you often see

Madame Dalmatian! ?"

" Yes, very often," said De Courcy, sur-

prised into an answer, and equally surpri-

sed at the question.

WOMEN. 129

" She is very beautiful," said Eva, who,

like all who have once begun, felt it easy

to proceed.


" Oh, exquisitely beautiful!" said DC

Courcy, in a tone he could hot repress.

" And very clever—talented, accomplish-

ed I mean," said Eva, hardly knowing a

term for intellectual eminence in women.

" Oh, yes !" said Charles, eagerly, equally

at a loss for a term that could express his

overpowering sense of Zaira's perfections,

but supplying all defects of language by

the tone in which his assent was uttered.

" How happy you must be in her socie-

ty," said Eva, amazed at herself, and conti-

nuing to speak almost unconsciously, and,

as it appeared to her, almost in delirium.

" Yes," said Charles, sighing involunta-

jrily; " all her friends are happy in her so-

ciety."

Eva became suddenly dumb; the spirit

that had supported her failed at once;

Charles's unqualified answer in the affirma-

F-SU

130 WOMEN.

live had left her without excuse for pro-

longing the subject, and she had no power,

and no wish if she had the power, to ma-


nage conversation so as to lead it: to the

point her heart was full of. She had hr-

tended, perhaps, that something tike an ex-

planation should take place, but she was

wholly incapable of conducting, or, what is

more difficult, of commencing an explana-

tion •;• and she finished as she began, in ti-

mid, embarrassed silence, regretting she had

spoken, dreading to pause, but dreading

still more to proceed. Chi such occasions,

the most uninteresting objects are often the

most welcome; in a crisis of feeling, any

object who does not partake in it, becomes

a relief; and both Eva and De Courcy, for

the first time in their lives, rejoiced to see

Mr Wentworth enter with some evarigehV

cal friends.

Macowen immediately sat down by

Eva. There was something about this man

always peculiarly repulsive to De Courcy-

'4

WOJCE-N.

This night, presuming perhaps on the in-

. creasing report of (what the evangelical

people called) De Courey's awful fall, he


was more offensive than ever. His gloat-

ing eyes, frightfully distorted between their

habitual up-turned fixture, and their leer-

ing obliquity of amorous squint,—his grea-

sy perspiring hands, rubbed with uncouth

: restless awkwardness on the thread-bare

polished knees of his black breeches,—his

stubborn red hair, every capillary tube of

which seemed alive in the present cause,—

instinct with horrid significant existence,—

his usual nasal, sonorous drawl, softened

. most reluctantly into, an amorous whine,—

his long, muscular neck, craning out from

his stiff, single, ill-coloured cravat, extended

instinctively, and instinctively reddening

to his jaws at the mention of a religious to-

. pic, and then declining with loathsome sub-

mission towards Eva, and extending its

spires over her like a serpent over its prey,—

his tout-ensemble might have served Mo-

132 WPMEN.

Here for his Tartuffe, and all his trans-

lators and followers, from Gibber down to

Murphy, for their Dr Wolfs and Dr Cant-

all.


well's, and was more disgusting than them

Eva drew back her chair quietly, till it

was close to her aunt's. De Courcy indig-

nantly rose from his, and, pushing back the

well-filled plate of buttered cake, (which

Mr Macowen drew gently towards himself)

retired.

As he went out, he observed something

like an unusual bustle in the hall. Mr

Wentworth had been called out of the par-

lour some time before ; he was now stand-

ing near the door talking to a man, whose

figure, dimly seen as it was by the light in

the hall, De Courcy observed, announced

extreme wretchedness; and the contrast

between his and Mr Wentworth's figure,

who stood close beside him, was curious*

Wentworth was erect, stiff, motionless;

he stood, indeed, but not with the slightest

2

WOMEN. 133

appearance of attention to, or even con-

sciousness of, the figure before him. He

listened, (if it could be called listening), for


neither eye, mouth, or muscle of the face

showed the slightest symptom of relaxation,-

no more than a clock shows, when a person

is stationed before it anxiously watching

the progress of its hands.

The man was standing before him, but

his attitude could hardly be called standing;

misery appeared to have given his form an

habitual, unalterable bend ; misery, arising

from pecuniary causes, is very degrading.

He stood a living personification of Burns's

strong description—

« To beg his brother of the dust

To give him leave to toil."

Wentworth, after listening to what seem-

ed a long account, answered, with perfect

immobility of attitude and aspect, and with

a voice such as might be supposed to issue

184 WOMEN.

from the lips of an automaton, (if an auto-

maton could speak), " Friend, you want

me to renew your bill; it cannot be done."


The wretched man looked as if he was

preparing to begin over again his effort of

explanation, remonstranee, and entreaty.

Mr Wentworth appeared ako prepared to

listen, as Shylock listens to the pleadings

of Antonio. But the suppliant's voice failed

him ; the' clamminess of despair was on his

lips ; his broken respiration; his frequent,

hopeless hems; his quivering fingers, raised

to his mouth as if to remove some impedi-

ment, which he felt no effort of his could re-

move—all gave signal that he pleaded, even

to his own conviction, in vain.

De Courcy kept busily searching for his

hat in the back-ground ; but he caught the

words—" the late fire—hard times—every

other creditor renewing his bills<—a little

time—Mr Wentworth might be sure—He

was the only bill-holder that held out against

him—it would be his ruin—his ruin," and

WOMEN". 135

the poor wretch dwelt with incense agoni-

zing emphasis on the last word, and re*

peated it three or four times almost convul-


sively.

It seemed to have a much stronger effect

on him than on Mr Wentworth. He lis-

tened unmoved, and then said, not speak-

ing till the man had said and looked his

utmost—" Friend, I always make it a rule

to renew a bill once (at a short date) that

is right and fair ;• but never a second time—

never. • We ought to owe no man any

thing, but to love one another?"

The poor man became dumb when he

heard Scripture quoted against him. He

tried to put on his hat; he tried to make a

parting bow with habitual respect and mi-

serable humility. Both efforts failed. He

did not know his way to the door. Mr

Wentworth stalked before him, like the

statue in Don John, and opened the door

with his own hands. The man hesitated

©n the steps, turned, felt that his turning

136 WOMEN.

was of no use; and plunged into the street,

as if he was plunging into his grave.

De Courcy followed him instantly. De


Courcy was the heir of a large property;

but his guardians had been strict in the

execution of their duty, and allowed him

no more money than was necessary for his

personal expenses. Those had been greatly

increased since his acquaintance with Zaira,

and he was now very poor; all the money

he had he thrust into the man's hand, as

they quitted the house together ; and the

man, with that strong expression of feeling

peculiar to the Irish, which sometimes re-

volts, and sometimes conciliates, fell on his

knees in the street to thank him.

De Courcy, shocked to the soul at this

humiliation, raised him, and inwardly re-

solved to call on his guardians for some

money, to assist this unfortunate man;

and he felt his wish to assist him, and his

indignation against all sordid feelings, con-

WOMEN. 137

siderably heightened by Mr Wentworth

having been the cause of their excitement.

" A Christian—an evangelical professor,"


said De Courcy to himself; " scandalous-

such people ought to be exposed to the

world;" and he strengthened himself in

his virtuous indignation.

John Bunyan, in his Pilgrim's Progress,

says, that when people begin to fall off in

religion, they always graduate through the

following stages:—

•* 1st, They cast off by degrees private

duties and prayer.

" Zd/y, They shun the company of warm

and lively Christians,

" Sdly, They grow cold to public duty ;

as hearing, reading, godly conference, and

the like.

" ^thly, They begin to pick holes in the

coats of the saints" &c. &e.

De Courcy had certainly arrived at this

fourth stage. He was beginning to be

extreme, to mark what was done amiss

138 WOMEK.

among the evangelical people ; and he in-

dulged himself in the bad' habit of trans-

ferring the censure due to individuals only,


to the whole society. Mr Wentworth and

Macowen (bad specimens enough), he dis-

ingenuously set up in his own mind as the

representatives of the whole party; and

then, with bad logic and worse feeling,

made the evangelical system answerable

with its life for the delinquency of these

capital offenders. Sometimes he pursued

this train of reasoning till it led him to

Eva herself, and he recoiled at his own in-

justice, yet felt that it was the secret pur-

pose of his heart to include her.

Resolved t© expose Mr Wentworth, he

thought proper to relate the circumstance

to Zaira, and was not a little surprised at

the apparent want of emotion with which

she listened to him. She appeared unusual-

ly absent and abstracted; and, in a short

time, sat down to finish some letters she

had been writing.- De Courcy took up a

womest. 139

book, and threw himself on a sopha at the

other end of the room. Zaira was writing

to her continental friends, and particularly


to Madame St Maur. Part of her letter

contained these words :—

** You cannot comprehend what I have

felt, since I learned the object of his attach-N

tnent is an evangelical female. You do not

exactly understand this phrase, my dear Del-

phine. You can explain it to yourself by

the puritans of Cromwell's time, with whose

history you are well acquainted. Imagine

a woman of this class, and then imagine

De Courcy united to her. I would sooner

be reconciled to any destiny that might be-

fall him, than to his becoming the victim

of this frightful religion. All the hopes,

the visions in which I had indulged my

imagination and my heart, are blasted for

ever..

UO WOMEN.

" I resigned, without a murmur, the

hope of partaking his happiness; but I

still cherished that of witnessing it; of see-


ing him attain that brilliant distinction in

society for which he was formed. I limit-

ed myself to the coldest pretensions of the

coldest friendship—to a feeling that migkt

have been cherished for him by one of his

own sex. His brother might be allowed to

exult in his success in life ; yet this hope,

humble as it was, is sacrificed and lost. He

is to be married to an evangelical female!

His talents; his taste; his intellectual am-

bition ; his seductive graces of form and

manner, are to be buried, overwhelmed for

ever, in the hopeless, rayless darkness of fa-

naticism !

" Mezentius, who united a dead body

to a living one, was guilty of a less crime,

and less cruelty, than he who unites De

Courcy to this girl. There is no descri-

bing, Delphine, my horror of this spe-

cies of religion, " which merits heaven> by

WOMEN. 141

making earth an hell!" Let them speak

for themselves, and let them speak out;

into what would they convert life if they


could ?—into a mass, formless and void;

as devoid of motion—of beauty and of va-

riety, as chaos, before the influence of the

Spirit, or the creation of light! Existence

"With them is only measured, and viewed

in a reference to futurity, -or, as they call

it, to eternity; and their deity is a being,

who, to raise the value of his heaven, de-

prives them of every enjoyment below,

that might cause them to linger in their

progress, or cast one longing look behind,

" It is certainly policy, ^i this view, to

rend away every flower that springs up in

the path of life, and bid us hope that their

wreaths are all transplanted to a future

state. If we estimated the enjoyments of

life on the most philosophical scale, we

might be allowed to reckon among them

health, competence, society, and the enjoy-

142 WOMEN.

ments of literature and the arts. But in

this view all these objects are neutralized,

We are to travel from Dan to Beersheba,


and cry all is barren, or rather we are to

raise fruits not indigenous to the soiL

With them, health and sickness, poverty

and affluence; all the enjoyments, and all

the privations of life, are to be viewed ex-

actly in the same plane, as merely various

manifestations of the will of the Deity

concerning our temporal destination, and

to be regarded as little as one who was

obtaining admission to a palace would re-

gard the structure of the passages through

which he was led, provided they ultimate-

ly conducted him to the presence of the

sovereign.

" This is stoicism in its hardest, least

digestible shape; for it is stoicism, with-

out the pride that makes indifference to

life supportable. The great vicissitudes

of life are usually submitted to the con-

WOMEN. 143

troul of religion ; and whether indiffer-

ence or resignation be administered as

the palliative of its evils, we are satis-


fied ; we willingly reliquish the cure of

complaints, of which we know not the

nature or extent, to any remedy that may

be proposed for their relief. None of us

can prolong human existence beyond its

appointed period, or diminish its physi

cal evils in any great degree, any more

than we can account for the vast prepon-

derance of both physical and moral evil in

life. We, therefore, -readily submit, in the

great questions relating to them, to those

who are appointed, or those who under-

take to direct or console us in the investi-

gation ^>f them.

" Those who feel they have a burthen

-they cannot shake off, will .readily sub-

mit to .any guide who promises an alle-

•viation of its pressure, either by affecting

to render us insensible of its weight, or

144 WOMEN.

by pretending they can shorten the path

through which we must support it.

" But life—life itself, we cannot resign


so easily. We sufier Divines to dictate

to us about futurity, but we choose to dic-

tate to ourselves in life. What a life

would those people have us lead? Their

society is compressed into their own cast;

they have no other standard for excellence,

moral or intellectual, but conformity to

their creed!

" All the virtues, talents, and graces, on

earth, if it were possible to combine them

in one form, (as I have seen them com*

bined,) would appear to them only as a

brilliant victim, arrayed for sacrifice on the

altar of Satan !—When they mix in socie-

ty, they mix only with the view of hear-

ing their sentiments echoed by those who

join in them, or opposed by those who dif-

fer from them. Their only alternative is

monotonous assent, or clamorous hostility.

They have but two notes in their scale,

WOMEN. 145

one of them is unison, the other discord—

no harmony!

" As to literature, it is unfair to speak


of them with reference to it: Since the

Restoration, the Puritanic party have be-

come literary in their own defence. They

have borrowed jewels of silver, and jewels

of gold, of the Egyptians, and spoiled

them, and, like the children of Israel, they

have quite forgotten the obligation. It

would be almost an awful question to ask,

(it would be certainly a question of deep

national interest,) What would have been

the result, had these people the issues of

intellectual life and death in their hands? Is

there one of them that would have escaped ?

History would appear to them a record of

the crimes of unenlightened men—Poetry,

that language of the gods, as the wanton-

ness of a depraved imagination—Science,

as the presumptuous effort of overween-

ing pride. All knowledge, all intellectual

TOL. II. G

146 WOMEN.

cultivation, they would have reckoned as

worse than nothing, and vanity. Like

the Arabian Chief, when he was going


to burn the library of Alexandria, they

would have employed the short dilemma.

" The Koran contains all necessary know-

ledge : If these books contain more than

the Koran, they ought to be burned; if

they contain less, they may;" and so the

most precious relics of antiquity fed the

baths of Alexandria for three months.

" Oh, my dear Delphine! Think of a dy-

nasty of beings, whose whole system would

reverse all that the intellectual power, (the

power of thinking freely, of judging right-

ly, and of assimilating man to the Deity,

in the only point which mortality without

presumption may seize, that of mental en-

largement,) has been slowly doing for ages.

What would these people make of the world ?

Their history would be the experience of

converts and preachers ; in other words,

It,-: -

WOMEN. 14?

ttae vaeciUation of the human mind between

infidelity and madness. Their poetry would

be the obituary tears of an Evangelical Ma-


gazine ; and their science—they would—-

they could have no science, beyond the

use of the plumb-line that enabled them to

measure the walls of their gloomy conven-

ticles, or the clock that summoned them

to their devotions ; and, " told legible their

midnight of despair." As for the arts—-

those persons may look on them as lawful

means for extorting subsistence from the

ungodly; but how would the arts fare, if

the world consisted of persons like them ?

Would not Guido's Aurora, and Raphael's

Cartoons, and Rembrandt's Descent from

the Cross, be all mortgaged this moment,

for the vile wooden-cut of an evangelical

preacher, with his lank hair and Iscariot

visage, as if he were just come from selling

his Lord, not preaching him ? Would not

sculpture, if she pleaded for her life with

Laocoon in one hand, and Niobe in the

148 WOMEN.

other, be rejected for some spruce mo-

nument over the reliques of Dr Coke,

or Dr Huntington ? Literature ; science;


the arts;—all that agitates or embellishes

life,—all that makes human existence su-

perior to that of the beasts that pe-

rish, would be lost, confounded, trampled

on. The world—the world, is called on

to oppose those men, to show the desola-

ting danger of their principles, to—and

De Courcy is to be united to an evangeli-

cal female ! Then he is lost to me for ever!

The malignity inspired by opposite creeds

has been found to exceed in its effects all

that hatred ever yet infused into the heart

of man.

" ZAIRA."

Madame St Maur's answer contained that

mixture of frivolity, worldliness, clear sense,

v

WOMEN. 149

and strong affection, which really formed

her character. There was the usual and

due proportion of philosophical sentiments,


and artificial flowers, and political terrors,

and terrors about a sick lap-dog; but on

one subject she appeared to be quite de-

cided.

In the end of her letter, she says, " It

is impossible that you can longer deceive

yourself. You never deceived me. You

love this man ; love him, in spite of every

thing hostile,—his country, his habits, his

engagements, his being actually on the eve

of marriage ;—in spite of yourself, and your

heroic resolutions about friendship ; resolu-

tions which I have always observed to ter-

minate exactly as yours have done; for it

happens that we never dream of commen-

cing friends, till we have actually taken

our degrees as lovers in the last stage. Then

your tirade against that poor girl and her

religion, which no doubt is bad enough ;

but, for Heaven's sake, can't you suffer her

150 WOMEN.

to go to the devil her own way! Can

any power on earth persuade me, that you

would sit down to study divinity, for the


sake of abusing a set of people, whom you

would care no more about than the Camis-

ards of France; only that you choose to

be in love with a boy whom one of these

yretty puritans has captivated ?

" Ah, my dear! all your apprehensions

•about the fatal results these people with

their strange opinions would produce in

*ociety, have an origin far remote from your

eeal for literature. It was yourself, and

not the world, you felt for, or I would try

to console you, by reminding you that these

people, with all the good they mean to do,

and all the harm they really have done,

never can subvert the frame of society, or

materially alter the tendencies of nature.

" Fear not, my charming Zaire! there

will always be enough to love the world.

It has a fine share of popularity in most

hearts; and to the end of our time at least,

WOMEN. 151

there will be theatres, and balls, and con-

certs, and eclat, and homages, and succes,

and pretty women, and men to admire


them, if all the begging Bonzes of the East

were united with all the mendicant orders

of Europe, and they again backed by the

ghosts of the Rump-parliament, raised from

the dead for the purpose. Do you remem-

ber your admirable Shakspeare ? " Think-

est thou, because thou art virtuous, there

shall be no more cakes and ale ? Yea, by

Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot in the

mouth too!"

- " The farce of fanatic religion is just like

all other farces, only that it is a little duller

for the spectators. There was our Madame

de -, with her gift of infrigldatlon, and

Fenelon, with his quietism, and the won-

der-working Abbe", whose bones caused so

much trouble in Paris that Louis the XV.

was obliged to lay his commands on the

Deity to work no more miracles at his

V

152 WOMEN.

tomb ;* and all these people just served to

make one laugh, when one was tired of

Carlini.


" And now, my dear Zaire, that I have

removed your apprehensions about the

world being turned upside down by these

moral Arehimedes's, have the goodness to

remove mine (if you can) about yourself.

" All my levity forsakes me when I think

of your situation; when I think you are on

the point of sacrificing your talents, your

distinction, your long-acquired and high-

sustained fame, for an attachment to a

stranger, a boy, an acquaintance of yester-

day, the native of a country that scarce has

a place in history. Impose no longer on

yourself; what you feel for him bears no

resemblance to friendship. And an Irish-

man ! is it possible that his talents can have

* De par le Roy, defense a Dieu .

De faire miracle en ce lieu.

V-

WOMEN. 153

received so much cultivation ; his manners

so much refinement; his mind so much

maturity, as to compensate the most intel-


lectual woman in Europe, for the sacrifice

she is about to make for him ?

" Do not misunderstand me, Zaire. By

sacrifice, I mean nothing but marriage; but

your marriage will be the greatest of all

sacrifices. Let him marry his pretty de-

votee, if he will, and convert her, if he can,

or be converted by her; and do you soar

aloft into those regions you were formed

for, and leave those tame fowl to bill and

brood till they are tired of it, which they

probably will be in a quarter of a year. If

I was speaking of a French pair, I should

say, in a quarter of an hour.

" Waken, waken, my charming Zaire,

from your dream! it is but a dream ; or

sleep on and perish, as the botanists did in

their tour of exploration on the coasts of

New Holland.

" DELPHINE ST

G3

154 WOMEN.

It was not till after many days that Zai-

ra's answer to this letter was written: Part

of it shewed the state of her mind.


" You have discovered to me the state

of my own heart—a woman can never es-

cape the penetration of a woman. I love

him then—a thousand circumstances con-

tributed to conceal from me, not only the

state of my heart, but the knowledge of

it. My early years were past in the slave-

ry of unremitting application, or the ex-

citement of premature ambition.

" That / could have loved, was certain ;

but my fatal, miserable marriage ! The de-

gradation, the physical sufferings, and the

necessity of constant public exertion, and

laborious preparation for that exertion

which followed, kept me in a state of in-

sensibility to any thing but the success of

the night, and the hope of obtaining a re-

10

WOMEN. 155

mission of my toils from the heartless

wretch who watched the applauses bestow-

ed on me as indications of his profit, and


sunk or raised the scale of his indulgence

in the same proportion. I was too mi-

serable to think of love, even had my feel-

ings inclined to levity, which they never

did. My sufferings, or my constitution,

served me in the place of those lessons of

virtue which I had never received, but

which I never transgressed. Perhaps the

contrast between my forced, brilliant ap-

pearance on the stage, where I was compel-

led for ever to sing and declaim about love ;

and the total absence of that feeling from

my heart and my experience, impressed

me with a degree of incredulity about the

feeling itself. One image alone remained

at the bottom of my heart—the image of

my child. After a day of laborious appli-

cation, and a night of theatrical exhibition,

how have I retired to weep over that

image, as if it was the corse of iny child

156 WOMEN.

I wept over, and pressed to my cold

heart!

" That hope has ceased—all hope of na-


tural objects filling up my existence ha&

ceased for ever!—What wonder, then, in

this isolation of feeling, this orphanship of

the heart, I should adopt any object that

promised to fill its desolate vacuity! Igno-

rant as I was of the very nature of love,

what wonder that I recognised the feeling

that invaded me under any other name !

I am all candour with you, my dear Del-

phine ! My ignorance of love was certain-

ly wilful. From the time I attained my

present distinction, I was surrounded, op-

pressed by admirers. But none of them

loved me; there was not one of them I

could have loved. They were all selfish,

sensual, ignorant, or depraved ! They court-

ed my notoriety, not me;—they coveted

the distinction my talents could have be-

stowed on them ;—they sought not to con-

WOMEN. 157

fer that distinction on me, which every wo-

man expects from the virtues or the genius

of the man whom she prefers.


" You can bear witness, my dear Del-

phine, to the indifference with which I

listened to those men, and the ease with

which I dismissed them.—Living in the

world as I did, what could I know of love!

Life may instruct us in its artificial modi-

fications, but never did it teach us the

knowledge of the most elementary feel-

ings; or assist us to develope those reces-

ses of the heart, which it is its daily lesson

to conceal. Life may teach us the know-

ledge of others, but never can instruct us

in the knowledge of ourselves.

" Thus ignorant, profoundly ignorant, of

the mysteries of the heart, while all ima-

gined I was mistress of its operations, be-

cause I could represent their external ex-

pressions, and because my physical powers

158 WOMEN.

were supposed to harmonize with that ex-

pression, I mingled in life, and learned the

danger of inexperience, when it was too


late to profit by the lesson.

" I was attracted by a form, of which it

is in vain to banish from my feelings the

power or the charm; and I believed I could

gaze on it, as I have gazed on a statue. I

have lived only in the presence of that be-

ing ; and I called the feeling with which

his presence inspired me—friendship! I

have mingled in society, and recalled his

image, to enable me to support it: I have

retired to solitude, and retraced his image,

to make solitude delightful: I have hung

on the words he uttered : I have recount-

ed the most trifling change of his mo-

tions : I have made a diary of the heart,

of every look, and word, and thought, (for

I have seen his thoughts:) I have fed on the

light of his eye : I have lived on the air he

breathed, and lived only on that air; and

still I called this—friendship !

WOMEN. 1,59

" Your worldly wisdom, my dear Del-

phine! and my increasing terror of the

feelings, which, new to me, derived in-


creasing terror from their novelty, have

undeceived me. It is not friendship—it

cannot be love. Whatever it be, I re-

nounce it. I may be unhappy, but never

will be ungenerous. He is engaged, de-

voted, sacrificed—be it so—I resign him

for ever—On this paper, blotted, bathed

with my tears, I renounce him for ever I—-

His beautiful wife shall not have to re-

proach me with a sigh—she deserves him,

no doubt—Why did I feel such agitation

when I heard of this marriage ?—what

was his marriage to me ?—Why did I feel

that agitation redoubled, when I heard he

was to marry an evangelical female ?—-what

was her religion to me ?—Oh! how my

heart reproaches, and yet consoles me !

160 WOMEN.

" I have mentally compared my cha-

racter with hers. Must I not be suffi-

ciently humbled, when I make this com-


parison ? Alas! Intellectual women do not

always make the impression they wish

on men. They do too much or too lit-

tle ; which has been my crime, I know

not; nor is it of any consequence note.

I forgot that this letter was written to con-

tain my renunciation of him for ever."

In her answer, Madame St Maur confirm-

ed Zaira in her resolution of abandoning Ire-

land and De Courcy for ever; but her ex-

hortations were almost illegible, from the

terrors under which they were written.

The allies were at Paris, in Paris, before

her letter was finished ; and poor Madame

St Maur, instead of seeing Marshal Blu-

cher at her feet, seems to have been appre-

hensive that those pretty feet would soon

have to bear her to a prison. She had been

a zealous Buonapartiste from fashion, en-

WOMEN. 161

thusiasm, from any thing but steady prin-

ciple. After giving her advice, her terrors

break out.


" Mon dieu!—The allies are absolutely

within a few leagues of Paris. The Empe-

ror's beating a few stragglers at St Di-

ziers, is mere fanfaronade. I begin not to

like this Buonaparte. How could he ex-

pose the Parisians to the horrors of an as-

sault. Shocking inconsideration ! I am

stunned by the temble, real tumult in the

streets. Ah, how. long is it since we have

had any thing real in Paris ! Realities do

not suit the sublime mercurialized genius

of the Parisians. What horrors surround

us ! I know not how man jolt chat will

escape. They say those Cossacks eat cats!

Horrible, I will rather perish first.

162 WOMEJf.

" Ah, my beautiful Zaire, the artillery

of the allies is sending its thunders from

the heights of Montmartre. What an event!


How astonishing! What a disgrace to the

history of civilised nations ! Paris, the me-

tropolis of the world, invested by hostile

forces! Paris, that like Sparta, never saw

the smoke of an enemy's camp ! After this,

the sacking of Rome by pagan Goths, or

by catholic Imperialists in the time of Cle-

ment, may be read with very little emotion.

All my feelings are suspended by my con-

centrated indignation. Paris invested !—

but it is impossible it can ever be taken. I

will fly and read all the histories extant, to

try if such an event ever took place since

the times of the League. I have some

faint recollections of the Duchess De Mont-

pensler's bread. I confess I shoidd not like

to eat it. No, on second thoughts, I will

fly and get a bunch of lilies, the largest

that loyalty can make or imagine, to put

WOMEN. 163

in my bat. Ah, my God ! what will be-

come of my cat if the Cossacks eat him ?

I think I will mix a few Provence roses


among the lilies. Roses always became

me."

Such was Madame St Maur's agitation,

that she forgot to send off her letter for

some days ; those days made a wonderful

alteration in her feelings, or rather her opi-

nions. Delighted with the change that had

taken place, just as a child would be for the

accompanying spectacle, she forgets that

she began her letter a Buonapartiste, and

ends an absolute Ultra. She speaks with

fluent rapture of le vieux bon tempt, and

Louis le Desirb. She takes some slight of-

fence, indeed, at the Duchesse d'Angou-

leme's petit chapeau, but recovers her good

humour, and eloquently describes the splen-

dour of a ball at Paris, where she was ac-

tually turned by the Emperor of Russia as


164 WOMEN.

he was dancing down with Lady Castle-

reagh. This turn seems happily to have

completed her conversion.

WOMEN. 16$

CHAPTER IV.

Bistutbers of tl>' indignant earth,

That shakes ye from her bosom forth,


And thou, fell author of this day,

Where art thou now, and where are they ?

SHEE'S Waterloo.

IT was all true; the allies were indeed

at Paris. That had actually come to pass,

which, if any man had predicted two years

before, when Buonaparte was setting out

to change the dynasty of Russia, he would

have been regarded as actually mad. In

Dublin, where parties run high, the sensa-

tion caused by this intelligence was beyond

all description, all imagination. The allies

themselves landing in the bay of Dublin

could not have made a greater bustle. It

was no stock-jobbing report; no bulletin

166 WOMEN.

fabricated in the cabinet of a minister; it

was all stubborn, homely, undeniable fact.

The allies were in Paris repaying the friend-


ly visits they had received from Buonaparte

at Vienna, Berlin, and Moscow. Nothing

ever was like the tumult in Dublin that

day, and many a following one.

The statue of King William, in College

Green, was placarded from top to bottom,

the characters on the papers large enough to

be read rom St Andrew's Church, or even

from the Post-Office. As to the Post-Of-

fice, there was no getting near it,—news-

hawkers and news-readers seemed to have

a lease for ever of its steps. The whole po-

pulation of Dublin appeared concentrated

in College Green. Carriages stopping by

dozens before the placards,—horsemen ri-

sing on tiptoe in their stirrups above the

heads of the crowd, to read them,—and the

crowd, wedged head to head, and foot to

foot, planted by hundreds and by thousands,

gazing, devouring with mouths, eyes, and

S

/

WOMEN. 1<J7

ears all that could be heard, seen, or swal-

lowed.

Happy those who could read, and happy


even those who could only get others to

read to them, the grand talismanic words of

—" Entrance of the Allies into Paris-

Overthrow of the Buonaparte Dynasty—

Restoration of the Bourbons"—all exclusive

intelligence that day received. Then the

shops where the papers were sold,—they

could not have been more beset had the

salvation of mankind depended on the

working of the press. There were the

hawkers flapping the damp reeking papers

in every body's eyes, and getting them

snatched out of their hands faster than

they could disentangle their wet clinging

sheets. The government papers, how they

triumphed—as well they might. " Our wise

and virtuous administration"—" our perse-

verance in a just and necessary war"—" its

glorious termination"—" the sublime atti-

tude of Great Britain, prescribing and contro-

168 WOMEN.

ling the destinies of all Europe." The oppo-

sition papers,—what had they to say now ?

Nothing,—not a word; as Cobbett himself


said,—" The Gazette was their answer."

They muttered something about future

fears and evils, and hoped all would be

well; but who minded their mutterings or

their hopes ? The Dublin Evening Post it-

self was reduced to silence; the very paper

which three days before had placarded the

statue with the " Defeat and Distraction

of the Allies,"* now was compelled to an-

nounce the success of the men they had

abused, and the measures they had de-

cried, with that kind of grim extorted ac-

quiescence with which Hainan attended

the triumph of Mordecai the Jew through

the streets of Susa.

Every man who came down from the

Castle of Dublin that day, from the smart

Fact.

WOMEN. 169

aid-de-camp to the lowest clerk in office,

looked six inches taller, and trod the pave-

ment of Dame-Street, firm, erect, graceful,


and triumphant. The demand for white

lilies, and high French bonnets, rose every

moment; the lilies were twined in the

locks of every belle, and worn in the straw-

hats of apprentices.

The general sentiment was certainly that

of joy. The appalling, supernatural great-

ness of Buonaparte had terrified even those

who wished him well, and men seemed

relieved, as from the spell of an enchanter.

His very well-wishers were glad he was

checked ; cJiecJeed only, as they hoped, not

overthrown. The violet blossomed again

in their imaginations ; they did not foresee

its final blast at Waterloo.

It was a pleasant sight to witness the

strong expression of loyal rational joy that

occurred in every street; men shook hands

with each other ; congratulations passed as

VOL. II. H

170 WOMEN.

eagerly, as if every one had gained a law-

suit, or succeeded to a property. Military

bands came thundering down the streets,


all playing the " Downfall of Paris." There

was a kind of national jubilee.

De Courcy had dined in the country

that day, and was stunned, deafened by all

he heard. His head and heart were full of

other objects, aristocratic as he was. He

hurried back to Dublin, and was met by

the intelligence that Madame Dalmatian!,

who had declined so long appearing on the

stage, was to appear that night in a short

scena, and join in an appropriate chorus.

Zaira had got from Pucitta a manuscript

copy of the chorus he had composed for the

occasion, " Esulta Britannia, di Wellington

Madre;" and bad as it was, (perhaps the

worst he had ever composed, and not at all

aided by the poetry), she had been impor-

tuned by peers to embellish this national fete

by her talents. Her spirits were elated by

the idea: to appear thus in the wake of kings

9

WOMEN. 171

and conquerors, hymning forth their vic-

tories, was congenial to her taste, and

to her talents; perhaps she wished also


to leave an impression on De Courcy of

what her talents might effect, when sup-

ported by an enthusiasm which she really

felt, and in which nations were the sharers.

When she consented to appear once more

on the stage, she hoped he might be in the

house. There was nothing strained or ex-

aggerated in this; she was an inveterate

royalist, as far as her political feelings were

concerned, and other feelings prompted her

to this last effort. It was on the stage he

had first beheld her, and she felt a justifi-

able anxiety to revive this impression, and

set in glory on his imagination.

Even when we are determined on final

separation, we wish its last moments to re-

flect the light of our first meeting; and this

feeling, inseparable from passion, is perhaps

aggravated by the consciousness of genius,

172 WOMEN.

which maintains its prerogative with jea-

lously, even amid the most lavish sacrifices.

Zaira could have borne to be the slave of


the man she loved; but she never could

have borne, that he should be ignorant how

much she was devoted to him.

With a kind of anguished and indignant

feeling she rushed on the stage this night,

determined to exhibit all her talents and

charms in full forcible contrast to the insi-

pid being, and monotonous life he had cho-

sen ; and, resolved to lose him, she was re-

solved also to show him what he had lost

in her. This may be forgiven her; she

believed it the last weakness She would be

guilty of.

The house was crowded from pigeon-hole

to pit. De Courcy could not get a seat.; a

place in which he could see from top to bot-

tom of the theatre. The heat was intoler-

able ; the applause tremendous. By dint of

interest he at length succeeded in screwing

himself into a place in the orchestra; (he

WOMEN. 173

was fortunately known to one of the pro-

prietors). He waited, gasped, panted ; at

last Zaira appeared,—appeared in all her


glory ; in all her beauty ;—thunders of ap-

plause. She moved—a perfect silence, bro-

ken only by some slight murmurs from the

half-suffocated patients in the pit. She

raised her white graceful arm—the suffer-

ers were dumb. Those who had fretted

and cursed, stewed and swore, for two in-

tolerable hours, were dumb in a moment;

those who had been raised on others' backs

sought to rise no higher, (for the first time

that night); and those who bore them were

contented with their burthen.

She sung—and all forgot what they had

suffered. The first bars in that insipid cho-

rus she sung, as a solo, with such spirit—

such expression, bordering on inspiration—

she appeared so much the embodied genius

of the moment; her arms extended as if

they were catching theHeaven-wove wreath

WOMEN.

to crown the head of the conqueror; her

features flushed with the loftiest expression

that can animate the human countenance;


(the consciousness of becoming an agent in

great events, by the power of sympathizing

with, or attesting them by the force of ge-

nius ;) her voice, like the trumpet of vic-

tory, its thrilling swell, its rich vibrations,

filling every ear and heart.—Such as she

was that moment; her talents excited by

dramatic applause, and national enthusiasm,

and an indignant consciousness that exalted

her pride, while it depressed her hope, and

combined the melancholy of sensibility with

the energy of genius—who could behold

her unmoved ?

All imagined that her extraordinary ex-

ertions were owing to the occasion. Her

appearance was gratuitous, and the emer-

gency, unparalleled in the history of Eu-

rope, seemed to have produced a corre-

sponding exertion of her unequalled talents.

WOMEN. 175

But in judging of the conduct of public

people, whether on the stage of politics, or

of the theatre, how often we look far and


wide for the motives that influence ! The

crowded theatre saw nothing but Zaira;

Zaira, in the crowded theatre, saw nothing

but De Courcy.

An old gentleman in the pit whispered

to his friend the well-known story of Ga-

brielli, who never exerted herself on the

stage, unless her lover was placed in a con-

spicuous situation near it; and he added,

that the audience to-night were indebted

to the same arrangement, for the extraor-

dinary display of Madame Dalmatiani's

talents. His friend's head was inclined to-

ward him to catch the intelligence. All

heads were quickly bent round in the ea-

gerness of attention. The old gentleman

got proud of dividing the attention of the-

bystanders with Zaira, and he whispered,

" I know it all; I heard it all from good

176 WOMEN.

authority; look at that tall lad in the or-

chestra."

They looked, and lo! they fixed on a


bassoon-player.

" Pho !" said the old gentleman ; " no-,

not that; that young man has sandy hair

and light eyes; but look at that tall lad

with the dark curled hair, and the dark eyes.

Well, I am credibly informed—mark him

now—he i& bowing towards Lady Long-

wood's box—that he is a lover of Madame

Dalmatiani's—a great pity—fine property

—and to marry an actress !"

Every word the old gentleman uttered

in confidence to about fifty listeners, was re-'

peated so rapidly, so audibly, that it reach-

ed De Courcy's ears sooner than the ears

that were all on the stretch to catch it. He

turned—" That is he; that must be he,"

murmured the initiated ; " see how he co-

lours !"

De Courcy cast one indignant look to-

WOMEN. 177

wards the murmurers ; " and to marry an

actress," rung again in his ears. He felt op-

pressed from every cause that could over-


come the body or mind; the intolerable

Heat, the whispers, his conspicuous situation,

and the notoriety evidently attendant on it.

He rushed out of the orchestra—a thousand

feelings were swelling and burning in his

bosom. The publicity of Zaira's situation,

—her evident exultation at it,—the very

applauses which she received, stung him

to the soul. He was jealous of that love

of fame and distinction inseparable from

her character, her talents, and her profes-

sion . (Profession! degrading, hateful word;)

he feared that it left room for no other love.

He was dazzled at her superiority, that

seemed to place him at an infinite distance.

What interest could he hope to inspire in

a being who seemed formed to live amid

theatres and fetes, and pomp and palaces ?

whose talents seemed destined to exalt the

magnificent, to embellish the beautiful, to

H2

178 WOMEN.

irradiate the bright, and refine the volup-

tuous,—" to gild refined gold, to paint the

lily," and remove the crumpled rose-leaf


from the couch of the Sybarite.

He contrasted her brilliant form, as it

appeared a few moments before, concen-

trating on itself the gaze and acclamation

of a theatre, with his own, a solitary spec-

tator, whose applause must have been like

the tribute of a single wave amid the mur-

murs of the ocean. All society must have

appeared to her compressed into an indivi-

dual character, whose single feeling was de-

light, and whose sole language was acclama-

tion ; could she stoop to discriminate and

individualize him among the mass ?—Im-

possible. With a whirling brain and agi-

tated heart, he rushed on; the triumphant

phantom seeming to pursue and torture

him with its brightness. He paused from

weariness ; he gazed on the beauty of the

sky; (that sky to which we always invo-

luntarily look in suffering) the dark beauty

WOMEN. 179

of a fine vernal night; its pure stars and

cool breezes seemed to utter a kind of silent

reproach to the artificial luxuriance and


oppressive splendour of a theatre.

" Oh, Zaira, are you then a woman who

can resign the seductive intoxications of

public homage; the applause, the crowds,

that would overset the mind of man, for the

enjoyment of such a scene as this in the

presence of your lover alone ? Can you

resign that dramatic existence, where you

are too lovely, too powerful; where you

* blast with excess of light,' for the melody

of the air, the murmurs of night, and the

voice of your lover ? Can you feel what I

feel this moment, that from your presence-

a world could not abstract me, and for

your presence the world could not console

me ? Oh, no! I might as well ' love a

bright particular star,' and imagine it would

descend from its sphere, and confine its light

to me alone, as dream of filling the heart

of Zaira."

180 WOMEN.

As he spoke, a strain of music, faint, low,

and solemn, (far different from the notes to

which he had just been listening) rose on


his ear—human voices were heard mixed

with the sound of an organ. He looked,

and saw he was near a large building with

lights in the windows ; he had wandered

till he found himself in York-Street, near

the Evangelical Meeting-house, which Eva

and her family often visited. He remem-

bered her having told him that she was to

be there that evening to assist at the re-

hearsal of some sacred music which was to

be performed the following day, accompa-

nied by a sermon for the relief of the wi-

dows and children of those who fell at ——.

****

Thus the same sentiments led Zaira to the

theatre, and Eva to the place of worship.

They were both exercising their talents for

the purpose of benevolence ; but this unity

of object was the only thing in which they

agreed. Which of them was best employ-

ed ? Or was not habit the only difference

WOMEN. 181

between them ? Charles could not answer

these questions, but his.feelingswere touch-

ed by the contrast-


He entered the meeting-house; the con-

gregation had dispersed (all but the private

singers, who remained to practise;) the

lights, too, except a very few near the or-

gan, where the singers stood, were all ex-

tinguished, so that the building was very

dark. Round the organ there was a stron

blaze of light, stronger from the contrast;

Charles could see all the figures distinctly;

though quite invisible to them from the

darkness that filled the body of the chapel;

They sung some hymns, and their solemn

quiet harmony, without applause,the echoes^

dying through the empty aisles, soothed

and solemnized him. It was like a fine

twilight after a burning day.

De Courcy felt as if his musical percep-

tions and his sensibility of nature were de-

lightfully mingled. He felt this music to

be like M the pleasant time, the cool, the si-

4

182 WOMEN.

lent." The music suddenly changed; they

sung the Hallelujah chorus from the Mes-

siah. The solemnity of the well-selected


words,—the sublimity »f the harmony,—

the awful repetition of the sounds, " for

ever and ever—Hallelujah! Hallelujah!"

forcing the idea of eternity on the mind by

their endless recurrence, thrilled through

De Courcy's heart. And when the sweet

and powerful voice of Eva, sustaining the

upper part, dwelt on the ascending notes,

repeating, " King of Kings, and Lord of

Lords ;" while all the other parts continued

the ceaseless, solemn iteration, " for ever,

and ever," De Courcy felt as if he listened

to the songs of angels.

There was nothing round him to disturb

or divide the impression on his senses or

his mind ;—no crowds, no bravo's, no glare

of lights, no stifling, and yet intoxicating

heat. He was alone almost in darkness,

and the figures so far above him, the light

felling on them alone, and the unearthly

WOMEN. 18S

music, exalted him for some moments be-

yond himself. He saw Eva separated from

him high in a region of light and harmony,


uttering in these awful words a last fare-

well, and returning to that God from whom

her rash and unhappy love had divided her

for a season.

" Am I then losing her?" he exclaimed,

with horror.

" For ever and ever," repeated the voi-

ces,—" For ever and ever /"

The lights swam before his eyes. He

retired to a remoter part of the chapel, and,

kneeling on the 'ground, prayed to Al-

mighty God, to enlighten his understand-

ing, and to touch his heart; and enable

him, in this awful crisis of his life, to re-

fuse the evil, and choose the good. Alas !

he did not know, that when we implore

God to search our hearts, it is because we

dread to search them ourselves. He pray-

ed fervently, indeed, and wept; but when

we make our imagination the interpreter

184 WOMEN.

between the Deity and us, its oracles are

not always infallible. He prayed that hisr

passions might be subdued; but perhaps,


like St Aiiorustine, he wished that his-

prayers might not be heard too soon.

WOMEN. 185

CHAPTER V.

They say she's fair and glorious; woe is me,

I am but formed as simple maidens are.


Miss BAJCLLIE.

SIR RICHARD LONG WOOD, some years

before this, had borrowed six thousand

pounds from Mr Wentworth, for which

he paid ten per cent, in the way of annui-

ty. He had sustained some losses from his

tenants lately, and found the payment of

this six hundred pounds a-year very trouble-

some. He represented this to Mr Went-

worth, who, perhaps, proud of obliging a

man of rank, or conscience-touched by

some plain passages in the Scripture about

usury, consented to take the usual inte-

rest for the money, instead of the ten per

cent.

186 WOMEN.

Sir Richard breakfasted the next morn-

ing at Wentworth's, to settle the busi-

ness, and sign the writings for this new ar-


rangement. Sir Richard was in high spi-

rits, and very anxious to show his grati-

tude at the least possible expence, by a

marked attention to Mrs Wentworth and

Eva, and by making a parade of how hap-

py it would make Lady Longwood and

her daughters, to show every attention, &e.

&c.; and that Lady Longwood proposed

herself the honour of waiting on Mrs Went-

worth ; and this poor embarrassed man, who

was borrowing money from the family,

thought he could dazzle them by the dis-

play of the splendour of his rank, and his

wife's parties.

Eva was silent—Mrs Wentworth bowed.

Then Sir Richard, who thought that when

females were present the conversation must

always be a trickle of common-places on

public amusements, began with the theatre

incontinently—" They had heard Madame

WOMEN. 187

Dalmatiani, no doubt."—" No !"—astonish-

ed—" Never go to the theatre? not even to

hear Madame Dalmatiani ?—Oh! they must


go ; Lady Longwood would take them in

her carriage—they must go some night with

her."

No ! even the irresistible carriage, and

the tempting patronage of Lady Long.

wood, were unavailing. Mrs Wentworth

never went to the theatre !

Astonished again ; as much as a po-

lite man could be. " But then they would

like to meet her in private. She was quite

an intimate of theirs ; with them constant-

ly ; so charming, such a beautiful, talented

creature; they must meet her, and Lady

Longwood would be so happy."

Every sentence begun and ended with

this phrase, as if Lady Longwood's whole

hopes of happiness in this world and the

next were dependent on her forming an

intimacy with plain, retired Mrs Went-

worth. " She is peculiarly interesting just

188 WOMEN.

now; said to be forming an attachment;

but I never can believe her to be such a

fool; a woman of her sense, and of her


fortune."

Eva now began to make so many mis-

takes in the management of the breakfast-

table, that Mrs Wentworth was obliged to

take it into her own hands, and fixing her

calm, steady eye on Sir Richard, she tried

to draw his attention from her niece. " Her

wealth is unquestionable," said Mrs Went-

worth, forcing herself to join in the con-

versation ; " but a woman of genius is not

always a woman of sense."

" Admirably observed. A little more

eream, if you please. I give you great cre-

dit for that remark. It would neither be

for the honour of her genius or her sense,

if she suffered herself to be ensnared by a

boy like De Courcy; a dissipated, idle,

wild young fellow, with nothing upon

earth to recommend him but his fine figure,

and a pair of black eyes; and he was to be

WOMEN. 189

married as soon as he came of age to a Me-

thodist lady, I heard. The poor Metho-

dist would have a heavy weight of him on


her hands or her conscience."

Eva's agitation became very great; but

Sir Richard, quite pleased with himself

and his conversational talents, and small-

talk fluency, went on triumphantly. He

really knew nothing of De Courcy's cha-

racter and talents, but he remembered

that the speculation to .get him to mar-

ry one of his daughters had failed; and

he was therefore willing to abuse him.

Taking breath, he turned to Eva, and press-

ed her to accept of a ticket, and a seat in

Lady Longwood's box for that evening;

the last evening of Madame Dalmatiani's

performance; the last, last opportunity you

will ever have of seeing her in Ireland, said

Sir Richard, with energy he deemed irre-

sistible. He was surprised at Eva's cold,

declining bow ; he thought her a fool; and,

turning to Mr Wentworth, he went on in

190 WOMEN.

a whispering, confidential tone;—" AH the

women spoiling him—sets up for an Ado-

nis—quite too effeminate for a handsome


man—so dissipated, racking out his grey-

hound-figure and baby-constitution in eve-

ry excess—die of old age, before he comes

of age—so volatile—Now, all for books ;

now for billiards ; now for blue-stockings;

now for black-legs—Ha, ha! you under-

stand me ?"

" I don't understand one word of it,"

said Mr Wentworth.

" Hey, well! you understand this : The

gross absurdity of his falling in love with a

Methodist at eighteen, and then turning

out in i^m the lover of an actress, and lea-

ving the poor Methodist to trim her black-

bonnet with willow, or die to the tune of

one of Wesley's hymns."

Eva got up and left the room. Sir

Richard felt an awkward indefinable con-

sciousness of some meprise ; he knew not

what it was, but he resolved to try another

WOMEN. 191

subject directly. " Sorry to see Miss Went-

worth looking so ill; quite altered since he

had the pleasure of seeing her/' This was

pathy.


said in a fine tone of sentiment and sym-

Mrs Wentworth, always for the truth,

above all shuffling mysteries and delicate

embarrassments, and neither knowing or

caring whether Sir Richard's allusions were

those of malice or ignorance, quietly said,

" Mr De Courcy had proposed for her

niece, and any reports, unfounded as they

might be, were—must be very distressing

to her." Sir Richard tacked instantly, with

all the ability of a skilful navigator.

" He was sorry—sorry from his vfcjfy soul.

He did not know a worthier, finer young

fellow than de Courcy. All that he had

said was merely just as one talks—heard it

from Lady Long"—(he checked) " from

somebody he did not know who—mere

tattle—all a falsehood, no doubt. A fine

young man—a fine property. I wish,"

192 WOMEN".

(the wish rising to Sir Richard's 4ips, he

wisely kept to himself, and he added, in

his best tone^)—" and I am sure, if he is a


little wild, Miss Wentworth's merit and

beauty will make quite a conrert of him."

And Sir Richard bowed with that graceful,

courtly inclination which made so often a

fine ineffectual^ figure at the levees of the

lord-lieutenant.

Mrs Wentworth's contempt for this

weak, worldly man, was increasing beyond

her power of suppressing it, except by si-

lence. Mr Wentworth was all the while

preparing for a speech pour I'occasion. His

mouth opened and shut with various con-

tortions ; at last he got out,—" Mr De

Courcy proposed for my niece, but he has

had an awful fall."

" A fall!"—exclaimed Sir Richard,—

" Good God, you alarm me. Where—

—when ?—I never heard of this. Was he

materially injured ?"

" Mortally," said Mr Wentworth, with

WOMEN. 193

unshaken gravity; " it was a fall from

grace."

" Oh," said the Baronet, recovering him-


self with a vacant laugh,—" Is that all ?-—

he may retrieve that; at all events, he has

not fallen from the good graces of the la

dies."

A rap at the door. Sir Richard's man-

of-business bowing at the half-opened door

with a bundle of parchments depending

low. Mrs Wentworth knew the signal,

and retired, not before she was overwhelm-

ed by the Baronet's apologies, assurances

(needles? assurances) that he had spoken

witho r t thouglit; regrets, (quite sincere,)

that he had committed himself, and entrea-

ties that she would make his peace with

her charming interesting niece. . .

" Now to business, Sir Richard, if you

please," said Went worth's peremptory voice.

His wife took the hint, and closed the

door. She enquired for Eva. Miss Went-

worth had gone out; she had gone out in

VOL. II. I

194 WOMEN.

the hope of forcing her mind from painful

thoughts by an application to her habitual

duties, yet she was beginning to experience


every day the power of feeling over habit.

One of her old pensioners she had lately

lodged in a room in Capel-Street, and vi-

sited her every day to read the Bible, and

listen to a long detail of her rheumatism ;

but never had she moved so slowly, or

felt so reluctantly, as she did this day go-

ing on her usual visit. As she arrived

at the door, she felt in the silk bag on her

arm (which she never called a ridicule) for

the small pocket-Bible which she always

carried in these visits, and it struck her

that, for the first time, she had omitted to

double down the passages which she con-

ceived most applicable to the situation of

the poor sufferer. She was embarrassed,

and more so when, on turning over the

pages, the texts seemed to wander before

her in a kind of melancholy confusion.

Was this the book which she ^ had studied

WOMEN. 195

day and night, and of which she was now

unable to turn over the pages, and know

one from the other ?


She felt ashamed of this confusion, and

as she sought out in vain the passages

•which she had hoped to press on the feel-

ings of her pensioner, she trembled to think

that she might search thus in vain for to-

pics of direction or consolation when she

needed them, and that need might be near.

"James," said she to the servant who had

attended her, " you need not wait; my

aunt will call for me here ;" and she went

to the room she had hired for this poor wo-

man.

It was a singular sight to see so young,

so very young, so beautiful a creature, as-

cending the miserable, stairs up to the very

garret, to visit an old, sick, querulous, un-

grateful woman. Yes, ungrateful;—for,

alas ! not always is charity repaid by grati-

tude, or religious influence, though enfor-

ced by all the beauty of youthful eloquence,

196 WOMEN.

successful. Eva entered; we must give

the dialogue verbatim.

" How do you find yourself to-day, Mrs


Morton ?" said a voice that might have in-

spired health and joy, like Magdalen's

among the City of the Plague.

" Augh !" (the unsatisfactory Irish augh,

that implies a thousand complaints, dissatis-

factions, and miseries, without expressing

one) " augh ! bad enough, miss."

" I am glad to see your room so neat and

comfortable, and that you have arranged

the little furniture I sent you so tidily."

" Yes, miss, the girl put up them little

things; but I had rather see the bit of

green before the door of the poor place you

took me from, than that box and chairs."

" Well, but the place I took you from

was three inches thick of mud on the floor;

you remember you told me your rheuma-

tic pains were brought on by living in that

damp wretched place."

" Yes, miss; Oh, God bless you!—you

WOMEN. 197

were very good; but I was asy there, some-

how."

" I have sent these myrtles to you, and


had them put into your window to console

you for the green bit; you know it was

merely a puddle in winter, and you used

to complain how the children annoyed you

by tearing up the clods and stuffing them

into the holes of your windows."

" Oh yes, Miss, but then—Augh, the

children were a comfort to me any how."

Eva knew not what to say next; but she

reverted to the cleanliness of the room, and

the spotless whiteness of the boards.

" Oh yes, Miss; the girl you sent was

washing them this morning, and my pains

are much worse since—Augh, God help

me, and it does not do for one like me to

be kept over clane, Miss, this way."

Eva was not discouraged; religion had

taught her more " than was dreamt of in

pliilosophy;" she was accustomed to bear

with every weakness, physical and mental,

198 WOMEN.

and as the sum of all her consolation, she

asked the old woman if she should read

her a chapter of the Bible ?


" Oh yes, Honey, but don't let them be

long."

Eva paused.

" No offence dear, I hope; only I'm

old."

"Oh no, no," said Eva, her countenance

brightening into angelic lustre—" old or

young, you know we all are mortal, ail

hastening to an immortal state—time is-has-

tening from us—eternity is approaching—-

let us try to prepare for it—we are all sin-

ners, all sufferers"

The old woman sat upright, bolt upright,

in her bed with astonishment. " Sinners !"

she repeated—" Oh yes, that we are, all of

us ! But sufferers ? Oh, Miss Honey,

how can you talk of suffering ? Have you

ever had sorrow, and sickness, and want,

and the loss of husbandj and child, and

grandchild ?"—she pursued, reckoning each

WOMEN. 199

separate loss on her bony, withered, out-

spread fingers—" and the rheumatism be-

side ?" added the old woman, sinking back


on her bed—yet raising one warning hand,

" Oh, how can you talk of suffering ?"

Eva burst into tears ; then she collected

her voice, and said, as calmly as she could,

'* If I have not yet known it, it is very pos-

sible I soon may."

She then prevailed- on this poor unfeel-

ing old creature to suffer her to read the

Bible to her; and, while thus employed,

her youthful, almost infantine loveliness,

the touching tones of her voice, to which

sorrow had already given its premature and

peculiar modulation ; the chaste and feeling

solemnity in her manner; the mild and

anxious expression of her bright blue eyes,

as she softly raised them to watch the effect

of those words on the hearer's heart, which

fell on her own like drops of balm ;—all con-

trasted strongly with the selfishness, queru-

lousness, and heartlessness of the old invalid.

200 WOMEN.

Her harsh, wrinkled features, in which no

expression but that of physical pain could be

traced, her vacant, yet wandering eye, fixed


on Eva's from time to time as if in forced

attention ; then rambling round the room

as if she wanted something, but would not

tell what, her weak, restless, ghastly look,

her evident destitution of all religious feel-

ing, and forced attempt to submit to its

forms for the time, contrasted with the look

of Eva, would have made a subject for a

painter: it seemed like the young Angel of

the Reformation struggling with the host-

tile, repugnant, obstinate spirit of the an-

cient superstition.

Her task ended, (and Eva, sighing as she

rose from her knees, felt it was a task,} she

retired. With what different feelings they

parted! The old invalid wondering at Eva's

insensibility to the blessings of youth and

health, and Eva feeling how these blessings

might be withered by that blight of the

heart, which made youth and health already

fade in her sight.

WOMEN. 201

She descended the narrow stairs with a

sigh. She had not felt that comfort in her

religious exercises which she had been ac-


customed to. She had knelt by many such

beds, and, though she had not always given

consolation, she had always felt it. Like

Saul, in seeking after asses, she had found a

kingdom. It was not so now. Whatever

bed she knelt beside, whatever prayers she

uttered, De Courcy was kneeling beside

her, and repeating the words in mockery.

This figure was continually before her. She

trembled at times, not for the obvious wan-

dering of her reason, for of this she was not

conscious, but for the derangement of her

religious feelings. In fact, the seeds of de-

cline were already laid in her constitution,

from the force of that silent struggle which

she was undergoing, and which none could

long undergo, but she felt only her in

creasing insensibility of religious feeling

When she got to the door, there was a

If

AVOMEN.

heavy shower, an indication of continued

rain.

By some accident Mrs Wentworth had


neglected to call for her in the carriage—

(the Wentworths kept a plain brown car-

riage, drawn by two sleek horses; they

advertised for a serious coachman, and they

had got one, a very grave man, who had

been converted secundum arteni years be-

fore ; and, for the horses, they knew their

way to Bethesda without a driver). Eva

was greatly embarrassed by this disap-

pointment. Though humble equally in

her habits and spirits, she could not bear

the idea of walking the streets alone. She

went timidly into the shop to wait till the

shower was over. In the shop were Lady

Longwood and her daughters, and their

splendid equipage at the door. Nothing

was ever like the polite pleasure of Lady

Longwood and her daughters at the meet-

ing.

WOMEN. 203

*' We must set you down; but where ?

where shall I set you down ?"

Lady Longwood, all delighted as she

lived.


was at the meeting, had forgot where Eva

w Dominick street, mamma," said the Miss

Longwoods in a breath.

" Oh, true, Dominick street,—we must

set you down. I wish," said Lady Long-

wood, speaking as far from her wishes as

possible, " I wish I could prevail on you

to allow me to order the carriage to Mer-

rion Square, instead of to"—-(again she for-

got, and the Miss Longwoods again whis-

pered Dominick street). " Do, be prevailed

on; let us run away with you, and send any

imaginable, or unimaginable excuse to your

aunt. Madame Dalmatiani dines with us;

and it is the last evening you will have

any chance of seeing her on the Irish

stage."

Lady Longwood pressed her request

with such polite energy, that no one could

204 WOMEN.

have imagined it was pressed to be refused.

Eva certainly did not understand it as

wished ; a thought, a wish of her own was


struggling at the bottom of her heart. She

did not know how to name it, and was re-

joiced to hear it named by another. When

this thougMt first occurred to her, she re-

pelled it as a sin—then she suffered it to

linger in her mind as impossible, and, there-

fore, as admissible merely to think of—then

she admitted it as neither sinful, or impos-

sible ; but merely as a floating dream—then

she began to think that dream might be

realized.

When people of this character once break

the bounds imposed on them, or the b'ounds

they have imposed on themselves, there is

no saying the extent to which they will

go ; farther, perhaps, than those who have

laid down no determined rules, and, there-

fore, know not exactly the bounds they

transgress.

Eva had an unconquerable wish infused

WOMEN. 205

suddenly into her mind of seeing Madame

Dalmatian! She knew not what she meant

by this wish; but felt indiscriminately, like


Mrs Saintly in Dryden's play, that " the

motion was of good." Sir Richard's offer,

Lady Longwood's politeness—every thing

seeming to correspond with her wishes ;—

with her wish, for she had but one,—she

yielded to it.

Lady Longwood's carriage was announ-

ced by two footmen. " Do—let us have

the pleasure"—(of setting you down, her

politeness would have said)—" of taking

you home," her politeness did say.

Eva, trembling at her own temerity, said

rapidly—" Your ladyship is very good—

you have anticipated my request—I was

just going to entreat that—"

" Then you will dine with us, and go

to see Madame Dalmatiani," said the Miss

Longwoods together. " Oh, how delight-

ful !—Come, mamma ? Miss Wentworth will

206 WOMEN.

come with us." And* in their good-na-

tured vacancy of mind, they said no more

than they felt.


Lady Ixnigwood* with due politeness,

saw her visitor first into; her carriage, and

followed herself.

Now, at last, they were in the carri-

age. Eva, trembling at her situation—at

her companions—trembling at herself; she

was giddy, speechless for some moments.

The only sensation she had, was that a car-

riage was rapidly whirling her along, but

where she knew not, or why. The prattle

of the Miss Longwoods was the first thing

to recall her. They reminded mamma, that

Miss Wentworth would like to call in. Do*

minick-Street for her dress, as she could

not go to the theatre in a wrapper. Then

Eva first began to feel the consequences of

the step she had taken, and to dread them

with a dread passing that of women. Though

exquisitely neat in her person, she never

WOMEN. 807

had worn a dress that displayed the neck

and arms, and she had now to confess this

poverty of her wardrobe to Lady Long-


wood and her daughters, in whose eyes it

would be little less than the unpardonable

sin.

" Why do I feel ashamed ?" said she to

herself, as she was making this confession.

" I ought not to feel ashamed ;" yet she did,

and this felse shame was even more tor-

menting than true, for it had none of its

ingenuous consolation. She had no time to

pause. Miss Longwood's hand was on the

check-string. " I beg your pardon; I have

no occasion to give you this trouble. My

dresses are all made—like this? (the last

words very low); " and if I must change

mine, I must trespass on you for the means."

Now it was out, and she congratulated

herself on her courage; courage, indeed, if

one might judge by the countenances of

the Miss Longwoods. Had Eva confessed

208 WOMEN.

herself guilty of wearing no clothes at all,

their looks qpuld not have been more petri-

fying and petrified; it was risibility min-


gled with horror.

At length their feelings, at first too great

for words, found way in a broken exclama-

tion—" And you never wear any thing but

morning dresses ?"

Eva, having got over the worst of it as

she thought, was able to say " Never!" with

tolerable firmness. " All made just like

this, with long sleeves and high collars."

Yes—Eva pleaded guilty to the whole

charge.—High collars and long sleeves in-'

eluded, "just like this"

Finding the case thus desperate, the Miss

Longwoods tried to attain some composure

of mind by going a little into detail, and

gathering courage to look this sad business

in the face—" Who makes your gowns ?"

" A poor woman, whom I"

" The waist is too long," said Miss Long-

wood.

WOMEN. 209

" And the sleeves not wide enough,"

added Caroline. .- -.:

" A poor woman, whom I"


" There is not fullness enough behind;

and the skirt ought to be six inches short-

er," interrupted the Miss Longwoods.

" A poor woman, whom I employ for

charity."

" In charity to yourself then, my dear,"

paid Lady Longwood, laughing, " never

employ her again ; she has absolutely made

a figure of you."

Eva every moment was feeling more and

more the unpleasantness of the consequences

that must follow the step she had taken; to

throw herself among people that had not one

thought,feeling, pursuit, orhabit, in common

with her. Her mind was forced to subjects

on which it had never dwelt before, and she

saw things in a light of artificial importance,

•which she had always been accustomed to

consider as trivial. Inconsequential and fri-

£10 WOMEN.

volous as Lady Longwood and her daugh-

ters were, and as she felt them to be, she

yet was embarrassed by their observations,


and mortified by their laughter; contempt-

ible as they appeared, it was painful to feel

oneself an object of contempt even to them.

She would have purchased immunity from

it, by giving up her mantua-maker, and

then she checked and blamed herself for

this as a worldly feeling. Thus, in the

struggles- of false shame, and genuine self-

reproach, commenced her entrance into the

world, and it had scarce commenced, before

she repented of it;

The rest of the drive was passed in dis-

cussing the merits of different dress-ma-

kers; but not even this, could appease the

astonishment of the Miss. Longwoods, at

the discovery that a human being could

live, and walk, and talk, though it never

wore any thing but a muslin wrapper;

and Caroline, as her foot was on, the step

WOMEN. g] 1

of the carriage alighting, could not help

repeating to herself—" Good God! and

not even a bit of lace on the sleeves,"


Arrived at LadyLongwoodX everything

around her seemed more' and more to dis-

tract and: dazzle Eva. The pompous offi-

ciousness of the servants; the getting out

of the carriage, and crossing the broad

pavement, where a party of young men

stopped to make observations on them;

entering the echoing hall ; and ascending

the lofty stone^staircase, where the sound

of her own steps startled her.—'The whole

of her entree assisted- to discompose, and

almost terrify her. She felt herself in a

new world, and/ a world so different from

her own. Her head' swam round; and

the elation of her senses seemed like a spe-

cies of intoxication. She dreaded her self-

possession; thought every thing round her

was in a kind of dazzling mist; and that

all the figures appeared very bright, and

212 WOMEN.

all with an intention to turn her into

mockery. She dreaded that the answers

she returned to the simplest questions were


absurd ; and Lady Longwood's polite, per-

petual smile, seemed to her like a fixed

and bitter laugh of derision. She wished

a thousand times that she was at home

again; then laughed at herself for fear of

being laughed at; and then felt disposed

to weep. She knew not where she was;

it was all like a dream. She felt for some

moments as if she was in the power of evil

spirits. She struggled strongly with her

feelings, and overcame them, but not -with-

out a solemn stipulation with her con-

science, that she would never again hazard

herself in such society.

She never had a future opportunity.—

Dinner was to be unusually early on ac-

count of the party to the theatre. Lady

Longwood and her daughters standing

round the fire, went into a committee of

WOMEN.

dress. " I would wish," said Eva, " if your

ladyship will allow me, to write a few lines

to my aunt, to account for my absence." «


" Certainly, my dear! roll over that wri-

ting-table for yourself near the fire. Your

note shall be sent this moment; and pray

tell Mrs Wentworth how happy we are to

have you."

Eva, not without awe, dipped the crow-

quill into the beautiful china ink-stand,

and wrote on paper, so highly glazed, she

could hardly trace a few lines, to tell Mrs

Wentworth where she was. She attempt-

ed to add why, but could not.

Mrs Wentworth read the note; compre

bended the contents; shook her head; and

told Mr Wentworth on his return, that

Eva dined out, without mentioning where.

In the mean time, the Miss Longwoods

had showed Eva to their dressing-room,

and ran back to Mamma, to know what they

were to do with her. " Why,- my dear!

214 WOMEN.

\

I

lend her some of your old things; any


thing; your clothes will hang like bogs

about her, and make her such a figure !"

Honoria did not at all relish the ob-

servation on their comparative figures, and

answered somewhat sullenly—"What am

X to lend her, ma'am ?"

" There's your pink satin, my dear; it

is quite soiled."

" Myipink-satin, ma'am!" repeated Ho-

noria, retreating full three paces, and mea-

suring her mother with a look of astonish-

ment—" Pink satin ! Why, ma'am, do you

think me mad to lend her that, and she so

fair, just to make us look like yellow dwarfs?

I had rather go with her in that muslin

wrapper."

"Do as-you like, Miss Longwood," said

her mother, cutting the matter short—-" on-

ly do this ; behave with propriety to Miss

Wentworth, and furnish 'her with what is

proper for her appearance in! public with

WOMEN. 215

«#. Your father is under great obliga-

tions to her uncle, and"—-Lady Longwood

checked herself prudently.


" Lord, mamma!" said Caroline, "what

obligations can papa have to her uncle ?

that grim old methodist. He must be as

poor as Job, to suffer his niece to trot

about the streets a-pied, and wear nothing

but wrappers up to the throat."

" Good God!" said Lady Longwood,

more aware of the truth than her-daugh-

ters, and losing all her retenue—" Good

God, Caroline! what a fool you are, and

•what nonsense you-do talk !"

With this castigatlon and remark, the

Miss Longwoods returned to• the dressing-

room. They attempted at first to dazzle

Eva, by a display of their finery, and an

affected debate on what they should wear,

though that had been revolved and deter-

mined in their secret souls-for many a day

before. Then they tried to overpower her

with their advice about her own appear-

•

216 WOMEN.

ance. Both attempts were vain. She se-

lected the very simplest of the dresses offer-

ed her; took no notice that it was too


large for her ; arranged her hair in the sim-

plest manner; and then offered her assist-

ance to the Miss Longwoods. The polite

young ladies laughed at her. " We could

never dress without mamma's woman—Fle-

ming will be here directly—Ring for her,

Caroline."

Enter Fleming. Eva stared, was going

to offer her a seat. A slight, graceful, very

affected personage, with her waist up to her

chin, a large broach marking the broad di-

vision of her corset, and her short petticoats

shewing her nice ancles and silk stockings

eight inches above what they ought to have

been seen. Then came on the business of

the Miss Longwoods' toilets,—-a business,

indeed. Eva was wearied, provoked, divert-

ed, terrified—wearied by its length, provo-

ked by the impatience of the fair patients,

diverted by their folly, terrified by the tre-

WOMEN. 217

mendous sight of beings approaching to

eternity, who seemed to put the arrange-

ment of a ringlet in competition with all


other interests, mortal and immortal.

" This must be very stupid for Miss

Wentworth," said Honoria, after a fretful

speech about the arrangement of the flowers

in her hair.

" Oh, not. at all stupid," said Caroline;

" she has got a book, you see."

Eva had got a book—a neglected book !

It was a small Bible that lay on Miss Long-

wood's table, and was regularly produced

at the Asylum Chapel (a fashionable Cha-

pel in Dublin,) once a week. Its gilded

leaves had complete repose for the rest of

the week, and very little disturbance then.

Miss Fleming, her task being finished,

advanced to Eva. " Sure, ma'am, you'll

not go down that figure! If you please,

ma'am, allow me to assist. Such a figure !

Excuse me, ma'am—Look at Miss Long-

wood's shoulders."—Eva looked and shud-

VOL. n. K

218 WOMEN.

dered.—" Then, ma'am, your sleeves. Lookj

only look, ma'am, at Miss Longwood's arms

—within two inches of the shoulder,"—Fie*


ming said, and pointed to arms so bare that

Eva really believed they were only exposed

thus for the purpose of being washed. All

her polite persuasions were thrown away.

The Miss Longwoods smiled in conscious

superiority.—" A little rouge, ma'am, the

least tinge only; not but what I know it

is not the thing for young ladies, but then,

just on this occasion."

" Thank you, Miss Fleming," said Eva,

retreating ; " but, on this occasion, I feel it

quite unnecessary."

And she said no more than she felt and

looked.—Her colour, " celestial rosy red,"

was in a moment exchanged for her usual

exquisite paleness—a tint so pure, that one

would have thought Eden had produced

none but the white rose before the fall, and

the red bore the blushing mark of man's

first degeneracy.

The dinner bell rang. Miss Fleming was

WOMEN. 219

.*

fluent in exclamation at its ringing so soon.

Then she remembered the party to the play,

Eva.


and again pressed her offers of assistance on

Eva, thus compelled to notice her own ap-

pearance, threw a glance for a moment on

Miss Longwood's tall mirror* and turned

away. Her first impression at the sight of

her own figure, in comparatively modern

costume, was terror, absolute terror. She

had hardly looked at herself while the Miss

Longwoods were arranging her dress, now

she looked. The second impression was

pleasure. Her beautiful neck and arms, dis-

played to her own view, for the first time !

She was astonished. She looked on herself

as she would on a beautiful embellished por-

trait of herself. Eva was not so ignorant as to

be unconscious of her personal advantages ;

but those advantages, displayed by a mode

of dress so new to her, gave her almost a

sensation of guilt. She trembled at the re-

flection of her figure* Many texts of scrip-

220 WOMEN.

•

ture, many habitual feelings, rushed on her

at this moment; and, catching up her thick


shawl, sfie folded herself so completely that

no eye could discover her change of dress.

Another dinner bell—The ladies left the

dressing-room.

The company below was not numerous,

but they appeared a very formidable num-

ber to Eva. She got to a seat as fast as her

trembling feet could carry her, and suc-

ceeded in escaping all notice till dinner-

time. The dinner ! What a business ! The

blaze of plate—the numerous attendants—

dishes, of which she did not know the

ingredients—wines, of which she did not

know the names—then she saw every one

using forks only with fish, and, with in-

stinctive promptitude, she laid down her

knife, and scarce knew whether she ought

to take it up again when she had meat on

her plate. She had remained standing too,

a considerable time, waiting for grace ; for

she could not believe that a few hasty words

WOMEN. 221

ji

muttered by a man in black, (just like all

the other men,) who bowed his essenced


ringlets over a dish as if he was examining

into its merits, could be supposed an ac-

knowledgment of the bounty of the Deity.

She had committed innumerable other pet-

ty treasons against bienseance. She had

not the happy art of sitting at dinner ; her

ear declined to one ; her eye fixed on ano-

ther ; her hand slowly conveying minute

morsels to her half-open lips; and her head

and heart, amid this divided attention, full

of nothing but herself; applying her lips

to the edge of a wine glass, with two drops

in the bottom of it, and slightly inclining

her head by way of drinking healths ; and

then taking off a dozen of rings, and scat-

tering the bright confusion beside her plate,

while she immersed the tip of one finger

in the water-glass.

She had sat down to dine as well as her

fright would let her; but that fright was

now increased to a pitiable degree by the

222 WOMEN.

discovery of her artless deficiencies. She

imagined the eyes of every one were fixed

on her: she felt as if they had been invited


merely to expose her. With this awful

sense of her own inferiority, was mingled a

strong perception of the frivolity of the be-

ings who were thus looking down on her.

Not a word was uttered, which, divested of

its fashionable jargon, would not be in plain

English downright nonsense or common-

place. When she contrasted the trifling

subjects with the affected accents, and ex-

clamations of assumed interest about them,

she could scarce consider the scene before

her but as a scene on a stage; and felt a

thousand times as if she could say, " speak

in your natural voices, and on intelligible

subjects, and let me understand you."

In spite, however, of her abstraction, em-

barrassment and diffidence, the delight with

Which she was beheld, at least by the men,

might have inspired confidence into any fe->

male but herself.

WOMEN. 223

Lady Longwood's quick eye caught it

in a moment. She spoke to one of the ser-

vants, and the carriages were announced


directly.

Eva's heart beat with terrible agitation

as they rapidly approached the theatre.

The tumult at the entrance was a relief to

her. The carriages were locked to the end

of Fowne's-street. Equipage after equi-

page drove off, yet such was the crowd,

that Lady Longwood's coachman could

scarce advance six inches at a move. At

length they were opposite the entrance,—

were alighting amidst the bustle of guards,

servants, and orange-women, the vocifera-

tion of " play-bills," and the glare of lamps

and flambeaux—were hurried through the

passage—were in their box.

The house was crowded, and the last

bars of the overture were playing. What

a scene for Eva ! The heat; the glare, the

tumult, the calls on the boxkeepcr, the dis-

putes about seats, the struggles in the pit,

224 WOMEN.

the uproar in the galleries, the tremendous

burst from the orchestra in the full storm

of the final chords, just below them, (for


they were in the stage-box), reduced her

to a state between stupefaction and terror.

She grasped Lady Longwood's arm, and

panted for breath.

" Are you alarmed ?" said Lady Long-

wood, smiling. " Keep up your spirits ;

you will soon see Madame Dalmatiani."

That name recalled her indeed, recalled

her to a state of far keener suffering, and

she felt in a moment, how far more exoui-

- i-

site is the sense arising from mental, than

from physical causes.

The curtain rose—Eva gazed, her whole

soul and eyes fixed on its movements. The

opera was Artaxerxes, and Zaira appeared

on the stage. The lights were down to

represent twilight, and at first Eva could

only see the dim glitter of her splendid

dress, that suggested the image of a spirit

in the shades of Elysium. But long before

WOMEN;

the lights arose, the delicious tones of her

voice made Eva feel she must be beau-

tiful ; and when they did, the first glance


was enough—too much for her. She felt

all was over—there was no hope—her heart

subsided—sunk within her. She felt that,

with the " might, the majesty of loveli-

ness," displayed in that perfect form, all

competition was folly or frenzy.

" Is she not beautiful ?" said the Mirs

Longwoods.

" Beautiful," repeated Eva, " beyond

imagination ; almost beyond humanity !"

But as she spoke, the tears started into her

eyes.

The piece proceeded, andEva grew calm;

but it was the calmness of despair. There

Was nothing in the opera that particularly

alluded to the situation of De Courcy and

Zaira; and she was thus spared any added

emotion, till, at the commencement of the

second act, a gentleman behind Eva said,

K2

226 WOMEN.

" Now she will exert herself to the utmost,

for I see De Courcy behind the scenes."

Eva looked up ; saw De Courcy behind


the scenes. The stage-box, in which Lady

Longwood sat, commanded a perfect view

of behind the scenes on the opposite side.

De Courcy stood there, leaning against a

side-scene, " his rapt soul sitting in his eyes,"

All his powers of body and soul seemed

concentrated into one burning look, and

that look was fixed on Zaira. Some young

men of his acquaintance, who were lounging

behind the scenes, came up and attempted to

draw his attention; he turned from them im-

patiently. Some pretty young actresses, who

were dressed, and waiting to join in the cho-

ruses, tried to fix his attention ; he smiled

superior on them. The opera went on:

Zaira's powers were evidently increased,

increasing. She was singing con amore;

yet a particular opportunity of allusion was

wanting, till the duet of " For thee I live,

my dearest." Then Zaira, when repeating,

8

WOMEN. 227

" how lovely thou appearest," turned her

love-radiant eyes, not on Arbaces, but on

De Courcy, and the expression could not


be mistaken. The audience perceived she

sung with peculiar onction. Eva alone felt

at the bottom of her wrung heart the dif-

ference of her style, and the cause of it.

When Zaira came to the beautiful air of

" Let not rage,"—so sweet and exquisite

was her voice, that Eva could scarce re-

press the exclamation,—" Ah, be not so

melting, so beautiful, so resistless !—What

needs it ?—I am overcome already, and so is

he—so he must be—all this is superfluous."

And when Zaira came to the passage in

the minor key, just before the ritornello,

*' I, alas ! at once have lost father, brother,

lover, friend," the piercing expression of

her voice thrilled every heart—what effect

had it on Eva's ! She could not restrain

her tears at these words thus svmg; and

yet she felt, that the woman who uttered

these thrilling tones was inflicting on her

228 WOMEN.

the very losses she was drawing artificial

tears from others for; tears, real tears, ra-

pidly gushed into her eyes. He was all to


her. She struggled for a moment, felt the

struggle impossible, leaned forward, and

wept in bitter unrestrained anguish. She

recovered with a violent effort, and forcing

her eyes on the stage, saw Zaira retiring

amid thunders of applause; and De Courcy,

snatching eagerly the shawl from her ser-

vant, folding it round her with tender care,

and drawing her arm under his, attended

her to the Green-room. After that she saw

nothing,—all was glare, delirium. She

heard voices speaking to her, but could dis-

tinguish no words; she spoke to herself,

but knew not what she was saying; but

she had a frightful indefinite consciousness

that she was smiling in every one's face,

while the smile felt to her like a convulsion.

The carriages were ordered. A great bustle

about setting her down,—an attempt on

her part at gratitude. She knew not what

5

WOMEN. 229

she said, or where she was going. The ima-

ges of the night were flashing before, around

her; they seemed within her brain. She


gazed round her—she was at last in her

own quiet apartment—she did not know

it—she sunk on her knees—she could not

pray—she rose, terrified at her own feel-

ings ; and she recollected this was the first

day she had ever passed among beings,

where the name of God was never utter-

ed, and among whom his existence appear-

ed to be utterly forgotten.

230 WOMEN.

CHAPTER VI.

Yet she that loves him best is Cleopatra.—DRYDIN,

How little Eva knew of Zaira's feelings


or purposes! How singular was it that each

of them was the object of envy to the other ;

that each would have given worlds to ex-

change with the other ! Zaira, determined

to resign De Courcy, imagined all happi-

ness was concentred in the destiny of the

woman to whom she resigned him. Eva,

comparatively ignorant of life, but possess*

ing that tact of the heart which makes aix~" -

idiot of experience, felt that she had lost

his; and though ignorant of Zaira's resolu-

tion, scorned to accept any thing but that

heart. But Zaira, though determined on

resigning him for ever, could not prevail on

WOMEN. 231

herself to give up the happiness she felt in

his society; in the short period that was

to precede their separation, she was resol-


ved to enjoy it with luxurious exaggeration,

and splenetic voluptuousness; to dissolve

the richest of pearls in the bitter cup of

parting, and swallow it. Zaira had courage

and strength of soul for great sacrifices, but

she had not that domestic resignation that

can submit to sacrifices every hour and

every moment, and condemn the heart to

die by inches. This accounts for her conti-

nuing to accept even the public attentions

of De Courcy, and perhaps to feel a bitter

pleasure to the very moment when they

were to part. Thus each of them felt as if

they were making a sacrifice to the other ;

a word would have decided their destinies,

and perhaps led to happier results, but then

their situations forbid all communication,

and Zaira's resolution, taken in secret, pre-

cluded an explanation even with De Courcy.

The morning after the opera, De Courcy

232 WOMEN.

went, as usual, to Zaira's; he felt an un-

common depression; and the words in

which her late performance had been an-


nounced, seemed to recur involuntarily to

his recollection, with a kind of melancholy

indefinite impression—Madame Dalmati-

ani, her last appearance in Dublin. De

Courcy knew she had retired from the stage,

but he thought there was something like an

omen in these words. She was not in her

usual apartment; through the half-open

folding-doors he caught a glimpse of her in

the next room ; she stood at a table cover-

ed with parchments, a candle was lighting,

two or three men stood near her whom

he did not know, and among them one

whom he recognised in a moment; it was

the man whose hard treatment from Mr

Wentworth he had mentioned to Zaira,

and been so much surprised at the insen-

sibility with which she listened to him.

He comprehended the whole in a moment,

and he was right. He leaned against the

WOMEN. 233

door—the men of business were so engaged

with their papers, they did not notice him ;

and Zaira, who had a book in her hand, as


usual, did not notice him either.

After some delay, her agent told her the

papers were ready for signature. She put

a mark in her book, approached the table,

glanced her eye over the words, " Deed of

Annuity," and turned to her agent with an

expression of surprise and displeasure.

The agent drew her aside for a moment,

and tried to explain to her, as well as his

amazement would suffer him, the folly, the

madness of losing (as he called it,) her mo-

ney at six per cent., when she might get

ten, twelve, or fourteen for it; and at the

magic sound of fourteen per cent., the law-

yer actually rose on tiptoe, displaced his

wig in the agitation of his delight, and

whispered the words to Zaira, in a tone

between a whistle and a squeal, with an

emphatic compression of the lips invincibly

ludicrous.

£34 WOMEN.

7

Zaira turned from him, without saying a

word, approached the table, and made her


meaning plain in few words, as integrity

and benevolence never fail to do. She said,

it was not her wish to affect relieving this

gentleman's distress, while she increased it

by usurious and consuming interest; she

would take his bond for the principal, and

nothing but legal interest for the money.

Having thus said, with a strong intellec-

tual habit, which seemed involuntary, she

took the mark out of the book, went on

reading, and desired to be told when it was

necessary to sign her name. A new deed

was drawn, signed, witnessed,—Zaira put

her name to the paper, the legal men lift-

ing up their eyes, and twisting their fin-

gers, with feelings inexpressible. The mo-

ney was produced, and put into the hands

of the wretched man, who could not even

then believe his eyes. He attempted to

speak, to thank her,—could not utter a

word,—tried to bow, as he retired; and felt

WOMEN. 235

himself ready to sink on his knees ;—as he

rushed out of the door, he almost fell over

De Courcy; recovered himself, and his pow-


ers of speech instantly ; grasped his hand in

the confidence of his happiness, and poured

out that tempest of gratitude, which Irish

tongues alone can utter, and Irish ears alone

can bear. At the end of a speech, which

may be spared the English reader, he re-

peated often, " I thank God, and you and

her." It was delightful to De Courcy to

hear Zaira's name and his thus joined, and

he grasped the man's hand with eager cor-

diality.

The man hurried away, for he saw Zaira

entering. She perceived, in a moment, that

he had been a witness to the last scene.

There was some embarrassment on both

sides, till De Courcy, recovering himself,

burst into praises, as eloquent as passion

could utter. He felt eager to magnify

his impressions if possible. Her virtues

seemed to furnish a justification of what

236 WOMEN.

he felt he could not justify to himself. Zai-

fa was absent, and embarrassed; she listen-

ed to him with a kind of melancholy ab-


straction, and then said somewhat abrupt-

ly, " But you have promised to pass this

evening with me ?"

" This evening; no, to-morrow evening

you mentioned."

'* To-morrow," repeated Zaira; " to-mor-

row ! oh, no ! that will be impossible—

You must come to me this evening, if you

wish to see me again."

De Courcy did not take notice of these

words, they were so rapidly uttered; and

he mentioned, though in a fainter accent,-*

that he was to spend that evening at Mr

Wentworth's.—" No matter," said Zaira

abruptly; " you will have time enough to

make amends there—time enough hereaf-

ter for the Wentworths—You must come

to me to-night—Promise me," she add-

ed.

De Courcy promised, and went that

WOMEN. 287

evening. There was a larger company

than usual. Never was Zaira so brilliant,

so animated; never had she looked so beau-


tiful ; yet those who were not, like De

Courcy, dazzled beyond all power of in-

quiry or observation, might have discover-

ed something of excitement; something

artificial and exigeant in her manner; a de-

mand for homage about her, that appeared

totally different from the usual tone o her

conversation.

All her talents seemed put in requisi-

tion. She sung; she played, though the

tremor of her hands was visible; she con-

versed "with eager rapidity, and seemed

anxious to make points in every thing she

said. The confusion of her ideas was ob-

vious; but she struggled through it, dis-

regarded it, and seemed anxious only to

make her wit conspicuous. In all she said,

or did, or sung, or looked, there was an ef-

fort unusual with her; and her flashing

eyes were turned on De Courcy every

838 WOMEN.

moment, with a mixture of reproach and

sorrow which none could penetrate. It

was after a conversation she had held with


a groupe of literati on the subject of infan-

ticide, as practised among the Eastern na-

tions, suggested by one of the engravings

in Sir George Staunton's View of China,

she had widely digressed from the subject,

and yet gracefully recurred to it in re-

marks on the practice, from the exposure

of infants among the ancients, sanctioned

by the laws of Lycurgus, and the practice

of polished Athens and virtuous Rome,

(Montgomery smiled with delight,) down

to the Chinese, who more humanely at-

tach a gourd to the female infants they

commit to the water, to keep them float-

ing on the stream, in hope of their being

saved by the Christian missionaries; and

to the family pride which urges a similar

practice in the East Indies, where it is

supposed that no suitable match can be

found for the female descendants of the

WOMEN; 239

Rajahs, and that it was better for them to

perish than to form an inferior connection ;

and she added the emphatic answer of a


Rajah, who, on being consulted how the

female infants of his family were to be. de-

stroyed, replied, " It is easy to crush a

flower in the bud;"

As she spoke, Zaira took a flower from

her bosom, and bent over it to hide a tear.

In a moment after, she turned away to ano-

ther groupe, who were watching a game at

chess•, and was deep in Indian antiquities

and Spanish anecdotes, and quotations from

Yida's Scacchia, before the applause that

hung on her last accents had ceased. She

had embellished the subjects on which she

was speaking with such variety of allusion,

such extent of information, and such feli-

city of wit, that the hearers were actually

converted into a theatrical audience, and

loud applauses followed every sentence.

De Courcy turned his triumphant de-

240 WOMEN.

manding eyes on Montgomery, and seve-

ral near them spoke in raptures of her wit.

" Wit," said Montgomery, " I heard no


wit. I only heard a string of allusions,

supplied by books, with which no doubt

the woman — any well-informed woman

must be acquainted. I heard no wit; eve-

ry thing she said was quite plain—quite

intelligible."

De Courcy could not help repeating—

" Men doubt, because they stand so thick i'the sky,

That those are stars that paint the galaxy."

Montgomery was piqued at the quota-

tion, resolved to disprove it, and encounter

Zaira on some literary ground where he

imagined that he must be superior. She

was still standing near the chess-table. He

fixed on an unfortunate subject, the total

ignorance among the ancients of all games

of chance. Zaira mentioned the Chorus in

the Iphigenia of Euripides, that speaks of

"WOMEN. 241

"Palamedes and another worthy playing

•with dice. Montgomery, provoked, im-

pugned even the authenticity of Euripides,


and appealed to Homer, if there was the

least mention of games of chance among

his heroes ; and he quoted authorities

enough to prove, that sad or merry, they

did nothing but eat heartily, and digest

their meals po^tyyi xiym; and Montgo-

mery went on to say, they could have

little intellectual resources, when it was

obvious they could neither read or write.

Zaira silenced him in a moment with the

ffry*«T» kvygo., the letters of Eellerophon,

which proved that the ancestors of the Ho-

meric "heroes probably knew something

about writing.

Montgomery had nothing to say, (though

he might have had.) He retreated discom-

fited ; and De Courcy could not T.elp con-

doling him on his defeat with the well-

known lines of Lope Vega, which de-

scribe, in allusion to his own name, a beetle

VOL. II. L

242 WOMEN.

perishing amid the fragrance of a rose it had

presumed to hover over—

" Audax dum Vegas irrumpit scarabaeus in hortos,


Fragrantis periit victus odore rosae."

Every one applauded the application;

every one the next moment applauded an

air Zaira was singing. One would have

said of that brilliant evening, in the lan-

guage of one of the first of our poets—

" It was her blithest, and her last."

Music, literature, luxury, flowers—all that

could delight or intoxicate, prolonged the

entertainment till a late hour. De Courcy

saw the Miss Longwoods to their carriage,

and returned for his hat to the saloon where

he had left it. Zaira was there alone, lean-

ing against the chimney-piece, and appa-

rently in deep and painful meditation. Not

a trace of gaiety remained on her fixt fea-

243

tures. t)e Courcy approached to take his

leave.—" Have you remarked any symp-

toms of dejection—of grief, about me to-


night ?" said she hastily.

" To-night ? Oh, no! Never saw you

more charming, more brilliant!"

" And yet all this night/' said Zaira,

Speaking with difficulty, and many pauses,

" I have struggled to hide in the bottom

of my heart, a thought—that wrings it."

De Courcy, amazed, could make no an-

Swer. Zaira made many efforts to speak

in vain. At length she uttered, in a choak-

ed voice, " We must part to-night."

" Part!"

" Yes," said Zaira, who* now that she

had found courage to utter one word, hur-

ried on with eagerness—" Yes,—part,—

the peace and honour of us both require

it. We must part to-night."

" Oh God!—oh Zaira!—and can you

leave me ? Is this the friendship—this the

promise?" and> in agonies of supplication,

244 WOMEN.

De Courcy prostrated himself before her,

grovelled beneath her feet, and holding up

his locked hands, tried to express by this


action what he had not words to utter.

Zaira's heart was torn at this sight, but

it was not moved. " Alas !" said she, " it

must be time to part, when our parting is

thus dreadfid to both!"

" Both /" De Courcy caught the sound ; it

gave him new life, new hopes. Again he

pleaded, he implored, he wept, and folding

his arms around her, as she sunk on a sofa,

clung to her in an agony that made her

tremble.

" Ah, release me !" she cried, struggling

in vain to extricate herself from his arms;

" release me while I have any self-posses-

sion,—leave me, if you would wish me to

preserve my reason."

At these words, to which De Courcy at-

tached a very different meaning from Zai-

ra's, he started up, and viewed her with a

look almost of indignat'on.

WOMEN. 345

Zaira, agitated beyond the power of re-

garding him, faintly exclaimed,—" If you

do not wish the parting hour to be my dy-


ing hour, go leave me."

De Courcy threw on her- a look which

she did not see,—a look in which anguish,

appeal, supplication, were mingled with

the wildest jealousy, and rushed from the

house like a madman. He tossed all night

on a feverish bed of agony, started from a

frightful dream late in the morning, and

felt-, for some moments, with vague indefi-

niteness, that something had happened

which he trembled to recall. Then the

full agony of the truth broke on him in a

moment. Zaira- was about to leave Ire-

land. He hurried on- his clothes, and while

thus employed, he could not help noticing

his feverish frame, wasted by so many causes-

of emotion; and the hectic, which burn-

ing in his cheek, contrasted that deadliness

of feature and expression which nothing

but despair can give, but which she seldom

246 woMEtf.

gives to youthful features. He felt how-

unfit he was to plead his own cause, yet

he hurried instinctively to Zaira's: The


hall was full of trunks and packages,—the

servants all in bustle, De Courcy's heart

beat almost audibly. He hurried up stairs—

those well-known stairs—that now appear-

ed to forget his steps—that were soon to

feel the steps of a stranger. He passed from

room to room ; in a remote one Zaira was

seated : She had a book in her hand, which

she laid down at the sight of De Courcy,

She forced, with a convulsive effort, a smile

on her features ; and then pointing through

an open door to her domestics, who were

all employed, seemed to consider that move-

ment as a sufficient answer to the silent ap-

peal of his looks.

De Courcy, grasping her hand, wept on

it. She withdrew it gently; and then, ex-

erting to the utmost her own self-possession,

and the influence she had over De Courcy,

she attempted (and succeeded in her owr*

WOMEN. 247

conviction, at least in the attempt) to prove

to him the necessity of their separation.

She pointed out to him the dishonourable


nature of their attachment, excluding her

to whom his vows were.pledged, and the

folly of supposing that feelings, 'partaking

of a far different character, could be divest-

ed of their nature by being baptised by the

name of friendship. As she spoke on this

subject, her voice failed her, for she remem-

bered into what illusions she had been led

by the feeling her faultering tones tried to

^ndemn;—then she collected her voice,

acquired some degree of firmness, and at-

tempted to speak of his future union with

Eva, and to suggest some advice that might

be (her voice failed utterly there,—she

recovered it with a determined effort) con-

tributory to his future happiness.

" Inspire your beautiful wife," said she,

" with a taste for literature ; it will supply

the want of charms, should her's decline, as

they may; it will atone for the want of

248 WOMEN,

youth when it withers, as it must." And

she repeated, with touching elocution, the

beautiful Eulogy on Letters, from Cicero


pro Archia.

De Courcy felt how far he soon, must be

from hearing such accents for ever. All

that miserable day and evening he sat al-

most at her feet, gasping for, recording in

his soul every word she uttered, scarce da-

ring to breathe himself, lest he might lose

something he panted to treasure in. his

heart's core, yea, in his " heart of hearts."

Towards evening, she had announced

that her departure was to take place ; as it

approached, Zaira became unable to speak,

or De Courcy to listen;—they walked

through the spacious rooms together in ut-

ter silence, but they heard and felt, (and

their short shudderings every moment made

each other feel) the sound of the servants'

feet; the inquiries, the orders, the " note of

prex^aration ;" the very knocks at the door

with articles ordered from tradesmen, made

WOMEN.. , 249

them look on each other with an unutter-

able expression. Those ceased at length,

the hurried step of a solitary domestic was


all that followed ; even that ceased soon ;

they could hear the melancholy ticking of

the clock below; then they heard the beat-

ing of each other's hearts, numbering the few

moments they were to pass together. What

a contrast to their last meeting! and in that

very room. Silence, darkness, grief, had

succeeded to that brilliant display of ge-

nius, talent, and passion, that had illumina-

ted it a few, so few hours before. To each

other they appeared like spectres wander-

ing amid the scenes of their former happi-

ness.

Zaira felt some effort necessary for both

of them, and she hastened to make it; it was

a relief to crush down the single agonizing

feeling of her heart, and beat it into frag-

ments, if possible. She attempted to di-

vide and distract her thoughts; she took

down some books, and was shocked to find

i- S

250 WOMEN.

that the lines wandered before her without

distinction ; then she eagerly seized on one

whose lines, though she could no longer read


them, she remembered well,—it was a vo-

lume of Scott's exquisite poetry, which,

shortly after De Courcy's first acquaintance

with her, he had read to her; and, as his ti-

mid and appealing feeling gradually kindled

with her's, she had marked with rose leaves

every passage his reading made delightful;

and now, on opening it, she found every

page filled with those leaves. The wither-,

ed flowers fell fast from the pages as she

opened them, faded memorials of hours as

brilliant as they Zaira wept.

De Courcy caught the book from her;

" My life resembled these pages," said he,

" when you strowed its hours with roses—

now"—and he shook the pages, as the

dead leaves dropt silently on the carpet—

« Now"—

Zaira could not speak; she attempt-

ed to pass him, for she saw some valuable

books in which she had written his name,

i

WOMEN. 251

and which she hoped to sooth him by of-

fering to him.

As she past on, her shawl swept the


strings of her harp ; they returned a me-

lancholy, desolate sound. De Courcy caught

it, and wildly importuned her " for a last

song." She attempted to comply with his

wish; sat down, touched her harp with a

trembling hand, and struggled to collect

voice for some short simple air.

At that moment De Courcy, almost un-

knowing what he did, opened the book

Zaira had just closed, and read in the first

page, lines that he himself had written there

from Burns.— ^

" Had we never loved so kindly,

Had we never loved so blindly,

Never met and never parted,

We had ne'er been broken-hearted."'

He read these lines aloud ; his voice fail-

ed at the last line. Zaira was weeping too,

He fell at her feet in silent agony; she

252 „ WOMEN.

struggled in vain to repel him; a tide of

recollections overflowed her heart ; she

wept in bitter but luxurious agony. * *


* * * * The weakness of the

moment was over. * * * *

She rose hastily, and pointed out to him the

books, the paintings, which she wished him

to retain as memorials of her affection. De

Courcy scarce raised his.head to mark them;

and then, falling back on the sopha, and

hiding his face with his hands, tried to

choak his audible sobs.

Zaira made a last effort to touch, and

to console him; she had reserved it for

the last. She took from a small cabinet her

own picture, suspended it from a black rib-

bon, and hung it round his neck.

De Courcy kissed it with melancholy

tenderness, and, gazing on it, repeated,

" But these lips cannot speak to me."

" What can I give more ?" said Zaira,

pale and agitated.

" Give me yourself!" exclaimed De Cour-

WOMEN. 253>

cy, folding his trembling arms around heir

as she stood before him.

" Impossible !" said Zaira,. gasping fot


breath to speak; " impossible! you are

engaged to another. I could not love you

so much,, if I ' did not love your honour

moreJ"

" I am not engaged. I renounce all en-

gagements, all ties; all objects, but you.—-

Resign me, and I resign life.—perhaps in

your presence; but let no vain belief of

another object possess your mind—you or

the grave must be my choice—do you de-

cide for me."

It would be needless to say how Zaira

decided. But neither the ravings of hope

or of despair could extort from her a con-

sent to an immediate union. She resolved,

even in this exigency of her feelings, to

try to develope his character ; to enlarge

254 WOMEN.

his mind; and to fix his heart. She pro-

posed that they should visit the continent

as strangers, and, at the end of a year, if his


feelings remained unaltered, she——

As he was rapturously hurrying her to

the carriage, a letter was put into his hands.

He glanced at it, crushed it together, but

put it into his bosom.

Zaira trembled from head to foot; it was

a female hand ; it was a last farewell from

Eva. They hurried to the carriage. The

hag, the sybil, stood on the pavement; the

servants, regarding her as a common men-

dicant, had not driven her away. She rush-

ed before Zaira, and exclaimed, " You are

going, then, going together ? There is

curse on you ; the curse of the earth where

ye tread; the curse of the sea where ye

sail; the curse of the winds and of the wa-

ters ; and my curse, bitterest, loudest, last:"

and she fell on her knees on the pavement

before them.

The servants soon forced her away. Zaira

WOMEN. 255

was too much agitated from other causes to

notice her; but on De Courcy the perpe-

tual hauntings of this singular being were


beginning to make a strong impression.

He recollected, that after recognising her

at Bray, he mentioned it to Mr Went-

worth, and pressed the necessity of having

her apprehended, to discover the cause of

the extraordinary circumstances under

which he had first met Eva.

Mr Wentworth positively declined it,

and seemed uneasy at the revival of the

circumstance. With Zaira also, this mys-

terious hag appeared acquainted. Mystery

on mystery—under these melancholy aus-

pices their journey to the continent com-

menced.

CHAPTER VII.

Tan that delight, and agbs that

Waft to haven

Pore.


THE day, the eventful day, that De Cour-

cy called on Zaira to take his last leave of

her, he felt a wild determination to re-

sign Eva for ever. He felt lost to all hap-

piness ; he disdained to retain any possible

share of it, to save a single fragment from

the wreck. With a kind of splenetic des-

peration, he resolved to make a sacrifice of

the only means of happiness in his power to

that which he never could attain, and show,

in this frightful defiance of earthly good,

an insensibility to all, but that which fiis

WOMEK. -2€l

*7H

imagination represented as the first and

last, and only one. He wrote,, before his


visit to Zaira,. a line to.Eva;. his heart was

agonized while he wrote it; but that is a

Avnetched apology. The note contained

these words : " Eva, I am a wretch ; for-

give me, if you can ; forget me, if you will."

There were some other expressions equally

incoherent, but nevertheless equally intelli-

gible.

The note came. Eva received—read it-

let it fall on her lap—took it up—could not

read the lines—gasped for breath in vain-

felt a mist spread over her eyes—wished for

some one to speak to her, though unable to

speak herself; and, finally, sinking into a

kind of senseless, horrible rigidity of frame,

she retained all her recollection, and rolled

about her strained eyes to try if there were

any witnesses of her weakness.

The agony was soon over; Mrs Went-

worth, who was in the room, saw it, and

258 WOMEN.

rang for the servants,—Eva was removed,

and the note dropt from her nerveless hand.

Mrs Wentworth caught it up, and read it;


and, in the impulse of a feeling with which

her better, her religious feelings for the

moment contended in vain, flung it on the

ground, and trampled on it—" Wretch,

poor misguided miserable wretch !" she

exclaimed ; then, recovering herself, she

took it up, asked pardon of the Deity for

this short indulgence of her worldly feel-

ings, and tried to force herself to read it.

When she had done so several times, she

still scarce could compel her honest, pure,

and lofty mind to admit the idea of such

baseness, such levity, such cruel treachery,

as these lines betrayed.

After a long struggle with feelings that

were not the less painful from their no-

velty, for Mrs Wentworth knew little of

worldly characters, and nothing of world-

ly passion, her mind began to flow in its

WOMEN. 259

habitual channel; and frequently she thank-

ed Heaven, that had saved Eva from an

union with a being so unworthy of her.


She reproached herself, for having been

led, by her partiality for her niece, to

adopt his cause, or plead in |his behalf;

trembled at the danger to which Eva had

been exposed; and then, as her feelings

rapidly fluctuated, she shuddered at the

thought, that the heart had been too close-

ly locked to his to bear the Blow that se-

vered them without breaking, when that

blow was dealt by his own hand.

She felt much misery, too, from the ap-

prehended reproaches of her husband ; the

persecution of Macowen, proud of her mi-

sery, because he had predicted it; the per-

secution of the whole party. All their pro-

phecies were fulfilled—all the means of their

querulous sagacity echoed and re-echoed in

her ears. " I said so—I knew it—I always

was sure it must be so." Those phrases,

260 WOMKtf.

which extort a tribute, a miserable tribute

to our pride.;- from the wretchedness- we in-

sult, while we pretend to deplore it.


Mrs Wentworth was much distressed;

but she had a resource in her distress " that

the world knew not of." She retired to

pray, and, in laying open her heart to the

great Searcher of all, she began to feel that

it was a small thing to be judged of man's

judgment.. The calm she had thus attained

abe T'^ed to communicate, if possible, to

Eva ; but she had too much sense to atr

tempt it too soon.. She left her to herself

the remainder of that day; but earnestly

lifted up her heart in prayer for this young

sufferer—her heart; for when her lips mo-

ved, the effort was convulsive, her voice was

choaked, and the tears rushed into her eyes,.

long unused to shed them.

The day went off better than she ex-

pected; Wentworth came home, but he

came alone. Macowen, nor any one else.—*

TTOMEN. S6l

no '* damn'd good-natured friend," was

with him.

Wentworth had heard of De Courcy's


leaving Ireland with Madame Dalmatian!;

but fortunately he felt so much elated by

having the news to tell (as he thought) first

to his wife, and next by the ample perspec-

tive expanded to his view of opportunities

for strictures, lamentations, denunciations,

spiritual and temporal, that he was actually

in a kind of splenetic good humour. There

was a singular contrast between his inward

and outward feelings on this occasion ;

something like the exoteric and eisoteric doc-

trine of the ancient philosophers, one lan-

guage for the enlightened, another for the

unenlightened. His outward man was like

the prophetic scroll, " lamentation, and

mourning, and woe." His inward man was

all triumph in his own sagacity, and in that

of his godly friends, " who had foreseen

all;" and in the solemn anticipation of the

many breakfasts, dinners, and tea-parties,

•

362 WOMEN.

where he would eat and drink, and pi*ay>

and exhort, and foretell every thing that

had happened, and many things that never


would happen.

Mrs Wentworth, as soon as she saw hftn,

put De Courcy's letter into his hands, and

turned away to conceal the feelings, whose

force she struggled with in vain. She wept

bitterly, most bitterly, but silently, while

Wentworth read the letter. She could not,

in the sincerity of her heart, imagine that

Wentworth knew it all before; and took

the letter merely that he might give a

stronger effect to his outset.—It began—

Mrs Wentworth was prepared for it: she

knew it would be " full of sound and fury,

signifying nothing."—He commenced with

the passage from the Epistle to the Corin-

thians, which he had quoted the day De

Courcy's inauspicious proposals were made,

and they sadly justified the application.

Then he went on, unanswered, (and in-

deed unattended to,) till he came to the

8

WOMEN. 263

text in St John, which he quoted to prove

the cause of De Courcy's apostacy—" They

went out from us, because they were not


of us." This he repeated with marked em-

phasis ; and it may be presumed, he felt

considerable relief from the repetition, as

it was continued with the punctuality of

minute guns, during the remainder of that

day and night, and the greater part of the

two following.

During this period, Eva did not ap-

pear, nor did Mrs Wentworth intrude

on her. The third day she came down,

and engaged in domestic occupation, just

as usual, but she looked dreadfully pale.

Even Wentworth, prepared for angry ex-

postulation under the name of exhortation,

was moved by her pale look, and was si-

lent—mercifully silent. Mrs Wentworth

tried calmly to engage her in her former

habits and pursuits. Not a word was spo-

ken on the subject by uncle, aunt, or niecfe;

5G4 women.

and the family soon returned to their usual

quiet course of life.

Almost immediately on the receipt of


De Courcy's letter, Eva answered it; and

This answer he received just as he was set-

ting out with Zaira.—It was as follows :<—

Letter from Eva to De Courcy.

" I answer your letter, because I feel to

do so will remove a pressure from my heart,

which has almost crushed it since I read

.your's. You bave renounced me then—

at

would you had done so before! before pain

(extreme perhaps,) was mingled with the

shame, which even the humblest female

must feel at the thought of being reject-

ed. Had I never seen you, I had ne-

ver been unhappy ; why then is my heart

thus torn, when I am about to bid you

farewell ?

5

WOMEN. 265

** I will wipe away a few tears, and then

try to tell you why I write to you. I

write not to reproach, but to thank you;


to bless you—yes, bless you, for having,

though at the risk of my life, dissipated an

illusion that might have been fatal to my

everlasting peace. I tremble yet at the

danger into which you alone could have

led, and from which you alone could have

rescued me. I do not see its extent yet, as

I ought to do; but I shall see it, I trust,

more clearly and more thankfully every

day,—when the oppression of my heart

abates.

" In loving you, (who saved my life, and

who appeared to me in a light so dazzling

to the imagination and the senses), I was

beginning to love the world. Beginning,—

Oh I had more than begun,—I knew not

how far I had wandered. The love of the

world was stealing on me under the dis-

guise of a conformity to your wishes,—a

cultivation of your taste,—the wish to please

VOL. II. M

266 WOMEN.

you, (which I began to view as a duty,) was

only a refinement on the wish to please my

own worldly feelings. I already made light


of the sobriety of mind, and simplicity of

manner, that becomes the disciples of Christ,

when put in competition with the hope of

pleasing you. I wished for gay attire, for

worldly society, for the cultivation of those

powers in literature and music, which I

heard you praise. I felt a kind of ingrati-

tude to the life from which I had -derived

so much happiness, and was anxious to di-

versify its monotony, because it was irk-

some to you,—so sincere, so simple, sa dan-

gerous was my devotion to you. Think of

the sacrifice I made of my habits, and feel-

ings, and duties, when I went to the thea-

tre, because you were there. You did not

solicit me, it is true; you did not even

know I was there; but had I not known

you were, what power could ever have

brought me within its walls! How far

this influence might have extended I know

•

WOMEN. 267

not; too far already for my peace here, and

perhaps, had I been united to you, too far

for my peace hereafter. If I could already


make such sacrifices to you, what limit

would there ftave been to them, when in-

clination assumed the aspect of duty, and

aE the rebellious feelings of my worldly na-

ture would have pleaded under the names of

conjugal ^virtues ! As a married woman, I

would have " cared for the things of the

world, that I might please my husband."

There is always a propensity in our hearts

to worldly indulgence, and when this is

Strengthened by the voice and example of

him we love, who can resist its seductions ?

I should have complied with your taste in

dress, in company, in conversation, in ha-

bits, in .conformity to the world, and still

the gaudy carriage " would have borne me

once a week to Bethesda Chapel, the ghost

of what I was,"—a withered, lifeless profes-

sor, clinging to a creed, while I apostatised

from practice, " having a form of godliness,


WOMEN. 269

struggling to regain that path from which

I wandered for you, and to which, though

you led me from it, you cannot lead me


back! I feel like one, who, misled by a

false guide, sees the torch extinguished

when it was burning brightest, and has to

feel her way back in darkness and alone.

Oh ! how many floods of tears, what ago-

nies of prayer, what self-humiliation, what

self-reproach are before me (and all how me-

rited,) before I regain the path I have lost!

The shades of paradise no longer can shel-

ter me; I hear the voice of God walking in

the shades of the evening, and tremble at

his summons. Alas! will he accept a heart

that a mortal has rejected—doubt and dark-

ness are on me now. I sometimes question

whether I ever knew the truth as it is in

Jesus, or walked with God in spirit and in

truth; such is the consequence of falling

from God. I mistrust my own sincerity, I

even doubt that I ever was sincere; how

can I rely on a heart that deceived me on

Ma



27S WOMEX.

this moment, I could not spurn you, but I

would not raise you—

" Still less think of what I cannot name


—that the hand you have resigned will ever

be given to another. Oh no! I feel even

in injustice, you cannot be so unjust; in

desertion, you cannot be so cruel—you can-

not—but I have done. Believe me there

is no sacrifice in this—it costs us little to

make a resolution, which we know we have

not long to keep. Every line that I write,

a voice seems to call to me, " Bid him fare-

well, and return to your God." I will try

to obey it. Oh how strong the contrast be-

tween us at present! I am about to return

to the existence you thought so gloomy

and monotonous, and which even / feel so

now. I shall be present at sermons, of

which I hear not a word; sing hymns,


274 WOMEN.

mies, had his boat overturned. The son

cried to his father to save him ; the father

saved himself—but never forgave himself—


and at the moment of his death, continued

to repeat in agony, " Father, save me-!"

The words of his dying son—words which

had never ceased to ring in his ears, which

rung in them still even then. May my

last words never echo thus in your ears;

yet if you should hear them, they will be

lifting your name to Heaven.

" Even thus I have one consolation—it

was you who deserted me. I think my

heart must have broke before I could have

resigned you.

" I am now writing in a room in which.

you have been so often.—I look at every

ebject which recalls your image, without

WOMEN. 275

having the power of recalling yourself. I

feel an agony, which even you would pity

me for. The books which you gave me,


and which I arranged so as to meet your

eye ; the flowers which I collected, because

you loved them; the harp which I placed

in-sight, to remind you that /, too, hoped to

sing for you—all these objects are around

me, and I do not think that a sword thrust

into my heart could give me more actual

pain than their simple sight. What plea-

sure they gave me once, when I entered

this room only to pray ! This pain, how-

ever, must soon abate. I know it must,

from its horrible force—it will grow milder,

or it will be less-felt, as my strength gra-

dually declines.

" I had-accustomed myself to watch your

l -knocks at the door; latterly they were very

. Infrequent, and then I watched them closer,

made an era in my day; now when I

276 WOMEN.

-

hear a knock, my heart beats still, but it is

only from habit, and habit (or any thing else)


cannot make it beat much longer.

" You will return in spring; in spring,

you will be back with your triumphant

beautiful bride : perhaps you will visit this

room from some lingering feeling; you will

see the flowers, the books, the music, you

once loved, all in their place, where you for-

merly wished to see them ; and perhaps you

will ask, where am J.—" I came," says the

eastern tale you told me, " to the tombs of

my friends, and asked where are they ? and

echo answered, Wliere ?"—

EVA.

END OF VOLUME SECOND
