               







                 HOWARD CASTLE.





                    A ROMANCE










Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.

                HOWARD CASTLE;

                     OR A

                    ROMANCE

              FROM THE MOUNTAINS.

            ------------------------
                IN FIVE VOLUMES.
            ------------------------

                BY A NORTH BRITON.


  What is vain life? an little flight of days,
  A still-delusive round of sickly joys,
  A scene of little cares and trifling passions,
  If not ennobled by some deeds of virtue.THOMSON.


                       VOL. IV.

                       LONDON:
            Printed at the Minerva Press for
          A.K.NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STREET.
                       --------
                         1817.

               
            HOWARD CASTLE

              CHAPTER I.

A BEAUTIFUL symphony being
sounded by the French-horns, stopped the
infantine conversation, which had rather
been distressing to Clementina. Lord
Howard felt that if it had been within the
power of possibility, it would have been
most interesting to him; but the scheme
laid by the little prattler having no pros-
pect of being realized, it did not create the
sensations which it did in her bosom.

  The air which was played was a plain-
tive Italian song; the instruments ceased,
except the softest accompaniment, and the
sweetest voices sung an ode to peace.

  "That is written by my brother Louis,"
VOL. IV.            B2       HOWARD CASTLE.

whispered Janetta, "and he sings with
those fine ladies who came from Paris; and
after supper there is to be another song,
composed by him, but we shall be in bed;
but I have heard it; it is made for papa's
birthday, and is very fine, but e does not
know any thing of it; he is to be sur-
prised. Ah! there is my dear Louis," cried
Janetta, springing from her seat; "I will
bring him here." She flew towards him,
and getting hold of his hand, pulled him
along. Clementina observed the struggle,
but janetta succeeded--"Here is my bro-
ther; he cut me those fine grapes. They are
all eat Louis," turning up her little basket
to shew it was empty. "This gentleman
eat some and praised them; and this lady
and out papa had the largest bunch."

  Louis made a graceful bow to Clemen-
tina as he took the offered hand of lord
Howard. The elegance of the boy's figure
and manner surprised her as much as his
animated, open countenance pleased her.

  "Why have we not seen you before?"
said lord Howard.

  "I was engaged, my lord," was his an-
swer.        HOWARD CASTLE.     3

   "Janetta tells us we were obliged to you
for the song we have just now heard and
admired."

   "Oh," replied he, blushing, "you ought
not to have told; I desired you to keep it
a secret."

   "Indeed, my dear Louis, it was so ad-
mired, I was proud to say you wrote it,
and that you were one of the singers. I
tried not to tell, but I could not help it."

   Janetta and Louisa were soon after call-
ed by the countess, who consigned them to
the care of their attendants. They wished Clementina good-night, and retired to the
pavilion without a murmur.

   "Is not this the picture of true happi-
ness?" said lord Howard. "The countess,
with every accomplishment which can grace
the fair sex, has every endowment which is
requisite to make her the best and most com-
fortable of wives, and the most tender of mo-
thers; she cares not for the contemptuous 
smiles of those gay fair ones who are strangers
to their offspring, and who trust them en-
tirely to the care of their nursery-maids. If
you visit her in a morning, you find her edu-

                    B 24.                HOWARD CASTLE.

cating those lovely little girls, and the count in his library with his son. Every pursuit, every amusement is mutual;no jarring contradiction, so often heard between married people,each asserting their right of independence and prerogative.The count and countess de Brille seem to have one object in view--the happiness of each other.If I was to have a wife," said lord Howard,"I should wish to have first such a one as the count has;I should choose to take him as my pattern, and I should be almost confident of domestic happiness;but," said he,"I hope you have not forgotten the plan I laid in coming here--to shew you one favourite walk of mine;it is very near, and very beautiful;you see they are again bust waltzing;when should we have a better opportunity than the present? There is still light sufficient to see the surrounding scenery;all are at present deeply engaged/"

Clementina hesitated--"Mrs.Conway promised to accompany us."

"She has been absent so long," said Lord Howard,"I believe she is engaged at cards."        HOWARD CASTLE.     5

   "And will her son not be a sufficient
guard for Miss Bouverie? Believe me, I
shall take care no harm happens to you.
In this country there is such freedom of
manner, no one will observe (as perhaps
they might do in London) that you ho-
noured me by walking with me; without
a third person, in England they might
deem me imprudent, as I certainly am in a
very dangerous situation, exposed to such
temptation as enjoying a friendship with
you, which must be Platonic.""

   As he said these words, he gently drew
her hand under his mar, and proceeded to-
wards the pleasure-ground. The noise of
the instruments was soon beyond their
hearing, and they were in as total retire-
ment as if they were alone in the world.
The French people would not leave a
scene of gaiety for all the picturesque view
in nature. Lord Howard led Clementina 
along a most delightful walk, shaded from
the north by every shrub famed for beau-
ty or sweetness, entirely selected by the
countess, planted by her direction, and 
flourishing under her fostering care. There
were many rare and tender flowers, which  6               HOWARD CASTLE

were protected by the most curious wickerwork, woven by the hands of Louis, who assisted his mother in her botanical amusements. He could give, by her and the count's instruction, a very tolerable account of the different tribes. Lord Howard made the remark, that he ought to have accompanied them. "I have taken a most pleasing office upon myself," said he; "but I find I am not sufficiently qualified to make an instructive companion."

  Clementina, without considering the import of her words, replied - "Be assured I am perfectly satisfied with you as a guide."

 She literally meant what she said, but lord Howard could not refrain from putting a construction upon her words, which he knew was not her meaning. He looked with the utmost animation, as he said - "I cannot be assured of any thing half so delightful."

 Clementina smiled as she replied - "Are you not my conductor, and in the sweetest paradise that ever was seen?"

  "Ah!" exclaimed he, "dream after
dream ensues, and still I dream that they
shall still succeed, and still am disappointed."
                HOWARD CASTLE.          7

     " Yes," exclaimed she, and in the language of the same poet, " and find the total of your hopes and fears, dreams-empty dreams."

     " Are my fears dreams?  Do you say so?"

     At that moment Clementina would have given the world could she have said-" I know not what you hope or what you fear," which would have led to an eclaircissement; but all power of utterance ceased.  She feared there might be a strange construction put upon her explaining her friendship with lord Montague (without divulging his secret), and she should expect, what in all probability she should not hear, his connexion with Miss Clifford was a complete barrier to her hopes, even if he believed her  at liberty.   A silence caused on both sides; each appeared struck by the quotations which had passed, but neither had courage to pursue the subject.  Lord Howard was convinced, the further he investigated Clementina's feelings, the more convinced he should be there were no hopes for him.

     The walk continued to present innu-
8          HOWARD CASTLE.

merable pretty views; with each turn a new
object arrested the attention; but the day
was so near a close, that the fine scenery
was nearly obscured from their sight.
When Clementina was on the point of pro-
posing to return to the pavilion, they reach-
ed a most beautiful botanical garden. In
the midst of it was an octagonal green-
house, with frames for glass entirely round
it.--"Here," said lord Howard, "the ami-
able countess spends part of every day; all
those nicely-trained flowers are taught to
grow as they do by her; all those delicate
plants are supported by her; the different
tribes are arranged under her direction;
she is the presiding genii of the place, and 
diffuses regularity and order around her."

   "You are quite an enthusiast," said Cle-
mentina, "on this subject."

   "I am," replied lord Howard; "there 
is such a combination of external and in-
ternal charms in the countess de Brille,
that she must be admired with enthusiasm."

   "Does the count know what a favourite
she is of yours?" asked Clementina.

   "Could he," replied lord Howard, "have
reason to even suspect his wife of the levity               HOWARD CASTLE.    9

which is natural to her sex in this country, 
she would cease to be favourite of mine;
my ideas are serupulously exact, in regard
to the conduct of women. I detest a prude,
and always suspect her to be acting an un-
natural part; a flirt disgusts me."

  "How seldom," said Clementina, "can
you be pleased! I should suppose, by your
accont. never."

  "That would be far from the trutyh," he
replied; "do you accuse all your own sex
of being either prudes or flirts? I have
not long had the honour of Miss Bouverie's 
acquaintance. but from the little speciemen
I have had of her character, I should sup-
pose she was neither. I firmly believe that
in the married state she will be a second
countess de brille."

  Clementina durst not ask what he thought
of a male flirt, as she suspected he was in
some degree acting the character. She
took no notice of the speech, but entered
the conservatory, which was partly strip-
ped of its beautiful plants, the glass was en-
tirely taken off; the top, which was merely
a canvas shade for some of the more tender

               B310         HOWARD CASTLE.

flowers, was supported on open pillars,
upon which were trained the cobea,
the scarlet passion-flower, and the numberless
others, all in full blow——" This," said she,
" is a retreat I could spend hours in; the
scene we have quitted is the same thing
over again, and becomes fatiguing in the
extreme; her, with such variety, it would
be impossible to tire."

   " I always understood," replied lord
Howard, " that it was natural to be fond
of what we excelled in, or to appear where
we are most admired.  I should have sup-
posed you would have been fond of dan-
cing, and of public places."

   " Then," said she, " you think I am a
being solely led by vanity, and that I would
sacrifice my time from all rational pursuits,
for the pleasure of hearing foolish speeches,
in which there is no sincerity.  Solomon,
in all his glory, is not arrayed like one of
these," taking hold of a lily.  " What is
there in creation so beautiful as many, or,
I may say, all the productions of the vege-
table world?  Examine with a microscope
the most trifling flower, and with the same
glass examine the human face——how you

        HOWARD CASTLE.     11

will start from the latter with horror and
disgust!"

   "True," rejoined lord Howard; "but
the face of a beautiful woman was not
meant to be examined with a magnifying 
glass; happily the eyes of our sex were
not formed to discover defects in what na-
ture gave for our delight and our solace."

   "Not always," said Clementina; "they
often prove mischievous toys, who inflict
severe punishment upon your sex."

   "They certainly inflict wounds," repli-
ed lord Howard, "which sometimes are
incurable; if the beloved object is beyond
the reach of an admirer, he is undoubtedly
worthy of commiseration."

   "By no means," answered Clementina;
"if there is an engagement, it ought to be
held sacred. I have no idea of either man
or woman sporting with the happiness of 
a being whose affections they have strove
to gain, and promised theirs in return; it is
a pledge that never should be broken."

   "I highly applaud your sentiments,"
was his answer, "and I believe they are
not in theory, but in practice."

   Miss Clifford was in Clementina's12          HOWARD CASTLE.

thoughts, and lord Montague was in lord
Howard's.

   "Our sex," continued she, "often entail
misery on yours, by leading men from their
duty to parents, and to the rank they hold
in society."

   "If sorrow is entailed by marriage,"
said lord Howard, "why is the woman to
bear the blame for her husband's folly?
She is not to be censured for having a fair
face, a fine form, and pleasing manners. If 
a man chooses to fall in love, surely a wo-
man may return that love, and marry the
object of it, without being liable to scorn?
--I should be the person to blame."

   "You did the foolish thing," said Cle-
mentina; "but the woman was the cause."

   "If nature had bestowed every gift to
entrance the heart of man," replied he,
"and with the most perfect exterior, she
had given her every endowment to amuse,
to interest, to charm the senses, what 
mortal could withstand such a combina-
tion? would he not run every risk to at-
tain the object of his adoration, and consi-
der the prudence of the step after it was 
taken?"         HOWARD CASTLE.        13

" And perhaps bitterly lament it," said
Clementian ; " but I am convinced, if your
lordship introduces a lady Howard to the
world, she will be deserving of the exalted
station she will fill. Pray let us retrace our
steps; the company may have retired from 
the pavilion to the house,and it will appear
strange our being absent."

  " They will think I am one of the hap-
piest of human beings," replied lord How-
ard, " in being permitted to attend Miss
Bouverie ; they know not that it is a most
dangerous, although a most pleasing office."

  " It was a self-appointed one," said Cle-
mentina, smiling.

  " True," rejoined he; " and had I a 
chance of succeeding, I should be tempted
to nominate myself; to what would you 
permit me to aspire?"
  
  " Very high," was her answer. " Your
friendship I should esteem a treasure."

  " My friendship, believe me, you pos-
sess."

  He paused, as if inclination would have
prompted him to have added more, but pru-
dence prevented him.

  She observed the restraint he appeared



                  HOWARD CASTLE.     14

to be under, and concluded his engagement with Miss Clifford had come to his recollection.

     When they were in sight of the pavilion, they found the company were dispersed in groups.  The dancing had ceased, and the French-horns were sounding the sweetest melody.

     "Oh," exclaimed Clementina, at the same time quickening her pace, " we have returned in time to hear those delightful notes! are you not, my lord, quite charmed with them?"

     "I hear them," was his answer, " and I am sensible the harmony is good; but they have not the same effect upon me as they have upon your feelings, although I am an admirer of music; this found dwells only on my ear."

     " The melancholy notes,"  said she, "vibrate on my heart, and give me an indescribable sensation."

     " I feel an indescribable sensation at my heart," replied lord Howard;  "but it is not occasioned by music."

     " Your lordship will perhaps allow," replied she, " that novelty is pleasing. I 
        HOWARD CASTLE.     15

never heard the French-horns well played
before; they are now managed with such
exquisite science and taste, that they al-
most convey me in imagination to heaven,
and that is seraphic music."

   "My ideas," said lord Howard, "are
still more strange; I can hardly convince
myself I am not in heaven, and in the com-
pany of an angel."

   "Let us pause," cried she, "and listen
to this symphony; there is nothing me-
taphorical in it; were our feelings ruffled
by wayward fancy, it would sooth them."

   She made a signal for silence, as she saw
her companion was inclined to pursue con-
versation. They stood a few minutes,
when the instruments ceased; and Clemen-
tina immediately moved towards Mrs.
Conway, who she distinguished walking
with the countess and a large party. The
light was so obscured, that they were not
perceived by the group, who they joined
just as a proposal was made by the count to
retire to the chateau, which was gaily illu-
minated. Mrs. Conway very readily gave
her hand to be conducted into it, as she had
long dreaded the damp of the evening; her16          HOWARD CASTLE.

English ideas attached consumption with
the night-air. Clementina's thin dress
alarmed her, and she was relieved when she
had the prospect of entering the house.

   Clementina had separated from lord
Howard when she joined the company.

   He again took her hand——" This," said
he, "is my property for this evening."

   " You have had it, my lord, without any 
competition," replied Clementina; " the
idea I can only speak English, and dance
country-dances, has thrown me a burthen
upon my countryman; self-conceit will
not permit me to suppose I should have
otherwise been so dependent upon your
charity."

   " It is your charity I crave," said he;
" mine has been self-indulgence, from
which I feel a painful sensation——

    " To love Clementina shall I be forsworn;
    To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn."

   " Why not begin the speech?" said she;
" do not mutilate our greatest bard,  The
first words are, and which you should have
spoken, 'To leave my Julia shall be for-
sworn."               Howard Castle.      17

  "I chose the part," replied he, "the
most applicable to the subject; I had no
Julia to introduce; but I could have gone
on with Protheus, and explained--

   'Oh sweet, suggesting love! if I have sinned,
    Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it.
    At first I did adore a twinkling star,
    But now I worship a celestial sun."

  "The lesser luminary," said Clementina, 
"in the present instance, ought to take
place of the greater, unless it is a fallen star
you worshipped."
   "And as that is nothing but a meteor,"
replied he, " I may be at liberty to adore
the sun."

  "Let us return," said she, "to the
opaque terra firma.  Shakespeare has ca-
rried you, in imagination, far beyond the
power of my reason to accompany you.
This scene is more suited to my capacity,
and is hardly less brilliant."
  They entered the hall, which is ablaze
of light ; but the ball-room surpassed any
thing Clementina had ever seen before.  
Opposite to the entrance, there was a large
star, of the most brilliant lustre ; under was18           HOWARD CASTLE.

a strong resemblance of the count, in trans-
parency, encircled with wreaths of laurel
and evergreens, interspersed with mottoes,
emblematical of the day.  Beyond the in-
scription, there were rays of lamps, which
made a frame to the portrait, and which
threw the most beautiful light upon the
company.  Dancing was begun by Cle-
mentina and lord Howard.  He seemed
to feel all he had described, in flying with
a beloved object, who appeared equally
animated and pleased.

   Mrs. Conway stood gazing and admiring
theirs forms, which passed her with the ve-
locity and lightness of aërial beings; never
had she seen her son so animated, or Cle-
mentina look so beautiful.

   " They were destined by Heaven for
each other," said the countess, "and
ought not to be separated."

   " I agree with you," said Mrs. Conway;
"but if the fates have decreed it otherwise,
what can be done?"

   "Oh," exclaimed the countess, " La
Belle Angloise is not to be compared with
the elegant Miss Bouverie."

   "I have heard repeatedly," Said Mrs.       HOWARD CASTLE.     19

Conway, "since I have been in Paris, of
La Belle Angloise; I should have conclud-
ed she is now dancing with my son; what
Englishwoman can compare to Miss Bou-
verie, who eclipses all in her own country?"

   "She must in every country she visits,"
said the countess; "all are enchanted with
her who have seen her to-night; they only
regret she does not understand the French
language, otherwise she would have had tor-
rents of fine speeches poured into her ears."

   Mrs. Conway smiled--"I thought the
gentlemen would have contrived to have
addressed her in her native tongue."

   "There is a dignity of manner in your
friend," was her reply, "which repels fa-
miliarirty; unless the gentlemen could be
eloquent, they durst not address her; I
know she is universally admired."

   Mrs. Conway ad no mind to let the sub-
ject drop, as she wished, above all things, to
gain some information from the countess;
she asked her if she was acquainted with 
the young lady who was honoured by the
title of La Belle Angloise?

   "Oh, yes," replied she; "lord Howard
introduced her to all his friends; but as20 HOWARD CASTLE.

she is a countrywoman of yours, I should
have expected information from you."

"I never heard of her," said Mrs. Con-
way," till I arrived in Paris; my son has
not introduced her to me."

"That is strange," said the countess,
"as it is generally supposed he meant to
marry her; but I shall not now believe it;
his introduction was sufficient to gain her
notice and respect, as never was there a man
more deservedly beloved than lord Howard
is; his character is so established and so ex-
alted, that suspicion of any kind, deroga-
tory to the young lady, never entered into
our minds. We believed her virtuous, and
possessed of lord Howard's affections; but
if his mother is ignorant of the connexion,
I am convinced none exists, nor is there
any in contemplation. All will be explain-
ed to your satisfaction."

"In what way did he introduce her?"
asked Mrs. Conway.

"By the appellation of his protégée.
He put her under the care of a most re-
spectable woman; there was a mystery at-
tending her situation, before she became a
member of Mrs. Biddulph's family, that the                 HOWARD CASTLE.       21

world is not acquainted with; but the world has not business to investigate every thing so deeply; it will all be cleared up, to the honour of lord Howard, who delights in doing good, and in acts benevolence."

     Mrs. Conway was pleased with her encomiums, but still she wished to hear more of the young lady, who, in spite of the countess's assurances, filled her bosom with uneasy sensations-" Was she to compare with Miss Bouverie in point of beauty?"

     Her answer was-" That all depended upon opinion.  Miss Clifford is pretty, gentle, and pleasing, unobtrusive in her manners, and appears amiable in her tamper, but in no way to be compared to Miss Bouverie, whose fine face, commanding figure, and graceful, elegant manners, can only be combined to subdue lord Howard's heart.  His attention," continued she, " I have remarked, is totally different to his country women; his eyes are fixed on Miss Bouverie with animated hope; he watches her actions as if there was not another human being in existence; he listens to her with the most profound attention, and seems to hang with rapture on every word22            HOWARD CASTLE.

she utters; his brilliant conversation, which
is so justly admired, is lost, since this divi-
nity appeared; even when she is not in
company, I believe his wandering thoughts
are with her.  We could not account for
the change, but this evening has convin-
ced me he admires her; and your igno-
rance of Miss Clifford has completely done
away the idea that she will be lady How-
ard."

   Mrs. Conway earnestly wished the coun-
tess de Brille might be correct in her sus-
picions.  If there was no connexion with
Miss Clifford, which she still dreaded, and
if her son admired Clementina as much as
was supposed, still her engagement with
her cousin would impede their union.

   The supper-room was thrown open at a
very late hour, and surpassed all the rooms
in elegance and splendour. There was a dis-
play of every thing which could please the
eye, and gratify the taste. The ears of the
company were likewise studied, as the
sound of the French-horns in the anti-
room charmed all, but particularly Cle-
mentina, who was afraid she should not be
gratified by again hearing their sweet tones;
               Howard Castle.     23

her spirits were exhilarated in a wonderful
manner; she had passed a most delightful
evening; lord Howard's attention to her
had been undivided by any other person;
she had suffered herself to listen to his
agreeable conversation with the utmost
pleasure, and she had in a great measure
forgot his engagement.  They mutually
seemed inclined to enjoy the present hap-
ppy moments, without considering how
long they might be permitted such feli-
city.

  The count de Brille's ball was the foun-
dation of much anxiety and misery to lord
Howard.  He had spent the most bewitch-
ing hours, and he trembled for the conse-
quence.  No character he held in more
contempt than that of a false friend; if Miss
Bouverie was really engaged to marry lord
Montague (which at times he flattered
himself was not the case), how would he
sink in his own estimation, if he had used
any means to supplant him! he durst not
be explicit, till nearer the period of their
parting, when he would, like sir Theodo-
sius Sydney, bid her adieu for ever, if hope
was extinguished.   24 HOWARD CASTLE.

The sound of female voices attracted the
attention of the company ; they sung the
verses which had been promised by Ja-
netta; they were the effusions of an affec-
tionate son, who had, in wonderful poetie
language, painted, as far as he could, the
virues of his father.

Clementina watched the countenance of
the count, who expressed the surprise he
felt ; he suspected who was the author of
the pretty but flattering stanzas, which
concluded with a petition for his long life,
health, and happiness.

"Ah!" exclaimed the count, "my boy
is the inventor of this little interlude ; his
affection is gratifying, but his compliments
are distressing."

The company entreated an encore.

The count at last consented, and it was
again sung, amidst the plaudits of the party.

Clementina was ashamed of her feelings,
as she could not repress the tears of admi-
ration from tracing each other down her
cheeks, as she heard the affectionate boy's
voice straining to sound his father's praises.
The music was extremely pretty, as he had
put the words into the hands of an amateur.
            HOWARD CASTLE.         25

   The singers retired, and Louis entered
the room, blushing at the praises which were
lavished upon him; he walked immedi-
ately to his fond father, who gently chid
him for flattering him so much.

   "There was no flattery," said Louis; " I
merely put into verse what every body
thought; I meant to surprise you by keep-
ing my plan a secret."

   " You have both surprised and pleased 
me," said the count; " go to your seat, my
boy, and be satisfied your juvenile produc-
tion is admired, and I am highly grati-
fied."

   Louis retired, overpowered by the com-
pliments which were lavished upon him.

   The countess produced many printed
copies of the words, and dispersed them
around her.

   Louis had placed himself by lord Howard,
who appeared to be his particular favourite.
He told him Miss Bouverie wished to have
the song presented by him;  he had a writ-
ten copy in his pocket which Clementina
preferred to the printed, as the notes were
with it.  Louis seemed gratified by the

   VOL. IV.   26         HOWARD CASTLE

commendations which lord Howard bestowed
up on his production,and Miss
Bouverie's she would play the
pretty air,delighted him exceedingly.


                 CHAPTER II

Clementina observed Mrs. Convey whisper
to the countess, at the same time their eyes were turned towards her;she was
afraid her friend was lying plans for her
to amuse the company, which she felt perfectly
unequal to do; her fears were verified, when she heard a harp ordered into
the room,and these words addressed to her
by the countess-"Will Miss Bouverie
favour us with a song?"

    Clementina rose from her seat, and in the most earnest manner entreated to be
excused; but no words she could use
were of the least avail. The count, who was an enthusiast in music, was all bustle and activity as he was charmed with this proposal; he saw and pitied the evident distress
    
             HOWARD CASTLE.          27

which was painted on Miss Bouverie's
countenance; he could not give up the
pleasure of hearing her, but he made a
propasal that she should not be the first
to exhibit; the countess should set her the
example.

  The countess, with the most perfect good
humour, seated herself at the instrument,
and sung a lively French song; she had
not a fine voice, but the bewitching air
with which she did everything would have 
rendered her performance pleasing, had she
even displayed less science than she did.
Lord Howard, who admired her manner
praise, and expressed, in animated terms, 
his thanks for her so readily acquiescing
with the count's request.

  She smiled as she gave him her hand_
"Do you praise me." said me,"for obey-
ing my husband? consider the inducements
I had, first to please the count, by doing
what he desired, and then I shall please 
myself and the whole company. I now
can, with perfect confidence, petition Miss
Bouverie to follow my example; she, I
28          HOWARD CASTLE.

dare say, excels in whatever she under-
takes."

   "One would suppose," replied lord How-
ard, "that nature had lavished all her gifts
on her exterior; has she likewise given her
the voice of a siren, with the beauty of an
angel?"

   Clementina overheard these words; they
did not tend to give her composure; the 
count allowed her no time to recover the
agitation she was in; to exhibit before so
large a party did not disturb her so much
as the wish to appear well in the eyes of 
lord Howard; she feared she should fail in
the attempt, as she never before had felt 
so agitated. The tremor she was in threw
the most brilliant colour into her face; she
placed herself at the instrument, which
was at a distance from the tables.

   The extreme beauty of her appearance,
as she bent over the harp, did not escape 
observation. Lord Howard saw, and pi-
tied the confusion which was painted on
her expressive countenance; he felt uneasy
at seeing her so much embarrassed; he
knew not the powers she possessed; if he
had, he could have felt no alarm. As she                   HOWARD CASTLE       29

struck the chords in the symphony, she
raised her eyes; but they were again quick-
ly bent down, as she perceived lord How-
ard intently gazing on her.

    The song she had chosen was the plain-
tive Italian air which she had before sung in
public; it suited the melody of her voice,
and the great compass which she, with the
utmost ease, commanded. Lord Howard's
apprehensions vanished the moment he
heard the powers she possessed; he heard
the sweetest notes, guided by the most
exquisite taste, which vibrated on his heart,
as she had described the effects of the
French-horns on hers; he gazed on her, as
he listened to her dulcet voice, and firmly
believed that never human being was so
near perfect as she was.

    When she paused, the torrent of appro-
bation was oppressive; she attempted to
quit the instrument, but the solicitations
were sp numerous, that she was under the
necessity of again striking the vibrating
strings, and sing a favourite English song.
Her composure was perfectly restored; she
was supported by a second, which she be-
lieved was lord Howard's voice; it ani
30          HOWARD CASTLE.

mated her; and never was there a compo-
sition more justice done to--the harmony
was beautiful.

   When the song was finished, Clementi-
na ventured to thank lord Howard for his 
support; he replied--"Conceit prompted
me; you required no support; it was the
impulse of the moment, that my voice
should be joined with the most delightful
notes I ever heard."

   "Ah, my lord! this example of flattery,
which is sounding round you, has taken
effect."

   She rose from her seat, handed by lord
Howard, amidst the most unbounded pro-
fusion of high-flown compliments; none
took any hold of her feelings, which were
lavished upon her by the company; a sin-
gle encomium from lord Howard pleased
her; she listened to every wor he uttered
with a secret sensation which she had never
before felt. Many followed the example of
Clementina, but none reached to the
summit of excellence which she had done;
she heard lord Howard addressed by the
lively Frenchwoman who had accosted
him in the gardens, in pretty much the        HOWARD CASTLE.        31

same strain, accusing him of forgetting la
belle Angloise.

  "Have I not introduced la belle Angloise
to the world this evening? Miss Clifford
must drop the title, now Miss Bouverie
has appeared."

  "But will she drop the title to your at-
tention?" was the lady's answer.

  "Certainly not," was lord Howard's re-
ply.

  Clementina did not understand another
sentence; enough had reached her ear to
set her mind at work; they continued to
converse, but only a word now and then
could she make out, as both spoke in a 
low voice.

  The lady at last said-" How your
whole soul seemed wrapped up!"

  Clementina lost a good deal; she heard
protegee pronounced soon after, and con-
cluded Miss Clifford was the subject of their
discourse. Clementina was relieved when
Mrs. Conway's carriage was announced;
she was fatigued with the amusements of
the evening; the lateness of the hour, and
the great variety she had seen, she believ-
32   HOWARD CASTLE.

ed, had worn out her spirits; but the real
cause was disappointement.

  Lord Howard's conversation and pleas-
ing manners had rendered the time she
had spent at the chateau particularly agree-
able; she had suffered herself to be in some
degree clated by his attention; the few
words she heard brought the most uncom-
fortable sensation over her, and the neces-
sity of quitting her beloved friend grieved
her; but an effort must be made to avoid
society, which was dangerous in the ex-
treme, as it was by far the most pleasing
she had ever met with.

  The count led Mrs. Conway to her car-
riage, and lord Howard took the passive
hand of Clementina; he claimed the pro-
mised seat with them, which was readily
granted by Mrs. Conway, and they drive
off.

  Clementina's thoughts continued occu-
pied with the occurrences of the evening;
she repeated to herself several of lord How-
ard's speeches, which had struck her as
marking too much his approbation of her,
were he engaged to Miss Clifford; it might                                  HOWARD CASTLE.                    38

be unmeaning gallantry, but her ears must
not be assailed with such dangerous flattery.

Lord Howard had not a volatile manner;
what he said appeared to be the result of
reflection, not the giddy impulse of the
moment, and as such most improper for
her to listen to; she was lost in a labyrinth
of plans, which required time and solitude
to digest. Lord Howard observed her ab-
sense, and wondered what had worked the
change; he had never seen her so cheerful
as she had been during the evening, which
had, in his idea, passed delightfully; she
now seemed to have repented of the lively
mood she had been in, as, from the mo-
ment she had quitted the chateau, she ap-
peared lost in thought.

At last he ventured to remark, he fear-
ed she had exhausted her whole stock of
spirits at the count de Brille's, or was it
fatigue which rendered her so silent?

She faintly smiled at his interrogation-
"Is it absolutely necessary I should ac-
count for any change which may take
place in either my spirits or manner? I
have not exhausted myself at the chateau,
nor am I fatigued by the exertion of the34         HOWARD CASTLE

evening. Sometimes I think it is particularly
agreeable to indulge my wandering faney,
and sometimes to indulge in reflections on
the past."

  " Have your thoughts," said he, " quit-
ted the present scene? The brilliant fete we
have just witnessed, and the happy family
group we have seen, must exhilarate the 
spirits, not depress them."

  " Is it impossible," said she, " to be si-
lent without being melancholy? we have 
spent a very charming evening at a most
beautiful place; the count and countess de
Brille are patterns for conjugal happiness;
I have admired all, and feel gratified to you
for introducing me to them."

  Mrs. Conway, who was worn out with 
fatigue, reclined in a corner of the carriage, 
and soon was fast asleep. Clementina  al-
most wished herself in the same state of 
forgetfulness, as a tête-à-téte with lord
Howard, she was convinced, was dangerous.
The restraint which the few words spoken
by a volatile Frenchwoman had thrown
over her manner was painful to her; she
was afraid lord Howard would observe it;
but it was impossible to explain why she

        HOWARD CASTLE.     35

was changed, as she had no title to expect
any attention from him; he was at liberty
to make his selection, which she believed
he had done; the only thing she could do
was to quit his society, before he made a 
discovery which would be mortifying in
the extreme; she feared her heart was sus-
ceptible, but she would fly, and hide in
solitude the unfortunate partiality which
had, by imperceptible degrees, taken pos-
session of her. Nothing she so earnestly
wished for as a pretence for returning to
England; how to manage with Mrs. Con-
way, not to create suspicion, she knew
not, as she was resolved, if possible, to
bury the secret in her bosom.

   Lord Howard found all attempts to rouse
her to conversation were fruitless; she
sunk into a reverie the moment he ceased
speaking; he wondered what could occasion
so sudden a change, but he was resolved
not to teaze her further on the subject.

   They both continued silent till they had nearly reached Paris, when lord Howard
said, with much animation--"How I
should have envied any man who had
handed Miss Bouverie into a carriage, and 36           HOWARD CASTLE.

I had seen him spring in after her! I should
have believed his situation the happiest in
the world."

  She smiled, as she replied—"It is a
good subject for moralizing upon; there
is a field of amusement without my speak-
ing a single word."

  "No ideas of my own could, in any de-
gree, make up for your taciturnity; can
no subject interest you, or call your atten-
tion? I can give you information of poor
Pelatro, who has been extremely ill since
you saw him—almost on the brink of the
grave."

  Clementina expressed the anxiety which
she really felt to know what situation he
was in.

  "They have changed their habitation,"
continued lord Howard; "they now can
receive a visit from Miss Bouverie, if she
will condescend to enter their abode with
me as her guide; I will introduce you to
a most interesting female, but poor Pelatro
must not know you have been near him;
he has been in a state of violent derange-
ment since the night he addressed you in
the playhouse; I am afraid it was a mark         HOWARD CASTLE.              37

his senses wandered from the delightful
vision he opened to my view. Do you
recollect the apellation he gave to you?"
 "I do, my lord, perfectly."

 "It is engraven on my memory," said
lord Howard, "as the most flattering,
bewitching sentence I ever heard. He
called you my bride- an idea I shall ever
feel grateful to poor Pelatro for; although
it was the effusion of a distempered brain, 
it conveyed such unspeakable happiness to
me, that at this moment the repeating it 
has caused an emotion I cannot describe."

 "It is better," said Clementina, gravely,
"not to paint foolish feelings; merely the
wanderings of a diseased imagination ought
not to create either pain or pleasure.

 "Does your fancy," said lord Howard,
"never stray where reason cannot attend
it? do you never anticipate joys which
are not likely to take place?"

 "No," replied she; "I banish impossi-
bilities from my thoughts."

 "Ah!" replied he with energy, "you
have no temptation; your thoughts centre
where your affections are placed; one mag-
net attracts your senses."38      HOWARD CASTLE.

  "If my affections were fixed," was her
answer, "I surely should not for a moment
lay a plan in which the object of them was
not connected."

  "Happy, happy being!" exclaimed he, "to
be the subject of Miss Bouverie's thoughts
--to be the possessor of her heart."

  Clementina smiled, as she replied--
"You forget the word if, which I began
the sentence with--I must again make use
of it. If either a man or woman has pro-
fessed a regard for another, and has gained
as ascendancy in the heart of the beloved
object, is that person not engaged, by ho-
nour, to keep steady? I think as much so
as if the marriage ceremony had taken
place; and I should have a wretched opi-
nion of any one who could sport with the
happiness of a human being; in no way
could a feeling heart be so tenderly touch-
ed as being deceived by a person beloved;
the ideas of the subject are exalted, of
course, as high as they possibly can be;
what a cruel disappointment! I should sup-
pose more sever than human nature could
support."        HOWARD CASTLE.     39

   "The more I converse with you," said
lord Howard, "the more I am convinced
there never was another being formed like
you; every word you utter conveys under-
standing, feeling, sympathy, with the most
exquisite tenderness. Oh. Miss Bouverie,
if every woman possessed such a mind, and
such correct ideas, how happy would it be
for our race!"

   "Are our sex alone to blame?" said
Clementina, with quickness. "How often 
do you men flirt, and pay attention where
you have no meaning, without once think-
ing the object of your pursuit has a heart,
perhaps a feeling one, that you are sporting
with? You may have an unrivalled fa-
vourite, until a more dazzling female ap-
pears; the old flame, to whom you (pardon
the liberty I take) had perhaps sworn in-
violable constancy, is neglected; all your
thoughts are occupied by the magnet, who
is the deity you worship, till a new face
again attracts your attention."

   "For Heaven's sake, do not use my name
in painting such a character!" exclaimed
lord Howard. "A beautiful woman is
one of God's most lovely works; I should40          HOWARD CASTLE.

admire her as an image formed to please
the eye; but I should do no more; my
heart would not recognise regular features,
or an elegant form, as its arbitress, unless
they were animated by a mind intelligent
and amiable. I am no flirt, Miss Bouverie,
nor have I spent my time in dangling after
the fair sex; I never have yet formed any en-
gagement, nor have I ever avowed my love
to any woman; so I am free from the dread-
ful stigma of being a male coquet. I abhor
it when I see it in either sex, and should
regard the person who had listened to my
protestations of affection with seeming at-
tention and complacency, as criminal in
the highest degree, were she to encourage
the admiration of another--I should fly
from her with disgust and thank my guar-
dian angel, who had preserved me from a
nearer connexion with one capable of be-
having with duplicity."

   "I had no intention," said she, "of
bringing you to your confessions; you
forced conversation, which perhaps would
have been as well avoided; I hope both our principles are good, and that neither of us
would give pain if we could help it."        HOWARD CASTLE.     41

   The carriage stopped at the hotel as Cle-
mentina finished the sentence.

   Mrs. Conway had enjoyed a comfortable
sleep; but lord Howard had not derived
the pleasure he had anticipated from the
tête-à-tête with Miss Bouverie, who had
been extremely guarded in her answers;
at times he flattered himself she was free,
but he again entertained the opinion that
her heart and hand were both engaged, and
his spirits were depressed from the idea.
It was strange, if she was engaged, that
the treasure should remain so long unclaim-
ed; but he was more and more resolved
not to interfere with the happy prerogative
of his friend; should he be mistaken in the
supposed engagement, he would not hesi-
tate a moment in securing, if possible, the 
prize. Her refusal of the marquis of Cle-
maire was an alarming circumstance, and 
filled him with apprehension.

   Clementina's mind was agitated by the
conversation which had passed; she firmly
believed lord Howard would not act cru-
elly either to Miss Clifford or herself; she
was convinced all would be explained in a 
manner to justify his character; but after 42            HOWARD CASTLE.

having been so recently involved in dis-
tress, by lord Montague's concealing his 
marriage, she was determind to be as
guarded as possible in her future conduct.
   The party retired to their several apart-
ments, when the lower class of Parisians
were repairingg to their daily occupations;
and not till almost their usual dinner-hour,
did the ladies make their appearance.
   After their meal was finished, lord How-
ard, who saw, from the languid coun-
tenance of Clementina, that she had not 
recoverec the fatigue of the preceding even-
ing, said - "Will you permit me to
drive you out in my curricle? the air will
be of service to you; and I am convinced,
seeing the sister of Pelatro will give you
pleasure; she is the most ingenious little
creature in the world; she is quite a Flora,
surrounded by the most beautiful flowers,
but all the produce of her own hands."
   Clementina looked at Mrs. Conway-
"Why cannot we go in the landau? then
we can all be accomodated."
   "My son," replied her friend, "has 
laid the plan extremly well; I am unfit 
for any thing;remaining so long in the          HOWARD CASTLE.    43

open air as we did last night, has given me
cold; I will stay quietly at home, and not
increase it."

  Clementina believed Mrs. Conway was
depriving herself of pleasure to indulge lord
Howard's whim, as in general she was par-
ticularly fond of air and exercise; she saw
his determination was to have no other com-
panion but herself in visiting the abode of
the Italian.

  The carriage was soon brought to the
door. Lord Howard took Clementina's
hand—"What a prospect!" said he; "to
be your guide—to introduce you to objects
of compassion—to hear you join with me in
the same sentiments of commiseration—to
see your eye glisten with what has sensi-
bly affected my feelings, can any thing be
more delightful?"

  "Nothing," replied Clementina, "can
be more desirable than a friend who can
participate in all one's pursuits; but it is
seldom to be met with; some little selfish
idea intrudes, and ruins all the gay plan of
intimacy."

  "Nothing could interrupt our scheme
of happiness," said lord Howard, as he44          HOWARD CASTLE.

placed himself by her in the carriage; "let
us be upon the enviable footing of bro-
ther and sister--let us mutually confide in
each other. Is not my mother yours by
adoption? She feels all the affection for
you that she could have done for my sis-
ter, had she lived."

   "And I love her," said Clementina, "as
sincerely as I could d, were she really my parent."

   "Then," said he, "let the genial warmth
of that love spread itself to her son. My
dear Clementina, permit me to have some
interest in your affections, and allow me to
feel for you as for a dearly-beloved sister."

   Clementina hardly knew what answer
to give to the strangest request, made
in a very abrupt manner. To have such
a brother as lord Howard, she should have
deemed the greatest of all blessings, but
to be on such a footing with him was
what her heart whispered her was impos-
sible--"Had I been blessed with a bro-
ther," replied she, with a degree of hesita-
tion in her manner, "I should have been
thankful for the gift."

   "And will you not," said he, "admit                  HOWARD CASTLE.                45

me, upon that footing, to be interested in all
your concerns? To have a right to protect 
and defend you until you become the pro-
perty of another? I would then resign my
charge, and watch, with anxious solicitude,
for your happiness, which, I trust, will be
as great as you deserve. The man you
marry will surely be sensible of the trea-
sure he possesses, and will shew his grati-
tude by making your comfort the study of
his life. The plan of my becoming a rela-
tion of yours by adoption, was the result
of a sleepless night; my fancy was in a tu-
mult; and the only way I could sooth it
was by appointing myself your guardian;
but you have disappointed my hopes, and 
spurned my offered friendship."
    
  The feelings which these words occasion-
ed in the bosom of Clementina precluded
an answer; she had occupied his waking
thoughts; perhaps she had rendered his pil-
low unrefreshed by sleep--perhaps he had
formed an engagement with Miss Clifford
before her arrival in Paris, and found, too
late, that she did not possess his heart. A thousand suppositions crowded on her ima-
gination; she was convinced that she oc-46 HOWARD CASTLE.

cupied his attenton; but she feared that
was all he had to bestow.

"The idea of imparting my scheme to
you," said he, after a considerable pause,
"made me propose this little plan of vi-
siting Pelatro; I wished to tell you how I
had in my own mind connected myself
with you."

"Your kind solicitude for my happiness,"
replied Clementina, "is infinitely flatter-
ing; that the son of my most valued friend
is interested in my welfare, must be ex-
tremely pleasing to me, and I trust I shall 
always prove worthy of your esteem and
friendship."

There was a cold stiffness in her manner
which checked the ardour of lord Howard; 
nothing he wished for more, next to being
possessed of her heart, than to be on the
list of her most intimate friends; would
she have readily agreed to treat him as a
brother, he might have expected her con-
fidence, and even interrogated her on her
engagement with lord Montague; being
on the footing of friendship did not pre-
clude love; if he found she was disengaged,
his fraternal affection would be very quick-              Howard Castle.                  47

ly converted into the most ardent passion,
which at that moment filled his bosom.

  Lord Howard had taken a circuitous
route to the lodgings of Pelatro; he had
avoided the streets as much as possible, as 
the rattle upon the pavement rendered
conversation unpleasant. At last they
reached the house, which was out of the
bustle of the great city; it looked pictu-
resque, from being completely covered by 
the most luxuriant vines; the very roof of 
the dwelling exhibited the finest bunches 
of grapes, the under branches forming a
natural trellis over each of the windows.
The air was perfumed with the sweetest
smells; orange flowers were in full blow;
and mignonette (the weed of the country)
was in the utmost profusion.

  "This," said Clementina, as she de-
scended from the carriage, "seems a para-
dise."

  Lord Howard opened the gate, and they
entered into a beautiful garden, in which
the cottage was placed, almost buried
amongst mulberry trees.

  "What a delightful change," said Cle-
mentina, again addressing her companion,
48         HOWARD CASTLÊ,

" must this have been to the Pelatros,
whose dwelling in Paris you described as
wretched!"

   " It is a happy situation for them," was
his answer.  " Poor Pelatro's malady was
increased by the noise and tumult of a
great town. This cottage, and these gar-
dens, belong to a gardener, who is likewise
a great breeder of silk-worms."

   At that moment the sweetest female
voice attracted their attention. She sung
an Italian air with the utmost taste and
feeling.

   " It is signora Pelatro," whispered lord
Howard, " who is perhaps soothing her
brother's troubled mind; she sings the mu-
sic of her country for hours to please him."

   " Let us listen," said Clementina; " it
is the sweetest air I ever heard."

   The lattice-window was open, and she
perceived a female, seated apparently at
work; still she persevered in the melan-
choly strain. Clementina would have stood
until she had ceased, had not lord Howard
reminded her of the hour.

   " The longer we remain here," said he,
" the shorter time we shall have to spend        HOWARD CASTLE.      49

in the cottage; and I assure you, that you
will be much gratified with the interesting
Italian and her employment."

  Clementina unwillingly advanced, but
siguora Pelatro did not perceive them; she
was so accustomed to strangers walking in
the gardens, an so intent upon her em-
ployment, that she continued to sing and
work, until lord Howard spoke in Italian,
when she raised her eyes, and shewed a
most intelligent, beautiful countenance,
but with so melancholy and expression, that
Clementina eyed her with admiration and
pity, without hearing her articulate a sin-
gle word.

  In a few seconds the door was opened by
the lovely girl, who appeared not above six-
teen years old; her dress was simple, but
extremely elegant; though her clothes
were made of coarse materials, yet there
was a peculiar air of gentility about her,
which forcibly struck Clementina. Lord
Howard asked her in Italian if her brother
was within and visible? and she replied in the
affirmative to both, and almost immediately
after signor Pelatro appeared.

  He expressed the utmost pleasure in50          HOWARD CASTLE.

seeing lord Howard, to whom he was pro-
fuse in his expressions of gratitude. He
gracefully bowed to Clementina, whom h
did not seem to recognize.  His tall, ema-
ciated figure was wrapped in a loose dress-
ing-gown, and his head was enveloped in
a coloured silk handkerchief; his haggard
face bespoke the severe illness which he
had laboured under, and the starving sys-
tem which had been used to recover him.

   The melancholy which was imprinted on
his countenance struck Clementina forci-
bly ; the tear of sympathy stole down her
cheek, when she saw the ravages the dread-
ful disorder had made upon him ; there 
was nothing to fear, but much to pity.

   Signora Pelatro, addressing Clementina,
whilst lord Howard was conversing with
her brother, asked her, in pure Italian,
if she would honour them by entering their
abode? she then added, in bad French——
" Perhaps you do not understand my lan-
guage?"

   Clementina replied in Italian, and they
entered the little dwelling, the lower part
of which was occupied by the gardener and
his wife, who was busily employed with
            HOWARD CASTLE.           51

her silk-worms. After examining the very
curious insects, her conductress led the way
up a narrow and miserable staircase, but,
what was uncommon, it was perfectly clean.
When they reached the apartment, sig-
nora Pelatro said ——" This place, perhaps,
may appear to you wretched, but to us it
is a paradise; and to the most benevolent
of human beings do we owe every thing——
this house and all out comforts. Ah!" said
she, in hardly an articulate voice, " Hea-
ven  has given you a happy lot."

   " How?" asked Clementina.

   " Are you not the peculiar care of the
best of men? is he not interested in all
your concerns? does he not love you with 
the most pure affection?  Ah," said she,
" to live with lord Howard, to be the be-
loved of his heart, must be heaven upon
earth!"

   " Perhaps, thought Clementina, " it
may be cruel to undeceive her; the young
and innocent girl might entertain hopes
which would probably ruin her future
peace of mind."  Lord Howard, she was
well aware, was a most dangerous acquaint-
ance; she believed no female could receive
 
                   D 252          HOWARD CASTLE.

attention from him, and retain her affect-
tions; she therefore merely asked why she
supposed her possessed of lord Howard's
heart?

   "My brother," said she, "before his late
dreadful illness, had seen you, and was
much struck with your beauty. He told me
he had met with an angel, who was come
from heaven to cure his wound. The last
evening he was abroad, he came home in
the greatest agitation; he said he had
spoken to you, and that you had listened
to him, but that you were the bride of a gen-
tleman who had taken you away, and that
he had lost you for ever. My poor brother
was very ill at the time; his brain was 
quite unsettled; but, thank God, his wound
broke out soon after, and he became more
calm. Lord Howard came as a minister-
ing angel; he discovered our wretched
abode--he got medical advice for my bro-
ther--he supplied us with clothes, with
food; and as soon as he could be removed,
he sent us to this delightful place. He is
now on the point of procuring a pension
for us, when we shall be enabled to return
to our own country, and to live as we could         Howard Castle.    53

wish.  Ah, madam," she added, "are you
not to be envied, to have such an amiable
being as lord Howard is, your protector,
friend, companion, husband?"

  The agitation Clementian was 
beyond description.  Signora Pelatro paus-
ed, her own feelings overpowering her;
both were silent for a few moments, but 
the entrance of lord Howard and Pelatro
roused them to exertion.  

  The latter addressed Clementina in Ita-
lian, and told her, that seeing her was the
only thing he could recollect.

  Lord Howard had explained to him
what had passed on  their former meeting,
as he feared he might have said something
which had alarmed her.

  "Your beauteous form has been the vi-
sion that haunted me in my illness; and 
could I have but seen you, I believe it
would have tranquillized my diseased brain.
You are," exclaimed he, with energy, "the
destined bride of the most amiable of his
sex; thank Heaven for one of its richest 
gifts, and prize the happy lot you have drawn. 
You are the loveliest mortal I ever beheld,
and I am certain, fair as the casket is, it co-54                HOWARD CASTLE.

vers a jewel of the brightest value, even surpassing the outward case in beauty Lord Howard alone is worthy of you; nature formed you for each other, and endowed you both with rare perfections.  Mark my words." said he,  "and remember them as the sentiments of Martino Pelatro, that, united, you will be happy; but separated.   You will be wretched."

     Clementina felt alarmed by the force with which he pronounced the last sentence; he looked wild as he grasped her hand with a convulsive motion.  She shrunk from the ardent gaze of his hollow eyes, yet she knew lord Howard was near her, and recovered her composure.

     " My mind," said Pelatro, "has been in a dreadful state since I saw you," looking earnestly in Clementina's face: "I believed I had got a glimpse of heaven, and seen an angel; but, alas! she disappeared.  and all my composure fled with her.  I now find you were the being I saw, and who I took for an inhabitant of another world."

      Lord Howard watched the countenance of Clementina; he had dreaded the effects
                  HOWARD CASTLE.        55

of Pelatro's seeing her; he now feared his
eecentrie manner might shock her; he
took her hand--" Have you seen the sig-
nora's flowers?"

   "Ah!" exelaimed Pelatro, grasping
their clasped hands in his, "let me unite
them for ever, and may heaven hear
my prayer, and shower down upon you
both its blessings! may you live the sup-
port and comfort of each other! and when
the hour shall come which is to divide you
from this world, may your kindred spirits
take their flight together to the mansion of
eternal happiness!"

   There was something so solemn, so im-
pressive, in the voice, in the manner, which
these words were uttered in, that Clemen-
tina shuddered. Lord Howards's counte-
nance expressed astonishment at the
strange flight of fancy, but she heard him
say a fervent "Amen" when the little eja-
eulation was finished; and the moment
their hands were at liberty, he pressed hers
to his lips. Pelatro quitted the room, and
they saw him no more.

   "My brother," said the signora, "often
agitates himself so violently, that he is ill  56               HOWARD CASTLE

in consequence; he has much ardour of mind, with little strength to guide it."

  Clementina had sunk upon a couch; her trembling limbs were incapable of supporting her.

  The agitation she was in did not escape the watchful eye of lord Howard. He seated himself by her, at the same time desiring the signora to bring a few boxes of her flowers. She left the room. Lord Howard again took Clementina's hand in his, saying - "I am afraid Miss Bouverie's nerves have been too much tried by poor Pelatro. Alas!" said he, "the were the ravings of a diseased brain. Would to Heaven -"

  At that moment the young woman returned, with beautiful specimens of her ingenuity, which she spread before Clementina. The flowers appeared uncommonly natural, and were arranged in boxes, made of different-coloured papers, suited to the varied tints of the flowers, which were grouped with particular taste. Had Clementina's mind been in a state to attend to any thing but what had passed, she would have been delighted with the proof of female in-               HOWARD CASTLE.                     57

dustry she now saw, but her confused
thoughts could hardly dwell for a moment
on the elegant works before her.

  Lord Howard saw the change; when she
entered the dwelling of the Pelatros, she
was animated and lively; now she seemed
lost in thought, and hardly to know what
was passing. She at last inquired how she
disposed of her works?

  The signora replied, with a deep blush,
she should think herself highly honoared
if madame would accept of those she ad-
mired, and immediately began to select the
most beautiful of her collection.

  Clementina accepted of her choice,
which were by far the best finished and
the most natural.

  The signora packed them up with the
nicest care, and they were deposited in the
carriage.

  Clementina made her a little flattering
speech, which charmed her; at the same
time slipping a bill for ten guineas into her
hand, bid her a kind adieu, and glided past
her to the carriage so quickly, that she had
no time to expostulate upon the gift.                     Howard Castle.

                     Chapter III.

Lord Howard anxiously inquired if Cle-
mentina had recovered the alarm which 
poor Pelatro had occasioned her? She as-
sured him she had. He lamented exceed-
ingly having been the means of introducing 
her again to a person who had before ter-
rified her; he did not suppose he was at all
in a state to have appeared, as the last in-
telligence he had heard of him was, tht he 
was confined to bed; the great discharge
from the wound had rendered him incap-
able of moving.- "I was sorry when he 
made his appearance, as I was afraid he
would frighten you, both by his looks and
manner."

  "My nerves are strong," replied Cle=
mentina, "otherwise the strange figure,
the sepulchral voice, and the wild expres-
sion of his eyes, were more frightful than
any thing I ever saw or heard before."

  "His words," said lord Howard, "I            HOWARD CASTLE.          59

hope, did not alarm you; they sounded in 
my ears most pleasing; I only lamented
they were uttered by Pelatro."

   " They would have been of little im-
port," replied Clementina, " whoever had
spoken them;  His wandering imagination
certainly claims our pity; and I feel that
his sister is an object of great compas-
sion, having to live constantly with a ma-
niac."

   As lord Howard saw very plainly she
wished to avoid dwelling on the words
which had conveyed a sensation of exqui-
site delight to him, he changed the subject to
the public buildings they passed, and noble
squares which they drove through; he ha
a never-ending source of conversation ; he
seemed delighted to give her information
on every subject, from the prince to the
peasoan; and from the palace to the hum-
ble cottage of Pelatro, all came equally 
within the scope of his knowledge.  The
animation of his manner roused her from
the strange oppression, which had com-
pletely deprived her of her usual cheerful-
ness; had the words she had heard not ac-
corded with her feelings, they might have60             Howard Castle.

passed unheeded; but as they touched her
in the most vulnerable part, they occupied
her mind, and were never for a moment
absent from her thoughts. She listened to
lord Howard's remarks, and was sensible of 
his powers of pleasing, but she felt quite une-
qual to keep up conversation; and although
their drive was very delightful, she felt
relieved when they reached the hotel.
Lord Howard appeared in excellent spirits, 
but soon after retired to his own apart-
ment.

  The change on his companion did not
escape the penetrating Mrs. Conway-
"I could not have supposed," said she,
"that you have been all this evening toge-
ther; lord Howard appears extremely gay,
and Miss Bouverie very remarkably grave."

  "Lord Howard," replied Clementina,
"has been accustomed, I find, to the scene
which has, in some degree, affected my spi-
rits. We have seen a lovely girl, beautiful
as an angel, and apparently amiable as she 
is beautiful, doomed to spend her days
with her poor brother, who is wrong in his
head. Neverly surely was there such a me-
lancholy situation as hers. She produced           HOWARD CASTLE             61

her flowers, to shew what industry, taste,
and genius,she was possessed of."

    "She is, indeed," said Mrs. Conway,
"worthy of a better fate, if I may judge
by her work." She examined the boxes and
their contents, and was charmed with the
beauty of each flower. "Does she make
those for sale?"

     "For long," replied Clementina, "she
supported her brother and herself by her
industry; she sold her work, and with the
money they produced, supplied her sick
brother with all the little indulgences she
could. She now has a friend, who guards
them from want and misery."

      "Has that friend no inducement to re-
lieve them?" replied Mrs. Conway; "has
the beauty of the young woman not tempt-
ed him, under the semblance of philan-
thropy, to supply them with money?"

      "No," replied Clementia, with quick-
ness, " I can answer for his motive; good-
ness of heart prompted him. Their pa-
tron is your son; I do firmly believe he is
the most benevolent of human beings."

      The warmth with which those words were uttered charmed Mrs. Conway. If even
62      HOWARD CASTLE.

there could be no nearer connexion be-
tween them, she wished, above all things,
lord Howard might be a favourite of her
beloved friend, she had a high idea of her
discriminating powers, and was sensibly flat-
tered by the encomium she had heard--
"I am pleased to hear Miss Bouverie praise
lord Howard."

  "You should be pleased," said Clemen-
tina, "that he is worthy of her praise, and
worthy of being the son of Mrs. Conway."

  "Has he ever mentioned Miss Clifford
to you?"

  "Never," replied she; "but on that sub-
ject I firmly believe that he has nothing to be
ashamed of; if she is the object he has fix-
ed his affections upon, he has a good mo-
tive for not informing you. He is not at li-
berty to explain her situation; there is a
delicacy attending their connexion which
keeps him silent; you will be informed as
soon as he can with propriety divulge his
plans."

  "A mother," said Mrs. Conway, "should
not be kept in ignorance on so important
a point. Howard know that my happi-
ness is interwoven with his, and that no        HOWARD CASTLE.        08

event can interest me near so deeply as his
making a proper alliance."

  "What do you mean by the word pro-
per?" asked Clementina; "can a heart be
always led by prudential motives?-can
lord Howard guide his affections by the
rule of right?  If a man of rank must mar-
ry in his own line of life, he would be far
better without his title, than to be stuck
by the side of a woman of quality who pos-
sesses not his love. If he gives you Miss
Clifford as a daughter, I am convinced she
will be worthy of your protection; and 
that you will, in the course of a short time,
thank him for an inestimable gift."

  Mrs. Conway shook her head-" I can-
not indeed flatter myself," was her answer;
"whoever Miss Clifford is, I cannot wish
her to be my Howard's wife. No, Clemen-
tina, I did once entertain a hope that fate
had decreed a treasure of my son; but that
pleasing idea, I fear, may be banished for
ever from my breast. you were the person
I wished to press to my bosom, and to be
enabled to give you the interesting appel-
lation of daughter."
64              Howard Castle

" I flattered myself," said Clementina,
with evident emotion, "I was regarded
by you in that light.  When your son
marries, you will be rich, as you will have
two claims, instead of one, upon your pa-
rental affections."

"I would have all combine in one," 
was her answer; "and then I should have
no fear for your happiness, for lord How-
ard's, or my own."

"Trust," said Clementina, "with per-
fect confidence in his conduct, as I am con-
vinced he will not injure your happiness.
Miss Clifford may be well born; and I am
sure, if she becomes your daughter, she is
well educated and amiable, and we know 
she is interesting and pretty.  Do not pre-
possess yourself against her, but give her a 
fair and impartial trial, and I trust she will 
prove worthy of your-"
 Contending emotions stopped Clemen-
tina; she could not articulate another word;
she meant to have added, "and of lord How-
ard's."  Her heart was full, and her eyes 
were suffused with tears. Alarmed that her
friend should perceive the agitation she
        HOWARD CASTLE.     65

was in, she rose from her seat, and walked
to one of the windows; she wished to re-
gain her composure.

   Mrs. Conway saw with surprise that 
Clementina appeared affected by what had
passed; she could not for a moment flatter
herself it was any peculiar interest she took
in the conversation which had worked the
change on her countenance; could she have
dived into the feelings of her interesting
companion, all her thoughts would have
centered in discovering if her son had made
any engagement. As they were circum-
stanced, she resolved not to interfere; she
had no hopes of success with Clementina, 
who, she firmly believed, was to be lady
Montague--"Your nerves," said Mrs.
Conway, "are injured by the visit you
have paid this evening. Did you see the
poor man who alarmed you so much in the
playhouse?"

   "We did," was her answer.

   "Did he address you in the same odd
way, and alarm you?"

   "Had lord Howard not been with me,"
replied Clementina, "I should have been 
terribly frightened; his appearance is still66         HOWARD CASTLE.

more strange than when you saw him;
sickness has reduced his meagre conte-
nance to almost the appearance of a skele-
ton ; his dark eyes are sunk in his head,
which add to their extraordinary expres-
sion ; and his ghastly features convey the
idea of want and penury ; I was shocked at
his figure, and alarmed by his manner."

   "It was a strange fancy in lord Hward,"
said Mrs. Conway, " to take you to his
house."

   " It was my request; he indulged my
inclination, contrary to is own judgment;
I had no widh to see Pelatro; I was anxi-
ous to meet with his sister, and I have de-
rived great satisfaction from my visit; they
are by lord Howard's means, rescued from
starvation and misery."

   " Give me your promise," said Mrs.
Conway, "you will not again run any risk
by meeting with that frightful man; you
know not the cunning plans a lunatic can
lay ; if he is again at liberty, he may at-
tempt to carry you off."

   " I dare say," replied she, smiling, "he
has no such inclination."

   " We have now," continued Mrs. Con-                    HOWARD CASTLE.       67

Way, " no reason for remaining longer
here; we waited for the count de Brille's 
fete; why should we not proceed on our
tour, and leave poor Pelatro to admire the
inhabitants of Paris ? I own, the idea of 
your again meeting with him terrifies me."

   "We have been immured in a town 
much longer than I expected," was her an-
swer; "but as I feel to be an appendage to
the party, I did not mean to express any
surprise, or a wish to quit the bustle of
this great place. Lord Howard, I dare say,
would rather remain here than proceed 
with us; he has inducements to stay, which
we have not."

    "No", replied Mrs. Conway; "Swit-
zerland, I believe, is far more interesting
to you than any other part of the world."

    "You are mistaken," said Clementina.
     Lord Howard's entrance stopped her;
she still stood in one of the windows, gaz-
ing into the street.

     Lord Howard approached her--" What 
arrests Miss Bouverie,s attention.?"
 
    "Nothing at all amusing," was her an-
swer; "stone-walls were never objects of admiration to me."
68          HOWARD CASTLE.

   "We were wondering how long we were
to continue breathing this confined air,"
said Mrs. Conway; "I am sure Miss Bou-
verie wishes to change the scene."

   "And the society," added lord How-
ard. "I am ready to attend you when and
where you please; I will conduct you, I
hope, in safety to where your wishes point,
and, can I add, resign my charge to the
care of a more favoured being. I own it
will be a struggle; I have been too long
accustomed to bewitching society easily to
give it up, even to my friend. You shall
appoint the hour," turning to Mrs. Con-
way, "when all shall be ready for our de-
parture. The pictures must be sent to
England, or shall they be forwarded to Ge-
neva, Miss Bouverie?"

   "Wherever Mrs. Conway shooses; my 
steps will be guided by her; and where she
orders her packet to be sent, I shall wish
mine to accompany it."

   "One miniature I shall take with me,"
said lord Howard. "I suspect lord Mon-
tague will wish to be possessed of his as
soon as possible."

   She gave no answer, and was resolved                HOWARD CASTLE            69

not to understand the continued hints of 
both Mrs. Conway and her son; if he was
determined to marry Miss Clifford, it was
better they should believe her engaged; it
might prevent their suspecting the real
cause of her spirits being in a state of agi-
tation, which she could not subdue. She
still had a secret plan of forming an ex-
cuse for returning to her native country.
At last it was fixed that, the day following,
they should prepare for their departure,
which should take place early on the second
morning.

     When they separated for the night, lord
Howard took the hand of Clementina, and 
whispered - " Oh that Pelatro's words
were binding, and that his decision was
irrevocable! then should I go and sleep in
peace, and dream of happiness."

     He pressed her hand, and she passed on,
her heart beating quick, from the few words
which he had said, and the tender manner
in which they were spoken.

      When she reached her apartment, she
dismissed her maid, saying, she was not in-
clined to go to bed, and she should not re-
quire her attendance. The moment she
70 HOWARD CASTLE.

was alone, she gave vent to the feelings
which oppressed her. She found she was
in the most dangerous situation-to be sub-
jeet to lord Howard's daily attentions-to
receive the tender and flattering speeches
he was now continually making her ; she
supposed it was almost second nature with
him, and that he could not be in the com-
pany of any female without her appearing
to be the object of his admiration. The
French nation were famed for gallantry
and vanity ; he had been so long accustom-
ed to pour adulation into their ears, he
could not refrain from doing the same to
all he met with.

Clementina's thoughts could not be tran-
quillized by reflection ; she wished to re-
turn to England ; but where could she go
when she quitted the protection of her
friend Mrs. Conway, whom Providence
had given her to supply the place of her be-
loved parent? If she went back to Roach-
wood-her spirits sunk at the idea-no
one to receive her-all so Colnbrook Ab-
bey, the world would say she was gone to
wait for lord Montague's return, and Mrs.
           HOWARD CASTLE.        71

Conway and lord Howard would be con-
firmed in the idea, and perhaps would
condemn her entering into the family, when
they knew a correspondence was kept up
between them.

  Lord Montague's marriage must soon be
known to the world. The convent was
now bo longer a retreat for her. She wish-
ed-earnestly wished, that she could con-
quer her foolish, wayward fancy, and marry
sir Theodosius Sydney; her heart was not
in a state to be controlled; she could not
fix her thoughts, but for a moment, on a
a plan of deceit-she would not feign a re-
gard she did not feel; every plan seemed
to fail, which could afford her an asylum to
fly to; at all events, she must not proceed
on the tour with lord Howard; her peace
of mind would be inevitably destroyed if
she did, and yet how to impart her deter-
mination to Mrs. Conway puzzled her; it
would be a humbling confession that she
could not travel in company with her son;
her heart was too susceptible-she must
fly his society.

  Almost bewildered with a variety of
plans, she had remained without taking72        HOWARD CASTLE.

a single pin out of her dress, when she was
roused from her reflections by her room
filling with smoke, evidently from wood
burning. She went to the windows, but
saw no light; they looked into a garden;
she listened, and heard a strange, confus-
ed noise; she did not throw up the sash,
for fear of alarming Mrs. Conway, whose
room was in the same passage with her:
she at last determined to go to her friend.

  Upon her opening the door, a column
of smoke seemed to rush in from the pas-
sage: the most dreadful alarm now seized
her, from an idea it came from Mrs. Con-
way's apartment. She flew towards it in
an agony not to be described, and was
on the point of entering when lord How-
ard appeared; he had no candle, and was
dressed in his wrapper-" Heavens!" he
exclamied, "Miss Bouverie, what is the
matter? you are pale as death!"

  Her haggard countenance, with the evi-
dent mark of tears, struck him- "You are
ill." He took her hand, with an expression
of anxiety not to be described.

  "Oh no!" she cried; "your mother,
Mrs. Conway."          HOWARD CASTLE.             73

   "What of my mother?"

   At that moment Mrs. Conway opened
her room-door; she was nearly dressed,
but was alarmed by the pale and trembling
Clementina, whom lord Howard supported
-"Thank God!"  said she, in almost an
inarticulate voice,  "that I see you safe."
She sunk upon a chair nearly insensible.

   "My dear Clementina," said Mrs. Con-
way, " what has so dreadfully alarmed
you? the fire is not in this house; we are
all perfectly safe."

   She supported the drooping head of her
friend. Lord Howard had disappeared;
he came in little time after with a glass
of wine, which, with the most tender so-
licitude, he entreated her to drink; she
obeyed him; he took her hand in his-
"You are cold," said he; "you tremble;
pray be composed."

   The pressure of his hand brought a glow
over her-" I am better, my lord; the
alarm I was in agitated my nerves; I be-
lieved the smoke issued from this room,
and my fancy magnified every thing, until
I worked myself up to a state of terror

   VOL.IV.        E  74          HOWARD CASTLE.

not to be described." Lord Howard quitted
them as soon as he saw her perfectly reco-
vered.

   Mrs. Conway again took her hand, and
expressed her gratitude for the kind con-
cern she had shown for her safety. The
tears which were flowing down the pale
cheeks of Clementina, accounted to Mrs.
Conway for her altered appearance.

   Lord Howard returned, and told them
he had ordered their maids to attend them,
and the carriages to be prepared, as they
must quit the hotel--"The fire rages with
fury," said he, "and they will soon begin
to remove their most valuable furniture
out of this house; I will conduct you to
a very comfortable hotel, and quite out of
the horrid noise and bustle; be as expedi-
tious in your preparations as you can; the
sooner we go from hence the better."

   He left them saying these words, but 
not till Clementina inquire if lord Stan-
hope had been roused. Lord Howard felt
almost envious of her attention; in the
hour of alarm, to think of any one, was
surely flattering; he obeyed her injunctions,
and found his lordship perfectly unconsci-HOWARD CASTLE.                                  75
outs of the uproar around him. He did not
continue long in a drowsy state; lord Stan-
hope was never half so quickly dressed in
his life, and he was prompt in his orders
to have his clothes packed with all speed;
he soon joined the party in the dining-
room, and, with much animation, thanked
Clementino for her kind recollection of 
him- "I believe. " said he, "I should have
slept on, and been buried in the ruins of the house, as my servant is like his master,
a heavy-headed Englishman, not easily
awoke."

  The carriages were announced. Lord 
Howard hurried Clementina along, at the 
same time desiring lord Stanhope to take 
care of Mrs. Conway; he handed her into
the first carriage, which was one of his
own, and sprung in after her, calling to the
servants to proceed. They advanced a few
yards, but the many frightful obects stop-
ped their career.

  The prodigious glare of light, from two 
. high houses being in flames; the little fur-
niture the inhabitants could save was scat-
tered about; the fire engines were playing
from the opposite side of the street; the76         HOWARD CASTLE.

cracking and tumbling of the beams, and
the noise of the mob, combined to alarm
the horses, and no power could force them
forward.

   Clementina sunk in a corner of the car-
riage, almost inanimate.  Lord Howard
assured her, with all the tenderness of
manner possible, there was no danger; they
were making room for the other carriage
to pass, which had steadier horses——" Do
not be alarmed, dearest Miss Bouverie."
He took her hand in his, as he gently drew
her towards him; her head reclined on his
shoulder, and his arm supported her——
" We shall soon be past this alarming
scene, which has terrified you so much;
my mother's carriage now takes the lead,
and we shall be immediately from this tu-
mult and noise."

   Lord Howard now felt the sweets of his
situation, holding in his arms the woman 
he admired——that he tenderly loved; he
sat for a few seconds, being almost afraid
of telling her all danger was over, as he was
certain it would be the means of his losing
the most enviable situation he had ever
been in. A moment's reflection made him        HOWARD CASTLE.      77

condemn the selfish motive, which could
induce him to keep her in terror for his
own gratification--"You are now safe,"
said he, in a low tone of voice, at the same
time pressing her with fervour to his heart;
"you may venture to look up."

  She raised her head at these words, and
blushed at finding herself so encircled by
his arm; she quickly raised herself from
the reclining position into which she had
sunk, and, with evident emotion, thanked
him for the care he had taken of her, at
the same time saying, with a languid smile
upon her conuntenance--"A female is a
troublesome companion, my lord."

  "Where the feelings are as deeply inte-
rested as mine have been, this night, on
seeing you so repeatedly alarmed," replied
he, "you might perhaps give it the appella-
tion of trouble; to me the sensation was far
different; it may sound strange to you, who
have suffered so much from fear, if I de-
clare it was delightful. I felt, at the critical
moment, I was your support, your guar-
dian, you all; you clung to me, when
you were in terror, for protection; but as78    HOWARD CASTLE.

soon as you discovered the danger was
over, you shrunk from the posture which
had given me such transport, and now
apologize for the trouble you gave me."

   Clementina thought, if lord Howard
really believed she was engaged, or if he
was engaged himself, his manner was very
strange; she had too readily take lord Mon-
tague's expressions as a declaration of love;
she certainly should not so easily give way
to little flattering speeches as she had done;
but lord Howard's voice, his words, his
looks, were more tender than any thing she
had ever heard before, and sunk deeper than
even she would allow herself to believe.
He saw plainly what he had said had em-
barrassed her exceedingly; he was sorry
for the warmth he had expressed, and se-
-cretly lamented that he had been totally
thrown off his guard.  The admiration he
felt for her had made him forget all idea of
engagements or propriety; the peculiar si-
tuation they had been thrown into by
mere accident, had betrayed sentiments he
wished to conceal.

   They had continued some minutes si-        HOWARD CASTLE.     79

lent, each wrapped up in their own medi-
tations. Lord Howard was fearful he had
gone too far; the idea of either offending
her, or of injuring his friend, weighed
heavily on him; she had no feel of anger
towards him; she supposed flirtation was
inherent in his nature, and that any one of
her sex would be subject to the same un-
meaning flattery, were she placed in her si-
tuition; Miss Clifford probably would
have still more tender speeches made to
her: thus she did away, as much as she
possibly could, the pleasure which, in
spite of all her endeavours, would steal
across her when she was listening to his
expressions of admiration.

   His offer of friendship and brotherly af-
fection did not accord with the very recent
description he had given of his feelings, 
when he supported her in the time of
her alarm; there was a warmth in his man-
ner, which certainly was more than frater-
nal.

   She was roused from these reflections
by lord Howard's asking her, why she was
in the same dress she had worn the preced-80         HOWARD CASTLE.

ing evening——" Had you not been in bed
when the fire alarmed you ?"

   " No, my lord, I was not," was her an-
swer.

   " What could interest you so deeply,"
replied he, " as to induce you to steal so
many hours from your repose? you com-
plained of fatigue when you left the draw-
ing-room; were you writing?"

   " No, my lord," again was her answer.

   " Were you reading?"

   " No" still was her reply. " I was not
in bed, and I was neither writing or read-
ing; I was employed with my own 
thoughts."

   " Ah!" exclaimed he, " what would I 
give to know who was the happy object of
them!"

   " Believe me you would repent, my lord,
as it could be of little consequence to you
what the subject was."

   " Is what a proper term? I fear who
ought to be substituted."

   " Would it be interesting to you," said
she, " when I tell you my contemplations
are generally on the past scenes of my life,         Howard Castle.      81

and on friends who are dead; last night 
they were a very melancholy cast."

"And do you think," answered lord
Howard, "what affects you have
no interest to me--that I would only wish
to participate in your gay moments? The
happiness, the joy of friendship, is taking
a lively share in every emotion which agi-
tates your bosom; to listen to and lessen 
every sorrow--that would be the summit of
me on the footing of an affectionate bro-
ther, how proud, how happy should I be, 
were you to intrust me with your hopes,
your fears! and would you listen to my 
advice, and permit me to impart my senti-
ments openly to you, and have no conceal-
ment between us, I think I should be sa-
tisfied with the appointment; I should 
feel that we were necessary to each other, 
as I should be equally ingenuous with 
you."

"Perhaps intrust me," thought Clemen-
tina, "with your attachments to Miss Clif- 
ford, and confide to me, what you conceal from your mother.--No." replied she, with 
quickness, "our acquaintance is of too re-
32          HOWARD CASTLE.

cent a date for me to feel upon that fami-
liar footing with you; time may work a
change, but at present I cannot look upon 
you as my brother; I could not think
aloud to you, nor could I tell you all my
foolish fancies." She smiled as she said
these words.

   Lord Howard replied——" I thought my
request was so humble, I flattered myself
it would be granted; but I find in no way
will you suffer me to attach myself to
you."

   " Your friendship," said Clementina, " I
shall prize very highly——your advice I shall
treasure, and your being interested in my
concerns I shall deem one of my greatest
comforts."

   " But no consanguinity," added lord
Howard; " you are a most guarded mor-
tal, armed at all points; your youth is
only in appearance——quite a sage in prac-
tice and principle."

   " My life has been short," replied she,
with a sigh, " but marked with some
strange events; I have met with the great-
est affection, and the utmost malice——some
severe mortifications, and I may say, with-
                  HOWARD CASTLE. 83

out exaggeration, the most poignant sor-
row; my natural temper was open as the
day, but experience has convinced me it
does not answer; I am become more cau-
tious and more reserved."

  "What has that mortal to answer for,"
exclaimed lord Howard, "who has check-
ed the greatest beauty nature can display!
an unsuspecting temper, who believes all
around as pure as the possessor, is the hap-
piest gift. Woe to the man who has 
given you cause to be suspicious, or to
change,in any degree, the innocent phi-
lanthropy of your heart; would to Hea-
ven I was worthy of your confidence! be-
lieve me, I would not abuse it."

  "I firmly believe you would not,: was
her answer; "but I cannont explain my si-
tuation without involving others; never
again ask me to do what I should deem
improper."

  Her manner of saying these words was
so grave and determined, that lord How-
ard durst not teaze her further. He con-
cluded, with heartfelt sorrow, she was
beyond his reach, and resolved that nothing
should throw him off his guard, or to be-84           HOWARD CASTLE.

tray, if he possibly could help it, the ad-
miration he felt for  her; it increased every
moment, as every moment he was more 
convinced she was the only being in exis-
tence who could interest him; but he
hoped he had sufficient command over 
himself to bury in  his own breast the most
pure and ardent love, which  he feared never
could succeed.

   When they reached the hotel, lord
Howard handed her from the carriage; he
perceived the utmost agitation in  her
manner; her trembling limbs could hardly
support her, and her pale countenance be-
trayed the tumult her feelings were in.
Mrs. Conway and lord Stanhope were
ready to receive them; but Clementina
could hardly answer their interrogations.
She leaned on lord Howard's arm, which
nearly sustained her weight——" This ter-
ror," said he, " has been too much for Miss
Bouverie's delicate frame to support."

   " Ah!" said Mrs. Conway, " you were
to blame for taking her to Pelatro's; she
received an alarm there, and this recent
alarm has completely overcome her."

   She ordered their attendants to haveHOWARD CASTLE. 85

beds instantly prepared; luckily travellers
were quitting the hotel when they arrived,
so that apartments were quickly ready. It
was not fear alone had agitated Clementina;
it was Mrs. Conway's son, who had occa-
sioned the alarming change on her appear-
ance; his assiduity, when he thought her
ill, and the tender solicitude he shewed,
had increased her agitation.

She was relieved when she reached the
room which was destined for her, and a
glass of hartshorn and water, which Mrs.
Conway insisted on her taking, restored,
in some degree, her compsoure. She on-
treated her friend to retire to bed; she
likewise soon after dismissed her maid, as
she thought repose was necessary for her,
having been disturbed for two nights.

The sun was rising in full splendour
nearly opposite to her windows, which
looked to the river, which had few beau-
ties to boast, after having seen the majestic
Thames. She stood slowly undressing
herself, and admiring the view, when a
figure, wandering near the river, arrested
her attention; it was lord Howard, seem-
ingly lost in thought. She anxiously gaz-86  HOWARD CASTLE.

ed at him, till a building obscured him
from her sight; why he should be there,
astonished her; but as she could not in any
way explain it to her satisfaction, she re-
tired to seek repose, which she felt was
absolutely necessary for her worn-out spi-
rits; she could not, however, compose her-
self until near the usual hour of rising.

   It was late before Mary entered her
room, and roused her from a short but re-
freshing sleep, with Mrs. Conway's anx-
ious inquiries after her health; and soon
after her kind friend entered, expressing
what she really felt, the utmost pleasure in
seeing her so much recovered, at the same
time entreating she would not disturb her-
self.

   Clementina assured her she was perfect-
ly well, and she would join her at the
breakfast-table as soon as possible.  When
she entered the parlour, she found only
Mrs. Conway and lord Stanhope; their
meal was silent one, except a few com-
ments from the latter on the uncomfort-
able night they had passed.  Lord How-
ard's name was not mentioned, and by
Mrs. Conway's grave manner, she suspect-        HOWARD CASTLE.      87

ed her mind was not altogether easy in re-
gard to him.

  Clementina again retired to her own
apartment, where she had desired Mary
to remain till she returned, as she meant to
give directions for the packing of her clothes.
As her maid was busy taking he things,
which had been hurriedly thrown together,
out of a traveling trunk, she asked her
mistress if lord Howard was at breakfast?

  Clementina answered, with a good deal
of surprise, he was not; why did she ask?

  "Oh!" said Mary, "I do believe he is
the best gentleman in the world' he saw
you and Mrs. Conway safe here, and al-
most immediately returned to the hotel."

   "I observed him," said Clementina.
"walking by the side of the river."

  "It was the nearest foot-road; his servant
told me he was not only gone to assist, if
possible, the poor sufferers, but to inquire
after an English lady, who lodges near the
hotel; he did not (his servant supposed)
think her in any danger; he is so much
interested in her, that he wished to pre-
vent her being alarmed; and she would be
terribly frightened about his lordship, as88      HOWARD CASTLE.

the hotel we were in was in flames soon
after we left it. If he was my lover," add-
ed Mary, " I should be most anxious
about him, as surely there never was seen 
so handsome a man, and by all accounts
there never was a better born."
  She was placed with her back to Clemen-
tina, therefore could not see the effect her
words had on her countenance. She con-
tinued her employment, and at the same
time her intelligence-" Did you ever
meet with this young lady, ma'am?"
  Clementina gave a simple negative to
the question, and her maid continued-
" Tom, the groom, says she is very pretty;
my lord found her somewhere in the street,
in a very sad situation ; however, he soon
changed it for the better, as he had new
clothes for her, and dressed her in the
most elegant manner. Tom says he is
sure he has either married her, or she will
soon b lady Howard.  Mr. le Brun, my
lord's valet, is very close, and will not say
a word on the subject ; but I am convin-
ced he knows a great deal."
  Clementina felt unwilling to hear more
on a subject which was not the most agree-                   HOWARD CASTLE                  89

able in the world; she did not suppose that Tom, lord Howard's groom, knew any thing of his master's plans; but the information coincided with what she had observed, as most certainly there was a connexion of some kind between them. She more earnestly wished than ever to return to England, and she hoped, in the course of the day, to arrange her plans, and communicate them to Mrs. Conway; she would delay her explanation as long as she possibly could, but she would not travel further in company with lord Howard.

  When she returned to the breakfastroom, she found Mrs. Conway and lord Stanhope still there; lord Howard not returned. She seated herself upon a sofa, where the variety of cushions and pillows invited repose; she leaned her head back, and remained perfectly silent.

  "You have not recovered the fatigue of last night," said lord Stanhope, as he approached her; "I am sure your head aches, from the heavy languor of your eyes."

  "Thank you," said she, "for apologizing for my stupidity; I certainly have not had much sleep for two nights."
                 HOWARD CASTLE.   90

    " We have not seen my son," said Mrs.Conway,  " since we parted this morning at your room-door, I believe before the run had risen; he is a complete knight-errant, gone in quest of adventures."

     " I think I will pursue the same plan." said lord Stanhope,  and take a walk, and visit our old habitation;  I understand it is a heap of smoking ruins."

    He left the room as he said these words.  Mrs. Conway insisted on Clementina's stretching herself upon a sofa; she unwillingly obeyed her friend, who had the satisfaction of soon seeing her in a profound slumber. She gently retired to her own room for her writing materials, leaving the door open, for fear of disturbing the sweet sleep Clementina had fallen into.

                   CHAPTER IV.
                   ----------
LORD Howard entered almost immediately upon Mrs. Conway's quitting the room; Clementina's figure struck him; the attitude in which she was laid, shewed the       HOWARD CASTLE.     91

beauty of her form to greater advantage
that he had ever before seen it; one arm
was hung over the end of the couch; her
hat was thrown back, which exposed her
lovely countenance to full view; a hectic
colour was in her cheeks and lips, which
might have vied with the damask rose, the
tint was so brilliant.

   Lord Howard cautiously advanced, con-
templating the countenance of the sleeping
angel; he wished himself an artist, as he
never saw so complete a representation of
female beauty. He softly approached, and
kneeling down by her, gazed with rapture
on her fine features; her hand moved--it
dropped on his--it had the effect of an 
electrical stroke upon him--he could not
refrain from printing an ardent kiss upon it.

   She awoke, and starting up, exclaimed
--"Good Heavens, lord Montague!"

   "It is not the happy, envied Montague,"
cried lord Howard, "who must have been
the subject of your dreams; and ah, Miss
Bouverie! is he not the object who occupies
your waking thoughts?"

   "Where am I?" said she, at the same
time raising herself up from her reclining92 HOWARD CASTLE.

posture; "how came you here, lord How-
ard? But now I recollect every thing; it 
was not kind in Mrs. Conway to leave me
thus exposed."

Mrs. Conway, who had entered the
room, and heard the accusation, declared
she had no been three minutes absent;
"and you," said she, turning to lord How-
ard, "must have slipped in in a wonderful
quiet manner."

"I did not know there was occasion
for caution; had I suspected Miss Bou-
verie was asleep in this room, I certainly
should not have intruded."

"I deserved any punishment," replied
she, smiling, "for committing such a piece
of indecorum; the fatigue of body and
mind I have experienced for these last two
days must plead my excuse; I was almost
worn out, and easily overcome by Mor-
pheus, who certainly is a most pleasing
companion; I was as sound asleep as pos-
sible, and knew not either where I was, or
who awoke me."

"You very, readily fixed upon a name,"
said lord Howard; "was he not present
with you in idea when I unfortunately                 Howard Castle.                  93

disturbed you? but," said he, pulling a let-
ter from his pocket, and presenting it to 
his mother, "I must not forget this packet,
which one of the waiters gave me for you."

  She took it, for a moment looked at the 
direction, and changed colour-"An Eng-
lish post-mark! and my brother, James
Waldegrave's hand! he must be arrived in 
his native country." She broke the seal in 
the utmost agitation-"It is indeed from 
my dear James!" Tears stopped her utter-
ance; at last she said-"He is in Lon-
don, after an absence of twenty years, dur-
ing which time I have never heard from
him; I trust all the uneasiness I have
suffered will be repaid by my now enjoy-
ing his society and friendship."

  Clementina had heard her mention hav-
ing a brother abroad, who had married
contrary to the inclination of his family,
which had broken off their correspondence
with him.

  "Or rather," added Mrs. Conway, "he
gave us up, as he was so fearful of the re-
ception his wife might meet with from his
proud relations, that he took her to the 
East Indies, where she died a few years94          HOWARD CASTLE.

after their marriage. This is the first let-
ter I have received from him for many
years, and real heartfelt satisfaction does it
give me."

   Lord Howard participated in his mo-
ther's happiness, and Clementina was not
an unmoved spectator; she, with unfeign-
ed pleasure, congratulated her friend on
her prospect, and she likewise congratulat-
ed herself that she had not imparted her
scheme of returning to England. She
heard lord Howard give orders to the ser-
vants to be in readiness for their departure
at an early hour next morning--"I antici-
pate," said he to his mother, "you wish
to be in the same country with your bro-
ther, and I shall arrange every thing for 
quitting Paris to-morrow. I lament, Miss
Bouverie, that you will be disappointed of
your trip to Switzerland; will you promise
to make one of a party next summer to
visit Geneva and its environs?"

   "How can you, my lord," was her an-
swer, "suppose that I shall feel any sen-
sation but of pleasure, when I see my friends
so happy? I share in your joy; I can ex-
perience no mortification when Mrs. Con-                 HOWARD CASTLE.                95

way is gratified; many circumstances may happen to prevent schemes formed now from being realized next summer."

     "That," cried he, "is a very prudent, proper answer, such as I should have expected from Miss Bouverie, who is always cautious and correct."

     Clementina laughed - "I am glad I have lord Howard's approbation; but it will be no very great disappointment to me if I never make the tour in question."

     The minds of the party were too much occupied to admit of much conversation, except on the subject of their journey.  Mrs. Conway could think of nothing but anticipating the meeting with her brother: even the terror of crossing the Channel seemed to be loss formidable.  Clementina hoped her courage would continue, and that she would suffer less from fear and sickness than she had done. 

     "I should certainly not have ventured across it for five weeks," was her answer; "I shall be very glad when I am again on British ground, which I should not have quitted, had I known my brother's plans."

     Lord Howard declared himself an excel-96    HOWARD CASTLE.

lent sailor, and that he would guard her
from danger. He left the room to dress,
as he was engaged abroad to dinner.

  When lord Stanhope joined them, he 
was surprised to find the revolution in 
their plans since the morning; when he 
had left them, their intention was to pro-
ceed the following day towards Switzer-
land. He declared that he would not pur-
sue a journey by himself, after enjoying 
such society; he should remain in Paris till
his brother arrived, and then quietly re-
turn to England, when he hoped again to
meet with the same party.

  "Of course," replied Mrs. Conway, "you
will visit lord Howard."

  "I have the honour of being taken
for his lordship to-day," said lord Stanhope.
"As I was standing looking at the ravages 
the fire had made, as the hotel is quite
burnt down, and the ruins still smoking,
an English servant came to me, and in my own language asked me if I was lord How-
ard? I, of course, told him I was not, but 
that I would deliver the card he held in
his hand to him. He told me he had strict
charge to give it either to lord Howard or        HOWARD CASTLE.     145

his servant, so I suppose his billet-doux is
not yet arrived; it must soon be here, as I
gave the man a direction to this place."

   Mrs. Conway said, probably her son had
received it, as she had heard nothing of it.

   Clementina sat busily employed weav-
ing a purse; her thoughts were as much
occupied as her fingers were; she guessed
whom the note was from.

   Lord Howard entered the room, prepar-
ed for his intended visit; he seemed gay
and cheerful, at the same time regretting
the necessity there was for his leaving
them--"I will make our sudden departure
an excuse to return early, and by that
means I shall not be deprived of agreeable
society the whole day."

   "Will you not," said Clementina, "la-
ment to the party you are going to join,
the cruel necessity which obliges you to
leave them?"

   "Do you accuse me of so much dupli-
city, Miss Bouverie?"

   "It is the general way of the world," an-
swered she, "to flatter one person at the 
expence of another. You wish to make us98 HOWARD CASTLE.

believe you regret leaving us; of course,
you will express the same feeling to those
you are going to meet, and perhaps with
more sincerity; you will part with them
for a length of time, which will not be the
case with us."

"Forbid it, Heavens!" said he, in a gay
tone of voice. "Were I on the eve of part-
ing with Miss Bouverie, my spirits would
be depressed beyond the aid of amusement."

His carriage having been announced, he
quitted the room, and she saw him spring
into it, and drive off.

Not many minutes after he was gone,
the letter arrived which lord Stanhope had
mentioned; lord Howard's servant brought
it into the room, and laid it upon his mas-
ter's writing-box, where all letters for him
were usually deposited.

"He has been a tedious messenger," said
lord Standhope; "he ought to have been
here an hour ago; it would appear the an-
swer cannot be of great consequence to the
writer."

He soon after retired to dress for dinner,
and Mrs. Conway had likewise left the 
room.        HOWARD CASTLE.        99

  Clementina, as soon as she was alone,
took up the letter, which was directed to
lord Howard, in a delicate hand. She look-
ed at the seal, on which were the initials,
" A. J. C." She laid it down, perfectly
convinced that her suspicions were well
grounded; Miss Clifford certainly was the
writter. She was again intently busy on
her work, when lord Stanhope joined her.
He spoke twice before he received an an-
swer; she apologized for her absence. He
walked about the room, and at last took up
the note, which was the subject of her
thoughts.

  "A.J.C.!" said he, looking at the seal;
"it is a strange infatuation keeping up that
connexion." He did not address the re-
mark to Clementina, but his words sunk
deep on her heart.

  "It is strange indeed," thought she,
"that lord Howard can be possessed of such
sentiments of propriety; if he should act
improperly, the word connexion, which
lord Stanhope had used, led her to suppose
that Miss Clifford was his mistress; if that
was the case, he had sported excellent prin-

                    F2100                Howard Castle.

ciples; but, alas! they did not guide his
conduct."

  The day passed in a very uninteresting 
manner; Mrs. Conway had letters to write,
and retired after dinner to her apartment.

  Clementina was not in spirits to converese
with lord Stanhope; she made an excuse,
quitted the room, and remained alone till
the evening was pretty far advanced.
When she returned to the drawing-room,
she quietly seated herself in one of the win-
dows, with a book in her hand; she was
pleased to find she was at liberty to amuse
herself, as Mrs. Conway and lord Stanhope
were busily employed conversing. Every
rattle on the street made her look for the
carriage. At last it appeared.

  Lord Howard saw her, and kissed his 
hand with an animated air-"I will not
attempt to describe to you, Miss Bouverie,"
said he, as he entered the room, "how I 
have managed to leave the party and re-
turn to you; you would not credit me, were
I to describe the difficulties I have encoun-
tered."

  "Then, my lord," said she, "as a re-HOWARD CASTLE. 101

ward for the trouble you have had, there is
a letter for you, laid on your writing-box."

He quickly took it up, and upon reading 
a few lines, hastily rung the bell. When 
the servant entered, lord Howard said-
" Order the carriage to wait at the door; 
I must go out in it ; this is unfortunate, 
when I had promised myself so much plea-
sure."

He did not address these words to Cle-
mentina, who had watched his countenance 
as he read the note. She saw, or fancied she 
saw, an unusual agitation in his manner. 
He left the room without speaking; she 
watched him enter his carriage, and drive 
off.

Mrs. Conway expressed her surprise at 
his abrupt departure, and hoped he would 
soon return, as she had to arrange several 
important points in regard to their jour-
ney, which she hoped to commence at an 
early hour next morning. She knew not 
from whom the note came; had she seen 
its badge, she would have been still more 
uneasy.

Lord Howard did not appear, and the 
party retired at an early hour to bed.
102     HOWARD CASTLE.

  In spite of the fatigue Clementina had
endured, she could not compose herself to
sleep. She heard lord Howard return; a
neighbouring clock had struck one before
his carriage stopped at the door; she heard
him pass her apartment, and she distinctly
distinguished those words, which she sup-
posed were addressed to his servant--"You
need not prepare for my leaving Paris in
the morning." She heard no more, but she
had heard enough to fill her with wonder.
In no way could she account for  his change
of plan, but that Miss Clifford had inter-
fered. How terribly would Mrs. Conway
be disappointed if she was neglected, to at-
tend--to whom? she feared, from lord
Stanhope's hints, his mistress!

  Mary came to her room at an early hour,
as Mrs. Conway was impatient to com-
mence her journey.

  Clementina found her friend alone in the
breakfast-room before eight o'clock.

  "It is strange," said she--"my son has
not been in the house to-night!"

  "You are mistaken," replied Clemen-
tina; "I heard lord Howard return soon                 HOWARD CASTLE.    103

after one; I could not be deceived; he spoke to his servant as he passed my room."  

     Mrs.Conway immediately rung the bell, and inquired if the footman was certain lord Howard was not in his own apartment?  

     His answer was, his lordship went out at seven: but he said he should be back by eight o'clock."

     The servant was correct in his account, as soon after he appeared.   He looked harassed and fatigued,  and not in his usual spirits.

     "I was anxious,"  said Mrs. Conway, " to have seen you last night, that we might arrange our plans.  Are you ready to set off?"

     "I have a proposal to make,"  was his answer, " which, I hope, will be attended with success.  Miss Bonverie, I must petition your interest in my behalf." Clementina knew what was to follow.  " It is,"  continued he, " that you will put off your journey till to-morrow; it can make no material difference, as your letter to Mr. Waldegrave is not yet gone; I cannot leave Paris to-day; to-morrow I hope I shall be more fortunate."  
104      HOWARD CASTLE.

  Mrs. Conway looked surprised, but only
said- "Then my dear Clementina, we
must take care of ourselves." She ordered
the carriages to be immediately got ready.

  Lord Howard was evidently disconcert-
ed- "I waited many days in Paris for your
arrival; will you not indulge me by remain-
ing a few hours? I may perhaps be able
to accompany you this evening?"

  "No," replied Mrs. Conway; "you had
no engagement when I wrote to my bro-
ther; why have you formed one when you
knew my plans were fixed? You appeared 
willing to quit Paris immediately; what
can now detain you?"

  "Not my own inclination, I assure you,"
was his answer. "Will you not speak one
word in my favour, Miss Bouverie? it will 
be a very serious mortification to me if I
see my mother and you set off, and I oblig-
ged to remain here."

  "Are you really obliged?" said Clemen-
tina, smiling.

  "I am in honour bound to fulfil an en-
gagement I made before I saw you; other-
wise, believe me, nothing should induce me 
to give up the highest gratification I could
            HOWARD CASTLE.        105

possible enjoy, to remain in this uninte-
resting place ; it will appear a desert to me
when you quit it."

   "You will find wherewith to amuse you ,"
said Clementina, smiling.

   " Are you not cruel," said he, " not to
make one effort in my favour?   You seem
to hold all I say in derision, and not to be-
lieve that I am hurt beyond measure by
this unfortunate circumstance."

   " I do believe you my lord, and that
you would have wished us all to have tra-
velled together.  We arrived in France
pefectly safe without a protector, and I
hope we shall be equally fortunate in reach-
ing England, without any misfortune hap-
pening to us; could you insure your mo-
ther's safety on the sea, I dare say she would
wait for you."

   " I am indeed an excellent sailor," turn-
ing to Mrs. Conway; " I will guard you 
from danger, and take all the care of you 
both that mortal can do, if you will suffer
me to be your escort."

   " I certainly expected it," answered Mrs.
Conway, " and I own I am disappointed

                 F 3106            HOWARD CASTLE.

on many differnet points. Your uncle too
will think it strange that you should delay
a moment in payingyour respects to him."

    "I fully expect," replied lord Howard,
with much gravity of manner, "to be at
Calais before you quit it ; my motions are
take you on the road."

     The carriages were announced, and all
prepared for their depature. He took
Clementina's hand-"This," said he, "is
a subject you would moralize upon. I
looked forward to this journey, which I
flattered myself you would have tkane in
my curricle, with the greatest pleasure.
How I am mortified by this change."

    "I hope you will still have a pleasant
one, my lord, though not in our cimpany."

     She stopped into the carriages as she said
these words, where Mrs. Conway was al-
ready seated, and they drove off.

     Mrs. Conway was evidently discompo-
sed, but she dropped not a hint of her sus-
picions ; and Clementina would not for the
world make any commenton her son's con-
duct. She was greatly rejoiced that they
were on the road to England, where, as       HOWARD CASTLE.     107

soon as they arrived, she meant to pay a 
visit at Colnbrook, and finally to settle at
Roachwood. At first it would appear dis-
mal, but a little time would accustom her
to solitude; she believed it would prove
more agreeable to her than a life of hurry
and bustle. Her spirits were not in a state
to enjoy the idea of gaiety; she had met
with such disappointments in her short
career, that she almost, in her own mind,
quarreled with the world. If lord How-
ard proved unworthy of her regard, she
should never have confidence in any of his
sex; her opinion of him had been exalted
as high has possible; could he be possessed
of such theoretical principles of goodness,
and act diametrically contrary, he must
be completely hypocritical and deceitful;
she fervently hoped the son of her dear
friend would not prove so unworthy of his
amiable parents and the good opinion of the
world, which he certainly had.

   Their journey was a silent a one as pos-
sible; no adventure roused their attention,
nor accident their fears. They reached 
Calais on the fourth day from their quit-
ting Paris. A packet-boat was on the108             HOWARD CASTLE.

point of sailing; but there being a fresh
breeze of wind, more than when they had
crossed before, Mrs. Conway's courage
completely failed her. She looked at the 
clouds; they were threatening; the sea ap-
peared rough, and her fears took complete
possession of her She asked no advice,
but resoloved to remain till the morning.

  Clementina secretly repined at her
friend's want of courage; she saw the boats
sailing pleasantly along, and the sailors as-
sured her there was only   sufficient
to ensure them a quick, good passage, She
was resolved not to expostulate, but to
submit with patience. Her great fear was,
that lord Howard would arrive before they
quitted Calais, and she suspected he would
have a companion with him, which would
give Mrs. Conway the greatest uneasiness.

 The state their minds were in, it cannot
be supposed that their situation could be
pleasant. Mrs. Conway lamented her fool-
ish terror, when she found the passengers
had been landed safe at Dover. The next
day Clementina listened to the wind with
secret sorrow; she was certain they should
remain where they were, as it was consi-                 Howard Castle.               109

derably increased.  Mrs. Conway's unea-
siness increased with it-what would her
brother think of their tardy appearance?
not that that they were detained by the 
weather! He must conclude that an ac-
cident had happened to them on the road
-"I wish," said she, as she walked from
window to window, which commanded a 
view of the sea, "that I had not yielded
to my foolish timidity yesterday; we may
remain here a month."

  "If it gives you pain," said Clementina,
"it will give your son pleasure, finding
you here."

  "That perhaps may depend on circum-
stances," was her answer; "should he
have a companion he is ashamed of, he may
be sorry that we should be witnesses of his
folly."

  Clementina was silent, and Mrs. Conway
was extremely laconic in her remarks; her
mind was not in its usual placid state; the 
irritation it was in rather affected her tem-
per; they tired of walking, conversation
flagged, and no books they could get af-
forded them any amusement.110          HOWARD CASTLE.

   The third day the wind was abated, and
Mrs. Conway was resolved to venture, al-
though she was almost sick with appre-
hension as she looked at the sea, which she
fancied was rather agitated; the tide would
not answer till near noon.

   Clementina stood looking out of a 
window, when she saw a carriage drive up
to the door. She was retiring from the
observation of the strangers, when lord
Howard's curricle attracted her attention.
He was alone, but his landau, which was
open, had two females in it. Clementina
recognised Miss Clifford before she quitted
the window, and that lord Howard had 
flown to hand his fair protégée from the
carriage; although she fully expected they
would come together, yet she was shocked
at a confirmation of her suspicions. "He
now," thought she, as she threw herself on
a chair, "openly avows the connexion, and
completely gives up all appearance of pro-
priety. How Nature has thrown away her 
choicest gifts, in lavishing such external and
internal endowments as she has on lord
Howard! If he is depraved, he is formed          HOWARD CASTLE.          111

as a snare for our sex, as there never was any
human being so pleasing. What a mis-
fortune that he is not equally amiable!"

  She retired to her own apartment, fear-
ful he should find his mother and she were
still there; of course; he would come imme-
diately to their sitting-room. She was not
in a state sufficiently composed either to
see his lordship or Mrs. Conway, who, she
hoped, had not been an eyewitness of the
arrival of the party. She heard lord How-
ard's voice on the staircase, inquiring for
the English ladies. Her heart beat quick
as she listened to him, and mourned over
the necessity there was for her driving him
from her thoughts. A bustle in the ad-
joining room made her conclude it was oc-
cupied by the lady and her maid; she dis-
tinguished female voices, and might have
heard what passed between Miss Clifford
and her attendant, had she chose to be a lis-
tener. A tapat her room-door, and Mrs. Con-
way almost immediately after entering, with
a countenance expressive of pleasure, con-
vinced her she knew not who was her very
near neighbour. She told her lord How-
ard was arrived, and was anxious to see her.112          HOWARD CASTLE.

   "Oh," replied Clementina, "I knew
his lordship was come; I feel sorry we are
still here."

   "We must forgive the past," said Mrs.
Conway, "and express what we really are
--happy at seeing him. I am much pleas-
ed we shall have him with us on the seal
my courage began to fail as the time ap-
proached; it is now near the hours appoint-
ed for the boat to sail. Happily it is near-
ly calm, and the knowing ones say we shall
have a very smooth passage."

   "Perhaps a tedious one," said Clemen-
tina; "too little wind is a fault, as well as
too much."

   "Yes," replied her friend, "it may be
a trial on our patience, and too much a
trial on the nerves; permit me to choose
a dead calm, and the sea like a mill-pond."

   Clementina accompanied her to the par-
lour, grieved to the heart that such a shock 
was awaiting her, as she knew the disco-
very of who was with her son would dis-
tress her beyond measure.

   Lord Howard advanced to meet Cle-
mentina, with animation and joy visibly 
marked in his countenance. He took her     HOWARD CASTLE.     113

hand the moment she entered-"This is
an unexpected pleasure," said he, "as my
stay in Paris was so unavoidably protract-
ed, that I feared you had reached London
before I left the capital of France; but,
thanks to my mother's fears! not your in-
clination has kept you here."

  "We have not experienced much amuse-
ment," said Clementina, "in our stay at 
Calais."

  At that moment the boat, being ready to
sail, was announced, and all was hurry and
bustle.

  Clementina secretly wondered what he
would do with Miss Clifford, who, she sup-
posed, he meant should accompany them.

  Lord Howard offered an arm to each, as 
they preferred walking the short distance
to the harbour. At last she saw the car-
riages which they had declined going in
approach; there were females in Mrs. Con-
way's chaise, who, she concluded, were
their attendants with the baggage. In
lord Howard's landau was Miss Clifford
and her maid.

  The crisis seemed to draw near when an 
explanation would be unavoidable. At114         HOWARD CASTLE.

last lord Howard said to his mother-" I
have a young lady under my care, who, I
believe, is in my carriage; will you allow
me to introduce her to you?"

  "A lady!" repeated Mrs. Conway, "and
under your protection! I do not under-
stand you."

  "You do perfectly," was his answer. "I
have been her guardian for several months,
and I hope to deliver her safe to her friends
in London; until she heard of a lady's ar-
rival, she could not quit Paris, which was
the cause of my detention. I could not
leave her in an unprotected state amidst
strangers."

  "How came she there?" asked Mrs.
Conway; "did she accompany you to
France?"

  "She did not," was his answer; "her
story is too long."

  "I wish to hear no account of her," re-
plied Mrs. Conway; "she certainly is in
a very suspicious situation; to travel with
your lordship is strange, if she is of a virtu-
ous character."

  "If you can suspect her," replied lord
Howard, with much warmth, "your son

        HOWARD CASTLE.     115

must be implicated in the suspicion ; do
you think I should introduce to Miss Bou-
verie and to you a person whose character
would not bear the strictest investigation?
You shock me by the surmise more than 
I can express."
  The agitation he was in stopped him for
a few seconds.
  Mrs. Conway took the opportunity of
his silence to say-"You in general are a
nice observer of female conduct, and pro-
priety of behaviour; what would you
think, had Miss Bouverie, or any single fe-
male, set off with lord Stanhope, or sir The-
odosius Sydney, without any other protec-
tion ?"
  " Knowing Miss Bouverie," replied he,
with warmth, " to be correctness itself, I
should not for a moment have dared to
have whispered, even in my own mind,
a suspicion derogatory to the purest inten-
tion and actions. I know Miss Clifford to
be as pure in thought and word and deed,
as Miss Bouverie is; I therefore must,
though very unwillingly, again separate
from you. I have pledged myself for Miss
Clifford's saftey, and no personal gratifica-
116   HOWARD CASTLE. 

tion shall tempt me to promise what I will
 not perform."

 They were within a few yards of the ob-
ject of their conversation, who had got out
 of the carriage, and stood waiting lord 
Howard's approach.

 "She may go in the boat with us," said
 Mrs. Conway, " but-- " 

But what ?" said he, with quickness ;
 a if she is not to be introduced to you, I
 must leave you ; I will submit to no indig-
nity being shewn to Miss Clifford?"

 "Very well," replied Mrs. Conway; 
" then introduce her to me."

 The extorted consent Mrs. Conway had 
given did not please lord Howard, and for
 a second the considered whether he should
 not return to the inn, until another boat
 was to sail ; he however conquered his 
feelings, and turning to Clementina, said
--" I know Miss Bouverie too well to
 dread her behaviour wounding the feelings 
of any human being, particularly a young
 and innocent female, who would shrink at 
the bare idea, or what has passed. Have 
you formed the same opinion of me my 
mother has ? Could you for a moment 
        HOWARD CASTLE.     117

suppose I would introduce to you any per-
son whom you could not esteem? No, Miss
Bouverie, I prize your feelings too highly
to insult you by such an act. You will
find Miss Clifford as amiable as she is in-
teresting and pleasing in manners, and as
lovely as she is pleasing."

   Clementina felt convinced lord Howard
had been injured by their suspicions; she
now believed Miss Clifford was virtuous,
but she believed her to be beloved by lord
Howard, who spoke of her with ardour and
affection.

   He presented her to Mrs. Conway, who,
with evident reluctance, received her; he
was proceeding towards the boat, when
Clementina said--"Why may I not be ac-
quainted with this young lady, my lord?"

   He turned round, his eyes beaming the
thanks he would have expressed, and pre-
sented Miss Clifford to her, at the same
time taking the hand of Clementina--
"How kind you are," whispered he, "to
anticipate my wishes! after my mother's suspicions, I durst not solicit your notice.
Believe me, I feel grateful for this kind-
ness; you prove you have not so bad118          HOWARD CASTLE.

an opinion of me, or of my poor protégée,
who would sink if she knew what an odi-
um had been thrown both on her charac-
ter and mine."

             CHATPER V.
             ~~~~~~~~~

Jack Stephens again hailed Mrs. Conway
as she entered his boat, and assisted her
along. Lord Howard, after he saw her 
safe, returned for Clementina, whose cou-
rage was so great as to require little aid
from any one.

   Jack assured him she was the very best
female sailor he ever had in his boat, but
that her mother was the very worst.

   Lord Howard smiled as he heard honest
Jack's idea--"Do you hear," whispered
he, "you are my mother's daughter?"

   "The sailor," said she, colouring as she 
spoke, "has anticipated your wishes, and
made us into brother and sister. I should
rejoice in having so near a relation; I
should not object to have his words veri-
fied; he believed me to be Mrs. Conway's                    HOWARD CASTLE            119

daughter when we crossed with him before."

  Lord Howard returned to take care of Miss Clifford, whose sweet countenance and innocent manner would have removed every suspicion from Clementina's breast, had she not heard lord Howard's defence of her. Mrs. Conway continued cold and reserved towards her, evidently shewing that she thought her company an intrusion; she was however, soon, obliged to quit the deck, as the motion of the vessel almost immediately brought on the terrible nausea of sea-sickness.

  As soon as the bustle of getting clear of the harbour was over, and they were fairly bending their course to the opposite shore, Clementina went to inquire after her friend, whom she found better than she expected, and less alarmed with the noise and tumult, which sailors always make, than she had been when they crossed before. The gentle breeze, which partially filled the sails, was favourable; there was so little motion, she could hardly believe they were making any way towards the British coast. She inquired how lord Howard and his compa-120         HOWARD CASTLE.

nion were going on-if they seemed much
occupied with each other, or if they were
guarded in their attentions and behaviour
before her?

   Clementina answered that her presence
could be no check on lord Howard, who
was politely attentive to both-" Miss
Clifford," she continued, "does not ap-
pear in good spirits.  I think her particu-
cularly interesting and pleasing." She heard
Mrs. Conway sigh, but she made no reply
to her remark.

   After a short silence, she asked if Cle-
mentina had conversed with Miss Clifford?

   " Nothing further has passed between
us," was her answer, " than common re-
marks on what was passing; she expressed
herself extremely well; but I can be no
judge of her powers of conversation."

   "It is a strange infatuation," said Mrs.
Conway, in a low voice; " I could never
have supposed lord Howard would have
been so imprudent."

   "You have no proof," said Clementina,
"that he either has acted, or means to act
imprudently; he has so much of the milk
of human kindness in his nature, that you          HOWARD CASTLE.            121

may perhaps attribute a bad motive to a
good action; wait in your judgment until
his conduct is explained, and do not allow
your mind to brood on evils which may
never happen.  I would confide in lord
Howard's integrity, honour, and judgment,
and never for a moment doubt him."

  "Thank you, my dear Clementina, for
the good opinion you entertain of my son,"
said Mrs. Conway' "your sentiments are
generous, and may they prove correct!
Believe me, your advice is congenial to my
feelings; but when they are so tenderly
interested as they are in his welfare, I can-
not guide them as I ought to do; the agi-
tation of my mind has taken off the terror
I should otherwise have felt upon the sea.
But," said she, "you must not continue
in this close confined place; you are not
afraid to see this little insignificant vessel
on the bosom of the deep: I am so foolish,
I durst not contemplate the ocean with
any degree of pleasure; the idea that few
slight planks, which have perhaps been for
years buffetted by the waves, are all that
save us from a watery grave, would tor-
  VOL. IV.          G122     HOWARD CASTLE.

ment me; my thoughts have been so en-
grossed by the addition we have received
to our party, that I have almost forgot 
where we are."

  "Perhaps," said Clementina, "you could
bear to visit the deck, and contemplate,
with composure, the surrounding beau-
ties?"

  Mrs. Conway shook her head-"You
have more than the sparkling of the sea to
look at," said she, smiling; "I am far 
better where I am. You have tranquil-
lied my thoughts wonderfully; and I
hope I shall remain tolerable comfortable
till we reach Dover, when I shall quit this
little prison with pleasure: surely Miss
Clifford will not join our party, or think
of travelling with us to-morrow? if she
does, I shall be convinced she has a pro-
spect of being nearly allied to me."

  "If she was on the point of marriage
with lord Howard," replied Clementina,
"she would not intrude herself upon you;
you will probably see no more of her after
she quits the boat; she will pursue her
journey independent of lord Howard, who,               HOWARD CASTLE.     145

I suppose, was only her protector in a fo-
reign country.”

When Clementina returned to the deck,
she found Miss Clifford seated alone, and
in a pensive attitude. Lord Howard was
walking backwards and forwards with Jack
Stephens; the moment he saw Clementina,
he approached her, and inquired after his
mother; he seemed pleased with the good
accounts she gave him, and told her, in
return for her information, that he had
heard her praised beyond measure—“Even
your charms have sunk deep on the feel-
ings of the honest tar; it is not your form,
or your face, which have struck Jack with admiration, but it is a qualification I did
not know you possessed, and I believed I
was sensible of all your perfections; it is
your noble courage which has filled him
with wonder. He says nature formed you
for a sailor’s wife, as lie is convinced you
would not torment your husband with
foolish fancies and fears.”


    Clementina was amused with the cha-
racter she had acquired, which she was
afraid was very different from what lord124              HOWARD CASTLE.

Howard would have given, after he had
been a witness to the terror she suffered
the night of the fire in Paris. They both
approached Miss Clifford, who was intently
gazing on the ocean.

   " How beautiful the sea is!" said Cle-
mentina; " the variety of vessels surround-
ing us are most amusing."

   " They are indeed," was all the answer
Miss Clifford gave. A deep sigh seemed
to come from the bottom of the heart, and
she continued with her eyes bent on the
water.

   Lord Howard was inclined to pursue
the subject; any topic was interesting to
him if Clementina would converse--" You
admire all Nature's works," said he, as he
seated himself by her; " nowhere is she
more lovely than in her marine produc-
tions. That weed, which is floating past
us, could we examine it minutely, would
disclose innumerable beauties; and could
we arrest one of the playful tribe, who are
sporting round us, with the fine colours
it possesses, in the element natural to it,
you would be charmed; many of them lose
their glowing tints almost instantly upon           HOWARD CASTLE.      125

being taken out of the water; some retain
their luminous appearance; but most of
them seem sensible of the change, and
lose their beauty before they can be exa-
mined; but in a fine day, when the sun is
bright, and shines upon a shoal of herrings,
the water is like a field bespangled with
azure, purple, and gold."

  "All," said Clementina, "given by the
bounteous Creator for the benefit of man!"

  "Yes," replied lord Howard, "and in
such abundance, that no quantity taken
ever appears to diminish the numbers; they
extend for miles, and are so compressed
together, that they nearly become an im-
penetrable body."

  "I should almost wish myself," said
Clementina, "to be transformed into a
sea nymph, and traverse the bottom of
the ocean: what wonders I should disco-
ver!"

  "You would find it, I believe," replied
lord Howard, "varied by caverns, rocks,
and mountains. The Red Sea would be
particularly interesting, as it is productive
of beautiful sub-marine plants, fine shells,
and beds of coral, formed by insects for126                HOWARD CASTLE.

their habitations. The American Sea af-
fords food for turtles and other animals, by
producing a variety of vegetables; but
every thing belonging to the sea, or I may
take a more comprehensive word, belong-
ing to creation, must excite wonder and
awe in a contemplative mind. The very
tides! that such a body of water should be
attracted by the sun and moon, so as to
create its rising in height and falling, ap-
pears strange."

  "It does indeed," said Clementina; "and
it appears to me almost as strange that the
mind of man should have made such dis-
coveries, particularly in the bold attempt
of traversing the ocean."

   "Yes," replied lord Howard, "not only
the boldness, but the ingenuity of our
early navigators, who first constructed
their ill-calculated vessels for combating
the various perils of a voyage, and the 
gradual improvement which has been made
in every age. It was not till the year
1500 that the compass was used in the
East Indies; to the ingenious Chinese we
owe the discovery, as early as the year
1260. In geometry to the Egyptians;        HOWARD CASTLE.     127

they found some plan was absolutely neces-
sary from the inundations of the Nile, and
invented the needful science. The English
have improved upon all, as no nation can
exceed them in nautical knowledge: our
ships are masters of the ocean; they ride
triumphant in every quarter of the globe."

   "And to what dangers are our brave
defenders exposed!" said Clementina; "of-
ten to a dreadful element, and the horrors
of war; I cannot conceive any thing so
terrible as a sea engagement."

   "Sailors," replied lord Howard, "are
made of different materials from other 
men; they are unconscious of danger; and
if death stares them in the face, in the
most horrid form he can put on, still they
are not appalled; a British sailor will do
his duty, if he knows the next wave will
prove fatal, or the next shot of the enemy
blow him to atoms: his heart is not like his
courage, immoveable, as no race are possess-
ed of finer feelings, or more tenderly alive
to humanity, generosity, and affection--I 
venerate the character of a British tar."

   "Your description would instill your
sentiments into every heart," said Clemen-128          HOWARD CASTLE.

tina, her eyes glistening from the emotion
he had excited.

   "Had I only been the hero of my own
tale," replied he, "and had seen such feel-
ing pourtrayed by Miss Bouverie, I should
have been flattered in the highest degree;
but alas! I am not Othello--I have no
battles to recount, or dangers to interest
you."

   A sigh from Miss Clifford attracted Cle-
mentina's attention she determined to
give up the pleasing conversation of lord
Howard, as she feared its being addressed
particularly to her might give pain to
their companion, whose depression of spi-
rits was very evident. She at last ventur-
ed to say, she feared she had left friends in
Paris, whom she regretted to part with.

   "I should be most ungrateful," replied
Miss Clifford, "if I told you that I had
not. I have met with great kindness from 
strangers; therefore I must, in some de-
gree, lament leaving them, probably for
ever; my sorrow is not occasioned by those
I have left."

   Clementina suspected she had received
a wound from Mrs. Conway's evident shyHOWARD CASTLE. 129

and ungracious manner ; yet if she was
possessed of lord Howard's heart, she was
an object of envy, in spite of his mother's
apparent dislike. Forced conversation is
difficult to keep up, and Miss Clifford did
not appear at all inclined to pursue it.

Lord Howard, after a little pause, said
-" I wish I could inspire you with more
spirit to contend with the minor evils of
life, which, I am convinced, ought to be
passed over as lightly as possible; you are
going to an affectionate friend and to a
fond parent."

Clementina, at these words, said, in a
low tone, and with evident emotion-
"What an enviable situation! Had I such
a prospect, I should, I hope, feel thant-
ful to Heaven for its blessing."

Miss Clifford looked surprised; she had
heard so much in paris of the beautiful
English lady, of her great fortune; won-
derful talents and accomplishments, she
fancied she must be a being exempt from
sorrow, gay and fluttering in the sunshine
of prosperity, surrounded by friends and
admirers. Miss Clifford's knowledge of

G 3130     HOWARD CASTLE.

the world was confined, although she was
nearly the same age with Miss Bouverie;
she firmly believed that having such ex-
ternal charms, with wealth, and being un-
controlled mistress of her actions, consti-
tuted happiness. She exclaimed, in a tone
of surprise-"I was led to believe that you
was fortune's favourite, and that your
bright days were not obscured by clouds."

  "Alas!" replied Clementina, "who are exempt?"

  "You are," said lord Howard, "as much
as any human being can be."

  She smiled as she addressed Miss Clif-
ford-"Would you not believe this gen-
tleman knew all the events of my life, so
boldly to affirm that I have a continued 
succession of happiness?"

  "Do not accuse me," cried he, "of
making any such remark; I know we
must all have sorrow and disappointment;
it is the lot of humanity; but some are
much more bowed down with them than 
others. Nature has been so liberal to you,
and given you such sources of amusement,
that you cannot feel the demon ennui,
which is worse to bear than real evils; you        HOWARD CASTLE.     131

are blessed with a strong mind and active
perceptions, which will carry you through
trials many of your sex could not contend
with."

   "Alas!" said Clementina, "in affliction
I have little fortitude or strength of mind
to support me; I have," turning to Miss
Clifford, "lost both my parents, and am,
at this moment, returning to my native
country without your happy prospects. I
have no affectionate father to fold me to
his heart."

   Tears stole down her cheeks at the re-
collection of her forlorn situation. Miss
Clifford's astonishment increased; she found
Miss Bouverie the very reverse of what
she expected: instead of being carried off
by admiration and the tide of fashion, she
found a rational being, possessed of much
sensibility and compassion, seemingly alive
to the most acute feelings, both for her
own woes and those of others. It roused 
her from a state of torpor which had ren-
dered her incapable of exertion.

   Mrs. Conway's repulsive reception had
shocked her; she feared her travelling
under the care of lord Howard had dis-132      HOWARD CASTLE.

pleased her, and that suspicions injurious to
her character might be the result; she
likewise felt her presence was intrusive
upon lord Howard and Miss Bouverie,
who, she was perfectly convinced in her
own mind, were engaged to each other.
She had heard his lordship run on in such
strains of high commendation of his fair
countrywoman, that she was convinced he
loved her, and her opinion of him was so
exalted, she did not suppose he could love
in vain.

 She had shrunk from joining in their con-
versation from a conviction of her own in-
feriority, and from a fear of being a check
upon their enjoying each other's society.
Miss Bouverie had paid her every atten-
tion, which she felt grateful for; but still
the idea her presence was irksome to them,
haunted her, and imposed a degree of si-
lence which was unusual to her.

 Clementina was not perfectly free from
restraint, as she suspected lord Howard's
little flattering attentions to her created
Miss Clifford uneasiness; her own bosom
was not tranquil; she felt the absolute ne-
cessity of giving up the pleasure whichHOWARD CASTLE.   133

she had enjoyed in a high degree; she
must quit her beloved Mrs. Conway, as
being subject to all the pleasing assiduities
of lord Howard was laying the foundation
of misery to herself.

   Never were his watchful attentions more
marked than since they had been in the
company of Miss Clifford. Being on board
of ship might induce him to exert his po-
liteness; but there was an indescribable
tenderness, when he addressed Clementina,
which, in spite of her reason, would sink
deep in her heart.  If he was Miss Clif-
ford's lover, he was undoubtedly an un-
bounded flirt; a degree of reserve stole
over her manner, with which she could not
combat, and upon mature reflection, she
thought it was necessary and proper.

   Lord Howard found both the ladies
were sinking into silence, which was not
at all according to his plan; he had been
deprived of Miss Bouverie's society for
some days; he could not permit hen to be-
come contemplative without his sharing in
her contemplations. He was resolved she
should not indulge the melancholy which
134         HOWARD CASTLE.

had overspread her countenance from the
time she had mentioned the death of her
father: every subject failed which he start-
ed; nothing could rouse her to converse;
he hummed an Italian air he had heard her
sing, and asked her to join in a duet—
"Miss Clifford has heard me mention your
singing in such terms, that I know it
would be the highest gratification for her
to hear you."

  "I have heard so much of Miss Bou-
verie's powers from lord Howard," said
Miss Clifford, "and from those who heard
you at the count de Brille's, that it would
be the highest gratification to me, if you
would grant lord Howard's request."

  She turned with so honest and anxious an
expression of countenance, that Clementina
smiled as she said—"I never refuse to do
what is in my power, if it can either please
or amuse: in the present instance, could I
enliven the party, I would willingly do it;
my songs are all calculated for the accom-
paniment of an instrument, and none of
them at all suited for sea song."

  "If you will accept of my voice as aHOWARD CASTLE.                            135

substitute for your harp," said lord How-
ard, "I shall be both highly honoured and gratified."

  Clementina felt unequal to the exertion;
but she was resolved, if possible, to com-
ply with the request. She sung in a low 
voice; her feelings accorded with the air,
which was plaintive and melancholy. The
sweet tones of lord Howard's notes were
delightful; they reached her heart, and
created emotions she wished to hide from
herself and from the world.

  The evening was charming : the gen-
tlest breeze wafted them towards Dover; 
the sun, which was spreading his last rays,
was sinking fast into the bosom of the
ocean, and leaving the finest glow upon
the expanse of water; the deeply reflect-
ed shadows of the innumerable vessels,
the dashing of the oars, and the noise of
the seamen singing the musical yeo, as
the cords tightened in their hands in brac-
ing the loose hanging canvas, was far more
delightful in Clemintina's ears than the
Italian air she was singing.

  Lord Howard's voice alone gave it in-
terest. The moment they paused, a sailor


136 HOWARD CASTLE.

began Dibdin's admired song of "Tom
Bowling;" it was one of the crew on the
deck, who seemed resolved to outdo the
singing he had heard, but which he did
not comprehend. He suffered no more
Italian words to be used, as they had a
continuation of English sea songs until they
reached Dover.

The sun was completely gone, and the
shade of night was enveloping the land-
seape in obscurity ; gloom of twilight
appeared to heighten the stupendous cliffs,
which attracted their attention.

"How great are the works of the Crea-
tor!" said Clementina; "the ocean, with
such a boundary, sinks the efforts of man
into insignificance; how trifling those ves-
sels appear!"

"And how much more so would you
think them, were you to view them from
the top," said lord Howard, " and yon
tall anchoring bark diminished to er cock,
her cock a buoy, almost too small for sight."
Nature is grand in her outline; at this mo-
ment I can survey some of her most choice
works, and I could almost wonder at crea-
tion; the rocks, the water which sur-
HOWARD CASTLE. 137

round us, call forth my admiration ; but
I see and could worship the fairest produc-
tion of all."

He stopped in his speech, as if he had
been led to say too much ; he rose from
the reclining position into which he had
sunk by Clementina, and walked to the
opposite side of the deck, where he again
appeared lost in contemplation ; each of
the ladies supposed the other was the ob-
ject who was flattered by his admiration,
so neither was sensibly affected by the com-
pliment.

Clementina soon after descended to the
eabin, to inquire after her friend, whom she
found perfectly free from all but mental
pain ; her mind was so disturbed, that she
had almost convinced herself the destiny of
her son was fixed, and that he was upon
the point of ruining fair prospects, by
forming a most imprudent connexion.

The moment Clementina appeared, she
anxiously inquired how they had spent
their time on deck, and if lord Howard
paid very marked attention to Miss Clif-
ford?

Her answer was, that his lordship was
138          Howard Castle.

equally polite in his manner to both Miss
Clifford and herself; she added, she was
sorry to find the uneasiness of her mind
had returned with solitude——" Had you 
been of the party, you would have been
far more comfortable."

   " Perhaps I should,"replied Mrs. Con-
way; " it has been the earnest wish of my
heart to see my son happily married; but
the idea of his marrying a Miss Clifford
makes me miserable. He, who might
form a connexion with the first family in 
the kingdom, to unite himself——to whom?
a girl certainly with a pretty face, which
seems all she is possessed of."

   Her fears had magnified the evil which
she believed was pending over her, as much
as possible; and when Clementina joined
her, she found her evidently agitated and
uneasy; she inquired who had been sing-
ing?

Clementina said she had complied with 
lord Howard's request, and that he had ac-
companied her.

   " I did not know your voice," was her
answer; " it sounded so low, I fancied it
was the———"           HOWARD CASTLE.          139

   She stopped, and Clementina added——
" Miss Clifford.  Lord Howard did not
ask her to join; we merely sung a little
Italian duet; I was not in a mood for much
exertion.  Lord Howard has a charming
voice."

   " Yes," replied Mrs. Conway, " my son
certainly has uncommon powers to please,
if he would only use them to advantage;
if they are exerted to charm Miss Clifford,
I wish nature had been less profuse; all
your rhetoric was lost upon me; in ten
minutes after you was gone, I became as
gloomy as ever."

   Clementina wished she had known, as
she would have returned and cheered her 
spirits.

   They were soon interrupted in their
tête-à-téte by Mrs. Conway's maid coming
to prepare her mistress for quitting the
ship.

   When they appeared upon deck, lord
Howard politely inquired after his mother's
health, but with a degree of stiffness he
had never shewn before. She observed it,
and concluded he was resenting her recep-
tion of his companion; it did not tend to140             HOWARD CASTLE.

make her manner to Miss Clifford more
gracious, as he fancied it was a certain sign
that he was attached to her. The whole
party was discomposed, as Clementina felt
vexed to see her beloved friend uncom-
fortable.

  When they were fairly on terra firma, her
arm was accepted by Mrs. Conway, and they
proceeded before Miss Clifford was out of
the boat. Lord Howard had taken the
utmost care of them; but the instant they
were safely landed, he returned. They
saw no more of him for a considerable time
after they reached the inn. Mrs. Conway
was again alarmed; she kept her place near
the window, as she believed she could dis-
tinguish their figures almost in the dark.

  Clementina had seated herself at a table,
where there were candles, and was busily
persuing an English newspaper. Her
thoughts would at times stray to lord How-
ard; but she strove as much as possible to
interest herself in what she was reading, as
she highly disapproved of his manner to 
her. If he was really what his mother
was convinced of--the lover of Miss Clif-
ford, she was quite resolved to leave such             HOWARD CASTLE.         141

dangerous society.  She intended to write
to her aunt as soon as she got to London,
and likewise to order her own house to be
prepared for her; she would first spend a
little time at Colnbrook, and then settle
herself at Roachwood; she would bid fare-
well to Mrs. Conway and her son, as soon 
as she possibly could.

   Mrs. Conway's spirits were too much
agitated for conversation; she spoke not a
word, but rung the bell.  When the waiter
appeared, she inquired if he expected lord
Howard? or did he frequent any other
inn?  His answer was, that lord Howard
was always there when he was in Dover;
the reason of his long stay was a young
lady, who was with him, having either
sprained her ancle, or hurt her foot so
much, that his lordship had sent for one of
the carriages to return for her, as she could
not walk.

   At that moment a carriage stopped at 
the door, and the waiter disappeared.

   Mrs. Conway at last said——" Will my
son bring his precious burthen to this 
room?  He has taken her in his arms with142          HOWARD CASTLE.

all the care imaginable: where will he de-
posit her?"

  " Not with you," said Clementina.

  They heard voices below, which they
supposed were Miss Clifford's and lord
Howard's.  He soon after joined them, but
not with his usual gaicty of manner; he
looked grave, and answered Clementina's
inquiries in a constrained manner. He
hoped the accident would prove less seri-
ous than he at first apprehended.

   "How did it happen?" asked she.

   "By treading on a round pebble; I have
sent for a surgeon, who will very quickly
decide if it is a sprain, or what is the mat-
ter."

   "The young lady," said Mrs. Conway,
"contrives to engross your attention."

   "Would common humanity," replied
he, gravely, "not have induced any one
to render all the assistance in their power,
when they saw a fellow-being in pain and
distress?  Would you acknowledge me
for your son had I deserted her at such a
moment?  Believe me, you do Miss Clif-
ford the greatest injustice if you think her                HOWARD CASTLE.     143

capable of any scheme to attract my notice;
she is well aware that she would receive
the same from me; without any contri-
vance."

     He paced backwards and forwards in the
room, evidently vexed, and hurt by his mo-
ther's insinuations.

     Clementina took the opportunity when
they were both so much engages, to go
and inquire after the poor sufferer. She
found her laid on a couch, and a surgeon
examining her ancle. A little bone had
been misplaced, which had occasioned very
severe pain. He put it to rights, bandaged
 it up, and left her, with the assurance she
would be able to proceed on her journey
next morning, without any inconveni-
ence, which were joyful tidings to her.
Clementina told her that she had come to
offer, in case she could not have moved with
safety, to have remained with her at Dover.

Miss Clifford, who was penetrated by
her goodness, could hardly thank her for
the charitable idea: her feelings over-
powered herl she held out her hand, and
at last said - "Nothing should have in-
duced me again to interfere with lord How-


144     HOWARD CASTLE.

ard's happiness; I have been a torment to
him, when I wished I could have been 
the means of his enjoying the most perfect
felicity. It was I who prevent his tra-
velling with you; I have involved him in
his mother's suspicions, and, I feared, in 
yours."

  "I am in no way entitled," replied Cle-
mentina, with confusion, " to investigate
lord Howard's conduct in any respect; as
the son of my friend, I regard him; for her
sake I wish him well; but it would be 
strange indeed if he had to account to me 
for either his attachments or attentions.
Our acquaintance has been of a very recent
date, and, in all probability, it is drawing
near a close."

  "I hope not," said Miss Clifford, with
much feeling, "as I would not wish the 
most compassionate nature that ever fell 
to the lot of mortal, to suffer mortifica-
tion and disappointment. Lord Howard
is, as far as I can judge, nearly a perfect
character-so generous, disinterested, hu-
mane, and honourable, that I hardly be-
lieve there can be such a combination in
any breast but his own. He admires you,

        HOWARD CASTLE.    145

Miss Bouverie ; and I should be grieved
to the heart if he should meet with sorrow,
which I know he would poignantly suffer,
were he to part with you for ever ; and I 
firmly think you were formed for each 
other.;
  " You surprise me !" said Clementina,
with the utmost agitation of manner ; " are
you not destined to fill the situation?"
  " Me!" said Miss Clifford, with evident
surprise; " never for a moment did lord
Howard flatter me with attention, but
what arose from his charity ; he has been
to me a guardian angel-never a lover.
You possess a treasure, Miss Bouverie, as
I am confident you possess his heart ; his
behaviour to me has been uniformly kind
and affectionate, such as a brother would
have shewn to a sister.  I was thrown upon
his goodness in the strangest manner; he
has protected me-guarded me from insult
-introduced me to a lady of the highest
respectability-supplied me liberally with
every thing I could want-and the last and
greatest effort of his extraordinary philan-
thropy was his remaining in Paris with
  VOL. IV.         H146         HOWARD CASTLE
me, when Mrs.Conway and you quitted 
it.He has,I see plainly,by his attention
to me,created suspicion and uneasiness in 
the bosom of his mother.This weighs
heavily at my heart, that the most unex-
ampled goodness should bring the slightest
stigma upon him. I cannot address Mrs.
Conway; but will you assure her what I
have stated to you is strictly true, and
that her son is beyond my feeble power of
praise? If I have not an opportunity of
narrating my story to you. I will write
down a few of the particulars of itm which 
will completely restore lord Howard's cha-
racer from every imputation in which I
am concerned."
  Clementina thanked her for her inten-
tion;she feared Miss Clifford would per-
ceive the agitation she was in; to be as-
sured by her that lord Howard was free,
and that she possessed his good opinion,
was highly gratifying to her; she durst 
not flatter herself that all Miss Clifford had
told her could be the case, as she couldnot
believe she possessed his heart; the odium
of maiking her gray speeches, at the expence
of Miss Clifford's feelings, was, by this
        HOWARD CASTLE.     147

information, completely done away; and
she was sure she could relieve Mrs. Con-
way's mind of a load which almost over-
powered her. Upon the whole, the intel-
ligence she had received was extremely sa-
tisfactory.

   Lord Howard tapped at the room-door;
and having gained a ready permission to
come in, entered, saying--"I suspected
you were here; ten thousand thanks for this
mark of kindness, and confidence in me;
you have not imbibed my mother's stranged
ideas."

   "Ah," exclaimed Miss Clifford, "Miss
Bouverie has not only visited me, and con-
doled with me on my accident, but she
came to relieve my mind, in regard to my
remaining here. She resolved to stay
with me until I was able to travel."

   Lord Howard at these words pressed her
hand with fervor--"Are you a mortal, or
really an angel? You are one in form and
face, and your nature seems equally lovely."

   Clementina blushed the deepest red--
"Why are you, my lord, to have the whole
undivided privilege of shewing a very in-   148     HOWARD CASTLE

teresting and pleasing young lady atten-
tion and civility? your own feelings must
tell you that there is no sensation so de-
lightful as to he of scrvie to any one;you 
pursue the plan. I shouldhave been gra-
tified beyond measure could I have been 
of use to her. Happily, she will be able
to proceed on her journey to-morrow with-
out risk."
  Lord Howard expressed satisfation that 
the injury she had received was so slight- 
"can you",said he, as he eagerly looked in Clementina's face." remove my mother's 
strange prepossession? she will not be
lieve my protestations; you alone can ex-
plain to her, convince her what I told 
her was correct."
   "I can solemnly assure her", said Miss
Clifford with animation," you have been
the kindest friend ever mortal had; but 
you never bordered on even flirting with
me."
  "It seems as if I was acting in the capa-
city of confessor", said Clementina, laugh-
ing.
  Lord Howard smiled-"May I make                  Howard Castle               149

all my confessions to you? and will you
promise me absolution?"

  "I think I may venture," said she, "as
I am confident there are not many crimes
of which you are guilty."

  A servant entering, announced dinner.

  Clementina immediately wished Miss
Clifford good-night, and a safe journey to
London: as they were to set off at an early
hour, she should not have the pleasure of 
seeing her again.

  "And have I no prospect of meeting
with you?" said Miss Clifford, taking her
hand; "I certainly cannot call upon you
at Mrs. Conway's. My friend, Mrs. Her-
bert, lives at Kensington, and would be re-
joiced to see one I have such reason to 
be grateful to."

  "My stay in London," replied Clemen-
tina, "will be very short-probably not
above two days."

  Lord Howard listened with attention to
her last words-"Not two days in Lon-
don!" repeated he; "does my mother
know of your sudden intention to leave her?"150          HOWARD CASTLE.

   "We have no time to discuss the point
now."

   She again shook hands with Miss Clif-
ford, but gave her no hopes of their meet-
ing again.

   When she got to the room where Mrs.
Conway was, she found her still unusually
grave; her spirits were bad, and Clemen-
tina feared she was unwell--"You have
not recovered the effects of your voyage."

   "I was not much alarmed," was her an-
swer; "why should I feel uncomfortable
from it?"

   "You have no cause for any other un-
easiness. I have only time to assure you,
in the most positive manner, you have
not--I hear lord Howard approaching!
Pray do not appear displeased with him.
You have great reason to be proud of him."

   He entered as she finished the sentence
--"Is this a dinner or supper?" asked he.

   "Perhaps both," said Clementina; "I
suppose none of us had a very substantial
luncheon."

   Lord Howard, nor either of the ladies,
proved that they had no dinner, as none             HOWARD CASTLE.         151

were at all inclined for eating, and retired
early to their respective apartments.

   Mrs. Conway hoped they should be alert
in the morning, as her impatience increas-
ed to see her brother, now that she was on
British ground, and had not again to en-
counter the terrors of the sea.

              CHAPTER VI.

E A R L Y the following morning, Mary en-
tered her mistress's apartment, with Mrs.
Conway's compliments, and that she wish-
ed to set off in half an hour, if she could
be so soon ready.

   Clementia returned for answer, she
should not detain her a moment, and de-
sired the carriages might be ordered at
the time she proposed. She inquired if
lord Howard's servants were getting ready
for their master's departure? She suspected
Mrs. Conway had a plan to leave him at
the inn: her fears were, however, relieved
when she saw him in the yard, seemingly in a152        HOWARD CASTLE.

bustle, and his servants soon after appeared.
  When she went below, she found Mrs.
Conway in the parlour, and perfectly ready
to set out; still her manner bespoke an
agitation of mind not usual to her. Cle-
mentina concluded that the conversation 
which had passed between her and lord
Howard, when she was with Miss Cliford,
had discomposed her. She had no time to
make any remark before his lordship join-
ed them.

  "Did you really hope," said he, address-
ing his mother, "you could slip away in
so quiet a manner as not to distrub me?
-Mrs. Conway's plan," turning to Cle-
mentina, "was to leave me in the arms
of Morpheus. The gogd and I have some-
what quarrelled lately, and my sleep was
not so profund: I heard the preparation
for your depature, and the fear of being
left behind made me move with no com-
mon alacrity."

  "As you said nothing," replied Mrs.
Conway, "when I supposed you would
remain here with your female companion,
I did not think it necessary to disturb you
at so early an hour."

       HOWARD CASTLE.     153

   "There has already been too much said
upon that subject I will not further pur-
sue it than to hope your mind will regain
its tranquility, and its confidence in me.
You have no cause for uneasiness, and
I promise you will never have, in regard
to Miss Clifford."

   "I should have thought," replied Mrs.
Conway, "your protection was fully more
necessary here than in Paris: leaving so
young a person in a crowded inn may be
attended with danger. In Paris, I suppose
she had some acquaintances besides your 
lordship."

   "I am sorry," said lord Howard, in the
mildest accent, "my character, for both
conduct and veracity, has to be established
with you. I believe, not an acquaintance
I have in the world but would give credit
to my words; it is strange my mother
should be so hard of belief!"

   "I am afraid," said Clementina, "we
shall not even hear of Miss Clifford this
morning."

   "I shall leave a few lines for her," re-
plied lord Howard, "to apologize for my
setting off so much earlier than I mentioned."154      HOWARD CASTLE.

   "Why should we interfere with your
plant?" again said Mrs. Conway: " Miss
Bouverie and I are accustomed to travel
alone; I want no protection in this coun-
try."

   He rung the bell without speaking, and
ordered writing materials to be brought.
He quickly wrote a few lines, which he en-
trusted to the care of the waiter, and walk-
ed about the room, seemingly lost in
thought, till the carriages were announced
——" How are we to travel?" said he, taking
Clementina'a hand.

   " Mrs. Conway," replied she, " accom-
panies me in my chaise."

   " Would you not prefer an open carri-
age? If you will permit me to drive you 
in my curricle, I will answer for your safety."
   
   " By no means," was her answer.

   " The landau," said he, " is a pleasant
conveyance in such weather as this is: I
do not wish to crowd you, at the same time
your company would be very delightful.
——Will you," turning to Mrs. Conway, "in-
dulge me? There are hack horses to my
carriage.  Your chaise shall follow us, with
your attendants, and my curricle may come

        HOWARD CASTLE.      155

after : they must travel slower than we 
shall. By this arrangement we can easily
reach London to-night."

  Mrs. Conway very readily agreed to the
plan, which seemed to restore, in some de-
gree, her spirits; and they set off, appa-
rently in better humour.

  Mrs. Conway inquired, in a more gra-
cious manner, if lord Howard had called at
the miniature painter's before he left Paris?

  "I did," was his reply. "The pictures
will be quite ready for lord Stanhope to
bring to Howard Castle in a week or ten
days, where, I flatter myself, we shall drive
off all melancholy from Miss Bouverie's
features. I mean it to be a scene of gaiety;
but if she runs away, as she threatens to
do, my plans will become vapid and com-
fortless."

  Those words of her son's did more to 
enliven Mrs. Conway, than all the assuran-
ces he could give her of his conduct being
correct- "And pray where does my Cle-
mentina mean to run to?" said she, look- 
ing at her with most affectionate ex-
pression of countenance.
  "To my home," replied Clementina, 


 156       HOWARD CASTLE.

   smiling "I first mean to visit my friends
   at colnbrook; afterwards, I intend to set-
   tle myself quietly at Roachwood."
     "And live alone?" said Mrs. Conway.
    Lord Howard smiled at his mother's in-
   terrogation_"You probe deep," said he.
   "Will Miss Bouverie answer such a ques-
   tion?"
       "I will, very readily," was her reply.
   "My intention is to live alone at Roch-
   wood. At first it will seem strange: a lit-
   tle time accustoms us to every thing; it
   will reconcile me to what of necessity I
   must do."
      "When did you discover the necessity?"
   said Mrs. Conway;"you were to have been
   my travelling companion for three months
   to come; therefore there can be no need for
   your returning to Roachwood. Your in-
   elination may prompt you to leave me, 
   but do not attribute it to any cause."
    "I positively engaged  myself to visit
   my Colnbrook friends immediately upon
   my return to England; my aunt will with 
   reason be offended if I do not perform my
   engagement. I can with truth affism, that
   I have spent very happy days with you,      HOWARD CASTLE.    157

and, I trust, there are more in store for me.
I have experienced the utmost kindness
and attention from you, and I am grateful
for both."

  "What do your words signify." said
Mrs.Conway, "if your actions contradict
them?  Give me your company rather
than fine speeches; your expressions of af-
fection would afford me the greatest plea-
sure if I thought them sincere.  Whilst
you are professing to feel happy in my so-
ciety, you are meditating leaving me."

  "What can I conclude?" said lord
Howard; "it must be my presence which
drives Miss Bouverie away; had I remain-
ed in France, you probably would have
had her company."

  "I cannot answer such a variety of ac-
cusations," said Clementina.

  "Yes," replied lord Howard, "you can,
in the most satisfactory manner.  Say you
will remain with us until we go to How-
ared castle - that you will accompany us
there, and stay with us for a week or two;
then you shall be at liberty to follow your
own inclination."

  Clementina firmly believed, the longer

158          HOWARD CASTLE.

time she spent in his company, the more un-
willing she should be to go: her plan was
dictated by prudence, but pleasure over-
came it, and she consented.

   Mrs. Conway congratulated her son on
his success.

   "If lady Radnor is offended," said Cle-
mentina, "you must plead my excuse."

   "I will, in person," replied lord How-
ard, with the utmost animation; " I will
go to Colnbrook, and tell them what I real-
ly fear is the case-you unwilllingly gave
up your engagement to them, to  accom-
pany my mother to Howard Castle."

   She thanked him for his offer-a let-
ter would save him much trouble, and
answer the same end, in explaining why
her visit was delayed.

   Before they reached London, Mrs. Con-
way appeared to have forgot all her unea-
siness.

   Clementina had taken the first opportu-
nity of their being alone, to repeat Miss
Clifford's assurances, that nothing ever had
subsisted between lord Howard and her-
self, nor ever could.

   Mrs. Conway did not altogether credit               Howard Castle.    159

the asseveration, as she declared, in love af-
fairs, there was no believing whatever ma
or woman said-" The fear of your telling 
me an untruth," added she, smiling, "has
prevented my interrogating you."

  I was not aware, aware," replied she, "that
you had the inclination; I could have answered
you without the least hesitation, and with
the most perfect truth, that my
heart is where it should be."

  "That," replied her friend, "is a most
equivocal answer; your heart may be far
from home, and yet quite right."

  "It is here," cried she, "in by far the
safest place; and, I assure you, I shall keep
it as stationary as I possibly can."

  It was late in the evening when they ar-
rived in London.  Mrs. Conway with im-
patience inquired where her brother was? 
The servants answered he had been there
about two hours before; but hearing no
tiding of the travellers, he had returned
to his lodgings, which were at no great
distance, meaning to call again the following
morning.  Mrs Conway dispatched a mes-
senger to inform him of her arrival, and 
hoping to see him to breakfast. 160        HOWARD CASTLE.

   Mr. Waldegrve was fatigued, and had
gone early to bed, but he should be with
them at the time appointed.

   At the usual hour Clementina entered the
breakfast-room, where she found Mrs. Con-
way in eager expectation; and in a few mi-
nutes after she had the satisfaction of seeing
her friend completely happy in the arms of
her affectionate brother, whose joy at meet-
ing with her seemed only equalled by her
own.

   It was a few minutes before lord How-
ard joined them.

   Mr. Waldegrave turned to Clementina,
saying ——" I presume I may salute this lady
as my niece, lady Howard?"

  " No," said Mrs. Conway; I wish you 
could congratulate my son on possessing
such a treasure.  Miss Bouverie is only
my friend; would to Heaven she was my
daughter!"

   " Perhaps," said Mr. Waldegrave, " she
may prefer your brother to your son; you 
are surely so interested in my happiness as
to bestow (if the lady approves) a treasure
upon me.  Can I flatter myself you will
prefer being Mrs. Conway's sister?"
HOWARD CASTLE.           161

"I was greatly prepossessed in your fa-
vour," was her reply, " before this meet-
ing, from your being brother to my valued 
friend."

 "Well, said he, "I give you warning:
I shall try to rival all the young men in
your good graces; but where is my ne-
phew? I think he was just six years old
before I left this country.

 Lord Howard's entrance put a stop to
his inquiries.

 Clementina admired the easy grace and
affection with which he addressed his un-
cle, who was evidently struck with his per-
sonal elegance.

 "What an old fellow I must be!" ex-
claimed Mr. Waldegrave; "the last time
I saw you, Howard, I was tossing you in
my arms; you was a fine little Pickle, and
very fond of your uncle James."

 "The attachment I formed in my child-
hood is not at all likely to diminish with
my years; I am heartily glad you are resto-
red to your family and your friends; and I
hope we shall never lose sight of you again."

 "No," said Mr. Waldegrave, "I trust
I shall end my days in peace, and in my na-162         HOWARD CASTLE.

tive country. No part of the glove is to be
compared to this little happy island, where
there is a blessed government, an enviable
climate, and every luxury, independent of
affectionate friends, which can tend to com-
fort and happiness. All Britons, who are
discontented with their homes, ought to
wander in quest of contentment; nowhere
can they go, but they will return, after a 
few years' absence, charmed with the in-
dependence, liberty, and laws, of their own
envied land. But," added he, turning to lord
Howard, "why have you not a little play-
fellow ready for me? I looked forward
with no small pleasure to the nursery at
Howard Castle, where I have spent many
a happy hour with your lordship; I sa-
luted Miss Bouverie as my niece, lady Howard."

   Lord Howard's eyes sparkled with plea-
sure at the suggestion of his uncle; he
looked at Clementina, whose blushing 
countenance betrayed the confusion she 
felt; there was no retreating, as she was
engaged making tea.

   "Since you have been so tardy," conti-
nued Mr. Waldegrave, "I shall set you a       HOWARD CASTLE.     163

good example, as the lady has more than
half consented to become your aunt; I have
always understood silence was construed in
that way. You see what dispatch I use."

   "You certainly are perfectly in the
right," replied lord Howard, "as you have 
no time to lose. Miss Bouverie, am I so
happy as to have the prospect of a nearer
connexion with you? Believe me, it is
what I ardently wish."

   She replied, smiling--"I shall certainly
consider of your proposal very seriously,
since I find it will give your family so
much pleasure. Mrs. Conway, will you
approve of me as a sister?"

   "I do not think," was her reply, "that 
I could wish more complete happiness for 
my brother, than to see him have just such
another companion, if there is another like
yourself in the world."

   "That is an evasive answer," said Mr.
Waldegrave; "I fear you have other views 
for this young lady, and you would be
sorry to see her bestowed upon your sun-
burnt relation; but, in spite of this repulse,
I will try what I can do to win her heart."

   Almost immediately after breakfast,164                HOWARD CASTLE.

Clementina retired to her apartment, to
write to lady Elenora Montague; and she
likewise wished to give Mrs. Conway an
opportunity to converse with her brother,
without a stranger being present. Lord
Howard's manner had again created strange
sensations in her bosom; she firmly be-
lieved there was no connexion between
hin and Miss Clifford, whose words, "You
possess a treasure, as I am confident you
possess his heart," were impressed upon
her recollection. Pleasing hope would
steal across her senses, and hush every fear.
She had so often been flattered by his at-
tentions, without any declaration of regard,
which she had attributed to his connexion
with Miss Clifford, that she had concluded
his manner was particularly flattering to
all females; and she strove, as much as she
possibly could, to prevent his pleasing as-
siduities making an impression upon her
heart. She was now in a more dangerous
situation than ever; she still resolved to
keep a guard upon her manner, and not
again anticipate a declaration of love, until
it was made in the most unequivocal terms
--she would not expose herself, as she had        HOWARD CASTLE.        165

done with lord Montague (b fancying she
could relieve his mind), to the most dis-
tressing situation. She continued in her
apartment the whole morning. A few mi-
nutes before the usual dinner-hour, she
went to the drawing-room, where lord
Howard was reclining upon a sofa, with-
out either book or newspaper in his hand
-" Do I find you, my lord, without any
occupation or companion?"

  Her voice roused him from a reverie. He
started up, and taking her hand, he said,
with much warmth-" I appear idle, but
I never was so busy; I lay a thousand
plans, but not one of them comes to matu-
rity."

  "You give a poor account of yourself,"
said she; "it is an unprofitable way for
your talents to be disposed of."

  "Sometimes," replied he, "they are very
pleasing to myself; at others, most painful."
  "Atleast," said she,"you have variety,
which is generally reckoned amusing. Do
you still propose to take your excursion to
Colnbrook Abbey?"

  "I do," was his reply: "Mrs. Conway
cannot leave London for a week; I will166            Howard Castle.

therefore take my flight to-morrow morn-
ing, and pay several visits. The first shall
be to your relations; the second, to your 
friends and admirers at Carnsworth Castle."
Clementina smiled. "I shall likewise pay
my respects at Courtland Manor, where I 
shall, I suppose, find the beautiful lady
Almeria Villyers; I shall engage, if possi-
ble, all to visit Howard Castle. My ser-
vant has written, I believe, two hundred
cards of invitation this morning-I mean,
since you have consented to accompany us,
to make the old walls resound with mirth.
Had you kept to your cruel determination
of leaving us, I should have given up all my
gay plans, and retired to my wild habita-
tion of Warncliffe Manor, where I should
have moped in melancholy solitude, deal-
ing destruction on the moors."

  "Will you give up the delights of the 
twelfth of August," said she, "for the
tame amusements of Howard Castle? I 
supposed nothing could compensate for the 
pleasures of moor shooting."

  "Yes," said he, at the same time look-
ing earnestly in her face, "there are other
pursuits far more bewitching; pleasing so-
           HOWARD CASTLE      167

ciety would make me forego all the sports
of the field. I am not madly fond of either
fox-hunting or any such diversion; I was
not initiated into the science early, for
which I am very thankful; I was not strap-
ped upon a pony before I could lisp my
A B C, and led by a groom, that the first
dawnings of my mind might be occupied
by a kennel, a stable, and the ne plus ultra
of leaping a five-barred gate in proper style.
What can that child turn out?—a very good
sportsman, but of little other use, if he can
be deemed of any at all, and a very de-
pendent being. If his health should not
always accord with violent exercise, or the
weather prove unpropitious, he has no re-
source, but yawning, grumbling at the im-
pediments to his happiness, and, at last,
having recourse to a never-failing way of
killing time—falling fast asleep."

  "With what a contemptuous sneer
would most of your sex listen to you, my
lord," said Clementina, "who have no
other idea or topic of conversation but
hounds, horses, and feats of sporting cele-
brity!"

  "This is certainly an odd subject for168              HOWARD CASTLE

Miss Bouverie, " interrupted lord Howard," either to have addressed to her, or to descant upon; we will change it to one more interesting. I have brough lord Montague's picture with me, and I shall deliver it to lady Elenora. Will you look at it before I part with it, and tell me if it is perfect?"

   He left the room, without waiting for an answer, and returned almost immediately, with a red case in his hand. She saw, in spite of the utmost quickness, a female figure.

   "I have brought a wrong picture," said he, closing it.

   "Shew it me," said she, holding out her hand, and smiling.

   "Pardon me," was his reply; "on one subject I am a coward; I can exist in doubt, but I could not were my fears verified. When I get a ribbon securely fixed to my treasure, I shall wear next my heart the image of her I adore; if I am forced to renounce her, this picture shall be transferred to my cabinet, where it shall be enveloped in a sable veil, as well as my feelings."

             HOWARD CASTLE.          169

   She urged him no further; her sensa-
tions precluded an answer; whoever he
meant, it tenderly concerned her. If it
was herself, which, from his strange man-
ner, she more than half suspected, she had
no wish to see it, at the same time the idea
gave her pleasure; if it was any other per-
son, nortification would overcome her, and
she should expose the state of her heart to
him whom she would most wish to con-
ceal it from. He left her, and quickly
brought lord Montague's likeness, which
he held before her. The agitation her own
thoughts had occasioned threw a strange
tremor over her-her countenance express-
ed the utmost confusion.
 
  "Ah!" thought lord Howard, "of I
could create such feelings as this inanimate
piece of ivory can do, what transport
should I feel!"

  Clementina held the picture in her hand;
her eyes were fixed upon it, but her senses
wandered; she knew not she was to make
any criticism; she returned it without a
comment.

  "Do you approve of it?" said lord How-
ard.

  VOL. IV  I
170     HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Perfectly," was her answer, but her
manner was so constrained, he believed she
hardly was conscious of what she said.

  "Would you wish to examine it again?
you may keep it till this evening."

  She thanked him but declined the offer.

  At that moment Mrs. Conway entered
the room. Pleased at seeing Clementina
and her son tête-à-téte, she almost, with an
involuntary motion, was retiring, when the
former said--"Is the dinner hour altered?"

  "Yes," replied Mrs. Conway, "it is an
hour later; my brother was engaged at
the India House on business; after it is
over he is to bring a stranger to introduce
to us. Much has passed since you re-
tired to your apartment; no less than
that I am aunt to a young lady, who
has been in England for her education for
some years. My brother," continued Mrs.
Conway, "would not introduce his child
to his own proud relations, but bequeathed
the care of her to her mother's family. She
did not survive being to a warm
climate, but died soon after her daughter
was born. We never saw him after his
marriage."HOWARD CASTLE. 171

Clementina wished her friend joy.

Lord Howard had taken his departure
immediately upon his mother's entrance;
but Mrs. Conway said-"He knew of the
cousin he was to see at dinner."

In a short time after the carriage stopped
at the door, and Mr. Waldegrave entered
the drawing-room, handing the expected
young lady; but the surprise of Mrs. Con-
way, Clementina, and Miss Waldegrave,
may be easily supposed, when they recog-
nized their fellow-traveller, Miss Clifford.
She shrunk back when she found who her
aunt was.

Mrs. Conway exclaimed-"Do I see
Miss Clifford? or do my eyes deceive me?"

"No," replied Mr. Waldegrave; "this
is my Isabella; and to my dear nephew,
lord Howard, do I owe the preservation of
my child. I knew you were all acquaint-
ed with each other, from my friend Mrs.
Herbert, to whose maternal care my poor
girl is likewise much indebted. She has
run on in your praise, Miss Bouverie, ever
since she has been with me: she can hardly
find words to express her gratitude."
I2172        HOWARD CASTLE
  Clementina declared she felt rejoiced at
again meeting with her, and under such
circumstances.
   Mrs.Conway saluted her niece with the 
utmost affection-"I own," said she,"my
dear Isabella, that your first introduction
to me was in so doubtful a shape, that I
gave my consent to your being of our par-
ty with reluctance; I feared your charac-
ter would not bear investigating- so young
a women, with no other protector than ,y 
son,filled me with suspicion injurious to
your innocence".
   "God bless my good nephew!"exclaim-
ed Mr.Waldegrave;"he incurred censure 
from those he loved most, on this poor
girl's account; he gave up the pleasure of 
accompanying Miss Bouverie, to take care
of a helpless being, who was accidentally
thrown upon his protection- he relieved
her in the greatest distress-he found a re-
spectable asylum for her, and he always be-
haved to her with the strictest propriety 
and benevolence; in short , I do not believe
there is another young man of the present 
age, who would have acted in so generous,
honourable, and noble a manner as he has
        HOWARD CASTLE.     173

done; and may he be rewarded by the wo-
man I see he fondly loves! and who, I am
convinced, is a treasure he is worthy of.
Miss Bouverie, what do you say to this
prayer? will you join with me in wishing
him success?"

   "I do most sincerely hope his lordship 
will enjoy the happiness he deserves," was
her answer.

   Mr. Waldegrave observed her counte-
nance betrayed an unusual expression as
she uttered these words; he flattered him-
self it was no unpropitious omen for his
nephew, whom he loved better than any
human being in the world, excepting his 
daughter. He had formed a wish to see
them united, that his wealth might enrich
his darling nephew; but the moment he
saw Clementina, he was so much struck
with her appearance and pleasing manners,
he was convinced, if the young lady was
disengaged, that lord Howard's destiny
was fixed; he thought nature had formed
them for each other, and had bestowed ex-
traordinary gifts on both. He inquired
where lord Howard was, as he was certain
he would enjoy the discovery, that he had174          HOWARD CASTLE.

cherished so near a relation with all the ten-
derness and affection of a brother, which
Miss Waldegrave had declared to her fa-
ther he had shown to her. Mr. Walde-
grave's impatience to see his nephew in-
creased; he rung the bell, and ordered that
lord Howard should be informed his com-
pany was requested in the drawing-room.

   The message had the desired effect, as
he almost immediately appeared.

  Miss Waldegrave purposely avoided be-
ing recognized at first sight. Clementina
and she retired to one of the windows,
where she was in some degree hid from
his view. The evident agitation and em-
barrassment of her manner was not unob-
served by her companion, who suspected,
in spite of her assurances to the contrary,
that the attention which she had received
from the most pleasing of his sex had sunk
deep on her heart.

   Lord Howard advanced towards his 
uncle, with an animated air.

   Mr. Waldegrave's arms were extended
towards him, and with ecstacy he folded
him to his heart--"Here," exclaimed he,
"is my daughter ready to idolize you;            HOWARD CASTLE.	l75


come, my Isabella, and share with your
father in the pleasing task of expressing
our obligation to your benefactor—to your guardian angel!”


 “Miss Clifford," exclaimed lord How-
ard, at the same time quickly approaching
her, “is it possible we thus meet?”


 He pressed her to his bosom with ardour,
and imprinted a kiss upon her check.


 Poor Isabella’s feelings were quite over- powered; she burst into tears, and sunk,
nearly lifeless, upon bis shoulder. He sup-
ported her to a couch, and placed himself
by her. His manner was tender to a degree,
as he expressed the happiness he felt in recog-nizing her as a relation. Mr.Waklegrave
poured forth a torrent of kind thanks; but
his daughter could not articulate a word, but her silence was quite as eloquent as words could have been.


 Clementina pitied the emotion Miss
Waldegravc was in, and proposed her re-
tiring for a few minutes, to recover her composure; but Mr.Waklegrave would
not admit of her absence.


“ No,” exclaimed he; “ she has borne
very trying situations with great fortitude;176          HOWARD CASTLE.

let me see if she can support happiness. I
suppose tears demonstrate both sorrow and
joy——I always understood they were the
mark of the former sensation, but on the
present occasion, I conclude they flow from
the latter source, as you are surely happy
in finding your best friend is your nearest
relation, and that he will still interest
himself in your welfare."

   " Yes," said lord Howard, " I shall be
delighted if I may look upon you as my
protegée. I was your father, uncle, bro-
ther——all but your lover, Isabella."

   " And all but my lover be to me!" cried
she with emotion; " you have been my
kindest friend, continue to regard me as a
sister, and I shall be completely happy."

   " I hope, soon," said her father, " that
you will have another relation in this ami-
able being," taking at the same time Cle-
mentina's hand.

   Her cheeks were suffused with blushes
at the speech, and lord Howard's eyes
sparkled with pleasure.

   Mr. Waldegrave, after a little pause,
which he, with a mischievous intent, made,
continued——" This lady has nearly given
             HOWARD CASTLE.       177

consent to become your-what would you
suppose, Isabella?"

  " Cousin," whispered lord Howard.

  " No prompting, my lord; I wish to
know if my daughter is posessed of pene-
tration enough to discover-I mean Miss
Bouverie to be her mother."

  Miss Waldegrave smiled-"You in-
deed flatter me with a happy prospect; I
have already experienced so much of the
heavenly disposition of Miss Bouverie, not
to wish, above all things, that I could
claim relationship with her."

  " Have patience, my dear girl," said
Mr. Waldegrave, with a significant nor-
"all in due time; nothing must be done with
precipitation.  Had my prospects been less
bright," turning to Mrs. Conway as he
said these words,  "I should have peti-
tioned that my Isabella might be your
adopted daughter."

  "I already have one," was her answer,
her eyes beaming with tenderness as she
looked at Clementina's; "I shall be happy to
present to her a sister in affection; I hope
she will be every way worthy of Miss Bou-
verie's regard."178          HOWARD CASTLE.

   "This young lady," said Mr. Walde-
grave, "if I am a true prophet, will not
be long your adopted daughter; I mean
her to be your sister."

   Dinner being announced, interrupted
Mr. Waldegrave's insinuations, much to
the relief of Clementina.

   The day passed happily to all the party;
lord Howard was in better spirits than
usual; he seemed pleased with Isabella's
naiveté, who expressed, in the most artless
innocent manner, her affection for him.

   Mr. Waldegrave would have his joke;
he had naturally good spirits, and the
events of the day made him particularly
happy. He was surrounded by his nearest
relations, who appeared to enjoy what had
happened. He had found his daughter in
every way superior to what he expected
her to be, and was delighted that her deli-
verer had proved to be his nephew; his
sister was kind and affectionate in her be-
haviour to him and Isabella. Miss Boup
verie he thought superior to any other wo-
man he had ever seen; so much ease and
vivacity of manner, evidently guided by an
excellent understanding, made her a mostHOWARD CASTLE.         179

bewitching companion. Her beauty had
at first struck him with surprise; but in the
course of the day he almost forgot her ex-
ternal charms, he was so much pleased with
her conversation-by all he could observe
he was convinced she would soon be nearly
allied to him, as lord Howard's admiration
could not be hid.

 Mrs. Conway saw the change, and flat-
tered herself there was some hope for her
son. If Clementina had any engagement
with her cousin, she was convinced she
would not suffer lord Howard to continue
in a dangerous error. Her opinion of her
was so exalted, she could trust, with the
most perfect confidence, to her prudence and
judgment, that she never would injure the
happiness of lord Howard. Why she kept 
up a correspondence with lord Montague;
she could not divine; and why there should
be a mystery attending their connexion
was likewise strange; yet she was tho-
roughly convinced all would be explained
to her perfect satisfaction, if she encouraged
lord Howard as her lover. She had intro-
duced them to each other: it was all she
had done; she had not even pointed out a
180          HOWARD CASTLE.

single perfection Clementina was possessed
of; she believed not one had escaped his
notice; as he seemed to admire her with
enthusiasm, she hoped his admiration
would be crowned with success. It was
the first wish of her heart to see them
united; but she determined they should
act entirely without her interference, or
even betraying her anxiety upon the sub-
ject.

   Before the party separated for the night,
lord Howard declared his intention of set-
ting off in the morning on his round of
visits.

   Clementina gave him her letter, at the
same time saying--"The post will convey
this packet, my lord, if you should change
your mind."

   "The only inducement for me not to
proceed to Colnbrook is, that I may sooner
return to London. I believe I shall feel
all society irksome, but what I at this mo-
ment enjoy."

   "Variety is delightful," said she; "you
will be so well amused, that Mrs. Conway
and the party here will be forgotten."

   "Most certainly was there only a patri-             HOWARD CASTLE.        181
archal party to induce my return, I proba-
bly might linger on the road, but with the
companion my mother has at present with
her, you will see how expeditious I shall be."

   " I dare say Miss Waldegrave will be
flattered by the speech," replied she.

   Miss Waldegrave was at the moment
standing with Mrs. Conway, waiting for Cle-
mentina's joining them. She hastily pass-
ed on, wishing his lordship a good journey,
and Mr. Waldegrave a good-night.



              CHAPTER VI.


MR. Waldegrave proposed that Isabella
should spend a little time with her friend
Mrs. Herbert, as he had business which
must detain him in London, after Mrs.
Conway was gone to Howard Castle, which
she intended to do in a few days. She was
not sorry at the proposal; as the Castle had
been so long uninhabited, she wished to be
there a little time before they arrived, to see
that it was in some degree prepared for the
reception of strangers: excepting the annual182           HOWARD CASTLE.

visit she paid to the deserted mansion, it
had been totally neglected.

   After their friends had left them, Mrs.
Conway and Clementina went out in the
carriage, as the former feared the day
would prove heavy to her friend; but her
thoughts had so much to occupy them, she
was almost unconscious of the passing
time; however, to amuse Mrs. Conway,
she consented to trifle away the morning,
which she believed was her wish; so each
studied the other's amusement, and return-
ed home to dinner loaded with purchases,
which neither of them were in want of.

   There were no acquaintances in town of
either of the ladies, so that shopping was
their only resource. The beginning of
August is such a dismal season in London,
that Mrs. Conway became extremely im-
patient to quit it.

   Not till the third evening after lord
Howard had left them did he return, apo-
logizing for his protracted stay.  Mrs. Con-
way was alone in the drawing-room when
he entered-" Where is Miss Bouverie?"
exclaimed he; "a packet is entrusted to
my care, which I must deliver to her."HOWARD CASTLE.  183

At that moment she entered; the glow,
which unexpectedly meeting with him had
occasioned, made her appear still more
beautiful than common, as the lily in ge-
neral was rather predominant. Lord How-
ard held a letter in his hand, on which she
saw the foreign post-mark; the fear it
would cause suspicion in his bosom occa-
sioned an agitation in her manner which 
did not escape the quick eye of love.

Lord Howard saw it, and involuntarily
exclaimend-"Would to heaven I could
create such emotions as that envied paper
does!" He gave her the letter.

"This is not what I expected," said she, 
putting it at the same time away: "I 
hoped to have heard from lady Elenora."

"Do you pretend," said lord Howard,
"to be disappointed? I never, till this
moment, suspected hypocrisy was in your
nature."

"And I never was more sincere," said
she: "I know the contents of this epistle
before I open it; lady Elenora's would have
contained what I wished to know-if my
aunt disapproves of my prolonging my visit
to Mrs. Conway."184             Howard Castle.

  "You will meet with the whole family
(who are in this country at least) at How-
ard Castle. I saw no signs of displeasure
in any one of the party. When lady Ele-
nora gave me the letter for you, she said-


  'This packet will give Clementina so
much pleasure, she will not discover any 
blank.' I own," said lord Howard, "it 
gave me a very painful sensation: I have
obeyed her orders, and delivered it to you,
and if you do not derive happiness from
receiving it-"

  "Pardon me," interrupted Clementina,
"I should pay my correspondent a very bad
compliment, were I to say I had no plea-
sure in hearing from him; the letter in
question is from lord Montague, with, I 
dare say, no other intelligence than that
he is in good health, which certainly is 
very interesting to me."

  "Undoubtedly," replied lord Howard,
who was surprised with her naming him
in so easy a manner.

  Mrs. Conway had sat without speaking
a single word; she hoped her son would 
extort an explanation from her why they
so regularly kept up a correspondence, asHOWARD CASTLE.        185

their relationship was not sufficiently near
to sanction such an intimacy, but the sub-
ject was dropped.

 Lord Howard gave them a history of
his excursion. He first went to Coln-
brook, where he found the marquis of
Clemaire, which prevented his intention
of spending a day at Carnsworth Castle.-
"He promises for the family," said lord
Howard, "they will pay their respects to
you," bowing to his mother, "on the fif-
teenth of this month. He first inquired if
Miss Bouverie was to be at Howard Castle;
upon finding you was, he paused a mo-
ment, before he assented to the plan. At
last he seemed to conquer his feelings; he
believes the family have no prior engage-
ment, and will accept of my invitation. My
next visit was to Courtland Manor, lord
Carberry's beautiful villa, where I found
an assemblage of the graces. Lady Alme-
ria is certainly extremely beautiful, and
her sister very pleasing; her face does not
exhibit the same regular features, but the
expression of her countenance is animated
and sensible. My old flame, lady Caroline
Seymour, who is staying with them, re-186        HOWARD CASTLE.

ceived me with a smiling countenance, and
inquired very kindly after you , Miss Bou-
verie; there was a large party of beaux
and belles, who all seemed so gay and lively,
singing and dancing from morning to night,
that they drove off a very melancholy feel-
ing which hung over me when I entered
the house; I meant to leave them early in
the morning, and to have breakfasted at sir
Charles Pemborke's, and joined you at din-
ner, but sitting up very late at night made
me drowsy, and obliged me to breakfast
where I slept.  I was stealing away when
lady Almeria perceived my intention, and
completely frustrated it: she offered to ac-
company me into the pleasure-ground, to
shew me a seat which has been erected
under her inspection.  I could not refuse
so sweet a pleader; I accompanied her——
the rest of the party soon followed us. The
seat was beautiful; all were gay and lively,
and time slipped imperceptibly away. The
morning was nearly spent before I recol-
lected my intention of leaving them; the
ladies retired to dress for dinner, after pro-
mising to come in a body to Howard Cas-
tle, and I mounted my horse, and rode to
                 HOWARD CASTLE.      187

Sir Charles Pembroke's, where I dined, and drank so much of the baronet's wine, who will not suffer any one to leave his house sober, that I made love to his sister, Miss Celina, and went to bed with a most severe headache, which has accompanied me home.  I have now given you a faithful narration of my visits and of my success: the Pembrokes received my invitation with apparent pleasure."

     " Your lordships," said Mrs. Conway, " will be a good speculation.  Lady Pembroke, I dare say, has already laid many a goodly plan in which you and her daughter Celina are engaged."  She then told him how they had behaved to Clementina.  

     Lord Howard laughed at the account-  " Is it not natural," said he, " for lady Pembroke to feel disturbed and disappointed, when she was wounded in the most tender part?  She believed her daughter was possessed of extraordinary beauty, until a magnet appeared, who attracted every eye and every heart.  What could the poor mother do but vent her spleen upon the invading enemy, who had jointed her party,188         HOWARD CASTLE.

to eclipse Celina, and rob her of her share
of admiration?"

   "I believe," replied Mrs. Conway, "you
have hit upon the reason."

   "The reason," said he, "is very obvi-
ous, and there will be a renewal of it at
Howard Castle."

   Mrs. Conway soon after was called out
of the room.  Clementina had sat perfect-
ly still, apparently inattentive to what was
passing. Lord Howard could not let her
continue in her contemplative mood; he
approached her, saying-" Are you not
trying to anticipate the contents of your
letter? why will you not peruse it?"

   "I see, by the superscription, that lord
Montague is well, and I am perfectly sa-
tisfied."

   "Ah!" said lord Howard, " how dif-
ferent have my seusations been since I re-
ceived it under my care! I believed it
would convey unspeakable pleasure to you;
but it has filled me with apprehensions
not be described."

   "Will it give you any satisfaction," re-
plied she, with the sweetest smile upon              HOWARD CASTLE.            189

her countenance, "if I open the letter in your presence, and read it aloud to you?"

     "One little, insignificant word," said he, "but which is most painful in the English language for a lover, pronounced by his mistress, would do more - it would give me inconceivable happiness."

     "It is strange," said Clementina, "that any information about lord Montague should interest you so deeply."

     Her own agitation was perceived by lord Howard; he dreaded an explanation, yet the state of suspense was terrible.  She saw the agony he was in. 

     At last he said - "Is your cousin a favoured loved?  Pardon the question, Miss Bouverie, and the abrupt manner in which I have put it; but my feelings will not permit me to study eloquence.  On your answer hangs my prospect of happiness."

     "Do you not know lord Montague's very peculiar situation?" was her answer.

     "If he is," said he, "what I fear, he is in an enviable situation."

     "If he has not informed his mot intimate friends," replied she, "I never will divulge his secret.  I can, with truth, as-  

190        HOWARD CASTLE.

sure you, he never can be nearer to me
than he now is."

   ' Than he now is!" exclaimed he; " for
Heaven's sake, inform me what connexion
subsists between you?"

   A stop was put to their conversation by
the servants entering with the supper-tray,
and Mrs. Conway appeared.

   Lord Howard rushed past her in evident
agitation, and shut himself into his own
apartment; he sent an excuse that he was
unwell, and could not join them. His
mind was torn with a thousand fears, from
the very particular manner in which he
thought Clementina spoke of lord Monta-
gue's situation; and the expression, that
he never could be nearer to her than
he now was, haunted him with the idea
they were privately married. Her uniform
behaviour to him almost confirmed him in
the belief; she had always been polite, but
cold and distant; at no moment could he
ever surprise her into the least expression
of kindness, nor did she ever betray pleasure
a this approach, or the slightest preference
for his society.

   The alarm she had shewn for his safety,
        HOWARD CASTLE.     191

when Pelatro spoke to her at the theatre,
had filled him with hopes that she was in-
terested in his preservation; but all those
delusive fancies vanished, and he spent a
wretched night, anticipating disappoint-
ment to all his hopes. He resolved not to
linger in uncertainty, but to avow his love,
and bear the mortifying explanation with
as much fortitude as he could; he could no
longer support the misery which he had 
often endured since he had become ac-
quainted with the most fascinating woman
in existence.

   This was he occupied, whilst his mo-
ther concluded sir Charles Pembroke's
wine was the cause of his retiring early to
bed. Clementina was not of the same opi-
nion; but she made no comment on her
friend's supposition; her thoughts were 
nearly in the same tumult as lord Howard's
were, and she was relieved when they re-
tired for the night. She now was convinced
she was possessed of his heart: pleasure al-
most precluded repose, as much as alarm 
and uncertainty would have done; she was
convinced he still suspected she was in
some way engaged to lord Montague; but192                 HOWARD CASTLE. 

she resolved, the very first opportunity she 
had, to put the letter she had received,
and which had evidently filled him with
suspicion, into his hands; it would con-
vince him there was nothing more than
friendship subsisting between them. He
terms, that his connexion with them could
not be understood.

  Her thoughts became more composed,
as she was resolved how to act, and she
appeared in the morning in her usual spi-
rits. Lord Howard did not join them at
breakfast until they had nearly finished;
he did not seem at all prepared to accom-
pany them. Clementina hoped his head-ache was quite gone.

  "Why will you bestow hope on me?
instil it into me, and it will cure all my
aches." Saying these words, he placed him-
self at the table-- "You are the most active
travellers," turning to Mrs. Conway, " and
I the most unfortunate man in the world.
I am unavoidably detaine in London; I 
need not petition for a moment's delay, as
I konw, if your plans are laid, nothing can
induce you to alter them."



       HOWARD CASTLE.                193

   "Clementina and I will be ready to welcome you to Howard Castle," said Mrs. Conway; "it certainly has happened, that when we were to travel. your lordship has been engaged."

   "It shews," replied he, "how cruel my fate is: this certainly will be the second time I shall be left to deplore your absence. I shall follow you to-morrow morning, and having ordered fresh horses to be sent from Howard Castle to meet me, I shall reach it nearly as soon as you will."

   The carriages were announced: as he took Clementina's hand. he whispered-"Your conversation has caused me a wretched night."

   "I am extremely sorry." was her reply; "I was not aware that any thing I said could have such an effect upon you; I think your imagination has been busy."

   "He pressed her hand as he said-"There must be nothing left for my fancy to fill up; where my happiness is so deeply interested, it will teaze and torment me." He handed her into the carriage, and she heard a low ejaculation of "Heaven bless you!" as they drove off.

VOL. IV.              K



194                  HOWARD CASTLE.
  Again Clementina was a very stupid
travelling compation, as they stopped at
the first stage without her having artieu-
lated a single word to Mrs.Conway.  She
saw evidently the agitation her spirits were
in, and augured unspeakable hapiness from
it.  She was convinced, from many little circumstances, that her son and her friend
were attached to each other, and she hoped
time would clear up, in a satisfactory man-
ner, the mystery which had attended her
correspondence with her relation.
  Lord Howard had presented her with a
letter from lord Montague, which he would
no doubt have explained before he made
his sentiments known to her.   They were
obliged to stay one night upon the road;
but reached Howard Castle early the fol-
lowing day.
  Clementiana's spirits had, in some de-
gree, recovered the tumult which evident-
ly agitated her when they parted with lord
Howard, and she was capable of admiring
the beauties of the park, which was in
great luxuriance; every part of it was in
the nicest order.
  "One could not suppose," said Clemen-
               HOWARD CASTLE.         195

tina, "that this is a place on so great a 
scale, it is kept with such peculiar care and
neatness."

   Every thing seemed to have an air of 
preparation; and Mrs. Conway remarked,
that she had no cause to fear her brother
and Isabella accompanying them.

   Clementina was intently gazing on the
surrounding scenery, and thinking at
the same time of the possessor of the
whole, when her old favourite had attract-
ed her attention; he was sheeted, and led
with several other horses by grooms, who
were exercising them-" Ah!" exclaimed
she, "my old friend is in high condition,
and looks so saney and handsome, that I
no longer dare ride him."

   "I suppose," replied Mrs. Conway, "my
son has ordered him to be prepared for
you; he heard you praise him, and has
taken the hint."

   "I did not mean it as such," said Cle-
mentina, "as I certainly had no intention
of seeing him again when I left Howard
Castle."

   "Did you mean to give up my society ?"
said Mrs. Conway. 
196            HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Not for the world!" was her answer.
"This is lord Howard's residence; I visited
you in London—I now feel that I am his
guest, and the idea is very strange."

  "I trust you will not feel strange, nor
long be a stranger in this house."

  Mrs. Conway laid a particular emphasis
on those words, and as they descended
from the carriage, she took her hand—
" May you, my dear Clementina, expe-
rience as much happiness in this house as I
earnestly wish you may; pray God my
hopes may not be disappointed!"

  She drew her hand under her arm, and
they entered the great hall together; the
old porter still welcomed their approach,
but his was the only face Mrs. Conway
knew. Footmen were seen in every direc-
tion; the castle had an appearance of inha-
bitants and cheerfulness which it had not
before. The housekeeper, a middle-aged
woman, attended them, and inquired if
she could be of any use.

  "I feel to be a stranger here," said Mrs.
Conway, smiling; "every thing is so
changed, that I hardly know where I am;     HOWARD CASTLE.    197

I think only the walls remain in their an-
cient form."

  "Will you permit me, ma'am, to show
you the rooms?" said the housekeeper.

  "I will visit my own apartment," said
Mrs.Conway, "and see what change it
has undergone."

  It was so extremely elegant, that she
could hardly believe it was the room she
had been accustomed to inhabit."

  "This apartment," said the attendant,
"is prepared for this young lady."

  She threw the door open into a most
delightful bedroom, and Clementina follow-
ed her into a dressing-room, fitted au-
thors.

  "This," said she, "reminds me of the
children's story of Beauty and the Beast;
at nine o'clock I shall certainly expect to
hear the noise of his approach."

  Mrs.Conway laughed, and went on
with the simile-

    "Enter Beauty, banish fear-
    You are queen and mistress here.

  "Those words," continued she, "I trust, are

198 HOWARD CASTLE.

more applicable than your idea of this being
an enchanted castle."

Mary entering to adjust the baggage,
made them proceed to examine the various
splendid apartments. All displayed the
ingenuity and contrivance of a London
upholsterer, as every corner was elegant
and convenient. The old state-rooms were
kept nearly in the same form they had
been in, only the gilding renewed, and
all brushed up with peculiar care.

Clementina was astonished with the
change on the drawing-rooms, which she
had disliked on her former visit--they
looked so large and comfortless, that she
believed nothing could make them bear-
able; they were now transformed into the
most delightful amusing rooms she had
ever been in--" This," said she, as she
looked round her, "is the age for luxuries;
what a change, and how very conspicuous
does this old mansion make the present
style of furnishing! how short a time ago
were we here, when every place appeared
particularly dismal!"

"I believe, the very week after you left
this house," said the housekeeper, " the
        HOWARD CASTLE.     199

furniture was sent down, and the work-
men only went away two days ago: in-
deed, the gentleman," added she, "who
arranged the library, only left us this
morning."

   Mrs. Conway expressed her approbation
of the improvements, at the same time in-
quiring after her predecessor.

   "Ah, ma'am!" was her answer, "she
and all the old servants are removed to the
delightful asylum my lord has provided
for them; their houses are furnished with
what was discarded from the castle, and I
assure you they are quite elegantly fitted
up. The house-steward has had all the
directions from my lord, who has ordered
the alterations himself; and even the most
trifling things for the servants' comfort have
been attended to by his lordship. Mrs.
Reeves has an excellent house, a good
garden, a cow, and the old dairy-maid as 
her servant, and a very comfortable annuity
from my lord: indeed he has taken care of
everyone in the same way; the inferior
servants have smaller houses to either the
old butler or the housekeeper. I sin-
cerely believe there are daily prayers put200 HOWARD CASTLE.

up for their master's health and happiness;
they are all as delighted as possible, as they
still feel they belong to the castle."

Tears stole down the cheeks of Clemen-
tina at this little simple narrative; her
nerves were not in a state to heav such an
account without emotion.

"I hope," said Mrs. Conway, "my son
will make this place his chief residence."

"I believe it is the general wish of the
neighbourhood," was her answer; at the
same time she retired, and Mrs. Conway
and her companion bent their steps towards
their favourite sitting-room, which was
likewise altered : it was now evidently
converted into a music-room; a superb harp
and pianoforte, a violincello, and violins,
dern music.

Clementina was surprised to find most of
her favourite composer's works selected, and
all the most admired Italian songs. She
recollected conversing with lord Howard,
both on literature and on musical composi-
tions; she was very open in giving her
opinion of both; she found her words had
been treasured, as he had provided an
        HOWARD CASTLE.     201

ample store of amusement for her: the at-
tention was flattering; whatever was the
inducement, she felt grateful.

   "These are new instruments," said Mrs.
Conway, as she examined the outsides of
both; "I wish you would try them."

   "You must excuse me," said Clemen-
tina; "I will not touch either until lord
Howard arrives, no will I waste a word
of praise--all shall be reserved for his ear."

   "I would not willingly encroach on his
happiness," was her answer, "and I am
sure your approbation will reward him for
all the exertions he has made to please
you."

   Clementina made no reply to this speech;
she appeared occupied in examining a beau-
tiful painting of St. Cecilia, which was
hung over the chimney-piece.

   "We have not yet done," said Mrs.
Conway; "the library will interest you
as much as any part of the change."

   Clementina followed her, but not at all
with the same idea her friend had.

   The selection of music was a flattering
mark of attention; it plainly evinced the
           
                  x 3202        HOWARD CASTLE.

impression which her remarks had made 
upon him, and that he studied in every thing
her amusement. How unfortunate it
would have been had she kept steady to
her determination of going to Colnbrook!
She would have lost the greatest gratifica-
tion, and lord Howard would certainly have
been much disappointed. They were again
delighted with the new face of every part
of the library, which exhibited a profusion
of amusement and knowledge. The many
very curious old editions of books were ar-
ranged by themselves, and their dates mark-
ed on the back of each. The botanical part
delighted Clementina; all the valuable
works of the most esteemed authors, and
the finest impressions of prints, were col-
lected--"Here," exclaimed she, "is a
fund of knowledge and amusement, which
I shall benefit from."

   "Do you understand botany?" said Mrs.
Conway.

   "I studied a little of it in the convent,
where we had a botanical garden, and very
good instruction; I know enough to im-
prove myself, with the assistance of those 
delightful books. Lord Howard must beHOWARD CASTLE.                            203

ford of it, from the valuable works he has
selected here."

"I should suppose," replied Mrs. Con-
way, "if you were to judge by this room,
that he has a general knowledge of every
subject upon which a book was ever print
ed. This section is entirely filled with
travels, voyages, and splendid port-folios of
prints. Here is natural history,antiqui-
ty---"

"And here," exclaimed Clementina, "is
a volume containing the beautiful and cu-
rious contents of the Louver; there is a
combination of all that is interesting, amus-
ing, and instructive. With this charm-
ing and valuable collection, and lord How-
ard to explain the different authors, and
point out heir various merits, who could
tire, if they were confined for life to this
apartment?"

Clementina never uttered a sentence
which gave more heartfelt pleasure to Mrs.
Conway, than the one she now heard-
"And I am thoroughly convinced," was
her answer, "that lord Howard's happiest
days will be spent with you in this very
room."
            HOWARD CASTLE.

Clementina Laughed-- "I believe my words expressed more than I intended; I meant, it would be delightful with anyone, who understood, as well as he does, the different subjects which invite you to study, Lord Howard's knowledge is very extensive, and his manner of imparting it particularly agreeable; he has done me the honor sometimes to explain what lay within the compass of my capacity; and I was particularly pleased with the clear, concise account, which I could not help understanding.

"I should fear," said Mrs. Conway, "if you study so much, you will become too learned, and will not relish the conversation of those who are not gifted in the same way; but I verily believe my son will not spend all his time with you here in abstruse studies. There is one, Clementina, will be more to his mind than the best written book in the world."

Dinner being announced, put a period to their inspection, which had afforded them both the greatest delight. The eating room was likewise metamorphosed, and their dinner was entirely on silver; every         HOWARD CASTLE.             205

thing was perfectly corresponding- all
seemed the work of magic, as there appear-
ed no head to direct the whole, which was
upon a magnificent scale.

 Mrs. Conway expressed pleasure when
the numerous attendants left the room,
and Clementina and she were at liberty to
make their comments on the wonderful
change which had taken place- "This,"
said Mrs.Conway, the moment she was at
liberty, "is extremely grand; but I own
I do not feel perfectly at home, the old cas-
tle is so changed. I believe my son would 
not accompany us, to give us time to ex-
press our surprise; every thing is a won-
der to me, even the regularity of the ser-
vants, who all seem to have been accus-
tomed to their various situations."

 The ices were delicious; the greatest va-
riety of fine fruits; and every thing was 
presented, which could please the eye and
gratify the taste.

"At least," said Mrs.Conway, "our 
enchantress gives us exceeding good things
to eat and drink; she has treated us in a
most luxurious manner."206        HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Our enchanter," said Clementina, "has
taken exceeding good care of us."

  "May he prove an enchanter to you, my
Clementina!" said Mrs. Conway, with much
archness of manner.  "He is under the in-
fluence, i believe, of an enchantress, who
will guide every wish and every action."

  "Lord Howard," replied Clementina,
with quickness, "should never be guided,
in thought, word, or deed."

  The compliment seemed the impulse of
the moment, which added to Mrs. Con-
way's pleasure.  She was in particular
good spirits, as she never before felt con-
vinced that the the evident partiality of her
son was at all reciprocal; she now flattered
herself, with the most intoxicating hopes,
that the two beings she so fondly loved
would be united.  From the first day she
saw Clementina, before she knew of the
great prospect of her father's fortune, she
wished she might live to see her the wife
of her son.  So many impediments had
arisen, that she had entirely given up tne
pleasing expectation; all her hopes had re-
vived before they left London; and from
        HOWARD CASTLE.     207

some little circumstances since their arrival
at Howard Castle, she was convinced Cle-
mentina had no other attachment, and that
her correspondence with her cousin was
merely accidental.

   The afternoon slipped imperceptibly
away--Mrs. Conway was gay and animat-
ed, and Clementina cheerful and happy.
The evening being serene and delightful,
she proposed to her friend to wander a lit-
tle out of doors; she had fatigued herself
with examining the alterations in the inte-
rior of the castle, and declined accompany-
ing her.

   Clementina took her parasol, and wan-
dered slowly towards the water, which
looked still and transparent; the little ves-
sels continued to display their colours,
which had been hoisted in honour of their
arrival; their shadows were deeply reflect-
ed, and the surrounding landscape was in-
verted in the clear surface. She stood
looking earnestly at the scene, which only
half occupied her attention, when the sound
of a carriage roused her from busy thought.
She returned to the road which she had
quitted, and soon saw lord Howard ap-208    HOWARD CASTLE.   

pear. He was lying across his curriele, and
driving at a very quick pace. His horses
perceived Clementina's white parasol be-
his thoughts was near him; they suddenly
sprung to one side of the road.

  Lord Howard, Who had been driving 
carelessly, was astonished at what could
cause their alarm. They paused for a se-
cond; but before he could get them into
command, they set off at full speed across
the park. The servants quickly followed,
but in a few minutes he had stopped their
career; and when his attendants came up,
he had leaped from the carriage, which he
gave into their care, and ordered them to
proceed to the house. He flew back to the
spot wher he had first got sight of Cle-
mentina, who was leaning against a tree,
as pale as death; her countenance betrayed
more than words the terror she was
in; he supported her in his arms-- "My
dearest Miss bouverie, be not alarmed--all
danger is entirely over."

  " Oh, my lord! thank God you are safe!
trust not yourself again, I beseech you, with
these horses."                HOWARD CASTLE.     209

     "Those horses,"  exclaimed he, with fervour, "will be ever highly valued by me; they have extorted from you this sweet anxiety for their master's safety.  Ah!  do not again chill me with your polite indifference from your manner when you fancied you saw me in danger.  May I flatter myself I am not wholly indifferent to you?  or was it merely seeing a fellow-creature in distress which caused the emotion?" 

     She raised herself from the ground, fearful that his manner would again put her composure to flight; but she was obliged to support herself against the tree, as the miniature picture was shaken from his bosom, and she saw her own image.

     " Ah! Miss Bouverie, a few words would restore me to unbounded happiness:  say, has the tender affection I have felt for you, from the first moment I became acquainted with you, been, in the smallest degree, reciprocal?  This heart is yours, and yours alone."

     He put his hand to his breast, and found the picture had been discovered; he took it in his hand-"Plead for me, thou dear image of the woman I fondly love! tell her210          HOWARD CASTLE.

what hours I have spent in contemplating
thee!--tell what thou hast seen me suffer,
when I have mourned over the idea she
did not return my unbounded affection!
Oh, Clementina, could I animate this pic-
ture, it would move your heart to pity, it
has witnessed such misery! Repay all--a
very few words would make me as com-
pletely happy as I have been miserable."

   "What must I say?" replied she, smil-
ing, and tears trembling in her eyes.

   "Will you say what I dictate?" said he.
"The oh! speak comfort to me! May I
ask you to say you love me?"

   She gave him her hand.

   He dropped on one knee as he took it,
and pressed it to his lips, and to his heart
with fervor--"I receive the gift of my
Clementina with gratitude, with transport;
and the whole life of your grateful How-
ard shall be studying to reward you for this
inestimable treasure."

   Clementina felt so agitated, that she
wished she was nearer the house, as she
feared her feelings would again overpower
her.

   He drew her hand within his arm--"Al-         HOWARD CASTLE.          211
                     
low me to support you."  They slowly 
moved forward; "and will you still do
more?-suffer me to dwell on the only
subject which can give me pleasure-when
may I look forward to the day when I may
call you my own?-when may I proudly
introduce you to the world as lady How-
ard?"
  
  "I have not composure at present to
bear this conversation," said Clementina;
" I must entreat a respite, otherwise I shall
not be able to reach the house."

  "Pardon me," said he; "what gave me
such pleasure, I hoped could not give you
pain-I fondly hoped it interested both."

  "It does indeed," replied she; "but it
agitates me exceedingly."

  "No pity, my lord, should have induced
me to have behaved to you as I have done
this evening, if my heart had not been en-
gaged in your interest."

  "You have said enough to remove every
uneasiness," said he; "I will teaze you no
more at present; but I must renew this
pleasing topic soon-perhaps to-morrow:                 HOWARD CASTLE.      212

and may I rejoice my mother's heart by telling her you consent to be mine?"

     " You may," said Clementina, " as soon as you please if; it can give Mrs. Conway pleasure, I would not for the world prevent your entrusting her with the seeret; but I entreat it may be divulged to no one but herself."

     " That I will swear to you," replied he; " and oh!  Clementina, shorten our separation as much as possible; I shall feel every minute an age, till I fold to my heart my beloved wife."

     He ventured to press her to his bosom as he said these words.

     she felt relieved when they reached the castle; he tried to persuade her to go with him in search of his mother, but that she positively declined, and retired to her own room.  She sat down in a sort of stupor-it was the most pleasing delirium she had ever experienced; she felt completely happy, but she hardly knew what had occasioned it; when the entrance of Mrs. Conway roused her from an almost insensible state.

     she pressed Clementina to her bosom, whilst tears of maternal fondness dropped

            HOWARD CASTLE.        213

on her neck——" Dear, adopted daughter of
my heart!" said she, " how can I express
half the joy I feel at the prospect of your
being the wife of my Howard? I have,
from the first moment I knew you, ear-
nestly wished for this event, when I might
clasp you to my heart with a mother's love.
My son lost not time in informing me of
your having rendered him completely hap-
py, as he knew it would make me almost
as much so."

   Clementina's tears had been flowing
from the first of Mrs. Conway's addressing
her; at last she said——" How gratifying
are those expressions of kindness! how can
I ever repay you?"

   " By what you are going to do," was her
answer; " by marrying my Howard, and
being in reality my daughter. He has en-
trusted me with an embassy," added she,
" which is to make us completely happy,
as soon as possible; when this bustle of
company is over, there must be prepara-
tions made."

   " Oh!" replied Clementina, " there can
be no hurry; I cannot, so soon after my
dear father's death, change my situation;214            HOWARD CASTLE.

you must permit me to remain one year
in mounting for him."

  " A year!" repeated Mrs. Conway ;
" surely you have forgot the word half; it
is now nearly six months since his death ;
I fully expected to see you put off your
sable dress at the expiration of that time."

  " My heart directs me," said Clementina,
" and it bleeds still for my dear parent.
How rejoiced he would have been at the
prospect of happiness which awaits his
child !"

   " Then do not put off what would have
given him pleasure. Lord Howard has
suffered a great deal on your account--he
had a thousand fears, which have prevent-
ed him making the situation of his heart
known to you."

   " He now can have no uneasiness," re-
plied Clementina; " he may trust to my
assurance, and we may be happy in the
certainty we are dear to each other, though
not absolutely married."

   " And will it be agreeable," said Mrs.
Conway, " for you to be long an inmate of
this house?--much better be its mistress."
   " I must go in the course of a week to
          HOWARD CASTLE.            215

Roachwood," zeplied Clementina, " and I
must pay my long-promised visit at Coln-
brook."

  "My son must converse with you upon
this subject-but he will be impatiently
expecting you."

  "I should be sorry," replied Clemen-
tina, " to betray such emotion as I am sure
I should if I saw him now; I shall soon be
composed, but I cannot accompany you
at present; allow me to remain a few mi-
nutes alone-I will promise not stay long
here if you indulge me."

   "I certainly will," replied Mrs. Con-
way,  "if it is your request."  She re-
tired to her own apartment, where she re-
mained until she heard Clementina leave
the room.  She was happy to see her look
as usual, excepting a paleness and languor
in her countenance, which the agitation
she had been in had occasioned. They
went to the music-room, where Mrs. Con-
way had left her son.

   He was still there, and welcomed their
return. Taking Clementina's hand, he
tenderly inquired if she had recovered the
alarm which he had foolishly occasioned216          HOWARD CASTLE.

her?--"They were," continued he, "a
pair of young horses, which were sent from
here to meet me, and I ought to have been
upon my guard; at the same time," said he,
smiling, "I cannot quarrel with them,
nor with myself, in spite of your terror."

   "You must have set off very early from
London?" said Mrs. Conway.

   "I left the metropolis at one o'clock;
there was a bright moon; I travelled all
night, and found it extremely pleasant--
much more so than in the scorching sun
which I have been exposed to; but I
shall never complain of any thing which
has happened to me on the day which will
be marked in my mind as the happiest of
my life."

   "And I hope we may all join in saying
the same," added Mrs. Conway.

   "We have been highly amused," said
Clementina: "The improvements in this
house have convinced me, all was the effect
of enchantment--we have been filled with
wonder and admiration. You must have
been very busy, my lord, to have given
such directions."

   "I did not exactly enter into the minu-HOWARD CASTLE.  217

tiae," replied lord Howard, " of how the
rooms were to be decorated-I put the old
mansion into the hands of the furnishing
amateurs, and they will leave no blank un-
filled up.  I did direct how the library
was to be arranged, and what additions
were to be made to the old collection of
books, many of which are brushed up, and
are very valuable.  Are those instruments
to your mind, Miss Bouverie?  I chose
them myself, and I shall be charmed if you
approve of my taste."

  He opened the pianoforte, and petition-
ed for a little music; he had only heard
her acccompany her voice with the harp.
He was charmed with the execution and
uncommon precision with which she play-
ed-she gave to the most trifling compo-
sition so much pathos and beauty, that lord
Howard was enchanted.

  The evening passed in complete harmo-
ny, as each was as happy as possible.218          HOWARD CASTLE.

             CHAPTER VII
              ~~~~~~~~~

Lord Howard had long possessed Clemen-
tina's heart, and of course nothing could
be so gratifying to her as his declaration of
love. The pleasing idea that all her fears
were removed, and that not a doubt re-
mained to cloud the seeming felicity which
awaited her, precluded all wish for sleep.
She, with the utmost fervor, thanked her
Heavenly Father for his great goodness to
her, in giving to her the protection of such
friends. Lord Howard's heart, she was
convinced, was a treasure, as she firmly be-
lieved he was possessed of more virtues 
than generally fell to the lot of any human
being: to be the chosen of his affections--
to have him her guardian, her friend, her
husband--was such a prospect of happiness,
that she almost doubted her senses, and
feared it was the wandering of her imagi-
nation: to be really the daughter of her
beloved Mrs. Conway, was another source        HOWARD CASTLE.     219

of joy--she seemed to be completely bewil-
dered in the most bewitching delirium
that ever had possession of her mind, and
she arose in the morning with the delight-
ful vision of happiness impressed upon her.

   When she entered the breakfast-room,
Mrs. Conway and lord Howard were al-
ready there, and seemed to be in earnest
conversation; they appeared in excellent
spirits, and greeted Clementina as the ob-
ject who had conveyed unspeakable plea-
sure to both--never was there a trio more
completely satisfied with each other. Mrs.
Conway hung with rapture upon every
word that passed, as not an expression fell
from her son, but conveyed the joy which
illuminated his expressive countenance;
and Clementina did not attempt to hide
that she was equally happy. She had no
idea--when so full an explanation had taken
place, to pretend any other feeling than
what really had complete possession of her.
The affection she felt for lord Howard was
pure, fervent, and sincere, and she made
not the least scruple in avowing the truth
to his mother, and shewing it in her man-                 HOWARD CASTLE        220

ner to him-she had not duplicity in her nature; and her countenance and behaviour expressed, in unequivocal terms, what occupied her thoughts.

    Lord Howard petitioned for her company in his curricle; he would order steady horses, and he would drive with the utmost caution.

    Mrs. Conway smiled-" I believe Miss Bouverie may trust herself with you-it is inherent in our natures to guard what is most valuable."

    Clementina replied-" His lordship certainly was not careful of his own neck-what can be half   so precious?"

     "When you saw so careless,"  was his answer,  :"I did not known my existence was so valuable;  I assure you, I will note run no risk."

     He ordered the carriage to be got ready :  he inquired if they did not admire the paintings, which of course they had seen, but had not mentioned-"They are the only part I feel interested in, as they are my own selecting."

     Mrs.Conway answered in the negative.  

     " I believe," said he, " the servants think       HOWARD CASTLE.     221

the gay furniture is more worthy observa-
tion than all the works of Titian, or the
greatest masters. I flatter myself," at the
same time offering his arm to Clementina,
"I have a treat for you, which will please
you."

   He led the way to a part of the castle
she had never been in before--it was an ad-
dition which had been built by his grand-
father, which had not been finished. Lord
Howard had fulfilled his intention, as it
had been evidently meant for paintings,
being lighted from the top. He had am-
ply furnished it, as the walls were covered
with pictures by the most eminent mas-
ters.

   Clementina, who was extremely fond of
the fine arts, and, for her age, a wonderful
good judge of the different merits of the
admired artists, was charmed with what
she now saw; her criticisms delighted
lord Howard, who believed nothing could
be half so pleasing as extending her know-
ledge, and improving the talents which na-
ture had endowed her with. The task, he
flattered himself, would be his own, and he222          HOWARD CASTLE.

should spare no pains in rendering her the
brightest ornament of the age. He list-
ened to her judicious remarks, which she
made with a degree of modest diffidence 
peculiar to herself, looking with the most
intelligent expression of countenance for
information from him, as she pointed out
what pleased her the most, and what, in
her opinion, were the best finished pic-
tures. She was fortunate in her choice.
A candle-light piece, by Rubens, struck
her as particularly fine; next, a Guido, 
which gave a fine representation of Arte-
misia, the wife of Mausolus, holding the
cup in which she drank off her husband's 
ashes. A Magdalen, by Titian, and seve-
ral pictures by Corregio, Salvator Rosa,
and Poussin, arrested her attention.

   "They are all good," said lord Howard;
"but you certainly have made a most ex-
cellent selection. I presume you use the
brush with tolerable success--have you ever
painted in oils?"

   "Never," was her answer; "humble 
water-colours are the extent of my know-
ledge."            HOWARD CASTLE.        223

   " Very beautiful specimens I have seen,"
said Mrs. Conway; "you do not know half
of Clementina's acquirements."

   " I cannot admire her more than I do,"
was his answer, " could she paint like Gui-
do, and was equally possessed of know-
ledge in all the fine arts."

   Clementina's colour became a deeper
tinge.

   Lord Howard observed it, and said——
" There can be no flattery, Miss Bouverie,
in my remark; I have given you the
strongest proof of my admiration.  I did
not extol your powers as much as I might
have done, as I have heard you sing: if
your drawing comes in any degree in com-
petition with your musical talents, I might
have said much, without exceeding the li-
mits of truth. If your genius extends to
antiquity, this collection may afford you
amusement."

   Upon a table, in the middle of the room,
were placed the fruits of his foreign re-
searches—— the most beautiful specimens
from Herculaneum, in bronze and plaster;
some curious vases, of excellent workman-
ship, and a small manuscript, in the origi-
224                 HOWARD CASTLE.

nal state.He explained to her the curious process of unrolling it,which he saw arrested her attention.There was a variety,which required considerable tome to examine;and as the carriage had been announced,and lord Howard was impatient to enjoy a tête-à-téte, he hurried her from what was extremely interesting,promising to return with her, and explain all she wished to know and examine.

After they were seated in a carriage, Clementina expressed a desire to visit the little colony, which she knew was at no great distance.

Lord Howard looked surprised as she begged of him to conduct her to Fredezie's town, which Mary had informed her was the name of the new settlement--"Have you given it my name?" said he;"if you have it, it shall not be changed."

"I have not the merit," replied Clementina," but I beg it may be continued: it wàs an idea worthy of you, to provide for your old and faithful servants, and it ought to perpetuate your memory."

The road lord Howard chose was entirely under the shade of noble trees,
          HOWARD CASTLE.      225

which formed an avenue on one side of the 
park: it was cool and delightful; he drove 
slow, that he might enjoy the most pleas-
ing moments he had ever passed. He soon
led to the subject by far the most interest-
ing to him.

  Clementina's feelings were not in the 
same agitation as when he first avowed his
love; she could now listen to him with
composure; and was fully resolved, if he 
mentioned lord Montague's name, to ex-
plain, in the fullest manner, her correspond-
ence and connexion with him; but he gave
her no opportunity. Lord Howard was
convinced there could be no attachment
between them, otherwise she would not 
have behaved to him as she had done.
His only anxiety was, to prevail upon her
to consent to be his, as soon as the neces-
sary preparations were made.

Clementina very readily answered him, 
when he tenderly urged her not to delay
what, he fervently hoped, would be their
mutual happiness---" That she would, in 
the most solemn manner, engage herself to
be his " but she entreated he would not 
hurry their marriage.
         
                  13
 226        HOWARD CASTLE.

 " Why," exclaimed he, "will you eru
elly torment me ?-why wish to postpone
a step which will give me a title to protect
you ? I have heard you lament haveing
neither father or brother,to assert your
rights, or avenge your wrongs (if any one
could injure you). Why not, my dearest
Clementina,suffer me immediately to be
your husband? You are young-you are
beautiful;I am not sanctioned by the ties
of relationship to prote you from the en-
vy of the world."
   " And should I not," said she,"become
a much greater object for envy when I be-
long to you than I am now?"
" We will not contend," replied lord
Horward, laughing, " on whose side the
advantage will preponderate. My mother
tells me you mean to leave us, and go to
Roachwood. Ah! do not, I entreat you,
let us part without a period being fixed for
your becoming mine! How exultingly do
I prononce that word, which will bring
me to the very summit of happiness! Oh,
my Clementina, in this paradise, how hap-
pily shall we live! what transport to know
that my joys delight your heart!-that my


            HOWARD CASTLE.         227

distress causes you sympathy!——that we
hang on each other! the one knowing no
sorrow but the other will be a faithful
sharer!"

   " How well can you paint, my lord, to
touch the heart!"

   " I have only sketched what, I trust,
will be finished with the most glowing
colours," replied he: " I have long roam-
ed in search of a congenial being, and have
now met with one, in every way what my
sportive fancy has often painted, but which
I fully believed was not in existence——a
companion, a friend, a treasure!"

   Clementina was penetrated by his words,
and by the fervor of his manner; she felt
the compliment deeply of being the chosen
of lord Howard's heart——she was flattered
beyond measure, and expressed it in the
most pleasing terms.

   " Then why protract this happy scene?"
replied he; " will you consent as soon as
the preparations are made to realize it?"

   " I will" said Clementina, " compro-
mise the matter, and promise to start no
obstacle to our union taking place before
Christmas."228           HOWARD CASTLE.

    "Thank you," cried he; "thousand 
thanks-before is comprehensive term."

   As he said the Lee's words, they came to the
boundary of the park, where they were
obliged to get out of the carriage.

  Clementina was struck with the beauty 
of the view which presented itself.

  They had four some way driven in the
thick shade of a wood, through which a
good road was cut for a carriage. They
came suddenly to an opening, which over-
looked a romantic little Dell, with trees
growing from the crevices in the rocks,
which seemed to screen it from every
last. In the bottom, run a clear lively
stream, which turned a delightfully-situ-
ated corn-mill, and seem to refresh a ver-
dantbank, where were scattered the neat-
est house Clementina had ever seen; cach
had a garden, neatly paled off, and a part
from each other. There were two supe-
rior to the rest, which belong to the head-
servants; their gardens were larger, and
each had pretty shrubbery, which the 
others had not. The houses were pure
white; and their blue slanted roofs, peepingHOWARD CASTLE. 229

from amongst the trees, gave it a most
picturesque appearance.

"What a sweet retreat!" exclaimed
Clementina; "I should almost wish to be
an old domestic of yours, to live in one of
those cottages."

"Is it not better," replied he, "to be
young as you are-to possess their master's
heart, and to take them under your foster-
ing care?"

She was leaning upon his arm as they
descended a steep bank to the rivulet, over
which were stones placed for crossing.

Lord Howard made the remark-
"There is an improvement for you to un-
dertake. My village is inhabited by old
people: you shall make them an easy way
to cross this little brook-it shall be Fre-
deric's town, but Clementina's bridge."

A proper place was soon fixed upon,
and all determined, before they ascended
the blank to Mrs. Reeves' house.

Clementina felt inclined to loiter by the
water, which was the clearest stream she
had ever seen. The rapidity with which
it made its way amongst and over some230                HOWARD CASTLE.

mossy rocks and stones, made a murmur-
ing noise, which pleased her exceedingly:
she felt elevated beyond herself-the man
she fondly loved guiding every step, and
hanging with delight on every word she ut-
tered. At last they reached the wicket-gate,
which was the boundary to Mrs.Reeves’
domain, and entered through a labyrinth of
sweets into her garden, in the midst of which
her cottage was placed, covered with jessa-
mines and honeysuckles, which were in
full blow. Lord Howard would willingly
have entered without giving her any previ-
ous notice ; but Clementina would tap at
the garden-door, which was glass, and
which she saw led into her parlour, which
her bright-rubbed furniture shewed she
did not daily occupy.


 Mrs. Reeves herself made way for them,
and with a scream of joy welcomed her be-
Loved lord to her peaceful habitation—
“Ah !" said she, “you have come to wit-
ness your kind generosity-see what a pa-
lace your lordship has allotted to old Reeves;
and comfortable she is, I, assure you-as
happy as the day is- long.”
        HOWARD CASTLE.     231

   "I am glad to hear it," said lord How-
ard, as he followed Clementina into the 
cottage.

   "Ah!" exclaimed Mrs. Reeves, "do I
again see Miss Bouverie? Your servants
told me you were going abroad to marry
a nice young man, your cousin, who lived
where I have often heard my lord's man say 
he has been."

   Lord Howard smiled, and looked at
Clementina; she coloured, and felt con-
fused.

   "Pray, are you still Miss Bouverie?"
continued Mrs. Reeves, "or am I wrong
in giving you that name?"

   "You are perfectly right," was her answer.

   She wished the old woman's loquacity
had not touched upon a subject which al-
ways gave her a painful sensation.

   Mrs. Reeves asked her twice, if she
would drink a glass of cowslip wine, be-
fore she knew she was addressing her. She
refused, Lord Howard made her happy
by accepting her offer. The sparkling
beverage was soon brought, and presented
to Clementina, who could not resist its in-
viting appearance, and lord Howard de-232            HOWARD CASTLE.

clared it was the most refreshing thing he
had ever tasted--" You must come," said
he, addressing Mrs. Reeves, " and teach
my housekeeper the art of making it."

  " This," said she, " is not the season for
the flowers, my lord ; if you will suffer me
to send a few bottles of my little store, it
will make the rest taste doubly sweet, your
lorship's honouring me by drinking some
of the same."

  " I accept of your offer," said lord How-
ard, " with much pleasure, and remember, 
in the proper season, to make some of it at
the castle."

  Mrs. Reeves declared she should recol-
lect, as it was too great an honour for her
to forget that his lordship had visited her,
had tasted her wine, and approved of it.

  Her parlour was the picture of neatness,
and Clementina express the admiration 
she felt on seeing it.

  " Oh," exclaimed the old woman, " you
shall see all my dwelling : there is the gi-
ver of every thing; I came into his grand-
father's service a town's apprentice, and
here I am, possessed of a good income, and
a comfortable house, as you shall see."        HOWARD CASTLE.     233

   She threw a door open, and displayed a
commodious kitchen.

   "This is," said she, "what I call my
house, where I generally live; behind it
there is a place for my servant, to do all her
dirty work; here I sit as comfortably as
my dear lady does at the castle."

   Before a small fire, in spite of the heat
of the day, lay her cat and dog, and above
her head hung a canary-bird, screaming its
little lungs, as she termed its fine music.
Her oven, tins, and coppers, represented
mirrors, and almost had as good an effect,
they were so bright and clean. The sash
was thrown quite open, and the sweet per-
fume from her garden scented the room.

   Clementina expressed what she felt--
greatly delighted with Mrs. Reeves' habi-
tation, who, she sincerely hoped, would
have good health to enjoy her very com-
fortable situation.

   They quitted the house, followed by her
prayers, and left her as happy as possible
in having had her master under her roof.

   They next visited the old butler, and
every cottage in the place; they were all
equally comfortable, and seemed to vie234            HOWARD CASTLE.

with each other in gratitude to their kind
patron.

   When they were seated in the carriage,
Clementina asked a few questions about
the settlement they had just visited - what
had made him think of providing them
with such a delightful asylum?

   "I have an idea," replied lord Howard,
"that after servants have spent their best
days in the service of a family, and con-
ducted themselves with honesty and respec-
tability, that they should be well taken care
of.  It was a whim of my own, building a 
dozen of houses in this retired little spot - 
it is near their old residence, but completely
hid from the view.  They have been fi-
nished for several years, and each knew the
spot which was to belong to them.  When
I chose to reside at Howard Castle, I
would not permit one of the old servants to
remain, but had an entire new set, and
those who have spent their early days in
the castle still feel they belong to it; each
has an income sufficient to live upon, with
the produce of their gardens, which the old
gardener, who was forty years in our fa-
mily, has the care of.  His son has now the
       HOWARD CASTLE.     235

situation his father filled. A field is allot-
ted to them, and each had a cow provided
when they began housekeeping. They
have all occupations, as I do not permit
idleness; they would soon be quarrelling
and miserable, if they had nothing to do
but eat, drink, and sleep. Human nature
is the same in all ranks of society; there
must be employment for either the mind
or body: without a proper pursuit or stu-
dy, the best education on earth will be
thrown away, and evil will be the result, as
the mind of man must be busy, either in
mischievous plans, or in being beneficial to
the world. Much, certainly, may be done
by parents and instructors in regulating the
occupations of their children; whatever
their prospects are, they ought to learn a 
habit of industry. Once accustomed to
it, it never forsakes them; they feel mi-
serable without an object to bestow their
attention upon: if their own affairs do
not require their exertions, the affairs of
the nation may; they may prove, by acti-
vity, a good education, and fair abilities,
to be of use to their country, and an orna-
ment to society."236           HOWARD CASTLE

   "You know the old saying, my lord,"
said Clementina, "idleness is the mother
of mischief, and I am perfectly of that
opinion. I could not suppose, even in
those delightful habitations we have just 
quitted, there could be happiness, if you
had provided them with every necessary 
and luxury of life, if you had at the same
time precluded employment: a mind capable
of amusement is certainly one of nature's
best gifts, and ought to be endowed with all
the artificial acquirements of education to
prevent the demon ennui from taking
possession of it. Oh! how I pity those
who talk of killing time, or who wander
from place to place in search of what they
cannot find at home--happiness! Indo-
lence and inactivity are the evils which
they know not are at the root of their
misery--dependent on others, they have
no idea of any exertion."

   "You are a most independent being,"
said lord Howard, "yet I do hope you
will hang in some degree for your amuse-
ment upon me: I shall feel my pursuits
doubly delightful if they interest you, and
I shall certainly be mortified if I see you        HOWARD CASTLE.     237

so perfectly capable of finding wherewithal
to entertain you without my aid and assist-
ance."

   "No, my lord, my pursuits shall be
guided by you; I shall be both proud and
happy to have such instruction and infor-
mation as you can give me; I hope I shall
improve with such a Mentor, and become
worthy of being your companion."

   "I whould be afraid of any change," said
lord Howard; "you are at this moment
endowed with every requisite to make me
completely happy; only on one point would
I wish you to act differently from what
you seem inclined to do--consent to be-
come mine, to put it beyond the michiev-
ous freaks of fortune to separate us."

   "I am not afraid," was her answer, "of
any evil genius having power to invade 
our prospect of happiness: allow me to 
mourn a few months longer for my father
before I put on what will be to me a joy-
ous bridal dress. Four months have hardly
elapsed since I was in the very deepest afflict-
tion--it would be too soon to lay aside my
mourning habit, and the sorrow I still feel
for my beloved parent. The day, my lord,2338            HOWARD CASTLE. 

on which I give my hand to you, I shall put off every semblance of woe, both outwardly and inwardly."

     "I earnestly pray it may be laid aside for ever," was his reply; and where your grateful Howard can avert it, believe me no cloud shall hand on my Clementina's brow."

     The week quickly slipped away in the most delightful manner to the party at Howard Castle : confident in possessing lord Howard's love, Clementina was completely happy.  Mrs. Conway was on the point of having her most sanguine wishes fulfilled, in seeing her son the husband of her friend.  Her brother and niece, who had joined the group at Howard Castle at the time proposed, gave her unspeakable satisfaction, as both were most interesting companions to her. 

     A playful naivete in Isablla's manner, and a considerable degree of humour in Mr. Waldegrave's took off the insipidity generally attendant on lover's society, who of course were engrossed with each other.  He had seen, from the first hour he was in their company, where his nephew's affec-                HOWARD CASTLE.     239
tions were fixed, and he thought it the most natural thing in the world so much beauty, and so many attractive qualifications, should have gained his heart; he was happy in the conviction they were mutually attached to each other; he saw still greater proofs of love, and his sister confirmed the idea.

     The mornings lord Howard would not give up; his uncle must amuse himself, whilst he spent hours with Clementina in the open carriage.   Alas! a termination would soon be put to the most bewitching week he had ever spent.  Her most earnest wish was, that not a suspicion should be created in the minds of any of the party who were soon to fill Howard Castle, that its master was attached to her.

     He promised faithfully to bury in his bosom, if possible, what occupied every sense, and to hide from the penetrating eyes of observers that she was the beloved object.  Mr.Waldegrave likewise promised to abstain from his amusing jokes, which was a great sacrifice to Clementina's feelings-she was such a favourite, he would give up his own gratification to please her.  He ad-240 HOWARD CASTLE.

mired her more than any human being he
had ever seen, and exulted in the prospect
of lord Howard's happiness; her kindness
to Isabella had endeared her to him; and
the more he saw of her, the more he was
convinced her mind was as amiable as her
manners were pleasing.

The evenings were dedicated to music.
Isabella bore her part extremely well, as
she joined in trios with her voice, and play-
ed on the piano-forte with taste and exe-
cution, and where Clementina was not
heard, would have been deemed a good
musician.

Lord Howard was charmed with their
little concerts; he accompanied the ladies
both with his voice and on the violincello,
from which he drew the sweetest tones.
Mr. Waldegrave and Mrs. Conway could
not join in the harmony-they were atten-
tive listeners, and admired both the music
and the performers.

The day but one on which the party
were expected, lord Howared gave Clemen-
tina a longer airing than common ; it was
to be amongst the last which she would
consent to take with him. The time was
             HOWARD CASTLE.           241
fixed  for her going to Roachwood: the 
whole party were invited to meet at Carns-
worth Castle, where the amusements be-
gun at Howard Castle were to be continu-
ed; she resolved, although she had receiv-
ed an invitation,to take her departure at
the same time, as she was perfectly deter-
mined not to make one at the duke of
Beauclaire's.
  Lord Howard had petitioned her to re-
main where she was, but he found her
quite determined in her plans; her pre-
sence was required at Roachwood, and she 
wished to be there alone.
  After your gaity is over at Carns-
worth Castle, i need not to say a visit from
Mrs. Conway,Mr.Waldegrave, his daugh-
ter, and your lordship, will give me the
greatest pleasure."
  " The last not least welcome of the party, I hope?" said he, smiling." How 
tedious shall I think the time will pass at
Carnsworth castle, until I can quit it and
fly to you!"
 "There must be no flying in the case."
said he, "unless you give your mother 
wings also."


242            HOWARD CASTLE.
 
   " Will you not receive me without the 
sanction of a matron?" asked he,


   " Have you not," was her reply, "warm-
ed me against the envy of the world? I
will not, therefore, run any risk by ex-
posing myself to it. You must not come
to Roachwood without your family party."

   " Do you insist," said he, " upon my
whole kindred accompanying me? You
require double protection-I should sup-
pose you feared the invasion of an enemy,
instead of a visit from the truest friend
you have in the world."

   "I do believe," replied she, "my friend
is so sincere, he would not wish me to de-
viate in the smallest degree from pro-
priety."

   "No." cried he, "not for the universe!
I would have my Clementina as pure, as
spotless as her sister-angles; not eben in
appearance could I bear the most vigilant
observer to find fault with her, in thought,
word. or deed. No self-gratification would
tempt me to steal in upon your retirement,
if I thought it could lead to any surmise
injurious to you."
   An involuntary sigh escaped her ; she
          HOWARD CASTLE.     243
inwardly prayed that fiend might blast
her happiness.

  Lord Howard, she was convinced, was
particularly nice in regard to the conduct
of women. He had frequently expressed,
in warm terms, the dislike he had to the
character of flirt. What might he thingk 
of her, if her correspondence and connex-
ion with lord Montague was to be repre-
ed with all the particulars?

  She earnestly wished she could explain
the whole to him, but her courage failed
her, as he had not limited the slightest un-
easiness of mind, since he had declared his
sentiments to her. She was convinced he
had entertained an idea they wer engaged,
but now it seemed all forgot--would she
do well to remind him of what might give
him inquietude? She forbore speaking on
the subject, which often occupied her
thoughts; she satisfied herself, even if she
had an enemy who would injure her, if
possible, in lord Howard's opinion, she
could easily set all to rights by shewing him
their correspondence, and explaining lord
Montague's situation; she was not afraid

244          HOWARD CASTLE.

of losing lord Howard's good opinion, yet
she felt uncomfortable there should be any
mystery or secret which he did not know-
candour and openness, she was thoroughly
convinced, were absolutely necessary for
happiness, and she was resolved to adhere
strictly to the plan when she became his
wife: the very first opportunity he gave
her, she was determined to tell him every
thing, but he must begin the subject.

   The following day was Sunday, and
Clementina expressed to Mrs. Conway a
wish to know where the church was situ-
ated which they were to attend?

   " The parish church," she replied, " is
about three miles from the castle, but the
woods intercepted a view of it; the bells,"
she added, " are distinctly heard, and
sound extremely pretty from the park."

   Still Mrs. Conway did not say she meant
to go, and Clementina feared lord Howard
had forgotten the day, as breakfast passed
without any proposal being made for at-
tending a place of worship.

   Mr. Waldegrave, who had imbibed care-
less notions in India, began to peruse the
newspaper, Isabella threw herself upon a               HOWARD CASTLE.            245
couch, and took the first book which pre-
sented itself. Mrs.Conway expressed no
wish to move, nor was she at all prepared
for going out in the carriage.


 Clementina alone seemed to feel anxiety;
she at last said to lord Howard—"There
is every thing in such order, and so well
regulated here, I should have expected Sun-
day would have been attended to with par-
ticular attention: I mean to go to church."

 "It gives me pleasure," said lord How-
ard, "to bear you have the same senti-
ments as I have; you will find the day is
not neglected; the outward forms are re-
gularly attended to; we do not go far to
say our prayers, as you will soon see."


 In a few minutes after, a footman threw
the room-door open, which was a signal
understood by Mrs. Conway. She desired
her son would lead the way with Miss
Bouverie, and the rest of the party would
follow.

Lord Howard offered her his arm, and
to her surprise they ascended the great
staircaise, and at the very end of a long
gallery, which Clementina supposed had led
only to a suite of bedchambers, she saw fold-
ing-doors thrown open, and they entered a
246          HOWARD CASTLE.

most beautiful chapel. The gallery, which 
was fitted up for the heads of the family,
was most commodious and elegant; it was
hung with crimson velvet, and cushions of
the same; superb prayerbooks and Bibles
were arranged in perfect order, and all
seemed to be regulated in the same style as
the rest of the castle was. Opposite to the
gallery were the pulpit and reading-desk,
which were beautifully carved and orna-
mented, and both hung with crimson vel-
vet, with rich gold fringe and tassels.
Nearly the whole end of the chapel was a
Gothic window, filled with fine stained
glass, which presented innumerable rich
and glowing colours.

   Clementina was struck with astonish-
ment, and whispered to lord Howard--
"This is indeed delightful!"

   As soon as their private ejaculations
were over, a sweet-toned organ played the
morning hymn, and the congregation
joined. She heard lord Howard's voice
singing the praise of his Maker; she was
charmed with the decency of his deport-
ment--"How seldom," thought she, "in
the present age, is there such a combina-
tion of excellence!"        HOWARD CASTLE.     247

   She was thoroughly convinced a sense
of religion was added to his numerous
qualifications, which was the only thing
she feared was wanting to make him nearer
perfection than she believed ever mortal
was; she could hardly convince herself she
was not in a bewitching delirium, and that 
all her present happiness would suddenly
vanish as a dream.

   When she looked down into the body
of the chapel, she saw what gratified her
exceedingly--all the old inhabitants from
Frederic's-town on one side of the aisle;
the other side was occupied by the servants
of the castle, who formed a very respectable
body, as none were permitted to be absent
who were in health. The seats were all lin-
ed with crimson cloth, and had an uncom-
mon air of neatness and comfort. The duty
was done in an impressive, distinct man-
ner, and a sermon preached in a plain, un-
affected style, calculated to be understood
by all; and all appeared, by their attentive
behavior, to listen, with profound atten-
tion, to the very good advice which was
offered to them.

   Clementina never felt more impressed
with religious fervency than she did on248         HOWARD CASTLE
the present occasion; her heart was raised to the Bountiful Giver, with grateful thanks for the care and protection he has afforded her, and the extraordinary gift of lord Howard's affection. She carnestly prayed a continuance of it, and that in no way her conduct should deviate from his entire approbation.
  Lord Howard observed and admired the devotion of her manner, and the sweet expression of her angelie countenance, as she meekly offered up her ejaculations: where the service was over, lord Howard whispered to her, he hoped she approved of what she had heard?
   "I highly approve," was her reply, "of what I have both seen and heard. I admire the chapel, and I like the clergyman."
  " He acted," said lord Howard, "in the capacity of my tutor, and he still has the care of me upon his shoulders, as he is now my chaplain."
   "These are strong proofs," was her answer, "he is well qualified for both situation."
    He pressed her hand as a token of thanks for the compliment, and said-" He is a worthy, sensible man, and a rational, agreeable companion; I wished to have secured
HOWARD CASTLE. 249

him as such. I proposed his living in the
house ; but love will creep into the heart,
and sometimes is very mischievous. He
married, and lives a few miles off, where
he has a comfortable living, a very good
wife, and a nice little parsonage, which
you must visit: his curate alternately does
the duty here."

Mrs. Conway was quitting the chapel,
when her son drew their attention to an
altar-piece, which he deemed a painting of
great merit. There were few figures, but
those exquisitely finished. Our Saviour
bearing the Cross, struck Clementina as the
finest specimen of the art she had ever see.

"It is," said lord Howard, "one of Car-
lo Dolci's best works ; I thought myself
particularly fortunate in procuring so
beautiful a painting, of the very subject
I wished to have, for my little favour-
ite place of worship. The pictures here
are all worthy of being in a cabinet collec-
tion-I selected them in Italy, with much
care : sacred subjects ought only to be
touched by the pencil of the greatest ar-
tist." They were most beautiful, and dis-
played his knowledge and taste.
M 3250             Howard Castle.

  Mr. Vernon was introduced to Mr.
Waldegrave, Isabellac and Clemnentina, the 
last of whom was much inclined to admire
the friend of lord Howard, who, she was
convinced, must be possessed of many ex-
traordinary qualifications. Mr. Vernon's
manners were peculiarly mild and pleasing,
and the enthusiasm with which he seemed
to regard lord Howard was not the least 
attractive part to her; the elegance and 
beauty of her appearance struck him as he
eyed the party from the reading-desk.

  He had read of angels, and he had heard
the term bestowed on females; but he had
never seen one who had, in any degree,
come up to his idea of such beauty as he 
supposed they possessed, until he saw the
lady who accompanied lord Howard into 
the chapel. He could not refrain from
gazing, he feared too much, on the love-
liest countenance he had ever beheld.

  When he was introduced to her, he
found her charms did not diminish, as the 
animation which illumined her features, as
she addressed him, added to their singular
beauty; he likewise discovered that her in-
terior was as perfect in its way as her ex-                  HOWARD CASTLE.             251

terior. The quickness of her remarks, as she conversed with lord Howard, convinced him nature had given her an ample store of sense, which had been highly cultivated by education; he thought her, upon the whole, a paragon of perfection, and never with a female- her questions were apt, and her remarks judicious, at the same time always attended with diffidence and modesty.

  Lord Howard saw surprise and admiration mingled in the countenance and manner of Mr. Vernon, when Clementina was led by him to give her sentiments upon any subject; he artfully laid plans to draw out her opinions, as eh wished his friend, whose judgment he had the highest respect for, might think as highly of her abilities as he was convinced he admired her appearance.

  The family again assembled to afternoon prayers, and Mr. Vernon spent the remainder of the day with them; he was exactly what Clementina would have expected the tutor of lord Howard to be- sensible and intelligent on every subject, and she concluded was extremely learned on those she did not understand. She felt252          HOWARD CASTLE.

particularly delighted when the conversa-
tion took a serious turn.

   Mr. Vernon's manner of expressing him-
self was so plain and distinct, that she
firmly believed she could soon comprehend
abstruse studies, if they were explained by
him; she was delighted with the prospect of
cultivating a friendship with him, as she
was convinced he was not only extremely 
good, but learned and agreeable, and from
whom she might gain instruction and in-
formation which might render her more fit
to be a companion to lord Howard.

   They parted mutually pleased with each
other. Mr. Vernon gave lord Howard the
utmost satisfaction, by declaring he never
had seen so lovely a female, or had he ever
conversed with so pleasing a one, as Miss
Bouverie; and he returned to his wife, de-
claring he had been in company with the
only woman, he believed, in the world, who
was in every way fit to be lady Howard.

   As soon as he was gone, Mr. Walde-
grave said he had never spent a Sunday so
much to his mind--"Your parson, my
lord, is a sensible, clever fellow, capable
to give instruction, and I dare say lives as
he recommends others to do."             HOWARD CASTLE.                253

     "I am convinced he does," was lord Howard's reply, who was walking about the room, more occupied with Mr. Vernon's last words that with his uncle's encomiums. 

     "What signifies precept without example?" continued he; "if a man lays down the best rules in the world for religion and morality, if he does not practise as he preaches, it is all good for nothing; if the clergy in general are only permitted to enjoy  their benefices quitely, and have their good cheer and bottle of wine, let their pews be empty and their flocks running to the methodist meetings, they neither feel ashamed nor grieved, nor do they make any exertion to bring them back - they strive only for the good things of this world."

     Clementina felt surprised Mr. Waldegrave's remarks, which, she feared, were perfectly correct. 

     The following morning the carriage was ready at an early hour, and lord Howard reminded Clementina it was the last day she would permit him to enjoy their delightful excursions - "Oh!" exclaimed he, 254                HOWARD CASTLE.

"what a vaccum shall I feel when deprived of your society!  If you will not suffer me to converse more with you than with those who do not in any way interest me, how I shall long to be restored to this bewitching manner of spending our time - to have you as my only companion!"

     Clementina smiling, said - "Novelty is charming; I should be sorry to be the means of your giving up society, which you always been accustomed to."

     "But I have never before enjoyed happiness," replied he, with quickness; "and do not protract the time which I long for more earnestly every day - consent to be mine without further delay that is absolutely necessary; be only my wife, and we will set off, the happiest of human beings, and explore the wild beauties of Bouneliff Manor: there you may continue in mourning for your father; wear any dress - black will be the same to me as the gayest colour; it is my Clementina I long to fold to my heart - to know that she is mine, beyond the power of fate to separate us."

     She shook her head, saying - "It is impossible."                 HOWARD CASTLE.       255

Clementina was surprised with the lateness of the hour when they returned; the time had passed so pleasantly in conversing with lord Howard, she was unconscious how long they had been absent.

     Mr. Waldegrave was ready to hand her from the carriage-" is much mind,"  said he, very gravely, " is much relieved by seeing you safely returned."

    " I am sorry," said Clementina, "that we have caused you any uneasiness."

    " This is hot weather," he replied; "a pursuit would have been very harassing and fatiguing to me, yet to have eased my sister's mind, I must have gone after you: going post alone to Gretna Green would not have been at all to my mind.  As half the pleasure of a runaway marriage is being pursued, we must have gone through the whole ceremony.  It would have been a good anecdote for the newspapers:  "On such a day lord Howard returned from a trip to 
256 HOWARD CASTLE.

Scotland, with. his beautiful and accom-
plished bride; they were pursued by his
lordship's uncle, Mr. Waldegrave, who did
not move with the rapidity of the lovers--"

"And could not get in in time," added
lord Howard, " to prevent the lightest
chains, which ever were worn, being forged
by the clumsiest hands. Thank you, my
good uncle, for anticipating what I ear-
nestly wish was verified!"

" All in good time," was his answer ;
"you are as happy now as you can be."

Cletnentina left them to settle the mat-
ter as they chose, and retired to her apart-
ment to attend to the business of the toi-
let. She soon after saw lord. Radnor's car-
riage appear, and lady Elenora quickly
found her way to her friend, who was de-
lighted with her affectionate manner.

They could only spend a few minutes.
together, as lady Elenora was in a travel-
ling dress : she took the opportunity of
her maid's unpacking, and preparing her
things, to express to her friend how happy
she was at her return to her native coun-
try. She looked out of the window, which
commanded an extensive view of the park
                    HOWARD CASTLE.    257

-" What a noble place this is!" said she; "we have been delighted ever since we entered at the porter's lodge:  it is a magnificent princely dwelling, and the possessor is the most elegant man I ever saw; he received us with such grace and affability!  I tremble for my brother; take care, Clementina, this dangerous hero does not tempt you to forsake an old friend-one who, I believe, most sincerely loves you." 

     It is the first time lady Elenora had openly mentioned lord Montague's attachment to her; she had hinted her suspicions more than once, when at Carnsworth Castle-they were then only suspicions; now she was convinced an engagement subsisted between them, as several of his letters to his cousin had been consigned to her care.

     Mary's entrance, with information to lady Elenora that her maid had every thing ready for her dressing, hurried her departure.  Clementina was struck with the words which had fallen from her friend; she remained fixed in the window, and seemed to be watching the approach of numerous carriages, which were crossing the park.258          HOWARD CASTLE.

  Her attendant roused her from her reverie.  Although she mechanically allowed herself to be adorned, yet her mind continued occupied with what had passed:  she more than ever wished she had been explicit with lord Howard, as he certainly was entitled to the utmost openness and candour.
  Lady Elenora and she entered the drawing-room together.  Clementina's feelings were very different when she made her first appearance at Carnsworth Castle; she was now perfectly collected and dignified; she net with numerous friends, who expressed pleasure at again seeing her.
  Lord and lady Radnor were kind in their reception, and introduced their son, Mr. Montague, who had a strong resemblance to his brother; the duchess of Beauclaire was gracious, and her daughter affectionate; many she was slightly acquainted with seemed inclined to renew what had give them pleasure, particularly Mr. Strafford and lady Isabella, who appeared the gayest of the gay, both in dress and manner--they greeted he with the utmost politeness.HOWARD CASTLE. 259

She at first shrunk from the former, whose
behaviour in London had disgusted her;
but she soon found her friend's timely in-
terference had rendered them both com-
pletely happy, and had made Mr. Strafford
a rational pleasant member of society.

The marquis of Clemaire could not help
shewing a slight degree of resentment, as
he stiffly bowed to her in passing; she dis-
covered what gave her pleasure, that lady
Elenora was the favourite fair with him.

Clementina's progress was arrested by
the numerous assemblage. Amongst them
she was sorry to see Miss Osburn, to whom
she moved, and to lady and the Miss Pem-
brokes. At last she reached a chair near
a sofa, on which Mrs. Conway was placed,
with a party with whom she was not ac-
quainted. Mr. Montague had followed
Clementina with his eyes, and very soon
after he saw her fixed, approached the
back of her chair, on which he leant, and
conversed with her in a very agreeable
manner, as he was a rational, well-inform-
ed young man.

Lord Howard soon after entered the
room; his animated, expressive counten-260          HOWARD CASTLE.

ance, and the graceful ease and elegance of
his manner, shone unrivalled, as he address-
ed the ladies whom he had not before wel-
comed to his castle; he looked at Clementi-
na as he passed her,and said more kind things
than many words could have expressed.
 
      Lady Almeria Villyers, and lady Caro-
line Seymour, made their appearance, most 
elegantly dressed, and in the height of 
beauty. They came into the drawing-
room arm in arm, and evidently advanced 
with a slow pace, that all might see and 
admire the lovely pair; two young ladies
accompanied them, whom Clementina did 
not know, but her companion Mr.Mon-
tague knew all the gay circle; the one
was lady Julia Villyers, the other lady
Harriet Seymour:they proceeded with the 
most indolent manner.

       Lady Almeria's fine eyes nearly closed,
such a weight seemed to oppress them;
her voice so low, as she expresses pleasure 
at meeting with her numerous acquaint-
ances. Clementina was surprised, and ex-
pressed to Mr.Montague how well lady 
Almeria looked, and yet how weak she 
appeared; she must have been in bad
health, as her strength seemed totally gone.
            HOWARD CASTLE.       261

   "Oh!" replied he, " you do not under-
stand the trick of all this; rouse lady Al-
meria to any exertion, or throw her off
her guard, you will find her voice perfect-
ly audible, and her nerves wonderfully soon
braced; she is now wishing to attract at-
tention."

   " And she will succeed," said Clemen-
tina ; " she is a beautiful woman."

   At that moment the languid pair ad-
dressed Mrs. Conway.  Lady Caroline
Seymour first perceived Clementina, and,
with pleasure painted on her countenance,
expressed her happiness at seeing her.
Lady Almeria gave her a vacant stare, and
bent her body into a kind of bow, declar-
ing, by her manner, that she had never be-
fore seen her.

   At that moment, the very person for
whom all the pretty airs had been put on
approached them. Lord Howard hoped
they had recovered the fatigue of their
journey?

   " Indeed I have not," exclaimed lady
Almeria: " four horrid hack horsed, my
lord, have jumbled me to death. Caroline
was well off in Villyer's phaeton."                  Howard Castle

     "I certainly have no reason to complain,"
said lady Caroline,  " either of the carriage,
the horses, or the driver - the heat of the 
sun, and the dust of the roads, were extremely unpleasant.  Lady Almeria came in her carriage alone, propped up with cushions, and at a slower pace than we or lard Carberry drove; we took place of your ladyship; I looked back , and saw you with Venetain blinds to screen you from the sun, when we were scorched to death, and enveloped in clouds of dust."
      " I hope not," said lord Howard, at the same time seating himself between the friends: " I should be sorry that your visit to Howard Castle should be marked in your mind as unpleasant, when it will give so much pleasure."
      The little compliment evidently afforded satisfaction. Clementina continued to be much amused with Mr. Montague, who rather displayed a satirical turn, when lady Almeria was the subject; he thought her
        

                     Howard Castle.           263

far below mediocrity in sense, and not at all
superior to others in beauty.

  "Her appearance," said Clementina, "is 
unexceptionable."

  "The form of her face," was his answer,
"is a fine oval; her eyes are large and 
dark; her teeth are regular, and kept with
the nicest care-is there any expression of 
countenance, any sentiment displayed in a 
single feature, but affectation?"

  "Oh!" replied Clementina, "you have
not enumerated half her charms: the finest 
skin, the most brilliant colour, those beau-
tiful tresses, and the symmetry and grace
of her figure-"

  "I grant it all," cried he; "she is tall,
she is slender, she is undoubtedly graceful,
but most of the charms you give her credit
for came from Bond-street; her pearly
whiteness, her lovely bloom, her fine glossy
hair, are all the produce of London, and her
ideas centre there; fashion is everything-
the very god she worships. At this mo-
ment she hopes to captivate lord Howard,
and will marry him if she can, because he 
is the fashionable man of the present day;
from that motive will lady Almeria fix her  
               HOWARD CASTLE     264         

choice, her heart will never be concerned;
she will never be the wife of a man inferior to herself."

     "I do believe," said Clementina, laughing, "you are in love with her."

     " I am not indeed," was his answer.

     Dinner being announced, put a period to their conversation.  Mr. Montague seemed afraid of losing his newly-found cousin, with whom he appeared greatly charmed.   Lord Howard, after having handed the duchess to her place, was evidently in pursuit of Clementina, who willingly obeyed his injunction of sitting by him; on his other side lady Almeria placed herself.-" Ah!" exclaimed he, "how I shall be envied my supporters."

     He would have bestowed one of them upon any of the company, as not for a moment had he a cessation; his attention was continually occupied, but not at all amused.  A constant talking, without saying any thing which could arrest his fancy, was fatiguing beyond measure.   It convinced him what a bewitching companion his Clementina was; her conversation was so animated, and her ideas so good, that never    
                    HOWARD CASTLE.         265

for a moment, when in her society, did the least languor of attention steal over him; she seemed amused with Mr. Montague, but not a word that passed could lord Howard attend to, as lady Almeria made the most of the time, and was as agreeable as she possibly could be.

    " I was defending myself from the accusation of being in love with lady Almeria Villyers," said Mr. Montague, in a low voice, to Clementina, " when we were interrupted; I think it necessary to defend my character, and in the most solemn manner to assure you I am not.

     " A friend of mine," continued Mr. Montague, " was taken in her toils; he admired her beauty without studying her mind; he allowed the most extravagant love to take possession of him.   She was a visitor at the duke of M-'S when he was at college; there he first saw her, and there he avowed his passion; they frequently met, and he had every reason to  believe his love was returned that vows and protestations could give him.  She left B-, and returned to London, where she was soon deeply engaged in pursuit of gaiety, but solemnly266            HOWARD CASTLE.

engaged to marry my fried; he was of
a noble family, but had fortunately no
prospect of being possessed of a title; he
got his father's consent to their union, wait-
ed on lord Carberry with his credentials, 
was well received by him - but his daugh-
ter had chosen another flirt from the gay
crowd who fluttered round her.  Intoxi-
cated with the admiration she met with,
she believed her charms would gain her
higher honour than marrying the man she
had professed to love, and had solemnly 
sworn to marry; she discard him with-
our her adamantine heart ever feeling a
pang: he left the country immediately,
and has never since returned."

   Clementina was surprised with this little, 
short, but interesting narrative - "I hearti-
ly pardon you," said she, "for the dislike
you have expressed towards a person de-
void of feeling; undoubtedly pity, honour,
ought to have actuated her, had there been
no love in the case."

   "Your sentiments," said he, "are so 
different, that I was convinced I should
surprise you."

   How he should know her sentimentsHOWARD CASTLE. 267

struck her foreibly ; she was afraid of in-
vestigating the subject, lest there might be
an explanation which would discompose
her. She continued silent.

He added--" Your sensibility is im-
printed on your countenance; I watched
your face, as I gave you the little sketch
of lady Almeria, and I plainly see your
features are the true index to your mind--
both lovely in a high degree."

"And I find my cousin has the art of mak-
ing fine speeches," said Clementina, smiling.

"I have never practised them on lady
Almeria," replied he, " nor on lady Caro-
line, nor on any of those butterflies who
exist but for the sunshine of life. When
their beauty fades, what will there remain?
Those insects do not attract my attention,
nor do they interest me; I see through their
little ways, and I am disgusted. Oh! rather
give me pure nature in her pristine form,
than all the art and trifling accomplish-
ments of the present day! Give me an
uneducated female, whom I can teach to
read and write, and I should be sure of a
more rational companion than one of those
fluttering beings!"
268        HOWARD CASTLE.

"Ah!" thought Clementina, "will you
also introduce to the world a Louisa, in-
structed by yourself, taught like a pliant
vine to bend and form as your elegant fancy
may direct?"

 "Where have your thoughts wandered
to?" said Mr. Montague, who had ob-
served the reverie she had fallen into.

 "your words," replied she, " recalled 
your brother to my mind."

 "Surely," was his answer, "it would not
require any thing which fell from my lips,
to bring my brother to your recollection?"

 "No," replied Clementina, "it die not
require your hands to remind me of lord
Montague; your strong likeness, before I
heard you speak, struck me forcibly, and the
great similarity in your voices could almost
convince me I was conversing with him."

 "I am flattered with the hope that I
shall one day address you by the tender ap-
pellation of sister. I felt a brotherly re-
gard for you from the first of our meeting,
and I do think the more I know of you,
the more I shall wish you to be my bro-
ther's wife."

 "That you never will see," replied she,
with unusual quickness.                   HOWARD CASTLE.              260

Mr. Montague looked surprised. Lady Elenora had told him of lord Montague's attachment and engagement; the former he thought the most natural thing to happen, as he could not suppose it possible to see Clementina, converse with her, and not love her. His heart was guarded with the idea she was destined for lord Montague; he highly enjoyed his brother's prospect of happiness, as, in spite of her string contradiction, he believed there was truth in the assertion; he thought her the only woman he had ever seen who was formed to make him happy, and the opinion he entertained of lord Montague was so exalted, that he almost thought it impossible he could sue in vain.

Clementina saw and pitied the bondage lord Howard was in: she looked back on the days which they had spent with peculiar delight, and compared them to the hurry and bustle they were now in--it struck her what a farce it was! Lord Howard, she was, was tired to death, and Mrs. Conway was exerting all her powers to be agreeable. Mr. Waldegrave was in the midst of a crowd, who were total strangers to him.

Clementina believed she was the best
270          HOWARD CASTLE.

amused of the party; she had no part to act,
but was highly entertained with her atten-
dant, who hardly for a moment left her.
Isabella seemed to be making friendship
with those of her own age. Lady Julia,
lady Harriett, and she, had formed them-
selves into a coterie. When the ladies re-
tired from the eating-room, lady Augusta 
drew Clementina from the group, who
were admiring the different ornaments, and 
whom Mrs. Conway proposed shewing the find collection of paintings to.

   "Let us," said lady Augusta, "retire
to a charming room we were first shewm
into, and there gratify my curiosity by an-
swering innumerable questions."

   Clementina readily assented, and shew-
ed her the way to the music-room, which
they found was prepared for a concert; they
spent an hour in interesting conversation.

   "Tell me," exclaimed lady Augusta,
"why you returned from France plain Cle-
mentina Bouverie? We all expected to
salute you as lady Montague; my letter of
congratulation is written."

   "You are premature, indeed," replied
Clementina. "Do you suppose I should
have followed my lover?"     HOWARD CASTLE.     271

  "He is so very odd," replied lady Au-
gusta, "I should not be surprised at any
strange thing he did, and you are so good-
humoured, that I think you will indulge
his whims."

  "You will perhaps be surprised," said
Clementina, "that lord Montague can
never be neared allied to me than he is at
present."

  "Is he your husband?" asked lady Au-
gusta, with quickness.

  "He is not," was her answer, "nor ever
will be."

  "Then do you mean to be lady Howard?
as I am convinced you may have any beau
on the fashionable list."
 
  "You do my attractive powers great
honour," said Clementina.

  "I wish most sincerely you would,"
said lady Augusta, "as the insufferable
silly creature, lady Almeria Villyers, has
declared her intention of marrying him: I 
shall be vexed to the heart if she should
succeed with the most elegant man I ever
saw; and the world say he is possessed of 
extraordinary abilities; surely he will not
chuse such a companion-but certainly he 
was as much occupied with her as you

  272  HOWARD CASTLE.

were with William Montague.  I suppose
he is paying court for himself-I suspect-
ed he was delegate from his brother; he
has watched you so sedulously from the
first moment you entered the drawing-
room, all the other male creatures were
kept at a distance.  There are two very
decided flirtations-you and your cou-
sin; lord Howard and that insipid va-
pid thing, which is like uncorked soda-
water; without its fermentation there is no
strength or body. Lady Almeria has no
sense to amuse lord Howard; he may ad-
mire her beauty, but his talents will sink
in my estimation if he does more.  You
positively must not permit his attention to
be so thrown away; you are wasting your
powers on William Montague, who will
make abundance of pedantic speeches,
Have you been informed that my brother
is determined to be allied to you? He has
now declared a preference for lady Elenora
Montague, and is permitted to entertain
hopes of success.

  Clementina expressed the greatest plea-
sure: she had long suspected her cousin
admired the marquis-" It is what I have
expected would take place; I saw he was
              HOWARD CASTLE.        273

perfectly sensible of her charms when he did
me the honour of professing to be my lover."

   "It was, in reality," said lady augusta;
"my brother suffered a most cruel disap-
pointment in your refusal of him. You
know he remained in the country a great
part of last winter, when you were the lead-
ing star in the fashionable hemisphere.
Lady Elenora was likewise in the country;
she comforted him, and soothed his trou-
bled mind in so gentle and insinuating a
manner, that he became convinced, al-
though her beauty was inferior to yours,
she was the most amiable being in exist-
ence. Clemaire will make a good hus-
band; but he ought to have a wife possess-
ed of brilliant endowments. You would
have been the best duchess of beauclaire in
the world. I hope you have reserved your-
self for lord howard; his rank, to be sure,
is inferior; but an old english baron, pos-
sessed of immense property, the finest place,
which this certainly is, and such a phoenix,
is no bad speculation. I durst not be in
your situation; without his having address-
ed half a dozen words to me, I am more
than half in love with him; he looks so in-
                   N 3274 HOWARD CASTLE
telligent, I could almost understand his
 meaning without hearing a sentence he ut-
ters. I do mourn over his conversation and 
attention being wasted on the desert mind
 of lady Almeria."
 Lady Elenom and Miss Osborn entered
 the room as lady Augusta finished the sen-
tence—, Ah!" exclaimed the former, "we
 did not expect to find you here; Miss Os-
 burn and I have been wandering about, 
admiring the taste of lord Howard, which
 is displayed in everypart of this noble house.
 Mrs. Conway says she has hail no interfer-
ence in the improvements which have been 
lately made." 
"I believe she has not," was Clementine's 
answer.
 Miss Osborn did not make any remark,
 but walked to one of the music-stands, and
 examined its contents, apparently inatten-
tive to what was passing. Lady Elenora
seated herself, at the same tine inquiring
if they had been settling any plan for the 
masquerade,to which all the country were 
invited?
 "A masquerade!" repeated clementina;
"not surely at Howard Castle?"
"I believe the eards,"replied lady Ele-
HOWARD CASTLE. 275 
nova, "mentioned on Wednesday evening.
 This house is to be filled with masks; you 
have not much time for preparation; I dare
 say the whole party have brought dresses.
 Maria, are you ready to assume a character?"
 " Undoubtedly," was her answer; "I
 sent to town on purpose; I dare say it was
 named in every invitation."
 " I am much surprised!" said Clemen-tina; 
" my lord has kept his plan a pro-
 found secret from me; I have nothing pre-
pared, nor should I know how to dress either
 my person or my manners for such a scene".
 "You were not at any of the masquerades
 in town ?" said lady Augusta. 
 " No," said Clementina ; " I was called
 suddenly from London  before the great
 gaiety began. How this intended plan
 should have been so concealed, by both Mrs.
 Conway and lord Howard, astonishes me."
 "They mean to surprise you," said lady 
Elenora.
 " And they must mean me to appear un-
masked, and without a feigned character?"
  "Except the one you already wear,"
 said Miss Osburn, sweeping her fingers over
 the strings of the harp as she spoke. 276             HOWARD CASTLE.

  "I Believe it is the character nature gave
me," answered Clementina, with the ut-
most mildness.

  "Then I suppose he admires natural in-
nocence," was her reply.

  She drew up a note, which she found
was out of tune; and seating herself, she
sung a little French air, which she accom-
panied with a few chords.

  Lady Augusta, smiling, rose from her
seat, and proposed returning to the draw-
ing-room. She took Clementina's arm,
saying--" I brought you here; I will now
accompany you to the other ladies."

  Lady Elenora was obliged to remain whilst
Miss Osburn continued to warble and play.

  "Why does Miss Osbrun detest me?" said
Clementina; "she cannot contain her ill-
nature; I am unconscious of offending her."

  "Oh !" replied lady augusta, "poor
Maria feels a pang of jealousy; pity her, but
do not be angry with her! She shews her
feelings more than lady Almeria, or lady
Caroline, or the Miss Pembrokes do; envy
rankles in their bosoms, and they would pull you to pieces if they could. Maria        HOWARD CASTLE.     277

cannot contain the uneasiness you have cre-
ated; lady Elenora and myself are the only
females who rejoice in your being admired;
and I positively wish you would become
lady Howard, out of pure spite to them."

   Clementina, smiling, desired her to re-
member the advice she had given her
--not to be angry with Muss Osburn.

   They found the party in the drawing-
room, formed into groups. Lady Augusta
directed the steps of Clementina towards a
sofa, where lady Almeria reclined, sur-
rounded by her friends. Lady Caroline
proposed moving another sofa, that they 
might accommodate the whole. Clemen-
tina had no wish to join the party, but lady
Augusta expected so much amusement,
she could not refuse the offered place.
They found the masquerade was the inte-
resting topic.

   Lady Almeria whispered, her most san-
guine wish was, to disguise herself from
lord Howard's knowledge, as he had de-
clared he should recognize her in whatever
dress she wore, if he conversed three mi-
nutes with her.--"I am resolved to dis-
guise my voice as much as my person."278          HOWARD CASTLE.

   "Perhaps," said lady Augusta, "it is
not your voice which has made such an
impression on lord Howard; the words
you utter have, I dare say, sunk deep."

   "Oh! of course," replied she, "I will
adapt my conversation to my dress. If I
am a fruit-girl, I will talk of my peaches
and nectarines, and teaze him to buy them
--if I am a fortuneteller, I will surprise
him with my knowledge--if a nun, with my
modest simplicity; in short, I will give my-
self infinite trouble to support my character,
which I never yet did at a masquerade."

   "You never before had a lord Howard
to deceive," said lady Caroline, archly.

   "True," replied lady Almeria; "you
were the goddess he worshipped the last
time he was in the country; it is now my
turn, since Villyers has supplied his place.
He knows you are out of his power;
what can he do but flirt with me? He tells
me lord Stanhope will be here, perhaps
to-morrow, and with him the agreeable
creature his brother; he will enliven the
party amazingly, as he is monstrous clever;
so lively and witty, but certainly not so
handsome as lord Howard."                HOWARD CASTLE.     279

"Ah!" said lady Augusta, "nor is poor
George Stanhope possessed of the attrac-
tive charms of a howard CAstle. What
would lady Almeria Stanhope be, living
in a snug box in the country,upon a pla-
try income, in comparison to lady How-
ard, seated like an Indian queen in this,
superb mansion? In winter, to be posses-
sor of a charming house in Pall Mall - par-
taker, if not leader, of all the fashionable
amusements, splendid parties, elegant car-
riages - and such a lord to study all your
whims, and anticipate all your wishes! I
advise you,: added kady Augusta, laugh-
ing, "not to forsake lord howard for George
Stanhope; he is a much better speculation."

     "I think he is," answered lady Alme-
ria at the same time languidly reclining
her head on a cushion; "I assure you I 
have no intention of changing my beau>"

     "How happy the declaration would
make lord Howard!" exclaimed Au-
gusta; "I wish he could have heard so flat-
tering a resolution!"

     "Oh! I would not for the world!" cried
lady Almeria; "it would nake him so
shockingly conceited - if he thought I as
280         HOWARD CASTLE.

mired him, there would be no possibility
of managing him."

   "He would be intoxicated with plea-
sure," said lady Augusta; "I could almost wish to be mischievous, and give his lord-
ship a hint of his happy situation."

   "I vow," said lady Almeria, "I would 
not speak to him for a whole day, to pu-
nish him, if I thought he was possessed of
the secret. He would be so presuming
he would not be bearable. I assure you,
I do not encourage him; I am so nervous
I can hardly exert myself to speak to him,
or any other person."

   "I think lord Howard's presence will 
give you strength," said lady Augusta,
who had been amused with the languid
voice and manner of lady Almeria: "You
must have had a severe illness, which has
reduced you to such a state of weakness;
I recollect the last time I saw you was 
at Mrs. H----'s charming ball, where you 
underwent great fatigue, as you danced
the whole evening."

   "I feel," said lady Almeria, "the effects
of my winter's exertion during the whole
summer; and the insufferable hot weather            HOWARD CASTLE.            281

had reduced me to this uncomfortable state
of languor; I must go to Brighton, and
breathe a little delightful sea air, which
may render me fit for the fatigue of next
winter; at present, I shall die under any
exertion-it quite overcomes my spirits."

  She closed her heavy eyes, and appeared
inclined to rest her wearied senses in sleep,
till the entrance of the gentlemen roused her
from her torpid state.  There were soon a
number of beaux round the sofas where
the graces were seated, but no lord How-
ard approached to enliven lady Almeria;
he walked about, conversing with the elder
branches of the company.  She, finding
there was no attraction, sunk into her re-
clining posture.

   Mr. Montague was soon leaning on the
sofa near Clementina-"You know, I sup-
pose," said he, as he approached her, "what
amusement there is proposed for this evening,
in which you are to bear a principal share?"

   A negative from Clementina made him
declare it was wonderful, as she was to aid
and assist in the performance - " Lord
Howard tells me your notes are ravishingly
sweet; if they are more bewitching than282                 HOWARD CASTLE.

your conversation, I shall be in a very dangerous situation.I believe it is imprudent in me to wish to hear you."

Clementina expressed the surprise she felt--"All my plans are kept a profound secret from me! I never heard of the masquerade till lady Augusta accidentally mentioned it; and if I am to be a performer in a concert, I surely should have been prepared."

"Lord Howard," replied Mr. Montague,"has such confidence in your powers,that he thinks you require no practice to surpass all the females in harmonious notes. In regard to the ball, I know not what his plan may be--any thing, if it is not his intention to run away with you.I am acting a dangerous part--I am guarding my brother's treasure, and may be involved in misery by it."

"I hope not," was her answer;"I should be sorry to cause uneasiness to either of my cousins."

At that moment lord Howard approached lady Augusta, and imparted his scheme. She readily assented to the plan, and to be a performer. He next addressed lady Almeria, hoping the fatigue she had suffered
                    Howard Castle              283

from her harassing journey would not pre-
vent her joining her powers to please the
company-"You must shake off this lan-
guor, as I shall entreat to hear one of the 
sweet airs your sung at Courtland Manor."

  "If my voice has not totally lost its
strength," whispered lady Almeria, "I
certainly will comply with your request:
You must support me with a second," at
the same time casting her fine eyes upon
him with the sweetest expression they
could convey.

  All were soon in motion, and the room
was nearly cleared of the throng, before
Clementina moved; her companion and 
she were amongst the last who entered the 
music-room, which they found brilliantly
lighted and many more performers than
she expected. Lord Howard had prev-
ously concerted the whole, and had order-
ed a reinforcement to their band.

  Mr. Montague was soon busily employ-
ed in the orchestra, which was arranged in 
ample order; each had his post assigned.

  Lord Howard whispered Clementina-
"This little scheme is to show off your
powers. Will you sing the second song?
Lady Almeria has consented to attempt the284        HOWARD CASTLE.

first: she will be a foil to your sweet notes."
  "Is it fair, my lord, not to have had warning, that I might have practised before I made a public exhibition?"
  "We have had sweet music from you every night since we have been here," was his answer; "you require no practice to charm every ear--Sing that enchanting Italian song, in which you display such science and taste."
  He had time for no more.  The concert was begun, by a full piece of Haydn's, which was executed in a masterly style.  Lady Augusta played a concerto, with considerable eclat; next, lady Almeria was handed by lord Howard.
  "Now," said Mr. Montague, who had laid aside his violin, and had procured a corner of a sofa by Clementina, "you will hear if her ladyship had strength to be heard."
  It was some time before every thing could be adjusted.  The whole music was tumbled over before she could select a song to her mind.  Lord Howard picked out many favourites of his; at last she chose (after all the trouble she had given) the very Italian air lord Howard had a first propo-              HOWARD CASTLE.     285

sed. The seat was to be raised; a cushion
brought for her feet to rest upon, when not
on the pedeals. At last she touched the
instrument; no fault could be found with
it. She was so very nervous she could
with difficulty play the symphony.

  Lord Howard, who had borne all the
trifling with wonderful good-humour, stood
patiently by her, and tried to instil cou-
rage into her--He was mistaken, as it was
not wanting; had he been less assiduous,
her song would have been sooner over.

  Mr. Montague saw her motive, which
was merely to draw, and keep lord How-
ard's attention; he whispered Clementina--
"All her plans will not succeed, as those
airs will never gain the admiration which
she wishes to inspire."

  At last her song was finished,and her 
ladyship was handed back to her seat, with-
out receiving the applause she expected.
  Clementina was surprised at the strength
lady almeria, were fixed on clementina.
He approached her, saying-- "May I now
solicity what will give universal pleasure?"
  "Not univeral, my lord," said Mr.


286          HOWARD CASTLE.

Montague; "can you suppose lady Alme-
ria will feel gratified at hearing herself so
far eclipsed, as I am certain she will be by
Miss Bouverie? Envy cannot possibly be
an agreeable sensation."

   "You are right," replied lord Howard;
"to the fair sex she may give pain, but
ecstacy to ours."

   "I must again differ from you," answer-
ed Mr. Montague; "her voice may convey
ecstacy, but to many misery."

   "Come," said lord Howard, laughing,
"we shall never settle this point; I can only
answer for my own feelings," at the same 
time taking Clementina's hand--"Will
you give me pleasure?"

   "Most willingly," was her reply; at the
same time rising from her seat, "I must 
likewise give trouble."

   Lord Howard flew, and placed the harp.

   Clementina had composed a pretty air,
adapted to the words in the Stranger--"I
have a silent sorrow here," which she had
never sung in company; it was a favourite
of hers, and what lord Howard had never
heard. She was resolved to attempt it,
and had no fear of succeeding, as the melo-
dy was simple, at the same time beautiful,        HOWARD CASTLE.     287

and suited her voice. The symphony dis-
played her execution upon the harp, and
was an excellent prelude to the elegant lit-
tle air, which she sung in her very best
style. At the lines,

        "It breathes no sigh, it sheds no tear,
        But it consumes my heart,"

she gave her voice a most scientific cadence,
and rather paused. A sigh reached her
ear--it was lord Howard, who was intently
gazing on her. Her figure, her counte-
nance, her voice, would almost convince
him she was an aërial being, beyond his 
reach; he could hardly believe such per-
fection would soon belong to him; it al-
most bewildered his senses; he heard her
pause, and he heard a general exclamation
for a repetition of the same song. Mr.
Montague was in ecstacy, and lord How-
ard said--"It is charming, but too melan-
choly--it has given me a sensation I can-
not describe; your singing such an air, and
such words, affect me in a strange manner.
Do set all to rights by my favourite Italian
song; it is plaintive, but not so touching,
as the one we have just heard. She again
exerted her voice to please him, and suc-288              Howard Castle.

ceeded.  Envy seemed to yield, as the ad-
miration was general.

  Lady Almeria did not appear offended
by the encomiums she heard bestowed on 
another; she lay upon a couch, playing
with a little spaniel of lord Howard's

  The concert did not conclude till a very 
late hour; all were sorry when the harmo-
ny ceased.

  Before they separated for the night, lady
Augusta proposed to Clementina having
a little conversation with her in her own
apartment.  She readily assented, at the same
time wondering what topic could be so in-
teresting to her as to make her wish to sit
up later than the hour the party separated
at; she was likewise surprised her ladyship
had let so good an opportunity slip, as when
they were alone in the music-room she ra-
ther appeared at a loss for a subject to con-
verse upon.  She concluded lady Elenora and
Miss Osburn had prevented her-there
could be no other reason.

                END OF VOL. IV.

    Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.
