/ 




THE UNIVERSITY 

dF ILLINOIS 

LIBRARY 



823 
G660 




-mUUC^i 



rt^ttWi^MiUBfe. 



¥Vx 



p 



The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its return to the library from 
which it was withdrawn on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons 
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from 
the University. 
To renew call Telephone Center, 333-8400 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 




/ 



N 



THE OPERA: 



A NOVEL. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 

"MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS." 



Ou les beaux vers, la danse, la musique, 
De cent plaisirs font un plaisir unique . 

VOLTAIRE. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. H. 



LONDON: 

HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY, 
NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1832. 



«. iVHITING, nKAtJFORT HOI SK, STRAND. 






THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER I. * 

But light and airj, stood on the alert, 
And shone in the best part of dialogue. 

By humouring always what they might assert, 
And listening to the topics most in vogue. 

Byron. 

Januarj/ 29. — ^Adelberg and I have been din- 
ing to-day in two circles as dissimilar as those 
of the Arctic and Antarctic. My engagement 
was to Meriton, — his to Lord Fieldingham, the 
foreign secretary ; he has been hearing praises of 
the Continent and foreign habits and customs ; 
— I, nothing but vauntings of England, and all 

54SX58 



2 THE OPERA. 

its ultra-nationalities. Again, my father is right ! 
—I admit that my countrywomen claim a 
decided pre-eminence in point of beauty over 
the rest of Europe. There is nothing in the 
pasty complexions and flattened features of 
Germany comparable with those brilliant cheeks 
where the full tide of feeling ebbs and flows 
with such varying beauty, and those prominent 
features which impart so intellectual a character 
to the face ; nothing in the aerial slimness of a 
Parisian outline comparable with the Grecian 
shoulders and fair graceful throats of the blondes 
of England. But, alas ! where nature has done 
so much, art has added little to her triumph. 
The handsomest Englishwoman has a cold and 
awkward deportment j — ^the most intelligent, a 
reserved and almost surly address. With cer- 
tain exceptions, they walk ill, talk ill, dress ill ; 
and those who attempt to counteract their na- 
tional deficiencies by an imitation of Gallic viva- 
city or Italian spirituality, degenerate into affect- 
ation, and a sort of mongrel indefinite character, 



THE OPERA. 3 

which is the vilest of defects. Let them be con- 
tent with the possession of the virtues, and 
leave the graces to their more accomplished 
neighbours of the Continent; they have that 
within which enables them to dispense with ex- 
trinsic fascination. Lord Brabazon, who borrows 
most of his similes from the table, observed yes- 
terday, in speaking of English beauty, that " it 
was like the English cuisine ; — the raw material 
superior to that of all other nations, but utterly 
ruined by the manner of dressing." 

The Miss Meritons' "manner of dressing" 
struck me as a most extraordinary failure ,* I 
never saw any thing more elaborate, exaggerated, 
and tasteless. There were several very lovely 
women present at our party, and not one among 
the number but was overloaded with ornaments 
which totally preclude that freshness and airi- 
ness of costume enhancing the elegance of a 
Frenchwoman. Theatrically speaking, there 
was no ensemble. Instead, too, of the courteous 
and cheerful flow of conversation which ani- 

b2 



4 THE OPERA. 

mates a Parisian circle, nothing could be more 
deadly dull than the two hours of dinner and 
dessert; and it appeared a general relief when 
the ladies of the party, according to the custom 
of the country, took their departure. How can 
it be otherwise, when they make it a point of 
propriety to rebut all attempts at general con- 
versation by monosyllabic replies, and an affected 
incapability to form opinions on the commonest 
topics. Any effort to amuse a stranger is re- 
garded as coquetry ; and the attempt to please 
is construed into an attempt to enslave. How 
different this sullen reserve from real modesty ; 
which, by the way, is perforce obliged to ac ■ 
coutre itself in the universal armour, lest its 
motives should be misinterpreted. These Miss 
Meritons, who will inherit a considerable for- 
tune, seem to have been showingly educated. 
They are accomplished musicians, and played 
and sang for the amusement of the company 
during the whole evening, so as to render con- 
versation impossible ; — and I had so many in- 



THE OPERA. 6 

quiries to make ! — ^They appeared fluent enough 
when gossipping with their female companions: 
—why could they not obHge me during dinner 
by a httle colloquial exertion, instead of favour- 
ing me, for three successive hours, with a series 
of duets on the harp and piano? — Heaven de- 
fend me from another tedious dinner in Han- 
over-square ! 

Adelberg, meanwhile, protests that nothing 
could be gayer, lighter, and more amusing 
than the tone of his party ; all the grace of a 
foreign coterie, with the addition of a more 
substantial basis among the male moiety. The 
very men who exhibited themselves most 
versed during dinner in 

The science, not unwise, to trifle well, 

distinguished themselves in the profound political 
disquisitions that ensued. Allowing something 
for his enthusiasm, which invests every object 
with an atmosphere of its own — a refracting 
and magnifying medium, — I am inclined to 



O THE OPERA. 

fancy that here the national character is seen 
under its most favourable aspect in the highest 
and lowest class ; whereas, in Paris the secondary 
order is decidedly the most intellectual and the 
most interesting. Adelberg is in raptures with a 
Lady Wroughton whom he met at Lord Field- 
ingham's; — a woman of a certain or uncertain age, 
which epoch, where mental superiority is con- 
nected with personal charms, is full of at- 
traction. A woman accustomed all her life 
to the proud pre-eminence of beauty, who 
has wit enough to note its waning lustre, 
will exert herself to obtain a new species 
of distinction, and attempt to propitiate the 
suffrage she no longer commands. Beneath the 
varnish of a gracious address, and freshened by 
the piquancy of her conversation, the faded 
complexion becomes re-illuminated, and the 
world-worn countenance divested of its languor. 
She has just sufficient beauty left to make her 
intelligence doubly attractive ; and a self-pos- 
session and facility of address rendering her 



THE OPERA. 7 

the pleasantest companion in the world. I hope 
I shall know this Lady "Wroughton. The Mar- 
quis, her husband, holds a distinguished place 
in the political world ; and her house is the 
rendezvous of all that is eminent or fashionable. 
To-day we dine with Brabazon; — to-morrow 
night, the Opera. 

January 31. — It is so much the custom on 
the Continent to talk with horror of the table 
excesses of England, that I own I was surprised 
by the tone of Brabazon's entertainment. There 
was something refined, even to effeminacy, in all 
the arrangements of his house and establishment ; 
and the mere dinner might have been eaten 
without contamination in a boudoir of the 
Chaussee d'Antin. With respect to wine, a few 
glasses of sherry and claret, with one of cham- 
pagne, formed the utmost limit of any man 
present ; I will answer for it, that neither 
Vienna, Berlin, nor Paris, could exhibit a more 
moderate assemblage of bachelor guests at the 
table of a bachelor host. Eating, rather than 



8 THE OPERA. 

drinking, appears the present mania among Eng- 
lishmen of distinction ; and the vice of gluttony- 
must soon be introduced into the commination 
instead of that of drunkenness. Gluttony, how- 
ever, is not the word for the thing ; we are sadly 
in want of a noun definitive of the more than 
Epicurean daintiness of modem fashion. What- 
ever may be the vices of the great world, they are 
no longer of the Bacchanalian order ; and a man 
convicted of excess of that description would 
be as speedily banished from good society as 
he would have been welcomed for his three- 
bottle joviality some forty years ago. They are 
now more eager to undermine their fortunes 
than their constitutions ; deep play appears 
the besetting sin of the hour. Scarcely any 
thing was discussed during dinner but the 
chances of the night before, and the prospects 
of the Spring Meeting. The turf and the 
card-table afforded as endless a theme, as a 
new tragedy, with Mademoiselle Mars for the 
heroine, might have done at Paris. After dinner 



THE OPERA. y 

the guests separated to go to their different, 
clubs, for at present there is Httle or no society 
in town. The poUtical circles, indeed, are about 
to be re-united (I was about to write re-formed) > 
but the more considerable families remain at 
their country-houses, and the younger men at 
Melton till after Easter. Had it been a little 
earlier in the season, I think I should have 
visited Leicestershire ; but it is scarcely worth 
while to form a hunting establishment for a few 
weeks* enjoyment. As to Gustavus, he scouts 
the very notion. He has no English blood in 
his veins to reconcile him to a winter in the 
country, but insists on the necessity of a 
crowd — of music, dancing, and, above all, of 
talking — to render one insensible to the dispi- 
riting influence of the weather. 

And this then is the Italian Opera of London, 
on which directly and indirectly so many fortunes 
have been thrown away; and to which the 
hearts of all the virtuosi of Italy aspire for con- 
summation of their fame ! — While I sit here, 

B 3 



10 THE OPERA. 

pen in hand, intent on recording some point 
or peculiarity worthy of commendation, not 
one can I bring to mind. The house is ca- 
pacious indeed — ^but the stage itself below con- 
tempt; the boxes and avenues commodiously 
arranged, but dirty and paltry in their decora- 
tions; the orchestra dignified by a few great 
names, but meagre and slovenly ; the corps 
d^opera et de ballet redeemed by the promise of 
some highly promising arrivals, but at present 
scanty and bad — deficient both in quantity and 
quality. As to the audience, notwithstand- 
ing all I had previously heard of the emptiness 
of town, I was ill-prepared for such an exhibi- 
tion of vulgarity and effrontery. During the 
whole of the opera, a set of men in cloaks and 
great coats were wandering about the lobbies of 
the pit, which echoed to the tramp and creaking 
of their boots ; while the air and conduct of the 
females gracing some of the principal boxes, 
sufficiently accounted to me for the emptiness 
of those adjoining. Harry Crawford, who visited 



THE OPERA. 11 

US in the course of the ballet, assures me, how- 
ever, that every species of public amusement 
connected with the great world exhibits this 
degraded character till after Easter ; and that 
the idle men, who have no fixed residence and 
no passion or fortune for fox-hunting, manage 
to double their pleasures by enjoying the carni- 
val at Paris previous to the commencement of 
the London season. He persists in asserting 
that the Opera presents, during the month of 
May, one of the most brilliant scenes in Eu- 
rope ; and that although a recent impresario 
has declared it useless to provide first-rate 
performances for a theatre which is only consi- 
dered as the " Serail des milords/* we shall find 
it successively embellished by all the first artists 
of the day.: 

" Sontag is coming," said he, " and Pasta ; 
but both are likely to be in the shade this 
season. Silvestra, — the syren who has kept 
St. Carlo in raptures for the last six months, — 
is to make her debut in April. She arrive 



12 THE OPERA. 

in Paris about ten days ago, and has already 
driven all the amateurs into a frenzy, by ex- 
ceeding every thing we have heard related of 
the triumphs of Gabrielli." 

Adelberg immediately interrupted the Braba- 
zon shadovi^ by inquiries concerning the quality 
of her voice. " Was it soprano or contralto — 
full or thin ? — had she much science, much taste, 
much feeling ? — in vs^hat school had she been edu- 
cated, and by what maestro brought forward ?" 
To all these queries, and fifty more of the same 
description, Crawford replied by a pinch of 
snuff and a stare of unqualified amazement. " I 
have heard and inquired nothing respecting her 
singing," said he ; " but La Silvestra is said to 
be a perfect divinity ;— her figure, symmetry 
itself, with the hands and feet of a fairy, eyes 
of an antelope, smile of a Circe ; her hair sweeps 
the ground, and her teeth shine through her 
parted lips like ' pearls of price.' What more 
would you have in a prima donna ?" 

" Nothing, certainly !" replied Adelberg, with 



THE OPERA. 13 

a smile. "Such qualifications will undoubtedly 
carry her through Semiramide, Tancredi, Zer- 
lina, or Ninetta. We can have nothing to wish 
for in the Silvestra !" 

Last evening I accompanied Adelberg to 
Countess Pignatelli's ; not, however, as the 
friend of her son, for I am anxious to surprise 
Anastasio and his companions^ on their return 

* 

from Italy, with the discovery of my real name and 
nation. I shall delight in witnessing Pignatelli's 
amazement when introduced by his father and 
mother to " Mr. Maldyn,*' and finding in him 
his friend Adrian von Elzstein, the partner of 
so many of his carnival freaks and follies. The 
countess seems to have been a beauty, and is 
still distinguished by her address and high 
breeding. Although her precedence ranks low 
in the diplomatic circle, a long residence at our 
court, and a peculiar urbanity of manner, have 
placed her first in the list of fashion ; and few 
persons are more courted in London society. 
She has a son older than Anastasio, who 



« 



14 THE OPERA. 

was present at her party last night. Count Ugo 
appears a solemn coxcomb, and regarded Adel- 
berg and myself with a most contemptuous smile 
as neio men ; till on observing us to be on an 
intimate footing with Brabazon, he requested 
an introduction. His Enghsh education 
seems to have produced a very different result 
from that it has wrought in his brother. 

The party was numerous and brilliant, but 
chiefly foreign. The English admitted into 
Countess Pignatelli's circle are, however, of the 
highest order of ton ; and among others, Gus- 
tavus pointed out Lady Wroughton to my ad- 
miration. She is certainly a splendid woman ; 
but produced any thing but a favourable im- 
pression on my mind. There is a certain ^er^e 
in her aspect, and an unquiet expression about 
the eyes, which mar the whole effect of her fine 
person and noble features. I could almost 
fancy the distaste reciprocal ; for I saw her in- 
quire my name of Mr. Crawford, with whom I 
had been conversing ; and scan me with a smile 



THE OPERA. 15 

of profound contempt, on hearing one so unfa- 
miliar to the fashionable world as that of 
Maldyn. A few minutes after the aimounce- 
ment, she had occasion to pass the door-way 
near which I was standing; and it was amusing 
to observe how studiously she drew aside the 
velvet folds of her dress, lest they should be 
defiled by contact with so obscure an individual. 
No! — I shall certainly never participate in 
Adelberg's engouement for the Marchioness of 
Wroughton. 

February 7. — A call of the house has brought 
all the members (fox-hunting notwithstanding) 
to town. This morning the Park was crowded 
with a new order of persons : and to-night I 
am to accompany Bagot to a soirte at Lady 
Romford's. The whole party from Romford 
Park arrived yesterday, to remain in town till 
the Easter holidays. T do not think Sir Henry 
improved by being in love. The great charm of 
' his character is frank and thoughtless vivacity; 
and just now he is as careworn as a prime mi- 



16 THE OPERA. 

nister. The lady of his thoughts, it seems, is 
the lady of a great many other men's thoughts ; 
and is moreover the fashion, as well as a wit 
and a beauty. So that, even granting her 
but a quarter of a share of the vanity of her 
sex, she has ample temptation to caprice. 
Bagot will shortly return to his mission at 
Paris ; so that unless he makes great haste in 
fixing her wandering choice, she will probably 
take a smiling farewell of him, and greet him on 
his return next season as the Countess of some- 
thing or other. Her sister. Lady Sophia, flirts, 
it is said, with the young Duke of Cardigan, 
who is supposed to be half engaged to another 
woman. But that may be an incentive ! 

February 8. — They positively are delightful, 
these Lady Charlevilles ! — Never did I see so 
charming a flow of spirits, without passing for 
a moment the limits of good-breeding ; or so 
brilliant a piquancy of wit, without overstepping 
the boundary of good nature. Their personal 
attractions are of a high order — Lady Clara 



THE OPERA. 17 

pretty — Lady Sophia handsome — both graceful. 
There is certainly something very fascinating in 
that easy, generalizing manner, peculiar to per- 
sons who have alw^ays lived in the world : — it 
saves one so much trouble, and evades such a 
host of petty irritations. - These girls, for in- 
stance, who from their childhood till now have 
existed in ^n incessant round of company, have 
no leisure for all the little petty jealousies and 
paltry prejudices which prick one to death with 
pins and needles in a narrow circle of second- 
rate people ; where every one's pretensions as to 
birth, fortune, wisdom, virtue, and fashion, are 
filtered away with scrupulous ill nature, and 
subjected to an arbitrary sentence. Neverthe- 
less, they have their enemies. 

" Look at the Charlevilles,'' said Lord Bra- 
bazon, as we were standing together in the 
recess of a window ; " were there ever such 
dancing dolls ! '* 

" They are very handsome, and seem lively 
and conversible,*' was my reply. 



t^ 



18 THE OPERA. 

'* They talk, and so does the automaton at 
Weeks's Museum ; but as to lively and con- 
versible, I never heard either of them utter an 
opinion vv^hich might not have fallen from the 
lips of every other silly, smiling, chatting, com- 
mon-place woman from the days of Mesdames 
Shem, Hem, and Japhet till now. Lady Clara 
and Lady Sophia are in fact well-dressed, 
well-mannered girls, without a notion upon 
earth beyond that of passing a pleasant season. 
Every thing with them is comprehended in that 
one word ' season.' If any member of the family 
be ill, they hope he or she or it will ' get well 
before the season.' If any public catastrophe 
occur — a famine, an epidemic, or a Reform Bill, 
•—their first inquiry is ' how it will affect the 
season ;' and nothing would induce either of them 
to marry or die, or perform any other remarkable 
evolution, so as to interfere with the pleasures of 
the season ; — * Wait till the end of the season,' 
will be their reply, — whether to the erl-king or 
to the earl-suitor. Ever since Christmas they 



THE OPERA. 19 

have been making eager inquiries of all their 
friends, whether it is expected to be an early 
season, or a late season,— -a good season, or a 
bad season ; and since we have been standing 
here, I have heard Lady Clara remark to seven 
young men and three young ladies, that ' thank 
heaven ! papa was obliged to come up for the 
House of Lords, and they are settled in town for 
the season/ That is what you call being lively 
and conversible,'' continued his lordship, with a- 
sneer, " and what I call having no heart, and 
very little head." 

^ I was not aware," said I, somewhat nettled, 
but assuming a careless tone, " that either head 
or heart were requisite to form an agreeable 
flirt, which was the light in which I was tempted 
to regard the Lady Charlevilles." 

" Flirt ! " reiterated Brabazon, surveying me 
leisurely from head to foot ; " I am inclined to 
fear you would burn your fingers at so hazardous 
a game. But if you are flirtingly inclined, why 
not amuse yourself at the feet of Lady Emily 



20 THE OPERA. 

Willesden, the most amusing Will-o'-the-Wisp, 
that ever bewildered the benighted heart of 
man ; or Lady Rhoda Percy, or pretty little 
Lady Southford j or Mrs. Perceval — but I forgot, 
she is at Naples with Pignatelli;*' and he 
finished his pinch of snuiF with as much com- 
placency, as if I were not longing to throw him 
out of the window. 

Of all conceivable torments, commend me to 
that of hearing the name of the woman we love 
defiled, in this manner, by the light mention of 
a coxcomb ! " Mrs. Perceval — but she is at 
Naples with Pignatelli !" Oh ! Cecilia, could 
you but know the harsh interpretation which 
the world affixes to the levity of a young and 
beautiful, and unprotected woman — surely you 
would be more guarded in your proceedings ! I 
had nothing further to say to Brabazon on the 
subject; for at that moment Bagot beckoned to 
me to come and be presented to Lady Clara 
Charleville ; and I must candidly own that the ill- 
natured sketch I had received was in some de- 



THE OPERA* 21 

gree justified by the question that followed her 
courteous bow of reception, '^ I think, Mr. Mal- 
dyn, this is youv Jirst season in town V* 



22 



THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER II. 



To find a joung fellow who is neither a wit in his own 
eyes, nor a fool in the ejes of the world, is a very hard task. 

CONGREVE. 



Lady Romford is a very agreeable person; 
and that, too, in spite of one of the greatest 
faults of address that a woman can exhibit ; she 
never gives her attention to the person with 
whom she is conversing: yet, such is the force 
of habit, and such her system of living con- 
stantly in society, and passing her whole time in 
listening, talking, and smiling, that she will 
hold you in conversation half an hour, — making 
the most reasonable questions and answers, — 



THE OPERA. 23 

while her heart and soul are a hundred miles 
off. — While affecting to interest herself in your 
comings and goings, your likings and dislikings, 
she is arranging a scheme to get the Duke of 
Cardigan down to Romford-park for the Easter 
holidays; or planning some manoeuvre to 
smuggle her second son into parhament. Yet 
it is only by vigilantly watching the pre-occu- 
pied eye and occasionally vacant smile, that 
you detect her absence of mind ! • 

Her daughters, on the contrary, — which is a 
fault of a more pardonable kind, — are all-in-all 
with the person who, for the time being, occu- 
pies their attention. They bring the whole 
amount of their faculties to the enjoyment of 
the diversion of the hour ; they are not only 
alia giornata, but al momento. It is true they 
are aware that their remote interests are de- 
posited in very safe hands ; that their dexterous 
mother is unceasingly employed in adjusting the 
balance of fashionable power — forming foreign 
alliances — and legislating the economy of the 



24 THE OPERA, 

home department ; so that they have the entire 
disposal of their leisure, both positive and moral. 
I wish, however, they were occasionally dis- 
posed to look beyond the hour and speculate 
upon consequences ; for, unless Lady Clara 
means something besides temporary amuse- 
ment, she has no right to listen to poor Bagot's 
rhapsodies, nor to encourage his homage by 
dancing, singing, riding, and flirting with him 
so much beyond the ordinary allotment of 
coquetry. I have often heard, and verily be- 
lieve, that women of the world are by no means 
anxious to excite a serious passion; that they 
are bored by the exactions and egotism of a 
real lover; and would much rather find the 
adoration of their admirers secondary to their 
wish to amuse and trifle away the weariness of 
life. Oh ! these creatures of prosperity, — how 
flighty, how heartless ! Nothing would grieve 
me more than to see poor Adelberg's honest 
heart entangled in the meshes of such a net. 
Lady Sophia Charleville tells me that her 



THE OPERA. 25 

brother, Lord Bruton, who has been passing 
the winter at Naples, writes in raptures of La 
Silvestra ; — never was there so charming a com- 
bination of beauty, talent, and excellence. She 
has refused the hand of a Sicilian prince who 
ensured his own exile from court by the mere 
proposal ; and the less honourable passion of a 
royal admirer has been met with still greater 
disdain. Her manners are represented as grace- 
ful and gentle to a fault (a professional fault) ; ' 
and it is reported that her motive for de- 
voting her talents to the stage, and declining 
various advantageous offers of matrimonial set- 
tlement, is the anxiety to make a provision for 
the old age of her father. Colonel Sandoni, — a 
veteran officer in the service of the King of Sar- 
dinia. Under these circumstances I can scarcely 
wonder at the enthusiasm she has excited. The 
prefect of Lyons, it seems, greeted her with a 
public fete when she passed through the city on 
her road to Paris ; and the authorities of Dijon, 
having presented her with three hundred louis 

VOL. II. C 



26 THE OPERA. 

as her share of the proceeds of the public concert 
at which she assisted, La Silvestra immediately 
deposited two thirds of the sum for the benefit of 
the charitable institutions of the city. Bagot 
learned this morning, by a letter from a brother 
attache J that garlands and sonnets are showered 
on the stage every night of her appearance ; and 
that all the nouveautts of the day are already 
named " a la Silvestra." She is to take her leave, 
aux It aliens, about ten days hence, in an opera 
of her own composition. 

The Duke of Cardigan has left his name with 
US, I fancy at Lady Romford's suggestion. But 
whoever might be the instigator of his gracious 
intentions, they are particularly welcome ; for a 
spring passed in London without the honour of 
his notice, is like Viola's history '' a blank." 
There is no society here comparable with that 
of Cardigan House. It is free from the blemish 



-wHcli we call 



A stamp exclusive, or professional ; 



THE OPERA. 27 

is neither blue nor bookish ; neither stately nor 
formal; neither diplomatic, nor political, nor 
philosophical, nor frivolously fashionable ; but 
a happy mixture of all these things. A foreigner, 
with a proper introduction, is secure of a flat- 
tering reception. 

One thing which I am unable to interpret 
among the* oddities of the Eno:lish is their in- 
consistency respecting dramatic entertainments. 
I have never yet been present where two of 
three of my countrymen were gathered to- 
gether, that — after a wrangling review of the 
weather — they did not turn their conversation 
upon the theatres. There is no topic more uni- 
versally discussed than the decadence of the 
drama, or the engagements, merits, and ad- 
ventures of the performers. Neither the Lord 
Chancellor nor the Archbishop of Canterbury 
is ever so familiarly known by name and person 
to the public, as the first tragedian and come- 
dian of the day ; and the theatrical belles and 

c 2 



28 THE OPERA. 

heroines are either elevated to the peerage by 
matrimony, or lowered by the undertaker into 
Westminster Abbey. As some French Vaude- 
villist observed, " Moliere v^^as denied in France 
the rites of sepulture, while 

Garrick repose a cote de nos rois !" 

Yet, notwithstanding all this clamour of po- 
pularity — all this infatuation — there is no branch 
of the arts so grossly neglected in England as 
the drama. It is no longer the fashion in 
London to attend the theatres. Owing partly to 
the increase of private amusements, and partly 
to the late hours gradually adopted ^\ring the 
reign of George IV., the custom of play^going 
has declined among the higher classes, and 
naturally produces the re-action of bad pieces 
and indifferent performers. Even a clever 
actor, when satisfied that he is to receive judg- 
ment from an unrefined and uneducated au- 
dience, will degenerate and grow slovenly ; and 
from what I have observed of the London stage, 



THE OPERA. 29 

I see it is the custom to daub for the galleries, 
or to creep through the business under cover of 
a cold, tame, mediocrity. Without the slightest 
patronage from the couit or substantial encou- 
ragement from the fosterers of literary merit, 
these luckless personages are expected to at- 
tempt the same exertions and intense study, 
which is rewarded, in foreign countries, by the 
most flattering and j udicious attention ; 'as well 
as by a pension, to cheer the infirmities of old agS. 
Although tolerably well paid by his manager, 
the English actor has the mortification of being 
tyrannized and insulted by the gallery, and over- 
looked by the higher classes. A few persons of 
rank and fortune are provided with private 
boxes at the national theatres; but these are 
usually let by the night to plebeian tenants. It 
is rare indeed to observe a family of distinction 
in the dress circle of either Drury Lane or 
Covent Garden; while the French play is 
never deficient in a fashionable audience. 

The opera too, is nightly becoming more 



30 THE OPERA. 

crowded ; while at the two patent theatres " a 
beggarly account of empty boxes," and an 
equally beggarly account of flat, stale, and un- 
profitable performances, greets me whenever I 
am rash enough to take my post of observation. 
Lady Romford has a private box, which she 
visits only in preference to staying at a still 
duller home, on a disengaged evening; and 
Bagot occasionally drags me to the play, to 
make my foreign ignorance and inexperience a 
pretext for following Lady Clara to a spot which 
no one seems to visit without an apology. 
People in society give as many reasons for hav- 
ing done so strange a thing as go to see the 
new tragedy, as they would invent in Paris to 
excuse a similar omission. 

Since the Kemble mania, and the Byron 
mania, there has been a general affectation of 
indifference towards poetry and the drama ; 
your true fashionable never mentions either 
without ridicule — the natural consequence of 
previously exaggerated enthusiasm. 



THE OPERA. SI 

But above all the absurdities connected with 
this national weakness, stands that of the pub- 
lic prints. So much importance is given by the 
newspapers to every thing relating to the 
histrionic art, that we are daily informed of the 
whereabout of all the third-rate performers of 
the minor theatres : that " Mr. Smith, of Sad- 
ler's Wells, is engaged to Mr. Ducrow for the 
ensuing season y " or that " Miss Brown, be- 
longing to the ballet department of the Surrey 
theatre, has sprained her ancle." While 
two-thirds of a leading print are occupied with 
details of the Reform Bill, or a debate on 
some constitutional question, — or while the 
foreign intelligence of two sieges and a battle 
are concentrated with a degree of terseness 
worthy a telegraph, half a column is devoted to 
the plot of a new melo-drama at the Coburg ; or 
to a cut and dried criticism upon the nine hun- 
dredth representation of Hamlet — beginning with 
the "immortal bard," and ending with the 
waistcoats of the grave-digger ! 



32 THE OPERA, 

The rara avis, whose notes and plumage are 
just now the subject of public rhodomontade, 
is of foreign growth, — even this miraculous 
Silvestra Sandoni ; and all the wonders of all 
the foreign journals are out-wondered in the 
relation of her musical exploits. Every trans- 
lating scribbler who is called upon for the para- 
phrase of a Silvestrian anecdote from the 
*^ Diario di Roma/' or the " Algemeine Zeitung/' 
prolongs, by half a note her heavenly gamut, 
diminishes a year of her age, and, for aught I 
know, adds a cubit to her stature. If this fair 
lady's debut should be procrastinated much 
longer, her ancles will be made so taper that she 
will not have a leg to stand on. Thus much 
between me and my journal ; for it is no matter 
for jest in society. The other night, at Countess 
Pignatelli's, a young officer of dragoons, re- 
cently returned from Naples, twisted his mus- 
tachios most fiercely at me, for having ventured 
to breathe the names of Pasta and Madame de 



THE OPERA. 33 

Rossi, while he was descanting on the cadences 
of Silvestra. 

February 19. — A delightful party last night 
at the Duke of Cardigan's ! Brabazon declares that 
it was inferior by five beauties, ten pine apples, 
and two dozen of champagne, to the very worst 
given by his grace last season ; but / am as 
" content" as ever was peer or proxy. In the 
course of the evening I was agreeably surprised 
to find myself singled out by the duke for a 
long and amusing discussion of the " powers '* 
and hours "that be;" which ended with his 
expressing a hope that I should pass a great 
deal of my time in his society. His grace's 
condescension, by the way, seemed to excite a 
greater degree of surprise and envy among the 
idlers of the throng, than I had conceived to be 
at the disposal of any personage less than royal. 
Scarcely had I recovered my astonishment on 
finding the Duke of Cardigan intimately versed 
in my Irish birth, Gottingen education, ay ! 

c3 



34 THE OPEKA. 

and even in my dear father's obstinate adhe- 
rence to the banks of the Traun, — when I was 
greeted with an angry sneer from Crawford, a gra- 
tulatnig nod from Brabazon, a smile of snper- 
extra courtesy from Lady Romford, and a familiar 
one-of-us sort of parsing ' phrase from Count 
Ugo Pignatelli. The duke had not held me 
half an hour in conversation, before the Anglo- 
Neapolitan count had already learned to love me. 
It is amusing enough to observe how little the 
Duke of Cardigan is embarrassed by the incense 
laid upon his altars ; he neither appears to de- 
spise the idolatry of his votaries, nor to fancy 
his divinity estabUshed by their bigoted devo- 
tion. For my own part, were I to find myself 
exalted on so lofty a pedestal, I should grow at 
once dizzy and sick of my elevation ; — but habit 
does wonders. The duke is still a young man. 
He has however been so long accustomed to 
act not only for himself, but for the heau-monde, 
one and indivisible, that he has acquired the 



THE OPERA, 35 

solemnity of a profound statesman in the legis- 
lation of the fashionable constitution. If Bra- 
bazon deserve to be its chancellor of the 
exchequer, as most conversant with its ways 
and means, the Duke of Cardigan has an in- 
disputable claim to the premiership. 

I made several pleasant acquaintances in 
consequence of having been shone upon by a 
distinguishing ray of the fixed star of the even- 
ing. Let me give due precedence to the ladies, 
by establishing Lady Southford and Lady Emily 
Willesden at the head of my list ; of whom the 
first has titles to that pre-eminence independent 
of her sex. Li the first place she is eminently 
pretty, — pretty to the utmost extent of mere 
prettiness ; the most diminutive features, the 
purest complexion, the softest flaxen hair, the 
most symmetrical figure, the most melodious 
voice, the most graceful gesture ; and, added to 
all these qualifications, the qualities of a sweet 
temper, and a tolerably good understanding. 
How many of the ingredients of what is called 



/ 



36 THE OPERA. 

an angel ! — and yet how mere a mortal did I find 
in Lady Southford. This lovely automaton is 
uninformed by a single spark from the Prome- 
thean torch. — She has no more soul than a 
gooseberry bush ! — 

It strikes me with surprise whenever I see 
her, that she should always chance upon a 
companion so enlivening as to move that in- 
cessant smile, or some friend so familiar as to 
require that endless whisper. But half an 
hour's conversation with this prettiest of dolls 
enabled me to determine that its vivacity is a 
habit, and its coquetry an unmeaning impulse. 
Were she to smile in my face and whisper in my 
ear as she does in those of Ugo Pignatelli and 
half a dozen others, it would move me no more 
than if the operation were performed by old 
Michelchen of Elzbach. Shakspeare talks with 
reprobation of 

The man who hath no music in his soul ; 

but for my part, 1 hold that the woman who 
hath no poetry in her^s, is quite as fit for " stra- 



THE OPERA. 37 

tagems;'* and utterly unqualified to evoke a 
sentiment in that of any other person. J feel no 
interest in the destinies of one on whom the 
calamities of life fall so lightly ; or who is con- 
tent to share its pleasures with half the popu- 
lation of the united kingdom. Such, however, 
is not 'the general estimate of Lady South- 
ford's attractions; for I hear Lord Bruton has 
been despatched to Italy chiefly with the view 
of breaking off his attachment to her. Not that 
Lady Romford is by any means scandalized at 
the immorality of the thing ; but she has pro- 
jects for establishing him in life by a marriage 
with a certain Miss Fitzgerald, an heiress of 
the first magnitude, with which Lady South- 
ford's smiles materially interfere. Lord Bruton 
passes in the world for a highly accomplished 
and promising young man. 

Lady Emily Willesden is the very reverse of 
all these Southfordisms ; — the veiy " reverse of 
wrong,*' yet equally remote from " right." She 
has a handsome and interesting face, with dark 



36 THE OPERA. 

and arching brows, and a lip whose Grecian curve 
would be loveliness itself, were it not disfigured 
by an unpleasing expression. Her silence, too, 
might be a relief after the pye-like chattering 
of some of her fair associates, while it leaves 
her beautiful features to engage one's attention ; 
but unfortunately it is any thing but that pen- 
sive silence, the sweetest attribute of woman- 
hood ! The smile that breaks over her features 
after one of these pauses, is bitterness itself; 
and the comment which at length escapes her 
lips, no less satirical. Her musings are all 
directed towards the frailties and follies of those 
she calls her friends. 

Her husband, Mr. Willesden, is as witty as 
Scarron and as malicious as Voltaire. He it 
is who invents the stereotype for the hon mots 
of the clubs; and says all the good things 
about all the bad people. Lady Emily and 
Mr. Willesden are generally known in society 
by the name of " the prickly pair;" but in spite 
of its thorns. Lord Fieldingham, the foreign 



THE OPERA. 39 

secretary, is said to prize its attractions beyond 
those of any other forbidden fruit in London. 

February 20. — I have j ust discovered the origin 
of the Duke of Cardigan's civilities. To-night 
he visited our box at the opera, which is situ- 
ated near his own; and to my great surprise 
again referred to various particulars of my family 
history. 

" There is no magic in the case," said Jie, 
laughing heartily at my astonishment, when 
he terminated his allusions by an inquiry after 
Hiob Armbrust. " BeUeve me I have neither 
visited Elzbach on a broomstick, nor acquainted 
myself with its localities on a magic mirror ; and 
though strongly inclined to perplex you with 
misgivings on the subject (for I perceive you 
have ' sins unwhipped of justice,' which you 
expect every moment to see rise up for judg- 
ment), perhaps it will be better to own at once 
that my aunt. Lady Harriet Manningfield, is 
the origin of my intelligence. She is half af- 
fronted that you have disappointed her of a 



40 THE OPEKA. 

promised visit; and has commissioned me to 

enact the grand inquisitor, and pry into your 

proceedings. Prepare, therefore, for a strict 

investigation ; for whether I find you deep in 

adoration of Lady Southford, or suspended like 

Mahomet's coffin between the attractions of 

Lady Clara and Lady Sophia Charleville,— 

garde a vous ! — I shall have no mercy on your 

secret." 

" I trust you may be able to find so sufficient 

an apology for my inattention to Lady Harriet's 
invitation," was my reply ; " for I am persuaded 
that in a woman's estimation to be in love is as 
fair an excuse for the commission of every 
other folly as to be doting or delirious. And 
yet I had rather be either, or both, than guilty 
of such blunders of the heart as those imputed 
to me by your grace." 

'^ Nay," said he, " I was myself desperately 
in love with Lady Southford, till she giggled me 
out of my passion ; and devoted myself to the 
Lady Charlevilles half a season a piece, till I 



THE OPERA. 41 

found that during my absence they were quite 
as well content to flirt with Anastasio Pignatelli, 
or waltz with his brother, or sentimentahze with 
Bagot. Beware how you despise the attrac- 
tions of any woman ; should she discover that 
you have adventured such an impertinence, not 
Venus of old — when irritated by an insult of- 
fered to "her altars — proved more implacable. 
I have observed, too, that the men most self- 
secure against the power of the opposite s§x, 
are of all others those most easily betrayed 
into a pitfall. It is only by admitting the in- 
fluence of each in her turn," continued the duke, 
laughing, " that I have remained heart-free and 
hand- free so long." 

I trust I know better than to talk sentiment 
to a man with a rent-roll of a hundred thousand 
a year ; who, from the moment of his birth, has 
never enjoyed a single hour of ruminative tran- 
quillity in which that filmy cobweb could have 
been spun over his heart. I said nothing to the 
duke of the inferior brilliancy of the galaxy, 



42 THE OPERA. 

compared with the bright particular star; — 
nothing of the inferior sweetness of a parterre, 
compared with 

The simple rose, which shedding there 
Its lonely lustre, meek and pale, 
Looks as if planted by despair ;— 

nothing of the inferior strength of a passion which 
has wandered from Lady Jane to Lady Anne, 
— from the countess to the viscountess — com- 
pared with an all-absorbing attachment such as 
that which enchains me, and for life, to the 
feet of Cecilia Perceval ! — 



THE OPERA. 43 



CHAPTER III. 



Topics which I sometimes introduce, 
Not only for the sake of their variety. 

But as subservient to a moral use ; 
Because my business is to dress society. 

And stuff with sage that very verdant goose. 

BYRON, 



The current of London is almost too strong 
forme; I, wLo have been used to sport in a 
brook, and feel myself master of its shallows, 
am scarcely able to cleave the waters of so vast 
a stream. To have lived as I have, in obscurity 
and poverty, leaves half the powers of the mind 
undeveloped,^ — ^half the feelings of the heart 
still hoarded in perilous inaction. 



■r . 



44 THE OPERA. 

It is the saying of a great philosopher, and 
often quoted by little ones, that " he who occu- 
pies himself with trifles, will at length become 
incapable of great actions;"— a sapient axiom 
which affords a plea to all the lazy, and all the 
selfish, for neglecting the minor, and alas ! 
most peremptory business of life. But whether 
Plato ever numbered his flasks of Falernian, 
or Cornelia darned the togse of the Gracchi, it 
is certain that the eye restricted for years to a 
narrow focus, becomes at length incapable of 
measuring distances ; that a person nurtured in 
a petty village, and educated in a petty city, is 
sadly to seek in the politics of a mighty me- 
tropolis. Even the opulence with which I find 
myself so suddenly, so strangely invested, op- 
presses the buoyancy of my spirits. Messrs. 
Ebene and Ludwig compel me to the mainte- 
nance of a species of domestic formality such as 
the abrupt but excellent Hiob never obliged me 
to assume ; and instead of recurring with gratula- 
tion to the period when the possession of a fiftieth 



THE OPERA. 45 

part of my present income would have saved me 
so many head-aches and heart-aches, and pre- 
served me from the grievous humUiation of having 
curtailed my father's comforts by indulging in the 
ordinary pleasures of my comrades, I am some- 
times gracelessly tempted to fancy that my 
scramble at Paris en polisson, with only a few 
hundred francs in my pocket, was more amusing 
than my sojourn in London, en prince, with as 
many thousands of pounds at my disposal. The 
true motive of my discontent probably exists in 
the length of Cecilia's absence. Mrs. Perceval at 
Naples, or Mrs. Perceval sharing my daily ride 
and nightly galoppe, are two very different fea- 
tures on the face of things. When — when will 
Easter arrive ? — 

March 6th. — Chapel Street, May Fair. — I 
have made an attempt at a change in our mode 
of life, hoping it may afford some insight into 
those miraculous " Pleasures of Comfort" which 
I have heard vaunted by all sorts and conditions 
of Englishmen with whom I ever conversed. 



46 THE OPERA. 

It seems that it is not the custom here, as at 
Paris, to live in a furnished hotel; and with 
Crawford's assistance I have accordingly pro- 
cured a very tolerable house, and a very decent 
establishment ; with which I intend to become 
as hospitable and as " comfortable " as my 
father was pleased to insist. We are settled, 
therefore, till the month of June ; when I am 
engaged to visit Abbotscourt, in company with 
Mr. Meriton. On my return I shall pass a 
month with Sir Herbert Manningfield; and 
then— but what is the use of such anticipa- 
tions ? — All the " then" and all the hereafter of 
Adrian Maldyn's destinies will have been de- 
cided between the month of May and Midsum- 
mer. Those six eventful weeks will either 
satisfy my misgivings respecting Cecilia, or 
determine me to renounce for ever all thoughts 
of her fickle sex. 

March 8. — I like our new system of domes- 
tication; there is a kind of selfish snuggery 
about a house with a door of its own, — (a door 



THE OPEHA. 47 

to keep bores and brutes at bay, and open only 
to the elect and select of one's fancy) — which 
makes one feel peculiarly English. Eb^ne 
assures me he has no longer any scruple in 
asserting to Mr. Meriton or Mr. Willesden, 
that " Monsieur 7i!y est pas," now that a wind- 
ing staircase, instead of an antechamber, divides 
these unwelcome visiters from my sanctum 
sanctorum. I do believe that half the surly un- 
sociability of John Bull proceeds from that bar- 
rier of his domestic citadel called a street-door ! 
Yesterday, Adelberg and myself dined at the 
Duke of Cardigan's, with the Romfords, Wil- 
lesdens, Brabazon and his second self, besides 
Loi'd Fieldingham and one or two other official 
men. Nothing could be better arranged than 
the entertainment, nothing better assorti than 
the guests ; and if any discontent arose on the 
occasion it was solely among the excluded. I 
overheard Harry Crawford saying before dinner, 
to Lord Brabazon, that Lady Wroughton was 
furious at having been omitted ; as she had 



48 THE OPERA. 

distinctly given the duke to understand she had 
a particular reason for wishing to be of the 
party. 

" Thank Heaven that on this occasion, as 
on most others, Cardigan did not listen to 
reason," replied his lordship. " Lady Wrough- 
ton's reasons are ' as plenty as blackberries,' 
or rather as * stravv^berries ;' for they are en- 
grafted on every ducal coronet she fancies 
she shall be able to fit upon her pretty 
daughter's head. My word for it, however, 
Cardigan will never be caught in any such 
sparrow-trap. If he should fall at last, he 
will 

be by a mousing owl 
Hawked at and killed : 

for that bird of wisdom, Mrs. Fitzgerald, has 
her eye upon him, and will soon hold him in her 
talons." 

" Talents?" reiterated the double — with a 
double's laugh, " Capital ! — Mrs. Fitzgerald is 
certainly the wisest fowl that flies ; but I doubt 



THE OPERA. 49 

whether she will ever feather her nest with 
Cardigan's plumage/' 

" You have formed that conclusion to please 
Lady Wroughton," observed Lord Brabazon, 
with a sneer ; " but have a care of false scents, 
Harry. Wroughton has a good place, it is 
true, but deuced bad patronage ; and her lady- 
ship's smiles are scarcely worth the sacrifice of 
an ounce of your own well-earned popularity. 
Recollect that woman has as many enemies ^s 
Don Quixote." 

" I rejoice to find that for once I vote with 
the majority. It is impossible to say how little I 
like Lady Wroughton. Her lord, I confess, ap- 
pears an amiable man, who having committed 
and repented a matrimonial blunder, has the 
good sense to keep his mortification to himself. 
He deports himself towards his wife with the 
utmost deference of good breeding ; but I sus- 
pect he hates her as much as a well-bred man 
can hate a woman." 

More ravings from the coteries of Paris, 

VOL. II. D 



60 THE OPERA. 

touching this new singer ! But the Duke of 
Cardigan tells me that in this single instance 
vulgar report is no exaggerator ; and that the 
Silvestra is quite as highly appreciated by the 
cognoscenti as by the populace. The oracles as 
well as the penny trumpets of fame are enlisted 
on her side. Prince Giustiniani, who arrived 
from Paris last night, declares that Mara, Banti, 
Gabrielli, Grassini, Catalani, Camporese, and 
Fodor, contributing the vast variety of their ex- 
cellencies, could not have formed a more accom- 
plished cantatricey a more fascinating woman ; 
and protests she has a blush which ought to 
add a thousand guineas to her engagement. I 
am sorry to hear it; nothing irritates me so 
much as to see a really diffident woman exposed 
to the publicity of a theatrical life ; — except in- 
deed to see her when the bloom is off the fruit, 
and the tremor of her feminine modesty departed ! 
— Poor Stephanine ! She certainly was bom 
for the stage ; — so much address — so much tact 
— so much artful self-possession ! How deeply 



THE OPERA. 51 

would it have grieved me had my father exer- 
cised his sly munificence by facilitating an 
entrte to the theatrical profession for any other 
woman who ever interested my feelings ! But 
Stephanine Haslinger was certainly intended 
by nature to weep imaginary tears, smile facti- 
tious smiles, and alternately assume the " lion 
port and awe-commanding grace '' of an em- 
press, and the playful ndivett of some simple 
cottage girl. Had her voice been of a better 
quality, she must have eventually risen high in 
her profession; — as it is, I fear the last news 
which reached me from Prague, that she 
had eloped with an itinerant showman, will 
degrade her destinies to their original level. 
Poor girl! I could wish I had assisted less 
actively in the work of mischief, but had she 
been educated in a convent of Carmelites she 
must still have turned out a scapegrace. I 
never knew a daughter of Eve with more 
vocation for emulating the frailties of her pro- 
genitress. 

d2 



52 THE OPERA. 

March 10. — I took Adelberg with me yester- 
day to call on the Meritons; — a visit of duty 
which I have long neglected. Seeing musical 
instruments in the room, he requested the young 
ladies to obhge him with a duet, conceiving he 
was doing the simplest thing in the world. But 
it appears there was something wonderfully ir- 
regular in the business ; for the poor girls 
blushed crimson, and appealed to a vulgar fine- 
lady of an aunt, who lives with them by way of 
chaperon. " Oh ! certainly, my dear, certainly, 
if the count wishes it i " was her reply ; and 
given with such very expressive looks and sig- 
nificant smiles, that I am persuaded poor Gus- 
tavus's love of music is already interpreted by 
the family into a passion for Miss Augusta or 
Miss Henrietta. We have received this morn- 
ing a double card for one of Meriton's formal 
" dinner-parties," and a visit of ceremony from 
the old gentleman himself. 

March 13. — Bagot is losing his spirits and 
health. He dined with us to-day, and says he 



THE OPERA. 53 

must be joff to Paris next week, — and yet he is 
further than ever from an understanding with 
Lady Clara. As far as nods and becks and 
wreathed smiles can be interpreted, her heart is 
his; but unfortunately she smiles quite as 
wreathedly when he talks of going away as 
when he assures her that she is an angel ; and 
the poor fellow is growing perplexed beyond his 
patience. I never saw a man with so sensitive 
a horror of being refused ; the very suspicion of 

• 

such a humiliation is enou2;h to retard his ad- 
vances for six months ; and I verily believe he 
will never venture on a proposal unless he can 
hedge with the certainty of acceptance. Yet 
Sir Henry is an honourable, gentlemanly man, 
and worthy the affection of any woman who 
prefers happiness to pleasure. 

I doubt however whether this is the case 
with Lady Clara ; nor can I blame her for a 
mere sin of ignorance. She has no more idea 
of the graver enjoyments of domestic life than 
a blind man of colours. According to her cal- 



54} THE OPERA. 

culations, the extreme of joy consists in living 
in a round of music, dancing, illuminated cham- 
bers, and dresses of the last Parisian invention ; 
in passing the summer in pic-nics and water- 
parties — the winter in dinners and private thea- 
tricals; and the extreme of wretchedness in a 
moderate income, with a respectable country- 
house, and a flourishing family of children ; 
she can form no conception of a lower grade of 
misery. The undecided tone of her demeanour 
towards Bagot probably proceeds from her un- 
certainty as to the exact point between these 
two extremities at which he is able to fix her 
destiny. She is unwilling to lose the adoration 
of the best galoppe?' and singer of Nottumos to 
be found in society just now; but cannot pos- 
sibly afford to love him at less than a jointure 
of three thousand a-year and a house in Park- 
lane. Lady Romford would not hear of her 
abating a guinea of these conditions ; particu- 
larly so long as the Duke of Cardigan remains 
"unmarried. I have sometimes fancied her 



THE OPERA. 55 

ladyship very solicitous that Lady Sophia 
Charleville should fall to mi/ share, whenever 
Sir Henry and myself present ourselves to call 
carriages and fetch shawls at the close of the 
Opera or a private party. But although she 
may have acquainted herself accurately with 
the Abbotscourt rent-roll and the state of my 
father's health, she has made a most erroneous 
calculation touching my own feelings. Even 
were there no Cecilia in the world, 1 should^ as 
soon think of marrying a figurante, as a girl so 
irrevocably devoted to amusement and fashion 
as Lady Romford's daughter. " Que fait on de 
tout cela a la maison ? " 

By the way, I have serious thoughts of ac- 
companying Bagot back to Paris; particularly 
if the course of his true love runs rough. I 
should really like to be on the spot, to greet 
Lady Neville's party. It would be unspeakably 
delightful to retrace, with Cecilia, all those en- 
chanting scenes of last year ; those parties to 
Montmorency — those petits comites at Lord Ne- 



56 THE OPERA. 

ville's ! — to recall the anguish which embit- 
tered my pleasures when I considered the 
distance of rank and fortune that seemed to 
divide us; and then and there inquire whether 
the interest, which was so generously bestowed 
on the soi-disant Hanoverian cadet, Adrian 
Elzstein, is to be withheld from Lord Abbots- 
court's heir. Dearest Cecilia ! Nothing but 
my father's commands that I should visit Eng- 
land, would have detained me so long from her 
feet. Why — why did she go to Naples ? 

Whenever Bagot is visited by the blue devils, 
and has occasion to note the pains taken by 
Lady Romford to draw me to her house, he 
begins to apostrophise me as the most enviable 
of men. " When I receive an invitation to 
dinner at Charleville House,'' he exclaims, " I 
am fully aware that her ladyship's hospitality 
has an object. She knows that Sophia never 
appears to greater advantage than when acting 
a Moorish ballad with me ; or she is desirous 
that Cardigan should see how gracefully Clara 



THE OPERA. 57 

can go through the attitudes of the Tarantella 
with my assistance. But as to you, lazy dog 
that you are, you neither help her to show off 
hei: daughters, nor to amuse her company. Al- 
though she despises a baronet, with a dirty five 
thousand per annum, with all the morgue of her 
aristocratic soul. Lady Romford is charmed to 
make me eat fire, or stand on my head, for the 
diversion of her guests; while she condescends 
to overlook your inactivity (by the bye, you 
seem to have given up dancing and singing since 
you were in Paris last season ?) in favour of your 
viscounty and estates." 

" She loses her time sadly," said I, affecting 
one of Brabazon's supercilious yawns ; " I would 
eat fire for Lady Romford, or stand fire, or any 
thing else she pleases, sooner than marry one of 
her daughters." 

"Of course you intend nothing discourteous 
to either of them, by such an observation ?" in- 
quired Bagot, reddening to the colour of scarlet. 

" Nothing ! I assure you. But as you may 

d3 



58 THE OPERA. 

be apt to suppose (if you have any remembrance 
of the Paris proceedings to which you just now 
alluded, beyond the fact that 1 sometimes sang 
and occasionally danced at Lady Neville's 
soiries), I have predilections of my own, which 
must materially interfere with such a disposal 
of my hand." 

And thus my affectation had all but involved 
me in a duel with a man whom I sincerely 
regard. Your true lover is a touchy mortal ! 
Sir H. Bagot is, however, too worthy a fellow for 
me to quarrel with on light grounds. It would 
be pursuing, with a vengeance, the evil fortunes 
attached to the name of Maldyn, were I to make 
giants of this description for the sake of prov- 
ing my valour by slaying them. 

Sir Henry Bagot errs, however, most grievously 
in supposing me to be an object of envy. Ac- 
knowledging, with due gratitude, the unexpected 
blessings attached to my destiny, I own I have 
recently experienced a listlessness of mind and 
body, such as never weighed upon them during 



THE OPERA, 59 

my monotonous banishment at Elzbach, or my 
insipid mediocrity at Gottingen. Only two 
years ago, before I had seen Cecilia, before I 
had dreamed of the possession of wealth and 
dignities, what eager aspirations occupied my 
mind ; — what longings after personal distinction; 
•—what a desire to add my grain of sand to the 
mighty pyramid of contemporary fame ! — But, 
above all, how ardently did I long to assist in 
the great task of enlightening, and ameliorating, 
and making happy the human species ! I fan- 
cied the will alone wanting to render a man 
capable of redressing public injuries — reforming 
established abuses — and purifying the earth, 
like Hercules of old, from all manner of mons- 
ters and oppressors. But now, alas ! that I 
recognise the difficulty of rooting up the tares 
without trampling on the wheat — the impossi- 
bility of introducing perfection into any earthly 
system of things — and the absolute necessity 
for evil and evil-doers, and misery, and suffer- 
ing throughout the world, — I seem to have lost 



60 THE OPERA. 

one great faculty of happiness — the sanguine 
hope of witnessing a Millennium of peace 
and good-will among mankind. It destroys 
half the energies of our nature to know our- 
selves incapable of bestowing any permanent 
advantage on our fellow-creatures. The "fly 
on the wheel " is a poor standard of comparison. 
There are not six men now living on the inha- 
bited earth, who can be estimated at more than 
the value of an invisible feather on the wing of 
a fly, when balanced against the mighty multi- 
tudes of the quick and the dead. For myself, 
I ponder over my own less than nothingness, 
till my heart sinks within me. 

From the moment we discover ourselves to 
be mere homogeneous "parts of the stupendous 
w^hole,'' the enthusiasms of youth fade from our 
eyes, and we become either intolerably selfish — 
as a revenge on the world for our own insignifi- 
cance — or listless to the uttermost stagnation of 
ennui. What indeed avails exertion ? Since 
no single individual among all the eminent 



THE OPERA. 61 

myriads of past ages has achieved a perfect re- 
putation, literary, miUtary, or political, — since 
the envious have been at work, like the undying 
worm, upon them all, — why should I disturb 
myself for the acquirement of a leaf or two of 
laurel, merely to nourish thereon the grub and 
the devouring locust? — " Allans donCj mon cher 
Monsieur Jourdain, nous voila bien monies en 

prose ! " 

Anastasio sends up his card. Just arrived ! 
What can have brought them to England so 
soon ? 



62 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Le monde — quel pays charmant ! 

Sans etre heureux on cherche a le paroitre -, 
On se deteste un peu, mais c'est si poliment. 

On s'embrasse sans se connoitre 
Pour se detruire I'un I'autre doucement. 

Florian. 



Disappointed ! — This unlucky visitor turns 
out to be a young Frenchman, a certain Cheva- 
lier de Villevargues, furnished by Anastasio, in 
all the haste of a chance meeting at Milan, 
with a visiting card instead of a letter of intro- 
duction. At least he brings us the assurance 
that Pignatelli and his party are on their return 
home; nor have I any reason to resent their 



THE OPERA. 63 

delay, for at present they are wholly unaware 
of my sojourn here. Adelberg, indeed, has 
corresponded with Anastasio, and to his civili- 
ties this Chevalier de Villevargues is addressed ; 
for even if the Countess or Count Ugo have 
chanced, and it is improbable enough, to men- 
tion their acquaintance with a " Mr. Maldyn,'' 
my friend can have no clue to connect such a 
person with Adrian von Elzstein. 

Monsieur de Villevargues seems to embody 
all the mercurial elements of his nation. I 
never heard so rapid a speaker, never saw so 
eager a gesticulator ; were he not good-looking 
and well-bred, he would be intolerable. But a 
person who talks incessantly, and who possesses 
at least that conversational tact without which 
no Frenchman was ever yet launched into the 
world, cannot but occasionally utter brilliant 
things, or entertaining paradoxes. From some- 
thing in my air or accent, heset me down, at this 
first visit, as a foreigner ; and alluding to him- 
self, ourselves, and Pignatelli, as " nons aiitres" 



64 THE OPERA. 

began to indulge in a thousand amusing sallies 
at the expense of my country and countrymen, 
which will serve us to laugh over anew, when I 
am presented to him in my real character. He 
has good diplomatic introductions ; and though 
he landed in England but last week, has con^ 
trived already to establish himself in society. 
A Frenchman makes a home wherever he goes. 
His feelings and ideas lie so near the surface, 
he carries so much of the small coin of conver- 
sation in his hand to exchange with every pas- 
senger, and is so ready to be courteous and con- 
versible where he can be so without positive 
derogation, that he becomes the pleasantest ac- 
quaintance, and worst friend, of any man in 
Europe. An Englishman feels as an individual ; 
the Frenchman as a nation. The whole popu- 
lation of France forms, indeed, but a single 
animal; whence arises its military successes 
and political blunders. To maintain the equi- 
librium of a constitution, there should be two 
parties ; to insure the triumph of an army, one. 



THE OPERA. 65 

Opposition is as vital to a senator, as it is fatal 
to a commander. 

Among the sources originating the copious 
flow of Monsieur de Villevargues's discourse, 
was of course the Opera : which, next to " le 
journal d'aujourd'hui," holds the most important 
station in a Parisian imagination. "The Sil- 
vestra — the Silvestra — nothing but the Silves- 
tra ! — Rossini sitting up all night to complete a 
new piece previous to her departure, — Darid 
surpassing himself in her bust, — Gerard pro- 
ducing a second Psyche in her portrait, — all 
Paris in a fever of enthusiasm ; even the French 
Opera deserted by crowds who throng nightly 
aux Italiens without the chance of reaching it 
nearer than the adjoining street.'* 

" I have brought over her portrait," continued 
the chevalier, " as a passport to the favour of 
our ambassador ; having refused a royal billet 
of introduction under the conviction that La 
Silvestra's lovely face would say more in my 
favour." 



Q6 THE OPERA. 

" And Anastasio !" said I, interrupting his 
rhapsody — for being less of a fanatico per la 
musica than my friend Gustavus, I am grow- 
ing somewhat weary of the superabundance of 
rigmarole wasted upon this musical divinity. — 
" Has he amused himself well at Naples ? — has 
it been a good carnival ?" 

" You forget that I quitted the south previous 
to Pignatelli's arrival ; we crossed at Milan. 
But I heard a good deal of him there, and still 
more at Paris ; and it seems that our friend is 
suffering from a painful and lingering disorder." 

"Indeed!" cried Adelberg, with eager in- 
terest. " We were not even apprised of his in- 
disposition." 

" Probably not ; for, like insanity, it is a 
species of disease of which the patient remains 
unconscious. Anastasio is desperately in love 
with a young and beautiful married woman, 
who is much more inclined to make a fool of 
him than of herself. Lady Neville is, in a quiet 
way, one of the most exact calculators with 



THE OPERA. 67 

whom I ever came in contact ; and it is evident 
she sees nothing in our friend worthy the mighty 
sacrifice an Englishwoman is required to make 
on such occasions. What she might have said 
to him were Lord Neville a Florentine instead of 
a British baron, I will not pretend to determine; 
but I am satisfied that the scandal of an elope- 
ment and divorce will act more forcibly on her 
mind than the restraint of those principles, and 
that prudence, in which her conduct gives one 
some reason to believe her deficient." 

" After all,"' I whispered aside to Gustavus, 
" we must acknowledge that the Protestant in- 
stitution we have so often reviled, has its uses. 
The dread of shame operates, you see, even on 
a shameless woman." 

" But Pignatelli is not so much to be pitied," 
resumed Villevargues, whose imperfect know- 
ledge of English saved us from the raillery 
which my comment must have excited. " This 
Miladi Neville is accompanied by a beautiful 
little English widow (not much bigger than 



68 THE OPERA. 

Titania — young, gay, accomplished, and in my 
opinion fifty times more attractive than the 
Neville), vv^ho is evidently in love w^ith Anas- 
tasio. She has a way of listening to him and 
looking at him which is impai/ahle. You never 
saw so docile, so patient, or so tender a Nina as 
this pretty little Mrs. Perceval." 

It is fortunate for me that Adelberg has 
sufficient insight into my feelings on this point, 
to suggest the necessity of terminating the 
chevalier's flippancies. I have no right to 
quarrel with a stranger for an assertion which 
may be partly true ; yet it was as well for all 
parties that Monsieur de Villevargues imme- 
diately afterwards made his parting bow. 

This is the second time I have heard light men- 
tion attach itself to Mrs. Perceval's name ; and 
allowing wonders for the fatuity and coxcombry 
of my own sex, I cannot but believe that some 
degree of guilt is attributable to her conduct. 
A perfectly modest woman, — living in and for 
the execution of her duties, — however beautiful, 



THE OPERA. 69 

however attractive, is secure from this sort of 
insult; but I never yet knew one lightly spoken 
of among the worst of libertines and fops, but 
had given some occasion for their impertinence. 
Lady Harriet Manningfield, for instance, is 
celebrated for her personal attractions, is mar- 
ried to a man considerably older than herself, 
and lives, during the liOndon season, in the 
most frivolous and dissipated circles. Yet I 
never heard any allusion to her name that 
might not be welcome to the ear of her husband 
or brother. 

What am I to think of Cecilia? — what of 
Anastasio ? To him the secret of my attach- 
ment was confided ; to herself, alas ! it was 
betrayed. Her last words to me when I quitted 
Paris conveyed something more than encou- 
ragement; and something little less than a 
promise of fidelity. — It was — it was a promise 
of fidelity ! — or how could she have ventured to 
require one to that effect in return ! And mine ! 
— how truly — how fondly has it been kept ! 



70 THE OPERA. 

Throughout the vicissitudes of the past year I 
have cherished the remembrance of Cecilia as an 
anchor of hope in the darkness, as a vision of 
bhss in the sunshine. 

Shall I set off with Bagot for Paris ? — This 
evenino; I am to meet him at the house of a 
Mrs. Fitzgerald, from whom I have received a 
card through Cardigan's hands. I fancy there 
is some family connexion between them ; for the 
duke appears Vami de la maison, and extremely 
interested that this little soiree should go off 
well. I have promised to be there early. En 
attendant, I must go and ride with Lady South- 
ford, who chaperones the Lady Charlevilles 
during old Romford's fit of the gout. Countess 
Pignatelli has a ball to-morrow night. 

March 16. — Notwithstanding Lord Braba- 
zon's declarations, I should not be much sur- 
prised to see the daughter of that " mousing 
owl," Mrs. Fitzgerald, become Duchess of Car- 
digan. The duke, who is generally so listless 
in society, unless when doing the honours of his 



I 



THE OPERA. 71 

house, was in full animation during the whole 
evening at her little concert, and scarely left 
Miss Fitzgerald's side. His devotion exceeded 
indeed even that of an ordinary lover ; for, not 
content with dedicating his homage to the lady, 
he insisted on the disposal of mine ; and managed 
to engage me in conversation with her for more 
than an hour. I suspect he wished to secure 
her from the attentions of other admirers, and 
thought me a safe person to assist in the task 
of amusing her ; but another time I shall not 
give myself the trouble to talk as his grace's 
proxy. Not that Miss Fitzgerald is an unin- 
teresting companion. Without being positively 
pretty, she has one of the most attractive counte- 
nances T ever beheld ; and without ever uttering 

a sentence that could be quoted for its wit, 

t 

'always contrives to say the thing that is most 

f to the purpose, or best calculated to give a 
^ lively turn to the nothings of human life. She 
has no brilliancy, either of complexion or con- 
versation : her voice is low, her demeanour in- 



72 THE OPERA. 

dolent ; yet with all this subdued tranquillity of 
air, she is more piquante than many a professed 
beauty. I do not wonder that Cardigan ad- 
mires her ; — she wants dignity for a duchess, 
perhaps, — but would be incomparable as a wife. 

On the whole, there was something particu- 
larly pleasing in Mrs. Fitzgerald's coterie, al- 
though I should be puzzled to point out the 
nature of the attraction. In the first place, it 
was limited, and therefore select; the guests 
appeared to understand each other, to be distin- 
guishable as much by their high breeding as 
their high rank, and to be on good terms with 
their hostess and themselves. I should think 
Mrs. Fitzgerald made a very valuable use of her 
stJ^eet-door, 

The ball at Countess Pignatelli's was a much 
finer affair, but far less pleasant. It was a 
fashionable mob, comprehending all the " any 
bodies" in town. I passed one half the night 
jostling on the staircase, and the other half 
gasping on the balcony. The ball-rooms of 



THE OPERA. 



73 



London are so much less lofty than those of 
Paris, and it is so much the custom to illuminate 
them with lamps, that a better arrangement of 
the ventilation is much to be desired. I was 
anxious to meet the Duke of Cardigan at this 
ball: intending to profit by the facilities 
afforded to a shy man by talking in a crowd, in 
order to ask him a few desultory questions 
concerning Cecilia and her friend. Lady Neville, 
to both of whom I have more than once heard 
him alkide. But it seems he never mixes in 
these large parties; an act of discrimination 
which I highly applaud.— I never— 

How welcome an interruption ! Sir Herbert 
Manningfield himself; just as the duke had 
begun to alarm me with prognostications that he 
would not come to town this year ! 

He is certainly very much broken since he 
visited Austria ; every moment he reminded me 
of my father, whose wounds and infirmities 
render him so much more decrepit. My father. 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE OPERA. 

is not yet fifty ; Sir Herbert nearly ten years his 
senior ; but till now he never looked his age. It 
struck me that there was something peculiarly 
mournful in his manner of contemplating me. 
Of which of the ill-fated ones do I remind him ? 
of Florentia, — of Wrottesley, — of Randolph ? — 
How fortunate that Providence affixes a limit to 
our sorrows and reminiscences ! Notwithstand- 
ino' the bitter afflictions of his early manhood, 
Manningfield has passed ten happy years in 
the society of one of the most charming women 
in England ; and probably remembers the object 
of his first ill-omened attachment only as one of 
the visions which flitted round his youthful 
fancy. He insisted that I should return with 
him to the hotel and be presented to Lady Har- 
riet ; and the favourable sketch I had received of 
her was fully justified. Among other questions, 
she inquired whether her nephew had introduced 
me to the acquaintance of her relations, the 
Fitzgeralds ) probably from an anxiety to ascer- 



THE OPERA. 75 

tain whether the rumours relative to his attach- 
ment have any foundation. But as my opinions 
on the subject are purely conjectural, I was very 
guarded in my reply. 

My private engagements have increased so 
much, that I rarely visit my opera-box. The 

performances, I hear, have been below medio- 
crity, and wholly uninteresting except to those 
who have attractions there such as I have never 
found, nor wished to find, in such a spot. Next 
week, however, the Silvestra arrives, and with 
my usual negligence I have omitted to secure a 
place ; her debut being cunningly fixed for the 
benefit-night of the manager, I have, of course, 
no claim to my own box. The duke, who is a 
determined amateur, will probably admit me of 
his party. They talk from one end of Europe to 
the other of the apathy and insensibility of the 
English J but I have never witnessed, and do not 
believe there can exist, in any continental city, 
a more furious enthusiasm for the musical art 
than appears to inflame the good people of 

E 2 



76 THE OPERA. 

London just now. Every print shop is full of 
portraits of La Silvestra, every literary periodi- 
cal is headed v^ith her name. 

" You will find, when you grow more experi- 
enced in our little harmless lunacies," said Miss 
Fitzgerald, as we were sitting together in a win- 
dow nook at Countess Pignatelli's ball, " that 
these epidemics never infect the metropolis after 
Easter. When the gallant vessel of folly is 
fairly launched upon its sea of pleasure, it 
glides along with smoothness and dignity; it 
is only at the outset of the voyage we are apt 
to toss about with a little irregularity. After 
Easter we should be ashamed to appear half so 
much enchanted with any reality, as we have 
been with the mere promise of this Sardinian 
syren. After Easter we shall forget her very 
name, — yawn during her most elaborate ca- 
dence, — and only talk the louder in our boxes 
for her * O, patria.* But you must forgive us 
for putting ourselves into a frenzy of rapture 
just now. Consider we have had nothing yet 



THE OPERA. 77 

by way of a season, except a few stupid par- 
ties to which the absence of the great world 
has enabled us to admit all our intimate friends ! 
Can I say any thing more disparaging ?" — > 

Miss Fitzgerald has a fair apology for occa- 
sionally indulging in playful satire on the follies 
of the day, for she never individualizes ; I never 
saw a woman so little addicted to the use of 
proper names. Whether for praise or blame, 
she deals with classes and not persons. 

March 29. — I have just been sitting an hour 
at Sir Herbert's — not tvith Sir Herbert, but with 
Lady Harriet ; whom I think I shall quote for 
the future as my beau ideal of all that is lovely 
and lady-like in woman. It seems she does not 
usually admit morning visitors ; and the name 
of Maldyn must have lost its evil influence, 
since to that I am indebted for my welcome into 
her family circle. Among the beautiful chil- 
dren to whom she devotes so much of her time 
and attention, there is a fine bluff little fellow of 
five years old, named Randolph ; and an elegant 



78 . THE OPERA. 

little girl some two years older, whom they call 
Florence ; both of whom have an especial claim 
on my affection. I am fond of children, and 
yet these are the first I have held upon my knee 
since my arrival in England. Here, where even 
grown-people are shy and reserved, their off- 
spring are reared with an unconquerable aver- 
sion to strangers ; but the little Manningfields, 
retaining all the simplicity of their age, are com- 
panionable and intelligent. 

AprilSd. — This is destined to be 2ijour defete ! 
— I woke to welcome the first brilliant sunshine 
which has greeted me since my arrival in this 
country, and a packet of letters from my father, 
bringing nothing but good tidings ! He writes 
in the highest health and spirits, and owns he is 
beginning to find Elzstein so dull, that I may 
look for his arrival before the close of the summer. 
This is indeed a satisfactory announcement ; for 
all my misgivings relative to Cecilia must be, 
and shall be, terminated previous to that time. 
I have many, very many, friends to whom I long 



THE OPERA. 79 

to introduce my father, and whom I know he 
would like : Mrs. Fitzgerald and her daughter, 
the Duke of Cardigan, Bagot, — even Brabazon 
and Ugo Pignatelli would amuse him by their 
absurdities, for their class is totally new since 
his day. There is no order of society which 
changes so often and so completely in its aspect 
as that of the fops. Your miser always looks 
the miser, — your arrogant man — the arrogant ; 
but a fop of forty years ago was a maccaroni, — 
of thirty, a buck, — of twenty, a dandy, — of ten, 
an exquisite, — of to-day, an exclusive. What 
folly will come next ? 

My father's letters have produced such an 
exhilarating effect upon my feelings, that I can 
almost sympathise in the paroxysm of delight 
with which Gustavus sits contemplating the ap- 
proach of to-night; — the momentous night of 
La Silvestra's first appearance! She arrived 
two days ago, and has not yet been espied, even 
from the end of a telescope ; though hundreds 
were on the watch to catch a glimpse of her 



80 THE OPERA. 

on her way to rehearsal. Brabazon protests she 
has never left her house; but sent her French 
maid to walk through the part of Desdemona, 
and learn the capabilities of the company upon 
which she has been engrafted at the price of 
four thousand guineas. 

I am just returned from the Park ; and it was 
really amusing to hear the same words hang- 
ing on every lip, young and old, — male and 
female. — " Yes ! actually arrived — in excellent 
voice, — two days to recover the effects of her 
journey, — ^the Duke of Cardigan in waiting to 
hand her from her travelling carriage, — the king 
sending every morning to know how she has 
rested." " Not a box to be had ; — I secured 
mine three weeks ago, — a few stalls still on sale 
at five o;uineas a-head." " We dine at six 
o'' clock, that our carriage may get early into the 
string; there will be a terrible smash at the 
door." " Six? — / am going home to dinner 
directly.'* " I have not felt my curiosity so 
much excited for years." " Nor I." " Nor I.*' 



THE OPERA. 81 

And I too must hasten to dinner; for the 
duke has given me a place in his box, and I 
have promised Miss Fitzgerald not to be 
late. 



e3 



82 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER V. 



My only love sprung from my only hate ? 
Too early seen unknown — and known too late ! 

Romeo and Juliet. 



Chapel Street J April 4. — Am I even now 
awake? — Surely I have been dreaming ! — 

Last night I did not manage to get to the 
theatre till the first act of Otello was half over ; 
for just before dinner Bagot came in, so bewil- 
dered and miserable, that I could not withhold 
my hospitality. I had to listen to his indignant 
account of Lady Clara's rejection of his hand, 
and his own threatened renouncement of his 
native country, before I could even venture to 
name the Opera, He assured me that he should 



THE OPERA. 83 

return to Paris next week ; and as Easter falls 
within ten days, when it is the custom for all 
London to retire to the country for the holidays, 
whether holidays or not, I promised to accom- 
pany him. 

On reaching the Duke of Cardigan's box, I 
found it so fully occupied that a dark nook 
next the curtain, from whence I could neither 
see nor be seen, was the only place into which 
I could niche myself. Lady Harriet Manning- 
field and Miss Fitzgerald filled the front 
seats ; and her mother, the duke himself. Lord 
Fieldingham, and Lord Brabazon, sufficed to 
crowd the box ; so that though convinced of the 
impossibility of obtaining breathingroom in the 
house, and the necessity of returning home 
without obtaining a glimpse of the syren of the 
night, I was about to retire. But Constance 
Fitzgerald turned round, with a smile and a 
bow that rendered retreat very difficult ; and 
Cardigan good naturedly laid his hand on my 
arm, and insisted on my remaining. 



84 THE OPERA. 

" If you cannot see, you can hear," said he; 
" so be still, like a good creature, and do not 
mar this beautiful j^V/a/e with the opening and 
shutting of doors." 

The duke, in a quiet way of his own, is very 
peremptory; but tempers his despotism with 
«o gentlemanly a deportment, that every one 
feels disposed to submission. Leaning, therefore^ 
against the wall in my obscure corner, I testi- 
fied my respect to the death-hke stillness with 
which the house was preparing itself for " V error 
d'uninfelicef' and when the voice which was 
to give utterance on this occasion to that touch- 
ing apostrophe swelled forth from the plaintive 
tenderness of its first faint notes, I had no 
longer any inclination to move. Like a " stream 
of rich distilled perfumes," it seemed to pour a 
soothing tranquillity into the depths of the 
lieart. If pity and terror be indeed the strongest 
elements of human interest, Silvestra possesses 
a miraculous control over her audience. The 
hoarse echo of the chorus, with its stern sym- 



-THE OPERA. 85 

pathy, seemed the involuntary tribute of its com- 
passion towards her afflicting appeal. " Se il 
padre m* ahhandojia ! '* — ^Yes ! the wrath, — the 
renouncement of a father are indeed terrible ! 
Were mine to turn from me with the obduracy 
of Brahantioj I feel that my own deep agony of 
soul must equal hers : — when a parent remains 
unrelenting, " da chi sperar pieta ? " — 

While these feelings were struggling in. my 
soul with all that tremour of emotion which 
the eloquence of music commands even more 
immediately than that of argument, my eyes 
were involuntarily directed towards an opposite 
box, whose inmates appeared somewhat less ex- 
cited than myself by the interest of the moment. 
On glancing rapidly round the living walls of 
the crowded theatre, I could perceive that eveiy 
eye was fixed upon the stage; — many with 
tears, all with intensity; — and that every ear 
was luxuriating in those pathetic accents which 
seemed to o-ush from the innermost warmth of 
a tender and feeling heart. Hundreds of beau- 



S6 THE OPERA. 

tiful women were leaning forward towards the 
stage; careless for once of their own appear- 
ance, or satisfied that every mind in that vast 
assemblage was inextricably entangled in the 
attractions of a single object. But in the box 
to which I have alluded, there sat two persons, 
who seemed to shrink from the sound and sight 
of Desdemona's sorrows. That one of them 
could be thus hard of heart, sui-prised me no 
longer when my glass informed me it was the 
Marchioness of Wroughton ; but what was the 
excitement of my feelings when in the other, 
who was hiding her face on the back of her 
chair, I thought I could discern the graceful 
beauty of my own Cecilia ! — Yes ! by all that 
was hateful ! — the figure of Anastasio leaning 
over her and comforting her, at once confirmed 
the startling fact that Mrs. Perceval was before 
me ! — From that moment the tones of Silvestra's 
voice were breathed in vain. — 

The curtain fell. Lady Harriet and Miss 

Fitzgerald were busy with the task of repressing 



THE OPERA. 87 

their tears, and assuming that hollow conven- 
tional smile which is an inevitable tribute to 
the tyranny of fashionable society, and Cardi- 
gan and Mrs. Fitzgerald were deeply interested 
by the mutual expression of their intense grati- 
fication ; while, still hidden behind Brabazon and 
Lord Fieldingham, I was able to muse in silence, 
and give my attention to the dialogue that en- 
sued between them. 

*' So PignatelU is come back ; — surely I see 
him yonder in Lady Wroughton's box?" 

" Yes ! — the Nevilles arrived this morning. 
What an idiot to cage himself yonder with those 
chattering women! Countess Pignatelh's box 
commands, in my opinion, the most advantageous 
view of the stage to be had in the house.'' 

'^ The box commands the stage ; but I dare- 
say ''Stasio is apprehensive the countess may 
command him ; and what is to be done if she 
should issue a prohibition against his new 
passion? ^ Se la madre m'ahbandona,' — poor 
fellow, — would be a very unwelcome edition of 
his finale." 



88 THE OPERA* 

'' Bah ! — the countess adores him ! — and no 
wonder, for he is the most buoyant, cheerful, 
amiable, aimahle creature on earth, — and Ugo 
a miracle of empty egotism." 

'* Umph ! is he making way with Lady Emily, 
that you are so virulent ? " 

" But what says Lady Wroughton to the 
business ? '' inquired Lord Fieldingham, evading 
this home thrust. 

"Never mind what she says ; for twenty thou- 
sand to one it is the very reverse of what she 
thinks—" 

" And feels ? " 

" Feel ! Is such a molten image of refined 
gold capable of feeling ? One would think not, 
by the nature of the first marriage into which 
she thumb-screwed her daughter. I am per- 
suaded Lady Wroughton borrowed the Arma- 
dian instruments of torture from the Tower ar- 
moury, to compel Cecilia to marry Perceval. 
Never was there so strange a mismatchment ! " 

" A woman who wittingly advises her daughte 



THE OPERA. 89 

to marry a libertine — a coarse roite such as 
Perceval — forfeits all claim to the respect due 
to her sex. I own I am no friend of Lady 
Wrough ton's, and am therefore sincerely sorry 
for Anastasio." 

" I am more sorry for Countess Pignatelli/' 
observed Brabazon. " She has always lived on 
such happy terms with her sons ; and Lady 
Wroughton is so inveterate a worker of mis- 
chief, that there is an end now to their domestic 
union.'' 

" True ! Lady Neville's affair was passager, 
he could not marry her ; — and the countess is 
too much a woman of the world not to have fore- 
seen a speedy termination to the business." 

" I suppose he will many little Perceval ? — 
She loses her jointure, I find, by a second con- 
nexion; but old Pignatelh can do something 
for his son. He has splendid estates in Ca- 
labria, and Lady Wroughton is a perfect Gol- 
conda.**' 

" Who is to marry Mrs. Perceval ? " said the 



90 THE OPERA. 

duke, turning round. " He must be a bold 
man. — Oh ! Maldyn ! are you there still? — You 
have been so paralyzed into silence by the en- 
chantments of La Silvestra, that I fancied you 
had left us, — or I should not have taken the 
liberty of abusing your cousin." 

A disagreeable consciousness swelled in my 
throat, and I could not utter a syllable. But I 
distinctly heard Mrs. Fitzgerald inquire of Car- 
digan, " His cousin ? — Is Mrs. Perceval so near 
a relative of Mr. Maldyn ? "— 

" She is the late Lord Abbotscourt's only 
daughter," was his whispered reply. " Surely, 
you recollect poor Wroughton's marriage with 
the widow ? — It is not above three years ago.'' 

" Very true ! I remember it all now. It was 
said, she hastened Mrs. Perceval's foolish 
match, because Lord Wroughton had an objec- 
tion to a grown-up daughter in evidence of the 
antiquity of his bride." 

" In this instance, I should think the bride 
herself far more seriously objectionable." 



THE OPERA* 91 

I heard no more. — My perturbation compelled 
me to leave the box. — 

And this, then, is my destiny ! — Thus it is I 
have been irresistibly impelled to w^ork out the 
fatal fortunes of my race. — Poor Wrottesley ! — 
it was no mental delusion which hurried him to 

w 

the grave. — 

That I — whose life has been passed in the 
remote seclusion of an Austrian village, as if 
for the purpose of removing me beyond the 
chances of such a collision — who seemed in the 
obscurity of an Hanoverian college to be secure 
from the very possibility of an attachment to the 
daughter of that -woman — that fiend — that I 
should have been driven by the scourge of des- 
tiny into my pre-appointed pit of perdition ! 
What madness hurried me to Paris? — What 
infatuation induced me to withhold the secret 
of my attachment from my father ? — He might 
have recognised the name of Perceval — and 
warned me. Yet no ! to this very hour he is 
ignorant of the recent fortunes of Katharine 



92 THE OPERA. 

Darley, and his brother's heiress. He told me 
he concluded the girl had met with some other 
alliance, — but he mentioned no name. No, no ! 
my father knew nothing of Cecilia ! — Great 
God ! — how would he have recoiled from the 
mere hint of my passion for the child of his 
enemy, — of the persecutress of my unhappy 
mother ! 

What will become of me! — My frame seems 
convulsed by a mingled feeling of loathing and 
love ; — my soul bewilders itself by a reviewal 
of all the horrible incongruities of such a pas- 
sion. Thank Heaven ! she has spared herself 
these torments. — Yes ! there was a special Pro- 
vidence in the levity which induced her attach- 
ment to Anastasio, — her forgetfulness of me. 
And yet so vile a breach of faith ! — Cecilia ! 
Cecilia ! — why did we ever meet ! 

I am so fevered — so restless — so irritable— 
so absorbed by this fatal subject; so anxious to 
banish it from my mind ! — Yet, how to evade a 
reflection which connects itself with past, pre- 



THE OPERA. 93 

sent, future, — with all my hopes, — with all my 
terrors ! 

I must return to my father ! — I will set off 
this very night for Elzstein. He alone can sym- 
pathize in my distress. — Sympathize ? Oh ! no, 
no ! he will regard as monstrous and unnatural 
the sorrows arising from such a source. *^ Se il 
padre nCahhandona ! '' — were not those words 
prophetic ? — 

How shall I escape the importunities of this 
day ! — Poor Adelberg, who perceives that I have 
not closed my eyes, and sees that I am deeply 
afilicted, was obliged to check the raptures 
touchins: La Silvestra with which he bec^an to 
greet me at the breakfast-table ; and dares not 
interrogate me. Gladly would I avail myself of 
the sympathy of that honest heart, even at the 
risk of giving it pain; but I cannot resolve to 
violate the bond of our family secrets. — They 
are of too terrible a nature to be lightly con- 
fided. — 1 have ordered my horse, to ride out of 
town, in the hope of . Interrupted ! — Have 



94 THE OPERA, 

they presumed to admit visitors, after my pro- 
hibition ? — ■ 

Ebene was right ; I have no business to close 
my door against my father's friend. Sir Her- 
bert Manningfield has at all times a right and 
title to admittance; — and how kind was the 
motive of his visit on this occasion ! — 

" Lady Harriet tells me that your cousin, 
Mrs. Perceval, is returned to England, and that 
she was at the Opera last night," said he, shortly 
after he had seated himself. 

I bowed affirmatively, for I was too much 
agitated to speak. 

" You must forgive my officiousness, my 
dear Adrian," he continued ; " but your father's 
old friend feels he has some right to pester 
you with advice. Family circumstances of a 
peculiar nature" (Uttle does Sir Herbert imagine 
how familiar I have become with their details) 
" have tended to place an insuperable barrier be- 
tween Abbotscourt and his brother''s widow. It 
was unnecessary to forewarn you of this, so 



THE OPERA. 95 

long as Lady Wroughton alone afforded the pos- 
sibility of renewing this inauspicious connexion. 
She is not only too repellent to interest you in 
her cause, but has been too much irritated by 
your father's refusal to listen to her overtures of 
reconcihation, to dream of seeking your 'ac- 
quaintance. But the case is very different with 
her daughter ; and as your good father in his 
hermitage is totally ignorant of the nature of 
her attractions, and the freedom of her hand^ 
and is therefore incapable of warning you 
against them, I have taken the privilege of age 
and friendship, to tell you that you will do well 
to avoid Mrs. Perceval's society.'* 

Again I bowed, and again with a trembling 
heart. I had not courage to break silence. 

« I am happy to find from Cardigan," con- 
tinued the general, with a smile, " that this 
fascinating little personage has engagements of 
her own which diminish half your danger. Still 
I could wish that you would not adventure 
so much as a partiality towards her ; as to any 



96 THE OPERA. 

nearer connexion, I would rather see a son of 
my own in his grave, than married to Per- 
ceval's widow. By the way, how does your 
fancy stand towards Lady Harriet's friend, my 
niece, Constantia Fitzgerald ? " 

" I will tell you when she is Duchess of Car- 
digan," said 1, glad that he had adopted a topic 
of general conversation. 

'' Duchess ? — pho, pho ! You are not so blind 
as to accept that view of the case ? — You do 
not really believe the report of their engage- 
ment ? " 

" Why not ? — Miss Fitzgerald is young, 
charming, rich, and of a noble house. What 
more does Lady Harriet require for her nephew ? " 

" Not half so much, I assure you ; she would 
be content with Constance for her own sake. 
But unfortunately those two halves of the An- 
drogynes were not born to match; and Harriet 
would therefore be content to bestow one of the 
most delightful girls in England on the son of 
her husband's oldest friend. — What say you, 
Adrian ? " 



THE OPERA. 97 

'' Regarding Miss Fitzgerald as the object of 
the Duke of Cardigan's attachment, I have 
never considered her in any other light." 

" Well, make haste and consider her in that 
of one of the best of daughters, w^ho will cer- 
tainly make one of the best of wives, or you 
may chance to be too late ; for I find my sister 
is as much perplexed by the pretensions of Con- 
stantia's suitors, as ever Penelope was with her 
own. I will answer for your having Mrs. 
Fitzgerald's consent, and your father's ; it only 
remains for you to obtain your own." 

" And that of your niece," said I, attempting 
to give as courteous a turn to the business as 
my disinclination for raillery at such a moment 
would permit, " but unfortunately I have no 
time for so hopeless an enterprise ; for I have 
made up my mind to return to Austria till it is 
my father's pleasure to visit this country. And 
thus you see, my dear sir, I shall avoid all 
danger from the society of Mrs. Perceval." 
" I understood from Abbotscourt, that Baron 

VOL. II. F 



98 .THE OPERA. 

Adelberg was your guest for the season ; and 
that he was dehghted to observe the first fruits 
of your prosperity bestowed in evincing your 
gratitude towards the son of one of his most es- 
teemed friends. " 

" I have taken this house till the month of 
July ; and there will be no difficulty in keeping 
up the establishment, so as to avoid interfering 
with Adelberg's engagements. He can remain 
here, en maitre, till the end of my term." 

" Can and luill are very different things,*' 
said Sir Herbert ; ^' you would have some diffi- 
culty, I suspect, in persuading a high-spirited 
young man like your friend, to accept such an 
obligation. Remember you have not a Harry 
Crawford to deal with." 

" I thank you for so just an estimate of his 
character," said I. '' Gustavus is indeed an ho- 
nourable fellow ; but our friendship warrants me 
in believing that he will act in this instance so 

as to " 

" Indulge you in a momentary caprice ? — No, 



.THE OPERA. 99 

no, I hope not," said Manningfield, laughing, 
'^ You have invited him to be your guest, and I 
trust he will release you from no single jot of 
the courtesy becoming a hospitable host. I shall 
advise him to insist on your remaining to do the 
honours of England to him ; and chiefly because 
I know that your father would be displeased by 
any change of your arrangements." 

At this moment the Duke of Cardigan entered 
the room, and gave a new turn to the conversa- 
tion by informing us he was just come from 
offering his homage to La Silvestra. 

" Colonel Sandoni has brought me letters 
from many of my most esteemed Italian friends,'' 
said he, " and I have of course marked my 
respect for their introduction by inviting her to 
my ball this evening." 

"And she comes?" I inquired listlessly. 

" I hope so ; but I suspect her motive for de- 
clining to give me a positive answer, was a dread 
of the crowd which is always attracted by the 
expectation of her appearance in society. She 

f2 



100 The opera. 

would rather content herself with my fete in 
a common-place way, than brave the stare of 
the hundreds who would be pressing for an 
invitation were it decided that she is to be of 
the party." 

" What absurdity ! — what impertinence !" 
cried the general, abruptly. " As if the Duke 
of Cardigan's circle, in its very worst aspect, 
were not immeasurably above the pretensions of 
such a person ! — How I do detest the modern 
custom of admitting these mountebanks into 

society !" 

" In a general point of view, I agree with 
you," replied the duke ; " but it is impossible to 
subject such a miracle of nature as La Silvestra 
to ordinary rules. Besides, she is of irreproach- 
able conduct, and honourable parentage. Her 
father, by whom she is always accompanied, is 
a veteran in the service of the King of Sardinia." 

"Well, I shall come and take a peep at this 
miracle of nature," said Sir Herbert, rising to 
depart, " and so will Maldyn; for I hereby lay 



THE OPERA. 101 

my hands upon him to dine with Lady Harriet, 
and we will all visit you together. Thank 
Heaven ! — (since your friend Baron Adelberg, the 
enthusiast, is out of the way)— thank Heaven ! 
I was bom with no passion for music ! — To have 
one's soul trickled into folly through one's ears, 
is a grievous compromise of human dignity." 



102 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER VI. 



I never wish to see tbee more, though I am still thy friend ; 
I never wish to see thee more, since dearer ties must end. 

Bayley. 



To what eventful destiny am I reserved ? 
What new marvels are about to perplex a career 
hitherto so monotonously tame ? — Wherever I 
turn, my path is beset with difficulties, — my 
heart with vexations ! — 

It required the exercise of all my courage to 
run the chance of meeting Cecilia and her new 
admirer at this unlucky entertainment. I 
felt that the ball-room at Cardigan House was 
no place for the scene which must arise from 



THE OPERA, 103 

such an encounter; but after making a thou- 
sand incoherent assertions to Sir Herbert of my 
promise to spend the evening with Bagot, who 
is seriously indisposed, I found myself compelled 
to give my arm to Miss Fitzgerald, who with 
her mother dined at Lady Harriet's, and accom- 
pany them to the ball. 

" My very dear Adrian," said the good old 
man, " do not fancy you can persuade me that 
Sir Henry Bagot will be the better for your 
company, now, at twelve o'clock at night. If 
your friend be really an invalid, leave him alone 
to go to sleep ; — your gossiping would only in- 
crease his fever." 

A smile from Constantia was still more 
peremptoiy than Sir Herbert's disposal of me. 
" Did you think of playing truant to-night ? " 
said she, as I conducted her up the grand stair- 
case at Cardigan House. " Is there a human 
being sufficiently philosophical to resist the 
temptation of seeing Silvestra dance a quadrille ? 
—a sight not to be had for money, and the more 



104 THE OPERA. 

delightful because her real excellence is of a 
diametrically opposite kind ! — Oh, fie ! Mr. 
Maldyn ; I thought you had a more becoming 
sense of the claims of fashion." We were 
joined at the head of the stairs by Lord Field- 
ingham with Lady Emily Willesden leaning on 
his arm ; nor could that sarcastic little beauty 
allow poor Constance to pass without paying 
the penalty of having detained the noble secre- 
tary in the Duke of Cardigan's box the pre- 
ceding night. 

" I never saw the duke in such spirits," 
said she, imputing to Miss Fitzgerald a design 
on our host similar to those entertained by 
the Lady Charlevilles. " He is waiting the 
arrival of Silvestra in a perfect ecstacy of en^ 
thusiasm ; and has ordered a chair to be pre- 
pared for her old father, Colonel Sandoni, at 
the head of the ball-room, where no seats are 
allowed. After all, I prophesy we shall have a 
Sardinian duchess : Cardigan is now madly in 
love, and for the first time." 



.THE OPERA. 105 

"Not, however, for the last,'* replied Miss 
Fitzgerald, smiUng at her vehemence. " If 
I know any thing of the duke, he will repeat 
the mania (by particular desire) for every de- 
butante of tolerable merit, whether in the mu- 
sical world or the world of fashion, for twenty 
years to come. May he give as good a ball in 
honour of each of his new passions, as this 
seems likely to be !" — she continued, as we en- 
tered the dancing-room together ; and its blaze 
of light and burst of music seemed to rouse all 
the exhilaration of youthful gladness in her 
heart. 

And mine? — At every step — its perturbation 
— ^its agony increased; till, having glanced round 
the room, I ascertained that neither Lady 
Wroughton (how my hand recoils from tracing 
that name), Ceci — Mrs. Perceval, nor the Pig- 
natellis, were numbered in its brilliant throns:. 
As we traversed the space allotted to the dancers, 
the duke followed. 

*' Pray, oblige me by beginning the waltz," 

F 3 



106 THE OPERA, 

said he, in a hurried manner, to Miss Fitzge- 
rald ; " for I cannot quit my post. It would 
be scarcely courteous to leave the Sandonis to 
make their entree alone into such a con- 
course of strangers ; so I must not think of 
dancing till Silvestra makes her appear- 
ance." And, with a hasty signal to the or- 
chestra, he quitted the room; leaving Con- 
stantia and myself so ostensibly placed, that 
with all my disinclination for such a measure, 
i could not avoid offering myself as her partner. 
Nor could she refuse the proposal. In a mo- 
ment we were both as eagerly engaged in the 
dance as if neither of us had a care on earth ! 

After a few rounds, however, she com- 
plained of fatigue, and proposed that we should 
go in search of Mrs. Fitzgerald, whom we had 
left with Lady Harriet in the gallery ; when, just 
as I was making way for her through the 
circle which sun-ounded the waltzers, I per- 
ceived Cecilia standing breathless with amaze- 
ment — her cheeks as pale as death — and her 



THE OPERA, 107 

eyes fixed on myself. A few paces further was 
Anastasio, engaged in eager conversation with 
Adelberg; chattering and laughing with his 
usual glee. " Le voila !" cried Gustavus, as I 
advanced ; when, instead of shrinking from me, 
as I anticipated, with the shame of detected 
treachery, Pignatelli pressed forward with so 
bright and warm a smile of gratulation, and 
extended his hand with such spontaneous, cor- 
diality, that for my life I could not withhold 
my own. — No ! it would have been impossible 
for a man who had injured me to approach me 
with such ingenuous frankness ! — 

" Un moment /" said he, detaining me, as I 
attempted to pursue my way to the^ door ; '' do 
spare me a minute, while I congratulate myself 
that the age of miracles is not wholly'passed ! 
Here have I been writing letter after letter to 
the worshipful Herr Adrian von Elzstein, all of 
which have been duly returned to me, at the 
cost of some dozens of ducats, by the matter-of- 
fact postmasters of Gottingen ; — while the ve- 



108 THE OPERA. 

ritahle Amphytrion turns out to be the new man 
announced to me by my brother Ugo as one of 
the popular darlings of the London season ! 
Tell me," said he, importunately following 
when he saw me resolved to conduct Miss Fitz- 
gerald to the gallery ; " tell me, my dear fel- 
low, whether Adelberg has been making a jest 
of me ; or am I really to inscribe you in the 
tablet of my affections as ' Mr. Maldyn,* 
and an Englishman ? — ^What, in the name of 
wonder, induced you to impose upon us all at 
Paris in the way you did ?" — 

" A truant college-student is not very scrupu- 
lous in his modes of seeking amusement," I re- 
plied, coldly ; for I was by no means anxious 
that my fair companion should become initiated 
into the secret of my follies. 

" Gustavus was as much a truant as yourself; 
yet he attempted no masquerade." 

" Perhaps I have a less indulgent father 
than Baron Adelberg ; for it is certain I was 
only anxious to avoid the possibility of giving 



THE OPERA. 109 

pain to mine by some chance rumour of my 
foolish adventures. At least I am no impostor ; 
and whenever you please, I will furnish you 
with sufficient proofs that I was for the nonce, 
and am in reality, Adrian von Elzstein.'^ 

" You may be ' von Teufel/ for aught I care," 
was Anastasio's reply, touching me affection- 
ately on the shoulder ; and not seeing, or not 
choosing to see, the air of reserve I strove to as- 
sume towards him. " But make haste and get 
rid of your partner," he continued, whispering 
in my ear; "and come and surprise her; she 
has not the least idea of all these strange 



occurrences." 



"Surprise her! — she has not!" — as if there 
were but one woman on earth in his estimation ! 
And yet I do not wonder he found it difficult 
in my presence to name Cecilia. 

I know not how much Miss Fitzgerald might 
chance to overhear of this indecorous and ill- 
timed colloquy, but she now expressed herself 
anxious that we should hasten towards the gal- 



110 THE OPERA. 

lery ; which we entered j ust as the whole as- 
sembly was crowding to its further extremity. 
There was so great a press, indeed, towards the 
outer door, that we could not so much as catch 
a glimpse of Lady Harriet and her companion ; 
but I discerned above the throng, the towering 
person of the Duke of Cardigan, evidently striv- 
ing to make way through the mass for some 
lady leaning on his arm, to whom he occasionally 
addressed himself with the most gracious assi- 
duity. — It could only be La Silvestra ! — 

" Let us stand aside," said I listlessly to Con- 
stantia ; " we shall see this wonder as she passes 
on to the ball-room/' And to my surprise, I 
noticed that many of the guests, in the eager- 
ness of curiosity, had jumped on the sofas 
and fauteuils to reward their ill-breeding with a 
better view of the stranger. 

" Who would be a lion ! — to become the inno- 
cent cause of so much impertinence among the 
fine ladies of the land !"— exclaimed Miss Fitz- 
gerald. But I was prevented the necessity of 



THE OPEHA. Ill 

reply by the approach of the crowd and its half- 
fainting object ; and the duke chancing to espy 
my tall ungainly figure, beckoned me to follow 
him. 

" Maldyn !" cried he, over the heads of his 
importunate guests. " We are going to dance ; 
ask Constantia to be our vis-a-vis/* 

What was to be done ? — Nothing, alas ! but to 
comply, — with the hope of arriving too late. wVs 
we entered the ball-room. Miss Fitzgerald, who 
seemed vexed by the whole affair, rallied her 
spirits to observe that the duke was too absolute 
to be gainsayed. " I trust, however,'^ said she, 
"that my uncle may be looking on; for Sir 
Herbert will certainly resent the bad example 
his grace is pleased to show on this occasion ; 
and which you and I are not particularly pleased 
to follow. But pray let me hear your verdict on 
the beauty of La Silvestra V 

1 turned towards the dancers, — the ropes were 
fixed, — the crowd cleared, — and the orchestra 
immediately struck up a contre danse, selected 



112 THE OPERA. 

from an opera of the prima donna's composi- 
tion ; when the graceful woman who had been 
occupied in conversation with the Duke of Car- 
digan, turning suddenly towards us, displayed 
to my amazed observation — ^the countenance of 
Stephanine Haslinger ! 

The blood rushed to my face, — I grew almost 
dizzy with the shock, — I even forgot for a mo- 
ment that Cecilia — my CeciHa — was present in 
that chamber ! Yet not the slightest change of 
countenance betrayed Stephanine's recognition 
of myself; and she went through the first figure 
with an air of the most easy and graceful self- 
possession. — Oh ! wondrous art of woman-kind ! 
— Could any thing surpass this display of presence 
of mind, at such a startling crisis, — at the de- 
tection of so monstrous an imposture ? — Was I, 
after all, in my right senses ? — Could the aerial 
being on whom I was gazing, — brilliant with 
diamonds, and soft and diffident in her demea- 
nour, — be in truth the wild animated girl, 
arrayed in a bodice of scarlet serge and half a 



THE OPERA. 113 

dozen ample kersey petticoats, with whom I had 
last parted by moonlight on the banks of the 
brawling Elz ? — Were those mellifluous accents 
which had recently so melted my soul, the same 
whose coarse Lower-Austrian dialect had 
breathed, that night, a tender farewell to her 
" Schatzerl ?"— Was that fairy foot in its sandal of 
silvery satin, the same which had plodded away in 
its buckled hob-nailed shoe, on the announcement 
of Brother Remigius's approaching snuffle ?— 
Impossible ! — I scoffed at myself for having even 
conceived such an hypothesis; till again the 
rich smile of Stephanine steamed full on my 
face ; and her deep blue eye rested upon mine 
with an expression which I had noticed too 
often and too closely to admit of mistake. 
, And what must have been her own feelings 
at such a moment? — However powerful the 
dissimulation which enabled her to disguise her 
emotions, surely Stephanine must have been 
deeply touched by meeting in so triumphant an 
hour the man, — ^but let me not venture to con- 



114 THE OPERA, 

jecture the nature of a woman's feelings ! — I will 
only presume to wonder what might be the train 
of association by which she accounted for the ap- 
pearance of Baron Maldyn — of her Adrian — in 
the illuminated ball-room of the Duke of Cardi- 
gan, a thousand miles from his ancient hermitage. 

" She is very lovely/' observed Miss Fitz- 
gerald, when she was for a moment hidden 
from our view by the figure of the dance, " and 
her step is that of a nymph. I never saw a 
person so decidedly graceful ; every movement, 
every attitude, would form a study. I can no 
longer wonder at our cousin of Buckingham's 
infatuation, for I am half in love with her 
myself; the duke must present us to her when 
the quadrille is over." 

" Heaven forbid I" was my secret ejaculation. 
" That would be a trial of sang-froid beyond 
even the abilities of Stephanine." 

But on this head I had nothing to fear. 
Scarcely was the set at an end, when a general 
rush took place, and in a moment fifty persons 



THE OPERA. 115 

divided us from the Duke of Cardigan and his 
partner; while Adelberg, Ugo Pignatelli, and 
Lady Sophia Charleville hastened to accost us, 
as if we derived some new and extraordinary 
charm from our temporary contact with Made- 
moiselle Sandoni. 

" She is wondrously beautiful ! — Is her voice 
as sweet in speaking as in singing?" eagerly 
inquired Gustavus. " I have been standing 
watching her with Mrs. Perceval, and " 

Involuntarily I looked round, to see if Cecilia 
were still standing near me ; and Adelberg im- 
mediately replied to the gesture. " No, she is 
not here ; — she is overcome by the heat of the 
room, and gone away. I think I heard her 
desire Pignatelli to look for the carriage." 

What would I have given at that moment to 
have been rid of Miss Fitzgerald, that I might 
follow them at a distance, and ascertain by my 
own observations how far my first suspicions 
and the opinions of the world are justifiable 
touching their connexion ! But this was impos- 



116 THE OPERA. 

sible : and I was obliged to listen with patience, 
and reply with complaisance, to Adelberg's 
thousand and one chimeras concerning the most 
accomplished musician in Europe. His en- 
thusiasm I could pardon, for it was for the can- 
tatrice ; but that of the five hundred persons of 
rank and distinction who were at that moment 
pressing towards her, was for the individual. 

Alas ! how is it possible for me to regard 
Stephanine Haslinger as a woman deserving 
the interest of such beino-s as Constance Fitz- 
gerald, and the attentions of so exalted and 
exemplary a personage as my friend the Duke 
of Cardigan ? — Should his infatuation increase, 
I must seriously deliberate on the propriety of 
putting him on his guard. — But am I justified 
in revealing a fact of such a nature ? — 



THE OPERA. 



117 



CHAPTER VII. 



Hard is the doubt, and difficult to deem, 
When all three kinds of love together meet. 

And to dispart the heart with power extreme, 

Whether shall weigh the balance down.— Spenser. 



What is to be done !— Pignatelli was with 
me before I quitted my bed this morning-, 
laughing, talking, and bantering, precisely in 
the style we adopted during our close intimacy 
at Paris. There is no maintaining any reserve 
with so warm-hearted a fellow ! 

After amusing himself with a thousand lively 
repartees at Bagot's expense (for in spite of 
friendship, every man seems to fancy himself at 



118 THE OPERA. 

liberty to treat a rejected suitor with the most 
contumacious disdain), he suddenly exclaimed, 
"And just imagine my horror, when the hella 
Contessaj my inestimable and (jesting apart) 
very worthy and approved good mother, ad- 
dressed me with an inquiry concerning mij ap- 
proaching marriage! I assured her very sin- 
cerely, and I trust very demurely, that I would 
as soon hail the approach of a column of the 
enemy's cuirassiers, or of a company of wild 
American cannibals ; when she informed me 
that the whole English world has chosen 
to marry me to your fairy love. Think of that, 
Master Brook!" 

"And what said you to such a charge?" 
"Like Sir Harry's valet in the farce — that 
'the world is an ass !' A pretty business, to be 
sure, that because as your friend — (for although 
you looked north-north-east upon me last night, 
my dear Adrian, and have only veered a single 
point to southward this morning, Cecilia ho- 
nours me by fancying me distinguished by your 



THE OPERA. 119 

personal regard) — because as your friend she 
condescended to a little more familiarity with 
me than with that long-backed, short-necked, — 
long-nosed, short-sighted specimen of Hibernian 
hideousness, Lord Neville, — or the coxcombical 
jackanapes, Bruton, — or the ponderous bore, 
Ginstiniani, — because she accepted my arm 
Vesuvioizing, and wept on my shoulder during 
a thunder-storm in the Coliseum, they should 
choose to consider us lovers! I honour Mrs. 
Perceval's good taste in the disregard she 
evinces towards that uncommon liar called 
common report ! — Half the silly women in 
London would have imagined themselves called 
upon to withdraw the light of their countenance 
from an unfortunate fellow labouring under a 
similar disadvantage." 

" Mrs. Perceval, of course, treated the thing 
as a jest ?" 

" Precisely ! — laughed at it, and at me, in the 
most provoking manner. By the way, what 
did you do to put an end to this merry mood ? 



120 THE OPERA. 

She went to the ball, en triomphe, to gratify 
Lady Wroughton ; and appeared more disposed 
to amuse herself than I have seen her since we 
were all at Paris together. But the wonderful 
vision which greeted her in the person of a Mr. 
Maldyn wearing the shape and gesture of a 
certain Adrian von Elzstein, quite overcame 
her. Surely you were rather slow and remiss 
in tendering your homage? — for before I had 
time to lend half the attention I intended to 
Cardigan's old-fashioned politeness, and obei- 
sances, and congees to the Silvestra, Cecilia 
pretended a migraine, or a mal de nerfs, or one 
of the numerous masquerades wherewith great 
ladies disguise their ill-humour, — and insisted 
on going away." 

" Remiss in tendering my homage ? Has 
Mrs. Perceval, then, an established claim on the 
devotion of society ?" 

"The claim of being an extremely pretty 
woman," replied Pignatelli, resentingly. " Surely 
i/on have not withdrawn your allegiance ?" 



THE OPERA. 121 

" Since you disavow the right of champion- 
ship, allow me to resist your title to that of 
cross-examination." 

" You shall resist no such thing/' said Anas- 
tasio, jumping up from the sofa on which he 
had thrown himself; " you shall deny me no- 
thing of your former confidence ! Curse upon 
this foggy climate ; — it chills the warmest heart, 
and freezes the genial current of the most glo^v- 
ing soul. — What ! — youy who in the rash confi- 
dence of your honesty entrusted me, after the 
experience of a few weeks' friendship, with the 
secret of yowv penchant for Cecilia Perceval — 
(you called it love in those days, but no matter) — 
will you now attempt to put me oflf with these 
scurvy ceremonies, and oracularly-mysterious 
answers ? Do you suppose me indifferent to 
your happiness, or hers, that you think to satisfy 
me by such evasions? No — no, Adrian! I 
am your friend or your foe ; — love me as you used 
to do, or not at all. Let me not suppose I was 
mistaken in hailing you as a kindred spirit, — as 

VOL. II. G 



122 THE OPEEA. 

one whom I could ' wear in my heart of 
hearts.' '^ 

There was no resisting this frankness. 

" Forgive me," said I, " if I appear either 
irritable or churlish ; believe me I have ample 
cause for a peevish humour on this occasion. 
For a moment, I own I gave credence to the 
numerous reports which reached me of your 
engagement to Mrs. Perceval " 

" Then you acted most unfairly — most unge- 
nerously. Did you not forewarn me of your 
attachment ? " 

" You knew that it was unsanctioned by its 
object; that I had not presumed to aspire to 
her hand." 

" Presumed to aspire ! away with such terms ! 
You loved her, — she knew it, — / knew it. Was 
not that enough?" 

" Not with men in general, as the world runs 
now, when opposed to the attractions of a beau- 
tiful and unengaged woman." 

" But I am not a man in general, and I know 



THE OPERA. 123 

nothing of the career of the world ! — Besides, 
what say you to the claims of Gertrude? — Had 
you forgotten the frailty of your friend, and 
the certainty of Lady Neville's noting any 
diminution of the affection she so poorly re- 
wards ?" — 

" I never calculate on the duration of a law- 
less attachment. But let it pass. A single 
glance at your countenance sufficed to convict 
me of error, and to prove that I had nothing to 
resent in the conduct of my friend.'^ 

" Then why these ifs and buts ? — Since you 
admit no cause of offence in Cecilia's conduct, 
wherefore this change of feeling ? — You have 
seen some fairer face in England, or one at 
least which touches your fancy nearer ? Admit 
it, — proclaim it ! I, Heaven knows, have been 
too often the sport of my own fickleness, to 
blame the inconstancy of others; and have 
neither the right nor the inclination to challenge 
your claims to freedom of choice. Why not 
say honestly, ' Anastasio, my friend, — bore me 

g2 



124 THE OPERA. 

no longer with your Mrs. Perceval; I have 
changed my mind.' '' 

" Because, alas ! I have not changed it. In 
the spirit of the same confidence which prompted 
the first acknowledgment of my attachment, I 
own to you, dear Pignatelli, that I love her 
with the utmost intensity of affection, — with 
madness, — with idolatry. Since we parted I 
have thought but of her ; have seen no fairer 
face — have heard no voice so sweet." 

'^ Bravo ! I have pierced a rock to invite the 
outbreak of a torrent. But have a care ! Re- 
member the dangers of a sudden thaw in frozen 
regions ; — you will overwhelm me with this 
flood of enthusiasm." 

" Nay ! you have nothing to fear. I have 
spoken of Cecilia, — to CeciUa, — for the last 
time. If you love me, mention her name to me 
no more ; and accept in two words an explana- 
tion of all these inconsistencies." 

" My dear Adrian, you alarm me by this ve- 
hemence." 



THE OPERA. 125 

" Let me satisfy you at once and for ever. 
Know that Cecilia Perceval is my near relative, 
— daughter to my own uncle. When I saw her 
at Paris, I was ignorant of her veiy exist- 
ence — her very name; and have become ac- 
quainted with them only to know that family 
circumstances, of a very peculiar nature, pre- 
clude all possibility of a nearer connexion — nay, 
forbid us the common ties of friendship. T 
must resign the acquaintance of Mrs. Perceval, 
or renounce my father's affection, — my own 
esteem." 

'' While you maintain this heroic tone, I 
hardly like to banter you," said Anastasio, re- 
pressing a smile. " But, my dearest Adrian, 
for the love of mercy, where did you pick up so 
lofty a scale of thought and action ? — Are we 
still in the age of Montagues and Capu- 
lets, that you would allow some stupid family 
feud, — some red-night-capped grandfather's 
quarrel, to separate you from one of the love- 
liest women in the world ?" 

" In any age, at any moment, the circum- 



126 THE OPERA. 

stances which place an eternal barrier between 
ns would be judged insurmountable. Believe 
me, on my word, on my faith, — believe me on 
the emotion which, at this moment, renders me 
indifferent to your satire, — believe me, dearest 
Pignatelli, I shall, in future, avoid Cecilia as I 
would a pestilence." 

" That is a harsh, and scarcely a fair compa- 
rison." 

" Tell me," said I, stopping short, — for I was 
traversing the room with hasty and unquiet foot- 
steps, — " tell me, Pignatelli, on what grounds 
you interest yourself so warmly in her behalf?" 

" Do you inquire as her cousin, — her lover, — 
or as my friend ?" 

" As each, — as all ! Since you disclaim all 
personal affection for Mrs. Perceval, why so 
eager in the assertion of her claims ?" 

" Because I am fully aware of their import- 
ance to the happiness of a very amiable woman* 
During the whole of last summer, at Paris, of 
the present winter, in Italy, I have been daily 
and hourly in her society. Independent of 



THE OPERA. 127 

her own excellences, she has a strong tie on 
my regard through her friendship for Gertrude ; 
nor has it been sparingly bestowed. I have a 
sincere interest in her welfare ; and for some 
time past have taught myself to believe it 
secured by her attachment to an honourable 
man, whom she loves with the thoughtless rash- 
ness of a child.'' 

" Do you indeed think so?" said I, inexpres- 
sibly touched by this avowal. ♦ 

" I know so ! — For many months after you 
quitted Paris, the regularity of your correspond- 
ence with Bagot and myself satisfied her that 
you were well and happy ; while an occasional 
postscript of ceremonious civility, addressed to 
her, or Lady Neville, assured poor Cecilia that 
she was not forgotten. But at length, there 
was an end to your letters. In November last 
we learned, from Adelberg's simple announce- 
ment of the fact, that you had quitted Gottin- 
gen ; and flattered ourselves, day after day, that 
you would vouchsafe to acquaint us with your 



128 THE OPERA. 

further movements. But not a line came to 
relieve our anxiety; and at length Mrs. Per- 
ceval's distress of mind became so evident, that 
I ventured to question her on the subject. In 
the unguarded hour of affliction, I extracted 
from her an honest confession of the nature of 
her sentiments for Adrian Elzstein, which 
shall not be repeated to gratify the vanity of 
Adrian Maldyn." 

I threw myself on a seat beside my friend. 
" You are right in concealing it ! " said I ; 
" suffer me to preserve the opinion I held but 
yesterday, that Cecilia either never loved me, or 
had sacrificed me to some new fancy." 

" No ! I will allow you to believe nothing so 
derogatory to you or herself Since you have 
made up your mind to resign her, do it like a 
man, with your eyes open to all she will suffer, 
— to all you renounce in the act. Scorn to de- 
ceive yourself by petty subterfuges. Say boldly, 
' Cecilia loves me, — I am aware of it, — I know 
that I shall never meet a more charming woman, 



THE OPERA. 129 

—I know that my obduracy will break her 
heart; but what is her affliction, or my own 
loss, compared with the punctilious exactions 
of my defunct ancestors, — my uncles and aunts, 
— my grandfathers and grandmothers, — a tribe 
of worthies whom I never even beheld, but to 
whom I will do my duty at the expense of any 
I may owe myself, or the woman who adores the 
very dust I tread on. Under a feigned name 
I gained her affections, and blighted the 
happiness of her future life; but quHmporte? 
— family quarrels must be respected.' " 

" Again I must remind you, Pignatelli, that 
you argue on false premises ; and whatever in- 
fluence your eloquence may obtain over my 
mind, believe me it will be powerless compared 
with the simple prohibition of the kindest and 
best of fathers. I am^satisfied that mine would 
not many days survive the announcement of my 
attachment to Lady Wroughton's daughter." 

" Lady Wroughton? — I was afraid the ill 

G 3 



130 THE OPERA. 

wind blew from that quarter ! I can indeed 
imagine that a thousand vindictive feehngs may 
have connected themselves with the career of 
that harsh, worldly-minded woman. Well, 
well, — I must leave Cecilia to plead her own 
cause. I have done by you as I would have had 
you do by me, in declaring my conviction that 
never was a woman so fondly devoted as Ger- 
trude's friend to mine ; and I have now only to 
hope that feminine folly will serve to moderate 
her passion, even as masculine wisdom has 
tended to diminish yours, — amid the levities of 
London life. And now for something else, — 
La Silvestra, — the Opera, — the Duke of Car- 
digan, — my brother Ugo, — or any other you 
please of the tinsel-and-buckram lions of 
society.'* 

''Of the two former, my dear Pignatelli, you 
must talk to Adelberg rather than to me." 

" As music mad as ever ? — and pray where 
has he betaken himself this morning; ? " 



THE OPERA. 131 

" To a dejeuner at the Russian ambassador's ; 
Silvestra will be there." 

" And when he cannot have the happiness of 
hearing her sing, he is contented to see her eat ? 
By the way, I have considerable merit in ab- 
senting myself from that said breakfast j for the 
Nevilles are to be of the party." 

" And Cecilia ? " 

" She seemed so much indisposed last night, 
that I cannot fancy she will be well enough 
this morning for the ordeal of a daylight crowd. 
After all, if you continue inexorable, I think 
she cannot do better than marry Bagot. Both 
will be victims to a sentimental attachment else- 
where ; and they can die together to soft music, 
like the heroine of one of Oehlenschlager's tra- 
gedies ; — she for the love of Adrian von Elzstein, 
— he of the Lady Clara Charleville." 

Vexed to find him relapsing into his ordinary 
tone of pleasantry on such a subject, I proposed 
a ride ,* and now, on my return from the Park, 
am attempting to beguile a solitary hour by re- 



132 aHE OPERA. 

cording these extraordinary details. Adelberg 
dines to-day with Villevargues at Countess 
Pignatelli's; I have excused myself on a plea — 
and no feigned one — of indisposition. 



THE OPERA. 



133 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Say that you love me not ; but say not so 

In bitterness ; the common executioner, 

Whose heart the accustomed sight of death makes hard, 

Lays not the axe upon the humbled neck 

But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be 1 

AS YOU LIKE IT. 



GusTAvus returned in raptures from his 
evening's entertainment, and still more de- 
lighted by his party at the ambassador's. The 
Duke of Cardigan, aware of his passion for 
music and proficiency in the science, good- 
naturedly presented him to Silvestra and— 
her father! 



i 



134 THE OPERA, 



Her father! — Who on earth has she pro- 
cured to countenance her imposture ? — and by 
what intense application or astounding talent 
has she managed to acquire the air and language 
of Italy so as to deceive the most enlightened 
of its natives ; — the smile, and tone of modest 
diffidence, so as to interest the most discerning of 
her own sex ? — Even Constance Fitzgerald, on 
other occasions so vigilant and discriminating, 
found reason to admire and praise the tokens of 
gentle blood visible in her elegant demeanour, 
the expression of feminine gentleness adorning 
her countenance. 

Adelberg assures me that all Princess Bu- 
dinski's female guests were enchanted with her ; 
and that Lady Romford insisted on taking her 
home though Signer Sandoni's carriage was 
in waiting. There was not even a proposal 
made for music at the ambassadress's, so great 
was the respect testified towards the cantatrice 
in her character of guest ; — but, fully aware of 



THE OPERA. 135 

the solicitude of the company, she took up 
Princess Budinski's guitar, and unpremeditat- 
edly and without invitation enchanted them 
for nearly two hours with a series of airs of all 
nations and languages, besides many of her own 
composition." 

"And did she gratify you with any thing 
German ?" said I, with a tone of indifference. 

" She attempted a Zawf/Zer ; but I own I thought 
it a failure. Silvestra's soft Italian accentuation 
was unequal to the peculiarity of our guttural 
dialect. Depend on it, Adrian, German lips 
alone are capable of doing justice to the harsh 
syncopes of Austria ; and Villevargues was ob- 
serving to me at dinner that Silvestra*'s voice 
is as silveiy and clear as the course of the Arno 
through her native valley." 

" And were the Nevilles of your party at 
Countess Pignatelli's ? '' 

" The lord, but not the lady. She remained 
with Mrs. Perceval ; who, it seems, is seriously. 



136 THE OPEKA. 

some say dangerously ill. Lady Wroughton 
has called in two physicians.'' 

" The mere fatigue of her journey ! " cried 
I, trembling in every limb ; " she was per- 
fectly well last night at the Duke of Cardi- 



gan's." 



^^ I only repeat to you the reports of the day. 
I inquired of Anastasio on leaving the dinner- 
table; but he would scarcely answer me, and 
went off directly to the hotel where the Nevilles 
are staying." 

" But Cecilia is surely with her mother ? " 

" Ah ! I rejoice to hear you call her ' CeciUa' 
once more. I was afraid, my dear Maldyn, you 
had quite forgotten Paris." 

'^ Is not Mrs. Perceval staying at Lady 
Wroughton's?" said I, without noticing his 
indiscretion. 

" Are you so ignorant of her movements ? 
She is in the very hotel you occupied on your 
arrival here. I left my card for her this 



THE OPERA. 137 

morning, and they told me at the door she was 
extremely ill.'' 

Scarcely had Adelberg uttered these words, 
when, making a pretext for leaving him, I 
rushed from the house. It was twelve o'clock, 
but I knew that the hotel would be open even 
at that late hour; and addressing myself to the 

first person I met in the hall at 's, desired 

to see one of Mrs. Perceval's servants. An 
Italian, who lived with her at Pans and to 
whom I was known by sight, was summoned to 
attend me ; and replied to my incoherent inqui- 
ries by repeated assurances that his lady was 
seriously ill — dangerously ill ; that Lady Ne- 
ville, Lady Wroughton, and several other 
female friends, were about to pass the night in 
her dressing room ; that the physicians had 
only just left her, and were to return at break 
of day ! He refused to carry up a message of 
inquiry, having been forbidden to approach the 
apartments. 

Hopeless of obtaining more explicit informa- 



138 



THE OPERA. 



tion, — agonized at the prospect of passings a 
long night in ignorance of what was going on, — 
I appHed for a bed at the hotel. But the house 
was completely full ; and I had now no alterna- 
tive but to return here, having secured the ser- 
vices of the courier to visit me at day-break 
with tidings of the sufferer. 

Daybreak ! — and there are still six hours of 
suspense before me ! — I, who as her nearest 
relative have a right to watch by her, — to com- 
fort her in sickness and in sorrow, — I must 
henceforward banish myself from her presence, 
and be to her as a stranger ! 

I cannot believe that the fatigues of her j our- 
ney have so suddenly and strangely influenced 
her health. She is not of a weakly, although 
of so slight a frame ; is accustomed to travelling 
— to exertion. She was in perfect health at the 
Duke of Cardigan's. When I first caught her 
eye the brilliant colour had not yet faded from 
her cheek. I thought her thinner indeed than 



THE OPERA. 139 

when we parted at Paris : but there was the 
same bright glance in her eye, the same grace- 
ful buoyancy in her attitude. — She was then in 
perfect health ! — 

Can it be that the agitation of that unexpected 
meeting — the change in my manner towards 
her, — or the startling discovery of our near 
relationship {stesso sanguej stessa sorte) which 
at once revealed the impossibility of a nearer 
tie — has produced this sudden revulsion? — Is 
my unhappy Cecilia sufficiently versed in our 
family secrets to know that the son of Randolph 
Maldyn and the daughter of Katharine Darley 
must henceforward live as strangers ? — 

Great God ! that I should be the cause of 
suffering, — the source of danger to her. — Per- 
haps — but no ! I will not think it ! — ^Wretched 
as I am, I will not anticipate so dreadful a 
renewal of our family misfortunes — so terrible a 
consummation of her destiny and mine. I will 
trust that they have exaggerated the report of 



140 THE OPERA. 

her indisposition ; I will hope that morning may 

bring me glad tidings, and dispel these horrible 

misgivings. 

* flp ^ ^ 

April 16. — How often have I inscribed in this 
journal a wish that Easter were arrived ! — It is 
come ! And what a period of affliction will it 
serve to commemorate. Ten days have elapsed 
since I took pen in hand — ten days of anguish 
and suspense; I have scarcely tasted food or 
repose since the night of that ill-omened ball. 
In registering the rash vow I breathed to the 
memory of my mother that Katharine Barley's 
daughter should become an alien to my heart, 
how little did I dream that she was about to 
assume an interest in my eyes so deeply and 
doubly painful ! Cecilia, suffering — dying — 
delirious; — suffering for my sake — dying, in 
the apprehension of our disunion — raving, from 
the mere certainty of my estrangement ; how 
little had I prepared myself with the sternness 
of heart requisite for such an ordeal I — 



THE OPERA. 141 

Had it not been for the kindness of Lady- 
Neville and Anastasio, what would have become 
of me? — The fever, which Lady Wroughton 
still persists in asserting to be the result of her 
hurried and fatiguing journey, produced so im- 
mediate an influence on her faculties, that the 
first injunctions issued by Mrs. Perceval's 
medical attendants regarded the tranquilliza- 
tion of her mind. The flurried condition of her 
nerves required an absolute cessation of sound* 
and sight; and during the whole of her indispo- 
sition she was kept in darkness, and secured 
from every voice, every footstep, that might 
produce agitation. 

Much therefore as I desired an interview ; 
eagerly as I longed to look once more upon 
that face which I feared was about to be re- 
moved for ever from my view, — in spite of 
myself, my vow was preserved inviolate. To 
have entered that chamber — had such a step 
been permitted by those who so affectionately. 



142 THE OPERA. 

SO vigilantly, guarded the invalid — would have 
been death to my dear Cecilia. 

Day after day, hour after hour, I sought and 
obtained such intelligence of her condition as 
could be procured through the medium of ser- 
vants ; and it was Anastasio's friendly office to 
comfort me every evening with such further 
details as Lady Neville deigned to furnish 
during the few short hours she allowed herself 
to devote to her own family. Sometimes, indeed, 
she permitted me to torment her with my own 
importunate and endless interrogations ; but for 
the greater part of the time, I have been in no 
condition to quit my own house. 

Till now I never estimated the wretchedness 
of those who endure the weight of unacknow- 
ledged anguish ! Could I have unfolded the 
nature of my affliction, many a grievous houi' 
would have been spared me. Gustavus and 
Pignatelli were constantly by my side, offering 
me such consolation as their imperfect know- 



THE OPERA. 143 

ledge of the circumstances would admit ; and 
I could see that both were inclined to resent the 
reserve practised towards them ; that they felt 
I had no right to withhold from such devoted 
friends the true cause of my despondency. Both 
were aware that it had preceded Cecilia's illness, 
with which it was mysteriously and inexplicably 
connected. Both were capable of discerning 
that althouo'h the merest hint of her dano-er 
tended to drive me to distraction, I was neither • 
cheered nor soothed by tidings of her amend- 
ment : — although her death was a theme of dis- 
may, her recovery was only a signal for the 
renewal of my settled melancholy. Yet how 
impossible for me to reconcile these inconsis- 
tencies by an explanation of the truth ! Even 
yesterday, when Anastasio Pignatelli burst 
breathless into my apartment to assure me that 
the physicians had pronounced all danger at an 
end, I could only throw myself upon his neck 
and sob for joy ; — I could not open my heart by 



144 THE OPERA. 

an unrestrained avowal of the hopelessness of 
grief with which it was mingled. 

She is safe ! — she is restored to the sunshine 
of the earth, — the tenderness of her friends; 
and I feel that my gratitude is due to that 
mighty dispenser of good and evil who has 
vouchsafed to listen to our supplications. 
Yet if Cecilia really loves me, if Pignatelli and 
Lady Neville are only half justified in their as- 
sertions of the strength of attachment with which 
she repays my own, surely it would have been 
better that she should perish ; that we might go 
down together into that grave which can alone 
unite us now, before the weariness of despair 
has withered up our youth. Yes ! — we might 
have burst the bonds of earth in the same 
bright happy moment ! — Sinner that I am ! — 
my father I — » 

uipril 18. — Mrs. Perceval is advancing rapidly 
towards recovery. If this brilliant spring weather 



THE OPERA. 145 

continue, she will soon be permitted to take the 
air, and return to the society of her friends. 
Friends ! — My heart shrinks as I write that 
word. — What shall 1 gain by the change ? — I 
must no longer seek her presence, — must never 
again enfold her hand in mine, — never sit gazing 
upon her loveliness, — never indulge myself with 
the light carol of her joyous voice ! — And others 

will enjoy those privileges, — one other perhaps 

• 
make them exclusively his own. She will be ad- 
mired, followed, courted, wooed, won ! Another ! 
— but why forestal the bitterness of such a trial ! 

For both our sakes, it is necessary that I 
should scrupulously avoid her society. And 
Cecilia will appreciate and forgive my self- 
denial; for though I cannot determine the 
precise limits of her knowledge on the sub- 
ject, a thousand incoherent expressions of her 
delirium, reported to me by Lady Neville, con- 
vince me that she is as well aware as myself of 
the utter hopelessness of our affection. 

" Why do they talk to me of marriage ? " she 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE OPERA. 

would say, amid her ravings. " Was I not 
pledged — pledged in heart more deeply than 
others are in hand — when a dark obstacle rose 
between us, and chilled my Adrian in its shadow. 
My mother brought it there, — my mother has 
rendered our union impossible. My mother has 
whispered to me that our race is a predestined 
race; and that should a Maldyn wed with a 
Maldyn, the curse would become tenfold !— 
Take him away — bear him far from me as the 
earth can divide us ; — do not drag him to my 
bosom, or both must perish ! " 

Sometimes Lady Wroughton herself was 
present during these affecting appeals; but 
being totally unaware of the previous connec- 
tion between her daughter and myself, she 
naturally ascribed Cecilia's apparent abhorrence 
of my name to her indignation at my father's 
former rejection of her overtures, and to an 
uncontrollable dread lest the proposal of alli- 
ance should be renewed. 

" You have nothing to fear from your 



THE OPERA. 147 

cousin/' was her ladyship's constant method of 
soothing the invahd. " You will never be mo- 
lested by his importunities. I have met and 
will meet him as a stranger, and treat with 
disdain all friendly overtures on his or his 
father's part. Mr. Maldyn shall never enter my 
house ; — fear nothing ! — so altered are my views 
on the subject, that I would sooner see you 
dead, Cecilia, than married to my nephew." 

And 1 am convinced that in this instance Lady 
Wroughton expresses her real sentiments : I am 
convinced that every pacificatory feeling she 
may have cherished previous to her daughter's 
marriage was changed to gall by the scorn 
with which her offers were met by my father. 
Eager as she is supposed to be that Cecilia 
should form a brilliant alliance, I am con- 
vinced she would bestow the wealth of the 
house of Templeton on any obscure and nameless 
individual, rather than that it should descend 
to me or mine. The notion of my union with 
Mrs. Perceval would not be more loathsome to 

H 2 



148 THE OPERA, 

the surviving husband of Cecil Darley, than to 
her whose evil ministry was the cause of their 
misfortunes. 

Lady Neville assures me that my dearest 
Cecilia was fully sensible of the nature of the 
scruples which retarded, last year at Paris, the 
declaration of my attachment. Aware of my 
poverty, and knowing that her own jointure 
must be forfeited by a second marriage, she 
saw that an engagement between us would be 
a source of ruin to both ; and the object of her 
precipitate return to England was to confide to 
her mother the nature of her difficulties, ac- 
knowledge her love for the German ward of the 
Hanoverian minister, and obtain if possible 
from Lady Wroughton's maternal tenderness, 
some effort of generosity to secure our union. 
An only child, and sole heiress to the Temple- 
ton estates, Cecilia felt she had a claim to 
some indulgence ; and Lady Neville persists in 
declaring that, as the circumstances were then 
understood, Lady Wroughton would not have 



THE OPERA. 



149 



withheld either her sanction or a proper settle- 
ment from the Baroness von Elzstein. 

" I will candidly own to you, however," said 
Anastasio, in relating this conversation, " that 
Cecilia's mother looks upon her nephew with 
undisguised aversion." 

Be it so ! — it would but have increased my 
difficulties, had the enemy of my parents been 
pleased to regard me with sentiments of conci- 
liation. I am contented that her sentence should 
be for open war. 



150 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Were mau 
But constant, he were perfect; that one error 

Fills him with faults. 

Shakspeare. 



April 24. — Cecilia is gradually recovering 
her strength, and is already pronounced con- 
valescent. Alas ! that I should be obliged to 
inscribe those words in my j ournal without one 
qualifying expression of sympathy or triumph ! 
She has accompanied Gertrude to Lord Ne- 
ville's villa in Berkshire for change of air ; and 
her absence from town relieves me from the 
irritation of hearing that others are admitted into 



THE OPERA. 151 

her presence, as well as from the apprehension 
that some accidental meeting between us might 
produce a relapse. It is indispensable that she 
should be secured from agitation for some time 
to come. 

The events of the last fortnight have rendered 
time a blank to me. I know nothing of what 
has been passing in the world. I have received 
several letters from my father, and acknow- 
ledged them by the most vague and unsatis* 
factory replies ; — I have received several visits 
from Sir Herbert Manningfield and the Duke 
of Cardigan (neither of whom will permit me 
the privilege of denying myself) and pleaded 
indisposition as an apology for my own negli- 
gence in return. 

Fortunately my personal appearance bears 
ample testimony to the reality of the plea. Sleep- 
less nights and anxious days have wrought that 
change in my aspect which might have been 
anticipated ; and the general expresses himself 
most kindly, but most unwelcomingly solicitous 



152 THE OPERA. 

on my account. During the past week, I have 
had several notes of inquiry from Lady Harriet ; 
and this morning, Sir Herbert was the bearer of 
an invitation from the duke, begging me to pass 
the hohdays with their party at Donningwell 
Castle, a seat on the borders of Windsor 
Forest. — I shall not go .'-—After the project con- 
fessed by the Manningfields of promoting a 
marriage between myself and Miss Fitzgerald, 
I should not be justified in throwing myself un- 
necessarily into her society. Constance — with 
all he7' merits and attractions, in addition to 
her splendid fortune and high connexions, — de- 
serves a better fate than to become the wife of 
one whose heart is worthless and exhausted as 
ashes of a funeral pyre. 

Sir Henry Bagot was off to Paris last week ; 
his diplomatic duties made it impossible for him 
to prolong his visit so as to admit of my accom- 
panying him ; and the condition of Cecilia for- 
bad me to quit London at such a moment. Even 
now, much as it might be for my advantage to 



THE OPERA* 153 

absent myself for a time, I have no corn-age to 
follow him. I cannot yet deny myself the enjoy- 
ment of breathing the same atmosphere with 
the woman I love, — ay ! the woman who loves 
me^ — for why should I still affect scepticism on 
such a point? I am anxious too, to exercise 
some little control over the manoeuvres of Sil- 
vestra ; who, during my absence from society, 
has made the most astonishing strides toward^ 
distinction. She has appeared professionally in 
several of her best characters, and withja de- 
gree of success leaving all competition at a dis- 
tance. Night after night, the house is crowded 
with persons of distinction, who for years past 
had absented themselves from its walls ; and the 
enthusiasm in her favour exceeds even that 
which has crowned her efforts in all other coun- 
tries. — And so far I can sympathize and rejoice 
in her triumph. — Even while blaming the undue 
means by which her abilities have been exag- 
gerated, and the fraudulent impression of her 
birth and birth-place sent forth to the public, 

H 3 



154 THE OPERA. 

Heaven knows / should be the last person to 
strip her of her borrowed feathers, or replace 
her on her just level. But when I hear of 
Stephanine Haslinger living in companionship 
with the good and gentle and artless, — such as 
Lady Harriet and Constance, — when I see her 
advanced by the weak partiality of the Duke of 
Cardigan above those of his own degree who 
have far stronger claims to his consideration, — I 
own the secret presses heavily on my bosom. 

That Stephanine has long ceased to feel a 
particular interest for myself, I know and be- 
lieve ; that I cherished more than a boyish 
fancy for herself I am even inclined to doubt : 
still there exists, and must ever exist between 
us, ties of mutual consciousness which would 
render a misunderstanding extremely painful — 
an altercation highly objectionable. But what is 
to be done ? — ^To see Constance leaning on her 
arm, or engaged in acts of feminine ministry in 
her favour — fetching her gloves, carrying her 
shawl, as she would for a friend or a sister — is 



THE OPERA. 155 

more than I can or ought to bear. Pignatelli 
assures me that these are the terms upon which 
Silvestra Sandoni has contrived to place herself 
in society ; and that the whispers of the world 
already hint at a still more extraordinary termi- 
nation of the business on the part of the duke. 
He has given several fkes in her honour during 
my indisposition; and the able dissimulation 
with which Stephanine manages to impart to^ 
her acceptance of these distinctions an air of 
gratified but diffident humility, has already in- 
gratiated her into the favour of those who might 
have been anticipated as strongly averse to her 
pretensions. Will she — can she dare — maintain 
in my presence all this cunning self-possession ? 
— ^The fates surely favoured her in the chance of 
Cecilia's illness, and my temporary withdrawal 
from the scene of her triumphs. 

Cardigan has just been here to press his in- 
vitation to Donningwell ; he will not hear of a 
refusal, nor have I any pretext for declining the 
visit which could stand against the earnestness 



156 THE OPERA. 

of a viva voce request. It is determined, in 
short, that I am to take Sir Herbert down with 
me as a hostage for the sincerity of my promise 
to pass Easter week at the castle. 

I took the opportunity to rally the duke on 
the report of his passion for Silvestra ; nor did 
his vehemence in denying the truth of the ru- 
mour at all tend to satisfy me of his indifference 
on the subject. 

" It is not the first time," said he, " that my 
love of music has been construed into love for 
the musician ; but, believe me, my tenderness 
on this occasion is solelv for the cantatriceJ" 

" I cannot but suspect that the w^oman has 
some little share in your homage, when I see 
you make her the associate of your female 
friends and relatives." 

" Which of course I should not do, were I 
not intimately acquainted with her claims to 
such a distinction — claims both personal and 
inherited." (Inherited ! poor old Gretchen Has- 
linger ! methinks I see her cutting the lucerne 



% 



THE OPERA. 157 

.for her only cow !) " Could you but hear, my 
dear Maldyn, the tribute which the venerable 
Sandoni delights in paying to the filial tender- 
ness of that charming woman, you would no 
longer upbraid me for becoming her partizan." 

" I do not see the use of partizanship," said I, 
" where there exists no opposing faction. Sil- 
vestra drives her triumphal chariot over all our 
heads ; every man — nay ! every woman in Lon- 
don is her votary." 

" And no wonder ! Never did so brilliant 
a creature appear among us. Beauty, virtue, 
intelligence — she is all intelligence — all soul ! " 

" And which of her spiritual qualities is to be 
adorned with the diamond necklace I hear you 
have presented to her?" 

" What would you have had me do ? " cried 
the Duke of Cardigan, colouring with vexation. 
" Silvestra has sung repeatedly at my house ; 
and I can neither accept the services of a pro- 
fessional performer without remuneration, nor 
presume to offer money to a person of Signora 
Sandoni 's eleoance and refinement.'' 



158 THE OPERA. 

" She, at least, appears inclined to consider the 
gift as offered to the woman, not to the canta- 
trice ! *' said I ; " for I understand the casket 
has been returned to its munificent donor." 

" Injudicious enough, I allow," he replied. 
" A woman who chooses to instal herself in a 
certain grade of society, by which she forfeits 
the caste of her high birth, has no right to re- 
sist or resent the customs of the class to which 
she has degraded herself. Colonel Sandoni's 
daughter cannot appear nightly on a public 
stage, without subjecting herself to receive the 
reward for which she seems to exercise her pro- 
fessional abilities. I believe the old man's 
pride is alone to blame ; I am sorry the thing 
has transpired, for with the idle and the vul- 
gar, it may obtain credence for this silly story 
of my attachment to La Silvestra." 

" I will fight the ground over with you inch 
by inch, when we get to Donningwell,"" said I; 
" but Pignatelli assures me I am growing too 
prosy for the atmosphere of London, and half of 



THE OPERA. 159 

■what I intended to say shall therefore be re- 
pressed." 

" You are at least ungrateful," replied the 
duke, rising to take leave; " the beautiful and 
fascinating being against whom you have de- 
clared war in so ruthless a manner, is a decided 
admirer of yours. The other night she was present 
at a supper party at my house, where several 
persons were inquiring of Anastasio Pignatelli 
concerning your health — the Fitzgeralds and 
Brabazon in particular. But Silvestra was the 
most eager of all 1 — I was surprised to find 
you were even known to her by name ; but she 
reminded me that you had danced opposite to 
her on occasion of her first appearance in so- 
ciety in this country ; and that upon her inquiring 
some idle fact to determine whether she had not 
been formerly acquainted with you on the Con- 
tinent, I stated you to he mi/ friend, and bespoke 
her interest in your favour. This tenacity of me- 
mory on her part — for she had only a glimpse 
of you — is flattering to both of us. She was 



160 THE OPERA. 

quite wretched to hear of your indisposi- 
tion/' 

" Wretched — a la mode of an opera singer." 

" Wretched — a la mode of an amiable and 
feehng woman ; and I really cannot compliment 
you on the liberality of your opinions concern- 
ing her." 

Such is the warmth with which his grace 
takes the defence of this designing girl : I hear- 
tily wish she had never come to England ! 

Donrmigwell Castle, April 29th. — Our Hano- 
verian poetasters used to be prodigiously ad- 
dicted to " the balmy breath of April," and 
the " variegations of the enamelled spring ! " 
what would they have said or sung or written of 
Donningwell — what would they have felt in the 
heavenly atmosphere I am this day breathing ! 
What a lovely spot ! — The castle is a venerable 
ruin, enclosing within its walls, a charming 
modern habitation, the front of which rises 
towards the river, above the boundary of the an- 
cient building. The quadrangles, one of which 



THE OPERA. 161 

is surrounded by a cloister, are laid out in ex- 
quisite flower-gardens ; and this romantic resi- 
dence is approached through one of the wildest 
glades of Windsor Forest. 

Instead of attempting to emulate in the new 
mansion, and its decorations, the Gothic severity 
of the former structure, whose immediate con- 
tact must have betrayed the inefficiency of the 
imitation, the present abode affords in every 
respect a remarkable contrast to its precursor. 
It is all lightness, elegance, and whim; and 
stands beneath the stern guardianship of the 
ancient keep — the only part of the old castle re- 
maining entire — like some airified coquette under 
the charge of an antiquated duenna or gray- 
haired knight. Within, it has all the perfections 
arising from the union of taste and opulence ; 
and rather resembles the ideal palace of an en- 
chantress, than a stone and mortar dwelling, 
adapted for the use of men and women. 

A considerable number of " men and wo- 
men" are, however, expected to-morrow, to fill 



162 THE OPERA. 

the Gothic courts with mirth and rejoicing; 
in the mean time, our party consists of the 
Manningfields, Fitzgeralds, Monsieur de Ville- 
vargues, Adelberg, and myself. We arrived 
to-day in time for dinner ; and as soon as the 
dessert was removed, profited by the absence of 
all formal company to indulge in the rare enjoy- 
ment of fresh air and fresh verdure. Although 
it was already twilight, the folding windows 
were thrown open towards the lawn that slopes 
to the river ; and in a moment we were all wan- 
dering by one, by two, and by three ; — some among 
the ruins — some among the parterres bright 
with flowers — some through the shrubberies 
just budding into the exuberant blossom of their 
lilac bushes. It was the first time I had found 
myself in Constance Fitzgerald's presence since 
my sudden disappearance from society; and I 
own I felt greatly indebted to the garrulity of 
Monsieur deVillevargues,who obliged us with the 
unsolicited favour of his company, and amused 
himself and us by a fluent monologue on the 



THE OPERA. 163 

state of the arts, sciences, literature, politics, and 
climate of Great Britain. His loquacity saved 
us both a world of embarrassment. 

I was not aware till the duke mentioned it 
this evening to Miss Fitzgerald in enumerating 
his country neighbours, that Neville Hill is 
situated only a few miles distant from Donning- 
well — within scope of a morning visit. The 
Pignatellis, it seems, will come from thence 
hither to-morrow; so that I shall be blest 
with far more detailed accounts of Cecilia's 
health than I have been able to obtain since she 
left town. We were all standing round the 
pianoforte when Cardigan vouchsafed us this 
piece of intelligence ; and I trust Sir Herbert 
was too much engrossed by the charming duet 
his niece immediately afterwards commenced 
with Gustavus, to notice the effect the name 
of Neville produced upon myself. I turned 
over the leaves for the singers with such ill- 
timed officiousn ess, that Constance several times 
glanced inquiringly towards me, as if to de- 



164 THE OPERA. 

mand the cause of all this absence of mind. 
At leno^th she looked wise and shook her head, 
fancying she had detected me ! 

" I see how it is!*' said she, escaping from 
the compliments of the party, and placing her- 
self in an unoccupied corner of the alcove, where 
Lady Harriet was exhibiting optical delusions 
for the amusement of her two elder children — 
" You are of the unhappy number of those who 
are planet-struck by the charms of my friend 
Mademoiselle Sandoni ; and justly condemn the 
presumption inducing me to attempt a song, 
in which her own sweet notes still echo in our 



ears/' 



" You mistake me — I have not even heard of 
her since — .'" 

" Well, well ! spare your apologies ; for I 
have none better to offer for my own audacity 
than that Silvestra has done her best to teach 
me a few of her songs, in hopes my blunders 
may demonstrate to the select of her partizans 
(the Duke of Cardigan and his set, for instance) 



THE OPERA. 165 

the difficulty of such a performance. I hope 
my deficiencies have tended to prove to yourself 
the consummateness of her art/' 

" Of that I required no further proof/' w^as 
my involuntary exclamation. 

" When we return to town, you must allou 
me to present you to her. She is a charming 
creature ; so frank, — so naive, — so unlike what 
I expected in a public performer. Do you 
remember mine and my uncle's prejudices 
against her when we first saw her at Cardigan 
House ? — I assure you she has now no warmer 
admirers than Sir Herbert and myself I wanted 
the duke to persuade her to join our party here 
(would it not have been charming?); but un- 
luckily, she was prevented by her professional 
engagements. How I hate the word profession 
when applied to so ladylike and delicate a 
person !" 

So ! I have had a pretty escape ! — It would 
have required far more tact than I am master 
of to pass a week in the house with Stephanine 



166 THE OPERA. 

without the crisis of an explanation ; after which, 
I must either have exposed, or become an abet- 
tor of her imposture. So long as no overt 
recognition take place between us, I feel less 
guilty in the affair. To find myself seated 
between Miss Fitzgerald and Ninchen Has- 
linger ! — ^Thank Heaven ! I have been spared 
such a retribution for my sins. 



THE OPERA. 167 



CHAPTER X. 



What a tedious homilj of love have you wearied your pa- 
rishioners withal ; and never cried " Have patience, good 

people." SlIAKSPEARE. 



Donnhigwell Castle j April 27. — When we 
retired last night Adelberg accompanied me to 
my room, to expatiate on the beauties of an 
Enghsh comitry-house, the charms of its do- 
mestic circle, the fascinations of Miss Fitz- 
gerald, and the superiority of Donningwell over 
the cold formalities of London society. ' 

*' And yet,'' resumed Gustavus, " I know not 
how I can tax that circle as cold or formal, in 



168 THE OPERA. * 

which an opera singer is welcomed with open 
arms. What would they say in Germany of 
such a relaxation of propriety, — in Paris, — in 
Italy ? — There, where the love of music amounts 
even to religious idolatry, they would shrink 
from a degradation which your prudent brethren 
of Eno-land court as an honour. No wonder the 
virtuosi become so spoiled and so insolent dur- 
ing their residence in London. Think, for in- 
stance, of this enchanting Silvestra condescend- 
ing to sauerkraut and kalbshraten after the dainty 
entertainments of Cardigan House.'* 

I started at this association of German fare 
with the name of the prima donna, I have often 
mentioned to Adelberg my father's peremptory 
termination of my engouement for Stephanine 
Haslinger; and we have even laughed over 
Remip-ius's officious interference in the busi- 
ness. Does he suspect any thing ? — Has any 
accidental circumstance afforded him a clue to 
the perplexing truth ?— 

" Mademoiselle Sandoni will probably never 



THE OPERA. 169 

find herself condemned to such a derogation/* 
said I. " Has she ever been in Germany ?" 

" Oh, no ; but she has asked me a thousand 
questions respecting my native country, which 
induced me to suspect her intentions of visiting 
BerHn. She even talks of passing the season 
at Carlsbad ; so that when I quit you I may 
chance to become her compagnon de voyage. 
We shall leave England about the same time ; 
and I could be of great use to the old colonel on 
his journey. Their ignorance of the language 
must necessarily throw a thousand difficulties 
in their way ; and I should like to do the 
honours of the country to persons who at pre- 
sent have only experienced the insipidities of 
the south.'' 

" It is lucky Pignatelli does not hear your 
disparaging mode of qualifying his beloved 
Italy.'' 

" He will be here to-morrow. The countess 
has promised to bring both her sons ; and the 
duke will ride over with me in the morning, and 

VOL. II. I 



•»» 



170 THE OPERA. 

engage Lord Neville to accompany them. It is 
fortunate for you, my dear Adrian, that Mrs. 
Percevars indisposition confines her to the 
house, or you could scarcely have escaped meet- 
ing her in this close neighbourhood. Cardigan 
has always endured the husband for the sake of 
his charming wife, and been on terms of the 
most friendly intimacy with the Nevilles ; a cir- 
cumstance the world adduces as Lady Wrough- 
ton's motive for cultivating their acquaintance 
for her daughter. She is wild to make your 
cousin Duchess of Cardigan." 

" I wish she may succeed," said I, with an 
aching heart. " Cecilia could not form a con- 
nexion more auspicious for her happiness." 

" And there would be an opera singer the less 
in the peerage," said Gustavus, wishing me 
good night, with very little suspicion of the 
difficulties he had thrown in the way of such an 
enjoyment. If Lady Wroughton should really 
set her heart on this match, I have no doubt 
she would manage to bring it about. I have 



THE OPERA. 171 

not, indeed, forgotten the unfavourable opinion 
expressed by Cardigan, at the Opera, concern- 
ing both mother and daughter ; but there is no 
strength of prejudice, or of resolution, which 
suffices to defend a man against the plots of an 
artful woman. 

I was in hopes that the state of the weather 
this morning would have determined the duke 
to postpone his visit to Neville Hill ; for as we 
were standing in the breakfast-room, contem- 
plating the beautiful vista of conservatories 
which connects it with an octagon library at the 
corresponding angle of the house, the sky became 
overcast ; and a stop was put to all our pro- 
jected boating, riding, and walking parties, by 
a violent storm. It was not half over, how- 
ever, before Villevargues, Adelberg, and the 
duke departed on their expedition ; but I must 
not find fault with the rain, since it has pro- 
cured a charming hour of Miss Fitzgerald's 
society. 

I intruded into that said octagon book-room, 

I 2 



172 THE OPERA. 

after seeing our host and my friend set off for 
Neville Hill, without being aware that the Man- 
ningfields had quitted it to give their morning's 
lesson to the charming boy and girl who accom- 
panied them hither; and that Mrs. Fitzgerald 
never makes her appearance till dinner. By 
this means, she indulges her taste for literature, 
without attracting attention, or restraining the 
lighter amusements of others; and by this 
means, also, I found myself entangled in a tete-a- 
tete with Constance. She was sitting near an 
open window, copying music, when I sauntered 
in, with a volume of La Bruyere in my hand. 

" Shall I interrupt you," said I, seating my- 
self in a large fauteuil, near her table, 

" Not if you continue your studies, while I 
resume my occupation. But I am not idle 
enough to talk just now." 

This proposition particularly suited me, I 
was just in the mood to sit and watch the light 
drizzly April shower, falling silently and almost 
imperceptibly on the turf, bringing forth from 



THE OPERA. 173 

the adjoining earth and its variegated flower- 
beds a natural fragrance delightfully refresh- 
ing. There is a stillness accompanying these 
soft spring rains, which soothes one like music ! 
Insects, — birds, — all are at rest ; while the bud- 
ding leaves seem to luxuriate in the moistened 
warmth of the atmosphere. I reclined in my 
great chair looking out upon the lawn, till I 
could have fancied myself vegetating like the 
beeches on which I was intently gazing. 
" I conclude you find your 

Wisdom in trees, and 
Books in the running brooks," 

said Constance, suddenly looking up from her 
music, and detecting my ruminative mood. " I 
fancy I must amend your idleness, by begging 
you to edify me with a share in your studies. 
Can you not find me something entertaining in 
that little brown morocco volume ? — I should 
suspect it to be too sober-suited to please a 
woman's fancy, were it not for a little vanity in 



174 THE OPERA. 

the gilt leaves and silk lining, which promises 
the daintiness of poetry." 

" I am sorry to disappoint you. Prose, and 
of the most matter-of-fact description, is all I 
have to offer; Philosophy plucking avy^ay the 
flowers from the tree of knowledge." 

" Natural philosophy, then, of course ; or, a 
manual of Chemistry — ^that barbarous modern 
invader of the ' realms of Faery ! ' " 

" Perhaps I should have said ivisdom — for I 
meant self-knowledge, which is the best of wis- 
dom ; I have been reading La Bruyere." 

'' Then I retract my request ; I will have no- 
thing to say to or rather to learn from your 
French philosopher. Mamma often tells me I 
must wait till I am thirty before I attempt such 
studies ; that it is imprudent to strip life of its 
illusions till the day for their enjoyment is 
over." 

" I should have thought Mrs. Fitzgerald the 
last person to recommend the bliss of igno- 
rance." 



THE OPERA. 175 

" Ignorance of the heart — not ignorance of 
the head. What use can it be to any of us to 
ruffle the current of a cahn easy life by a curious 
and restless examination into its sources? I do 
not want to know why I am gay or grave ; it is 
enough for me, at present, that I am so.'* 

" I will not tell you, — like the children's story 
books, — that you are gay when you are good, 
and grave when you see others less so than 
yourself; but I am still enough of a moralist to 
reject the happiness which wilfully arrays itself 
in illusions/* * 

^' You are a man ; and folly in your sex be- 
comes mischievous because it is active. But 
the vague lackadaisical folly of mine does no 
harm ; and for my part, I am determined to be- 
lieve the rainbow a painted arch as long as I 
can. What could La Bruyere and his maxims 
do to heighten my enjoyment of the refreshing 
air which reaches me through yonder window ; 
or my satisfaction in feeling that I have only 
seven more bars to finish of this tedious Polo- 



176 THE OPERA. 

naise ? — I can imagine that speculative philo- 
sophy may be of considerable service in aiding 
mankind to support the adversities of life ; but 
persons like you and I, — basking in its sunshine, 
groaning under its good gifts, with youth, health, 
fortune, and the intense affection of a surviving 
parent to shelter us against the paltry rubs of 
society,— what need have we of La Bruyere to 
smooth down our ruffled feathers by degrading 
the human species in our estimation ? "" — 

" Remember I have been reading for my own 
instruction, not for that of Miss Fitzgerald ; and 
may therefore be pardoned for a quotation ad- 
dressed precisely to the class you describe as 
above all necessity for instruction ; " and open- 
ing my book I read aloud—" La sante, les 
richesses, otant aux hommes Texperience du mal, 
leur inspirent la durete pour leurs semblables ; 
et les gens deja charges de leur propre misere 
sont ceux qui entrent davantage, par la compas- 
sion, dans celle d'autrui." 

'' I shall ?iot pardon you your quotation," said 



THE OPERA. 177 

Constance, looking up with cheeks blushing at 
her own earnestness, "because it proves that 
you seek your rules of morality where you are 
only justified in looking for those of worldly 
policy. If we need admonitions such as these, 
they are tendered us by a higher authority; if 
we admire them only for their moral beauty, 
they are to be found arrayed in a more attractive 
garb. Have you forgotten Lear? — 

Take physic, Pomp ! 
Expose thjself to feel what wretches feel ! — 

Or were you never a schoolboy, that you are 
ignorant of 

Ah ! little think the gay, licentious, proud. 

Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround. 

They who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth, 

And wanton, often cruel, riot waste I 

Ah 1 little think they, while they dance along. 

How many feel, this very moment, death 

And all the sad variety of pain : 

How many pine in want, and dungeon glooms, 

Shut from the common air and common use 

Of their own limbs. How many drink the cup 

Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread 

Of misery ! 

I 3 



17$ THE OPERA. 

Thought fond man 
Of these, and all the thousand nameless ills 
Which one incessant struggle render life, 
Vice in his high career would stand appalled, 
And heedless rambling impulse learn to think. 

There ! — ^you have Thomson in exchange for your 
La Bruyere ; and I consider you a gainer by 
the barter, even without including your enjoy- 
ment of the brilliancy of my declamation. And 
now I leave you to resume your studies, for my 
mother is waiting for me to seal her letters for 
town.'' 

Constance is a charming person, — just pretty 
enough to lend piquancy to her little peremp- 
tory way of thinking and talking ; and there is 
a character of good sense and good feeling in 
her slightest words and actions. Her face, 
figure, voice, are all on so slight a scale, that 
there is no chance of her seeming to overstep 
tbe moderation of her sex. Her countenance 
wants the glowing brilliancy of Mrs. Perceval's, 
and her features the noble regularity of Silves- 
tra's ; but there is something in her transparent. 



THE OPERA. 179 

and almost poetical paleness, which forms a 
beautiful contrast with her bright black tresses; 
— ber hands and feet, and the turn of her head, 
are models for the sculptor. I cannot conceive 
how Cardigan has seen her so much in the fami- 
liarity of private life, without becoming attached 
to so sweet a creature. But many men prefer 
beginning with the glare and delusion of a 
crowd, and ending their period of enchantment 
in that delightful interchange of thought and. 
feeling, in which my infatuation would certainly 
originate. 

Thursday nights — The Pignatellis are arrived ; 
and though we have passed a delightful 
evening, with music, conversation, and the 
countess's partie to vary the diversions of the 
saloon, I cannot help fancying Anastasio is 
growing reserved in his intercourse with me. 
He evidently avoids alluding to Cecilia, except 
in a general way ; and all I have been able to 
learn respecting her has been extracted from 
Gustavus, who saw her for five minutes in his 



180 THE OPEEA. 

morning visit to her friend. Adelberg assures 
me that though she still looks an invalid, she is 
wonderfully recovered ; and that Lady Neville's 
counsels will do much or rather have done much 
towards the restoration of her wonted cheerful- 
ness. It is not to be supposed that a young, 
lovely, and capricious woman would suffer long 
from a disappointment of this nature. At 
twenty-one, with wealth, health, and liberty, the 
heart is not susceptible of very vivid emotions. 
Yes ! my quotation to Constance was spoken by 
no false oracle ; ^' La sante, les richesses otent 
aux hommes I'experience du mal, et leur in-^ 
Spirent la durete.'' 

Tuesday. — I am just returned from riding 
with Miss Fitzgerald, Lady Harriet, the duke, 
Anastasio, and Adelberg, through some of the 
most beautiful forest scenery I ever beheld. 
What must it be when the trees are wearing their 
rich luxuriance of summer foliage, in contrast 
with the hoary trunks of its druid oaks, and the 
glossy bark of its graceful beeches. The wav- 



THE OPERA. 181 

ing of the feathery fern is in itself a summer 
glory which cannot well be spared from a wood- 
land landscape ; and yet the tender verdure of 
the young leaves admitting the golden daylight 
to shine through them with subdued bright- 
ness and affording the promise of a thousand 
vernal pleasures, imparts an unreal and holiday 
aspect to the scene. We feel that there is 
something still to come ; — we stand as if in 
hourly expectation of a brighter and more' 
beautiful transition; — and does not all earthly 
beauty and all earthly joy exist in the coming 
moment ? — « 

Even now, however, the woods are clothed 
with foliage ; the turf is green with its spring- 
tide vegetation. The thickets are bright with 
spreading tassels of primroses, or blue with 
the flowers of the periwinkile and ground ivy ; 
the song-birds are astir again, renewing last 
summer's notes of gladness as if no gloomy 
winter had intervened ; and earth is brilliant in 
renewed animation, as if the afflictions of her 



182 THE OPERA. 

children availed not to imprint one furrow on 
her face ! 

There are several beautiful dells in the forest, 
overshadowed with ancient oaks and dotted with 
the twisted stumps of venerable thorns round 
which herds of deer lie clustered in picturesque 
grouping ; while the distant horizon is crowned 
with the magnificent towers of the royal castle — 
a relic of past ages connected with our noblest 

historical and poetical associations. Sometimes 
this lofty feature is intercepted by the lordly 
groves of the adjacent park; and caught again 
and again, at intervals, through openings in 
their majestic masses. Nothing could exceed 
the charm of the scene, enhanced by the spring- 
ing freshness of the turf and buoyant elasticity 
of the air; and as I rode leisurely along 
between the duke and Miss Fitzgerald, I envied 
them those disengaged hearts and tranquil 
minds which must have rendered them doubly 
susceptible of the charm. 

The Romfords, Brabazon, Crawford, Ugo 



THE OPERA. 183 

Pignatelli, and Lord Bruton arrived for dinner 
to-day ; and our party is now complete. The 
Ladies Charleville say they are recruiting for 
"the season/' during the holidays; yet they ex- 
ert themselves for their proverbes and mazurkas 
every evening, just as if no such interim were 
needful ; and are already planning, with Ville- 
vargues' and Anastasio's assistance, a little vau- 
deville to surprise us to-morrow ; — that is to say, 
it is to be a suprise of which we shall all witness ' 
the rehearsal ! — To-night we are to have petits 
jeux and music ; and I must hasten down to the 
gallery, or my absence may provoke the raillery 
of these gay and careless beings. 

Tuesday night. — ^What an adventure ! — I am 
ashamed to own how much it has agitated 
and annoyed me. On entering the saloon, to- 
wards the close of the evening, I found the 
party had proved too idle to amuse themselves 
for any length of time with " Le Tabouret" 
" Jeannette qui pleure et Jeannette qui rit/' 
** Maisonnette a vendre/* and other games, pro- 



184 THE OPERA. 

posed by the restless vivacity of the Ladies Char- 
leville. They were all gathered round the 
pianoforte, chatting and laughing, and occa- 
sionally interrupting themselves with music. 
Lady Clara, Miss Fitzgerald, Anastasio, Adel- 
berg, Villevargues, and the Duke of Cardigan 
himself, are amateurs of superior excellence; 
and although somewhat fastidious in such mat- 
ters, I was beginning to be considerably inte- 
rested by their performance of a scene from Bel- 
lini's last opera, when Constance, who took the 
soprano part, chancing to turn to Anastasio in 
a charming duo passage they were executing 
together, suddenly uttered a loud cry of joyful 
surprise, and rushed towards La Silvestra, who 
had entered unobserved, and was stationed be- 
hind Pignatelli. 

" This is too bad — this is abominable ! '^ cried 
every voice in one accord. " You had no right 
to come and detect us in the midst of our 
blunders." And the finale was laid aside in 
despair, while they crowded round the new 
comer. 



THE OPERA. 



185 



" You owe this obligation to we/* exclaimed 
Miss Fitzgerald to the duke^ who was offering 
an eager welcome to his lovely guest. " I has- 
tened to assure Mademoiselle Sandoni, by yes- 
terday's post, that we were dying of the dulls ; 
and that you would not condescend to assist in 
amusing us, unless she broke through her pro- 
fessional engagements and flew down to Don- 
ningwell." 

" An order with which you must admire my 
unhesitating compliance,*' exclaimed Silvestra. 
And the costume in which she must have hur- 
ried dovm from the vei*y door of the theatre at 
the conclusion of her evening's performance, 
bore ample testimony to the promptitude of her 
obedience. 



186 THE OPERA, 



CHAPTER XL 



As for equivocations or oraculous speeches, they cannot hold 
out long. The best composition and temperature, is to lave 
openness in fame and opinion ; secrecy in habit j dissimulation 
in seasonable use j and a power to feign, if there be no remedy. 

Bacon. 



Nothing, in fact, could be more piquante 
than the effect produced by Silvestra's Fiorilla 
costume among the common-place dresses with 
which she was surrounded ; and such is the 
delicacy of her features, and the youthful 
transparency of her skin, that the glare of rouge 
essential to stage effect which still remained 
vivid on her cheeks, only served to impart a 



THE OPERA. 187 

more brilliant lustre to her large blue eyes. 
The general elegance of her face and figure is 
remarkable even in the most high-bred circle. 

The Duke of Cardigan, though evidently- 
startled by her unannounced appearance, 
hastened to divide his thanks between Miss 
Fitzgerald and his nev^r guest; and taking an 
arm of each, led them to a sofa at the end of 
the gallery, where buffets of fruit had been 
already spread by his order. 

" And so, because we have the first musician 
in Europe present in the room, there is to be an 
end of music for this evening !" cried Gustavus. 
" How provoking ! — ^how indecorous ! — What 
can his grace mean by bringing this woman 
among his female guests, unless to amuse them 
by her exertions ? *' 

"Nay, my dear Adelberg," said I, "you 
have heard, as well as myself, that he had at 
least nothing to do with her appearance here 
to-night ; you are to thank Miss Fitzgerald for 
the honour of sleeping under the same roof with 
La Silvestra." 



188 THE OPERA. 

''I was not aware," cried Lady Sophia 
Charleville, tossing her beautiful head with 
irrepressible indignation, " that Miss Fitzgerald 
was to do the honours of Donningwell. Mamma 
gave up a very pleasant party at home to accept 
the Duke of Cardigan's invitation ; but she had 
not been led to imagine we were to be favoured 
with the company of the corps operatique.'' 

" These girls are jealous," said Lord Bruton, 
laughing at her air of pique. " Never mind, 
Sophy ! — although you may as well put an end 
to your Barearolas and TirSnas while Mademoi- 
selle Sandoni remains here, remember you have 
an honourable retreat in your vaudeville. I 
never yet heard an Italian who could manage 
the French vowels Parisianly." 

"Pray let us be doing something!" said 
Lady Clara; " all this is far from diverting. 
Count Ugo — Mr. Maldyn — Sophia — cannot we 
manage some quiet game which does not inter- 
fere with Countess Pignatelli's ecarte table, 
and Mrs. Fitzgerald's sublime meditations ? " — 



THE OPERA. 189 

" Why not a round at ' Devine ma pensee V " 
said Lady Harriet Manningfield, wlio was an 
unobserved auditress of their murmurs ; having 
been drawn towards our group by vexation at 
her nephew's unceremonious flight, and indis- 
creet appropriation of Miss Fitzgerald's com- 
pany by way of sanction to the prima donna, 
** Let us sit down and forget the ' interrupted 
quartette.' Mr. Maldyn, draw those ottomans 
forward. Baron Adelberg, ' Devine ma pensee ? ' 
Guess, all of you ! — I take a book from the 
table, — open it, close it again, — lay it aside, and 
cover it with a gold chain and a bronze gray- 
hound. ' Devine ma pensee V " 

A thousand surmises were immediately made 
and disavowed, and a forfeit claimed from 
each of the party; when, just as they were in 
process of surrender, the Duke, finding that 
no one followed him to the gallery, returned 
with his fair companions and begged admit- 
tance into our circle. This was probably the 
effect desired and anticipated by Lady Harriet. 



190 THE OPEEA. 

" I, who am rather tired with my journey," 
observed Silvestra with one of her most grace- 
ful smiles, " must be peimitted to sit by and 
hold your stakes. Here !" she continued, 
seating herself behind the duke and Lady Har- 
riet, and extending the skirt of her gorgeous 
dress, "throw them here till the forfeits are 
claimed." 

And in a moment her lap was full of chains, 
rings, bouquets, and other trinkets. I alone 
held back. Unaccustomed to join in these jeua^ 
de societe, I had nothing about me adapted to 
the purpose but my tcarte purse, which would 
perhaps admit an ungracious interpretation, if 
thrown into the hands of Stephanine Haslinger. 
— I hesitated. — 

" Does that gentleman forfeit nothing?" in- 
quired Silvestra of the duke, looking towards me 
with the most unabashed sang-froid, 

" Maldyn, — allow me to present you to Ma- 
demoiselle Sandoni," cried Cardigan, obeying 
the hint. " Suffer me," he continued, bending 



THE OPERA. 191 

gracefully towards her, " to claim your kind- 
ness for a friend of mine, whom I always fancy 
to be one of my oldest and dearest, though time 
and place disavow the pretension." 

The lady bowed in return with a similar de- 
gree of courtesy ; and immediately began, under 
shelter of one of her pearly smiles, to demand 
my forfeit. — Plague upon my blundering con- 
fusion ! — Instead of emulating her easy self- 
possession — I stammered — coloured — ^bit my 
lips — and applied to Gustavus to assist me by 
the loan of his pencil-case. 

" It is already in Mademoiselle Sandoni's 
possession," said he. " Give any thing — a 
ring — a — " 

'* I have nothing," said I, colouring with still 
deeper vexation. " I will fetch — *' 

" No — ^no — no !" interruptpd every voice, 
" Don't keep us waiting." 

" You have a ring — give your ring!" whis- 
pered Miss Fitzgerald ; " or, stay, you shall 
have my bouquet;" and she was about to take 



192 THE OPERA. 

a bunch of jonquils from her girdle, when the 
duke exclaimed that I should evince very little 
gallantry by surrendering a gift of such a na- 
ture'; — a remark which induced poor Constance 
to replace her nosegay in its original position. 

" Allans done /" cried Pignatelli, provoked 
to find his amusements interrupted ; for he had 
been manoeuvred away from Lord Brabazorf and 
the tcartt table by the cabals of Lady Romford 
and her daughters. " We cannot wait all 
night for the adjustment of this delicate di- 
lemma !" — And Silvestra raising her hand, again 
demanded my ring; which I, again colouring with 
vexation to find the eyes of the whole party 
fixed on my proceedings, had the weakness to 
take from my finger and drop into the delicate 
palm extended towards me. 

In another mipute they were all guessing at 
Lady Harriet's second thought — a competition 
in which Adelberg was the victor ; while I sat 
swelling with vexation at the recollection of 
having profaned a pledge which once be- 



THE OPERA. 193 

longed to Mrs. Perceval, by yielding it to the 
hands of Stephanine ! Anastasio, who had no- 
ticed my embarrassment and was acquainted 
with its origin, evidently regarded with pity 
that feebleness of mind which had prevented me 
from braving the raillery of the circle in defence 
of my property ; and for my own part, I was so 
irritated against the promoter of the mischief, 
that when a second forfeit became due I no 
longer hesitated to tender money in pledge to 
the offender. 

" Mademoiselle Sandoni," said I, with a 
glance which I fancy touched her nearly, " must 
condescend to take charge of that which I was 
just now ashamed to produce for such a pur- 
pose." But the duke, taking the purse from 
my hand, replied for her, while she affected to 
busy herself with claiming the forfeits of the 
rest of the party, " No, no, Maldyn ! — one so- 
vereign will do at a time.— I am glad to see you 
are well provided ; for I never knew you so likely 
to be a loser as this evening. Take back your 

VOL. II. K 



194 THE OPERA. 

purse ! Unless you brighten up, we shall re- 
quire its whole (jontents — guinea after guinea. 
Ah ! fa. Baron ! comment va la pensee T* 

Cardigan's prophesies were fulfilled ; I grew 
more and more embarrassed; and when the 
game was over had not once conquered the 
post of " philosophy.'* But the forfeits were 
now to be cried ; and to my infinite annoyance I 
found that the penance imposed in redemption 
of my ring, was to proclaim from whence it 
came. I fancy there was no collusion in passing " 
this perplexing sentence ; for where trinkets are 
given in pledge, nothing can be more common 
':-^..- than an arrangement so calculated to provoke 
.Ibmbarrassment and equivocation ; but it was 
Tendered doubly tormenting to myself by Sir 
Herbert Manningfield's presence ; who, driven 
by our merriment from the perusal of the even- 
ing papers brought down by Colonel Sandoni, 
now sauntered towards us, and stood listening 
to the successive taxes imposed on our stupidity. 
" Whence had you the ring ? '' cried Miss 



THE OPERA. 195 

Fitzgerald, assuming the tone and gesture of 
Portia. . 

" De qui tenez vous cette bagiie ? " cried 
Silvestra. 

" I found it in the Vallee de Montmorencij* 
was my reply, but uttered with every appear- 
ance of disingenuousness. My colour rose, — my 
voice faltered. — Instead of entering into the 
sportive gaiety of the game, I assumed the air 
of a criminal under legal cross examination. 

"I thought" said Sir Herbert, much amused 
by my embarrassment, " I thought you were all 
compelled to declare the truth, the whole truth, 
and nothing but the truth? Adrian has not made 
put his claim. Ask him, Constance, when he 
found this ring in the Vallee de Montmorenci. 
You will discover, by sifting the matter, that he 
never even set foot in France." 

" Go away, go away, uncle," cried Miss 
Fitzgerald, compassionating my awkwardness. 
" You are not of our council." 

" / will attest the fact — since the honourable 

k2 



196 THE OPERA. 

gentleman's word is called in question," cried 
Anastasio Pignatelli ; " I was with him in the 
valley, and present when he found the ring." 

A general acclamation decreed that I was 

now entitled to my property ; and Mademoiselle 

Sandoni with a grave bow of congratulation 

immediately presented me with a ring which I 

instantly discovered to be none of mine. A 

second glance informed me that it was one I 

had given to Stephanine Haslinger, in that 

moonlight parting on the banks of the Elz ! — I 

had certain means of recognizing it ; for Adel- 

berg still wears one exactly similar, containing 

his mother's hair, which was purchased in Got- 

tingen at the same time of the same jeweller. 

It was plain that this provoking exchange had 

not been undesignedly made. Stephanine had 

probably taken this method of satisfying any 

doubts I might entertain of her identity. But 

then she retained possession of the only gift I 

ever extorted from my dear Cecilia: — a ring I had 

taken from her hand at a gypsey party in the 



THE OPERA. 197 

Vallee de MonfmorencL It was a small emerald 
antique, bearing the impression of a scorpion ; 
and enchased in a heavy Roman setting of a. 
peculiar kind. Nothing could be more difficult 
of imitation or easy of recognition. 

" Pardon me, Mademoiselle," said I, so as to 
be heard by Anastasio and Miss Fitzgerald, 
who were sitting between us ; " you have made 
a mistake ; this is not the ring I gave you." 

"Nay!" cried Silvestra affecting to search 
over the trinkets in her lap, " I am certain it zV 
the identical ring you gave me. Yours, Mr. 
Maldyn, was in fact the only one among the 
forfeits, with the exception of a very small hoop 
belonging to Miss Fitzgerald, which is here." 

And she produced a little fragile circlet as un- 
like my own as possible, and denounced me in 
an ironical tone to the party as attempting to 
make a false claim on the property of Constance* 

" A very fair subterfuge, — an excellent 
scheme !" cried the duke, aifecting to coun- 
tenance the accusation. " What say you, Miss 



198 THE OPERA. 

Fitzgerald — is it exchange no robbery? Do you 
authorize Mademoiselle Sandoni in giving up 
your ring to Maldyn ? '' 

"Certainly not!" replied Constance; "for 
though there is nothing mysterious or talismanic 
about mine — though I did not find it, like 
Sinbad the sailor, in a valley of diamonds, — 1 
prize it highly. Beside,'' said she, looking with 
a scrutinizing eye towards Silvestra and myself, 
and detectino; with a woman's fineness of obser- 
vation my air of resentment and Aer look of 
defiance, '' it seems there is no equivalent foi* 
my loss. Mr. Maldyn's ring is not at present 
forthcoming." 

*' He has it in his hand," said Stephanine, 
coolly. " I will pledge my word that it is his 
own. There caii be no mistake," said she, 
rising and shaking her dress so as to prove that 
it had not become entangled in her drapery. 

" Why, Maldyn, mo7i enfant , you are mad or 
dreaming !" cried Adelberg, officiously looking 
over my shoulder to examine the one I held ; 



.THE OPERA. 19D 

" that ring is certainly yours ; — I will venture 
•to swear that it is yours ; — I was with you when 
you bought it. Vo2/ez hierij monsieur le ducy* 
he continued, taking off his own and offering it 
in evidence, " elles se ressemhlent comme deux 
gouftes d'eau.'' • 

" Exactly ! " cried the duke, the Lady Charle^- 
villes, and the whole party. 

" Exactly ! " cried Anastasio Pignatelli, with 
an air of astonishment. " I never saw this ring 
before ; — it is not the one I imagined.'' 

" I never heard so much perjury except at 
the poll of an election," cried Sir Herbert Man- 
ningfield, again interfering. " Baron Adelberg 
is ready to swear he saw this ring purchased at 
a shop at Gottingen. Count Pignatelli that he 
was present when it was found at Montmo- 
renci. Mr. Maldyn protests in the face of both 
assertions that it is none of his, and Mademoi- 
selle Sandoni declares that it belongs to no 
,other person. Which are we to believe of all 
these conflicting witnesses ? " 



200 THE OPERA. 

'^ We all are right and all are wrong." cried 
I, attempting to turn into a jest a business 
which was beginning to excite the suspicions of 
more than one person present. " I acknowledge 
my error — can a penitent do more ? — And now 
revenons a nos moutons :-^wh.2it forfeit comes 
next ?" 

Silvestra, wholly unmoved by the surmises 
her extraordinary proceeding had called forth, 
immediately raised her fair hand containing 
some trinket which was adjudged to its owner, 
on the penalty of taking Sir Herbert Manning- 
field by the hand and leading him into the 
gallery; — an arrangement by which Cardigan 
contrived to get rid of his observation, and 
which was scarcely less welcome to myself. I 
saw that the general was still pondering over 
the unlucky Vallee de Montmorenci. 

But though eager to terminate a discussion 
nvolving so many embarrassing mysteries, I 
cannot suffer this business of the ring to rest. 
Since Stephanine has thought proper to venture 



THE opera; 201 

on so bold a step, she must have made up her 
mind to provoke an explanation which, for 
both our sakes, should have been avoided. I 
own it will grieve me to deal with her in the cold 
and severe manner her conduct has necessitated/ 
Without attaching undue importance to her 
peculiar claims on my consideration, I cannot 
but admit that she is one of the most fascinating 
women I ever beheld. Her beauty is enhanced 
by talents of the most varied and attractive de- 
scription ; her talents by a graceful gentleness 
of demeanour which seems as incompatible with 
her profession as with the opinion I once formed 
of her character. I really do not much wonder 
at the enthusiasm with which she has been 
universally greeted ! 

Immediately after supper, Colonel Sandoni 
having whispered to her that Lady Harriet and 
Countess Pignatelli had expressed a wish to 
hear the genuine Venetian dialect, she flew into 
an adjoining room, and returned in a minute 
with a black shawl twisted round her so as to 

K 3 



202 THE OPEEA. 

offer a very fair representation of the costume ; 
and snatching a mandolin from the piano, as- 
sumed the tone and dialect of a Venetian Con- 
tadina, with a degree of vivacity and humour 
which enchanted the two Pignatellis, to whom 
it was intelligible, and afforded considerable 
amusement to the rest of the party. At the ter- 
mination of a barcarola which caused the Lady 
Charlevilles to grow pale with envy and vexa- 
tion, she dropped on one knee, extending her 
hand to beg for charity ; and the duke taking 
a beautiful moss-rose from the jardiniere threw 
it to the graceful Venetian. I would have given 
worlds for courage to seize on this occasion for 
returning the ring she had attempted to impose on 
me ; — but I was apprehensive of provoking a scene. 
A nod from her father terminated the exhibi- 
tion, and the lovely Venezianetta disappeared. 
But on re-entering the saloon, we found her 
with a long white drapery thrown over her 
dress, prepared to amuse us with an exhibition 
of a very different description. 



THE OPERA. 203 

Cardigan having often expressed his anxiety to 
witness her powers as an improvisatrice, which 
were highly vaunted by the letters of his Parisian 
friends, Silvestra was now preparing to gratify him, 
by requesting from various persons present a sub- 
ject for her declamations. The usual routine of 
heroic themes, — " Liberty,'' " The decadence of 
Greece," "The pleasures of memory," "The 
discovery of America," &c. &c., were accordingly 
written down on slips of paper, and shaken 
together in a vase ; one of which, drawn forth at 
her desire by Adelberg, contained the monosyl- 
lable " Home." Scarcely had he uttered the 
word, when Stephanine, after striking a full chord 
of the harp near which she had stationed her- 
self, assumed the attitude of one who gazes on 
the varying features of a landscape, advanced a 
few paces, and burst into a wild apostrophe, of 
which the following translation affords only a 
more rhythmical version. 



204 .THE OPERA. 



Bright streamers sweep athwart the evening sky, 

Heav'n-tissued banners, gorgeous with the gleam 
Of yellow sunset. Stern and solemnly 

Amid the pinegroves, — mystic as a dream — 
The columned temples stand I Gaze — gaze on them ! 

Behold the ocean stretching far away 
Where the proud city, like a diadem. 

Circles the jutting rocks. How the leaves play. 
Rustling and sporting o'er us ! Hear, oh ! hear 
Nature's soft voice low whispering in thine ear, 

*' Hence with thy spell ! — its sounds and sights sublime 

Are fruitless all ! The orange-blooms that flaunt 
In the warm sighs of thy love-breathing clime, — 

Its lofty mountain-top — its gentle haunt 
Of tangled wood, or tufted mead, or plain 

Where wandering shepherds pipe, and the long fern 
Shelters the coney and its young, — in vain 

Crowd on my listless soul. Still, still I turn 
From the green landscape — from the marble dome. 
To think — to yearn — to pray — to weep — for Home." 

Mark mid yon clustering cork-trees, rainbow hued. 

Gay lories flutter round on glancing wings; 
While high above, in regal solitude. 

The palm-tree's stem a loftier shadow flings : 
Lo ! falling blossoms, like a starry shower. 

Brighten the air they mock with od'rous breath. 
Lo ! opening buds proclaim each voiceless hour. 

And fading cystus-flowers foreshow the death 
Of fading day ! — Behold— behold expand 
Around thy path the patriarch's promised land. 



.THE OPERA. 205 

*' Wizard, avaunt ! — I loathe thy wanton skies, — 

Nor flowers, nor fragrant airs, my envy move, — 
Heaven's awful throne itself appears to rise 

On the stern mountains of the land I love ! 
What tho' a misty shroud o'erhangs the hill, — 

What tho' the scanty herhage sickens there, — 
What tho' e'en summer's breath blows rude and chill, — 

Amid that desert scene and atmosphere 
My heart expands in blessings ! — Scomer ! — Come, 
Judge, judge the smile that decks the face of Home !" 

What can all this mean ! By what miracle of 
inspiration has tliis extraordinary woman attained, 
not only so remarkable a facility in a difficult 
foreign language, but so elevated a tone of sen- 
timent and diction? — I was standing foremost in 
a group of men who are among her most public 
and professed admirers ; Cardigan himself, the 
Pignatellis, Adelberg, Villevargues, Brabazon, 
Bruton, and Crawford ; and a murmur of half- 
repressed applause stimulated her efforts at the 
close of every period. But I could not help 
feeling that it was to my ear she addressed her- 
self; and that it was on myself the full and 
powerful expression of her clear blue eye was 
fixed. 



206 THE OPERA. 

Am I so unfortunate as to retain an influence 
in lier bosom ? Does she, — the worshipped of 
princes, — the idol of the most illustrious, the 
most commanding, — condescend to waste her 
affections on one to whom the gift is so utterly 
valueless? Or, after all, is she doubly a de- 
ceiver? 

How is it possible to rely on the sincerity of 
a person who is capable of assuming all dis- 
guises and the semblance of every human pas- 
sion at her own good pleasure ? Even bent as 
I am on the recovery of Cecilia's ring, I own I 
shrink from the explanation which must precede 
its restoration. There is something to me 
almost awful in the perfection of dissimulation 
practised by this woman ; it seems abetted by 
the inspiration of an evil spirit ! 

I am beginning to wish I had accompanied 
Bagot to Paris. Nothing would annoy me more 
than that either Sir Herbert Manningfield or 
Miss Fitzgerald should obtain the least insight 
into this disgraceful business. 



THE OPEHA.* 207 



CHAPTER XII. 



In life, love doth much mischief 3 sometimes like a Syren — 
sometimes like a Fury, 

Bacon's Essays. 



" Neville Hillj Tuesday. 

" Yes ; we must part ! I have at length 
attained the courage to acknowledge that ne- 
cessity — the firmness to write those words ; and 
welcome indeed would be the conviction that 
they are likely to be received with half the 
anguish it costs me to transcribe the sentence, 
I am discontented with myself, Adrian; and, 
therefore, with yo^t. I rebel against the decrees 
of Providence ; — ^is it wonderful that I should 



208 THE OPEllA. 

resent your own conduct ? — I know that during 
my illness you were an anxious inquirer after 
my welfare. My servants, my friends, unite to 
re-assure my misgivings, by acquainting me 
with the frequency of your visits to the hotel 
during my illness. Perhaps I have no just 
cause for displeasure ; perhaps I am unreason- 
able, peevish, inconsistent; yet, methinks, had 
I been situated as you were then, I should have 
burst all bonds of common ceremony, and 
rushed to the side of one who was encompassed 
for my sake with the snares of death. You 
were not wont to be so prudent ! — I can under- 
stand, I can forgive the deliberate resolution 
which decreed that we must meet no more ; — but 
where — where — did you find the fortitude en- 
abling you to persist in such a detennination, in 
the face of my suiferings — in the face of my 
danger ? I search my own heart, and find no- 
thing: that can match with such stern steadiness 
of purpose! 

" How shall I address you ? — I was wont, iu 



THE OPERA. 209 

the secrecy of my heart, to call you Adrian — 
my Adrian ; but I dare no longer maintain the 
dangerous associations with which that name is 
connected. I would wilHngly learn to consider 
you as my friend, kinsman, cousin ; — ^but those 
names convey at present only a painful warning 
to my ear. — *■ Mr. Maldyn — Lord Abbotscourt' — 
what records of suffering, past, present, and to 
come, lie condensed in those unmeaning words ! 
Why — why should they involve two beings, in- 
nocent as ourselves, in their ruinous influence ? 
I will call you my beloved ! — Yes ! for a while 
— for a few short weeks that are requisite to 
reconcile me to all these changes. I will, I 
must still call you my beloved ; in my appeal to 
your heart — in the bitter self-reviling of my 
own — in my intercessions for the favour of 
Heaven. — Oh ! what will become of us, should 
its aid be denied in calming the struggle that 
still labours in my heart ! 

" What have I done to merit this strange, this 
cruel ordeal? — I sought you not — outraged no 



210 THE OPERA. 

3uty in devoting^ my whole heart to reward your 
aiFection — infringed no tie, no obhgation, in my 
secret vow to become your's for ever ! Through 
my childhood — my youth, I was a patient and 
submissive daughter to my afflicted father — my 
imperious mother. I obeyed her, even in be- 
stowing myself on a man I could not love ; and 
in remaining ostensibly his wife, long after the 
closer marriage vow was broken. I w^ould not 
injure her in the eyes of the world, by revealing 
to what a husband she had consigned her only 
child. — He died ! — I insulted his memory by 
no demonstrations of indifference ; I profited 
by the liberation of my hand, only to be- 
stow my heart on one who approached me in 
a character of humility and virtue. Wealth 
and titles were at my feet ; but the Hanoverian 
stranger attracted my sympathy by the gene- 
rosity of his sentiments and the disinterested- 
ness of his love. — Where was the error of all 
this ? — Which was the cause that brought upon 
me so horrible a retribution ? 



THE OPERA. 211 

" Adrian ! — from my first hour till now, every 
painful reminiscence of my life is connected 
with yourself ! — My first tears were shed when 
the little playfellow of my infancy was torn 
from us by your father's interposition; and 
often, very often, were they renewed, when I 
perceived in after-days that all my tenderness, 
and all my submission, were insufficient to con- 
sole my mother for the loss of her unacknow- 
ledged nephew. I was jealous of her love for 
you, even while I loved you myself with all 
the recollected endearments of infancy. Time 
passed on — I forgot you ; the name of Adrian 
vanished from our household records. — But a 
period at length arrived, when I was taught to 
regard with the affection of a woman, that 
cousin who had been so much beloved as a 
child. Many sought my hand — many attempted 
to interest my feelings ; — ^but my mother pointed 
it out as my duty, to preserve both unshackled 
for that nephew of my father's on whom she 
had determined to bestow them. * Mr. Maldyn, 



212 THE OPERA. 

was already familiarly referred to as my future 
husband ; and I was assured that your foreign 
education alone induced you to defer the com- 
pletion of our engagement. 

" Would I could forget my mother's frantic 
fury on learning that her desire of placing me 
at the head of the Maldyn family was wholly 
frustrated ! My unfortunate father was scarcely 
laid in that grave which afforded no darker im- 
prisonment than that to which his mental infir- 
mities had for years consigned him, than she 
formally proposed our union to the new Lord 
Abbotscourt, and was stung to madness by the 
contempt which marked his rejection. Oh ! 
that I had remained in ignorance of all the 
horrible revelations her frenzy brought to light ! 
Child as I was, I felt that your father was justi- 
fied in the harshness of his refusal ; — that the 
daughter of Katharine Darley, and the son of 
Cecil, were destined to eternal estrano;ement. — I 
persuaded myself to think of him as a stranger, 
• — almost as an enemy ! 



THE OPERA. 213 

" Though grieved to know myself an unoffend- 
ing object of detestation to my uncle, I dreamed 
not that my trials were only then beginning. 
My mother, eager to complete her matrimonial 
engagements with Lord Wroughton and to 
escape all suspicion of the injurious rejection of 
her daughter, insisted on my union with the 
least welcome of my suitors. Mr. Perceval was 
heir to an earldom ; his estates were contiguous 
to those of the Templetons, which must one day 
become my own ; — what more was desirable in 
my future husband ? — Lady Wroughton issued 
her fiat; and I became the repining wife of a 
heartless profligate. Adrian, in the ignominy of 
this degradation, — in the bitterness of my 
destiny, — often and grievously did I upbraid 
those unknown relatives whom I regarded as 
the chief origin of my misfortunes ! 

"The compassion of Mr. Perceval's family 
declared me to be justified in severing myself 
from all but the name of wife. Even from that 
I was shortly released ; he died a victim to in- 



214 THE OPERA. 

temperance ; and in the kindness and affection 
of my old playmate, Lady Neville, I promised 
myself a new life of tranquillity and joy. In the 
course of our sojourn at Paris, you were intro- 
duced by Anastasio Pignatelli to our little 
circle ; and in the intimacy which soon united 
us, my joy was indeed increased, but my tran- 
quillity departed, and for ever. — Adrian ! — how 
was it you so rapidly, so unreservedly, ob- 
tained those affections which had been obsti- 
nately withheld from other and far more perse- 
vering pretendants ? — How was it I so soon 
learned to love you, — to confide in you ? — Was 
it nature speaking in my heart ; — was it the kin- 
dred blood which rose up within my bosom and 
told me you were my own ? — I know not — I 
care not! I can scarcely remember at what 
period I discovered that the whole happi- 
ness of my life was concentrated in its con- 
nexion with your own. — ^Why should I seek to 
recall it now ? — My cousin ! let us bow to the 
decree which bids us regard those bonds as 



THE OPERA. 215 

unhallowed of Heaven ; let us submit ourselves 
patiently to the wisdom which prompts me to 
declare that this letter must terminate all com- 
munication between us. — My Adrian ! — my be- 
loved ! farewell. — All happiness and peace be 
with you. "C. P." 

Such was the letter I found upon my dressing- 
table on retiring for the night; which Ebene 
informs me was brought hither by one of Lord 
Neville's servants late in the evening. What 
mingled emotions of joy and anguish oppressed 
me in the perusal; what varying dreams of hope 
and desperation flitted alternately before my 
eyes ! Cecilia, loving me thus, — thus avowing 
her attachment, — could I have pictured to myself 
a more enchanting termination to my long tedious 
year of absence and probation! — My cousin, 
the daughter of Lady Wroughton, avowing her 
belief that the family of Maldyn stands accursed 
in the records of fate, and that our own irrevo- 
cable estrangement must propitiate its evil ge- 



216 THE OPERA. 

nius, could my soul shrink beneath a more 
afflicting condemnation ! 

I have sometimes fancied that to be convinced 
of her participation in my feeling, w^ould dimi- 
nish my load of misery ; but now methinks I 
would give worlds to know that I suffer alone ; — 
to be able to think of those beloved eyes as 
unstained with tears, — of that bright and joyous 
disposition as still irradiating the path of life 
for herself and all around her. — If I could but 
see her for one short hour in all the delusive 
happiness of the days we passed together ! — If 
I could but linger once again by her side, 
doubtful — almost despairing of her love, yet 
drawing fresh and thrilling auguries from every 
gentle word vouchsafed by her lips, — from every 
more gracious glance rewarding my efforts to 
win her regard. — Even those nights of sleepless 
excitement, when — after a day passed in her 
society, I used to beguile the tedious hours by 
recalling to mind every look, every smile, every 
Sentence which had embellished her presence, — 



THE OPERA. 217 

now seem to excite my regrets as a season of 

joy; for then I could permit myself to cherish 

and dwell on such remembrances, — to invoke 

the image of CeciUa, — to revel in the ideal joy of 

lending to her lips a still more flattering avowal, 

to her eyes a yet more tender expression. The 

livelong night she was before me — speaking, 

listening, smiling ; — and I dismissed the illusive 

enchantment only to rush in the morning to 

her presence, — again to linger by her side, — again 

to feel her breath upon my cheek, — again to 

tremble beneath the accidental touch of her 

hand. — Oh ! that we could be thus once more, 

were it but for a day — an hour — a single minute ! — 

Even the indulgence of such affection as is 

sanctioned by the ordinary claims of kindred 

would be some relief to the wretchedness of that 

fate which the gloominess of our fortunes has 

overshadowed. Yet no ! — 'tis better as it is ! 

I had too long allowed myself to consider her as 

my future wife, to content myself with the poor 

exchange of a cousin's privilege of friendship. 

TOL. II. L 



218 THE OPERA. 

Shall I, dare I, venture on an appeal to Lady 
Wroughton's compassion? — to my father's 
mercy ? — He loves me — he has no other tie on 
earth than that which unites him with his son. 
Surely I might presume on its influence, and 
entreat him to suspend his judgment, to see 
Cecilia, become acquainted with her character, 
her disposition. Yes ! her very attachment to 
myself would plead strongly with him for 
sympathy and indulgence. 

Yet how could I even phrase so unwelcome a 
petition, so disgraceful a detail ? — Shall I say " I 
have outraged your confidence, my dear father, 
disobeyed your commands ; while you were 
enduring the privations of a penurious economy 
to forward my education, while you believed me 
to be prosecuting my studies at Hanover, I was 
wasting my time and means at Paris. The 
vacation you supposed me to pass in a tour 
among the Hartz mountains, I dissipated in the 
formation of connexions revolting to your heart." 
Shall I tell him that the very daughter of 



THE OPERA. 219 

Katharine Darley, whose advances he repelled 
with scorn, has obtained an influence over my 
bosom superior even to the impulses of filial 
affection ? — Shall I tell him that he must sanc- 
tion my union with his brother's child, or pre- 
pare to see my youth wither before his eyes, 
and find himself condemned to a solitary sur- 
vival of his predestined race ? — 

Oh ! no, no ! — I cannot consent to afflict, to 
insult, to aggrieve him thus. What a father 
has he been to me ! — He shall know nothing of 
all this ; he shall never hear Cecilia's name ; 
never learn how fondly, how madly I loved her ! 
He shall only see how patiently I can endure 
my untold sorrow, — how calmly resign the pros- 
perities of life, and turn from a world the 
better joys of which were denied me from the 
veiy hour of my birth. 

Wednesday. — My appearance to-day must be 
strongly indicative of the mental struggle in 
which I passed the night ; for I found it impos- 
sible to evade or silence the inquiries and con- 

l2 



220 THE OPERA. 

dolences with which I was greeted on my 
appearance in the breakfast-room. Lady Har- 
riet Manningfield kindly proposed a thousand 
remedies for my head-ache; and Sir Herbert, 
whose Indian experience suggests but a single 
shape for bodily suffering, insists that I am un- 
dergoing a severe attack of fever. I have pro- 
mised them that I will not leave the house ; but 
the moment the party is dispersed for the day, 
I shall order my horse and ride over to the 
neighbourhood of Neville Hill. I should like to 
obtain a correct notion of the spot, to look upon 
the house in which Cecilia resides. Lady Ne- 
ville informed Adelberg that she obliges Mrs. 
Perceval to take a daily drive for the benefit of 
her health. Perhaps I may meet them. To 
catch a passing glimpse of her countenance can- 
not surely prove injurious to either of us. 

Mademoiselle Sandoni did not appear at the 
breakfast-table; and I understood she was to 
pass the morning with Constance in Mrs. Fitz- 
gerald's dressing-room. The Ladies Charleville 



THE OPERA. 221 

were radiant with smiles, in anticipation of this 
arrangement ; and I heard them making an 
appointment with Gustavus and Villevargues, 
for a rehearsal of their vaudeville in the music- 
room. By these means I flattered myself I 
should have the book-room for my solitary 
meditations, till I had an opportunity of evading 
Sir Herbert's watchfulness; and having seen 
the duke take his departure across the quad- 
rangle towards the stables, vdth the Pignatellis,. 
Bruton, and Brabazon, I stole through the 
conservatory, and hastily opened the door of 
my favourite chamber. It was too late to 
retreat; although the sight of Constance and 
the prima donna, seated together on a sofa and 
engaged in the perusal of the same volume, gave 
me a strong disinclination to remain. I felt 
unwilling to witness such profanation. — I longed 
to place myself between them, and sever the 
upright spirit from the fallen angel. — 

" Come in, Mr. Maldyn," cried Miss Fitz- 
gerald; "pray come in, and let us judge for our- 



222 THE OPERA. 

selves whether my uncle's announcement of 
your approaching demise is likely to put an end 
to the festivities of Donningwell. Sir Herbert 
has been assuring Mademoiselle Sandoni that 
a young gentleman in the house is labouring 
tinder an attack of the typhus fever. Qu'en 
dites vous ma chtre ? — Do you see any very 
alarming symptoms in his countenance V^ — 

" I am not sufficiently familiar with the ordi- 
nary appearance of Monsieur Maldyn to pro- 
nounce an opinion/' said Stephanine, with an 
arch glance towards me, which provoked me 
beyond measure. 

" I assure you it very little resembles his 
aspect of to-day/' said Constance. " I never 
saw his colour rise and fall with half the rapidity 
it is doing in resentment of the impertinence of 
our investigation. We must graciously sanction 
his departure, or thunder will accompany the 
lightning. Having satisfied our own curiosity, 
we permit you to amuse yourself elsewhere.*' 

" Nay," said I — feeling that I should cut a 



THE OPERA. 223 

most ridiculous figure in thus seeming to obey 
the peremptory mandate of two contemptuous 
women, and perceiving that Villevargues, who 
was stretched at full length on a chaise longue 
at the further end of the room, though affecting 
to read a new hrochure, was in fact attentively 
noting our proceedings — " since you have in- 
vited me into your presence, you must endure 
the penance of mine so long as I choose to pro- 
long your punishment." 

" Taut que vous voudrez/^ replied Mademoiselle 
Sandoni, laying aside her book with a courteous 
smile. " You must undertake the task of amus- 
ing us instead of leaving us the labour of amus- 
ing ourselves." 

" To you, who are so much accustomed to 
minister to the entertainment of others, that can 
be no very difficult task." 

" I fancied the history of Carlini and the 
mask was sufficiently well known to instruct all 
Europe in the natural dulness of all theatrical 
puppets !" said Silvestra,with some bitterness, and 



224 THE opera; 

pointedly generalizing herself with the mem- 
bers of the calling to which I had so uncere- 
moniously referred. " Philosophers assure us 
that the sun which emits such scorching rays, 
possesses no inherent heat," she continued ; " and 
I, who am so often rewarded with the cheers and 
laughter of an audience, should find it impossible 
to elicit a single grain of merriment from my own 
soul. Even you, who appear to set some value 
on my powers, I defy even you, Mr. Maldyn, 
to enliven me to the amount of one genuine 
smile." 

'' But there are so many sorts of smiles," 
cried Villevargues, jumping up from his sofa, 
delighted to find the two studious ladies about 
to engage in conversation, " many of which a 
man would be unwilling to extort from the lips 
of beauty. There are smiles of contempt, of 
pity, as well as of encouragement, approval, 
affection, and rapture. Each admits of many 
constructions, according to the spectator's vanity; 
and, for my own part, I prefer the homage of a 



THE OPERA. 225 

single tear to all the smiles that ever irra- 
diated the human face divine." 

'' Perhaps you are right/' said I, musingly ; 
for at that moment I remembered how much 
more profoundly my heart had been touched by 
Cecilia in her hour of depression, than in her 
season of triumph and rejoicing. "Tears cer- 
tainly afford a far more eloquent appeal." 

** Have you any inclination that Mr. Maldyn 
should exercise his ingenuity by trying to make 
us cry ?" inquired Miss Fitzgerald, turning to 
her companion. " How do you augur of his 
powers ? — Do you fancy him skilled ' to soften 
rocks and bend the knotted oak ? ' — to touch our 
hearts into a becoming mood for the luxury of 
woe ? "— 

" No V* said Silvestra, with some dignity; " I 
should imagine that the tears to which Mr. 
Maldyn might attempt to give rise, 'would 
turn to sparks of fire.' For my own part, I have 
no hesitation in assuring him that he is incapa- 
ble of commanding mine." 

L o 



^26 THE OPERA. 

*' Far be it from me to hazard the attempt/* 
said I. " I must leave you to choose, Made- 
moiselle, between the infinite variety of smiles 
so curiously defined by Monsieur de Villevar- 
gues." 

" After all," observed Miss Fitzgerald, evi- 
dently surprised by the acrimonious tone we had 
mutually adopted, " our smiles and tears depend 
very little on extrinsic causes. They are phy- 
sical impulses connected with the human con- 
stitution; and unless their sources lie within 
lourselves, even the divining rod of genius be- 
comes powerless in the search. Unless the ele- 
ments of pathos are ' hived in our bosom like 
the bag o' the bee,' Lear may lament over Cor- 
delia, and Hector breathe his parting vows to 
Andromache from now till Doomsday, without 
moving our ' pebblestone of a heart.' '* 

*'I suspect that the sting rather than the 
honey is hived in mine !" exclaimed Villevar- 
gues, with the fond egotism of a Frenchman ; " I 
never feel inclined to weep, unless for rage !*^ 



THE OPERA. 227 

*^ Like Cassius,'* — said Miss Fitzgerald, " or a 
spoiled child quarrelling with its own bad tem- 
per ! — While I can^weep for all sorts of sentir 
mental woes, from La Fleur's dead ass to the 
defunct heroine of a provincial tragedy. I never 
yet, however, stared sorrow face to face, and 
can hardly conjecture the influence of real 
affliction ; but I am inclined to fancy that 
on such an occasion, I should be silent and 
dignified.'* 

" May you never amend your experience V 
cried I, very fervently and very sincerely ; and 
Constance appeared so much startled by this 
sudden and public effusion of gallantry, that I 
almost regretted I had given it utterance. Per- 
ceiving that Mademoiselle Sandoni was prepared 
to resent my ill-timed vivacity, I seized an 
early opportunity, which was no longer resisted 
by Miss Fitzgerald, to quit the room. — Shall I 
ever find courage to have a tete-a-tete with the 
woman who thus daringly defies me ? — I fancy 
I must take shelter in a crowd ; and defer my 



228 THE OPERA 

remonstrances on the subject of the ring, till the 
confusion of the vaudeville this evening shall 
enable me to give a free course to the expression 
of my feelings and opinions. 



THE OPERA. 229 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Portia. I'll take this ring from you. 

Do not draw back your hand, — I'll take no more. 
And jou in love shall not deny me this. 

Bas. This ring, good sir, alas ! it is a trifle ; 

I will not shame myself to give you this. 

Merchant of Venice. 



Wednesdai/ night. — Never was I more dis- 
agreeably situated than at the dinner-table this 
day. I thought myself fortunate in escaping 
the chance of being compelled to offer my arm 
to Mademoiselle Sandoni, and in being seated 
as usual next to Miss Fitzgerald; but before 
the appearance of the dessert, I had ample rea- 
son to regret being stationed so near her. 



230 THE op:eea. 

This morning, as I was loitering on horseback 
beneath the garden wall at Neville Hill, fixing my 
observations on the place and earnestly hoping 
to catch a momentary glimpse of Cecilia, I ob- 
served Lord Neville, whom I had imagined to 
be riding with the Manningfields and their 
party, taking a deliberate survey of me from some 
little distance. I rode off before he had tim6 
to approach, and I trust, before he had occasion 
to recognise me. But what was he doing there 
at all? — Living on the terms he does with his 
wife, one would fancy it his policy to seize the 
pretext of a few days' visit to Donningwell, 
to get rid of her cool contempt; — yet he 
hurries back again without reason or motive, 
unless for the purpose of tormenting her by his 
xmexpected return. Neville is a surly, ill-con- 
ditioned animal, and wholly unsuited to so gen- 
tle and amiable a wife. I have many times 
heard it remarked as an extraordinary coinci- 
dence, that two husbands so worthless as Per- 
ceval and his lordship should have been un- 



THE OPERA, 231 

justly apportioned to women so superior as Ce- 
cilia and her friend. Were it not for the excel- 
lence of Lady Neville's principles, and a certain 
coldness of character only too fortunately con- 
nected with a position such as hers, I own I 
should augur ill from her excessive intimacy 
with Anastasio. It is now two years since he 
first made his attachment apparent ; yet still 
she perseveres in inviting him to her house, and 
accepting his homage. — Has any woman a right 
to trust herself so far ? — 

Scarcely were we seated to-day at the dinner- 
table when, addressing himself to Brabazon 
who was placed opposite, Lord Neville com- 
menced a system of inquiry into the morning 
proceedings of the whole party, evidently from 
no ordinary motive of curiosity. He informed 
himself accurately, though with seeming list- 
lessness, who had been riding — who walking — 
who staying at home in the billiard-room ; till 
at length from the nature of his cross examina- 
tion, I perceived he was bent on detecting 



232 THE OPERA. 

the mysterious person he had encountered at 
Neville Hill. On any other occasion, nothing 
would have been more natural to me than to in- 
form him I had been taking a morning ride in 
that direction ; but with Sir Herbert Manning- 
field's eyes fixed upon me, I had no courage to 
admit that I had any peculiar interest in the 
place. In vain, however, did I attempt to en- 
gage my attention in an animated conversation 
with Constance. During the intervals of ques- 
tion and answer, I still caught detached por- 
tions of the discussion, which became more and 
more embarrassing j and every moment I ex- 
pected to hear details demanded and given, 
such as must have proved satisfactorily to Sir 
Herbert, Miss Fitzgerald, Mademoiselle San- 
doni, and the two or three others who were 
within hearing, that instead of passing the 
morning according to my own avowal in 
writing letters for the foreign post, I had been 
lurking in the neighbourhood of Lord Neville's 
habitation ! — The Manningfields have been 



THE OPERA. 233 

made aware by the Duke of Cardigan's an- 
nouncement that Mrs. Perceval is on a visit to 
her friend ; and the remainder Tof the party 
would probably attribute my equivocation on 
the subject to some discreditable motive. The 
last words I heard uttered by Brabazon were, 
" No one here rides an iron-gray but Pignatelli ; 
with the exception of Maldyn, — but he has not 
left the house to-day." 

To this assertion I turned a deaf ear, and- 
trembled only lest Lord Neville should address 
me with a direct inquiry; but to my infinite 
relief he contented himself with muttering 
several times, " Very extraordinary — I cannot 
make it out — very extraordinary indeed.'^ And 
the subject dropped. 

Just, however, as I was congratulating my- 
self on my escape from a public exposure of the 
strange reserve I had "practised in this mys- 
terious visit, Miss Fitzgerald observed to me, in 
a low voice, not sufficiently whispered to attract 
the attention of the party, " Another time, when 



234 THE OPERA. 

you do not wish to hear what is going on at the 
opposite side of the table, let your own share of 
the dialogue be somewhat more lively. / am 
not called upon to acquaint Lord Neville, in 
mitigation of his seeming uneasiness on the 
subject, that Mr. Maldyn and his iron-gray 
have left the house this morning, and been seen 
wandering in divers directions in the forest ; 
and therefore I may stand excused. But nothing 
can exonerate yon for remaining silent on the 
occasion, except a plea which, although the 
true one, you would hesitate to give ; — that the 
secret is a woman''s secret. — Don't look so much 
alarmed ; instead of requiring an answer either 
negative or affirmative to my proposition, I am 
going to devote myself for the next ten minutes 
to the task of amusing Ugo Pignatelli, who is 
very much out of humour just now because he 
came in too late for the fish course." 

A woman's secret 1 — What can Miss Fitzge- 
rald mean .'* — Have any rumours of my attach- 
ment to Mrs. Perceval reached her ears ? — Is she 



THE OPERA. 235 

aware of the misunderstanding existing between 
us I — I trust not ! Sir Herbert could not, in that 
case, fail to become acquainted with the business, 
and I have not couraae to encounter the blunt 
comments of his dissatisfaction. Before Con- 
stance turned towards me for a renewal of our 
conversation, she had contrived to entangle Pig- 
natelli and Lady Sophia Charleville in the dialogue, 
and to direct it to some topic of general interest. 
I know not whether the change be owing to 
the instigation of her good taste and good feel- 
ing, but this evening no allusion was made to 
Mademoiselle Sandoni's professional excellence? 
and no reluctance shown to performing in her 
presence. The curtain drew up for the vaude- 
ville immediately after coffee, with as little 
hesitation as if the prima donna were already 
Duchess of Cardigan ; when, without affecting 
either to despise or to insult the Lady Charlevilles' 
performance by any vehement excess of applause, 
Mademoiselle Sandoni enacted the part of 
auditress and spectatress as ably as she acts 



236 THE OPERA. 

every other falling to her share. She exhibited 
no effort of indulgence, but simply seemed 
amused ; and the performers were soon induced 
to forget the presence of La Silvestra, 

Lady Clara, indeed, is an excellent actress : 
one of the best soiihrettes I ever saw on the 
boards. That line of character is invariably 
overacted by professionals, from its affinity 
to their own. In playing it naturally they 
fancy themselves tame and insipid ; but the 
fine-lady, who studies to appear the waiting 
woman or the grisette, copies it from the life, as 
something wholly foreign to her own nature ; and 
the imitation is unchecked by vexatious associa- 
tions. I suppose it is by the same rule that Bra- 
bazon was so admirable this evening in the part of 
a financier. It must have cost him some study to 
appear so inflated by prosperity — so oppressed 
by superfluous gold. Crawford, too, on a similar 
principle, undertook that of a sturdy peasant ; 
father to the Nitiette of the night,' who was 
faultlessly represented by Miss Fitzgerald. 



THE OPERA. 



237 



Silvestra herself could not have been more 
gracefully awkward — more cunningly artless ! 
The manner in which she mimicked the fopperies 
of Villevargues, as Vhomme de la cour et le dieu 
de la ville, was full of humour and talent. 

Having declined taking a part in the pieces 
on the plea of indisposition, I was in hopes of 
finding an opportunity in the course of the 
performance to address Stephanine without the 
embarrassment of a tke-a-ttte, or the annoyance • 
of observation. But just after dinner, Lord 
Bruton (who was to have taken the Lubin role) 
thought proper to set off for town ; summoned, 
he said, by a letter of importance which reached 
him with the evening papers, and which his 
sisters openly attributed to Lady Southford's 
hand-writing ; — and, at the risk of disappointing 
the whole party, I found myself obliged to walk 
through his part ! — Nothing could be more pro- 
voking than to appear in this disadvantageous 
position, in the presence of one so likely 
to triumph in my awkwardness as the prima 



238 THE OPERA. 

donna of the Italian Opera; unless it were the 
exaggerated praise bestowed on my efforts 
by that intolerable Colonel Sandoni. 

Whenever that man approaches me I feel my 
blood boil! — In spite of the elegance of his 
manners and the venerable respectability of his 
aspect, he must be a villain. What but villany 
could induce him to undertake such an impos- 
ture? — He is too old to be the lover of Ste- 
phanine — too well-bred and intelligent to be the 
humble instrument of her will; and every day 
I become more perplexed respecting the real 
part he is playing. In London I could better 
endure to see him form a sort of formal ap- 
panage to her train ; but here, in the country, 
in this intimate association, I feel myself inex- 
cusable in lending my tacit sanction to his 
collision with the party. In the course of to- 
morrow I am determined to seek an interview 
either with himself or the lady, and signify my 
mistrust and disapprobation of their proceedings. 
Should they still persevere, I must offer an ex- 



THE OPERA. 239 

planation to Cardigan on the subject, without 
further delay. 

While we were lounging about in the gallery, 
after the fall of the curtain, Ugo Pignatelli in- 
formed me, that the origin of Lord Bruton's 
abrupt departure for town was Miss Fitzge- 
rald's rejection of his hand. He protests that 
the proposal was made and declined in the 
course of their morning's ride ; and that Bruton 
only remained till dinner, that the arrival of the 
evening post might afford a plausible excuse for 
his sudden journey. 

" In my opinion," said he, with his usual su- 
percilious nonchalance, ** our little friend has 
done a very silly thing. She will never catch 
the duke— never — never — that is out of the 
question. He is evidently in love with La 
Sandoni ; and with all Constantia's heiresship, 
and piquancy, and the rest of her attractions, 
she is very unlikely to do better than secure an 
earldom, and a slave trained by such accom- 
plished hands as those of Lady Southford. 



240 THE OPERA. 

Bruton is one of the most gentlemanly men 
about town. If he had a guinea he could call 
his own, nobody would do things in better 
style; and were he once master of old Juno 
Fitzgerald's mint, he would astonish us all." 

" He would astonish ???e," said I, " if he had 
no other incentive in his proposals to her 
daughter." 

" Ah ! by the way, I forgot to whom T was 
talking," said Pignatelli, looking languidly in 
my face. " I forgot that you are the origin of 
his misfortunes."— 

" In what way ?" — 

" Lady Clara Charleville whispered to me 
just now (in the strictest confidence, for which 
reason I shall tell it to all my friends and half 
my acquaintance), that the fair Constance, hav- 
ing missed fire in her aim at the Duke of Car- 
digan, has made up her mind to bring you 
down in his stead ; that she prefers your 
heros de roman air, to Bruton's namby-pamby 
assiduities; and is determined to become the 



THE OPERA* 241 

Lady Viscountess Abbotscourt, or die un- 
mated." 

" I can understand Lady Clara's inducement 
to make me the object of her ridicule/' said I, 
with some indignation ; " for I have taken very 
little pains to disguise my contempt for the 
heartless coquetry evinced in her own conduct 
towards my friend, Sir Henry Bagot. But she 
has no business to give currency to groundless 
and impertinent surmises touching Miss Fitz- 
gerald ; who, I will stake my life upon it, never 
troubled her head or her heart respecting a 
person so little likely as myself to aspire to 
the disturbance of either." 

" I can only answer, with Moliere's Agnes, 
* iVe gagez pas ! ' I am very much of Lady 
Clara's opinion that the exertions displayed by 
the lovely Constance, this evening, were made 
far more in behalf of the prompter, than of the 
audience. I wish it were not so ; for I have 
often fancied she would make a very pretty 
little wife for 'Stasio; and her scudi might 

VOL. II. M 



242 THE OPERA. 

assist in patching up the tapestry of the Palazzo 
Pignatelh. I could not think of marrying her 
myself, — that would be an exertion far beyond 
my virtue. But my brother, you know, has a 
genius for thawing these frigid Northern beau- 
ties ; and as soon as he has wit enough to dis- 
cover the hopelessness of his devotion to Lady 
Neville, I shall try and persuade him to attack 
the Fitzgeralds, — parent-bird and chick, — with 
all the force of his classical acquirements. 
He must invocate the mother in hexameters, 
and the daughter in heroic measure ; and, unless 
you should oppose his pretensions " 

" Once for all," said I, " do not involve my 
name in any discussion oifensive to persons 
whom I regard with the warmest respect; 
but with whom I have neither the hope nor 
the inclination to form any closer con- 
nexion." 

" Come with me now, then, and testify your 
Vwarm respect' (is that the word ?) to the lovely 
Constance; for I have a civil nothing or two to 



THE OPERA. 243 

whisper to the Silvestra, and would not for 
worlds alarm our friend Cardigan, by crossing 
the room to speak to her alone. Miss Fitzge- 
rald is stationed, as usual, acting jackal to the 
fashionable lioness. Nay ! do not look so in- 
dignant ; — your ^ warm respect ' does not entitle 
you to become her champion." 

How disgusting is the coxcombry of an empty 
head ! — Lord Brabazon is by no means free 
from the affectation of a fine gentleman ; but 
then the blade he waves around him has temper 
and edge—it can smite as well as dazzle, and 
dazzle while it smites. Ugo Pignatelli's rather 
resembles the gilded dagger of a pageant, — a fit 
weapon to fulfil the purposes of a venomous 
heart, though unquaUfied for any heroic effort. 
I should put a peremptory stop to his in- 
solent way of talking of Miss Fitzgerald, but 
that Constance might resent my appropriating 
the honour of her defence, or perhaps, as- 
cribe my activity to serious pretensions to her 
hand. 

M 2 



244 THE OPERA. 

Were I less pre-occupied by the painful and 
perplexing position in which I find myself, 
nothing would amuse me more than to watch 
the peculiarities of English character revealed 
by the intimacy of a country house. In London, 
no man forms more than a single brick in the 
vast edifice of society ; he even loses all sense 
of his own identity in the overwhelming im- 
portance of the mass ; and while he sees others 
amused, moves onward with them in the general 
progress, and fancies he is amused himself. It 
is difficult to preserve the selfish consciousness of 
one's individual vexations while surrounded by 
myiiads of happy faces, and amid the incessant 
stir and tumult of the world. But in a small 
circle such as this, people are driven to their 
own resources, thrown upon their own responsi- 
bilities, and compelled to make their own ac- 
quaintance. Total solitude might perhaps 
afford a lesson more permanently useful ; but 
the melancholy seclusion which limits them for 
a time to the intercourse of some twenty or 



THE OPERA. 245 

thirty individuals, all dependent upon others 
for amusement, is not without influence. No 
crowd, no theatres, no orchestras, no variety, 
nothing current in the way of gossip but the 
coinage of their own brains ; — nothing attainable 
in the way of an exercise of human ingenuity, . 
except from their own exertions. — The dull are 
taught to discover their own dulness — the unac- 
complished their insipidity ; till terrified lest the 
fact should become apparent to others as well a^ 
themselves, they do their utmost in their own 
defence, and renounce for a time the indulgence 
of their indolent egotism and trivial vanity. The 
Ladies Charleville who, in Arlington Street, 
think only of diverting themselves, labour at 
Romford Park, or Donningwell Castle, for the 
entertainment of others ; and act, dress, dance, 
sing, ride, as much for our amusement as their 
own. Brabazon too, whose reputation as a wit 
is sufficiently established to enable him in town 
to eat his dinners in silence, feels himself ia 
some degree responsible here for the flatness of 



246 THE OPERA. 

the dialogue, and exerts himself to talk as well 
as listen for our gratification. 

I suppose it is the weariness of such efforts, 
and in many instances their total failure, which 
imparts so rare a charm to the plebeian lions, 
and professional beaux esprits one occasionally 
meets in the best circles. A man who can con- 
trive to secure my lord (his host) from the 
necessity of being witty and entertaining ; or a 
family of young ladies, whose petits talens can 
be put forward as a screen for the deficiencies of 
her ladyship's (their hostess) patrician offspring, 
are of inestimable value during the ordeal of the 
holidays. 

To some such cause too, I am willing to at- 
tribute the epicurism of the higher classes. 
The enjoyments of the table form a point 
of union dear to the selfishness of every 
guest; — producing no envy, requiring no disin- 
terested exertions, beguiling the tedium of a 
life of unmixed prosperity, and susceptible of 
the excitement of endless variety. The mansions 



THE OPERA. 247 

of the great cannot be provided with a more 
popular artist than a good cook ; for his mi- 
nistry becomes available at least three times 
in the twenty-four hours, without rendering 
him a burthen during the intervening period. 
The musician or the wit must be amused in his 
turn ; but Monsieur le chef requires no such re- 
ciprocation. He addresses his talents solely to 
the sensual and selfish gratifications of others ; 
and the art of cookery necessarily assumes a 
pre-eminence over all other fine arts, in the bril- 
liant retirement of the villa and the country 
seat. There is no need for calculation on 
the powers of pleasing exhibited by its pro- 
fessors. We are sometimes compelled to in- 
quire, " What shall we do with Rebus this 
evening? the Duke of Dorchester dines here, 
and you know how he hates a pun ; " or, " How 
shall we contrive to keep the Minims quiet? 
Lady Dunny is coming down, and she abhors 
music.'' But Monsieur Casserole and his three 
courses are sure of sympathy in every breast. 



248 THE OPERA, 

Brabazon was observing to me last night, that 
Mademoiselle Sandoni is the only professional 
genius he ever met in a comitry house who did 
not prove a heavy incumbrance. " For my own 
part," said he, " I like the music of the Charle- 
ville girls and Constance Fitzgerald, which is 
good enough to be pleasing, and bad enough to 
prove that they have passed some portion of 
their lives in doing something better than me- 
chanize the movements of their fingers and the 
expansion of their throats, far better than the 
cold perfection of a professional performer; and I 
should consider Rossini himself dearly bought 
at the expense of sitting beside him after dinner, 
or riding with him all the morning. But Silvestra 
is only a more accomplished and more elegant 
woman than the rest of the party ; and her father 
is a man on all accounts entitled to be amongst 
us." 

And this is the verdict pronounced by Bra- 
bazon (the most high-bred man among the 
7'oues of the day,) on an obscure and probable 
rascally adventurer ! 



THE OPERA. 249 

Thursday. — It seems there is to be a gathering 
together of the country neighbours this evening. 
The duke makes it a point of duty to generalize 
his hospitaUties at Donningwell ; and never fills 
the castle with London visiters, without inviting 
the lions and tigers of the country menagerie to 
appear among them once or twice in the course 
of his visit to Berkshire. The duchess dowager 
and her daughters being now abroad, Lady Har- 
riet Manningfield does the honours on these 
occasions ; which confirm the duke's popularity, 
and help to amuse those more fashionable guests, 
who are by no means sorry to secure an admiring 
audience. Donningwell has what is called in 
England, " a very good neighbourhood." I am 
rather curious to observe in what the society of 
the provinces differs from that of the capital. 

The Vaudeville is to be repeated on this 
occasion; and neither Miss Fitzgerald nor 
the Charlevilles will hear of my declining the 
part vacated by Lord Bruton. I know not 
whether it is my English nature, so long sub- 

M 3 



250 THE OPERA, 

dued by foreign associations which is at length 
breaking out, and whether I am gradually be- 
coming reserved and shy like some of the amiable 
youths I meet at Meriton's dinner parties, or the 
surly bear which growled at me one night at 
Covent Garden; but I own I have an insur- 
mountable distaste for these private theatricals. 
I cannot endure to make a buffoon of myself 
when my heart is so ill at ease. I must either 
do violence to my feelings, and exert myself to 
assume a vivacity hateful to me, or pass among 
these people for a blundering dolt incapable 
of giving point to a few sentences of playful 
dialogue. 

Yet no one here is able to undertake the cha- 
racter, unless Silvestra could be persuaded to 
overcome her objection to male attire. The 
fancy-dress of a peasant necessitates no very 
remarkable exposure, and I shall certainly 
suggest the alternative. Will she dare affect 
any prudery on such a point before me? — 
It will not do ! Accompanied by Lady Clara 



THE OPERA. 251 

Charleville, Villevargues, and Ugo Pignatelli, 
I made my way just now to the Gothic armoury, 
in which Miss Fitzgerald and Mademoiselle 
Sandoni were amusing themselves by persuading 
the duke to array himself in the panoply of some 
defunct ancestor. I certainly never saw him to 
such advantage as in mailed vest. His tall person 
assumes considerable importance in the stern 
dignity of armour; and the ladies present 
appeared of the same opinion, or their pane- 
gyric was strangely exaggerated. They have 
made him promise to sit to Lawrence as Hot- 
spur; and the charms and splendours of his 
grace produced such an overwhelming effect 
upon their minds, that the object of our em- 
bassy would have been forgotten but for the 
tenacious selfishness of Villevargues and Ugo. 
All their prayers and arguments were, however, 
wholly fruitless. The lady cast so soft and im- 
ploring a glance at Cardigan, that he hastened 
to relieve her from their importunities, by pro- 
nouncing the request to be unreasonable, and 



252 THE OPERA. 

hy Jrowniiig it to be offensive; and when, un- 
daunted by his imphed prohibition, I profited 
by my right over her acquiescence to urge the 
proposal as a personal favour to myself, she still 
refused, but with so sweet a smile, and such de- 
precating humility in her beautiful blue eyes, that 
I had not courage to persist in my demand. It 
seems pre-ordained that my instability of pur- 
pose, and incapability of saying " No,'' are 
to place me in a thousand disagreeable situa- 
tions. I would as soon stand to be shot at for 
half an evening, as expose myself to the criti- 
cisms of Lady Romford's fastidious tribe ! How 
glad I am that Anastasio is off to town. He 
left us yesterday with Bruton on pretext of a 
diplomatic commission from his father, whose 
foreign courier had just arrived with an express. 
I must look over the part before night, that 
I may not make a greater ass of myself than is 
necessary. The more I think of the undertak- 
ing, the more odious it becomes. I will go back 
to the music-room and remonstrate with Lady 
Clara. 



THE OPERA. 253 

What a disagreeable fellow is Ugo Pignatelli 
when be gives free course to that bitter vein 
concealed under his affectation of dandified in- 
anity ! " My dear Maldyn," said he, when I 
ventured to urge my disinclination to the exhi- 
bition to-night, " you require as much wooing 
as the jeune premiere of a strolling company ! 
Be assured we shall be quite as well convinced 
of the immensity of our obligation towards you^ 
in filling Bruton's place, without any more coy 
denials. If you will but promise to know your 
own mind, and not renew these shill-I-shall-I 
proceedings, / will undertake to inform the 
audience that your appearance is ' by extremely 
particular desire, and for this night only.' Miss 
Fitz, — Lady Clara, — unite with me in pre-assur- 
ing Mr. Maldyn of the gratitude of the whole 
county." 

" Should he say much more on the subject,'' 
cried Lady Clara, " I will teach the Duke of 
Cardigan's poodle to whine the part." 

"If you feel too much indisposed for the ex- 



254 THE OPERA. 

ertion, say so, and /will bring you off," said 
Miss Fitzgerald, aside ; " but you would really 
oblige me by not throwing the part into some 
stranger's hands. I am not anxious to play 
Ninette to the Lubin of some Captain A. or B. 
from the Windsor garrison." 

This appeal decided me : — vexatious as it is, 
I will undertake the task. — Plague on the vaude- 
ville and its contrivers ! — I had a presentiment it 
would tend to my annoyance in some way or 
other. 

We were forty at the dinner table to-day; 
and about a hundred persons are expected in 
the evening, which will terminate with a ball. 
It would create a vexatious discussion amons: 
all these people should any thing occur to im- 
pede the theatricals ; for it seems they are not 
often blest with so favourable an occasion for 
seeing lords and ladies make fools of themselves. 
Cardigan has therefore expressed his thanks to 
me for lending them my assistance so much in 
opposition to my own inclinations ; and I must 



THE OPERA. 255 

stumble through the platitudes of Lubin's tender 
passion as well as Miss Fitzgerald's laughing 
eyes will allow me. She is in charming spirits 
to-night 'j but what a pity that she pays so little 
attention to the niceties of the toilet ! A simple 
white gown, and her hair twisted round her 
head with an utter disregard to the pecu- 
liarities of fashion, will not do by the side of 

Mademoiselle Sandoni's Parisian brilliancy, I 
never saw Stephanine look so lovely. She ex- 
hibits the full triumph of beauty, illuminated 
with diamonds enough for a princess ; — tributes 
of admiration, I conclude, from the crowned 
heads with whom she has associated since she 
used to assist old Gretchen in milking her cows 
at Elzbach. Brabazon tells me that the county 
is in a fever of curiosity respecting her intimacy 
with its lord-lieutenant ; and that the squires' 
wives who are coming here to-night, are divided 
between their anxiety to see the renowned Sil- 
vestra, and the prudery which makes them doubt 
the propriety of receiving such a person. But 



256 THE OPERA. 

I must hasten to dress ; the performances begin 
in half an hour, and I have already heard several 
carriages enter the court-yard. 

Thursday/ night, — I am almost too much 
vexed and wearied to complete my record of 
the irritations of the day ; but to defer the task 
will not render it more agreeable. 

On reaching a gallery adjoining the temporary 
theatre, to which no one was admitted but those 
concerned in the representation, I found the Duke 
of Cardigan in close council with the little party. 
The spectators, he said, were all assembled and 
impatient for amusement ; but Miss Fitzgerald, 
who had been seized with indisposition while 
dressing for her part, could not yet make her 
appearance. " Nothing, indeed, but her good- 
natured anxiety to prove no obstruction 
to the entertainments of the evening, would 
induce her to quit her own room," said the 
duke; and already I began to hope that my 
theatrical genius would escape being put to the 
proof. 



THE OPERA. 257 

It was in vain I inquired what had been 
the matter with Miss Fitzgerald; — no one knew, 
no one cared ; — all were occupied with their own 
vanities, their own expectations. — Was it a fit 
of nervousness ? " No ! " — of timidity ? — " No ! 
no ! " Nothing was understood on the subject, 
except that she had turned faint after quitting 
the dining-room ; but could not be persuaded 
by her mother and Lady Harriet to give up the 
play. 

" Do you think," said the duke, addressing 
Lady Sophia Charleville, " that you could as- 
certain for me what chance we have of hasten- 
ing the business? They have all taken their 
places, and are waiting the drawing up of the 
curtain." 

" I will do my best," replied the young lady, 
mortified to find herself filling the part of ple- 
nipotentiary where she was so anxious to reign 
as sovereign ; " but I doubt whether I shall be 
admitted into the mysterious dressing-room. 



258 THE OPERA. 

Mrs. Fitzgerald and Mademoiselle Sandoni 
are with Constance, arranging her costume.''^ 

I had not, however, got through twenty words 
of inquiry and explanation on the subject, be- 
fore Lady Sophia returned, followed by Ste- 
phanine, hastily drawing on her gloves. " Miss 
Fitzgerald cannot make her appearance for half 
an hour to come," said she to the duke ; '^ but 
if you will accept my poor services to di- 
vert the impatience of your guests, the piano 
can be drawn on the stage, and I will try to 
please them with an English song I brought 
with me from Naples ; a little ballad, composed 
by the friend of your neighbour Lady Neville, 
tlie beautiful Mrs. Perceval. How say you? — 
Will that novelty suffice to excite them into good 
humour ? " 

Cardigan evidently hesitated ; and anxious 
as he was to remedy the embarrassment of the 
moment, I can only attribute his reluctance to 
profit by Silvestra's obliging offer, to a disincli- 



THE OPERA. 259 

nation that his country neighbours should 
have an opportunity of seeing her in any thing 
like a professional light. If Ugo Pignatelli's 
and Brabazon's opinions go for any thing, he 
is becoming really attached to her, and has 
serious thoughts of making her his wife ; and I 
suspect he is unwilling she should continue to 
attract the idolatry of the public. He had, 
however, no freedom of choice allowed him on 
this occasion. Villevargues and Pignatelli, who 
were standing by, ran to give orders respecting 
the piano ; and a few minutes afterwards, Sil- 
vestra, after a plaintive symphony, commenced 
one of the most enchanting airs I ever heard, to 
an audience enraptured with wonder and de- 
light. At the close of every stanza, an involun- 
tary shout of enthusiasm was heard in the little 
theatre. 



260 THE OPERA. 



BALLAD. 

So lately glad — so latelj blest — 
My heart so latelj bounding- free, 

Ah ! ■whence the struggle of my breast. 
Why is all nature changed for me 1 — 

I sicken of the weary hours — 
I shun the face of foe and friend — 

I tremble when the night-cloud lowers — 
I grieve when morning dews ascend. 

But 'tis not love — no ! 'tis not love 
That my bewildered mind o'erlords. 

Misleads my footsteps as I rove, 
And falters in my trembling words. 

No, 'tis not love ! — no plighted vow 
Of mutual faith hath sanctified 

These thrilling sighs that wildly glow — 
These silent tears that ceaseless glide !- 

Some nameless, hopeless, helpless grief. 
Corrodes my worn, my aching breast. 

Seared like the Autumn's withering leaf. 
And hastening to its bed of rest ! 



THE OPERA. 261 

For my own part I can scarcely define the ex- 
cess of pleasure I derived from the performance. 
To know that Cecilia must have occupied her- 
self during her sojourn in Italy with the ex- 
pression of regrets, tender and mournful 
as those illustrated by these verses — this 
touching air, — filled me with triumphant emo- 
tions ; and without even a passing reference to 
the singer, the song itself excited my heart to a 
degree of irrepressible enthusiasm. Uncon- 
sciously I joined a group consisting of the Duke 
of Cardigan, Villevargues, and the rest of the 
corps dramatique, and advanced with them 
towards the piano-forte, to unite our applause 
with that of the spectators. But as I stood 
entranced by the intense gratification of the 
moment, my eyes wandered involuntarily from 
the syren who was producing this potent en- 
chantment, to the brilliant audience crowding 
the theatre ; where, in one of the principal boxes 
I instantly discerned Lord Neville, seated 
between his w^feand — Mrs. Perceval ! — Cecilia 
was attired in a close white silk pelisse, and still 



262 THE OPERA. 

retained the delicate and faded look of an in- 
valid ; but never did I see her, never did I feel 
her to be so beautiful. The surprise of hearing 
her own ballad breathed by the lips of the most 
accomplished singer of modern Europe, lent a 
varying blush to her transparent cheek, and 
produced in her eyes a half timid, half trium- 
phant expression. Even from my remote po- 
sition I could perceive that she had some diffi- 
culty in repressing her agitation, and keeping 
her seat. 

At length the song. was over; and the ap- 
plause so excessive, that the duke whispered 
to me to lead Mademoiselle Sandoni forward ; 
— he seemed to shrink from connecting himself 
with her at such a moment in the eyes of the 
public. It was impossible to refuse ! — I tendered 
her my hand ; and while she was bending low 
and repeatedly to the spectators, in acknow- 
ledgment of their almost frantic plaudits, I 
beheld only the figure of Ceciha Perceval, 
covering her face with her hands." 

END OF THE JOURNAL. 



THE OPERA. 263 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Adorning Fashion — unadorned by dress — 

Simple from taste, and not from carelessness ; 

Discreet in gesture, in deportment mild, 

Not stiff with prudence nor uncouthly wild : 

No state has Amoret : — ho studied mien, 

She frowns no goddess, and she moves no queen. 

The softer charm that in her manner lies 

Is framed to captivate, yet not surprise ; 

It justly suits the expression of her face, 

'Tis less than dignity and more than grace. 

R. B. SHERIDAN. 



Mrs. Perceval, the cousin of Adrian Mal- 
dyn, was a woman affording one of those instances, 
so numerous among the children of prosperity, 
of a gentle and amiable disposition, invali- 
dated by early neglect, and the corruptions 



264 THE OPERA. 

of the world. In her early childhood she 
had been accustomed to witness her father's 
gloomy distemperature of mind, her mother's 
fierce ebullitions of temper ; and the total dis- 
cordance of thought and feeling existing between 
them. Lord Abbotscourt was a rigid Catholic, 
his lady a careless Protestant; and the little 
Cecilia, alternately disciplined by both, was at 
length secured by her father's confinement from 
the infection of his bigotry, and left to the 
guidance of the unprincipled and violent 
Katharine. 

The representations contained in her letter to 
her cousin afforded, in fact, only too true a pic- 
ture of her destinies ; and it remains to add to 
the portrait sketched by herself, that an affec- 
tionate and honest heart had forfeited but few 
of its good qualities, among those dissipations 
which imparted the usual fashionable mea- 
sure of levity to her manners and conver- 
sation. As the wife of the notorious libertine 
forced on her acceptance by her mother, Ce- 



THE OPERA. 265 

cilia had been subjected to more than the ordi- 
nary trials of her sex and station ; but she had 
escaped from the ordeal pure, spotless, and even 
unaccused. Her extreme loveliness, and the 
peculiar delicacy of her position had attracted 
around her half the profligates of the fashion- 
able w^orld, without injury to her reputation, 
or danger to her freedom of heart and hand. 

Perhaps, hov\^ever, it v^^as fortunate that cir- 
cumstances should have retarded that familiar 
acquaintance v^^ith her cousin which so soon 
rescinded her vows of perpetual indifference 
— perpetual widowhood. Had Adrian Elzstein 
presented himself to her friendship during the 
lifetime of the gross and vicious Perceval, the 
vexations of the insulted wife would have been 
inevitably increased, and her peace of mind en- 
dangered. A heart which had so long main- 
tained the monotonous torpor of indifference, 
spoke at length with the vehemence of passions 
long repressed ; and CeciHa, who had believed 
herself incapable of loving, now loved with 

VOL. II. N 



266 THE OPERA. 

a degree of rash inconsideration character- 
istic of the name of Maldyii. The soi-disant 
cadet of a noble Hanoverian family, without for- 
tune or profession, was clearly no match for the 
wealthy widow of Mr. Perceval ; nor was the 
son of the vindictive and injured Viscount 
Abbotscourt less unsuitable to the daughter of 
Lady Wroughton — of Katharine Darley; yet 
she had bestowed on the one an unlimited con- 
trol over her affections, and still acknowledged 
the other to be lord of her destinies ! — In her 
attachment for Adrian, the hopes, the wishes 
the happiness of Cecilia's whole life were con- 
centrated. Young, beautiful, accomplished, 
noble, opulent, — she would have resigned all the 
dignities all the endowments of life, but to pass 
^ome portion of its days in his society, — cherished 
by his tenderness, upheld by his protection. 
With the fond self-abandonment of her sex, she 
suffered her existence to become bound up in 
that of another. 

But in her visit to Donningwell, it was not 



THE OPERA. 267 

the desire of finding herself in Mr. Maldyn's 
society which induced her to neglect the counsels 
of her physicians, and the still more serious ad- 
monitions of her own mind. The resolution set 
forth by Cecilia in her letter to her cousin, had 
been deliberately and sincerely taken; and might 
have been religiously preserved, but for a series 
of vexatious circumstances in which her friend 
Lady Neville found herself involved, by the of- 
ficiousness of certain members of her husband's 
familiar circle of ;o 7/^5, who had recently pointed 
out to his suspicions the devotion prompting 
Count Anastasio Pignatelli to follow their wan- 
derings from London to Paris — from Paris to 
Italy—from Italy to Donningwell. Although 
it was impossible for the most expert manufac- 
turer of mischief to specify any encourage- 
ment, public or private, extended by the stately 
Gertrude to the young Neapolitan, the partiality 
of Mrs. Perceval for her cousin rendered it im- 
possible that Cecilia herself should be the ob- 
ject of his passion ; and Lord Neville was just 

n2 



268 THE OPERA. 

beginning to exercise the infirmities of a natu- 
rally bad temper in a violent fit of jealousy, 
when Lady Neville's refusal to accompany him 
to the Duke of Cardigan's, and Anastasio's unex- 
pected disappearance from Donningwell, united 
to magnify his causes of mistrust. Returning 
unannounced to Neville Hill in the hope of 
confirming his suspicions, the unadvised ap- 
pearance of Mr. Maldyn lurking near his house, 
only tended to confirm his apprehensions ; nor 
had he scrupled to upbraid his wife, in the pre- 
sence of her friend, with the duplicity of her 
pretexts for absenting herself from the castle 
and dispatching him in her place, in order that 
she might welcome, undisturbed, the visits of a 
favoured admirer. 

Happily for Lady Neville, her disposition 
was of an order eminently calculated for the 
wife of a morose and unamiable man. Her 
character was precisely that of three-fourths 
of her country-women in her own condition of 
life : by nature gentle, reserved, and indolent, — 



THE OPERA. 269 

and educated in a formal adherence to the 
etiquettes of Hfe, and a stern austerity of 
reUgious principles. The gift of beauty could 
not have been imparted with less danger to 
the possessor. Her feelings were strictly under 
her own subjection; and passions she had 
none. She was unsusceptible even of the 
virtuous indignation against Lord Neville's 
suspicions which might have proved a source 
of peril to other women ; and though disgusted 
by the ungracious and ungrateful violence of his 
conduct, was scarcely less angry with herself 
for having provoked it by a mildness of re- 
proof to Anastasio amounting to a tacit ac- 
ceptance of his homage. If, indeed, she ex- 
perienced any degree of tenderness for the young 
count, she confessed the weakness neither to 
him, her friend, nor herself; — and replied to 
Lord Neville's accusations simply by requesting 
Cecilia to accompany her to Donningwell 
Castle. 

Mrs. Perceval was too little in the habit of 



270 THE OPERA. 

giving pain to others to persist in the refusals 
with which at first she met the entreaties of 
Gertrude; Lady Neville's representations of the 
harsh usage likely to be her portion, should she 
attempt the visit tke-a-ttte with her lord, soon 
induced her friend to surmount her own dis- 
inclination for the effort. Perhaps indeed some 
latent influence might tend to soften her opposi- 
tion to the measure ; perhaps the anticipation of 
finding herself once more in Adrian's presence, 
might unconsciously magnify the claims of her 
friend upon her acquiescence ; but in preparing 
for the visit, she flattered herself she was acting 
in positive variance with her own inclinations. 

*' How shall I bear," thought CeciUa, as she 
found her hand sympathizingly pressed by Lady 
Neville, on passing the gateway of Donning- 
well castle, " to stand in Ms presence as a stran- 
ger ; to behold his courtesies, his smiles directed 
to every one but me ; to see his attention bend- 
ing to the observations of others as once it did 
to mine ! — Yet as this trial must one day arrive, 



THE OPERA. 271 

let me nerve my courage to meet the pain, that, 
once inured to its anguish, I may become callous 
to future suffering. To-night — ^to-night ! — let 
me but surmount the difficulties of to-night, and 
we may both subside into a calmer frame of 
mind.'' 

Even Lady Harriet Mannmgfield, who wo-s 
stationed in the ante-chamber of the saloon to 
" welcome the coming, speed the parting guest," 
though infinitely surprised and vexed by the ar- 
rival of Mrs. Perceval leaning on Lady Neville's 
arm, and fully aware of Sir Herbert's anxiety 
to prevent all intercourse between the heir of 
the house of Abbotscourt and the last of its 
female branches, could not but feel interested 
by the feminine softness which indisposition had 
imparted to Cecilia's manner, and the tremulous 
faintness of her voice. Although amono^ the 
brilliant faces and gaudy costumes collected in 
honour of the Duke of Cardigan's hospitality— 
the over-dressed squiresses and high-com- 
plexioned county beauties — Mrs. Perceval 



272 THE OPERA. 

looked faded and insipid, a second glance at 
the refined delicacy of her features, and the 
earnest though pensive expression of her eyes, 
induced a very different judgment. Every 
stranger present felt satisfied that in her day 
of health and beauty the invalid must have 
been irresistible. 

Meanw^hile Lord Neville, eager to prove 
to the world that his wife experienced no 
disinclination to appear at an entertainment 
ungraced by the attraction of Pignatelli's pre- 
sence, conducted his two fair companions in 
triumph through the crowded suite of state 
apartments towards the theatre, and placed them 
in a prominent situation among the audience ; 
where Cecilia, who had already learned from 
Anastasio that Mr. Maldyn was not included 
among the performers, sat expecting every mo- 
ment to observe him among the gay groups that 
soon crowded the adjoining benches. She knew 
nothing of Lord Bruton's departure — of Adrian's 
reluctant engagement to supply his place ; but 



THE OPERA. 273 

her close vicinity to Lady Romford, who was 
pouring her maternal sorrows into the bosom of 
Countess Pignatelli, did not leave her in pro- 
longed ignorance of the arrangements of the 
evening. 

" It is really too tiresome/* said she, in a half 
whisper, to the ambassadress, — who being bon 
gr^ malgr^ deprived of her tcartt for the even- 
ing, was trying to keep herself awake with her. 
snuff-box, and a kind of see-saw movement 
expressive of her vacancy of mind. " My 
girls have been giving themselves infinite 
trouble about this stupid vaudeville; Sophy 
and her maid sat up more than half last night to 
finish their new costumes, and Clara has done 
nothing but practise her couplets for the last 
three weeks ; — and you see every thing is going 
wrong. — It is all Miss Fitzgerald's doing. — Be- 
tween ourselves, my dear countess, that girl is 
a complete coquette." 

" C'est possible /" said Countess PignateUi, 
shrugging her shoulders, and opening her half- 

n3 



274 THE OPERA. 

closed eyelids. " Nevertheless it would suit me 
particularly to have her for a daughter-in-law. 
She is a good girl — considerate to her mother — 
less selfish than most young ladies of the 
great world — and far more intelligent than those 
of the world in general. I like Constance; 
unless when she comes near the card table, and 
interrupts the business of the night." 

" Your daughter-in-law?" cried Lady Rom- 
ford, who was already fretted into an utter dis- 
temperature of mind and body. " Surely, 
countess, you must have perceived the indiffe- 
rence with which she received even Bruton's 
attentions?" 

'^ Oest possible 1^^ calmly reiterated Countess 
Pignatelli, placing her little skinny feet in their 
white satin douillettes in a very ostensible situa- 
tion upon the bench below. '^ But mi/ Ugo is a 
young man who has shown himself so very diffi- 
cult to please, — so very select in his preferences, 
— that /m' homage would confer an honour on any 
woman. No one has ever charged Ugo Pigna- 



THE OPERA. 275 

telli with flirting with your Lady Southfords or 
your Lady Emily Willesdens ; — your Lady Any- 
bodies and Everybodies." 

" Bruton is one of the handsomest young 
men in town," observed Lady Romford, spite- 
fully directing her glass towards the swarthy 
brows and diminutive figure of her excellency's 
son and heir ; who had certainly little beyond a 
supercilious air of fashion to boast by way of 
personal attraction. 

" And so is my Anastasio," replied Countess 
Pignatelli, with the same languid apathy ,• " and 
he is not a mere tailor's block, good to fill a 
place in a coronation procession, or a tableau. 
^Stasio has intelligence and ability to give ex- 
pression to his fine features.** 

The mother of Lord Bruton sat swelling with 
jealous indignation- 

" Well, well," cried she, at length, " I fancy 
Miss Fitzgerald will never feel herself called on 
to decide between the charms of an English 
Earldom or a Calabrian Principality. My girls 



276 THE OPERA. 

assure me that she is ridiculously in love with 
this Mr. Maldyn ; and I have good reason to 
know that the Duke and Lady Harriet will be 
very glad to set at rest the manoeuvres of Mrs. 
Fitzgerald, for making her daughter Duchess of 
Cardigan." 

" No hope either for the mother or daughter/' 
said the countess, with a renewed application 
to her snuff-box. " Mr. Maldyn has no eyes 
but for La Silvestra. That young man interests 
me as the friend of my son Anastasio; and I 
took the trouble of watching him yesterday with 
his eyes intently fixed on Mademoiselle Sandoni, 
for more than an hour. There was some non- 
sense about an exchange of rings between them 
the other night ; and though our pretty little 
heiress may have lost her heart to the young 
Irish-Austrian, with his large dark eyes and 
commanding person, she will find a dangerous 
rival in the duke's pet lioness." 

" Indeed !" cried Lady Romford, reverting to 
her own views for Lady Sophia Charleville on 



THE OPERA. 277 

the rent-roll of the Abbotscourt estates. " Will 
nothing but an English peer satisfy the ambi- 
tion of this opera singer ? — Well might our late 
majesty observe that the drawing-room would 
shortly become the green-room ! — We are none 
of us safe ! — If such people as this Mademoiselle 
Sandoni are to be introduced into our private 
circles, merely because they have a sweet voice 
and an ingratiating manner, all the barriers of 
society may as well be overturned at once. We 
shall find figurantes on the bench of peeresses, 

and " 

Her ladyship's apostrophe was curtailed by 
the abrupt rise of the curtain, displaying its 
unconscious object seated at the piano-forte, 
backed by a group of the most distinguished of 
the Donningwell guests, — among whom were her 
own two fair daughters ; and Cecilia had not a 
moment to recover the startling effect of Lady 
Romford's extraordinary revelations, before they 
received ample confirmation from the vehement 
applause lavished by the Duke of Cardigan on 



278 THE OPERA. 

Silvestra's performance, and by the homage 
displayed by Adrian in presenting her to the 
enraptured guests. The surprise with which 
she noted Mademoiselle Sandoni's selection of a 
composition of her own, with a view of flattering 
the prejudices of a Berkshire audience, was lost 
in the perturbation of her feelings on the dis- 
covery of Mr. Maldyn's levity of heart and 
mind. Recalled to herself by the compliments 
and inquiries of those around her, — by panegyrics 
on her own exquisite taste, and the exquisite 
voice and execution of the prima donna, — she 
strove to recover her self-possession sufficiently 
to observe that Mademoiselle Sandoni's per- 
formance had amply fulfilled her expectations. 

Long before the enthusiasm of the audience 
subsided. Miss Fitzgerald, arrayed in full cos- 
tume, and with her ordinary paleness super- 
seded by a crimson flush, entered the gallery 
and terminated the apprehensions of the Ladies 
Charleville. — Long before Mrs. Perceval's emo- 
tion was tranquillized, the orchestra concluded 



THE OPERA 279 

a lively overture v^^ith the usual twang of trum- 
pets and rumble of drums, — the green curtain 
again disappeared, — and Ninette was discovered 
sitting at her spinning wheel, with Adrian Mal- 
dyn in the costume of a peasant of the Alps, 
hanging enamoured over her chair ! 



280 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER XV. 



Oh ! comme devant moi ma superbe rivale 
D'un coupable bonheur etalait le scandale ! 
De mon front avec joie observant la paleur, 
Elle s'embellissait encore de ma douleur ; 
Et de loin je voyais sourire le parjure — 

Toi, qui connois mon cceur, le crois tu que jamais 
Une autre femme I'aime autant que je I'aimais ? 

Ancelot. 

Of all the careworn mammas who parade 
their cachemeres and plumed toques at Almack's 
or Devonshire House, it would be difficult to 
point out a dowager of sufficient fortitude of 
mind to wait with patience the arrival of the 
Lord Henry or Honourable William, destined to 
<* lead to the hymeneal altar " that youthful 



THE OPERA. 281 

copy of her own charms, whose steps have been 
measured by the French dancing master, whose 
dialogue instigated by the French governess, 
whose hair tortured by the French hair-dresser, 
in the hope of hastening the approach of an 
English mate. 

Without entering at large into the wide 
question of " to marry or not to marry," 
it must be admitted that every wise mother is 
anxious to obtain for her silly daughter the per- 
manent guidance and protection of a husband's 
love ; every silly mother to get rid of this addi- 
tional burthen on her time and liberty. On one 
hand, the frightful warning afforded by many 
an ancient spinstress, the plague of all her fa- 
mily and friends, induces the prudent parent to 
keep a vigilant eye on the increasing years and 
decreasing partners of the beloved Anne or 
Elizabeth who hangs so heavily on her arm for 
the greater portion of the evening ; on the other, 
the triumphant debut of many a patrician bride, 
with her diamonds and white satin, spurs her 



282 THE OPERA. 

impatience for a similar beatification to extend 
to her own offspring. The long anticipated 
coronet — the patronage — the extended con- 
nexion — the discomfiture of rival chaperons — 
the envy of disappointed aspirants, — lend incal- 
culable joy to the moment of despatching a 
daughter from the home of her childhood. 
Lady Abbotscourt might feel more than com- 
monly delighted to bestow on Mrs. Perceval the 
only obstacle to her own marriage with the 
Marquis of Wroughton; and Lady Romford 
more than commonly eager to secure the Duke 
regnant and Viscount expectant for two daugh- 
ters in whose behalf she had passed so many 
watchful nights and toilsome days as the Ladies 
Clara and Sophia ; and all the silk, satin, gauze, 
lace, feathers, and flowers, which had been 
lavished on their persons, all the maternal ad- 
monitions on their mind, all the dinners which 
had been eaten in Arlington-street, all the 
powder and shot expended at Romford Park, 
served but to aggravate the provocation of his 



THE OPERA, 283 

grace's insensibility, and Adrian's indecision of 
purpose. 

But it would be unfair to class the estimable 
sister of Sir Herbert Manningfield among the 
politic mothers who have no other inducement 
to cultivate the mind and adorn the person of 
their daughter, than the chance of entrapping 
some unwary nobleman or raw heir-apparent. 
Mrs. Fitzgerald, having found herself at an 
early age the widow of a beloved husband, had 
refused all subsequent engagements with a view 
of devoting her whole time to render his sur- 
viving child an honour to his memory. In the 
education of Constance nothing was neglected 
to make her a fitting representative for the 
noble fortunes she was destined to inherit, — a 
fitting companion to the strong-minded but soft* 
hearted mother to whom she afforded so fond a 
consolation. From the period of her brother, 
Sir Herbert's return from India and union with 
Lady Harriet Ellerby, till that when Constance 
emerging into society had an opportunity for the 



284 THE OPERA. 

exercise of her own opinions and prejudices, it 
had been the dehght of the family to project an 
alHance between the young Duke of Cardigan 
and the still younger heiress. But no sooner 
did she ascertain their views, than a frank 
avowal of her own feelings convinced them that 
their expectations had been premature. 

'^ I have no objection to talk, walk, dance 
or ride with him," said Constance, after ex- 
pressing to Mrs. Fitzgerald her discovery of 
Lady Harriet's flattering designs. " I like the 
Duke of Cardigan for his frank good-nature, — 
his generous and gentlemanly character ; but I 
could not look up to his understanding with 
respect, — I could not honestly ask his advice in 
in any moment of difficulty, or submit myself 
to his reproofs for an imputed fault. I have 
been too happy as a child, dearest mother, to 
put up with this limitation of love towards my 
husband. No, no ! I would not marry Lady 
Harriet's nephew, were he thrice a duke." 

Satisfied of her sincerity, the very idea of 



THE OPERA. 285 

such an alliance was dismissed by the whole 
family ; and if Mrs. Fitzgerald experienced some 
vexation at the disappointment of her expecta- 
tions, it was far less permanent than that of the 
duchess his mother, or his young sisters the fa- 
vourite companions of Constantia. On quitting 
England for a twelvemonth*'s sojourn in Italy 
and the south of France, Lady Mary Ellerby 
had made it a particular request to Lady Harriet 
to offer every facility to a change of opinion on 
the part of the young heiress, by bringing the 
Duke before her observation in the domestic 
character most advantageous to the development 
of his excellent qualities ; nor was it till Mr. 
Maldyn's appearance, and Miss Fitzgerald's 
evident inclination in his favour, that the pru- 
dent aunt wholly resigned her trust in the 
caprices of woman-kind, and her hopes of seeing 
her husband's attractive niece become Duchess 
of Cardigan. 

No sooner, however, did her observations ex- 
tend to his grace's intimacy with Mademoiselle 



286 THE OPERA. 

Sandoni, than lier lamentations over Constantia*s 
obstinacy were redoubled ; and she now wrote 
to hasten the return of his family from Italy, 
that their presence might tend to influence his 
further determination. She was too well ac- 
quainted with her nephew's love of indepen- 
dence, to offer any violent opposition to his 
proceedings ; and being now in hourly expecta- 
tion of the arrival of the Duchess and the Ladies 
Ellerby, sought only to procrastinate the avowal 
of his resolution, till they were on the spot. 

Under these circumstances, nothing could be 
less welcome to the Manningfields, than the 
inopportune visit of La Sandoni to Donningwell 
Castle; and although with adroit pliancy of 
character she had managed to soften the preju- 
dices of Mrs. Fitzgerald, and attach the gentle 
heart of her daughter, Lady Harriet still re- 
mained suspicious and suspecting. She would 
have given much to prevent that untimely fit of 
indisposition, by which. Constance had so un- 
wittingly favoured the views of his rival ; and 



THE OPERA. 287 

was doubly vexed, on perceiving that the rap- 
ture of applau:^ lavished on the cantatrice, 
imparted a character of disapprobation to the 
silence attending the performance of the vaude- 
ville. Never, in fact, had Miss Fitzgerald (to 
w^hom the opening scene was assigned) played 
half so ill. She was preoccupied, dejected, 
nervous, — and incapable of the buoyant piquancy 
she had imparted to the same character the pre- 
ceding night. Who can shake off the clinging 
influence of disappointed affection ? — who en- 
dure the biting pangs of jealousy, "and make 
no sign?" The audience were satisfied with 
knowing that Lubin was tame and heavy, and 
Ninette tremulous and vapid, and with pro- 
nouncing both to be a decided failure. It was 
nothing to them, that the heart of Mr. Maldyn 
was absorbed by conflicting passions — that of 
Miss Fitzgerald subdued by the mastery of one ; 
and, on the termination of the piece, both were 
greeted with precisely the same cut-and-dry 
parade of congratulations and plaudits, which 



288 THE OPERA. 

awaited the really clever efforts of Lord Bra- 
bazon and the Charleville girls. The same ? — 
nay I twice as loud, and fifty times more ge- 
nuine; for no jealous envy interfered with the 
hollow tribute. 

It would have been highly satisfactory to 
many of the parties concerned, had those plau- 
dits been conclusive of the pleasures of the 
evening. But a " scene of excellent dis- 
sembling" was yet to come ; a scene of exertion 
far more compulsory than those of the theatrical 
exhibition. While Lady Clara Charleville was 
eagerly throwing aside her pompon and hoop 
to assume a simple ball-dress, and Lady So- 
phia, wiping the rouge from her handsome face 
to resume the fascinations put forth to dazzle 
Monsieur de Villevargues, and captivate his 
Grace of Cardigan, Lord Neville, with all that 
force of genius for being disagreeable by which 
he was characterized, insisted that his wife 
should renew her acquaintance with the Phoenix 
of the night ; to whom she had been induced to 



THE OPERA. 2^ 

show particular graciousness during the winter 
season at Naples, by the interesting circum- 
stances attending her professional career. The 
self-devotion of a young and timid girl, de- 
scending from the dignified respectability of a 
private gentlewoman to all the humiliations of a 
theatrical life for the sake of an infirm father, 
was sufficient to bespeak the goodwill of Ger- 
trude and Mrs. Perceval; and the heroine of 
St. Carlo had not only been honoured by the 
public notice of Lady Neville, but occasionally 
admitted into the refined selection of her do- 
mestic circle. 

And thus by the curious legerdemain of acci-^ 
dent, the first and second object of Adrian Mal- 
dyn's love were united in a country foreign to all 
three ; and while Cecilia was safe from any sus- 
picion that the beautiful and artless Sardinian 
damigella was in fact a mere adventurer, the 
poetical version of a degraded Lower Austrian 
peasant, Stephanine, the crafty Stephanine, did 
not fail to recognise, in the '* Adrian von Elz- 

VOL. II. o 



290 THE OPERA. 

stein," so often and so familiarly quoted by- 
Lady Neville and her friend, the object of her 
own intense passion, — the unwitting cause of 
her own moral degradation, and elevation in life, 
— the origin of all the schemes of her wild am- 
bition. ^ 

Wholly misuspicious of Silvestra's capability 
of affixing an original to the sketch, Mrs. 
Perceval was more than once tempted to give 
utterance, in her presence, to the pathetic me- 
lody which soothed while it served to express 
her own vexations; and Gertrude found no mo- 
tive to repress her railleries on the attachment 
of her friend, and the romantic character of the 
absent Adrian, before a person to whom the affair 
must needs be a matter of indifference. 

But the soi-disant daughter of Colonel San- 
doni was too keenly alive to every incident and 
every hint connected with her early lover, to 
lose one word of their discourse, or neglect one 
deduction to be drawn from Mrs. Perceval's 
state of mind. She had the art to unravel by 



M 

4 



THE OPERA. 291 

dexterous questions the whole mystery of 
Adrian's visit to Paris; to detect the family 
connexion between Mr. Maldyn and the beau- 
tiful widow, whom some trifling occurrence 
pointed out to her as having borne the same 
name previous to her marriage. She had the 
address to assure herself of Cecilia's devoted 
attachment to this unsuspected kinsman, as well 
as of her intention to obviate the difficulties 
seeming to divide her from the Hanoverian col- 
legian; but she had also the wretchedness of 
learning, in reply to her seemingly listless in- 
quiries of Lady Neville, that Adrian was devoted, 
heart and soul, to the lovely woman so deserv- 
ing and so ambitious of the possession of his 
affections ! 

To a being impassioned and unprincipled as 
Stephanine, the excitement of this intelligence 
was almost maddening. Like a beautiful flower 
springing in the waste of Alpine regions, and only 
likely to meet the admiring gaze of civilized eyes 
by attracting the observation of some lordly 

o 2 



292 THE OPERA. 

stranger she fancied herself born to waste her su- 
perior endowments in the uncultivated wilderness 
of Elzstein, or achieve a brighter destiny by law- 
less means. Nature had deteriorated the lavish 
gift of beauty and talent with the accompani- 
ment of a crafty mind and fierce temperament ; 
and no sooner did she ascertain that her power 
over her youthful paramour was at an end, and 
that she was not destined to form an exception 
to those who having been too much cherished 
are too easily forgotten, than her first impulse 
of rage subsided into a calm vindictive malig- 
nity, like that of the serpent coiling in patient 
expectation of its victim. 

She determined to acquire a mastery over the 
destinies she could no longer influence j to tri- 
umph — to inflict — to injure — where she could 
no longer enjoy the sweeter predilections of life. 
She contemplated Adrian's fickleness — Adrian's 
inconstancy — till the wrath of her soul waxed 
hot within her ; — she anticipated the joys of 
vengeance, and was consoled ! 



THE OPERA, 293 

Such was the being who had quitted her en- 
gagements in Italy, her triumphs in Paris, with 
the view of approaching the spot to which her 
dihgent investigation had traced the career of 
Count Maldyn's son ; who had ingratiated her- 
self with a whole nation but for the furtherance 
of her maUcious views on a single individual ; 
who had possessed herself with deliberate cun- 
ning of a jewel she recognised as one referred to 
by Lady Neville in conversation with her friend ; 
and who now came forward to receive the S2:ra- 
cious courtesies of both, as if humbly cognizant 
of their affability, and grateful for their good 
will. 

But while Mrs. Perceval, agitated and un- 
happy, attempted with flattering lips to breathe 
a remonstrance to Mademoiselle Sandoni for 
the publicity she had given to a composition 
made known to her in the confidence of private 
life, Stephanine, after appealing to those around 
her for a judgment in favour of the error by 
which they had so much profited, affected to 



294 THE OPERA. 

lay her hand imploringly upon Mrs. Perceval's 
sleeve, beseeching her pardon. Shrinking from 
this theatrical display (which passed with the 
bystanders for a mere act of naivete)^ Cecilia 
naturally cast down her eyes; when, promi- 
nently revealed by the spotless whiteness of her 
own dress, and of the fair hand resting upon it, 
she discovered on the finger of the prima-donna 
that ring which she considered a first and only 
pledge of love between herself and Adrian 
Maldyn ! Unwilling to lend light credence to 
so atrocious a breach of faith, she fixed her 
eyes inquiringly on the precious gem, which its 
present owner was in no haste to withdraw from 
her observation. There could be no mistake ! — 
The trinket was of a peculiar nature ; a family 
relic which she had been accustomed from her 
childhood to wear. It was — it was the ring 
taken from her hand in the Vallee de Mont- 
morenci by her profligate cousin — her perfidious 
lover ! 

Deep as had been her recent afflictions, there 



THE OPERA. 295 

was nothing in the dreadful barrier existing 
between herself and Adrian, calculated to draw 
forth a mental pang comparable with that by 
which she was now assailed. Among the 
bitter varieties of sorrow forming the inhe- 
ritance of the human kind, there are few 
more humiliating — more fitted to cleave into 
the inmost soul — than a discovery of the un- 
worthiness of those we love; of a breach 

• 

of confidence in that heart, wherein we have 
deposited the whole treasure of our affections. 
There is a degree of self-abasement connected 
with the disappointment, which recoils with 
double force on our perceptions. Cecilia felt 
herself injured, defrauded, insulted ; and the 
sharpness of the pain arising from this convic- 
tion admitted of no mitigation. 

It was in vain that Lord Brabazon addressed 
her in his usual tone of vsdtty pleasantry, of 
flattering adulation: it was m vain that the 
Chevalier de Villevargues strove to attract her 
attention by the wonted manoeuvres of his grace- 



.296 THE OPERA. 

ful egotism. The beautiful widow, whose lan- 
guid air of indisposition seemed to impart a new 
character to her beauty, retained amid the 
giddy scene all the cold inanimation of a marble 
statue; and even Lord Neville, weary of her 
dispiriting silence, secretly acknowledged that 
his wife was j ustified in her assertion that Ce- 
cilia was still too ill to mix in general society. 
It was a considerable relief to his feelings 
when Mrs. Perceval begged the carriage might 
be called to return to Neville Hill. 

Meanwhile Adrian, who, instead of expe- 
riencing in those scenes of the vaudeville which 
exacted an unusual degree of familiarity be- 
tween himself and Miss Fitzgerald, the same 
hilarity with which they had inspired him the 
preceding evening, found himself almost in- 
capable of maintaining the forced spirits indis- 
pensable to his part. While he attempted to 
address to Ninette the tender devotion exacted 
by the situations of the piece, he seemed to 
feel the eyes of Cecilia fixed upon every move- 



THE OPERA. 2^7 

ment — her ear attentive to every sigh — her tears 
responsive to every endearment. Occasionally, 
in glancing over the audience, her pale face 
became palpably apparent; and the unusual 
flush overspreading that of Miss Fitzgerald, the 
excited irritation of her manner, and restless 
glances of her eyes, became invisible to him in 
the engrossing interest of his cousin's unexpected 
presence. 

At length the piece terminated ; and while 
Lady Neville and her friend, on the conclusion 
of the dramatic entertainments of the evening, 
were addressing their attentions to Mademoi- 
selle Sandoni and her father, Mr. Maldyn has- 
tily divested himself of his theatrical costume, 
in order that, although debarred from all free- 
dom of intercourse with Cecilia, he might follow 
her movements through the crowd, — gaze unmo- 
lested on her sweet face, — listen unsuspected to 
her voice, — and perhaps enjoy the thrill of 
contact with her drapery in the press of the 
throng. But as he made his way across the 
saloon, regardless of the criticisms passing 



298 THE OPERA. 

around him, many of which were severely ap- 
plied to the mediocrity of his own skill and his 
lameness as a dramatic lover, he was met by 
Ugo Pignatelli, yawning forth to Lord Brabazon 
his sense of the recent fatigue of having con- 
ducted Mrs. Perceval to her carriage. 

" How long have you exercised yourself in 
the duties of a detrimental ?" inquired Braba- 
zon, surprised to detect the egotist in an act of 
courtesy. " You should leave it to Anastasio 
to call carnages and carry boas ; you, an elder 
brother, are exempted by privilege of peerage." 

" The very motive for my condescension ; I 
cannot be suspected, on such occasions, of act- 
ing on any thing but principle." 

*^ Principle?" 

" You would not have had me allow that 
brute Neville to stalk triumphantly through the 
house, with the two handsomest women in Eng- 
land leaning on his arm ? It was my intention 
indeed to secure her ladyship, — as being the one 
he would least like to resign ; but poor little 
Mrs. Perceval looked so very deserted and 




THE OPERA. . f^ 299 

dolorous, and accepted my graciousness with 
such silent, soul-struck gratitude, that upon my 
soul I could not make up my mind to quit her 
during the chilly quarter of an hour she passed 
in the vestibule." 

" But are they really gone ?" cried Adrian, 
mingling in the dialogue. 

" As fast as Neville's four bays can carry 
them. By the way, if he were not the greatest , 
beast on earth, he would neither play the Pacha 
with his wife, nor use those fine horses at night. 
Were I Lady Neville's brother, or her coachman 
I would not put up with such proceedings." 

"Mrs. Perceval seemed very much indis- 
posed V interrupted Adrian, interrogatively. 

" Did she ? — I forgot to ask her. Those 
bays of Neville's are worth eight hundred to 
the last guinea. He bred them himself; — and 
Tattersall was saying to me the other mom- 
mg— 

" Lady Neville was very imprudent," inter- 
rupted Maldyn, "in permitting Mrs. Perceval 



300 THE OPERA. 

to venture into the night air so soon after her 
dangerous illness." 

" Has she been ill ? — oh ! — ay ! — very true !— 
she had the measles in the winter. People said 
she caught them of that odd-looking prince, 
vs^ith the odd-sounding name and voice between 
a grunt and a whine." 

''No, no, no!" cried Brabazon. "It was 
Lady Rhoda Percy who had the ineasles. Mrs. 
Perceval came over to England in a rhapsody 
of romance about some mystery or other that 
gave her a brain-fever. Don'*t you remember 
that night at the Travellers', when 'Stasio was 
very near calling out Villevargues for protesting 
she was in love with him ; and had tried to 
drown herself in the Bay of Naples ? " 

'' A brain-fever was it ? Then she certainly 
had a relapse to-night ! — She talked so inco- 
herently, and shuddered so wildly while we 
were waiting for the carriage. By the way, it 
is quite amazing to me how Neville can keep 
that Irish coachman of his; the horses had 



THE OPERA. 301 

been standing in the court- yard for more than 
an hour without — " 

" Then Mrs. Perceval was, after all, seriously 
indisposed?" 

" I should not be much surprised that the 
consequences were fatal/' continued Ugo, per- 
sisting in his details concerning Lord Neville''s 
bays. 

" Ha ! " cried Adrian, — " and yet you af- 
fected not to have inquired concerning her 
health!" 

" The off-wheeler had a deuce of a cough," 
continued Pignatelli, addressing' Brabazon, of 
whose sympathy he was secure on any point of 
stable discipline. 

'* Lady Neville must have been mad !" cried 
Adrian in so loud a voice as to startle the 
languid hero into attention. 

" Lady Neville mad ! — no, — it was his lord- 
ship ! — I never saw a man in such a fury in my 
life." 

" He is proud of the animals, though he 
wants the spirit to appreciate them, I have al- 



302 THE OPERA. 

ways observed that to sympathize properly with 
a horse, a man must have a gentlemanly turn of 
mind," drawled Lord Brabazon, taking snufF. 
" Now Neville has not a spark of generosity in 
his composition." 

'^ I can tell you he has plenty of sparks of 
another kind. It was not about the horses he 
was mad to-night (though that was enough to 
drive any rational man out of his senses) ; no, 
no, it was concerning 'Stasio^s arrival." 

" Did you not procure some assistance for 
Mrs. Perceval?" said Adrian, horror-struck by 
the insensibility of his companions. 

" Assistance ? — of course. — I tried to persuade 
her to try some patt de foie gras as we came 
through the supper-rooms, and even offered to 
get a glass of claret properly temperated for 
her ; but " 

" Neville, I should fancy, had very little pa- 
tience to wait for the operation," said Brabazon, 
perceiving Maldyn's anxiety, and bent on pro- 
longing his penance. 

'* But just then, in walked Anastasio; having 



THE OPERA. 303 

arrived in town, with a face brightened by love, 
and hope, and a cold journey; — and never did 
I see three people more discomposed ! — Lord 
Neville growled out like a bear as he is, that he 
did not choose to keep his horses, — and away 
we went to shiver under the portico ; 'Stasio not 
daring to follow, — and her ladyship not daring 
even to wish him good night.'' 

" And Mrs. Perceval?" inquired Maldyn, in 
a low voice. 

" Not one of the three cared a rush about her, 
I conclude," yawned Pignatelli; " for they 
took no notice of her illness — or I did not, — 
which amounts to the same thing. Brabazon! 
do come and try the Strasburg pate ? — Ville- 
vargues was very busy there when I quitted 
the table, and expressed a good opinion of it." 

" I have never touched a pate in this house 
since Cardigan got rid of Casserole," said his 
lordship. " The idea of turning away the first 
cook in Europe for forging ahttle paltry cheque 
of £20 !" 

" Oh ! it was just as well to throw him over ; 



304 THE OPERA. 

Casserole was any thing but a sterling cook ! 
He was full of theories, — an experimentalist,— 
a mere romanticist in the art. My father tried 
him for three months, but found the fellow too 
much of a genius : he always insisted on morels 
instead of truffles with brown game; and would 
never roast the legs of the partridges." 

" Did you happen to hear," inquired Adrian, 
disgusted beyond measure with their sensuality, 
" whether Mrs. Perceval is likely to remain long 
at Neville Hill ?" 

" I don't think she is likely to remain long 
any where in this world, unless she take better 
care of herself," cried Brabazon, allowing no 
time for a reply. " Allons done, Ugo /" 

** A tous les coeurs bien n^s, que le souper est cher ! " 

I will do you the honour to try the pdtc at 
your recommendation ; and then you shall try 
a little ecartc at mine. Any thing to get away 
from these tiresome women, — this eternal 
music." — 

END OF VOL. II. 



C. Whiting, Beaufort House Strand, 



p 



\\:m' 



'.mm 

Ill 



i mm 






MMli 




UNIVJER8ITY OF ILUN0I8-URBANA 




0112 046407364 



-I 






m 



M 

m 




^mm 







Wm 









mi 



^l:»li«ljlliiii'iiiri'liiu». 



