^v. CHAPTER I. 



TRINITY COLLEGE. 



ilae\ est done, I'objet de vos colleges, de vos academies, de taut de 
foiidations savantes ? Est-ce de donner le change au peuple, d'..itcier 
d'avanoe sa raison, de rempecher d'aller au vrai ? 

Rousseau, Lettre a Mon. de Beaumont. 



Among the penal clauses, which filled the 
Irish statute book from the period of the revo- 
lution, the most effective in degrading the peo- 
ple of all ranks, were the laws against education 

VOL. Ill B 



is THE OBRIEN'S AND 

Reading and writing were the peculiar privilege 
of protestantism : and he who had not given up 
transubstantiation and the infallibility of the 
Pope, had but little chance of enjoying the 
delectable adventures of Renard the Fox, or of 
imitating the heroism of Don Bellianis of Greece 
and the Seven Champions of Christendom. 
While the first elements of learning were thus 
jealously withheld from the catholic people, it is 
not surprisingthatthe higher branches of science, 
the pathways to professional eminence, were still 
more rigorously guarded ; and that the Gates of 
the Irish University were hermetically sealed 
against all, save the sons of ascendancy. 

The young members of the great emporium 
of church and state prerogative, high in the 
conscious privileges of their caste, were, by their 
very position, little likely to submit to the re- 
straints of a rigorous discipline ; and the advanced 
age at which they were then accustomed to ma- 
triculate, did not tend to increase their subor- 
dination. At that period the road to reason was 



tHE O FLAHERTYS. 9 

long and circuitous ; there were no short cuts 
and by-ways to the learned languages ; and the 
venerable college of the capital received no 
" boyish troops in unhaired sauciness," under 
her owlet wings. No pert precocity then started 
from her halls and classes, well stocked with poetry 
and pastry, with genius and gingerbread. No 
minor poets wrote Odes to Phoebus or to Dolly, 
which afterwards could come forth to shame the 
prosaic wisdom, that had removed their authors 
from the grottos of Helicon, to the stalls of a 
cathedral. On the contrary, the students of the 
Irish University, some fifty years ago, came fresh 
from the rack-rent castles of their bashaw fathers, 
in the first burst of manhood. Full of rest- 
less energy, with passions awakened, and habits 
of turbulence formed, they were from their 
entrance, better 

•'Versed in the rudiments 
Of many a desperate study," 

than in those sedentary pursuits which cool 

the blood, ''and preach the pulse to temper." 

B 2 



4 th£ o'briens and 

Leaders in every civil broil which disturbed the 
bacjly policed capital ; dictators in the street, 
and umpires in the theatre, they were popular 
with the populace whom they resembled, and 
feared by the citizens whom they annoyed. 
But, like the young scions of modern Jesuitism 
on the continent, they formed a '^ jeunesse bien 
pensanty Though violating the laws, they 
upheld the constitution ; though breaking the 
king's peace, they fought staunchly for his 
crown and dignity ; and though public dis- 
turbers of social order, and private violaters of 
domestic happiness, they acted under the espe- 
cial protection of the church, as by law 
established. 

Still the University of Dubhn, the " Colle- 
gium Sanctce et indiv'iduce Trinitutis^^ was 
then, as now, a good old monkish and venerable 
institution, bounded in those semi-papistical 
times, when the reformation (which, as a great 
divine has lately declared, is only now be- 
ginning to take efTcct), was but a word ; and 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 



erected upon the model of other institutions 
which sprang up under the full influence of 
popery, it still preserved all those forms, laws, 
canons, and customs, which were as purely 
monastic, as those of any Jesuit or Dominican 
seminary in France or Spain. The students, 
for whatever profession designed, were supposed 
to lead the lives of the '^ fraii" of a foreign 
convent ; and whoever beheld them in their 
white, sacerdotal surplices, with their strongly 
marked Irish faces, well set off with demurely 
smoothed bands, celebrating their matins, ves- 
pers, or high mass done into English, in their 
old popish-looking chapel, might have mistaken 
these scions of protestant ascendancy, for the 
officiating " chericV of an Italian Duomo, or 
the robust brotherhood of the Irish friary at the 
^^ Pace''' of Rome; where the " lingua toscana^" 
and the brogue of Tipperary are still cultivated 
with equal assiduity and equal success. 

Towards the latter end of the last century, 
the opening of the university to catholics and 



O TH5 O BRIENS AND 

dissenters, and still more, the diiFusion of poli- 
tical knowledge and public spirit through the 
bloodless revolution of eighty-two, produced 
their ennobling eifects, even within the walls of 
the strong hold of all ancient institutes. The 
spirit of the " Trinity boys," as they were 
fondly and familiarly called by the people, was 
then not less buoyant and vigorous, than that of 
their restive and restless predecessors : but it 
took a higher and a better direction, consonant 
to that greatest and best epoch of Irish story. 
The sparkling effervescence of the Irish tem- 
perament no longer evaporated in unprofitable 
ardors and ignoble contentions : and to how 
great an extent, patriotism and science profited 
by the kindling of energies so fresh, and the 
concentration of powers so unworn, the lives 
and works, the eloquence and the actions of the 
Avonmores and the Youngs,* the Grattans and 
the Currans, afford abundant testimony and 
proof. Never did any country give to the 

• Dr. Young, Bishop of Clonfert. 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 7 

world a more splendid, or more intellectual 
generation, than that which now burst forth 
to illustrate the benefits of political indepen- 
dence ; and to prove the superiority of the age, 
that was dawning in the light of truth and libera- 
lity, over that which was setting in the darkness 
of bigotry and intolerance. A spirit was abroad, 
which gave to senility the vital energies of 
youth ; and to youth the high aspiration and 
pertinacity of purpose of vigorous manhood. 
Learning raised her head from the study of 
useless abstraction, to catch the rising light. 
The historical society was established : and if 
national and youthful vanity found their account 
in the opportunities it afforded for ambitious 
display, if taste and judgment sometimes shrank 
from the ebullitions of over-excited genius, still 
tliat splendid association of youthful, fervid, 
and honest hearts, which nurtured the national 
talent of eloquence, and fostered the national 
spirit, was a benefaction to the country. In 
the dreary interval that has succeeded its 



8 THE O'BRIENS AND 

dissolution, the genius, which was the sole 
distinction of the country — the solitary attri- 
bute which tyranny had not quenched — has 
sickened in the cells of " the silent sister;'' 
and subserviency and hypocrisy have been 
made the profitable substitutes for patriotism 
and talent. 

The canons of Elizabeth were now of little 
avail against the spirit of the age. Swift and 
Molyneuxwere again read with avidity. Locke 
was not yet banished from the course of col- 
legiate instruction. Curran, Yelverton, Grat- 
tan, Flood, Burgh, and Ponsonby, had but 
recently come from the meditation of their 
philosophical, hardy, and convincing pages; 
and were already shedding a glory, which 
effaced the memory of that dullness, that had 
expelled the creator of Gulliver, and had re- 
jected the poet of Auburn. The " Monks of 
the Screw," who in the midst of their classic 
festivities, mingled mirth with wisdom, and gave 
to political philosophy, the charm of eloquence. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 9 

and the lustre of wit,— the Monks of the Screw 
]iad long left to other monks, the gravity 
which is the talent of mediocrity, and the cant 
which is the eloquence of hypocrisy. Though 
some embryo Boulters and Stones were then 
crawling in the lowest walks of collegiate service, 
to attain the church's diadem, which they have 
since worn with such unchristian despotism ; 
the youth of the Irish University, foi' the most 
part, followed emulously in the luminous 
track of their unrivalled predecessors : and men 
not less highly endowed, though less fortu- 
nate in their epoch, trod closely in the steps 
of those destined to fill a brighter, but not a 
more honourable page in the history of their 
country. 

Among these juvenile aspirants for honest 
fame, these enthusiasts for national regeneration, 
the Honaurable Murrogh O'Brien stood pre- 
eminent, as one whose unguarded frankness, 
buoyant spirit, and popular endowments had ren- 
dered him a subject of notoriety, from the first 
B 3 



10 

record of his name upon the College books. He 
was, indeed, the very heau ideal of the French 
and the Irish youth, who, in many important 
particulars, so closely resemble each other. There 
was, too, a brilhant, but unlucky, adaptation of 
his qualities, principles, and acquirements to the 
then reigning opinions in Ireland, which consti- 
tuted him at once a leader of that portion of the 
students who had enlisted themselves in the 
popular cause : and an accidental, or an affected, 
resemblance to the style of Mirabeau, in his 
rhetorical orations at the Historical Society, had 
obtained him much vogue amongst his fellow- 
students ; while his military skill in the volunteer 
corps, which he had materially assisted in raising, 
had equally distinguished him among the mem- 
bers of the great national army. 

He had thus become the subject of especial 
suspicion and vigilant observation to the chiefs 
of the university ; and he had been more than 
once cautioned as to his mode of treating the 
•subjects discussed at that society, which, like 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 11 

himself, had already began to <' devancer son 

The Historical Society of the Irish University, 
in its origin, and before it had attained to its 
high eminence, was but a mere ordinary debating 
club. No exception had been taken to it as 
long as its members confined themselves to moot- 
ing the Irish rebellion, the gun-powder plot, the 
restoration of his sacred majesty King Charles 
the Second, and such other themes as had been 
handed down traditionally from some archetypal 
exercises of church and state eloquence. Thus 
conducted, the institution was rather cherished 
than feared ; as being (under the cover of a de- 
sirable exercise of the intellect) a hot-bed of 
servility, and a school for time-servingness. But 
when, awakening from the lethargy of a stulti- 
fying despotism, the youth of Ireland, and of 
her university, began to think, to feel, to speak, 
and even to write — when they took for their 
discussions the real subjects of national interest, 
a reform of the representation, and the emanci- 



12 THE O'BRIENS AND 

pation of the catholics, then a sort of inquisition, 
or Star Chamber, was erected within the Col- 
lege walls, and the free course of debate was 
checked by cautions, threats, rustication, and the 
loss of all collegiate caste, expulsion.* 

While such a spirit was called forth in the 
councils of the university, and was strengthened 
and authorised by its Vice-Chancellor, many of 
its younger members furnished but too many 
favourable pretexts for the exercise of its power : 
for they were imprudent, (as the uncompromising 
and honest always are.) and impetuous, (as tlie 
ardent and the young cannot fail to be.) Visita- 
tions, followed by censures and punishments, 
were frequent. Even a fellow of the College, 
one of the most enlightened and learned of it« 
members, was threatened with a suspension (which 

* " Armed," says a writer of the day, *' with the doc- 
trine of libel, the great engine of oppression in all des- 
potisms, you have invaded the student in his cell ; and the 
subtlety of a Spanish inquisition has been employed to 
ensnare the artlessness of youth, and to draw generous 
simplicity into self-crimination " 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 13 

was afterwards put in force), for opinions purely 
theoretical ; while the disgrace of expulsion was 
held in terrorem, though upon what devoted 
head it was to fall was still a mystery. 

Such was the moral condition of the Irish 
University, when Murrogh O'Brien was about 
to incur its censures, for a conduct, that, what- 
ever might be its errors, would, twenty years 
before, have been passed over in silence ; as one 
of those juvenile " frolics, done at the heat of 
blood," which then nightly disturbed the streets 
of tlie Irish capital. 

O'Brien, on his return to College, after two 
days' absence, crossed its threshold with a heavy 
and foreboding heart. Lighted by one of the 
porters, who accompanied him from the lodge 
to his own chambers in the library square, 
(which looked from their rear into the park), he 
found them chill and comfortless — almost as de- 
solate as that he had lately occupied in his 
paternal home. The porter, too, who only staid 
to light his candle, was churlish and surly ; and 



14* THE o'bRIENS AXD 

treated him as one, who was already under the 
ban of that empire, which was to its underlings — 
the world. In answer to O'Brien's question for 
letters or notes (for he was anxious and full of 
expectation as to his father), the man replied 
sullenly, that he believed there were both mes- 
sages and letters, but that it was then too late 
to send them up from the lodge, and that the 
fire-lighter would bring them in the morning. 
He then retired ; and O'Brien, worn out in mind 
and bod}^, stiff with protracted fatigue, and the 
bruises he had received among the falling ruins, 
and chilled with the drenching rain, under which 
he had so long been exposed, retired to his little 
dormitory in utter despondency, and wholly 
deficient in those physical energies, from which 
!<pring the pleased alacrity of spirits and cheering 
aspirations of hope. 

It was late when he rose on the following 
morning ; so late, that he missed the chapel 
service, as he necessarily had done on the pre- 
ceding day — another item in the long account 



THE oVlaHERTYS. 15 

which college discipline had to settle with him. 
As he entered his sitting-room, he found his 
breakfast table covered with cards, notes, and 
letters. There is in such mementos of friendly 
recollection something peculiarly cheering to 
spirits depressed with the consciousness of isola- 
tion. The certainty of being thought of, in the 
moment when some especial stroke of life's vi- 
cissitudes leads to the apprehension of a general 
abandonment, was gracious and gratifying. It 
was a solace he needed ; for he was still steeped 
in thought from visions of the night — from ad- 
ventures, at least, which might pass for visions. 
Intense solicitude concerning the mysterious 
absence of his father, at a moment so critical to 
his only child — anxiety for the fate of Shane — 
the utter ruin of his father's fortunes — and last, 
though scarcely least, the agitating and doubtful 
impression left on his mind, by the sudden ap- 
parition of that female phantom, standing on 
the brink of destruction, amidst the ruins of the 
falling house — all combined to sink his sus- 



16 THE o'bRIENS and 

ceptible spirits to the lowest pitch of depression. 
He gladly, therefore, took refuge from himself 
in externals, and was disposed to see, in the 
common forms of good-will, more of courtesy 
and of kindness, than might even have been in- 
tended. 

The visiting cards included the names of the 
most distinguished members of the Historical So- 
ciety, some of whom had called on him, the day 
before, at the castle guard. There was also a 
letter written on coarse paper, coarsely folded, and 
sealed with a thimble. A slight flush coloured his 
])ale cheek, as he threw the letter carelessly 
and unopened on one side : he was not wholly 
unused to receive letters sealed with thimbles. 
lu the present instance, however, he could not 
tax himself even with a guess at the probable 
writer ; and he threw aside the letter, and took 
up another of larger dimensions, and more courtly 
form, which was sealed with a coronet. His faint 
blush deepened to crimson ; and he tore open 
the aristocratic missive with a trembling hand. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 17 

It was a blank cover, containing a card for a 
masked ball at Knocklofty House, on the follow- 
ing evening — a mandate evidently issued from 
the office of the countess's groom of the cham- 
bers ; and his name had probably been set down 
with the sweepings of the porter's book. 

O'Brien was disappointed, he knew not why. 
He looked at the inclosure. The address was 
in a large hand ; but the seal was the Knock- 
lofty arms. There was the pearl in a field or, 
and the motto of " Qui me cJterche, me trouveJ" 
The recollection of the interview in St. Patrick's 
Hall, the exchange of the precious and elegant 
ring for the awful signet he still wore on his 
finger, recurred to his recollection, and wholly 
absorbed him, as he swallowed his coffee. 

Gradually kindling under the cheering influ- 
ence, he took up another note; having first, 
however, cut off the Knocklofty seal, and de- 
posited it in his writing box. This note had 
lain concealed under the envelope of the Knock- 
lofty invitation. It looked like a billet from the 



18 THE O'BRIENS AKD 

queen of the fairies. It was written on rose- 
coloured paper, and bore the fragrance of the 
flower whose tints it imitated. Its tiny seal 
was impressed with the head of a veiled Isis; and 
the spirit of the billet appeared, to his heated 
fancy, as pretty as its materiel. It was headed 
" L' Invito,"" and ran as follows: — 

" If there be truth in eyes, I've read in thine 

More than by words or breath could e'er transpire, 
A soul in sacred sympathy with rainej 

And I'm a spirit of no common fire. 
To-morrow's eve— remember, ten's the hour — 

Come, if hope, feeling, passion, warm thy breast j 
A mask, en rose, a ring, a wreath, a flower, 

These are the signs — so leave to fate the rest," 

O'Brien read over the billet a hundred times. 
Its contents, like its odours, were intoxicating ; 
and its odour was so peculiar, as to breathe even 
upon his mental associations. It was an odour 
peculiar to the musky atmosphere of the Arno. 
A small phial, which lay in his writing box, was 
filled with the same distillation, the secret of 
which was only known to the monks of the Santa 



19 

Maria Novella, of Florence ; from whose "j^- 
deria'^ of pious perfumery, it was sent forth, — 
for the emolument of the convent, and the de- 
licious inebriation of all who partook of their 
hallowed essence of " Mille ^orV* 

But whence came this pretty note and its 
perfume ? Its fantastic contents, its seducing 
invitation, were assigned, with a rapid heart-beat, 
to Lady Knockloffy. O'Brien wasperhaps vain 
andimpassioned, with just enough of the coxcomb 
to misdirect a susceptibility, always on service : 
but it was scarcely necessary to be either, to sus- 
pect that the prepossession of the beautiful coun- 
tess, in favour of her champion, had taken a 
colour, of a deeper dye than that which gratitude 
sheds even on the most grateful feelings. O' Brien 
had all the sense of moral propriety which 
belongs to superior minds, and all that high 
feeling of honour, which a chivalrous profession 
and character combine to form and to nurture. 
But there are frailties incidental to the young 
and the ardent, which, (howpyer they may tend 



20 THE 0*BRIENS AND 

to violate the best interests of society,) come in 
such an illusory guise, as to conceal their real 
turpitude from their victim ; and which society 
itself appears, by a sort of tacit agreement, to 
\devv, not with approbation, but with pity and 
indulgence. 

To have conceived, to have cherished a passion 
for a married woman, would never have entered 
into the moral abstractions of one, who, even 
with ail his foreign habits of viewing certain 
liaisons (treated in Germany, above all other 
countries, as matters of course), shrunk with 
disgust from that corruption in private life, 
which is only found to flourish where public 
virtue is unknown. He was aware that the 
Irish "high life" of the day was, in certain 
particulars, mounted upon springs similar to 
those, which governed the aristocratic society of 
the continent. But, however he might succumb 
under certain temptations, which the young and 
impassioned rarely resist, his principles would 
still have stood opposed to his conduct ; and no 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 21 

cold-blooded sophistry in favour of what was 
wrong, would have advocated and excused his 
dereliction from what was right. O'Brien did 
not, for a moment, suppose himself in love with 
the wife of the Earl of Knocklofty, of whom he 
had seen and known so little. He had, indeed, 
thought not on the subject ; but had suffered 
himself to be led on, flattered, seduced, and 
intoxicated by those gracious and gratifying 
sensations peculiar to his time of life, and to the 
impression of which, that epoch alone is sus- 
ceptible. For a moment, therefore, the pleasure 
he received from what he believed Lady Knock- 
lofty's poetical challenge, wholly and deliciously 
pre-occupied him ; and he resolved, come what 
might in the interim, that nothing short of 
physical inability should prevent his giving the 
rendezvous to the mask, in rose, whose wreath, 
ring, and flower, he doubted not, would be ex- 
hibited as his signal and guide. 

While he locked up the precious billet in the 
most secret drawer of his writing-box, the letter 



22 THE o'bRIENS and 

with the thimble impression again caught his 
eye. In a listless and almost unconscious cu- 
riosity? he opened it, and found a volume writ- 
ten in a long, narrow, old-fashioned, Italian 
hand, which was not quite unknown to him. 
He looked for the signature at the end of the 
fifth page, and saw, with something like plea- 
sure, the name of Mabie Mac Taaf, while, to 
a postscript scrawled on the envelope, appeared, 
" Your affectionate aunt, Monica." These 
names brought back to his heart a tide of kjiadly 
feelings, and gracious, though homely, recol- 
lections. The tenderest remembrance of his 
gentle and affectionate mother had rendered 
even the foibles and peculiarities of her elder 
sisters endurable, to one who was not himself of 
a very enduring temper ; and who, in boyhood, 
had sometimes ill-brooked the dictatorial manner 
of his aunts, and their vituperation of his father. 
Between Terence O'Brien and the Miss Mac 
Taafs, a temporary reconciliation had but laid 
the foundation for deeper animosities ; and ten 



THE o'flaheutys. S!3 

years absence from St. Grellan, had cancelled all 
bonds of kindred and propinquity between Lord 
Arranmore and his sisters-in-law. Although 
he had not forbidden his son to write to his only 
surviving female relations, yet when he did so, 
and even proposed to visit them in the summer 
vacation, his father had, with his characteristic 
manner, observed, as he read the letter addressed 
to them in a style at once playful and tender — 
*' You don't know them aunts of your's, or you 
forget them, Murrogh; which comes to the same 
thing. You might as well attempt to smooth 
down the back of a pet hedge-hog, as tame down 
the Miss Mac Taafs ; who are for all the world 
like the cat coucliant in the arms of the Blakes, 
always ready for a pounce; so take my advice, 
child, and lave the Miss Mac Taafs alone, and 
they'll lave you alone ; and that's the best can 
happen to you." 

O'Brien did not take his father's advice. The 
Miss Mac Taafs were his mother's sisters ; they 
were women ; and they were now old, perhaps 



24 THE o'bBIENS and 

helpless: and however dictatorial and despotic 
they might be to others, they had always been 
kind to him. He remembered the snipes he 
had kiUed on their bogs with the brigadier's 
fowhng-piece ; he remembered, with something 
like pleasure, the cream and honey of Bog Moy, 
by the never spared abundance of which, his 
aunts had often sent him home sick and surfeited. 
He remembered the little Connemara poney, the 
first horse he had ever ridden, and which they 
had presented to him, on his first return from 
the Isles of Arran. 

It was now five months since he had written 
to the ladies of Bog Moy, under the influence 
of these reminiscences; and the letter he now 
endeavoured to decipher, was their tardy and 
not very legible answer. The Miss Mac Taafs 
spelled as they spoke ; and they spoke as the 
old Irish gentry spoke in the reign of Queen 
Anne. The Miss Mac Taafs wrote with all the 
dignified verbosity with which they conversed, 
in that little circle, to which they were both the 



THE O'FLAHKRTYS. 25 

law and the gospel, and tlieir digressive style 
was both characteristic and national. Their 
letters ran as follows : — 

'* Dear Nephew, 
" Your missive of the 30th of November 
came safely to hand ; and no thanks to Paddy 
the post, but every blame in life — who let it 
drop upon the road near James Daly's dike, 
having got a sup in his eye, where it was found, 
by old MoU-of-the-rock, the mona-shul^ of St. 
Grellan, or never should have set eyes on it. 
It has been in the contimplation of your aunt 
Monica and myself to acknowledge the receipt 
thereof, any day, for these last three months : 
and the marvel is that we get lave to sit down 
at all in pace and quiet, and reply to the con- 
tints therein contayned ; seeing that we are 
not lift time to bless ourselves, as the papists 
say, (to whom no disparagement ; laving that 
to the new comers and upstarts), what with one 



Mona s/iul, a wandering woman. 



VOL. III. 



THE O BEIENS AND 



matter, and what with another, and the place 
never empty noon or night, but coming and 
going, and coshering and gostering, and the 
bog saison coming down upon us all of a sud- 
den, hke an hail shower in June, in regard of 
the dry weather : and James Kelly (though 
surely a faithful servant and a trust-worthy, 
save in respect of the drop, poor cratur), not 
being as young, as he was when he mounted you 
on the little raghery ; and them furreign un- 
dertakers at Moycullen, opening a new vein of 
red bog, and underselling the world ; also green 
marble, of w^hich more in due time. So that, 
what with one thing, and what with another, 
it is no aisy matter to get time to inform you, 
Murrogh O'Brien, of our good will to you, now 
and always : though, as your aunt Monica truly 
sayeth, it's little your father's son has a right 
to expect of us. For it's ourselves, Mab!e and 
Monica Mac Taaf, that never yetw'as the better 
of you, Terry O'Brien Lord Arranmore to 
the value of a brass thimble ; though when you 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 27 

was a poor garloch of a cratur, it's us, and ours, 
was at your wicked will, as the saying is, and 
the house never free from you ; for like the 
crickets, oncet you got in, ould Nick would not 
get you out on't, till you falsely abducted that 
poor innocent, who, —but it is no matter now, 
nor shall you, Murrogh O'Brien, be a screed the 
worse for the great injury done us by your 
father ; of which your mother's abduction, (a 
child in the eye of the law, and our ward as 
well as sister and co-heiress), was not the first 
nor last. But of that hereafter ; this being 
shortly and simply to tell you, that we shall be 
heartily glad to see you at Bog Moy, where 
board and bed is at your disposal ; and would 
be plaising to know your raal intintions and 
views in life, which, by all accounts, are like 
the prospects of Mam Turk on a winter's day — 
high and cloudy. Hearing tell of all them that 
comes from Dublin, that your father's a ruined 
man, though now a great lord, in his mansion- 
house in the capital : but far less well to do 
c 2 



28 THE O'HRIENS AND 

now, than v/ben lie was Terry O'Brien, attor- 
ney at law, in his snug red brick house, in the 
High-street of St. Grellan, and every thing 
dacent, and highly respectable about him. And 
hears from young counsellor Costello, nephew 
of the ould counsellor, and of the widow and 
Miss Costello, (great cronies at Bog Moy, 
though regular Ave Marias and great Toteens, 
Father Festus Daly, P. P., director), that you 
carry your head above the world in Dublin 
college, and are the ''die shin""^ of the place ; 
though nobody knows how your father keeps 
you there, nor for why, nor for what ; since, 
being a lord's son, I don't see how you could, 
or ought to earn your own bread, either as a 
counsellor, or in any other way, except as 
chancellor of Ireland ; which is a thing to be 
compared to Achille Head, high to look at, and 
far to get at ; nor aisy either, to my mind. And 
the whole Ballyboe marvels much at your un- 
expected return to the country, at all, at all ; 
• " Who is that ?" 



THE OFLAHEBTYS. 29 

the rumour going that you were hand and glove 
with the emperor, in respect of the honour done 
to the memory of your great great granduncle, 
the aullc counsellor Count Mac Taaf, also my 
cousin Rodolphus IVIac Taaf, Chancellor of 
the Empire ; and that you would be a gineral 
in no time ; and many young chaps here was 
thinking of going over to you, thinking you 
would make their fortunes, and get them com- 
missions in the imparial army, which, to be 
sure, you might. 

" But we guess it was your father's doing, 
who has more tricks in him than a Leprachan, 
always devising, and colloguing, and policizing ; 
and has his own raisons for getting you back, 
I'll ingage. But Murrogh O'Brien, I would 
warn you well against such idle drames ; and if 
you will be led by us, our intire and sincare 
advice to you i^;, that it is not on your father 
and his wild schemes, and ouid Shanaos, you 
will depind. And as for your earning your 
crust and crum, by carrying a bag on your arm. 



30 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and a lord's coronet on your head, I hope, for 
the honour of the family, it's what you won't 
attimpt ; but be, in due course of time, a raal 
and undoubted estated nobleman. For though 
your aunt, Monica, and I, might make ducks 
and drakes of the lands of Bog Moy, if we plased, 
there being no male tail ; and though by marry- 
ing to-morrow (and one is never too ould to do 
a foolish thing, but the oulder the foolisher; 
not, as you will see, that either myself or my 
sister, Monica, is a hair the worse since you left 
us, and will ride, walk, or dance an Irish jigg 
with the youngest she in the Bally boe, be she 
who she may) ; and, as I said before, by marry- 
ing to-morrow, we could bring the title of Bally- 
slattery, now in abeyance, into any family, and 
the green knighthood ; yet having, at prisint, 
no such intintions, we are inclined to consider 
you as our natural heir, if not by law, always by 
affection (for favour goes by liking) ; and I 
need not mind you, Murrogh, that yourself was 
the pet of Bog Moy, when you was a donny 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 31 

cratur, though it's little signs on you, never 
writing a line to say how it was with you — but 
pass for that. And would be plased that you 
would finish your college studies, in which I see 
neither rhyme nor right, seeing that when you 
left this ye were the greatest scholar of your age 
in the barony, in regard of the Latin which you 
spouted out like your mother's tongue, no thanks 
to the diocesan, but to poor Abbe OTlaherty, — 
who, though a great papist, was a gentleman 
every bit of him, to the back bone ; which is 
more than can be said of the Archdeacon Hunks, 
nor any of his breed, seed, or generation ; and go- 
verns the town and Ballyboe under thim Proud- 
forts (now Knockloftys), who seldom see the 
place but in election time, of which more when 
we meet, in which you are much concerned. 
And would wish you to lose no time, but come 
home, as I may say — for what other home have 
you but Bog Moy ? and think you would find the 
same plasing to you in every way, and especially 
in making head against them mushrooms and 



32 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Williamites, the Knockloftys, and the new comers 
and undertakers at MoycuUen, and their hedg- 
ing, and draining, and planting, and arogating,* 
as it is called, disputing the ould mill-strame, 
that has been allowed to go over the country, 
without let or hindrance, with ould Mr. Martin, 
of Dangan, and giving the bog for nothing to 
them as will cut and dry it, and long leases, 
and building chimnies ; and says it's a barbarous 
custom, ploughing, harrowing, and drawing 
horses, garans, and colts by the tail, after th' 
ould Connaught fashion, ' whereby,' says their 
Scotch overseer to James Kelly, * the breed of 
horses is impoverished in the county,' and such 
like talk ; as if none ever ploughed, till the new 
undertakers of Moycullen came among us. And 
who are they at all ? and what brings them here, 
building and bolstering up th' ould Abbey, and 
the ould dwelling-house of the O'Flaherties? 
But all doing from the Galway side, and Lough 
Corrib ; and th' ould pass to the mountains. Glen 
• Irrigating. 



THE o'tl^ihertys. 33 

Murrogh (so called after your ancestor), not 
opened. But of this more when we meet, only 
wishing you were here on the spot. Remain, 
" Truely your affectionate Aunt, 

'* Mable Mac Taaf. 

" P. S. Plase to mintion when you mane to 
come — say this day fortnight ; having it in con- 
timplation to give a Jug-day to the country 
round, in regard of the pipe of claret from 
cousin Hyacinth French and Co., Bordeaux ; 
also six beds in the barrack-room, and shakes 
down in plinty ; also wishes you would borrow 
your father's coroneted coach for the journey, 
and not come in like a boccah* on a market da}^ 
sly and shabby ; and if means were, would send 
you the Brigadier's Kevenhuller hat ; but sup- 
poses you have a military three-cocked of your 
own — for once a colonel, always a colonel. 
And would heartily desire you should drive 
through the town in your full shute of furreign 
* A lame beggar, 
c 3 



34 THE o'biiiens and 

regimentals ; and I'll ingage it's widow and Miss 
Costello will be on the shoughraun looking out 
for you at the bay window. And mind, when you 
come, that you don't tread on Paddy Whack's 
tail, for he's the darling now with your aunt 
Monica ; and a dirty darling he is, neither 
wormed, nor clipped, and the most troublesome 
cur in the barony this day— but every one to 
their taste. And am your affectionate, 

" M. Mac T." 

" Dear Nephew Murrogh, 
'' I slip in a line in the cover of the inclosed, 
just to say I join my sister, Mable, in all good 
wishes, and hopes to see you ; ' and the sight 
will be good for sore eyes,' says Father Festus, 
who takes an hand at ' fi ve-and-forty ' with us by 
times, and was coadjutor when you were in it. 
Plase to say, is grogram worn now ? also coiber- 
teen ? Would deem it a favour to inquire if a 
Kerry stone solitaire, oi great value (once Lady 
Betty Mac Taaf "s), would be trucked with ad- 



THE o'flahertys. 33 

vantage against a pair of silver shoe buckles and 
salt-cellars — N. B. Try Skinner^s Row, No. 6. 
Peter Blake's, silversmith, of Galway, under- 
values the same, though twice brought to him. 
Also, would like to have, if not too troublesome, 
a double-quilted camlet petticoat, like Miss Cos- 
tello's, eked out with grey serge behind. To 
be had No. 77, Corn Market, opposite the sign 
of the Golden Flace. — N. B. Make use of Miss 
Prudence Costello's name, (got her by the young 
counsellor, a great buckeen). Will be surprised 
to hear that the ladies of Mary, John, and Jo- 
seph, much respected, are dissolved by order of 
the Provincial, and are transported to a new 
order or confraternity in Moycullen, as yet no- 
body knows where. Some say th' ould Abbey 
of Moycullen, some say Cong; having never 
thriven, as Father Festus says, P. P. of St. Grel- 
lan, since your great grand-aunt's time of Bally- 
slattery, Supariour thereof!*, long after the Bog- 
moys came over to the protestant church ; and 



36 THE O'SKlEKS A^D 

will be happy on your arrival to pay for 
same. 

" Your loving Aunt, 

" MoxiCA Mac Taaf. 

" P. S. Wish just to mention, in a sly "way, 
that if you don't mane to strew green rushes 
under James Kelly's feet, you may as well quit 
at once — governs the place intirely, and is the 
sense-keeper of the family. As to his not being 
wormed, it is not true ; but give a dog an ill- 
name, and hang him, which is the case with Paddy 
Whack. See, and judge for yourself ! — so called 
after Paddy Whack, ould My. Robin Martin, of 
Dangan's dog, young Dick's father, of whose 
breed he is, dam, Miss Joyce, of Joyce's county,* 
her dog Stella, first cousin once removed. So 
belf and sister expects to see all the family on 
the Jug-day, long in contimplation, and hope to 

* A large tract of land, so called in Connaught. 



THK. O'FLxVHl'.IlTYS. 07 

see you of the party. Till then, and ever, 
yours, &c. again with raal regard. Your affec- 
tionate aunt, 

" Monica/' 

The perusal of this strange, but characteristic 
farago, which, under other circumstances, might 
have amused him to whom it was addressed, 
served only, in his present tone of depression, to 
sink his spirits still lower. His " making head 
against the Knockloftys," broadened his smile to 
a laugh ; and the chances of going " into the 
neighbourhood of Lady Knocklofty's sum- 
mer residence," increased the palpitation which 
even her name upon paper had excited. On 
the subject of titles and inheritances, however, 
he was completely disabused ; and if bis ro- 
mantic imagination still gave him an interest in 
the historical names of his country, if a feeling 
of family pride still lay lingering in his mind, 
the mortifying position between rank and 
indigence, in which his father's recovered ho- 



38 THE o'bhiens axd 

Hours had placed him, combining with opinions 
formed under the social philosophy of the day, 
left his aunt's views and promises of hereditary 
honours without a single attraction. " The Green 
Knight of the Fassagh ! the Baron of Bally- 
slattery ! ! How ridiculous!" he said, "who 
would go labelled into the world with such 
absurd titles?" 

The estate of Bog Moy, indeed, might, he 
thought, be a substantial benefit. Although 
he had no great confidence in Connemara es- 
tates, he remembered the great importance 
he had attached to Bog Moy, and to the ladies 
of Bog Mo}^, in his childhood. They were to 
him like the queens or ogresses of a fairy tale — 
tall, gaunt, majestic, and awful. Here, then, 
was a hope against abject poverty, and an home 
against utter destitution : but on what terms ! — 
dependence, evidently — absolute, subservient, 
and humiliating dependence upon two dictatorial, 
ignorant, old-fashioned, and eccentric women ; 
with all the idle gossipping of a remote country 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 39 

neighbourhood, such as might be expected from 
the widow Costello, and the parish priest, James 
Kelly, Miss Costello, and Paddy Whack. "No," 
he said, as he sat clasping his hands despondingly, 
" not for all the green knighthoods, the honours 
of Ballyslattery, and the wealth of the turf mines 
of Bog Moy ! With robust health, the conscious- 
ness of some talent, and exhaustless energy, with 
Ireland in my heart, and a spirit to meet the 
worst and dare the worst in her cause, what have 
I to fear?" 

There was, however, a tone of good will, of 
family feeling, quaintly expressed indeed, in this 
letter, that was not ungracious to O'Brien's feel- 
ings. There was a home to give him temporary 
shelter ; and in the Brigadier's tower-chamber, 
he might by hard study and application, make 
up for the time he should lose, by a rigorous, 
but he frankly owned, not altogether an un- 
merited sentence, such as he anticipated. And 
now with the hope that Shane had escaped, and 
was on the wav back to his native mountains ; 



4;0 THE o'BltlEXS AND 

and in the confidence that his father, if in town, 
would not fail to give him some sign of life in 
the course of the day, and that Lady Knock- 
lofty would receive the homage of a visit he 
was about to offer her, — a visit of thanks, pour 
le moins for the protection and influence she had 
exerted in his favour — he arose to dress: but he 
found that his whole wardrobe, with Lord Wal- 
ter's great-coat had been taken away. 

He threw up the window and called to " the 
boy"" who attended at his chambers. But the 
queer old cripple, who answered to that juvenile 
appellation, and who in a scratch wig and ragged 
suitout, usually occupied the stone bench in 
front of the building, inhabited by such of the 
students as had appointed him their valet, was 
not, as usual, at his post. While still waiting 
for him, and looking listlessly out of the win- 
dow, O'Brien saw the same porter, as had 
lighted him to his room, the night before, cross 
the court, followed by " the boy," who was 
carrying the clothes^ cap and gown, which were 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 41 

missing. The porter was an old familiar of 
the institution, jealous of its dignity, and a 
stern and rigorous upholder of the points of dis- 
cipline which concerned his high and important 
calhng, as the provost himself. 

O'Brien perceived that his page had only- 
taken away his clothes to brush them ; and that 
the gruff old porter accompanied him for the 
purpose of delivering a college mandate. On 
opening, he found it to contain a summons 
to attend a board on the following day. While 
reading it, he felt the pressure of the cripple's 
foot upon his own, who took the opportunity of 
passing with the clothes into the inner room, 
thus to arrest his attention. He looked round 
abruptly, and perceived that the porter lingered 
at the outward door, as if to watch the under- 
ling out ; who on again passing Murrogh, mut- 
tered, " mind, Domine, you know nothing of 
the papers in the great-coat." The two ser- 
vants then departed together. O'Brien's first 
impulse was to call after the porter, and order 



42 THE O'BRIENS AND 

a messenger to take home Lord Walter's coat 
to F. House. But instantly taking the hint 
that its pockets might have contained something 
that affected, or could injure its owner, he 
checked the impulse, and resolved to write to 
him ; and to leave the note himself, in case he 
should not find him at home. 

He had already began his letter, when the 
same gruff Cerberus, who seemed to have him in 
especial surveillance^ brought him the following 
note. 

« My Dear O'Brien, 

" For you must allow me to use a form of 
familiar intimacy, where I am desirous to become 
both intimate and familiar, — I write to say that 
I am obliged to leave town with my brother, the 
duke, and cannot possibly return till to-morrow 
afternoon, when I will call upon you in college 
about four o'clock. I regret that I cannot meet 
you at the m^ss of the Prince's Own — will you 
try, if there are any papers in my great-coat 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 43 

pocket, and burn them ; keep the coat till my 
servant calls for it. 

" Your's faithfully, and in haste, 

" Walter F." 

The coincidence between the warning of " the 
boy," and the direction of Lord Walter, struck 
O'Brien with some surprise. W hat papers could 
the brother of the Duke of F. have about his 
person, which it was important should be 
destroyed? and what, if they were not un- 
known to the underlings of the university, 
and had been examined ? Without indulging 
further in surmise, he proceeded to fulfil his 
friend's inj unction ; but on examination, found 
the pockets of the great-coat empty. Either 
Lord Walter had been mistaken, or the papers 
had been removed. In so doubtful a case, he 
deemed it most prudent to make no inquiry, and 
to shew no solicitude ; and to this he was the 
more induced, because, the secret of the owner 
of the coat was in his keeping, and whatever 



44 THE o'briens and 

might be the nature of the papers, Lord Walter^s 
name would remain unconnected with them. 

O'Brien, therefore, finished his toilette; and, 
though pale and haggard, from fatigue, anxiety, 
and emotion, there was a reflection in his glass 
which might have soothed his vanity, and have 
told him that a cheek so pale, and a look so 
pensive, did not assort ill with eyes so dark, and 
features formed in the very mould of sentiment. 
Thus armed, though unconsciously, for conquest, 
and ignorant that ladies who profess platonism, 
and '^poiLSsent les grands sentimens,'' prefer pale 
young men with dark eyes, to ruddy young men 
with light ones, he was issuing forth from the 
stone porch of the building, when he was met 
by an orderly, who inquired for the rooms of 
the Hon. Murrogh O'Brien. O'Brien acknow- 
ledged himself, and received the following note 
from the orderly, who immediately rode off: — 

*' Lord Charles Fitzcharles regrets, that cir- 
cumstances of a particular nature, will prevent 



THE o'FLAHERTY^. 4i$ 

him from having the pleasure of receiving Mr. 
O'Brien at the mess dinner of the Prince's 
Own, on this day." 

" Barracks, Wednesday Morning.'^ 

This note struck O'Brien with deep mortifica- 
tion, he scarcely knew why. He felt its con- 
tents almost as an insult ; and had he obeyed 
the very Irish, and very petulant feelings of the 
moment, he would have answered it by a chal- 
lenge to the Fifteen Acres. But to fight a man 
for not being able, or even willing to receive 
him at dinner, was rather a desperate and 
Bobadil measure ; so tearing the paper into a 
thousand pieces, he hummed away his irritable 
and nervous feelings ; and again walked forth, 
directing his steps to Knock lofty House, with 
spirits depressed, even beyond the power of th^ 
delightful visit he anticipated, to raise them. 

He soon reached the gates of that noble man-- 
sion, and was passed on from the porter's lodge to 
the vestibule, where a crowd of liveried footmen 



46 THE O'BRIENS AND 

received his card, and forwarded it to a groom 
of the chambers, who leaned in gossipping idle- 
ness with one of his fraternity, over the balus- 
trade of the first corridor. After an interval of 
a few minutes the card was returned, to be 
entered into the porter's book, and an answer 
given that her ladyship was not at home : this 
was possible, — was probable, — was perhaps, the 
fact ; and yet it confounded O'Brien, and amazed 
him. As he took back his card, at the porter's 
request, to write his address on it, that it might 
be entered in the great record of ceremony, over 
which that functionary presided, Lord Kilcol- 
man came down the great stair-case, looked at 
O'Brien, without recognizing him, mounted his 
horse, which a groom was leading about the 
court, and rode off. 

O'Brien went forth. The summons to the 
board, the sudden departure of Lord Walter, 
the mysterious papers, the excuse of Lord 
Fitzcharles, the denial of Lady Knocklofty, 
and the insolent cut conclusive of Lord Kilcol- 



THE O'FLAHEIITYS. 47 

man, combined to work powerfully upon a proud, 
touchy, and susceptible imagination ; and before 
he had got an hundred yards from Knocklofty 
House, he not only considered himself as a very 
ill-used gentleman, but gradually worked up his 
morbid fancy to see in himself one who had lost 
caste, and who was cut and branded as the very 
pariah of society. 

In this cup of mingled bitternesses, the sole 
palateable infusion was derived from the confid- 
ing and friendly tone of Lord Walter's letter ; 
and the consciousness of maintaininfj and de- 
serving the friendship of such a person, enabled 
him to treat with comparative indifference the 
slights of the Kilcolmans and Fitzcharles's, and 
assisted in restoring his spirits to something like 
equanimity. 

His next visit was to his father's attorney in 
York-street : but Mr. Fitton, a noted limb of 
the law and conductor of the litigations of half 
the gentry of Connemara, whose bills of costs 
were the only bills they permitted themselves to 



48 THE o'briens and 

pay, was on circuit ; and the young men in the 
c office had not seen Lord Arranmore for more 
than three weeks. All the information O Brien 
could obtain, was from the head clerk, who 
whispered him that the execution had been for 
the non-payment of a bill ; and that till some 
settlement was effected with his very refractory 
creditors, his lordship found it prudent to keep 
out of the way. 

, " And what settlement — what compromise 
can be made," asked O'Brien, '' when no 
assets,"'' he was about to say, but he paused, 
and the clerk added, 

" Oh, I believe matters will be settled in a 
day or two ; a friend has come forward, and 
money has been advanced." 

" A friend ! what friend ?" 

" Of that we know nothing,'^ said the clerk : 
" he acts by an agent, with whom Mr. Fitton 
has had several interviews ; but I believe he is 
spme foreign relation." 

O Brien started ; he knew but of one foreign 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 49 

relation, but of one living, who could have the 
means, if indeed he still had them ; and this 
person was the secretary of the Propaganda at 
Rome, the Ex-superior of the Jesuit'^s college 
in the eternal city ; but he was in Rome, and 
advanced in life beyond the given years of man. 
Neither had Lord Arranmore mentioned his 
uncle since O'Brien's return, except once or 
twice in a cursory way. 

" Have you any idea,"" he asked, " that this 
kind relation is an ecclesiastic ?"" 

" I suspect he is," said the clerk, " and that 
there is a lady in the case ; at least Counsellor 
Blosset, the agent of the party, seemed to say 
as much ; and a note sent us yesterday by the 
counsellor is in a female hand." 

'* Can I see it ?" asked O'Brien ; and the clerk 
seeking among some papers, presented a note, 
and observed, 

" You may be sure it is from a lady by the 
fine scent.'"' 

The note breathed of the perfume of the 

VOL. III. 1> 



so THE o'eRIENS and 

millejiori ; and he thought was in the same hand- 
writing as that, which he had received in the 
morning—a new hght broke upon him. Was 
there — could there be some secret tye between 
his family and Lady Knocklofty ? The interest 
she took in him might thus be accounted for : 
and if his vanity suffered some abatement by 
this suspicion, his feelings were not the less 
gratified, nor his prepossession for the fair 
Urganda, (who thus waved her magic wand 
over the fortunes of his family) diminished. 

Still all was mere surmise; but O'Brien 
without spirits or opportunity for proceeding 
further with his inquiries, returned to college, 
ordered his commons to his own room, and in the 
evening determined to go, perhaps for the last 
time, to the Historical Society. 

The rumour of his inevitable expulsion had 
been widely spread, and was known to all but 
himself. Strange reports had gone abroad, 
which his friends, in disbelief of their veracity, 
and in delicacy to his feelings, had concealed 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 51 

from him. The accusation that would chiefly 
affect him, was the supposition that he belonged 
to some secret society of which government had 
intimation ; but his liberal principles, some theo- 
logical opinions, on points purely speculative, and 
an open, frank and manly advocacy of catholic 
emancipation, were also items in his accusation, 
which covered him with glory in the eyes of his 
young CO- partners in the Historical Society. On 
his appearance in the society, he was received 
with loud cheering. Many of its ardent mem- 
bers, and some who have since worn the ermine, 
took his martyrdom as the theme of their 
impassioned eloquence on tha night; and a 
declaratory resolution was proposed, that under 
all circumstances, Murrogh O'Brien would ever 
be considered as a most distmguished ornament 
of that society, as he had uniform" y been amongst 
its most energetic and useful members. 

This ardent rally round the victim of impend- 
ing persecution, was balm to the wounded spirit 
of O'Brien. Among the bitterest sensationi to 
D 2 



^V 



^\U^ 



52 THE o'briens and 

which humanity is exposed, is the consciousness 
of having made great personal efforts for an 
ungrateful or an unworthy public. The disco- 
very that we have over estimated the public 
spirit of our age, — that we have acted from a 
confidence in high aspirations and intense 
feelings, which had no existence ; the sudden 
conviction of a wide spreading and grovelling 
selfishness among the lofty pretenders to 
patriotism and zeal, convey not only disap- 
pointment and disgust to the mind on which they 
burst, but also a sense of dupery, the most 
irritating and intolerable. The melancholy 
doubt of Brutus, that the virtue to which his 
life had been one long sacrifice, was but a name, 
is the most desolating shipwreck of human 
hopes, \\ hich history has recorded ; the tor- 
tures of Regulus, the fanaticism of Scaevola, 
make no such call upon our sympathy. 

From this pang, O'Brien was spared : the 
sordid calculations of egotism had not yet in- 
fected the youth of the country; nor were 



THE o'flahertys. 53 

prudent considerations of remote and contingent 
dangers, ranged among the first elements of 
collegiate morality. Those, even, who had 
been but slightly acquainted with the object 
of the meditated attack, now officiously crowded 
around him, to mark their participation in his 
sentiments, and their contempt for his perse- 
cutors. It is melancholy to reflect that among 
this youthful and ardent band, were some, 
who, incapable of that passive resistance, which 
is so essential to a public cause, yielded in after 
life to the temptations of avarice, and of ambi- 
tion ; men who sat in judgment on their former 
companions, and passed the sentence of an igno- 
minious death, upon heads unstained by any 
crime, save that in which they had themselves 
so largely participated — a love, an unregulated, 
but an ardent love for Ireland. 



54 THE o'bRIENS and 



CHAPTER II. 



THE EXPULSION. 



Rien n'est impossible ; il y a des voies, qui conduisent a tnutes cliosfs ; 
et si nous avions assez de volonte, nous aurions toujours assez de 
moyens. 

De la Rochefoucauld. 



It is an awful thing to hear some great public 
bell at an unwonted hour solemnly toll the 
tocsin of alarm, the announce of some public 
calamity or private misfortune, of death, of fire, 
of insurrection. In the gloom of a chill and 
truly Irish spring evening, the bell of the uni- 
versity, thus unseasonably clamorous, aroused 
the curiosity and alarm of the neighbouring 
citizens, as it tolled for the purpose of collecting 
the members of the university in procession, to 
accompany the provost and fellows to the great 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 55 

hall, for the purpose of pronouncing sentence of 
expulsion, and of erasing from the university- 
books the name of him who had encountered its 
ban. 

From the star-chamber of the learned and 
secret tribunal (where the delinquent is tried, 
heard, but not confronted with his accusers), 
to the examination hall, where sentence is pro- 
nounced, the distance is but short. Yet the 
bell had rang for some time, and the chiefs of 
the college had waited for some minutes in their 
robes for their usual attendants on public cere- 
monies : none swelled their train, save a few 
sizers, a still fewer number of the scholars of 
the house, and the domestic officials. At the 
head of these followers, the authorities pro- 
ceeded to the hall ; and in their presence only 
the name of the distinguished fellow-commoner, 
the Hon. Murrogh O'Brien, was erased from 
the books, and the fiat of his expulsion solemnly 
made known. At the instant of denunciation, 
a groan was heard from the remoter part of the 
hall under the gallery ; a sound that seemed to 



56 THE O'BRIENS AND 

burst from the oppression of a broken heart. 
But it passed away. None perceived who had 
uttered it ; and the procession returned to the 
provost's house, with the same ceremonial with 
which it had set out. 

Upon all such awful occasions, delicacy pre- 
vents the greater number of the students from 
being present at the last ceremony. The 
previous investigations being conducted with 
great privacy, and in secret committee, the 
students, with the usual generosity of youth, 
refrain from sanctioning by their presence a 
sentence, of whose merits they are not permitted 
to judge. But never had the college courts 
exhibited such a scene of gloomy desolation and 
utter desertion, as on that evening, when, 
after an examination of several hours before 
the visitors of the university, Murrogh O'Brien 
was found guilty of those high crimes and mis- 
demeanors, which were, in the apprehension of 
the autocrats of the moment, beyond the pale 
of all mercy. It is melancholy to reflect that 
collegiate expulsion, a censure inflicted in the 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 57 

very outset of life, and influencing all its ulterior 
prospects, is necessarily not governed by any 
fixed and written law, but by the will of the 
supreme authorities. Though in all the uni- 
versities of the sister kingdoms a great prac- 
tical forbearance usually accompanies the exer- » 
cise of this discretion, yet in all, a capricious or 
vindictive sentence is possible. Nor is it to be 
wondered if in the bad times of Ireland, political 
considerations powerfully influenced the deci- 
sions of the visitors of Trinity College, on the 
fate of its suspected, and perhaps calumniated 
students. 

Even the college park, then the evening resort 
of the younger members of the university, was 
on this evening completely deserted ; or if some 
few wandered in its deep shaded and gloomy 
avenues of trees, almost coeval with the founda- 
tion of the institution, they were confounded 
with the shadows of its old elms and oaks, and 
were as invisible as if they were not. 

It was while the sentence of expulsion was 
yet pronouncing, that he on whose devoted 
d3 



58 THE o'briens akd 

head it was launched, rushed from the dark 
stone passage which leads to the Provost's 
house, and passed into the park. Heated, 
flushed, fevered, exhausted, after having been 
baited, worried, and cross-examined, worked 
into vehement and unguarded petulance, and 
tortured into self-crimination, or to what was 
deemed such, by the cold-blooded scrutiny and 
provoking insolence of forensic ability (for the 
most formidable of his judges was the most active 
of his examiners), O'Brien sought the refresh- 
ment of shade, silence, and solitude, with the 
same eagerness with which the wounded hart 
*' panteth after the waters" 

He felt the delicacy of his fellow-students, in 
the desertion which left him thus unobtruded 
upon ; and he availed himself of it to conceal 
the immediate sting of mortification, and to re- 
cover from the first shock of a sentence, severe 
beyond his worst anticipations, and preceded 
by an examination of the most unexpected and 
embarrassing nature. 

It was evident that, not his conduct, but his 



THE o'fLAHEKTYS. 59 

opinions had been the chief mark of inquiry. 
He had been accused of popery, and at the 
same time of infideUty ; and the whole drift of 
his scrutineers was less to bring home to him the 
riot at the Strugglers, than to involve him in 
the great Socratic accusation which has served in 
turn for striking at all opinions, and putting 
down the victims of every sect, — the accusation 
of " believing in other gods than tliose by law 
established, and corrupting the youth of the 
country." 

Besides this sweeping and general charge, he 
was arraigned as the open leader of political fac- 
tion in the college ; of acting as the secret agent 
for the French jacobins, and of being a member 
of a new seditious society, which the govern- 
ment was then watching with such suspicion and 
alarm, but which was, as yet, too constitutional, 
to give a handle for legal prosecution. 

Of this charge he stood accused on the evidence 
of some papers which had dropped from the 
pocket of his great coat, while under the process 
of brushing, in the porter's lodge. The con- 
tents of these papers amazed him ; he might 



60 THE o'bJIIKKS AXD 

have cleared himself of the imputation by reveal- 
ing to whom the coat belonged. But, in denying 
all knowledge of the papers, he truly and rigour- 
ously kept the secret of Lord Walter; and 
though he felt, with bitterness and indignation, 
that his word, under these circumstances of par- 
tial concealment, was not believed, he had per- 
sisted in withholding the only exculpation which 
could vindicate his veracity. 

In a temper of mind, such as these events 
might naturally be supposed to produce in such 
a character, O'Brien sought the deepest shades 
of the umbrageous and straight-lined avenues of 
trees, which then overhung the Anatomy-house, 
the nocturnal resort of resurrection-men, and the 
site of many a superstitious tale. He was pacing 
with steps rapid and hurried as his thoughts, 
when he suddenly came against some person, 
whose march was as precipitate as his own. It 
was Lord Walter Fitz waiter ; their recognition 
was instantaneous. Lord Walter passed his arm 
through O'Brien's, and turning up the avenue, 
said, abruptly, " You are expelled, I hear.'" 

" The news has had a quick circulation," said 



THE o'FLAHEIITYS. Bl 

Brien, with a forced laugh ; " the bell has 
scarcely yet done tolling out my knell." 

'' On what charges have you been expelled ?" 
said Lord Walter, eagerly. 

" Charges the most frivolous; but quite enough 
to establish my delinquency, under statutes 
which have long rested in abeyance, and have 
only been revived in my especial case. The true 
cause of my expulsion is, however, not my being 
" membrum pestilens, et cceteris valde pernicio- 
sum^'''' but my opinions.'' 

'' Your opinions ! — But who has denounced 
them r 

" Our board, like the tribunal of the Inquisi- 
tion, does not permit the accused to be con- 
fronted with his accusers ; but the principal 
evidence against me was —myself. Attacked on 
the score of my principles, I scorned subterfuge, 
and rebutted the charge by a defence still more 
obnoxious than the particulars of my accusation. 

1 confessed myself the author of a pamphlet on 
the necessity of a reform in parliament, and ca- 
tholic emancipation, for the ' better quieting the 
country,' (to use a phrase of Elizabeth's times). 



62 THE o'bRIENS and 

This was ' the very head andfro7it of my offend- 
ing — no more.' " 

Lord Walter paused for a moment, and then 
abruptly asked, " What did you do with the 
papers you found in my great-coat pocket ?" 

O'Brien, after an instant's hesitation, replied, 
'' I found none." 

" Did you look in the breast-pocket, as I re- 
quested of you ?" 

" In every part of the coat. There were no 
papers " 

'' My dear O'Brien," said Lord Walter, press- 
ing his hand, " you have relieved my mind from 
a terrible load of anxiety. The other night, 
coming out of a particular society, a person, one 
known to me, thrust a paper into my hand, and 
desired me to read it attentively. I put it into 
the breast-pocket of my greaUcoat, forgot it, 
and was reminded of it at an early hour yester- 
day, when I wrote instantly to you to burn it. 
Being obliged to hasten without delay to my 
brother the Duke, who had been seized with an 
eminently dangerous attack of gout, I have 
been haunted ever since with the idea of the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 6S 

danger which might accrue to you, should the 
paper be found in your possession. I have, 
therefore, taken the first possible moment of re- 
turn to see you, and on my arrival in town, 
half an hour ago, hastened to your rooms. At 
the gates of the college I learned the event 
which has occurred." 

" Are you aware of what this paper con- 
tained?" demanded O'Brien, carelessly. 

" Nothing less than a plan for the separation 
of Ireland from England.'* 

" A plan," said O'Brien, " as physically im- 
practicable, at the present moment, as it would 
always be politically unwise." 

" Exactly," said Lord Walter ; " but all 
great causes have two enemies to guard against 
amongst their advocates, — those who, by hurry- 
ing on events before they are ripe for develop- 
ment, insure defeat ; — and those who, by a 
bigotted attachment to inapplicable abstrac- 
tions, and by bringing the principles of past 
combinations to bear upon present occurrences, 
miss the occasion for effecting that practical 
good, which can never be obtained but by con- 



64 THE O'bRIF.NS and 

suiting the genius of the times, and acting under 
its influence." 

" And who was the author of this notable pro- 
position ?'' 

" His name is — but no, hang it, he has, though 
perhaps unwittingly, trusted me with his secret 
(for I am not quite sure the paper he gave me 
was the one he intended), and 1 will not risk his 
name, even to you." 

" You are quite right," said O'Brien, warmly; 
*' it would be a breach of trust, of " 

" Oh !" interrupted Lord Walter, smiling, 
" the danger would not, I believe, be great ; 
for I have a strange suspicion that he is an 
emissary of government ; one of the paid fo- 
menters of sedition, who first lay the train, and 
afterwards apply the spark, which makes the 
explosion. But a- truce with the subject ; 
and let us speak of what, just now, interests 
me infinitely more, your expulsion." 

" Expulsion, I believe, is not disgrace.^" said 
O'Brien, in an anxious and inquiring tone. " It 
does not necessarily lower its victim in public 
opinion ? If it blast his prospects, it may 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. 65 

Still leave honour untainted, and character 
undefiled." 

*' Expulsion," said Lord Walter, " is un- 
doubtedly intended to be taken as a mark of 
disgrace ; but the moral value of such authorita- 
tive decrees is not at the disposal of the tribunal 
which launches them. Honest and honourable 
men, in all times, have been expelled, excom- 
mimicated, banished, inflicted with infamous 
corporeal punishments, and some have died the 
death of the felon ; yet their fair fame has come 
out the brighter from the fiery persecution 
through which it passed. The banishment of 
Aristides was the immortal infamy of his ene- 
mies ; and the glorious patriotism of Sydney 
and of Russel, was not to be sullied by the 
tyrants who maligned and — murdered them." 

" But / am not Aristides !" said O'Brien, 
with a pettish laugh, " nor Sydney, nor Rus- 
sel. Humanity has no interests to defend in 
my person ; and the instincts of mankind will 
not force opinion to do me justice." 

*' True,'' said Lord Walter. " But neither is 
the board of pedantic mufties, headed by their 



66 



THE O BRIENS AND 



.superior the vice-chancellor (though one of 
Ireland's most implacable enemies), among 
those great tribunals, which impose upon man- 
kind. The sphere of their influence extends 
not beyond that of their activity." 

" Such a consideration," said O'Brien, " is 
the only escape the wounded spirit finds from 
local littlenesses, and temporary oppressions. It 
is a relief to send forth one's thoughts, and to 
lose in the contemplation of great and general 
causes, the bitter sense of petty and personal 
inflictions. The world is indeed still before me, 
where to choose ; but, Lord Walter, Ireland is 
ray vocation ! If foreign rank had been my 
calling, I might have fought my way to ambi- 
tious distinctions, like others of my countrymen ; 
like all men of strong volitions, who worried 
and oppressed at home, And the intentions of 
nature in their favour justified, by the acknow- 
ledgment of their merit abroad, where no local 
disqualifications impede their progress. But 
here, in this unhappy land, stands the altar of my 
first and warmest vows : and in returning home, 
and breaking the brilliant thraldom of my past 



THE o'flAIIEUTYS. 67 

profession, I had hoped, by honest exertion, by 
devoted patriotism, and by some success in that 
liberal profession, which gives to the bar the 
dignity of the Forum, — I had hoped as the de- 
fender of persecuted individuals, as a champion 
of the great cause of political and religious free- 
dom, to have served Ireland, and to have arrived 
at an honourable independence ; without which 
man can never act as his conscience dictates, nor 
place himself beyond the influence of grovelhng 
and debasing necessity. Andrew Marvel, my dear 
Lord Walter, did much upon his cold shoulder 
of mutton ; but still he possessed the means of its 
purchase : for after all, man is not like the lily 
of the valley ; and where the rewards of pro- 
fitable labour are denied, he is shorn alike of 
his political, and of his personal morality. 

" On arriving in this country, that I might 
give to my new profession all the eclat of which it 
is susceptible, and that I might wholly efface the 
mark of my foreign education, I entered at rather 
a late period of life, the national university. A 
classical scholar, almost from my cradle (like 
those Irish urchins who, as Stanihurst says, in 



68 THE O'BRIENS AND 

his days spouted i^atin more fluently than their 
mother tongue), I came not unprepared for 
collegiate success ; and I should have obtained it : 
but vaulting ambition hath o'erleaped itself; and 
the step taken in the highest consideration for 
the honorable profession I was about to enter, 
has become the stumbling-block of my destiny. 
Marked and branded, I go forth labelled with 
the disgrace of expulsion. Can such a person 

bring credit to any '* 

" My dear O'Brien," interrupted Lord Wal- 
ter, " you are viewing your present position 
under the depressing influence of a very diseased 
state of mind. You have but anticipated events. 
Expulsion from college has merely saved you 
from tbe mortification of a more mature defeat. 
With your feelings and your opinions, with 
your frank and impetuous temperament, all 
hope of success in any of the professions was, 
in this country, mere dehrium. Look at Cur- 
ran, Grattan, Ponsonby ; under the present 
system, the dignities of the law are not for 
them. In the law, one merit alone is acknow- 
ledged, alone rewarded ; and that is political 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 69 

subserviency. A.re yoii for the scarlet robe of 
physic ? ' throw physic to the dogs !' A patriot 
physician, a physician who thinks, or feels, or 
reasons beyond the limits of the pharmacopoeia, 
is no physician for the public. He may dissi- 
pate his time and his faculties in idle gossip, in 
intrigue, in dependance, and if he do but wear 
black stockings and a grave countenance, if he 
only attends the church or the meeting, he will 
undoubtedly succeed ; but if he raise his regard 
to the greater interests of humanity, nay, if he 
diverges into the philosophy even of his own 
craft, and sees more in his profession than the 
phials he fills, he is an unprofitable branch, fit 
only to be lopped off and cast into the fire. Then 
as for the church " 

^' Alte-la,"" said O'Brien, smiling, "there is 
no danger of my taking that broad road to 
intellectual and moral nothingness." 

" Well then, on summing up the evidence, 
it seems to me the verdict is in your favour. 
You are free, free to make the honest applica- 
tion of your talents in the way most congenial 
to your own nature.*" 



70 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

•* De V esprit pour s'avancer ! Monseigneur se 
nioque de moi. No, no, my Lord, in professions 
or out of them, here I fear the case is still the 
same, ' mediocre et rampant, et Von arrive a 
tout^ and so much for my expectations on this 
side the Irish channel." 

" Your entering at the present epoch,'' said 
Lord Walter, " into the Irish University, was 
certainly a false calculation ; and all things 
considered, I do not see that the board could 
have acted otherwise than as they have done. 
For until premiums are given for patriotism, and 
church preferment waits upon public spirit, it 
is to little purpose that the language of liberty 
is taught in our classes, and that Demosthenes 
and ^Eschylus are illustrated from our pro- 
fessors' chairs.'' 

'' Yes," said O'Brien, kindling at the fire of 
Lord Walter's manner, " we are taught the 
Greek, to become acquainted with its metres, not 
to catch the glorious spirit which breathes in the 
pages of its poets and its orators. We may scan 
lines, and string centos of poetical fragments, 
but woe to those students who presume to scan 



THE o'FLAIIERTYS. tl 

men or combine realities. The only classic maxim 
popular in college is the populus vie sibilat, at 
mihi plaudo ; all, however, will not do : while 
such studies are taught, while such authors are 
perused, even the Irish youch will not be slow 
to interpret them in their proper way." 

" Yes," said Lord Walter ; " and eventually 
imitating what they must admire, they will one 
day unite to redress wrongs, such as Greece or 
Rome never suffered under. For which of the 
varied oppressors of those countries have rivalled 
the despotism of the Stones and the Boulters, 
the Kings and the Knockloftys !"" 

OBrien's arm, as it leaned on Lord Walters, 
seemed to vibrate with an electric shock, at the 
mention of the last name. He hem''d away a 
sigh, and Lord Walter continued, "Our youths, 
so deeply versed in ancient patriotism, so called 
upon by modern example (all Irish and hum- 
bled as they are), will one day associate for the 
purposes of national redemption, by its sole 
means, — a national union ! — that brotherhood of 
affection, that community of interest, which 
operating from its centre, to the remotest verge 



72 THE O'BRIENS AND 

of society, will effect a regeneration by means 
as constitutional as they are effectual/' 

"And those means?" demanded O'Brien, 
breathlessly and impatient. 

" Are reform in the representation, and the 
abolition of the penal code." 

" And with such means," exclaimed O'Brien, 
" and with the greatest happiness of the greatest 
number for its dogma, what ages of suffering 
might not be spared to this long suffering land ? 
How long have men congregated, combined, 
conspired for the purposes of oppression and 
injustice ? What has not been effected by the 
unholy alliance of despots, by kings, by Popes, 
by the Jesuits of all ages, catholic and pro- 
testant, christian and infidel; (for the sins of 
churchmen belong to their craft, and not to the 
religion they accidentally profess). What has 
not in all climes been done against the liber- 
ties of mankind by the co-operation of knaves ! 
What might not be effected for their service 
by the union of the virtuous ?" 

" Suppose,*" said Lord Walter, lowering his 
voice," such an association did exist, with your 



THE O'FLAIIERTYS. 73 

own maxim for its object, the greatest happiness 
of the greatest numher^ and with the appropriate 
motto of " idem sentire^ dicere, et agere^'' if such 
an union of strong minds and true hearts did 
exist, would you make the voluntary offering 
of your time, your talents, and your energies, 
of your '' 

"Of my life ! ' interrupted O'Brien, enthu- 
siastically ; " alas ! 'tis all I have to offer." 

" Say you so,'" continued Lord Walter, in a 
still more subdued tone ; " but suppose such 
a society did exist in embryo ; as yet but feeling 
its way to the talent and liberality of the Irish 
heart ; and therefore assuming for the present 
the secresy and caution which is unhappily 
sometimes more necessary for the promotion of 
good, than of evil. Suppose such a society 
found it necessary to observe a discretion 
bordering on mystery, a secrecy which renders 
the bond of union more cohesive, its spirit more 
ardent; for in all human associations, the weak- 
ness of humanity must be taken into account, 
and the imagination enlisted on the side of 
reason." 

VOL. III. E 



74 THE O'BIIIEXS AND 

*^ It was in no secret association," said O'Brien, 
thoughtfully, " that the great principle of 
American Independence originated. It was the 
free and bold explosion of public opinion, which, 
in giving birth to the French revolution, worked 
openly, and in the face of day. I distrust, I 
dislike secrecy.'** 

" But Ireland, wretched Ireland has no public 
opinion, no public to express an opinion," re- 
plied Lord Walter, eagerly. " Ireland is not 
America, still less is it France. The knowledge, 
the philosophy of the one, the energy, the 
freshness of the other, are wanting to this land 
of helots. The lever, by which this inert mass 
is to be moved, is one of infinite delicacy. Its 
springs must be secret, for the^^ are of no vulgar 
mechanism. Besides, had you not in France your 
clubs, your affiliations, and something of the 
mystery as well as the ceremony of freemasonry .^" 

" Yes," said O'Brien, " but that is not the 
best aspect of the French revolution. It was 
the personal ambition, and petty reckless in- 
trigues of these clubs, that palsied the national 
impulse ; and will, eventually, I fear, check its 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 75 

progress, and turn aside its course. The revo- 
lution which is not based on public opinion, is 
at best but insurrection. Still, I will concede 
something to human weakness, and to the pecu- 
liar phasis of Irish society. I will allow as much 
mystery as will excite, with as much ceremonial 
as may strike on the senses without impeding 
real business,- — and will animate philosophy 
without awakening the passions." 

" Exactly, exactly," interrupted Lord Wal- 
ter, eagerly. " You have described the utmost 
verge of mystery intended in the present asso- 
ciation of devoted patriots; who, to the total 
immolation of all personal interests and private 
views, have constituted themselves a body by 
the name of the ' Society of United Irishmen 
OF Dublin.' It is to this society I would direct 
your views, your thoughts, your genius, and 
your actions." 

O'Brien replied with some astonishment : " It 
is as an imputed member of this society that I 
have already been accused of sedition, and 
incipient rebellion ; though I heard its name 
pronounced this day for the first time. Thl8 is 

E 2 



76 THE o'bKIENS AN& 

the society which I have just heard accused of 
exciting the people to rebelhon, of overturning 
the king's government, and separating Ireland 
from England, and of employing the sacred name 
of the Irish Volunteers, to cover the formation 
of an armed banditti, who, in due time, were 
v.ith the appellation of national guard, to over- 
throw the constitution, and to govern Ireland in 
its stead/' 

" In the present state of things," said Lord 
Waller, " this is the basest of calumnies. So 
constitutional, indeed, has been the conduct of 
the society, that though some of the paid spies 
of government have, it is suspected, enrolled 
themselves among our members to betray us, 
they have been unable to afford even the slightest 
pretext for interference or prosecution. To 
what we may yet be driven, by the machinations 
of the faction, who govern the country, 'twere 
vain to anticipate : but that men, some of them 
of the most illustrious families, the most inde- 
pendent fortunes, of the highest character, of the 
most brilliant talents, members of the bar, and 
of the church — that such men have been the 



THE o'flahertys. 77 

founders of the society, and are among its mem- 
bei's, is some warrant for the purity of its 
motives, and even for the wisdom of its object.'"' 

" The man who addresses me," said O'Brien, 
** is, in my mind, sufficient security for its 
honour, its propriety, and its purity. Tha 
descendant of the princely Geraldines, the 
brother of a peer of the realm, one who has 
every thing to lose, and so little to gain, by a 
change — I want no other surety." 

Then suddenly stopping short in his rapid 
pace, and taking both the hands of the young 
nobleman in his, with the strong compression of 
vehement feeling, he added, " Lord Walter, I 
also am an united Irishman, united with the 
advocates of the cause of Ireland by all the ties 
of sympathy and conviction ; and in all sin- 
cerity, I am ready at this moment to become r 
member of your society by any outward form 
its discretion may dictate. But I must not — i 
will not intrude upon your confidence, or upon 
that of your associates, without the fullest, the 
frankest exposition of who and what I am. 

'^ You and the world, the little world w!;ich 



78 

takes any note of my existence, know but this, 
that I am a member of the illustrious family of 
OBrien; which founded its glory, not in the 
royal dignity of its sons, but in the devotion of 
that illustrious chieftain who defended his native 
land against foreign invasion, and died in the 
cause of national independence. They know 
me as the son of an eccentric nobleman, as a 
fellow commoner of the Irish university, and 
as one to whom the narrow circle of his acquaint- 
ance has given the full meed for those trifling 
abilities, which a vehement temperament has 
perhaps pushed too obviously upon public notice. 
Rut you have yet to know that the Hon. Mur- 
rogh O'Brien is the son of an ex-attorney, a 
pauper, bankrupt peer ; that, ever at odds 
between his poverty and his gentility, he has 
for the last few months earned a penurious 
support by the exertion of mental labour, bor- 
rowed from the hours of his natural repose and 
his daily studies. You see, then, Lord Walter, 
before you one, who, to live, must have recourse 
to his head or his arm, to his pen or his musket. 
The story of my short life may be briefly 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 79 

summed up. It forms a page in the history of 
a country, to which it is an infliction to belong. 
From my birth, the victim of false impressions, 
— reared as the wildest of my sept, and in the 
wildest regions of the land,— born and educated 
in the Isles of Arran, amidst the temples of tra- 
ditional superstition, and the ruins of barbarous 
grandeur, — fed upon the dream of ancient Irish 
glory, and in the faith of early Irish sanctity, — 
my first preceptor was the poor, half-civilized 
creature, with whom you last night found me as- 
sociated ; — my next instructor, the most learned, 
the most elegant minded of men, an Irish foreign 
ecclesiastic, one who, like the Culdees of old, 
lived an example of the pure morality he 
taught. Again dragged by intolerance from 
my sea-girt isles, and forced by that protestant 
Jesuitism, so similar in its means and ends to the 
system of Loyola, into a seminary of the esta- 
blished church,— kidnapped into protestantism, 
as my father had been before me,— witnessing the 
persecution of my excellent and learned friend, 
and the ignominious death, (as I then thought) 
of the ruder, but not less loved guide of my 



80 THE o'bRIEN'S and 

childhood, I escaped from the horrors whien 
bewildered my young imagination, by playing 
the truant, and embarking on board a French 
vessel. With an Herculean strength for my age, 
I worked my passage to Bordeaux ; where my 
mother's friends heard my story, pitied, and 
received me. Her death ensued before the news 
of my safety arrived ; and I was followed to 
France by my father, and placed in a seminary 
of a singular description, — one of those colleges 
which, under various names, have still per- 
petuated Jesuitism. Thence I was moved to a 
confraternity of a similar nature at Florence, 
under the inspection of the ex superior of the 
Jesuits at Rome, my uncle, the celebrated Abate 
O'Brien. This is no time to dwell upon my 
ideas, my sensations, during my residence under 
the tuition of the secret sons of Loyola. In- 
dignation, disgust, an early discovery of the pur- 
poses for which I was so carefully educated, for 
which every acquirement, every accomplishment 
was pushed on me, drove me from the Italian 
Jesuits as I had been driven from those of the 
diocesan school of St. Grellan. Again I fled ; 



THE oVlAHKRTYS, 81 

entered a volunteer in an Austrian regiaicnt at 
jMilan ; and by a success which has hitherto 
attended all my personal efforts, recommended 
myself to the notice of Marechai Lacy. In 
recognizing a countryman, he discovered a rela- 
tion. A commission followed ; the most imme- 
rited advancement procured me the friendship 
of the young, the gallant Charles De Ligne, 
and the paternal notice and protection of his 
father, the Prince. I served in various cam- 
paigns until the siege of Belgrade; when a 
communication which my father made, of the 
recovery of his title, and, as I supposed, c f 
the means of supporting his rank, determined 
me to gratify the longing of my heart by re- 
turnino; to Ireland. His letters, like the 
character forced on him by circumstance, were 
a mixture of hyperbole and mystery. Deceiv- 
ing himself, he deceived me ; and an accident 
occurred at this epoch which wound up all my 
purposes to the sticking place. 

" In that service where the discipline of the 
cane still marks the degradation of the soldier, 
the superior officers exercise an authority, the 

E J3 



82 THE o'bRIENS and 

natural result of privilege. Insulted by one 
v/ho formed but a link in this chain of slavery, 
I resented it, and challenged the offender : and 
on the point of sending in my resignation, I was 
broken for a breach of discipline. This was 
unlucky, but it was inevitable ; my conduct was 
justified by the testimony of the Prince de Ligne; 
who wrote a letter on the subject to my father, 
which I shall beg leave to put into your lord- 
ship's possession. 

"In passing through France, I paused upon 
that great scene of human regeneration ; and 
found my dear, my illustrious preceptor, the 
parish priest of St. Grellan, the venerable Abbe 
O' Flaherty, a constitutional Bishop of France. 
Received into his palace, as the child of his 
adoption, I was presented by him to La Fayette, 
La Rochefoucauld, the Abbe Gregoire, Mira- 
beau, Segur, and all that then and now consti- 
tute the glory of the nation. Three months 
residence at such an epoch, and with such per- 
sons, did not, perhaps, exactly fit me for the 
country of my views and my aspirations ; but 
I will not digress. Arrived in Ireland, and 



THE oVlahertys. 89 

deceived by my unfortunate father, whose pride 
and tenderness ahke concurred to conceal our 
mutual ruin, I mistook his habits of hfe, the 
very appearance of his antiquated dweUing, for 
mere eccentricity ; and by much persuasion, 
induced him to enter me at the Irish University, 
and permitted him to do so under all ' the pomp 
and circumstance ' of a jilius nobilis. Soon, 
however, I discovered that he was utterly in- 
solvent, deeply in debt ; and that, to gratify my 
wishes, he had made the sacrifice of an old Irish 
crown and target of gold, supposed to have been 
worn at the battle of Clontarf, by Brian Borrti ; 
which he had purchased in the days of his opu- 
lence, when a thriving solicitor at St. Greliari. 
From that moment, I have never received a 
shilling at his hands ; and. Lord Walter, to you 
alone I will confess it, 'I have coined my brain, 
not, alas ! to drachmas, ' but into the merest 
means of subsistence.' Ireland has no literary 
existence. Still, ' The Anthologia,^ and the 
rishig demand for political discussion in the 
pamphlet form, have opened a market for native 
talent. But with a false pride I cannot conquer. 



84 THE o'briexs and 

I have pursued my honourable vocation, as 
though it were a crime : how long I m.ay be 
permitted to continue it with impunity, the 
Jaw of libel, which is superseding all other law, 
must decide. 

" I have only to add, that my father's ]-uin 
seems complete. What may be his intentions I 
know not, nor even, at this moment, where he 
is. It is through him that I so deeply feel this 
penalty of expulsion, which deprives me of the 
means of contributing to his future comforts. 

"And now. Lord Walter, started into admira- 
tion of your character, by the exposition of 
principles so unexpected in one of your caste and 
class— anticipating the intimacy of years on 
the sudden prepossession of hours — won by 
the testimony of your interest and good will — I 
have, for the first time in my life, pleaded guilty 
of that crime so abhorrent to proud gentility — 
poverty ; and I Vvould have you to understand, 
that I accompany the avowal by a solemn and 
sacred assertion, that there exists not the human 
being (those connected by tics of blood alone 
excepted) from wliom I would accept ui pecu- 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 8-5 

niary assis^tance. I should consider the offer an 
insult; and I would forfeit, for ever, the friend- 
ship of the man 1 most esteem — allow nie to 
say of yourself — rather than avail myself of its 
ill-directed generosity." 

" My dear O'Brien," said Lord Walter, 
laughing, and pressing the arm on which he 
leaned, '•' spare your Rousseau-ish feelings, and 
diatribe against presuming friendship. We 
younger brothers of great families are, ourselves, 
but noble paupers, or stipendiaries of the state, 
which is obliged to provide for the exigencies of 
our enforced mendicity. If you will accept ot* 
nothing, / have nothing to offer : 1 have hitherto 
lived by my good sword ; for the duke, my bro- 
ther, is not on the right side, and cannot quarter 
his cadets on the people. Every thing you have 
said, from the confession of your ' truant dis- 
position,' down to your romantic self-dependence, 
but deepens the interest I have long felt for you." 

''Long felt!' re-echoed O'Brien, with sur- 
prise. 

" Yes, long. I have read a pamphlet, of 
which you were the suspected author; I have 



S6 THE o'bRIENS and 

watched your examinations in college ; I have 
heard you in the Historical Society ; I have seen 
you at the head of your corps ; I was witness of 
the spirited manner in which you conducted 
yourself at the castle; and all this has tended 
to confirm certain views with which I have 
been entrusted, and which have you for their 
object.'" 

"•Views on me, Lord Walter!" said O'Brien, 
with emotion. 

" Ay, views : do not suppose that the papist 
and protestant Jesuits exclusively possess the 
secret of turning the talents of highly-gifted 
youths to their own purposes. There are other 
societies who have benefited by the hint, though 
not exactly with the same intentions. Why 
should not truth and freedom adopt an agency, 
which slavery and superstition have found so 
available.? In a word, we Jesuits of tlie Union 
have, for some time, marked out you, and such 
as you, as our destined agents; and the ex- 
superior of Florence and Rome had not more 
direct designs on your brilliant endowments, than 
our brotherhood of United Irishmen. The at- 



THE o'flahertys. 87 

tendon of our society has, from its commence- 
ment, been directed to attachino^ to the great 
cause, young men of high promise, and vigour 
of body and mind ; whose activity and talents 
may assist in disseminating throughout all Ire- 
land that spirit of unity, which can alone work 
the redemption of the country. As an orator, 
I know you can, and as a WTiter, 1 am inclined 
to believe you may be of infinite service. There 
is, too, an extensive correspondence to be con- 
ducted with certain societies, organized upon 
similar principles with our own. Other agencies 
also are necessary ; provincial and even baronial 
committees must be formed, and delegates must 
be appointed to carry on communications between 
the different branch associations and the great 
central point of union in the capital. For such 
missions, the time, the talents, the health, the 
energies, the pleasures of the volunteer must be 
sacrificed ; and the hired officer of the despot of 
Austria need not blush to receive the honest 
remuneration earned in the service of his country. 
— Nay, hear me out! You have not concealed 
from me that the descendant from the supreme 



88 

kings of Ireland, has not now, in the land of 
his fathers, one rood of earth he can call his 
own. Your frankness has left me nothing to 
guess ; and you must live — '"' 

" Well," interrupted O'Brien, with a deep 
sigh, " of that, my lord, more hereafter ; at 
present, what is the preliminary step in point of 
form to my true and only vocation ?'" 

*' To propose you to the society, as an ordi- 
nary member, which I will do this evening ; for 
we meet for business at half-past eight. Every 
candidate must be proposed by one, and seconded 
by another member." 

" And who is to be that other,'' asked O'Brien, 
*' for I conclude your Lordship will do me the 
honour to propose me ?" 

" There are already some of your college ac- 
quaintance among us ; a scholar of the house, 
for instance, one who does tb.e honours by your 
talents, and boasts of his intimacy with you, 
Cornelius Costello.'"' 

" He is a countryman of mine," said O'Brien, 
" and was my class-fellow in the diocesan school 
of St. Grellan ; but I have no intimacy with 



THE o'fLAIIEUTYS. 89 

him. He is vulgar, trades too much on his 
principles, too obtrusive, pushing, pretending." 

" Humph !" said Lord Walter. " Vulgar, 
perhaps, he is, but he is honest, — has been 
deemed eligible to become des notres. We 
must not refuse men, because they are vulgar, 
my dear O'Brien ; cela sent les coteries de Vienne. 
I fear, after all, your continental liberalists look 
too much to revolutions a Veau rose. Your 
young preux, Charles de Ligne, his princely 
and very aristocratic father, and others of the 
' high transparencies' of the Austrian court, 
have spoiled you for the coarse efforts of Irish- 
men. But men, struggling to be free, must not 
wait for the co-operation of the graces.'* 

" They are, however, no bad allies in any 
cause,'' said O'Brien. " Democracy en petite rnazt- 
resse is much more formidable than jacobinism 
a la poissarde ; and Mad. Boland, the most in- 
fluential female politician in Paris, is la femme 
la 7nieux chaussee de son guar tier.'''' 

" Well," said Lord Walter, laughing, " bring 
as many Mad. Rolands to our cause as you can; 
you are the very person to recruit for us in that 



90 THE o'bRIENS and 

line. Apropos, what do you mean to do with 
Albina, Countess of Knocklofty ?" 

O'Brien started, so as to make liOrd Walter 
start likewise. 

" Do with her ! — do with Lady Knocklofty ? 
I do not understand you, my lord. ' 

*' Pooh ! pooh ! I do not want your secret, 
man, which, by the bye, is no secret at all ; the 
town is full of it Only be on your guard. 
Lady Knocklofty is a fine woman still, and to 
very young men, a very seducing woman ; but 
then a man must be young indeed ; and / was 
once ' very^ very, very ' young. Though, 
with all her faults and frailties, she has some 
good points ; and while her fancy lasts, she is 
capable of the most romantic enterprize, and the 
most generous sacrifice — as charming woman ever 
is, under the influence of particular excitements. 
I know her — I know 



' II suo mobile ingegno 
Usato amare, ed a disamare a un punto.' 



Trust her no further than as it leads to no con- 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 91 

sequence to yourself, or to others ; and observe, 
keep clear of politics." 

" Good God !" said O'Brien, " do not sup- 
pose — I am not aware — upon my honour and 
soul, I have not seen Lady Knocklofty since 
that foolish frolic of the Castle, and " 

'- That is not the point,^' said Lord Walter, 
interrupting him ; " only remember, she is the 
wife of the man by whose instigation the perse- 
cution of your principles, if not of your person, 
is carrying on." 

" But she is herself adverse to the principles 
of her party, opposite as day and night." 

*' Oh ! she has come to that with you already, 
has she ?" said Lord Walter, laughing. " You 
have yet to learn that all the wives of these 
oligarchs have a tendency to liberal principles, 
wherever liberal principles are professed by the 
most gifted, and (generally speaking) the best 
looking young men in Ireland. Lady Knock- 
lofty visited young Macartney in Kilmainham, 
while under sentence of transportation for a libel 
on her husband's friend, the Chancellor; and 
the three Ladies O' Blarney clubbed their pocket- 



92 THE O'BllIENS AND 

money to treat the Captain of the White Boys 
in his dungeon, after sentence of death had been 
passed on him. Women, who are in their habits 
and feelings aristocrats, jusquau bout du doigt, 
may tallt: sentimental whiggism and poetical de- 
mocracy ; but power and supremacy are their 
idols ; and they will cling to those who possess 
both, even though they should be— their own 
husbands." 

O'Brien laughed, and said, " Vous parlez en 
homme qui connait son rnonde.''' 

'* Exactly," said Lord AValter. " Apropos, 
you are of course going to the fancy ball at 
Knocklofty House to-night ?"* 

" I have been invited, and have accepted the 
invitation ; but in my present position, with my 
present feelings '*' 

" What has your position to do with a mask 
and domino ? Remember ' Democracy en petite 
maitresse.' The conspiracy of Fiesco was 
forwarded amidst the gaieties of a masked ball. 
So I propose that when we step out of the den in 
Back-lane, where our " union " meet, we turn 
into the first masquerade shop we find on our 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 93 

way, and — but first where do you dine? You 
are too late for commons : let us go to Daly's, 
it is so close." 

O'Brien agreed, and the illustrious united 
Irishman and his neophyte proceeded forthwith 
arm in arm to the ^'Brooks's"* of the Irish capital. 
As they passed the library square, a few of the 
students were gathered in little groups at various 
points. At sight of O'Brien and his noble 
friend, they took off their caps, and (though Dr. 
Barrett, the college Bursar, was looking from 
his window upon the scene) cheered them as they 
passed, singing in chorus : 

*' Wooden sons of the board, let us join hand in hand, 
Tis ours to discourage the youth of the land, 
Nor ever permit them, like us, to entwine 
The myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's vine.''* 

O'Brien returned the salute ; his spirits rose 
with this courage; us testimony of good will and 
admiration; and the petAt convert and Burgundy 
of his friendly Amphitryon, contributed to the 
gradual dispersion of that weight and gloom, 

* Part of a sorg, about this time, popular in college. 



94 THE o'bKIENS and 

which so readily dissipate from the elastic 
spirits of the youthful and the sanguine. 

After an hour given to the necessary refresh- 
ment of the table, the two friends parted till their 
appointed rendezvous at the Tailor's Hall in 
Back Lane, where the United Irishmen held 
their meetings. Lord Walter returned home 
to dress ; and O'Brien went back, for the last 
time, to college, to put up his papers, books, and 
clothes ; that they might be in readiness when he 
could send for them, to theGalway Coffee-house 
in JamesVstreet, — a customary haunt of his 
father, kept by one of Lord Arranmore's 
Connaught cousins, a gentleman bred and born, 
and of half tribe. Here O'Brien was certain 
that he could have shelter, till something definite 
could be decided for his future existence ; and 
here alone there was a likelihood of meeting 
with his father. 

When he returned to college, it was perfectly 
dark ; and the few lamps which are destined to 
light the squares, were not yet lighted. As he 
entered the gloomy stone passage of his cham- 
bers, two figures wrapped in long mantles 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 95 

passed him down the stairs; the one, though 
doubly concealed by a cloak and darkness, was 
evidently a woman. Such visitants, at such 
hours, though strictly forbidden, were not 
wholly unusual in the university; and O'Brien 
drew up, to let the strangers pass ; and then 
iiurried on to his rooms. 

He had locked the door in going forth ; but 
when he now opened it, he was surprised to see 
the fire burning brightly, and the green wax 
taper on the writing desk, still half extinguished, 
and sending forth a tiny stream of smoke. He 
relighted it ; and his amazement increased to find 
his papers and books, collected, tied up, and 
directed to the Gal way Coffee-house, his clothes 
smoothed into his valise, and a sealed letter 
directed to him on the table. He opened it, in 
great trepidation, and read as follows: 

" Since there exists not on earth that human 
being, from whom you would accept pecuniary 
assistance, save those connected with you hy ties 
of blood, one who claims the privilege you have 
admitted, begs to administer to your present 



96 THE o'BHIEKS AKD 

wants, by desiring your acceptance of the 
inclosed." 

The letter fell to the ground ; the inclosure 
remained in 0'Brieri''s hand, — it was a bank bill 
for fifty pounds. He remained for many minutes 
lo&t in the confusion of utter astonishment. He 
had locked his chamber door, — the key was in 
his pocket — his father only had a duplicate key. 
The mysterious visitant had evidently but just 
departed, for the seal of the letter was still 
warm. The words, too, which he had repeated 
in whispering confidence but an hour before to 
Lord Walter, were in this very letter repeated, 
and the most generous advantage taken of them. 
Yet all around him in the park had been silent 
and solitary. In the adjoining alley to that in 
which he had conversed with Lord Walter, he 
had for a moment fancied that he had perceived 
a shadowy figure walking to and fro, but it 
seemed to have passed away into a close walk, 
which opened by a private door into Nassau- 
street; and he had taken it for granted that it 
was some of the junior fellows who had the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 97 

privilege of a key. There was a well-timed 
dexterity in this agency, an alertness, a sort of 
dramatic or fairy trickery, which struck on his 
imagination by its subtlety, ingenuity, and 
prompt execution. This was surely a woman's 
act; for the hand, though disguised, was a 
woman's : and what woman in Ireland was inte- 
rested for him, if not her^ who however " mobile il 
suo ingegno," \ya?' yet "capable of the most ro- 
mantic enterprize, the most generous sacrifice !"" 
But then, there was a claim of propinquity and 
blood. There was, however, almost a certainty 
that his father was of the party : he alone had 
the means of ingress. The muffled persons he 
had met on the stairs were the probable parties; 
but then Lady Knocklofty in alliance with his 
father ! and prowling about the college park, on 
the night of her own fancy ball, — on the night of 
that day, on which her friend, the Vice-chan- 
cellor had condemned him to expulsion ! l^his 
was too fanciful, too romantic, too wild, to admit 
of a moment's credence: the mystery was un- 
fathomable ! Still, however, in the whole em- 
broglio, in the fantastic agency, the mysterious, 

VOL. III. F 



98 THE O'BRIENS AND 

invisible, and flattering superintendance of him- 
self and his fortunes, there was something so 
gracious to his feelings, so consonant to his 
strongly imaginative disposition, that it operated 
like a philtre on his mind and spirits. There 
was yet another influence connected with the 
complicated intrigue. It reminded him of car- 
nival adventures in Italy. His impetuous and 
eager passions had, more than once, plunged 
him into difficulties, during those saturnalia, 
from which he had been extricated by means as 
fantastic, as those under the influence of which 
he was now acting. Much leisure, however, was 
not left him for these reflections ; time was hurry- 
ing on, his hours were counted. The college 
clock had struck eight, ere he had quite finished 
his toilette ; and when he had made the arrange- 
ments for giving up his rooms, given his orders 
for the removal of his luggage, and surrendered 
his key to the porter who acted as marechal de 
log-is, he bid a last adieu to Alma Mater, and 
turned his steps towards the Tailor's Hall in 
Back-lane. 



THE oVlahertys. 99 



CHAPTER III. 



THE UNITED IRISHMAN. 

Whenever the legislators endeavour to take away, or destroy the 
property of the people, or to reduce theui to slavery, under arbitrary 
power, they put themselves into a state of war with the people ; who 
are thereupon absolved from any further obedience, and are left to tho 
common refuge which God hath provided against force and violence. 

Locke on Government. 

Sin va Rinaldo, dove I'amor rinvita. 



Back-lane, the site where Jiberty had for 
the first time raised her fane, in Ireland, after 
ages had passed over her ruined altars, is one of 
those narrow, dirty, and close defiles of the old 
quarter of Dublin, which still represent the 
great streets of great capitals in those good old 
times, which genius in the pay of despotism has 
endeavoured to revive. In such thickly popu- 
lated and ill ventilated " vicoU," the plague was 
propagated, and fires were kindled, to be 

F 2 



100 THE O'BRIENS AND 

extinguished only after an extensive loss of the 
lives and properties of the inhabitants. The 
wisdom of our ancestors, who saw no incon- 
venience in what tlieir fathers had borne, and 
admitted no remedy that came in the form of 
innovation, continued to reject, with equal 
tenacity, wide streets and inoculation : as equally 
subversive of social order, and opposed to God'*s 
providence in the government of the world.* 



* The narrowness of streets derives from two sources. 
In the south of Europe, the object sought was shade. In 
the more northern regions, the necessity for inclosing walls 
to protect the towns, led to a similar mode of architecture. 
The taste for fresh air is, notwithstanding, an acquirement 
of civilization; and, like all other such acquirements, has 
been opposed by the organic tendency to imitation of the 
species, and by the stupid servile dread of innovation, arti- 
ficially engendered by its teachers and misleaders. Not that 
any direct effort has been made to prohibit ventilation ; be- 
cause no corrupt interest has stood in its way ; but timidity 
and self- distrust, once begotten by a bad system of religious 
and political education, sheds its baleful influence over the 
whole range of human thought. It is curious to remark, 
that England, the most fanatical and bigotted country in 
Europe, has likewise opposed itself, with the greatest ob- 
stinacy, to the practice of vaccination. The native land 
of Jenner lies open as much to the ridicule of Europe, for 



THE o'fLAHEHTYS. 101 

Back-lane, inhabited only by coarse mechanics, 
and petty shopkeepers, had, in the early part of 
the century, been chosen, as an appropriate spot 
for erecting a catholic college for the education of 
catholic youth. But the intolerant spirit of the 
limes forbad the accomplishment of this purpose ; 
and the melancholy and monasticbuilding, shut up 
in a narrow court, remained unappropriated, till 
it was purchased by the Corporation of Tailors ; 
when the master's name was ostentatiously 
traced in the iron-work of the gateway, to the 
dark and narrow passage that leads to it. 

O'Brien, wrapped up in a Roman f err ajtcolo 
(the remains of his foreign toilet), had picked 
his way as he might, through the then always 
dirty avenue of Skinner-row, High-street, and 
Nicholas- street; to the utter detriment of slight 
pumps and silk stockings. More than once, as 
he applied his musked handkerchief to his nose, 
to cover the noxious exhalations of this region 
of new-born freedom, he recalled the assemblies 

its imbecility respecting its ultra attachment to sma'-pox, 
as it does respecting its ultra apprehension of catholic 
emancipation. 



102 THE O'BRIENS AND 

at which he had been present, for the promotion 
of a similar cause, amidst the orange groves of 
Versailles, and the scented atmosphere of the 
Jeu de paume ; and he thought that the men 
who struggled for hberty in Back-lane had much 
greater merit, than those who congregated round 
her banner in the champs Elysees, and the 
Jardin du Luxembourg, 

The graphic and jocular description given of 
the rendezvous of United Irishmen, by Lord 
Walter, during their dinner, left O'Brien in no 
difficulty in making his way to it. The ill- 
scented passage which led to the place of 
meeting, was no further lighted than by the 
feeble rays of a dim lamp, suspended in the inner 
court ; and it was so narrow and so dark, that 
he pushed against some person, who appeared 
to stand against its wall, at the entrance. O'Brien 
muttered an hasty apology ; and was answered 
by the invocation of " charity for Christ's sake.*" 
There was something in the tone of voice in 
which this was uttered, which struck him to the 
heart. It was wholly unlike the drawling, 
whining, turgid supplications of the Dublin 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 103 

beggars. It had even an inflexion to which his 
ear was familiar ; and it induced him to step 
back and search for his purse, hght as it was. 
He had, however, left it in his writing-desk ; 
but he found some silver, or what he took for 
silver, at the bottom of his waistcoat pocket ; 
and he silently dropped a piece into the ex- 
tended hand of the supplicant, and passed on. 
A simple, but most emphatic " God bless you'* 
still rung in his ear, and on his heart, as he 
crossed the little court, and ascended the steps 
of the Tailor's-hall ; when it again struck him 
that the voice was familiar to him ; and, at the 
same moment, as if by some sudden association, 
he was awakened to the conviction that the offer- 
ing he had made to the mendicant, was a small gold 
coin of very ancient date, which he had purchased 
a week before, with some silver medals, to present 
to his father ; but which he had left in the 
waistcoat he now wore. He was the more cer- 
tain of this, on reflecting that the piece he had 
given was much too heavy for a shilling. He 
immediately turned back to overtake the mendi- 
cant, but he was gone ; and being already beyond 



104 THE o'bRIENS and 

the time of his own appointment, he again 
entered the dreary building, whose dusky hall, 
and broad, low stairs were only lighted by 
a tallow candle, held in the hand of an old 
woman, whom the noise of his footsteps had 
brought out of a desolate, unfurnished room, 
on the right of the entrance. He inquired if 
Lord Walter was arrived. 

"Och I yes, indeed," she replied, turning her 
red eyes up to his face, '* this quarter of an 
hour or more ; and bid ye be shewn up to the 
committee-room, when ye came (if you are the 
young gentleman he expected), and to let him 
know. This a- way, if you be plazed.'* 

O'Brien followed her up the creaking stairs, 
into a room on the landing place, where, laying 
down her candle on a long fixture table, she 
said " Wait a taste, and as soon as his lordship 
is done spaking — for the society is sitting on 
business— ril let him know." She then dis- 
appeared. 

There was something particularly dreary in 
this " Qommit tee-room." Its fireless grate was 
concealed by a large, ill-painted picture, repre- 



THE o'flaheriys. 105 

senting a shivering and naked wretch, standing 
near a person seated on a tailor's shop-board, 
and cutting out a piece of cloth. O'Brien 
held the light down to it, and read an inscrip- 
tion, intimating that it was the portrait of 
*' J. Homodon, of Cremona, a tailerer, who gave 
all his gaine and labour to the poore. Cano- 
nized in his time for his miracles by Pope 
Innocent the Third." It was one of those 
atrocious representations of humanity, given by 
the inferior painters of the early Italian schools, 
which sink the spirits to look at; and Mur- 
rogli soon turned away, and seating himself 
at the table, took up a torn Magazine which 
lay before him. Chilled, spiritless, and impa- 
tient for Lord Walter's appearance, he was glad 
of any resource to while away the time. 

The first thing he hit upon, as (beating a 
tattoo with his feet), he turned over the leaves, 
was " Thoughts on Prudence." 

" Prudence is a quality of the human mind" 
. . . . " What stupid nonsense," he said, turning 
over several leaves at once, till he lighted on 
" Reflections by Moonlight," — " Poetry of the 



105 THE O'BRIENS ANIJ 

Masque of " Ma Chere Amie,''^ — " Fashionable 
Pattern for working a Flounce," — " Private 
Theatricals at Knocklofty House." This fixed 
his attention ; and he read with almost audible 
utterance, " The drama has ever been a part 
of elegant literature ; and indeed, all the world's 
a stage, and all the men and women merely 
actors, as the immortal Shakspeare has it, &c. 
&c. &C.5 which leads to the brilliant exhibition 
of dramatic talent displayed at the private thea- 
tricals of Knocklofty House, on Monday the 
4th instant. The play was the Beggar's Opera, 
followed by the Sultan. The principal charac- 
ters were, the Coimtess Knocklofty, as Roxa- 
lana, and Captain O'Mealy as Macheath, which 
was allowedly given in the most capital style. 
It would be idle to comment on the Captain's 
theatrical excellence, for Madam Fame has taken 
that pleasing task upon herself- But we must 
say his attitudes were imposing, his voice mighty 
melodious, and his manner of giving, — 'the 

charge is prepared,' was '* 

Here a murmur of voices, which seemed to 
come from some adjoining room, interrupted 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 1U7 

the perusal of this evidently autographic criti- 
cism on the merits of Captain O'Mealy. O'Brien 
distinctly heard the -voice of Lord Walter, 
speaking in a sustained tone. He arose and 
perceived that the sound proceeded from a 
door, just sufficiently opened, to discover that 
it gave entrance to a balcony, which dominated 
a somewhat spacious apartment, whence the 
murmur of voices issued. 

As he looked down, there was something in 
the little senate he saw assembled, so picturesque, 
that its members seemed ready grouped for the 
purpose of a well- sketched conspiracy ; and a 
single lamp (falling from the centre, and only 
dispersing the gloom of that part of the apart- 
ment over which it immediately hung), con- 
centrated its yellow light upon heads and busts 
that recalled the '' grande quadro'' of Salvator's 
pride and glory. 

At the head of the table, which occupied the 
centre of the apartment, and in an arm-chair 
raised by a few steps from the floor, sat the Pre- 
sident of the society of United Irishmen. He 
alone was covered, and though plainly dressed, 



108 THE O'ERIENS AND 

there was an air of hio-h breedinoj and distinc- 
tion about him ; while in his bland smile were 
exhibited, the open physiognomy of pleasant- 
ness, and love-winning mildness, which still 
mark the descendants of the great Anglo-Nor- 
man Lords of the Pale, the Lords of Ormond, 
Orrery, and Arran, the Mount Garrets, and 
Kilkennys, — in former times, the great oligarchs 
of Ireland, and in times more recent, the grace 
and ornament of the British Court. 

The president was the Honourable Simon 
Butler : beside him, on a lower seat, sat the 
secretary. His uncovered head, and unshaded 
temples received the full light of the suspended 
lamp. It was one of those finely chiselled 
heads, which arrest the imagination, and seem 
to bear incontrovertible evidence of the cer- 
tainty of physiognomical science. A dress par- 
ticularly studied, was singularly contrasted with 
the athletic figure and antique bearing of this 
interesting looking person. For though un- 
powdered locks, and the partial uncovering of a 
muscular neck, by the loose tie of the silk hand- 
kerchief had something of the simplicity of re- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 109 

publicanism, yet the fine diamond that sparkled 
at the shirt breast, and the gUttering of two watch- 
chains (the foppery of the day), exhibited an 
aristocracy of toilet, which did not exactly assort 
with the Back-lane graces. The secretary of the 
United Irish men, was Archibald Hamilton Rowan. 

On the opposite side sat a small, well- 
formed, and animated person, who was talk- 
ing with singular vivacity of look and ges- 
ture, to one of extremely placid and even formal 
appearance. The first was the gay, gallant, 
and patriotic founder of the society, Theobald 
Wolfe Tone ; the other was the celebrated and 
clever Doctor Drennan, a skilful physician, and 
an elegant writer, who might have passed in 
appearance, for the demure minister of some 
remote village-congregation of the Scotch kirk. 

A tall, elegant, and sentimental looking per- 
son sat near to them, in an attitude of interested 
attention, listening to the speaker, to whom, it 
seemed, he was about to reply. It was Thomas 
Addas Emmet, the son of the state physician of 
Ireland, — then a young lawyer of great promise, 
and now the Attorney-General of New York. 



110 THE O'BRIENS AND 

The handsome and animated Dr. Mackenna, 
one the most popular writers of the day, and 
Oliver Bond, the representative of the most re- 
putable class of merchants, had grouped for- 
ward their intelhgent heads; while one who 
brought no personal beauty to the cause* (that 
letter of recommendation to all causes), James 
Napper Tandy, stood waiting with a packet of 
letters, which he had received in his former 
quality of secretary to the meeting. 

While other leaders of the union, distinguished 
for their birth, talents, or principles (and it is 
remarkable that they were all protestantst), 
filled up the seats near the head of the table ; 
more mixed groups less distinguished by the 



* When Napper Tandy was mentioned in the House of 
Commons, as participating in the proceedings of the 
United Irishmen, a fiippant young lawyer, then unknown 
to fame, got up, and in allusion to his ugliness, observed, 
*♦ that he v, as sorry the society could not put a better face 
on it." Such were the jokes which then had their value 
in the Senate, and smoothed the path of the facetious ut- 
terer to nearly the highest judicial eminence. 

t Of the twenty United Irishmen confined at Fort 
St. George, four only were catliolics. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. Ill 

beau sang, which then came forth, in the fine 
forms of the genuine Irish gentry of both sects, 
were congregated in the obscurity of the bottom 
of the room. Here might be seen the square 
set forms, the strongly marked, but less noble 
features of the Scotch colonists of Ulster, the 
stern brow of uncompromising presbyterianism, 
contrasting to the mobile, varying muscle, of 
trodden down Catholicism ; the latter drawling- 
forth its plaintive discontents, the former an- 
nouncing its immoveable resolutions. 

At the moment when O'Brien was taking a 
rapid glance at this singular and picturesque 
association. Lord Walter, who stood near Ha- 
milton Kowan, was speaking, and in the act of 
pronouncing the following sentence : '* Since 
this society is constituted for the purpose of 
forming a brotherhood and a community of 
rights among Irishmen of every religious per- 
suasion, thereby to obtain a complete constitu- 
tional reform in the legislature, founded on the 
principles of civil, political, and religious liberty, 

I beg to propose one whose '' 

Here O'Brien instantly closed the door of the 



112 THE o'bRIENS and 

balcony, and reseated himself by the flaring 
tallow candle, that was now fast burning down 
into its socket, resumed his perusal of the 
transcendent dramatic merits of Captain 
O'Mealy, and got through the whole '* Thoughts 
on Prudence," without one thought on the sub- 
ject, — when a sudden burst of applause reached 
his ear from the hall; and the next moment 
Lord Walter entered the room, and shaking 
him heartily by the hand, said, " You have been 
proposed and received with acclamation. Our 
friend, Costello, was not here to second you as he 
promised ; but Emmet is my fellow sponsor, for 
all the good things promised and vowed in your 
name. You have been elected without a single 
black ball, and nothing now remains but the 
form of taking the test." 

The two young friends, arm-in-arm, then 
descended the stairs, and entered the haJl to- 
gether : and never did two finer representatives 
of the Anglo-Norman and Milesian races of 
Ireland present themselves at the shrine of 
national independence. All made way for them, 
as they passed on towards the president's chair ; 



THE o'fIAHKRTYS. 113 

and there was a murmur of approbation and 
applause, so little consonant to the wonted 
sobriety and awful purpose of the meeting, that 
the president rose from his seat, and took off his 
hat. At this signal, silence and order were 
instantly restored ; and the next moment all were 
seated, save the neophyte and his sponsors, 
who stood between the secretary and chairman, 
when the test was presented for O'Brien's peru- 
sal. On his assenting to its purport, the whole 
society arose and stood uncovered, while the 
candidate, stepping forward, read aloud as fol- 
lows: 

" I, Murrogh O'Brien, in the presence of 
God, do pledge myself to my country that I 
will use all my abilities and influence in the 
attainment of an impartial and adequate repre- 
sentation of the Irish nation in Parliament ; and 
as a means of absolute and immediate necessity 
in the establishment of this chief good of 
Ireland, I will endeavour, as much as lies in 
my ability, to forward a brotherhood of affec- 
tion, an identity of interests, and a communion 
of rights, and an union of power among 



114 THE o'eRIENS and 

Irishmen of all religious persuasions; without 
which every reform in Parliament must he 
partial, not national, inadequate to the wants,, 
delusive to the wishes, and insufficient for the 
freedom and happiness of this country. 

''I do further declare that neither hopes, 
fears, rewards, nor punishments shall ever in- 
duce me, directly or indirectly, to inform on, or 
give evidence against any member or members of 
this or similar societies, for any act or expression 
of theirs done or made, collectively or individu- 
ally, in or out of this society, in pursuance of 
the spirit of this obligation.'' 

O'Brien was then introduced to the principal 
members present, and having accepted the si- 
tuation of secretary to a baronial committee 
for St. Grellan, in the province of Con- 
naught, he took his leave of the society for 
the night, with his friend Lord Walter. 
Leaving the elder members to pursue the dry 
details of business, which have nothing to do 
with the poetry of freedom, he j;^imped into 
Lord Walter's carriage, which was drawn up at 
the end of the lane ; and heard, with something 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 115 

like the heart-beat of pleasure, his order to the 
servant to drive to Tweedie and Lindsay's, in 
ParUament-street.* 

" My servant," said his Lordship, drawing 
up the glasses, to exclude the noisome smells 
that came " between the wind and his nobility ;" 
" my servant is already there choosing us pil- 
grim's dresses ; for a pilgrim's robe, like that of 
charity, covers a multitude of sins— that is, the 
sins of dullness and inaptitude to the noisy plea- 
sures we are about to plunge into.'' 

" Apropos to your man,"' said O Brien ; " he 
did not come for your great-coat, and you men- 
tioned that he would." 

'' I quite forgot it," said Lord Walter. 
" When once my mind was at rest about those 
cursed papers, which I feared might affect you." 

" And which," said O'Brien, " to a certain 
point, did affect me. It is now all over ; but 
the fact is, those papers were taken out of my 
supposed pocket by the familiars of our inquisi- 
tion, and were read at the board. Wild, inco- 

♦ The Howell and James of Dublin in those days. 



116 THE O'BRIENS AND 

herent, and ruinous to the happiness of Ireland, 
they were so ill-written, that I believe I stood 
exonerated from their composition by my judges; 
but they affected not to credit the assertion of 
my ignorance of their existence. At all events 
you are not even suspected ; and I fancy you 
must be content to make a sacrifice of the coat 
in order to continue so ; for it would be folly in 
you, Lord Walter, to draw upon yourself sus- 
picions, which would injure the cause in which 
you are embarked, without producing any good 
whatever." 

*' Good God !" said Lord Walter, in great 
trepidation, " can you suppose that I will suffer 
you — is it possible that '' 

" You cannot force me to reveal what I have 
just sworn to conceal," said O'Brien, emphati- 
cally. " The oath is still warm in the records 
of liberty, and I have promised, in the awful 
presence of God, that neither hope nor fear " 

" You are a noble fellow, O'Brien ; but this 
must not be." 

'• At least," said O'Brien, " this is not the 
time to argue on the needlessness and folly of 



THE oVlahertys. 117 

betraying a friend to no purpose. That you 
were made the confidant of such foolish and 
treasonable designs, as the having such papers 
committed to your care would intimate, could 
not serve the great cause in which you have 
embarked ; though it might serve the purposes 
of your enemies, and the enemies of Ireland, to 
ascertain the fact of your so having them, on the 
credit of your own testimony." 

" I am now convinced," said Lord Walter, 
musing, " that my suspicions respecting the 
person who forced those papers on me are well 
founded. He is the intimate friend of another 
member of the union, whose name, if I am not 
deceived, is yet destined to reach posterity under 
the execration which follows treachery in all 
ages." 

Lord Walter then sunk back in the carriage, 
and remained silent and thoughtful, as one ill 
at ease with himself; while O'Brien, affecting, 
or feeling an elation of spirits, which scarcely 
belonged to his position, talked at random, and 
dropping the window-glass, amused himself with 
the questions and observations of the thickly 



118 THE o''bRIENS and 

gathering crowds, who had already began their 
usual inquiry on masquerade nights in Dublin, 
of " What's your charackther ?" The car- 
riage drew up before what would now be called 
a mart, magazine, temple of fashion, or physi- 
technicon ; but which, then, simply indicated 
itself as the shop of Tweedie and Lindsay, 
haberdashers. All the resignation that time can 
bestow from its experience, or philosophy boast, 
as the result of its maxims and tenets, youth, in 
its brilliant petulance of temperament, gives in 
a superior degree. O'Brien's spirits had already 
flung off their load, " his bosom's lord sat lightly 
on its throne;" and more than reconciled to his 
fate, he had forgotten it. Springing into the 
gay temple of fantastic folly, and reflected on 
by the brilliant lights that illuminated its altars, 
and not a little, perhaps, by the pretty priestesses 
who served them, he walked about in pleased 
and idle curiosity ; almost fancying himself at 
Venice or at Rome, in the height of the carnival 
Taking up and flinging down crooks and crosiers, 
cowls for monks, and crowns for kings, party- 
coloured jackets for harlequins, and ermine 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. HQ 

gowns forjudges, he collected the materials for 
dressing his own character ; and robing himself 
in pilgrim's weeds, " fixed the scollop in his hat 
before,*' and left his address at the Galway 
Coffee-house, that his trappings and their hire 
miffht be sent for in the morning. 

Miss Lindsay, who had in the mean time 
dressed Lord Walter, reminded him that, though 
masks were not admitted at Knocklofty House, 
every other species of disguise was allowed, 
which was necessary to top the character, by 
colouring faces up to the disguise. Rouge, 
ochre, burned coi'k, beards, brows, mustachoes 
and noses, and all the artful etccetera of the 
masquerading toilet were then furnished; and 
O'Brien undertook to officiate as the artist. 
When he had made up his own face, as a sam- 
ple of his skill, he exhibited a perfect and 
beautiful model of the pilgrim of the Abruzzi, 
on his way to the shrine of Loretto, — to-night, 
a stern bandit of the Pontine marshes; to- 
morrowj the penitent wiping off by prayers 
and vigils, the crimes he had committed with- 
out pity and without remorse ; his fierceness 



120 THE o'bEIENS and 

Still beating on his bent brow, and flashing 
from his dark eye. 

" No," said Lord Walter, looking admiringly 
upon him, " I cannot compete with that ; for 
though 

* From Toscane came our worthy race,' 
and 

* Fair Flore.ice was some time our ancient seat,'* 
my Anglo Norman blood, has so weakened my 
Italian, that my appearance can never assimilate 
with your Milesian colouring and countenance. 
The utmost I can aspire to is Goldsmith's 
" Gentle Hermit of the Dale, the love-lorn 
Edwin." So, my dear Miss Lindsay, a pale, 
amber-coloured beard, if you please ; and pray 
give me a robe of more tender tint, that the 
contrast with my friend''s brown and scarlet may 
be more striking.*' 

The two young men, completely, though 
differently equipped for the same character, and 
equally dramatic in their appearance, again 
entered their carriage, and drove on to Knock- 

* Lord Surrey's Sonnet to ** the Celestial Geraldine." 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. ] 21 

lofty House, laughing and light-hearted, as if 
the one had not been that day expelled, and 
cast friendless and fortuneless upon the world ; 
or the other had not just issued from that mis- 
prision of treasonable cabal, the society of United 
Irishmen, — where he was about to risk all that 
made life pleasurable, in search of the uncer- 
tain good, his generous sacrifice might bring to 
his unhappy country. In this rapid transition 
of feeling, this sudden change of objects, this 
versatility of thought, passion, and pursuit, 
there was much of youth, in all its heyday of the 
blood and fancy ; and not a little of what is 
Irish, in the full development of the national 
temperament, — of that morbid sensibility to ex- 
ternid impressions, which kindles at a sun-beam, 
and sinks beneath the shadow of a cloud. 

In driving down Capel-street, the carriage was 
surrounded and cheered at every step, by that 
most licentious, but most cheerful and humorous 
of all congregations — a Dublin mob. The an- 
swer to the reiterated question of " What's your 
charackter ? ' " pilgrims from CrogJi-Patrick,^ 

VOL. III. G 



122 THE o'BraENS AND 

was received with loud acclamations. Pilgrims 
in real life, were then common in Ireland ; 
and the staff and cross were plausible and ap- 
proved badges of beggary, by which many made 
a livelihood, extracting from credulous bigotry, 
what charity might have denied. 

In Ireland even the public pleasures and 
amusements smack of that disorder and coercion, 
which in all bad governments act and re-act on 
each other ; giving to licensed festivity the cha- 
racter of suspicion and terror. Groups of mili- 
tary, mounted and dismounted, filled every 
street, and mingled with the fearless and voci- 
ferous mob. At once harmless and incontrol- 
lable, the people were permitted to annoy the 
passengers, by opening the carriage doors, and 
in some instances obliging the masks to come 
out, shew themselves, and explain and describe 
their "charackters." The license thus granted, 
or rather assumed, as a prescriptive right by 
the populace, is rarely exceeded, except when 
the persons questioned resist with insolence and 
hauteur, and refuse to gratify the curiosity 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. 123 

they have awakened. Then occasionally scuffles 
ensue; and riots, leading to dangerous conse- 
quences, occur. 

The vehicle, which immediately preceded 
Lord Walter's carriage, was filled by the officers 
of the Prince's Own ; and being stopped by the 
mob, they replied to the accustomed vocifera- 
tions, by a command to " Shut the door, you 
rascals," and " drive on, coachman, at your 
peril.'' 

" Droive an !" reiterated a leader of the fun, 
with an imitation of the English accent. " Och 
then, sorrow step you'll stir, nor droive an 
neither, till you show yourselves, honies, and tell 
us your charackters :'"* and he forcibly opened 
the door, and let down the steps of the carriage. 
The rage of the military occupants of the 
vehicle, which now knew no bounds, was 
expressed in a manner so violent and insulting, 
that the mob, under the influence of their satur- 
nalia^ were about to commence an assault ; when 
suddenly catching a glimpse of the uniforms, 
they shut up the steps and closed the door, ex- 
claiming in an humourous tone of utter con- 
G 2 



124 THE o'bRIENS and 

tempt. '^ Och, the poor craturs, let 'em alone. 
Shure, it's only th' officers, that have no cha- 
rackters at all. Drive on, coachy." 

Another carriage now drew up a-breast of 
Lord Walter's, in which some fantastic figure 
was amusing the persons without, by replies in 
consonance with their own peculiar humour. 
Shouts of laughter and " Musha, long life," fol- 
lowed every reply. 

" You see,'^ said Lord Walter, " they are in 
excellent temper now. This is some person au 
fait to the national humour."" 

" Long life to you, Mar'ram. Success to your 
ladyship ! All happiness V exclaimed a variety 
of broguing voices. *' Aisy, now, aisy ; don't 
you hear the lady is spaking.? And it's all 
what we ax to know now, Madam, is, what's 
your charackter .?" 

" Gran-uaile,'' replied a sweet voice, in that 
rich, mellifluous brogue which is only heard 
on the right side of the Shannon ; " being 
returned from a long voyage, and finding no 
hospitality at the gates of Howth Castle, I'm 
come to ask the ' caed milleJaUha' from you.*' 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 1^5 

" Och! then, and you sluill have it a thou- 
sand times over," was the general exclamation ; 
for all understood this allusion to a popular tra- 
dition ; *' and it's on the necks of our hearts 
we'll draw you every step, and we'll give you 
a stave of your own song, any how." 

The carriage then passed on, accompanied by 
tlie mob, joining in the chorus of the then 
popular air of Granuaile ; which, hke the lille- 
bulero, had not long before been applied to 
political purposes, with great popular effect. 

" That's a clever creature, whoever she is,^' 
said Lord Walter, as they were now permitted 
to drive on. " She knows how to play with the 
Irish temper ; I should suspect that Granuaile 
and Lady Honoria were one and the same per- 
son, but that the accent is purely Irish."" 

" And the voice much too melodious," said 
O'Brien. " Lady Honoria's is particularly harsh 
and wiry. There was something peculiarly 
sweet in the tone of that voice, and it struck me 
tiiat it had a foreign accent." 

The flaring flambeaux fixed over the gates 
of Knocklofty House, announced the scene of 



126 THE o'bRIENS and 

festivity ; but there were so many carriages 
to set down before that of Lord Walter and 
O'Brien, that they alighted ; and hustled and 
bustled as they might, through a multitude of 
footmen, policemen, coachmen, chairmen, and a 
mob, which not even a party of the Royal Irish, 
with swords drawn, and with denunciations as for- 
midable, could keep back. In the general scuffle, 
O'Brien got separated from Lord Walter ; but 
still pushing on, with a flutter of the heart, in 
which anxiety for his friend had no part, he 
soon cleared the court, and entered the illumi- 
nated and garlanded hall ; where a military band 
completed the enchantment of the fairy scene. 
A servant stationed at a door to the left of the 
entrance, informed him that it was a dressing- 
room, appropriated to such gentlemen, as chose 
to change their dress, in the course of the even- 
ing; the room on the opposite side being de- 
voted for the same purpose to the ladies. . 

" This is indeed in the true carnival spirit,'' 
observed O'Brien ; and he thought of Italy, and 
of the proconsular government of the dull 
Austrians, over that region of the imagination ; 



THE o'flahertys. 127 

whose natives, like those of Ireland, thus twine 
tlieir chains with flowers, and in the amusements 
of an hour, forget the wrongs of an age. 

He now looked around him, but looked in 
vain for Lord Walter. Groups of common 
place characters were rushing in, on all sides ; 
but he was struck by the singular appearance 
of two figures, which issued from the ladies' 
''tiring room on the left of the hall. That they 
were female, was only apparent by a certain 
graceful fulness of the bust, and by the fairy feet 
that twinkled in silken sandals, beneath a robe, 
which fell in full straight folds, from neck to 
ancle, circled only at the waist by a rope, sup- 
porting a cross and rosary. The head and neck 
were enveloped in the frightful cappa of the 
coiifraternita de' penitenti, which (with its 
horned termination, and two apertures seamed 
with black for the eyes), was the habit a la 
rigueur of the males and females of the con- 
fraternities of Italy. Such personages were 
familiar to O'Brien, attending the '^predica in 
piazza^'' of every Italian town :; and devoting 
themselves, from penitence or piety, to certain 



J 28 THE o'bRIENS and 

acts of grace and humiliation, performed in this 
deepest of all disguises, — disguises invented by 
the church to carry on its great scheme of human 
prostration, without shocking too deeply the 
amour propre of its dupes. 

The whole of this singular and truely Itahan 
costume from the cappa to the sandals, was of a 
deep rose red; like that worn by the ^' assis- 
ianti " of Ischia, whose procession forms so con- 
spicuous a part in the celebration of the jubilee 
at Naples. 

The PenHente brushed lightly by O'Brien, 
and ascended the staircase immediately before 
him ; but they were stopped on the corridor 
which led to the apartments, by a group of 
gentlemen, who seemed to have stationed them- 
selves there, for the exclusive purpose of annoy- 
ing the company, and interrupting the course 
of the evening's pleasures. Evidently inebriated, 
they were no otherwise disguised, than according 
to the Irish acceptation of the phrase ; though 
the uniform they wore, gave them a singula- 
rity of appearance, which any where, but in 
Dublin, would have served the purposes of a 



V29 

masiiuerade. Their whole dress, including their 
stockings, was of a bright flame colour, save 
only their coat, which, lined with flame coloured 
silk, was of black cloth. They were the leading 
members of the Cherokee Club, the last succes- 
sors to the " Hell Fires," the " Devil's Owns,'' 
and " Pinking Dindies," of more barbarous and 
more fierce times. Flushed and flashy as they 
appeared, there were among them, some of the 
most fashionable members of the Irish beau 
monde ; Lords Kilcolman, Kilmainham, and 
Kilshandra, were prominent personages in the 
group ; while Sir Phelim O'Flynn, with a long 
white wand, staggered about, crying ** Order, 
order," in the most disorderly manner ; and 
Captain O'Mealy, dressed as Father Paul, 
affbcted to be the chaplain of the society, and 
intonated at intervals, over a goblet he held in 
his hand, 



This bottle's the sun of our table; 

Its beams are rosy wine ; 
We, planets that are not able 

Without its light, to shine." 

c 3 



130 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Many groups, as they ascended, and passed 
this formidable out post, played them off in 
their own way, with all that ready but local 
humour, which like other indigenous produc- 
tions of Ireland, thrives best on its own soil. 
The appearance of the two Italian penitents, 
characters out of the common muster roll of 
Irish masquerading, excited a considerable sen- 
sation among the Cherokees ; who advanced to 
meet, and to surround them with a boisterous 
curiosity, and a characteristic war-whoop, that 
intimidated the penitents, till they shrank 
back, so as almost to oblige O'Brien to back 
also. 

One of them, either in fear or in character, 
exclaimed, " Hei mihi, quia incolatus mens 
prolongatus est^ 

*' Non amplius quam placehiU' replied 
O'Brien to this singular apostrophe, which both 
struck and amused him ; and, offering an arm 
to either lady, he added, in English, "Holy 
sisters, allow a brother of your community, and 
a participator in your vocation, to offer you his 
aid against those obstacles, which the enemy of 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 131 

mankind opposes to your progress, to the shrine 
of our common devotion." 

The fair penitents still held back, though one 
of them uttered a, ^' grazie tante^ Signor Pelle- 
grino^'' while O'Mealy, without recognizing 
O'Brien (for though seeing double he saw none 
the clearer), sung out — 

' It was a friar, of orders grey. 

Went forth to tell his beads ; 
And he met with a lady fair, 

Clad in a pilgrim's weeds." 

"A lady fair!" cried Sir Phelim OTlynn, 
who, with the rest of the party had drawn up so 
as to prevent all ingress to the anti-room. " How 
the devil have you found out that, Father Paul ? 
Leave a monk alone for finding out a pretty 
girl : I'll be hanged if I did not take these out- 
landish figures for Egyptian mummies, or a new 
reading of blind man's buff. Pray, ladies, 
what's your character ?" 

" Siamo penitenti rossi, della confraternitd 
iTIschia, in graiide penitenza, alia santa casa,"' 
replied one of the ladies, the most elegantly 
formed of the two. 



132 



THE O BRIENS AND 



" We'll th rouble you for change for that, Sig- 
nora," said O'Mealy, in his broadest tone of 
vulgarity, whispering Lord Kilshandra ; " give 
you my honour its the Bonajillola of the Opera 
in Capel-street; I know her by her pretty httle 
pasterns— smoke the foot." 

O'Brien, infinitely disgusted with the coarse, 
mistaken humour of the party, translated the 
Pilgrim's answer to ears not so familiar with 
their dialect as his own. " They are saintly 
■women, of the order of the red penitents of 
Ischia, pilgrims to the shrine of Loretto. So 
pray, good christians, impede not their pious 
progress, as you hope for remission of your 
own sins and peccadillos by prayer and peni- 
tence." 

" Then^ if that's the case," hiccupped Lord 
Kilcolman, looking earnestly at O'Brien, as if 
endeavouring to make out who he w^as, " they 
don't pass here. We have papists enough al- 
ready ; and so, Signor Friar, I advise you to 
be off, and join your popish banditti in the 
south." 

*' Oh ! for the friar," interrupted Lord Kil- 



THE O^'LAHERTYS. 1S3 

shandra, "he has leave to quit; but we must 
not part with the sisterhood. Such pretty 
papist feet as these would find footing any where; 
for prettier never trod the boards, abroad or at 
home ;" and whispering Lord Kilcolman, he 
added, " so make way for the sisters — 

« If to their faith some popish errors fall, 
Look at their feet, and you'll forget them all.' " 

" Oh ! that alters the case,^' stammered Lord 
Kilcolman ; "for though I suspect this pilgrim 
is the most dangerous papist that ever came 
amongst us, since St. Patrick ; and though I am 
the protestant St. Peter — (hiccup) — and keep 
the keys of — (hiccup) — " 

" The cellar," interrupted the dangerous 
papist ; and a general laugh followed the ob- 
servation. 

Lord Kilcolman, easily irritated, by wit or 
opposition, as the dull and the drunken always 
are, exclaimed, inarticulately, " Cellar or no 
cellar, I am, at all events, so far like the papist 
St. Peter, and his representative the Pope, that 



134! THE O'BKIENS AND 

I must be bribed well, and sell my place in 
Paradise to the highest bidder — '' 

" As you did your place in Parliament," re- 
plied the penitent. " What is your price, now?" 

The allusion to Lord Kilcolman's recent 
disposal of his venal voice in one house, and of 
his borough in the other, excited a general titter, 
which respect did not permit to rise to a laugh ; 
while annoyed and irritated by the sarcasm, he 
vociferated " Come here, my dear, whatever 
my price may be, let me know your's, and if 

your face is as pretty as your foot " and he 

reeled forward to seize her hand, and mutter 
some insolent gallantry, when O'Brien threw 
himself between the masks and the Chero- 
kees. Indignant at the unmanly spirit, which 
forgot alike the courtesy of gentlemen and 
the respect of men, he said, " These ladies 
are under my protection ; pray make way for 
them :" and backing in before the masks, with 
shoulders and elbows that were not to be re- 
sisted, he made a passage, through which the 
ladies glided unmolested, while the Cherokees 



THE o'flahertys. 135 

raised their accustomed war-whoop, and O'Mealy 

sang, 

*• * A lovely lass to a friar came, 
All on a morning early.' " 

Lord Kilcolman at this moment endeavouring 
to spy under the pilgrim's cowl (which O'Brien 
had drawn half over his face, on first perceiving 
the party at the head of the stairs), exclaimed, 
'' I'll be d — d if that isn't Lady Knocklofty's 
pet rebel, Captain Right." 

O'Brien had just caught the conclusion of 
this allusion to himself ; and irritated at the 
wanton insolence of these autocrats of Irish 
fashion, he was half inclined to take as a personal 
insult what was probably meant only as a general 
annoyance, or considered as good fun ; and 
to throw himself again in the way of the assail- 
ants, — when a gentle and plaintive " O/ime," 
from one of the pilgrims, who was suffering 
much from the pressure of the crowd, induced 
him to struggle with his own petulance. Aban- 
doning his intention, therefore, he turned back 
to the helpless and imprudent females, who had 



J 36 THE O'BRIENS AND 

ventured so unprotected, into a scene, where 
protection, he now perceived, was so necessary. 

Struck, as he was, with the prompt humour 
of her, A'/hose Latin, Italian, and EngUsh were 
almost eqjfally well pronounced, O'Mealy's 
suggestion, which he had overheard, recurred 
to him. It accounted for her singular gift of 
tongues, for the Italian costume, and for the 
hardihood with which she and her companion 
had ventured alone into an assembly, in which 
the rank of the host did not always secure the 
good breeding of the guests ; and where the 
license of a masquerade permitted the expression 
of many an irascible feeling, which the forms 
of society keep in check. 

CBrien, therefore, offered an arm to either 
lady, which both silently accepted; and he 
enabled them to pierce the motley crowd of 
characters, which with a terrible rush, were 
precipitating themselves into the ball-room, 
through a beautiful arch, hung with coloured 
lamps and flowery garlands. Immediately to 
the left of the entrance, he perceived a vacant 
sofa, and having conducted his unknown jjrote- 



THE o^'flahertys. 137 

^(V^ to this desirable retreat, he was retiring 
with a pilgrim's salutation and saintly hene- 
dicite (the flutter of a vague hope at his heart, 
and the signs of a " masque en rose^ a wreath, 
a ring, a flower,*" full in his imagination), when 
the speaking mask, solicited his attention by a 
timidly uttered, ^' Sense, S'lgnor Pellegrino ~ via 
— di grazia.''' 

He instantly returned, the stranger paused. 
O'Brien begged to know if he could be of any 
further use ; but the penitent drooped her head, 
and played with her rosary, with a graceful 
awkwardness, that intimated one who had a 
request to make, but not the courage to prefer 
it. O'Brien, doubtful whether this was nature 
or art, and impatient to be off", again asked if 
he could seek any person, any friend. 

" Ohime! Sigjwr Paladifio gagliardo,'''' re- 
plied the penitent. " I have eo friend here, 
and therefore " she paused again. 

O'Brien thought that there was something 
ironical in the tone, in which the flattering 
epithet of Ariosto was applied to him ; and fear- 
ful of getting entangled with this clever and 



138 THE o'briexs axd 

singular mask, who was " topping her part" to 
the uttermost, he coldly expressed his regrets 
that he could be of no further use ; and he was 
again retiring, when the mask, in an abrupt and 
pouting tone, exclaimed as she touched his arm, 
" All! il est toujour s plus facile de secourir son 
prochain, que de le supporter.'''' 

" I can assure you," said O'Brien, amused 
by the naivete of the reproach, and by its tour- 
nure, " I am quite disposed to do either, in the 
present instance ; and if you will honour me with 
your commands, I will fly to execute them."" 

*' Fly !" said the mask, " suppose you stay, 
to execute them." 

" I should be too happy, fair saint," said 
O'Brien impatiently ; " but I have engagements 
which will prevent my having that pleasure. 
However, if you have got separated from your 
party, and will permit me to " 

" No,*' interrupted the mask, with a sigh, " I 
belong to no party; not even to that of the 
United Irishmen." 

O'Brien started ; was this coincidence, or " a 
palpable hit." Was he guessed at, or known, 



THE o'fLA-HERTYS. 189 

and betrayed ? He involuntarily seated himself 
on the arm of the sofa ; and leaning on his pil- 
grim's staff, he gazed with fixed attention on 
the figure beside him, as if he would have pene- 
trated the muslin cappa which fell before her 
face : but though it betrayed the outline of a 
fine profile, he could not recognise a single 
feature ; and he had the caution to reply with 
affected carelessness, 

"If there be such a party as the United 
Irishmen, your vocation, fair saint, being not of 
this world, would, doubtlessly, exempt you, as 
much as your sex, from being a member of it." 

" Women have been members of societies, 
quite as secret, and much more discreet." 

" Indeed !" said O'Brien : " and yet they are 
accused of not being able to keep a secret."" 

'' That is a vulgar fallacy. The fidelity of 
a woman is the most inviolable of all human 
trusts. AVoman can keep every secret, but — 
her own." 

" Trust me then with yours,"" said O'Brien, 
insensibly interested and amused ; " and if you 



140 THE O'BRIENS AND 

will not raise the envious cappa, at least tell me 
the nanie of her whom it conceals."" 

" How may I trust you ?" asked the mask, 
with a low earnestness of voice and manner. 

" I will swear,'' said O'Brien, " by any oath." 

" Hush !'■* whispered the mask, " you have 
sworn one oath too many already, to-night." 

O'Brien remained silent from consternation. 
He was then known by the person who ad- 
dressed him. Was she friend or foe ? one who 
came to warn, or to scan him ? If a friend, 
who could it be ? Lady Knocklofty ? The idea 
was too romantic. If a foe, what foe ? A spy 
perhaps of the government — one of those hinted 
at by Lord Walter. What an agency ! It 
recalled the reports circulated abroad of the 
sisterhood of the " Sucre Coeur^'' the newly 
affiliated agents of the Jesuits. 

Resolved to give the conversation a light turn, 
and to cut it sliort, as soon as he could, he con- 
tinued : 

" Without pretending to understand your 
allusion, nor to take it either as provocation 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 141 

or a warning, I will take any vow of secresy 
you please to dictate ; provided it procures my 
personal acquaintance with the charming person 
I have the honour to address." 

" You were not always so ready to take 
vows," said the mask drily. 

O'Brien was startled by an observation, which, 
if not accidental, referred to a particular event 
in his hfe. " 1 never," he said, '' was half so 
tempted.' 

'' You are easily tempted/' was the half- 
laughing, but contemptuously uttered reply. 

*' Indeed !" said O'Brien, " as for instance, 
how, where, or when .?" 

" Everywhere, anywhere," was the careless 
reply — '' at a review in the Phoenix ; in the 
presence chamber at the castle ; in the park of 
the university ; in the council-room of the TailorV 
hall. With two words you may be tempted to 
any enterprise, however wild ; or led into any 
adventure, however perilous." 

" Two words !' reiterated O'Brien, eagerly — 
*' name them." 

" Love and liberty," whispered the mask. 



142 THE o'bkiens and 

O'Brien remained silent. It was now evident 
that he was but too well known to the extra- 
ordinary person, who thus so faithfully described 
him. Puzzled, beyond all power of even guess- 
ing at the Sphinx which bewildered him (whom, 
for a moment, he took for Lady Knocklofty, 
and then again suspected to be Lady Honoria) ; 
provoked, but still pleased, he scanned his com- 
panion with eyes of intense curiosity, and at last 
said, " 1 would give all I possess, to know who 
you are?" 

" Humph ! How much may that be ?" asked 
the pilgrim, significantly. 

" Faith," said O'Brien, piqued, but laughing, 
" so little (as you seem to intimate), that I be- 
lieve it is confined to mere personal property." 

" The sum of which, par eccemple, is — "" 

" A heart that never resisted woman, nor 
flinched from man," said O'Brien. 

" A most concise inventory," interrupted the 
mask ; " and to be taken for its value on the word 
of the appraiser. But do you count for nothing 
the principahty of Arran, the green knighthood 
of the Fassagh, and the barony of Bally- 



THE o'flahertys. 143 

slattery ? Trust me, there is one here to-night, 
who would not be pleased to hear you say 
so." 

With annoyance and amazement now at their 
utmost, O'Brien replied, " Indeed ! and who 
may that be ?" 

" Your aunt, Mac Taaf, from Bogmoy." 
" My aunt, Mac Taaf !" exclaimed O'Brien, 
completely the victim of an intrigue, carried on 
with such puzzling ingenuity ; " that is im- 
possible — I have just had a letter from her."" 
" Of what date ?" 

O'Brien remembered that it was dated a month 
back. The mask continued, 

*' Your aunt was at your rooms this evening, 
and found you absent. So she has come here to 
give you rendezvous." 

" So," said O'Brien, with a laugh expressive 
of extreme provocation ; yet struck by the coin- 
cidence between this intimation, and the note 
and bank bill he had received in the evening. 

" Business," said the mask, " with Lord 
Knocklofty's agent brought her to town; and as 
an electioneering bribe, she has received a ticket 



144 TJiE o'briens and 

for the ball, at which she has j ust arrived, in 
the well supported character of Gran-uaUe. 
Shall we go in search of her ?" 

" Not for the world," cried O'Brien, with 
vehemence. 

" Wiiat an ungracious nephew^," said the 
mask, laughing. 

O'Brien remained silent. He washed to 
go, but could not. An insatiable curiosity to 
know who his accomplished tormentor could 
be, — a vague suspicion, scarcely amounting 
to a hope, that one so well, so flatteringly 
acquainted with him, and with all that con- 
cerned him, was, indeed. Lady Knocklofty, 
was still crossed by the improbability of the 
fact, and by a display of accomplishments, 
which, he believed, v> ere not within the posses- 
sion of his noble protectress. The accent, too, 
was either really or affectedly foreign ; though 
the English was spoken with infinite fluency, 
and with a slight inflexion of the Connaught 
patois^ so soft and singular in its rhythm. Could 
it be one of his aunts ? The idea was too absurd. 

While thus he mused, group after group 



THE o'flahertys. 145 

passed ; and some addressed the mask, who re- 
phed with more wit than mercy, while the other 
pilgrim remained mute. Lord Walter, in earnest 
conversation with a beautiful woman, in the cha- 
racter of Night, smiled and nodded at O'Brien, 
as much as to say, " I see you are engaged, as 
well as myself." 

" There goes one," said the mask, " who, to 
guess by his words and looks, is taille a Van- 
tiqiie; devoted as an Aristides to his country, 
as a Pylades to his friend, and as a Leander to 
his mistress ; but all will not do. On ne joue 
pas aiuv ecUecs avec un bon ccsur.''' 

" You know Lord Walter, then ?" 

*' About as long as you do : which, it seems, 
is long enough for a friendship a VAllemande. 
Still there is something honest in these uncalcu- 
lated friendships. The world's friendships are 
so herissees de si, etde mais, et de sous-entendusJ*^ 

At this moment, Lady Honoria, in the cha- 
racter of Psyche, winged and winning, passed 
on, followed by a crowd: she looked full at 
O'Brien, but either did not recognise, or refused 
to acknowledge him. 

VOL. III. II 



146 THE o''bp.ieks and 

" Psyche reems disorientee to-night," said the 
mask. " That fatal lamp ! the moment you 
throw a hght upon love, it vanishes. The alle- 
gory is obvious." 

" That is according to the nature of the love,'' 
said O'Brien. 

" There is but one love," repUed the mask, 
" though there are many counterfeits." 

" The ancients had several.'' 

" And so too has Lady Honoria," said the 
mask, laughing. 

" With such wit and such beauty, how could 
she fail ?' said O'Brien. 

••' For her beauty, passe ; and pass it will of 
itself before long : and for her wit, it is V esprit 
d'antichambre, — tres goi, et un i)eu polisson. 
But people of the world are not nice. Trompcr 
leur ennui en le divertissant is their aim and ob- 
ject ; and whoever makes them laugh by a sally, 
gets credit due only to a discovery. There is 
nothing original, nothing that comes of strong 
feeling and strong thinking, in the wit of Lady 
Honoria, c'est unejlamme sansfeuP 

Exclusively preoccupied by his mysterious 



THE oVlaiiehtys. 147 

and brilliant companion, whose manner had so 
completely changed since he had first addressed 
her, O'Brien had now ahnost forgotten the 
object which had brought him to a scene so ill-as- 
sorted with his position ; and he was wholly given 
up to the spell that enthralled him, and the 
conjectures it gave I'ise to. Once before, he had 
been thus attacked, and thus had succumbed. 
The adventure, by interfering with a rendezvous^ 
had saved him from a crime, and eventually 
from the summary penalty of such crimes, in 
Italy — assassination ; but what was this to lead 
to ? it was followed up with too much perti- 
nacity, not to have some object. While thus 
deeply musing, his eyes accidentally bent down, 
and for the first time met those of the penitent. 
She was earnestly gazing on his thoughtful and 
almost wrapped countenance, of Avhich the depth 
of expression was increased by his additional 
colouring, and the dress he had assumed. He 
thought that he recalled, in the fixed and intense 
expression of those eyes, the same glance which 
had confused him at the review in the Phoenix 
Park, and he ventured to observe — 
H 2 



148 THE o'beiens and 

'* I have surely met those eyes before ?" 

" Yes ;"" said the penitent, casting them down, 
with a sigh ; "■ and yet they are not the eyes 
you came to meet." 

" If I were sure of that," said O'Brien, pas- 
sionately and emphatically — " 'Tis the doubt, 
the hope, the fear connected with that uncer- 
tainty, that disheartens and stultifies me. If I 
dared ask "" 

" Fairy favours," said the penitent, " should 
be accepted without inquiry. Ask no questions, 
obey, and be paiient." 

" For my patience I cannot answer, though I 
am disposed to an obedience the most implicit, 
the most devoted ; but obedience implies a re- 
ciprocal tie, and I would at least know to whom 
I am to swear allegiance." 

" To the Queen of the FainGS," was the 
reply. 

'* I guessed as much," said O'Brien, full of 
the signature of the invito; "and I here so- 
lemnly offer myself her liege man, in life and 
limb, and in all earthly worship of faith and 
truth, so help me Heaven and AUhallows !" 



THE o'flahertys. 149 

" Vows are but breath,'" said the penitent, in 
a low and agitated voice ; " have you no better 
pledge ?" 

" What other do you demand ?" whispered 
O'Urien. 

" The ring that was given you in St. Patrick's 
Hall." 

" If I had it,"' said O'Brien, much agitated, 
" I would not part with it for a thousand worlds; 
but it was taken from me while I slept, and 
I suspect — I hope, by the beautiful donor her- 
self: perhaps, in repentance either of her con- 
descension or her confidence." 

" What is that ring you wear ?" asked the 
mask, fixing her eye upon the ungloved hand 
that grasped the pilgrim's staff. 

" That ring — it is a bauble, of little value — '' 

'• But of most melancholy import," said the 
mask, looking more closely at it. " If it is 
valueless and sad, why do you wear it?" 

" It would be an history to relate," said 
O'Brien impatiently ; " and this is not a moment 
to enter upon any tale, save one." 



150 THE O'BRIENS AND 

"Let that be short, then," replied the penitent, 
quickly, and in a low voice ; " for we are 
watched, and shall soon be interrupted. Leave 
out the tag and the moral, and come at once to 
the theme." 

<« Gratitude," said O'Brien, hesitating and 
sighing deeply. 

" Gratitude ! — a cold theme, and a fabulous, 
at least a doubtful one." 

" Fabulous?" 

"Yes; httle minds never feel, though they 
profess it; and great minds blush to own, though 
they should feel it. "Tis an humiliating senti- 
ment at the best. II y a pen cle hienfakeurs qui 
ne disent comme Satan, si cadens adoraveru 
me. Have you, then, no fitter tale for a lady's 
ear, good Signor Pellegrino ?""' 

" None so worthy for such a lady's ear— none 
that I dare venture upon now ; and yet one 
there is, the truest and least feigned the heart of 
man ever dictated." 

" By its prologue, I guess 'tis an old tale 
with a new title page ; like the sonnets got up 



THE O'FLAHEUTYS. 151 

by the pauper poets of Italian towns ; who greet 
every stranger with the same compliment, and 
change nothing in their compositions, but the 
name and the date." 

" Hear, at least, before you judge," said 
O'Brien, petulantly, and mortified by the flippant 
observation. 

*' I hear ! giiardi il cielo /" said the mask, 
laughing contemptuously ; " no, Signor Pelle- 
grino, such rifacciamenti are not for ears like 
mine ; keep it for her's, whose interest it is to 
believe." 

'* For Iters ? If you be not ' the inexpressive 
she,"* then is there no truth in sympathy.'' 

" Vanity, like hope," said the mask, with an 
emphatic movement of the head, " da Juclk 
credenza a quel che vuole ; and sympathy thus 
applied, is but another name for vanity. I, 
however, am not the Armida of the nis-ht." 

'< Nor I the Rinaldo," said O^Bricn. " I am 
not again to be misled ; nor am I like other fairy 
victims, to be for ever fluttered and tantalized, 
scorned and protected. Still, I would give ex- 



152 THE o' BRIANS AXD 

pression to feelings as far, at least, as words can 
express them, and I beseech you — " 

" Hush !" said the mask ; '\je ne veux pas 
vous escamoter vot7'e secret. Here comes one 
who may have claims upon it ; I have none." 

At that moment, a general movement in the 
company, a rush from all the other apartments, 
the performance of the royal anthem of God 
save the King, and the appearance of the 
officers of the vice-regal household, announced 
the arrival of the Lord-lieutenant. He entered 
the room leading in Lady Knocklofty, and was 
followed by the Duchess, attended by the Earl, 
who, < as well as his Grace, was in the full cos- 
tume of the order of St. Patrick. Like the 
rest of his caste, his lordship affected all the 
forms of nationality ; and never failed to parade 
the Irish order, to put a shamrock in his hat on 
Patrick's day, and to drown it in his Patrick's 
pot at night, with due maintenance of a cus- 
tom "more honoured in its breach than the 
observance." He, indeed, boasted, on all occa- 
sions, of being a good Irishman ; and, as far 



THE o'fLAHEKTYS. 15^^ 

as ostentation and intemperance went, he liad, 
according to the acceptation of the times, a claim 
to being a genuine one. 

All who were seated, now arose ; all who stood 
in groups or crowds, made way for the vice-regal 
procession; and the brilliant party, as they 
passed up the room, were saluted and hailed 
with an homage, to which the genial spirit of the 
moment contributed, at least as much as the po- 
litical unanimity of the company. O'Brien alone 
remained motionless and transfixed, till Lady 
Knocklofty had so closely approached him that 
her drapery touched him in her passage. Her 
eyes met his, but with a glance of such con- 
temptuous indignation (their only recognition), 
as at once confounded him, beyond all power of 
joining in the general act of courtesy, which the 
gracious smile and ready bow of the Duke ex- 
acted from all. The court master of the cere- 
monies now made the necessary arrangements 
for the opening the lists ; and the country dances 
began, with the exhilarating air of Patrick's 
Day. The ball was opened by two long sets ; 
the one led off by the Lord-lieutenant and his 
h3 



154« THE O'BRIENS ANI> 

noble hostess,— the other by the Duchess and 
Lord Knocklofty. Groups, the most grotesque, 
followed : monks figured in with oyster- wenches ; 
the devil see-sawed with St. Patrick, and set to 
the Lord Chancellor ; a jack-boot turned a 
windmill ; and a village apothecary went three 
hands round with Death and the Lady ; while 
hands across, right and left, change sides, and 
turn your partner, were executed with a rapidity, 
which would have pozed the prosing performers 
of modern quadrilles, and would have put out 
of breaih and patience, the sauntering figurante*? 
of " chaine dc da7nes,'" and " demi-queue de chat.'' 
In the midst of this general scene of gaiety and 
amusing variety, O'Brien, pre-occupied and con- 
fused, saw only the terrible glance of Lady 
Knocklofty. More than ever perplexed and 
annoyed, he, for the first time, doubted that the 
invitation had come from her ; and suspected that 
he was but the victim of a mystification, which, 
whatever was its object, had been but too suc- 
cessfully played off against him. Anxious to 
escape, and yet unwilling to leave without further 
explanation, his extraordinary companion, whose 



THE o'flahertys. 155 

subtlety and adroitness had given him an ahiiost 
painful impression of her character and agency, 
lie had unconsciously reseated himself on the 
arm of the sofa by her side, with a countenance 
expressive of his agitation and his feelings. 

The mask, meanwhile, was evidently amusing 
herself with the gay groups which flitted before 
her ; beating time with her foot to the music, 
and humming a very elaborate base to the 
melody of Patrick's Day, with a science which 
shewed her a perfect mistress of counterpoint. 

" Brava r said her silent companion, for the 
first time giving signs of life, '' non va maley 

" Cosi, cosh," replied her friend ; " Irish music, 
like all simple melody, (the effusion of feeling 
and of ignorance,) is too irregular to admit of 
scientific harmony." 

^^ Musica harhara .'" said the virtuosa. 
"Yet Geminiani concerted some airs of 
Carolan; you have heard me play one,' replied 
the other. 

" Perrucca,'^ exclaimed the fastidious co^y- 
noficente, in the harshest guttural tone of the true 
Italian organ. 



156 THE o''biiiens and 

^'Scuse,'' replied her companion, " it was 
any thing but that. A rich melody running 
through a dry and learned harmony, like a fresh 
spring flowing into the briny deep, will preserve 
its sweetness still ; and there is nothing of what 
you call perrucca, except where science exclu- 
sively holds the place of melody. But musical 
taste is a mere affair of organs and associations ; 
to either of which there is no prescribing. 
Every age has its musi<S^ That whicli charms 
the ear to-day, displeases it to-morrow. Figu- 
ratevi, cara^ the votarists of Piccini, listening to 
the madrialif which were the rage in the seven- 
teenth century ; or the devotees of our Paesiello, 
lending their ears to the cramped harshness of 
Leo and Durante. '"* 

'' /Z divino Paesiello! L'insigne maesti'or 
exclaimed the Signora, with enthusiasm, as she 
sounded the depths of a massive snuff-box, 
drawn from the pilgrim's scrip, with fingers 
which were certainly not those of Aurora. 

^'Divino, yes, for us ; but quaere as to our suc- 
cessors. Even the strains of Paesiello may yet 
be put out of fashion by the more brilliant and 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 157 

exciting cieations of some future genius ; and 
tlie // mio hen of the sweet Cimarosa may be 
pronounced by future virtuosi, —nn aria dl sor- 
betto:' 

*' Non credo iilente^'' said the cognoscente, '* e 
cosa impossihile.^'' 

'' Every thing is possible," was the reply. 

''A lei, s^i,'' rejoined the Italian, significantly; 
while in raising her cappa to take her snuff, she 
exhibited one of those marked, withered, and 
furrowed visages, which are only to be found in 
the regions where the youth of woman is 
loveliest. 

" Che ne pensate T' said the original mask, 
turning to O'Brien, who had almost involun- 
tarily listened to these musical observations, by 
which he became insensibly as much amused as 
he was amazed ; while his suspicions again 
reverted to O'Mealy's hint of the prima donna 
of the opera. '* I know," she continued, "you 
are an amateur. At least, I remember once 
seeing you ecstatized at the litany of the Virgin, 
sung on a particular festival in the Chiesa di 
Loretto at Rome." 



158 THE o'briens and 

" Good heavens," cried O'Brien, " is that pos- 
sible ?" 

" Yes, you stood near the altare maggiore^ 
under Arpino's great picture, when one of the 
congregation of the Corpo Sacro, a sister of the 
convent of the Bamhin Gesil, sung the solo." 

" Then," said O'Brien, " it was in Italy you 
have known me." 

" In Italy, in France, in Ireland, in the Isle^ 
of Arran, in Ischia, in the Campagna, and \u 
Connemara, any where, every wliere," was the 
careless and incoherent reply. 

" Oh ! pour le coup^'' said O'Brien, now 
more than ever perplexed by fresh conjectures 
and surmises, connected with passed adventui-es 
in Italy ; " this is carrying the imbroglio of 
masquerading to the very head and front of its 
offence. That you know me but too well, is 
beyond all doubt. Of this you have given me 
a somewhat too painful assurance. For to be 
frank with you, you have embittered moments 
destined to far other sensations than those you 
have aroused ; and have turned an expected 
pleasure into a positive annoyance.*' 



THE o'flahertys. 159 

" Olume r said the pilgrim, putting lier fingers 
to her eyes, like a pettish child, " you consider 
me tlien a seccatore, what you call in English a 
bore?" 

" No," said O'Brien, half laughing in spite 
of himself, " not that exactly ; that were an 
annoyance easily gotten rid of. You are the 
reverse of a bore. If you prosed, I should fly ; 
but like the lucciole of your Italian woods, you 
attract attention only to evade it. You wind 
me up to painful excitement, only to let me 
down to mortifying depression.'" 

" I have but followed the course of your own 
feelings. I came not here to hurt, but to save 
you,"" said the mask, in a deep and much affected 
voice. 

" Indeed,' said O'Brien, " I thank you at 
least for the intention. May I beg to know 
from what danger ?" 

" From the commission of a perilous fault, 
and of a deadly sin." 

" And they are " 

" Unavailing conspiracy and criminal love.**' 

" Good God !' exclaimed O'Bncn ; then 



160 THE O'BRIENS AND 

suddenly recollecting himself, he added, " here 
at least your wit fails in its divination. I 
presume you have taken me for another ?"" 

" No," said the masque, with emphatic seri- 
ousness, " I have known you too long and too 
well. Your story was the dream of my earliest 
3^outh ; your fate the subject of my constant 
occupation." 

" Indeed !" said O'Brien, affected beyond all 
power of concealing his emotion. " If you are 
really serious, — if this is not mere jeu d'esprit, 
— if we have met before, — if you are one, who, 

; but I must not again commit myself, 

till you give me more positive proof of your 
identity. If you indeed know me, you must 
know me for one at this moment, out of sorts 
with fortune." 

" I know you," said the mask, " for what you 
are, and for what you know not yourself to be, — 
one of high aspirations, but mistaken means. 
You are, perhaps, that foolish Roman boy who 
put his hand into the furnace, and only burned 
his fingers for his pains. Or if not he, you are 
Cola de Rienza, or the simple patriot Capponi 



THE O'FLAHEETYS. 161 

of Florence, who lost his life, and saved not his 
country a bit the more ; or you are the gallant 
Fiesco, who spoiled the cause he adopted by an 
ill-timed explosion ; or you may be Meo 
Patacca, or any other Capo popolo — a people's 
wonder and a party's dupe : one of those whom 
governments permit to go certain lengths, that 
they may afterwards convert them into agents, 
or immolate them as victims. For such spirits 
have been so impersonated, as often to mar as 
to make the reformation they seek to effect.'' 

This sudden change of tone, from the deepest 
feehng, to the coldest irony, wound up the 
annoyance of O'Brien to its acme ; and he 
answered with all the coolness he could com- 
mand, " So much for what I am, — a subject of 
which, whether you have judged it right or 
wrong, I have become a little weary : and now, 
Madam, for yourself." 

" Oh ! I ? do you not then guess at me ? I 
am Nuccia, the trasteverina, who prevented 
Meo Patacca from going to beat the infidels out 
of Vienna, or from some other enterprize no less 
safe and wise. Do you, then, forget the car- 



16.^ THE O'BRIENS AXU 

nival ball at the Borghese palace, the vows you 
breathed, and I believed ? 

' Dimmi che I'ho fall' io. Ma troppo errato 
Perch^ amare e grande colpa, a un cor ingrato,' " 

This citation, given in the Unguaggio Ro- 
manesco, from tlie popular poem of Meo Pa- 
tacca, confirmed O'Brien in his conjecture, that 
the Mask of Knocklofty House, and the " belh, 
Nuccia' of tlie Borghese palace were one ; but 
who this gifted and tantalizing person could be, 
was still the enigma. The adventure of that 
carnival evening had left a deeper impression on 
his mind, than carnival adventurers are wont to 
make. He had gone under the influence of 
the spell of pleasure, which at that season, in 
Italy, so often tempts the young and the unwary 
into folly and danger ; he had consented to a 
rendezvous with one more experienced in such 
adventures than himself ; he had assumed the 
character of Meo Patacca, by an understanding 
with the party, who was to have appeared as 
Nuccia : but another Nuccia had crossed their 
intentions; and with a wit and spirit, a grace 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 16S 

and intelligence, and above every thing, with 
an interest and a knowledge of all that concerned 
him, had so worked on his volition, as to have 
led him from the original purpose of the night ; 
and by thus rescuing him from a folly, had 
eventually protected him from a crime. This, 
his one sole adventure in the pleasurable, but 
perilous scenes of Italian gallantry, had fre- 
quently visited his imagination, to cheer and 
warm it ; and the remembrance had often re- 
curred with a flush of pleasurable sensation, that 
came like sun- shine, and left the impression of 
its light and warmth behind it. 

" If,'' he said, after a long pause, *' you are 
indeed the Nuccia of a certain eventful evening, 
passed in the Palazzo Borghese, you will tell 
me where we first met?" 

" In the ninth room of the suite a pian-ter- 
reno. You were standing with your eyes fixed 
on the picture of Love and Psyche, of Dossa da 
Ferrara, when I drew your attention to the 
' amove divino e profano ' of Titian." 

" That is enough," said O'Brien. 

*'The evening was warm, the moon was 



164? THE o'bRIENS and 

bright, you followed me to the garden, whose 
fountain refreshed the air, and spread around a 
delicious coolness. My donna d'accompagrw 

' Suzia se chiama, e non vo mai senza,' 

was no restraint upon vows as ardent as 
carnival passion ever inspired — 

*Io so che solo idolo tuo me chiami 
Per farmi schernodagli inganni tuoi.' '* 

" No, by heavens/* said O'Brien, " I felt then 
all I professed ; but who can for ever worship a 
phantom, nameless and unknown, or love with 
human feelings the vision of a dream ? You 
told me then, as now, you came to save me." 

" And did I not ? She whom you went to 
meet, the faithful, ' inexpressive she,' of that 
night, consoled herself with another Patacca, 
and, detected by her husband, saw her lover fall 
by his hand.'' 

O'Brien shuddered. 

" Had you been but four days in Rome, 
instead of two, you would have better known 
the Duchess's character." 

" I almost fear to ask further," said O'Brien. 



THE o'flahertys. 1G5 

" Her husband died in the dungeons of St. 
Angelo ; — for her lover was a Doria." 

"And the duchess ?"" said O'Brien. 

" You Avill be shocked to hear." 

" Pray go on." 

" Married her coachman,*' said the mask 
drily. 

The blood which rushed from the heart of 
O'Brien, crimsoned his face. 

" Oh ! these duchesses," cried the mask, with 
a gurgling laugh, which fell upon the ear, like 
trickling water — " these idol mios, with souls as 
warm as their suns, these bel tirannos, who 
alone know how to love, and lead the youth of 
colder climes a dance from Florence to Rome, on 
an absence without leave ; getting them cited 
before courts martial, and sent to lay siege, not 
to the hearts of duchesses, but to the heights of 
Oczakow. O Dio buono, how often does man 
mistake his vanity for his susceptibility, and the 
gallantry of a woman of gallantry, for any thing 
but what it is !'' 

"If you mean to say, that man is every 
where the dupe of woman," said O'Brien, in 



166 THE ©""bRTENS and 

a tone of evident depression and pique, '' vous 
prechez un converti ; I am not the one, heaven 
knows, to dispute the axiom, — as you, I sus- 
pect, are the person to estabhsh the fact ; that is, 
if you are not some gay creature of the element, 
who laughs at all human ties.'' 

" This is not the language 3'ou held in the 
garden of the Borghese," said the mask 
reproachfully. 

" No ; but then you were all woman, soft, 
gracious, fanciful and — " 

" Credulous," interrupted the mask. 

" Not so credulous ; since either in doubt or 
in timidity, you failed in your appointment in 
the Santa Maria Maggiore on the following 
day." 

" I failed neither in doubt, nor in timidity, 
but in obedience." 

" Obedience ! to whom could such a soul as 
yours submit ?^' 

"To my master and to yours."' 

" Mine ! that is pleasant. I acknowledge no 
master." 

" Yes, yours, il est, lefut, et le doit etre." 



THE OFLAHEETYS. 167 

'' I.ove of course ?'' 

" No, a more potent power (though, like love, 
blind)— necessity, the law of gods and men." 

" A bold doctrine," said O'Brien, " if meant 
philosophically ; or do you mean it literally, that 
you are married. " 

*' Wedded," she replied, with great energy, 
and raising her clasped hands with a graceful 
movement. '' Wedded by vows, which, if vows 
are to be regarded, no human power can break ; 
and this, I swear by the altar on which those 
vows were pledged." 

" You have a doubt then on the subject ?'" 
said O'Brien, significantly, and fascinated be- 
yond all power to move his eyes from those 
which now met and replied to his. 

" I have a doubt upon all things, and all sub- 
jects. I am a secret member of that mAich per- 
secuted sect, whose creed is more hated than 
Catholicism in Ireland, heresy in Rome, or truth 
everywhere. 

" And its name ?" 

" The I-dont-knows — for, observe, that to 
acknowledge ignorance has ever been deemed a 



168 THE O'BRIENS AND 

ci-ime. Believe what is absurd,— impossible ; but 
believe, and assert, and dogmatize, (n'importe 
quoi,) and you will have partisans and protectors 
everywhere.'' 

" What an extraordinary creature !'* said 
O'Brien. " But when is this carnival imbroglio, 
began nearly two years back, to come to its 
eclair c issern ent?'"' 

" To-night, I fear," said the mask, sighing.* 

" When, and where .?" cried O'Brien, breath- 
less, from emotion. 

" This will inform you," replied the mask, 
drawing a sealed paper from her bosom. 

O'Brien snatched it eagerly, and was about 
to break the seal. 

" Not here, not now," interrupted the mask, 
putting her hand eagerly upon his, and as sud- 
denly retiring it. " See, who approaches .^" 

O'Brien looked up. The Duke and Lady 
Knocklofty, who had danced down the inter- 
minable couples of the long set, were now ap- 
proaching the sofa, to which O'Brien had been 
chained since his entrance. Every one rose as 
they advanced, and the masks rose also ; and 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 169 

made way for them, where they had been seated. 
Lady Knocklofty and the duke took their places 
without ceremony : and O'Brien, in great con- 
fusion, not knowing whether to seek the notice 
of Lady Knocklofty, or to avoid it, — to move 
away, or to remain, — stood for a moment beside 
the sofa, where the masks had left him. 

His characteristic and distinguished person^ 
set off by a dress calculated to give it every ad 
vantage, probably, struck the duke ; for he 
looked at him earnestly, and then whispered 
Lady Knocklofty. She replied almost aloud, 
*' 1 don't know at all. We are never very 
fastidious upon these occasions, v;here number, 
and not selection, is the object ; and persons are 
sometimes invited under false impressions, who, 
perhaps, ought not to be here. Shall we join 
the duchess.'^ I see her in the next room." 
Taking the duke's arm, she arose, and moved 
through the opening crowd into an adjoining 
apartment. 

With the deepest mortification, with pride 
wounded, with every sense of delicacy, of taste, 
of feeling, violated, O'Brien heard himself 

VOL. III. I 



170 THE O'BRIENS AND 

marked out as an unbidden and an unwelcome 
guest, as a person asked under false impres- 
sions ; and he stood writhing under the 
agony of his humiliating obtrusion. What did 
all this mean ? Whence this change in Lady 
Knocklofty's conduct, looks, and manner ? was 
it the result of his expulsion ? was it the terrible 
consequence of his blasted reputation ? To her, 
at least, (his hitherto supposed "fancy's queen,") 
he stood guiltless. Was this, the explication of 
her " qui me cherche me trouve T' was this the 
protection she had promised him in all exi- 
gencies ? He trembled with stifled vexation and 
annoyance. Now too, for the first time, he felt 
the isolation of his position in this gay, fantastic 
multitude. The penitent mask had so surrounded 
him with her spells, that he had hitherto seen 
nothing beyond the range of her magic circle. 
Now the charm was broken, and he was alone, 
in the most fearful sense of the word, — alone in a 
crowd. His first impulse was again to seek the 
sybil, whose mysterious leaf still trembled in his 
hand ; the next was, to consult its oracular con- 
tents. He looked on the seal as he was about 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 171 

to break it : its motto struck him. It was his 
own " Vigeur de dessus.'' He hurried with the 
paper to an empty room on his left, and read, 
as follows : — 

" If the most unfortunate of parents has yet 
a place in the heart of a wayward child, Mur- 
rogh O Brien will hasten to the burying ground 
of the Hospital-fields, near the ruins of O'Brien 
House ; where, by a new-made grave, at the foot 
of the square tower, he will meet the houseless 
mendicant, his charity this night sought to 
relieve by the donation of the inclosed. 

" Arranmore." 

The inclosed was the gold coin, bestowed on 
the beggar in the court of the Tailor's Hall ; 
and that beggar was — a deadly sickness came 
over O^Brien, at the bare suspicion — that beggar 
was his father ! The revulsion of thought and 
feehng this horrible fact occasioned, was accom- 
panied by an intolerable sensation of pain in his 
head and eyes, with a dizziness that obliged hiui 
for a minute to support himself on the chimney, 
near which he stood ; and again, as his dazzled 
I 9, 



172 THE o'bRIENS and 

sight reverted to the terrible letter, written in his 
father's well known hand, the big drops gathered 
on his forehead, and fell upon the paper. While 
he still read, the pendule on the marble chimney 
piece struck twelve. There was not a moment to 
lose, not one to seek for the strange mysterious 
bearer of this letter ; if indeed she might yet be 
found. But of her, even of her, not a second 
thought occurred. Pity, the most overwhelm- 
ing of human sentiments, while it endures, 
pity for a father, who, if not more than misera- 
ble, was scarcely less than mad, took possession 
of every thought ; not unmixed with a remorse, 
which if exaggerated, was not wholly un- 
founded. 

Hurrying from the Circe bowers (so opposed 
to the scene he was about to seek), with a pre- 
cipitancy, wild as his thoughts, he sprang into 
a hackney coach, and drove to the masquerade 
shop, where he took off his dress. Resuming his 
hat and coat, and discharging the carriage, he 
proceeded on foot to the Hospital-fields. 



THE o'flahertys. 173 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE HOSPITAL FIELDS. 



" What is he, whose grief 
Bears such an emphasis? Whose phrase of sorrow 
Conjures the wandering stars." 



It was already " the dead watch and middle 
of the night," when 0'*Brien having passed 
through the streets and lanes on the south side 
of the Liffey, found himself in one of the most 
dreary and ruinous suburbs of the Irish capital. 
Swamps and wilds to the left, were edged with 
dilapidated buildings, the more melancholy in 
their aspect, when a glimmer of light issuing 
from a broken pane, gave indication that there 
some victim of wretchedness had retired to die. 
To the right appeared the then neglected 
banks of the river, with the high walls of the 
various hospitals, (the refuge for every infirmity, 
from the mental aberration, for which Swift had 



174 THE o'bRIENS and 

here provided, in a dreadfully prophetic spirit, 
to the most loathsome of bodily inflictions.) One 
dark mass, frowning and terrible above all, for a 
moment fixed his eye, and arrested his steps, 
— the state prison of Kilmainham : and never 
under the iron sceptre of the direst despotism, 
had power, trembling in its strongest holds, 
erected a more fearful image of coercion, to 
supply the influence of an wholesome and paci- 
fying legislation. O'Brien shuddered, and passed 
on. A narrow, rutty lane to the right, led to 
the open cemetery of the Hospital -fields. An 
hurry of thought, a flutter of feeling, a feverish 
velocity in all the vital and moral functions of 
his being, left him incapable of thought or re- 
flection, of inference or conjecture. In the 
course of his gloomy and devious route, all that 
had occurred in this most eventful day, his trial, 
expulsion, initiation at the club of United Irish- 
men, the scenes at Knocklofty House, the sybil 
mask, came and went, like confused and fear- 
ful phantoms, over the surface of his imagina- 
tion. But all these spectral reminiscences 
vanished as he entered the churchyard, the sad 



THE O FLAHEllTYS. 175 

receptacle of posthumous wretchedness, where 
the earth is permitted gratuitously to receive 
those in death, whom it could not support in 
life. He plunged on through its long, rank 
grass, and plashy soil, over those garlanded 
monuments and intermingled tombs of departed 
indigence, which the pauper pride of surviving 
misery, had decorated with paper crosses, and 
faded flowers. One "bright particular star" 
shone steadily above the ruinous tower described 
by Lord Arranmore, and one dark unfilled grave 
yawned beneath it. This, then, was the ap- 
pointed rendezvous. 

OJBrien was already near it, and he paused 
for breath and force to proceed. Perceiving a 
human figure under the broken archway of the 
tower, he advanced a few steps ; when a sudden 
thought of danger flashed on him like lightning. 
He was unarmed, and utterly defenceless ; but 
he called in a firm tone, " Who stands there ?" 

" Murrogh," replied a broken, plaintive, and 
well known voice. 

" My father !" he exlaimed ; and the next 
moment he would have been in his father's arms. 



176 THE O^BRIENS AND 

but that Lord Arranmore held him off with 
trembling hands, and looked on him fixedly, 
fondly, yet with a fearful and haggard wildness. 

*' Do you not recognise me, my dear father ?" 
said O'Brien, almost suffocated with emotion : 
*' Do you not know me?" 

" Know you !" said Lord Arranmore, still 
holding him off, " heu mihi Jesu I know you !" 

" Am I not your son, your own and only 
son ?" exclaimed O'Brien, inarticulate from the 
agony of his feelings, as he grasped his father's 
hands, and pressed them to his eyes and fore- 
head. Lord Arranmore*s countenance, faint as 
was the light by which it was seen, was so 
changed, so haggard, and so sad, as to render 
him scarcely recognizable ; and even the gar- 
ments he wore might have passed on an heated 
imagination for the shreds and patches of men- 
dicity. O'Brien could not proceed. His hot 
tears fell fast on his father's hands. After a 
pause, in which the old man seemed to gather 
force of mind and clearness of apprehension, he 
at length spoke. 

" Murrogh, shed no tears for me, my son; 



THE o'flahertys. 177 

but weep for yourself. My course is run, my 
sacrifice is accomplished, is accepted, through 
the merits of Him, who has suffered for the sins 
of all ; and who has not rejected the offering of 
a broken and contrite heart." He paused and 
threw up his eyes with an awful expression, as 
one occupied in mental prayer, and then con- 
tinued. — " The cup of bitterness has passed from 
me ; but it rests in your hands. You have yet to 
drain it to the dregs ; for the unredeemed curse of 
the church you have abandoned, and would per- 
secute, — the curse, drawn down on your race, 
by him who betrayed his king, and slew the 
Lord's anointed, is still upon your young head, 
like the cloud that muffles the thunderbolt." 

" My dearest father!" said O'Brien, terrified 
at this denunciation, and at the aberration of 
mind which evidently produced it, " What is 
it you mean ? what curse do you " 

" What do I mean !" reiterated Lord Arran- 
more, releasing his hands from the grasp of his 
son. "Rebel! Atheist! false to your king and 
God, worthy descendant of O'Brien the ' In- 
cendiary,' — I disown you — I cast you off. You 
i3 



178 THE O'BRIENS AND 

have blasted my hopes, and broken my heart ; 
you have linked yourself with the enemies 
of me and mine, and are unworthy of the name 
you bear, and the blood that flows in your 
veins." 

O'Brien had long observed a change in the 
manners as well as person of his father ; whose 
mode of speaking, whose very tone and accent 
were within the last few months much altered. 
He had, however, never been so much struck 
with the total transmutation of his parent's 
personal appearance, as now : and he could only 
answer to this wild and incoherent accusation, in 
a confusion of feeling, that rendered him almost 
as unconnected as the unfortunate parent he 
addressed. 

"My dear, dear father," he said, "by whatever 
impressions or prejudices you are now judging 
me, I beseech you reserve them for another time. 
Consider me now, as I am, the most devoted, 
the most attached of sons ; ready for any sacri- 
fice, for any effort you dictate ; ready to labour, 
to suffer, to live, to die for you ; only be calnij 
be confident : all may yet be well. Let me-, 1 



THE o'flaheiitys. 179 

beseech, lead you from this horrible place; 
its awful dreariness affects you ; the very air is 
pestilential. We tread on human dust, we 
breathe an infected atmosphere. Accept of the 
support, which nature has provided for you ; 
drive me not from you, let me lead you home.'' 

" Home,'** said Lord Arranmore, in a deep 
despairing tone, " I have no home, I am thib 
night homeless, houseless." 

" Gracious God !' exclaimed O'Brien, in a 
voice of agony, expressive of his harrowed 
feelings, and throwing his arms round his 
father, while he supported him in their fold 
and sobbed upon his bosom. 

With a convulsive pressure, that seemed 
the victory of some natural emotion over a con- 
certed and bidden restraint, and with a vigour 
more borrowed from a strength of feeling than 
from physical force. Lord Arranmore drew his 
son to his heart. " You love your poor old 
father, then," he said at last in a tone of heart- 
breaking pathos. 

" Love him ! Oh God P' 

" You will not, then, abandon him ?*'' 



180 THE o'bRIENS and 

" Did I ever ? Was it not you, my dearest 
father, who, wrapped up in mystery, have so 
long left me a prey to the most melancholy 
conjectures." 

" Oh, Murrogh, Murrogh !" interrupted 
Lord Arranmore, more collectedly than he had 
yet spoken, " there is, I fear, between you 
and me, a gulf, which neither of us can pass in 
this world ; and in the next, my son, I fear we 
are parted eternally." 

" I would not believe it for a thousand 
worlds," said O'Brien, now firmly convinced 
that his father was worked upon by some un- 
known influence, some mystery, as yet impene- 
trable. " So far from that, again restored to 
you, even here, in this desolate and mortal 
Golgotha, I feel a joy that is inexpressible ; 
differing, as we have ever done, upon particular 
opinions," (Lord Arranmore sighed almost to a 
groan), " with views as opposed as our age and 
breeding — but of this at a more apposite time — 
still the ties of filial respect and tenderness have 
never loosed from my heart. No change of 
place or circumstance, neither distance nor time, 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 181 

has absolved or weakened them. C.'onfide then 
in your child, your only son, let us leave this 
dreadful place ; and," he added, in a soft 
soothing voice, and scriptural language, " thy 
home shall be my home, and thy God my God." 

Lord Arranmore started. " Do you say this, 
Murrogh, from your heart .? Will you now, 
seduced as you have been, bewitched as you 
are at this moment, will you leave, and for me ? 
There is — there has been a shelter offered to 
your desolate and houseless father, to save his 
grey hairs from descending with sorrow to the 
grave, — to such a grave as this, which else must 
soon receive him.'' 

O'Brien shuddered, and endeavoured gently 
to lead him away ; but in vain. 

*' Would you," said Lord Arranmore, " save 
from the shame of a pauper's grave the de- 
scendant of the princes of Arran, and the repre- 
sentative of those whose ashes sleep beneath the 
Druid's cromlech and the saint's altars, whose 
bones moulder in the consecrated earth of Dun 
Engus ? Would you now fly with me, where a 
refuge, safe and calm, honourable and holy, is 



182 THE o'lriens axd 

prepared for me, while 1 yet live ; and when the 
hour comes, now so near, when the last of the 
chiefs of Arran, worthy of the glorious heritage, 
shall descend to the tombs of his ancestors, in the 
isles strewed with their bones, he will go, borne on 
the necks of his people. The dust, blessed by St. 
Engus, shall still be spread over him ; and his 
body shall sink to the narrow house, amidst the 
chree of his clan ; while his soul shall ascend, 
through faith, to his Redeemer." 

" Good God," interrupted O'Brien, worked 
upon by images, to which his spirits lent them- 
selves but too aptly, " I cannot bear this — hear 
me, I beseech you." 

" No," said Lord Arranmore, with vehe- 
mence, " I will hear only your assent or 
refusal. For you I will forfeit all — again looking 
on you, my son, my soul returns to you — again 
united, we part no more ; and if you come not 
with me, where, for the little time I have yet to 
breathe and suffer, ere I go where the wicked 
man ceases from troubling, and the weary may 
be at rest, I shall remain here, to share your fate 
and to meet my own.'' 



THE o'flahertys. 183 

" Let me but lead you away," said O'Brien, 
in the fullest excitement of extreme wretched- 
ness, and momentarily more struck by his 
father's attenuated and changed appearance. 
" Let me but lead you from the inclemency of 
this night and the horrors of this place, and 
I wiJl agree to any proposition that can ease 
your mind or calm your spirits, and give you 
confidence in the devotion of your son.'"* 

" Then," said Lord Arranmore, after a mo- 
ment's pause, and an effort to collect himself, 
while he permitted his son to assist him over the 
graves and mounds, " know that the ruin of 
your father's fortunes is imaged in the fall of 
the last roof he could call his own. All honour, 
hope, and maintenance are laid in the dust. He 
has done with the world, but for the tie that 
keeps him there, through you. Houseless, 
homeless, pennyless, there is yet a congregation 
of good and holy men, ready to receive and 
place him beyond the reach of the prison, that 
now awaits him : and there are revenues, which 
for religion's sake, and inapplicable to all other 
purposes, will suffice to redeem him from the 



184 

fangs of his creditors, — from the worldly evils 

that beset him on every side. While 

but this is not the time or place for further ex- 
planation. Murrogh, it is you, that have been 
opposed to my worldly and eternal safety. I can- 
not quit the world for ever, where you stand still 
exposed, the last branch of the tree of Magha- 
doire,* severed from its ancient stem, and left to 
the blast and whirlwind, its bloom withered, 
and its young buds scattered : I ought not to 
remain in it. Oh ! Murrogh, Murrogh, the heart 
of the father, wilful and sinful, forgets its God, 
for the sake of the child, which he has given in 
his goodness, or in his wrath. On the road to 
salvation, I pause ; and drawn back to the 
world you inhabit, my heart still pants for you, 
to see you, to commune with you, to warn, to 
bless you, to part from you no more." 

He fell, overpowered, into the arms extended 
to receive him. 

'* Nor shall we part, my dear father," said 
O'Brien. " Had we the means of departure, 

♦ An old oak, under which the chiefs of the O'Brien 
family were inaugurated. 



THE o'flahertys. 185 

even now I would fly with you, succour, pro- 
tect you ; and having consigned you in safety to 
those friends who offer you their shelter, return 
only to this working-day world, to earn the means 
of an honest and honourable existence, for us 
both." 

" The opportunity of departure,'' said Lord 
Arranmore, in an hesitating voice, " is not 
wanting, I cannot now enter upon a long and 
sorrowful story. Time presses. For three 
months, I have been baited, hunted, perse- 
cuted. I have also, by God's grace and his 
blessed Mother's, voluntarily endured much. 
But I am escaping from the toils ; and this 
night, — even here, within a few paces, means 
of escape are provided." 

" Indeed !" said O'Brien, struck by this in- 
formation, which so ill agreed with his father's 
destitute condition. But he in vain endea- 
voured to collect his thoughts : they every mo- 
ment were becoming less coherent and less within 
his controul ; as a numbing and stupifying pain 
in his head, increased to agony. '' This is 
strange, is fortunate. Yesterday I learned at 



186 THE O'BRIENS AND 

your lawyers, that some relative, some foreign 
ecclesiastic, had come forward to arrange with 
your creditors ; and this night I found a letter 
in my room with a bill, a bank bill. You 
have some powerful agent too ; and with such 
an agent, I do not understand, at least I would 
wiUingly believe that a misery so insupportable 

was but my thoughts are so confused, I 

know not what I say." 

He paused : and Lord Arranmore replied 
quickly, " I have no agent but Shane-na- 
Brien, himself an hunted out-law.*' 

" Gracious heavens ! is that possible ! and 
where is he now ?" 

" Safe now, I trust," said Lord Arranmore ; 
" but my hour is come." 

He put up his finger, as one in the act of 
listening ; and O'Brien at that moment heard 
a carriage drawing up to the entrance of the 
cemetery. 

" Murrogh," said his father, trembling vio- 
lently under some agitating contest of feeling, 
" Murrogh, judge for me ; judge for your 
unfortunate father. Save me in this world and 



THE o'fLaHERTYS. 187 

the next. I will not, I cannot again part from 
you." 

" I will attend you, Sir, whatever may be 
the consequence, whatever the nature of this 
mystery. My mind is just now terribly 
confused, I have gone through so much within 
the last four-and-twenty hours ; but I feel that 
in following your fortunes, and my own senti- 
ments, I am acting well."" 

He articulated with difficulty, as he endea- 
voured to collect and arrange his scattered ideas. 
They had now reached the gate of the bury- 
ing-ground, the carriage had drawn close to it, 
and the door was opened by one, who appeared to 
be the driver, and who alighted for the purpose. 

" I will attend you, Sir," said O'Brien, me- 
chanically ; seeing that his father still hesitated, 
and putting his hand to his head, he added, " I 
will at least convey you safely to your friends." 

Lord Arranmore motioned him to enter. He 
sprang into the carriage ; and his father, having 
given an order, in a low voice, to the driver, 
followed. The door was shut, the blinds were 
drawn up, and the carriage drove off, — at first, 



188 THE O'BRIENS AND 

slowly, over the rutted road : then stopping 
for a few moments, it proceeded with a velocity, 
scarcely noticed by its younger occupant. 

With folded arms, and a drooping head, — van- 
quished by agony of mind and body, by inordi- 
nate fatigue and exhaustion of all the faculties, 
physical and moral, — he lapsed into that dis- 
turbed, but absorbing slumber, which vibrates 
between insensibility and delirium. He had felt 
that something more than a moral mal-aise hung 
over him. He felt it in the pulsations of his 
aching head, in flushes of perturbation, and in 
sinkings of the heart. He had felt this, in fainter 
symptoms, since the night of the fall of Arrari- 
more House ; but he had, as it were, put it off. 
He had not *' leisure to be ill;" and, for an 
interval, moral energy had kept physical in- 
firmity in abeyance. But on entering the car- 
riage, his oppression had amounted almost to 
suffocation ; and he had been compelled to let 
down the glass of the window beside him. The 
fresh air of the country came like balm on his 
senses : and the regular breathing of his father 
giving indication that sleep had closed on his 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 189 

sufferings, and forbad further conversation, he 
permitted the refreshing, but dangerous coolness 
of the night breeze, gradually to overcome the 
feverish agitation of his thoughts ; and he sunk 
into forgetfulness, if not into repose. 

Starting from many a broken vision, disjointed 
and made up of wild and incoherent images, he 
frequently put forth his hand, to ascertain that 
his father was still beside him ; and this convic- 
tion being obtained, he endeavoured to connect 
his ideas, and to turn his thoughts to all that had 
recently occurred. But Lord Walter, the extra- 
ordinary, the tantalizing mask, the office he had 
accepted in the Society of the Union, his expul- 
sion, his present strange situation, his father's 
ruin, the fall of the old house, the unlooked for 
re-appearance of Shane-na-Brien on the scene of 
life, and in the particular business of his own 
especial interests, mingled together, and con- 
fused his imagination to delirium. Horses were 
changed, and daylight had broken, and the 
ancient and venerable town of Athenry was 
reached ; and still, life was to him almost as if 
it were not. 



190 THE O'BRIENS AND 



CHAPTER V. 

THE ABBEY OF COXG. 

A lo'^•ly roof, a shed 
With hoary moss and winding ivy spread, 
Honest enough to liide an humble hermit's head. 

Dryden.—Hind and Panlher. 

When the learned orientalist and enterprizing 
traveller, Richard Pococke, had overrun the 
east, " to Aleppo gone," and visited Palestine 
and Syria, and Jerusalem and Mesopotamia, 
and Candia, and Cyprus, and Giuret on the 
Nile, — regions belonging then only to antique 
fable (for space and time had not, according 
to the lover's wish, as yet been annihilated, by 
steam-boats and grasshopper-springs), he com- 
pleted the measure of his life's vicissitudes by 
terminating his wanderings in the obscure soli- 
tudes of an Irish province ; and he reposed from 
his labours in the purple indolence of the Irish 
prelacy. In reviewing the different scenes he 



THE O'FLAHERTrS. 191 

had visited, and comparing Mount Calvary with 
the Scottish Dingwall, the Bishop of Elphin, 
was wont to add — "And yet there is a spot in 
Ireland, that comprizes within its verge more of 
the loftier features of picturesque beauty, than 
any one scenic combination I saw in the course of 
my oriental travels." The spot alluded to was 
an accidental elevation, in the neighbourhood of 
Cong, a decayed village on the borders of Mayo 
and Galway ; and the " scenic combinations " 
were the ruins of its ancient abbey, that bathes 
its delicate reflections of gable and tower in the 
beautiful river, which runs in liquid silver be- 
neath its walls. Its druidical monument, once 
revered as " the great Caellagh"* of anti-christian 
times, — its antique bridge, — the green rich 
soil, speckled by clumps of white rock, looking 
like Turkish tombs, — and the gushing springs 
bursting forth from their subterraneous caverns, 
(to which they return by other cavities,) formed 
the foreground of the picture ; while the blue 
waters of Loughs Corrib and Mask, with their 
wooded islands and winding shores, and the stu- 
* Csellagh, — a stone, — the caillou of the French. 



192 THE O'BRIENS AND 

pendous mountains of Connemara, Morisk, and 
Mayo, broken into tumultuous disorder, and 
admitting through the intervals of their " cloud- 
capped'' heads, views of the great Atlantic, filled 
up the distance, and completed a scene, well 
worthy of the eulogium of the travelled Bisliop. 

This site had early attracted the attention of 
both church and state, by its loveliness and fer- 
tility. Here the kings of Connaught fixed tlieir 
residence so early as the sixth century ; and here 
St. Fechan, the director of the conscience of 
Donald, supreme king of Ireland, erected in the 
succeeding age, his magnificent monastery for 
regular canons, under the invocation of theVirgin 
Mary ; which the rich donations of his royal peni- 
tent rendered one of the wealthiest and most 
beautiful of the ecclesiastical establishments in 
the island of Saints. 

The regular canons of Cong, like those of 
the neighbouring monastery of Headfort, be- 
came wealthy by the commerce they carried on 
between the interior country and the coast; — as 
they were powerful from the rank of many of 
their royal members : and their abbots, princes 



THE o'flahertys. 193 

palatine, held their place in those rude parlia- 
ments, where all came armed, from the heel to 
the neck, and prepared for other contests than 
those " keen encounters of the wits," which 
bring the members of modern senates into the 
lists of fierce, but bloodless discussion. 

Thus richly endowed and influential, the 
Abbot of Cong became a proverbial type of all 
honour, wealth, and prosperity; and <' not for 
the Abbey of Cong,*" or " not to be made abbot," 
was an appeal to probity, which testified that 
the asserter of his own powers of resistance was 
beyond the reach of all human temptation.* 
Forms persecuted did not extinguish the spirit 
which originated them ; and though the Abbev 
of Cong, (a model of the finest ecclesiastical 

* Saint Colgan, speaking of the Irish saints and mo- 
nasteries, says, " All that is reported of their numbers, 
will scarcely in after times be credited ;" and though they 
had much diminished in the time of Henry the Eighth, so 
that only four hundred regular monasteries were found in 
Ireland, at the period of the supposed suppression of such 
establishments, yet there was scarcely a secular benefice, 
or even the poorest parish that had not, in its origin, 
maintained a community of monks or nuns. 

VOL. III. K 



194 THE O'BRIENS AND 

architecture in Ireland,) was left to moulder in 
premature ruin, and the tithes and lands, which 
supported its altars and its monks, went to support 
other monks, as useless to the community, as those 
thus summarily dispossessed, — still from century 
to century the order was kept up, within some 
nook of its ruined walls, by one or two 
successive members ; the elder of whom con- 
tinued to be venerated by the catholic pea- 
santry of the surrounding district, as the Abbot 
of Cong. 

As, however, the monastery mouldered into , 
untenantable ruin, beautifying as it fell, the '•• 
Abbot and his one or two brethren (poor and 
lowly, patient and suffering as they were), 
were obliged to yield their ancient tenement 
to the owl that sheltered beneath its Saxon 
arches, and the bat that flitted through its beau- 
tiful cloisters. 

But when, thus banished, the Abbot and his^^ 
solitary brethren betook themselves to a little 
fabric, raised by the piety of the poor, o.ut of 
the rubbish of the Abbey ruins, they excited no 
attention, and provoked no persecution ; at a 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 195 

time even when the law of the land was most 
rigorous against regulars of all denominations. 
By degrees the Abbot's house, as it was called, 
assumed a better appearance. A chimney to 
emit smoke, and a glazed window to admit light, 
with other tokens of mondanity, announced a 
better state of financial affairs, and an increase 
of oblations and voluntary offerings, — to the 
diminution of the revenue of the parish priest. 
Still the protestant rector of Cong, (who was 
building his own comfortable glebe-house, by 
carrying off and appropriating some of the finest 
druidical monuments, the remains of which are 
still to be seen near the Abbey,) did not think 
the " church was in danger." 

It happened, however, about the same epoch, 
at which General Count O Flaherty had re-edi- 
fied the Abbey of Moycullen, in a manner the 
least edifying, by a conjunction of the cells and 
cloisters of St. Bridget, with pavilions worthy 
of Epicurus, the Abbot's house underwent a 
transmutation, scarcely less striking than that, 
which covered the rude walls of the Santa Cosa 
of Loretto, with gold and gems. The miserable 
K 2 



196 THE O'BRIENS AND 

house rose into a commodious and spacious dwell- 
ing. Although rapidly, and therefore slightly 
raised, and destined to be long survived by the 
ruins out of which it had sprung,* it assumed a 
gothic form and outline, which gave it an anti- 
quated and massive air ; and its little chapel 
had borrowed so largely from the cloisters and 
pointed windows of the abbey, that it looked 
like a prolongation, or rather well proportioned 
parcel of the original building. Even the altar- 
piece, which had been hung upside down by the 
rustic artificers employed to place it, would have 
revealed to the amazed eyes of a cognoscente^ 
had any such then visited the village of Cong, 
a replico of the beautiful holy family of Annibal 
Caracci, of the Florence Gallery. This humble 
attempt to raise the once puissant establishment 
of regulars was ascribed to some foreign eccle- 
siastic, who, visiting Cong on a journey into 
Connemara, had been struck by the beauty of 
the place, and shocked at the sacrilegious neglect 
of one of the finest ecclesiastical ruins in Ire- 
land; and the donation he had made to the 
community, was followed up by others. The 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 197 

plan of the Abbot''s new house was attributed to 
one of the most distinguished members of the 
Royal Irish Academy, Baron O'Brien, after- 
wards Lord Arranmore. Notwithstanding the 
notoriety of these proceedings, and the visible 
improvement in the condition of the establish- 
ment, no shew of molestation was offered by the 
church by law established, until one of its rural 
Boulters and Stones took exception at the 
Abbot's availing himself of a neglected salmon 
weir, which had belonged to his predecessors in 
the reign of Henry the Seventh, and which con- 
veyed the fish alive into the cistern of the abbey 
kitchen from the stream. The whole artillery 
of the penals was then brought to bear against 
the community, and the order was once more 
dispersed, as in the time of Henry the Eighth. 

The house and its pretty garden, however, re- 
mained ; and it was kept in preservation, and in- 
habited by an old man and his wife, — the reputed 
proprietor living abroad. After a time, it was 
again occupied, by two or three respectable, 
middle-aged gentlemen, whose number gradually 
increased ; but whose quiet, unobtrusive congre- 



198 



THE O BRIENS AND 



gation excited neither suspicion nor alarm. 
They were known as constituting one of those 
confraternities, then and now so numerous in 
Ireland, whose members, in disgust with the 
world, or in love of solitude, live in community 
for the performance of religious practices. 

At first, nameless and unconspicuous, these 
associates were called, " the religious gentlemen 
of Cong ;" and living in strict retreat, they were 
known only by the good they did ; for they were 
charitable and almsgiving, and being of all pro- 
fessions, they applied their skill and acquirements 
to relieve the various ills to which the unaccom- 
modated wretchedness of the Irish peasant stands 
every where exposed. Their medicine chest 
supplied the place of those excellent dispensaries, 
which, of late years, have become so general 
and so beneficial in Ireland. Their kitchen 
distributed soups, such as the Abbey refectory, 
in former times, dispensed to the crowding ap- 
plicants. The garden teemed with simples, 
sovereign in every malady; and one of the 
members, a surgeon, superseded all the bone- 
setters and wise women in the country. Their 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 199 

paddock, which at first only fed the mule that 
drew their market-cart, gradually became a field ; 
and the field grew into a farm, which in time 
became the source of new light agriculture to 
the scollogs and middle-men of the neighbour- 
hood : and their chapel, in consequence of the 
admirable preaching of a young Franciscan, who 
had left the convent of his order, to unite him- 
self with the confraternity, became so much too 
small for the congregation, that they were ob- 
liged to raise the roof, and add a gallery round 
the choir. 

Their affluence, from whatever sources it 
sprang, gained them consideration among the 
" estated gentlemen" of the province ; and 
the suavite?' in modo of some few of the mem- 
bers, and the bonhommie of all, procured them 
a certain respect and good-will from the inhabi- 
tants of the neighbourhood ; which was not a 
little increased by their occasional, though always 
accidental, hospitality. Though they paid no 
visits, they were always pleased to receive them ; 
and though they accepted no invitations (never 
sleeping or eating from under their own roof). 



200 THE o'briens and 

they gave them constantly and kindly to such 
gentlemen as came from Tuam or Ballinrobe, 
from their castles in Lough Corrib> or their 
mansions in the mountains of Gal way. 

Their fare, though served upon coarse, but 
snowy linen^ and on plain yellow delf, consti- 
tuted a menu that often startled the palates 
of the Connaught gourmands. Matelottes d'an- 
guille, which changed the mud eels of Cong 
to the savour of those of St. Cloud ; trmtes 
a la maitre d'hotel, which confounded the pe- 
culiarities of the red trout of Corrib, and the 
white of Mask; with soupes malgres, which might 
fatten the ribs of abstinence itself, gave a new 
species of reputation to the community. The 
report even went, that their cook was a French- 
man ; and that toleration, at first refused to their 
dogmas, was now implicitly yielded to their 
dinners. The bluest protestants in Gal way, the 
most kiln-dried high churchmen of Mayo, were 
but little inclined to persecute men ^' whose 
port they liked.'* The creed of these Reverend 
Amphitryons stuck not in the throats of those 
who swilled their claret ; and the protestant 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 201 

Bishop of the diocese even expressed a wish 
to examine the tenets and the table of a con- 
fraternity, whose pastry almost excused their 
popery : for they had sent him a perigord pie, 
which might have driven him (had the book 
then been in existence) to parody the remark in 
the Almanack des Gourmands, and to have said, 
*' Ainsi cuit, on aurait mange le Pape''' 

It soon became the fashion of the most ortho- 
dox tables to toast the Abbot of Cong ; an appel- 
lation, however, which, when applied to the 
superior of the confraternity, he constantly re- 
fused ; — with the observation, that it would have 
been well for the christian world, had there never 
been any more powerful abbots, or more wealthy 
orders, than himself, and the little community 
over which he was but as an elder brother : — a 
community, whose members, like the first con- 
gregated ascetics of the church, were neither 
separated from the world by vows, nor led into 
it by ambition ; but who retired to live in purity, 
to love God above all things, and their neigh- 
bour as themselves. 

When he had first mentioned the name of his 
K 3 



J^Oa THE o'bRIEKS and 

confraternity, he replied to the inquiries made 
concerning it, that it was a peculiar culte of the 
catholic church, newly established in Italy, in 
honour of that sacred heart, which had beaten 
in human sympathy with human suffering. 

Profound as was the retreat of the religious 
gentlemen of Con, and inofficious as were their 
habits, they still appeared to have " views on 
this side heaven ;" or at least ties and interests, 
which were not all centred in the remote and 
romantic site to which they had retired. The 
community, or some one individual among them, 
had obtained the superintendence of a large 
tract of bog and mountain in lar Connaught, 
including the ample ruins and fertile valley of 
Moycullen ; which . scarce a day's journey, by 
land or lake, from their own retreat, was looked 
to with all the care, and worked with all the 
skill of a favourite domestic farm. There were 
also within the last two years certain, " alUs et 
venues,'' of the brethren, which passed not 
without remark ; and the little post-house of the 
village, was put into almost daily requisition, 
for letters of foreign mark, and heavy postage. 



THE oVlahertys. 203 

directed to the reverend gentleman at the 
head of the society. The arrival also of a very 
aged, but most singular and distinguished 
looking ecclesiastic, whose dress and air bespoke 
his rank, excited considerable sensation in the 
neighbourhood ; from the circumstance of his 
being accompanied by two females, who were 
lodged at the old inn at the foot of the bridge, 
kept from the remotest times by the Betaghs 
or hereditary innkeepers of Ireland ; though now 
so rarely frequented, as to make the event a 
marvel. 

The ecclesiastic himsel»fwas lodged in the best 
room of the retreat, and served with a respect and 
reverence by all the brotherhood, in his occa- 
sional visits, which the titular archbishop of the 
province never exacted or received. The females 
were understood to be foreign nuns ; for they 
were habited like Miss Joyce of Balintogher, 
and Miss O' Kelly of Balinrobe, who on the 
dissolution of the French monasteries, had re- 
turned to their people, for the purpose of being 
installed in some of the Galway or Tuam nun- 
neries. They had remained but two days j^t 



204 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Pat Betagh's, and had passed their time in 
sketching among the ruins and caves of Cong, 
and in stringing an old Irish harp, which had 
lain in a corner of Pat Betagh'sbest parlour for 
ten years. It had been deposited there as a 
pledge for whiskey drank, beyond the means of 
the Irish muse to pay for: and as Rory Cor- 
mack, the blind harper had been drowned on 
the very night of the deposit, in Lough Corrib, 
he had consequently never redeemed it. The 
religious but musical ladies found no difficulty 
in purchasing this harp ; and when they took 
their departure with their venerable companion, 
they embarked on Lough Corrib with the instru- 
ment, a portfolio of drawings, and one of the 
religious gentlemen of the confraternity. 

Something more than a year had elapsed^ 
since this notable event, which had supphed the 
tea table, as by law established, in the parlour of 
the Rev. Mrs. Ginkle (the rector's wife), with 
exhaustless sources of surmise and suspicion, 
when another arrival at the porch of the retreat, 
announced by the braying of every cur in the 
village, gave renewed vigour to the gossiping 



THE o'flahertys. S05 

curiosity of the neighbourhood. A report was 
spread that the chaise and four, whose rattle 
over the Irish pavement of the main street had 
no less disturbed the equanimity of the cater- 
wauhng, than it had of the canine population, 
had contained a maniac and his keepe.r, and that 
the former had been instantly consigned with 
much mystery to the hospital room of the retreat : 
it was moreover added, that the second personage 
never left that room, till carried from it in a 
state as dangerous, as that of the patient he had 
watched. 

The physician from Tuam, who had been 
called in to assist the medical brother of the con- 
gregation, told another story ; of which Mrs. 
Ginkle believed as much as it pleased her pre- 
judices to credit. He stated that a young gentle- 
man, travelling into Connaught with his father, 
had been seized with a delirious fever on the 
road, in a wretched village between Athenry 
and Cong ; and that, in utter hopelessness of all 
medical aid, or necessary assistance, the anxious 
parent had pushed on with his charge, to profit 
by the skill, benevolence, and known hospitality 
of the confraternity, in the hope of shelter, and 



206 THE o'bRIENS and 

of that aid which had ab'eady worked marvels in 
the country, not always referred to the science 
of Podalirius and Machaon. 

The elder gentleman was Lord Arranmore, 
and the unfortunate invalid his son, the Ho- 
nourable Murrogh O'Brien. The malady had 
raged with a fierceness, which by no means 
turned out to be " prophetic of its end.'* For 
three weeks, the fever had continued unabated ; 
and the alienation of mind was complete : on the 
beginning of the fourth week, when some amend- 
ment was visible, the unhappy father (fevered and 
delirious almost as the object of a solicitude, that 
seemed tinged by the agony of remorse), himself 
sickened, and was unable to continue his office. 
Stretched on his mortal couch, his physician 
discovered that the noble patient was a member 
of some rigid order of penitents ; for he bore 
upon his person all the testimonials of the ex- 
tremest austerity. A shirt of hair-cloth, a girdle 
of rope, a discipline of sharp infliction, and an 
iron cross, whose impression had sunk into his 
bosom. 



THE o'flahehtys. 207 

It was towards the close of the glowing even- 
ing of one of those warm summer's days, in Ire- 
land so fine, so few, and far between, that the 
sun, as it sunk in clouds of gold, lighted every 
casement in the front of the Ketreat of Cong. 
A long level ray of crimson brilliancy streamed 
on the half-drawn curtain of the hospital room, 
which had been thrown back to admit the air, and 
fell with peculiar effect upon the head of one, 
who slept upon the raised pillows of the bed. 
Colourless as Parian marble, with an expression 
of that pain, which had left its impress on every 
feature, it was the head of Prometheus, by SaU 
vator Rosa. A painter's or a sculptor's eye would 
have dwelt with insatiate delight on a subject 
which presented to either art so noble a study. No 
eye save that of a simple sister of charity (one of 
those beneficent beings, who, in Ireland, as else- 
where, are to be met, wherever suffering hu- 
manity may need their assistance), now gazed on 
it. Dressed in the sombre habit of her vocation, 
and holding back the curtain of the bed with 
one hand, her figure and attitude placed in deep 
shadow, and opposed to the glare of bright 



208 THE O'BRIENS AND 

light which fell upon the head of the sufferer, 
completed a picture, belonging to other climes 
and other combinations than those, under which 
this singular group now appeared. 

A movement, scarcely perceptible, that passed 
over the face of the sleeping invalid, displaced 
the principal figure in this living picture. The 
curtain fell gently from the hand of the soeur 
grise, and she glided with a noiseless step out of 
the room, as another female entered it. This 
was a coarse and homely person, of middle age, 
dressed in the costume of the Gal way peasant. 
The importance of a nurse was marked in her 
strong Irish features. Her hands were laden 
with the drink, which she was about to place on 
a little table in the corner of the room, when a 
low and mournful sound, that seemed to swell 
and die upon the air, caught her ear ; and sud- 
denly, but softly, dropping on her knees, she 
crossed herself and prayed. She then approached 
the open casement, and, after a moment, again 
drew in her head, and hurried away, as if 
urged by curiosity to inquire into the cause of 
some interesting and striking effect. 



THE 0*FLAHRETYS. 209 

Meantime, as the sounds were repeated, they 
rose in deeper sadness, at measured intervals, 
and died away in sobs of more audible grief ; 
till, in their nearer approach, they evidently 
awakened consciousness in the sleeping sufferer. 
At first, mingling with the gracious dream, 
which accompanies the first calm sleep of con- 
valescence, they harmonized with its placid and 
soothing sensations. He thought them the 
blessed sounds which issued from the lips of 
ministering angels ; but as consciousness grew 
stronger, and sense and reason, for the first time 
during a long period, awoke together, the wild 
and unearthly tones struck strange and unwonted 
upon his ear ; and they caused a powerful effort 
at inference and combination, to enable him to 
ascertain the circumstances of his actual position. 
The effort, however, was too arduous and pain- 
ful ; and scarcely moving his raised head, he 
turned his eye towards the casement, through 
which the sounds were admitted, upon the sweet, 
soft air, that fanned his feverish temples. His 
feeble gaze grew stronger, as the light faded 
into a more sober tone ; and the scene on which 



210 THE o'bRIENS and 

it rested spoke a doctrine to the sick or dying, 
beyond all the holy brotherhood of the Ben 
Morire ever impressed by smoke of torch and 
sound of bell. A brilliant rainbow hung its 
arch in the heavens, and spanned a scene 
.beneath of as much beauty and sublimity as 
ever displayed the magnificence of the Creator. 
Lakes, and hills, and mountains, brighten- 
ing into gay confusion, or fading into aerial 
tints, in the remoter distance — the full glory 
of the setting sun falling upon all — all 
looked as on the evening of the seventh day, 
when God, resting from his labour, saw that it 
was good. 

The invalid stretched forth his languid glance 
on the scene, which the position of his couch 
enabled him to command ; and he looked upon 
its loveliness, as the long suffering look upon 
nature in her freshness and beauty, with sensa^ 
tions not dearly purchased by their privations 
and pain. 

But again that mournful cry chilled his sus- 
ceptible spirits, which responded but faintly 
and vaguely to impressions, so new and unac- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 211 

customed. The brightest external objects fail 
to produce their exhilarating effects, ere returning 
health strengthens the organs for their recep- 
tion. As he gazed and listened, he perceived a 
train of persons moving slowly and proces- 
sionally round an old stone cross, that stood at 
some distance, directly opposite the casement 
of the chamber. The sad cry, which was 
again half uttered, was suddenly suspended and 
broke into a faint murmur, as if by some abrupt 
but imperative command, that checked the 
lamentation for the dead, lest it should affect 
the living. 

The slowly returning memory of the invalid 
recalled in this hullaloo the choral burden of 
the caoine, or Irish death cry, as raised in the 
province of Connaught ; and in the movement 
round the cross he recognized a superstitious 
ceremony, practised every where, in Ireland, 
in conveying a body to the grave. The sound 
and sight did not serve to promote that exhila- 
ration, which a slow convalescence was already 
bringing with it. In the course of a long and 
vicissitous disease, some suspensions of suffering 



212 . THE o'bKIENS and 

had been accompanied with lucid intervals, and 
the clearing of his consciousness of all around 
him; and he now looked for forms that had then 
flitted about him, and cheered, or soothed, his 
frail existence, by care and kindness, or had agi- 
tated it by that restless anxiety which, while it 
more than shares the pain it cannot relieve, too 
frequently increases it. But the pale and hag- 
gard countenance of almost maniacal solicitude 
of him, who so often had drawn aside his curtain, 
and looked its anguish upon him, was now no 
longer near; neither was that stern brow of un- 
sympathizing fortitude there, that was once seen 
to beetle over his pillow, in all the resignation of 
aged insensibility ; nor yet that phantom of cha- 
rity, which flitted before his eyes, and confused 
his wandering fancy. All were now gone, and 
were replaced by the appearance of the homely 
person, who soon returned, as she had departed, 
muttering and praying in the low and mimic 
whine of the Chree^ which had called her from 
her hired office, to inquire its subject. 

" For whom is that death cry raised ?" asked 
the invalid, almost startled at the unwonted co- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. • S13 

herence of his own ideas, and the perfect utter- 
ance of his own voice. 

" Ochj musha !" said the woman (a stranger 
but recently brought in, to relieve the attendant 
brother of the hospital, which, till the present 
occasion, had 

'* Ne'er by woman's foot been trod") — 

*' Och, musha ! sure the Keeners say 'tis the 
chief of the Clan Tiegs of Arranmore, who is 
gone to glory. But young father Francis has 
stopped the Chree and the Keeners, the greatest 
in the prowence ; and there they are now going 
their last round, and the shular man, 'bove all, 
bearing the cross afore the corpse, and come in 
from the mountains, with the Connemara hoys, 
to help the berrin down to the lake ; and a fine 

berrin it is, and " 

She had now approached the bed, with the 
drink, which she had been busily preparing for 
her patient, against he should awaken ; but he 
again lay as one in a deep slumber, his eyes 
closed, his lips compressed, and his colour 
deadly pale. When his medical attendants 



S14 THE o'bUIEIs^S AKD 

entered the room, they found him with a pulse 
that scarcely beat, and a breath that scarcely 
sullied the mirror presented to his lips. Nature 
had undergone some great revulsion, some 
terrible shock had been given to the nerves, 
through the feelings. That shock was the 
sudden announcement of a father's death, when 
the mind, all unstrung, was deprived of every 
energy, and unsupported by any principle of 
resistance to the overwhelming impression. 



THE O'^FLAHERTYS. 215 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE CONFRATERKITY, 



C'est pousser la politique bien loin, que de se faire aimer de ceux 
qu'on outrage, et de savoir si bien porter leg coups dont on les perce, 
qu'ils ne s'en apperjoivent point. 

Lettres Juives, t. 5, p. 386. 



Hail to the bright brief spring of human 
existence, in which care sits hghtly, like clouds 
on a summer sky ; from which sorrow flies fleetly, 
like mists on the morning breeze ; and to which 
health returns with rapid revulsion, as the steel 
rebounds by its own elasticity, on the removal 
of a temporary pressure. 

About three weeks from the death of the 
unfortunate Lord Arranmore, and on the morn- 
ing of a fine July day, there sat, and thought, 
and wrote, in the deep embrasure of a bay 
window of the library of the confraternity, one 
who was the very personification of mental 



216 THE O'BRIENS AND 

energy, rapt in the boldest dreams of specu- 
lative philosophy. An eye clear, full, and 
upturned, — high, intellectual, and unshaded tem- 
ples, catching the ray of yellow light that strug- 
gled through the half drawn curtain, — the rich 
hectic hue of the blood propelled by thought 
over a cheek of marble paleness, — and a soul- 
illumined look, playing over a somewhat melan- 
choly countenance, that " o'er informed its tene- 
ment of clay," combined to render the writer, as 
he sat in the happiest disposition of light and 
shade, habited in solemn black, and leaning on 
his elbow, one of those studies, which virtu has 
somewhat conventionally assigned to the exclu- 
sive execution of Rembrandt's inspired pencil. 
Who, in this fine form of intellectual life and 
physical energy, would have recognized the frail 
and feeble frame, which, three weeks before, lay 
struck in helpless alienation of mind on the 
couch of sickness ? Yet such is youth, the all 
we know of the privileges of immortality. Such 
lately had been, and such now was Murrogh 
O'Brien. For the last four days of his con- 
valescence, breathing the purest air, basking in 



THE o'FLAHERTys. 217 

the soft sunshine, gazing on the finest views, 
enjoying the most dehghtful of all sensations, a 
calm sequestration, with agreeable but not ex- 
citing societ}', surrounded by books, whose very 
external form rouses the miad of genius to 
meditation, O'Brien felt as one regenerated by 
probationary suffering ; and with spirits the 
most genial, and ideas clear, distinct, and cur- 
rent, he employed the first days of his restora- 
tion to health on the subject, which in sickness 
and in health had lain nearest to his heart. 

He had, while in college, began a pamphlet 
" On the State of Ireland ;"" and he was now 
occupied in finishing, revising, and clearing it 
off for the press. It was written with eloquence 
and enthusiasm, evincing that its author had 
felt more than he had thought on his subject. It 
was full of truths that were libels, and of general 
djservations, personally applicable to certain 
obnoxious individuals in the council and the 
senate, whom popular indignation had already 
marked out for popular reprobation. It was 
honest and injudicious, and eminently perilous 
to the fearless writer; who in the uncompromis- 

VOL. III. L 



218 THE o'beiens and 

ing probity of youth, saw only the end, and was 
careless of the means (as they affected himself,) 
by which that end was to be attained. 

O'Brien had already from his bed, and as 
soon as his hand could grasp a pen, written to 
Lord Walter, to account for his sudden de- 
parture, and his long silence as to its cause ; and 
to renew his pledge to the band of well inten- 
tioned patriots, into whose service he promised 
to enter, as soon as his renovated health should 
render him capable of the mission they had 
honoured him with. He had been cheered by 
a kind, cordial, and immediate answer, full of 
expressions of confidence in his integrity, his 
honour and devotion to the great cause, which, 
said Lord Walter, " not even your Hegira or 
marvellous flight, under the protecting wing of 
Ignatius Loyola, could weaken or destroy. For 
I do believe that you are, at this moment, in 
the keeping of that warrior saint ; and that your 
* amiable confraternity,' of which you speak, is 
but a resuscitation of those once sovereign lords 
of the will and intellect of the human race, who 
did but follow the vocation that man has ever 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 219 

acknowledged, to rule and dupe his brother 
man." O'Brien had more cogent reasons for be- 

o 

lieving what Lord Walter did but jocosely sug- 
gest. Yet for the moment, more amused than 
affected by the conviction, he willingly profited 
by his strange position. 

From the epoch of his most singular enleve- 
ment by his father, when under the influence of 
the strongest feehngs, and excited by the feverish 
malady that was circulating in his veins, — from 
that moment when a delirious sleep and uncon- 
scious vigils had exposed him to the unwholesome 
airs and mists of night, his mind had been so feeble 
and confused, that he found an infinite difficulty 
in connecting his thoughts, or even in giving 
utterance to the solicitous curiosity, which per- 
petually prompted him to inquire from his father 
tlie mysterious circumstances of his recent un- 
happy life. One phantom, however, still floated 
perpetually before him, — the suspected agent of 
his father's wishes, the singular mask! But 
what he had asked concerning her, what his 
father had answered during the terrible night of 
their journey, or whether he had indeed made 
l2 



^20 THE O'^BRIENS AND 

any inquiries, or received any satisfactory in- 
formation, he could not now, even on bis perfect 
recovery, recollect. The form of this person 
who had pre-occupied his last conscious mo- 
ments, had incessantly haunted him during his 
illness ; and her voice, in a variety of languages, 
of tones, and inflexions, had sounded in his ears. 
Sometimes her image had taken the form of 
Lady Knocklofty, sometimes of a Sister of Cha- 
rity, praying by his pillow. Sometimes, he 
thought he detected her in the garb of the nurse, 
of a priest, and of the superior of the Jesuits ; for 
her idea best assorted with the wild incoherent 
images of a powerful fancy, relieved from all 
restraints of judgment and ratiocination. 

The little information he had been enabled to 
acquire, or retain, of Lord Arranmore's fortunes, 
having been asked under feelings of more deter- 
mined interest and upon more positive data, with 
which the passions and the imagination had no- 
thing to do, had so well assorted with his previous 
knowledge of the order to which his father had 
bound himself body and soul, (a fact he soon 
learned,) that by inference and reflection on the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 221 

concatenation of events, and by some information 
secretly given him by the physician who had 
attended his father in his last moments, he was 
enabled to draw a perfect conclusion, which led 
to tlie clearing up of the last act of Lord Arran- 
more's fitful life. 

The early victim of a persecuting proselytism 
had abjured his enforced faith, connected as it 
was with the deepest wrongs and bitterest humilia- 
tions. Terence O'Brien, in his tenth year, the little 
sacristan of the mass cave, — in the vigour of his 
manhood, the protestant solicitor and high 
church partisan, in his later life, had become a 
relapsed papist, and died in all the probationary 
martyrdom of a noviciate of the Jesuits. To 
the serv'ices of this order he had unconsciously 
been bound for the last twenty years, under the 
prevailing influence of his zealous and perti- 
nacious uncle, the Abbate O'Brien, of Rome. 
To tlie services of this order he had been in- 
duced to devote his only son, from that period 
of his life, when dawning into adolescence, he 
exhibited such qualities as might render him an 
efficient and brilliant member of any society, 



^22 THE o'bRIENS and 

and a support of any cause to which he should 
bring the full force of his natural endowments. 

The first object of Lord Arranmore, under 
his relapsed principles, had been to separate his 
son from his protestant mother and aunts ; and 
to have him secretly, but, as it were, acci- 
dentally, educated by the accomplished parish 
priest of Moycullen, the Abbe O'Flaherty. 
The retired habits of the Abbe, so displaced in 
the sphere to which obedience to the church had 
called him, had promoted the well concealed 
designs of his father, by removing the boy from 
the observation of the protestant authorities of 
St. Grellan, until, to evade persecution in his own 
person, Terence O'Brien was obliged to enter his 
son a pupil of the diocesan school. Devoted by 
early oppression to perpetual evasion, Terence 
was himself a party to his son''s flight to France, 
after the execution of his foster-brother, Shane- 
na-Brien. The supposed loss of her son broke 
his tender mother's heart ; and this event drew, 
to its utmost tension, the remorseful bigotry of 
the proselyted, but still conforming father ; and 
he resolved on expiating the self-attributed crime 



THE o'flahertys. 2S3 

of his wife's death, by the offering of his child 
on the altar of religion, where, hke Isaac, he 
lay bound and ready for immolation. 

The keen perceptions of O'Brien's highly 
organized mind, in accordance with the strongest 
prejudices against Jesuitism instilled by his Jan- 
senist preceptor, and with a deep sentiment in 
favour of religious reformation, implanted by his 
protestant mother, enabled him to break through 
the bonds, in which the zeal and intrigue of his 
father had involved him : and once convinced 
that he was completing his often interrupted edu- 
cation in a Jesuit institution, for Jesuit pur- 
poses, — with the boldness of a strong volition, he 
fled. Fortune, or his own high quaUties, led 
him on through a changeful, but not undistin- 
guished career. His strange destiny had given 
him the start of the home-bred youth, who 
ripens into maturity unpractised and undeve- 
loped; subject to the influences of time, without 
the enjoyments and experience, which is alone 
purchaseable by bustling activity and arduous 
enterprise. 

Saddened by the recollection of his father's 



224 THE o'biiiens and 

evident prostration of mind, he was still soothed 
by the reflection that Lord Arranmore had de- 
rived gratification from the hope of extricating 
him from what he believed a perilous conspiracy 
with heretics and infidels: (for such he had 
esteemed the protestant and presbyterian bands 
of reformists, which constituted the society of 
the United Irishmen.) There was likewise 
another tie, which Lord Arranmore and the 
Abbate O'Brien had evidently wished to break, 
— a tie so vague, so undeveloped, so delicate, 
and (as O'Brien had thought) so unknown to 
all but his own thoughts, that he could not 
but wonder at the quick perception, secret 
information, and fastidious jealousy, with which 
it had been watched and thwarted. Nor could 
he comprehend, how that which was almost a 
secret to himself, should have been thus di- 
vined by two old men : in one of whom the 
sources of passion had been dried up from 
infancy, by a vocation, which had broken through 
all social ties ; while the other, simple and cre- 
dulous, and involved in temporal embarrass- 
ments and spiritual conflicts, must have had but 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 225 

little thought or time to start at a liaison^ which 
had as yet led to nothing, and had perhaps al- 
ready ended in bitter mortification and disappoint- 
ment. Yet his confederacy with the United 
Irishmen, and his incipient predilection for the 
Countess Knocklofty, had been hinted at by 
that mysterious mask, who, he was almost con- 
vinced, acted in the service of his Jesuit relations. 
Who was she ? a foreigner evidently, or one 
who had long lived in foreign lands ; one who 
knew hira personally, and who had twice sought 
him out, in Italy and in Ireland, and who had 
parted from him as lightly on each occasion, as 
she had met him, in fanciful mystery and care- 
less pleasantry. If his father had known her, 
the secret had died with him ; if she was known 
to his grand uncle, the secret was equally buried 
as if in the oblivion of the tomb. For though the 
Abbate O'Brien was then occupying the same 
dwelling with him, and was apparently the 
superior of the confraternity, to which his looks 
were laws, yet he held but little personal com- 
munication with any, nor suffered anything to 
transpire, but what he chose to impart; and 
L 3 



2^ THE O'BRIENS AND 

that was so little, that O'Brien since his conva- 
lescence, had seen the awful old man but once, 
—when their intercourse was limited to a few 
cold inquiries after his health, and condolences 
on his father's death, spoken in Italian, and 
in the presence of a person who acted as a sort 
of Camerlingo, a foreigner and member of some 
religious order. 

AVhile the active fancy of O'Brien was thus 
fed by vague conjectures on one point, on every 
other he saw his way clearly. Considered in- 
timately, and in all its bearings, the prospect 
was not brilliant ; but as long as it lay distinctly 
before him, there was that within, which ren- 
dered him confident in his powers to grapple 
with difficulties, and to vanquish obstacles. His 
father had left him heir only to his misfortunes, 
and his ancient name ; his debts, as he had told 
his son, had been paid out of funds, destined by 
that singular order the Jesuits, to liberate from 
worldly embarrassments, such' as they might 
require to abandon the world for their service. 
Lord Arranmore's peculiar endowments were 
kuowledge of the Irish language and customs, 



THE oVlaHERTYS. 2^7 

and his popularity with the lower orders : both 
powerfully available in a system, which in its first 
resuscitation was contented to grasp at what it 
could, until it should become capable of attain- 
ing the all it desired. 

With respect to the absolute mendicity to 
which CBrien had found his father reduced (a 
state so much at variance with the imagined 
donation of fifty pounds to his son, and with the 
protection afforded him by the order of which, 
by his own confession, he had taken the first 
vows), O'Brien had heard with a mingled sen- 
sation of pleasure and indignation, that this aims 
asking, was one of his six spiritual exercises, or 
probationary experiments ; and that he had 
availed himself of the circumstance to attack the 
feelings of his son, and to give more influence 
to the offers he was commissioned to make him. 
These offers were, that he should become a 
member of a society to which his energy and en- 
dowments might prove serviceable, which would 
give him the boundless command of wealth, 
without its responsibility and anxieties, and 
which might eventually place him in a sphere 



228 THE O'BRIENS AND 

for centuries occupied by the direct successors 
of Ignatius himseU*, the counsellor of kings, the 
director of popes, the sovereign of sovereigns, 
the umpire of nations, and in the profane but 
expressive language of the institution, the " Jesus 
locum Dei tenens in terra'' 

The price of a destiny thus splendid, so 
fabulous in sound, yet once enjoyed in fact, was 
no sacrifice of the passions or pleasures of life. 
It was but the firm internal resolution, the tacit, 
but solemn and irrevocable vow to live and die 
exclusively devoted to the interests, views, and 
prmciples of the society, by a blind and perfect 
obedience to its decrees, and '' prostration* of 
all will, virtue, and science,'^ to every order of 
the superior, " such as Abraham evinced in the 
sacrifice of his son." But this great mental vow, 
this " internal desire," and ^' voluntary engage- 
ment under a tacit condition,' ' required no 



* Query — Was it from the Jesuits that the Bishop of 
London borrowed this oft-quoted phrase ? or, did it arise 
in his mind as a necessary result of that universal spirit of 
domination, common to the high churchmen of all reli- 
gions 



THE o'flahertys. 229 

enforcement from monastic professions, no con- 
ventual privation and retreat. It imposed no 
habit, to mark by external forms, an internal 
separation from that world, to which its mission 
was wholly devoted. The Jesuit was not less a 
Jesuit in courts and camps, than in colleges and 
congregations; in the saloon of the mondane than 
ill the cell of the ascetic ; in the cabinet or the 
academy, than in the cloister of the Ignorantins ; 
in the bowers of beauty, and in the halls of 
wealth and pleasure, than in the impervious 
forests of Valombrosa, or the tractless snows of 
St. Bernard. 

This brilliant and flattering proposition had 
no attraction for one, whose principles and pre- 
judices were alike armed against it. In another 
age, and another aspect of society, it might 
have tempted his ambition, seduced his passions, 
and given him up unreservedly to an order, 
which then governed the most powerful states 
of Europe; and influenced the happiness, and 
checked the progressive illumination of millions. 

In answering the paragraph in Lord Wal- 
ter's letter on this subject, O'Brien observed, 



230 THE o'iJKIEXS AND 

'* Your suspicions of the attempted revival of 
Jesuitism are better founded, than your appre- 
hension of my subjection to their system. I 
have a charmed life, and none of Jesuit-breed 
can hurt Macbeth, I was brought up by my 
Jansenist preceptor, under the especial invocation 
and protection of that saint of all heretics, St. 
Augustin; and loDg before reason meddled with 
inquiry, I had drawn my tenets against the 
doctrines of Loyola, from the ' verites acacU- 
miques^'' of that arch infidel D'Alembert,* which 
were placed in my hands by my dear Abbe 
O 'Flaherty. For, hating the tribe of encyclo- 
pedists, as Le Tellier himself would have done, 
had he lived in their reign, the disciple of 
Jansen could set aside his prejudices in favour 
of his doctrine; and he permitted his young 
pupil to look into the pages of the chief of a 
party, for which he believed there was no 
salvation. So malleable are men's principles, 

* D'Alembert wrote to show that the public would sus- 
tain no loss by the suppression of Jesuitical instruction, and 
to point out the defects in their system of education, both 
in the higher and lower classes. 



THE o'l'L^-HERTYS, ^31 

when brought into contest with their opinions. 
My Abbe, by the bye, was the very Pascal of 
modern times : and as I was occasionally em- 
ployed as his secretary, and twice copied his 
admirable answers to * Le Jansenisme conf on- 
due^' (a brochure de circonstance from the secret 
press of the suppressed Jesuits), I sucked in 
my antidote, before the delicious poison of 
Loyola was distilled into my ears, — as it after- 
wards was by the zeal of my grand uncle, and 
the subtile eloquence of his coadjutors ; some of 
whom are at this moment my agreeable com- 
panions and hospitable hosts at Cong. Not to 
terrify you by the astounding fact, you are to 
know that I have some reason to believe, that I 
am, indeed, as you jocosely suggested, in the 
hands of the Jesuits ; and hterally an inmate of 
one of their new probationary houses. But all 
will not do. I am a very type of the generation, 
against whose freedom the old shirri of religion 
are secretly arming, under the encouragement of 
that double-minded Pope, Pius the Sixth. How 
much the old tact of the order is blunted, is 



232 THE O'BRIENS AND 

apparent in their application of means to ends, 
which are totally inadequate to the exigencies of 
the age : if they continue in this old tack, they 
are lost. Some royal penitent, like Louis tlie 
XIV. may cherish them, some narrow-minded 
monk, elevated to the papal throne, may revive 
them, and princes and governments may deem 
it useful to protect them ; but the force of cir- 
cumstances, that force to which princes and 
nations must alike submit, that force of which 
Wicliff, and Luther, and Calvin, were merely 
instruments, — which produced the dispersion 
of the Jesuits, and of which Gano-anelli was but 
the agent, will effectually prevent the success- 
ful employment of arts, adapted to another age, 
and to another constitution of human society. 
When learning and opinion were in a few hands, 
and the mass of mankind were sunk in ignorance 
and mental inactivity, the current of thought 
might be checked, or directed, by a well combined 
conspiracy of the few. But now, that the whole 
world is in movement, that nations are alive to 
their own interests, and reflect on their own 



THE OFLAHERTYS. £33 

affairs, the education, which the public gives to 
itself, absorbs and neutralizes the instruction pre- 
pared for it by governments and hierarchies, 
whenever the results of both do not coincide. 
Open or secret, the confederacy to govern by 
misleading must fail,, where the many have an 
interest in detecting its fallacies, and a ready 
agent for giving utterance to their thoughts. To 
govern the age in which we live, ambitious 
spirits must place themselves at its head ; and 
to controul opinion, they must advance it. The 
people and the press are irresistible ; and should 
the Jesuits again be revived, and their obsolete 
education again be forced upon nations by royal 
authority, the force put upon thought will only 
serve to make it expand with additional re- 
si hence. 

"Still, great efforts are making in Italy to revive 
this long influential order. In fact, they have 
never really been suppressed ; and though their 
superb palaces, called colleges, have been closed, 
and their classes dispersed, yet they have always 
maintained their congregations, their confrater- 



284 THE o'beiens and 

nities, and their secret affiliations, religious and 
laical ; which have kept up a partial influence on 
the feeble, the ignorant, and the voluptuous, 
(no small portion of society in all ages.) While 
some monastic orders leaned to the stoics and 
others to the platonists, the Jesuits were ever 
partisans of the philosophy of Epicurus. One 
of their elegant and sumptuous congregations at 
Paris, * La Congregatiati des Messieurs^'' was 
still to be traced by its debris^ when my father 
brought me from Bourdeaux, to place me a 
scholar in a new-named seminary of the sup- 
pressed order, in the Rue St. Jaques. The house 
' des Messieurs ' was a temple of pleasure ; 
holy altars had been removed, that theatres might 
be erected, and dramas were gotten up and 
acted by the noble Catechumens, which rivalled 
the pious private theatricals of St. Cyr. 

"By means of one of these congregations, 
(secretly favoured by the present pope and the 
sovereigns of Italy,) assisted by that sex which 
brings such powerful aid to any cause it adopts, 
they are again endeavouring to revive their order. 



THE oVlaHERTYS. 9$$ 

The name of this new association is ^ La devo- 
zione del sagro cuore di Gesu.' The foundress 
of this order is a young and beautiful religieuse, 
an Sieve of the Jesuits, and an uncloistered nun, 
of the Bambin Gesu monastery, and afterwards 
of the Florentine convent, suppressed by Leo- 
pold. Rich, or reported to be rich, greatly 
gifted, and highly organized, with talents for 
all the arts, cultivated with all the success which 
industry and ambition ever bring with them, 
this modern St. Theresa, when I was in Italy, 
not only made her fine voice heard above all less 
melodious sounds in the choir of her convent, 
but, it is said, in the oratories of princes and 
the cabinets of cardinals. Acting under the 
direction of her masters the Jesuits, it was she 
who obtained from the pope, through the 
influence of her friend the Cardinal Rezzonico, 
leave to found a perpetual mass ' m honorem 
sacrosaiicti cordis Jesii^ and she obtained in- 
dulgences for the congregation, showered upon 
her a larga mano. 

" I heard her once sing in her choir at Rome, 



236 THE 0'bR!EN3 AND 

when it was the fashion to do so ; and the im- 
pression left by her tone and style has never 
since gone from my mind. I saw her also 
veiled and draped as a priestess of antiquity, 
carrying the sagro cuore in a procession in 
honour of the new worship; and there was a 
life and a grace in her movement and air, which 
recalled all that is most admired in the antique 
relievos of the capitol. Imagine the aid such a 
creature must bring to a cause, which espe- 
cially addresses itself to human passions and 
human weakness. You will laugh when I tell 
you, that I am not quite sure, that these offsets of 
Jesuitism are not even here employing a similar 
agency in their little way ; and that some sister 
Bridget is not doubling the part of ' la SoreUa 
Irene,' of the convent 'del Gesit,'' of Home. 
I certainly saw a female figure, of a most mys- 
terious appearance, among the falling ruins of 
O'Brien House. She escaped miraculously, by 
means, which may yet discover to me her nanie 
and vocation. Should I tell your lordship 
of other phantoms which have crossed my path 



TIIK o'l'LAIIEIlTYS. 237 

in the female * form divine,' you would deem 
tlie relation a wreck of my feverish delirium, 
and laugh at the poetic visions of typhus. Still 
let me caution you, should you again trust 
yourself to a Dublin masquerade, and be ac- 
costed by a creature, light and evanescent as 
the 

* Gay motes that people tlie sunbeam •' 

should you find in her the humour of Sevigne, 
the philosophy of Tencin, with the form of a 
sylph and the foot of a fairy, should you find 
that she tnows you an Jbnd, and plays you off 
in an epigram, then fear and fly her, for she 
certainly is a concealed — Jesuitess. Meantime I 
confess that some of the spell of Loyola is upon 
me ; and that if I had a vocation to wear out 
my 3'outh * in shapeless idleness,' I should hang 
up my arms in the library of the religious gen- 
tlemen of Cong. 

" Their society at present includes a few French 
and Italian emigrants, who have fled from the 
obnoxious lio^hts of the revolution, and from 



23S THE o'beiens and 

what they call the persecutions of the Grand 
Duke Leopold in Tuscany ; who has suppressed 
many convents in his charming dominions^ as 
being under the influence of the Jesuits, and 
as engaged in the furtherance of their system. 
Here are also some English and Irishmen, lay- 
men and seculars, evidently retired soldiers of the 
disbanded army of Loyola ; who have weathered 
out the storms, which, as they say, the might}^ 
spirit of infidelity has conjured up against them. 
My great uncle, the Abbate, stands apart from 
all, living rather among them than with them. 
His dark, despotic and overbearing character 
retains nothing of its former energy, except 
what wastes itself in impotent efforts at the re- 
instatement of his order, in which his own 
prolonged life is bound up. His residence here 
is, it seems, but temporary ; and with habits 
isolated as his manner is imperious, he passes 
his time shut up in solitary supremacy ; and 
permits the society to indulge in the ' sainte 
oisivetP of the canons of Boileau. 

'* As yet, they have made no attempts at 



THE o'flahertys. 239 

proselyting, nor opened any classes ; though they 
now speak frankly of their calling, as a branch 
of the accomplished society of Stonihurst ; which 
has lately pledged its allegiance to the king and 
government,* and is much respected as a loyal 
and religious community, and as much opposed to 
the revolutionary epidemia of the day, as the 
most furious partizans of protestant ascendancy. 
All Jesuits as they are, they are evidently pro- 
tected by the very government that makes a 
vital point of withholding catholic emanci- 
pation. 

" The contrast of this society, with that in wliich 
I have for years been mingling, is extremely 
pleasant ; and suits alike to my present state of 
mind and of health. Their habits suit my 
present tastes, and leave me free from all 
' restraint of hospitable zeal.' Shut up in their 
cells all day, or occupied abroad in farming, or 
in lounging through the romantic scenery of 
the neighbourhood, they hold at night a circle 
in their library, which might rival the mercu- 

• Anno 1791. 



213 THE (/jmiEXS AXD 

riales of Menao-e. It is amusino; to observe with 
what vigour they go over the old ground of the 
demele of Pere Bonhours, and the Trisotins of 
the Sevignes and the DeshouHeres ; with what 
fen^d controversy they argue for and against the 
deci&ion of Daubignac " sur comhien dheures 
a dure Taction de V Heautontimorumenos''* of 
Terence. Here are still preserved the feuds of 
Perault and Dacier. The names, bandied 
from mouth to mouth, are not D'Alembert, 
Diderot, Condorcet, Voltaire or Volney ; but 
Heinsius, Scaliger, Balzac, Vaugelas and Voi- 
ture ; whose works enrich the shelves of their 
library, and, with some good editions of the 
classics, lives of Loyola, tracts against Jansen, 
Spectators and Guardians, * discours sur les 
a^remens de Vesjnit^'' essays, ' sur la delica- 
tesse du goiit,' treatises, ' de honesta voluptate,'' 
make up the catalogue of its contents. 

*' As yet, not one word has been addressed to 
me, from which I can deduce a perseverance in 
those views, which my unfortunate father enter- 
tained for me. But so premeditated has been 
my residence here, that in the chamber in which 



THE oVlahertys. 241 

I have been installed since my recovery, I have 
not only found all my clothes, books, and escru- 
toire which I left in my college-rooms, — but its 
\vhite- washed walls are covered with the pictures 
of those of my ancestors, who were founders 
and protectors of churches and monasteries. 
Some of these I recently missed from my 
father's old mansion, of which you must have 
retained a fearful recollection. 

" There are two pictures also, which, from the 
freshness of their tints, have been repaired or 
recently painted. One is a very characteristic 
portrait of General Lord Inchiquin, a celebrated 
apostate of our family, who joined the republican 
party under Cromwell. He is painted in his 
youth, and in the fanciful dress of Charles the 
first's court, which he visited with his father, 
when a boy. AVhat is singularly ridiculous in 
this, (to such little arts do these ingenious men 
descend,) that it is a striking, though flattering 
likeness of myself. The young Lord Inchiquin 
is represented leaning his hand on a table, on 
which stands a golden crucifix, with a label 
beneath, inscribed ' S^ib hoc signo v'lnces.' 

VOL. III. M 



24:2 THE O'BRIENS AND 

The other picture is a representation of the 
siege of the cathedral and rock of Cash el, by 
the same pervert O'Brien.* He is here repre- 
sented, mounted on a spirited charger, his 
sword bathed in the blood of a prostrate bishop^ 
trampled upon by his steed. His countenance 
scarcely preserving a trace of the youthful 
calmness of his portrait, is disfigured by the 
fiercest passions. The beautiful gothic windows 
of the cathedral are lighted by flaines bursting 
from the body of the church, which were said 
to have been kindled by Inchiquin himself, 
and to have consumed twenty ecclesiastics. 

* Le peuple consterne aux approches de ce tyran, chercha 
en vain un asyle dans I'^glise cathedrale. Les lieux saints 
ne furent pas des raniparts assures, centre des ccEurs bar- 
bares. Inchiquin fit donner I'assaut^et ordonna aux soldats 
de ne faire quartier a personne. Le massacre fut grand, 
dans I'^glise, et au dehors : personne n' echappa. On 
compta environ vingt eccl^siastiques, tant seculiers que 
reguliers, egorg^s dans cette occasion, sans parler d'une 
multitude de peuple. II se faisait un plaisir barbare de 
brAler partcut les villages, les maisons, et les biens des 
habitans; c'est ce que lui fit donner le nom de Murrough 
an ^o/Ma/«e, c'est a dire Murrough I'incendiaire, — nom sous 
lequei il est encore connu d^.is cette province, oii sa m^- 
moire est en horreur. — Hist. d'Ireland, torn. iii. p. 682. 



THE oVlahertys. 243 

Risinsr above the flame and smoke that issue 
from its dome, appears the Archbishop of 
Cashel in all the pomp of his holy vestments, 
and all the sublimity of martyrdom. He is in 
the act of pronouncing that dreadful prophecy, 
which predicted that every curse should fall 
upon the family of ' the incendiary,' to be re- 
deemed only, through the expiating zeal of some 
distant descendant. Underneath is written 
' The Siege of Cashel by O'Brien the incen- 
diary, who denied his God, betrayed his king, 
and died the victim of his crimes in 1650/ 

" The picture is painted by some artist in the 
service of the confraternity ; for I saw a fac- 
simile in miniature, among the illuminations of 
an old family chronicle, in my father's possession, 
called the Green Book of St. Grellan ; which by 
the bye, was recovered from the ruins of the 
old house, and now lies on my table. 

*' And now, my dear lord, having thus ' prated 
to you of my whereabouts," for the present, I 
have nothing to communicate of the future; 
which lies before me, vague and indistinct as 
the prospect that my window commands. The 
M 2 



244 THE O'BRIENS AND 

surface appears full of inequalities : there are 
swamps to sink in, and acclivities to be mastered ; 
but there are also bright points, which may be 
attained, ere the night of age closes upon the 
hopes of life ; and there are vallies and glens to 
fly to, ere peril overtake the wanderer, or per- 
secution strike its fangs into its victim. 

" I shall leave this charming retreat early in the 
ensuing week. Since I began tliis letter, a cir- 
cumstance has occurred to hasten my departure. 
The constituted authorities here, have found out 
that the invalid of the rehgious community is a 
member of the United Irishmen, and the student 
of Trinity College, lately expelled for atheism 
and sedition. They have had an interview with 
my uncle, who coldly and haughtily commanded 
me to rebut the charge, by denying it. I have 
of course declined to deny a fact, in which I 
glory, that T am an United Irishman ; or refute 
an absurd calumny, of whose falsehood, they 
who circulate it, are best aware. I mean there- 
fore to visit the neighbourhood of my native 
town of St. Grellan, on an invitation long given 
me by my mother's sisters, two maiden ladies, 



THE o'flahertys. 245 

who have declared me the heir to the bogs and 
rabbit burroughs on their estate, in the borders 
of lar Connaught. I shall not through ' Eden 
take my solitary way,' but through Connemara ; 
passing over the magnificent masses of water of 
Corrib. Direct your next to the Post Office, St. 
Grellan ; and let the society issue their orders, to 
theirs and your devoted servant." 



"246 THE o'bRIENS AiJD 



Dante. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE CAVES OF CONG. 

Profonda era, e nebulosa, 
Tanto che per ficcar lo viso al fondo, 
lo non vi discerne?a alcuna cosa. 

Questa e I'antica e memorabil grotta 

. . Donde una donna uscio. 



O'Brien's political authorship had occupied 
him for two days incessantly ; and on the even- 
ing of the third, having sealed up his pamphlet 
with his letter to Lord Walter, he walked into 
the town of Cong to deliver it to the host of the 
old inn, who was going, on the following morn- 
ing, " up to Dublin, to state case, and take 
counsel, in regard of a bit of an estate in Joyce^s 
country, to which he had every right in life, 
called Betagh's land to this day."" The packet 
was directed to Mr. Fitzpatrick, bookseller^ 
Capel-street, Dublin ; and Pat Betagh having 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. 247 

reiterated his assurances of its safe delivery, 
invited O'Brien " just to step in and take a 
tumbler with a few gentlemen, his particular 
friends, who had got their feet under his maho- 
gany, and were drinking to his speed, success, 
and safe return."" 

The hospitable invitation was declined, with 
as much courtesy and earnestness as it was 
given ; and O'Brien, almost suffocated with the 
fumes of punch and tobacco, which issued from 
the parlour, where Mr. Betagh's friends were 
taking the stirrup-cup, hasted from the close 
atmosphere of the ruined street of Cong, to the 
shores of its lovely river. His head ached in- 
tensely, from the arduous occupation of the 
entire day ; his limbs were cramped and stiff from 
sedentary confinement ; and as he issued from 
the smoky cabins, aiad noise of pigs, children, 
and dogs, he felt the fresh air as it came down 
in cooling breezes from the mountains, flow with 
a voluptuous influence on his brows, and gra- 
dually relax their painful tension. 

In taking the course of the river, which, 
rising in the mountains, flows into Lough Corrib, 



248 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and bathes, as it passes, the abbey ruins, O'Brien 
paused to observe the deep etching of the tower 
and cloistered walls upon the placid stream, 
reheved by the setting sun ; and his train of 
thought involuntarily led ,him to penetrate the 
ruins, and examine their details, with more in- 
terest than he had hitherto done. In quoting 
largely in his pamphlet from the very Irish 
history of the Abbe Mac Geogheghan, written 
in such very pure French, he had pitched 
upon the story of Roderick O'Connor, the last 
supreme King of Ireland, and his final retreat 
mto the Abbey of Cong. It was here (thought 
O'Brien, as he passed the refectory), here, 
perhaps, on this very spot, that O'Connor, while 
yet supreme King of Ireland, gave secret ren- 
dezvous to his dear friend and ally, Donald 
O'Brien, King of Munster : and it was under 
the benediction of the Abbot, that both had 
marched against that impious son, who liad 
always sought the ruin and death of his father, 
in whose life-time he had usurped his throne. It 
was here that, in affliction for his domestic and 
national misfortunes, the royal Roderick retired, 



THE o'fLAHKETYS. 249 

resigning his barren sceptre to his son, Can- 
chovar, " oil il employ a^'''' says his historian, " le 
reste de sa vie, quifut de treize ans, a se preparer 
pour Veternite.''^ 

The sun was pouring down from the summits 
of Ben Leven, a flood of light upon the tomb 
of the unfortunate Roderick,* as O'Brien ap- 
proached it. The monument was fast sinking 
to tlie earth, and was covered with rank 
weeds and briars. As he threw himself upon 
the long grass beside it, resting his right 
arm on the carved fragment of a mullioned 
window, while with his left hand he plucked 
away the dark night-shade which covered the 
ashes of royalty, he gave himself up to reverie, 
such as the place, the hour, and his own dark 
fortunes inspired ; for the sunshine of the morn- 
ing had faded from his spirits. The close of 
the natural day has something in it of the 
dreariness which belongs to the close of life ; 

• Mac Geogheghan, who wrote in a foreign country, 
was not aware of this tomb's existence ; for he says, '* Son 
corps fut transport^ de Cong a Clanmacanoise; et en- 
terre avec pompe dans cette ^glise." 



250 THE O'BRIENS .AND 

a dreariness to which the literary labourer is 
especially susceptible. The fatigue by which 
man earns his daily bread, forces on the strongest 
the " penalty of Adam ;" but the exhaustion 
of mental occupation, the terrible wearing of 
intellectual exertion, (for the deep despondency 
of which, physical suffering has no parallel,) 
pay back the fatal pre-eminence of genius, at a 
price the dullest would not envy. 

O'Brien, weary from the toil of creative com- 
position, sighed as he sat by the grave of O'Con- 
nor, and again smiled in humourous sadness, at 
the services performed by his ancestor Donald 
O'Brien, to the heroic Roderick, as contrasted 
with those which he himself was now discharg- 
ing, in weeding his grassy and neglected tomb. 
While thus employed in thoughts that led to a 
conviction of the nothingness of all things, of 
the brevity of life's fitful malady, (at best, a 
paroxysm), and of the wisdom of those who, like 
Roderick O'Connor, withdraw themselves from 
its unavaihng struggles, he was suddenly roused 
from his sombre reflections, by a gentle rustle 
among the shrubs which grew upon a buttress of 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 251 

the venerable pile, near which he sat. A startled 
raven fled from his nest in the adjoining gable ; 
and O'Brien, as he looked and listened, thought 
he heard the heavy footsteps of some ponderous 
visitant, dying along the cloisters. They faded 
on the air, and he again sunk upon his elbow, 
and fixed his eyes on the distant heights of 
Connemara, for which he was soon about to 
leave the comforts of his present retreat. 

Again the sound of footsteps, with a crushing 
fall, seemed to approach him. He raised him- 
self erect from the grass, but saw nothing : and 
all became again silent and solitary. Meantime, 
the surrounding scenery tinted into more per- 
fect and picturesque beauty. The foreground, 
chequered by the massive shadows of the 
cloistered pile, gradually fell into deeper 
gloom ; while a flood of yellow light poured 
through a gothic door-way which was richly 
chiselled in its cornices with grotesque devices, 
and the grim heads of saints and monsters. One 
of these, seen imperfectly through the masses 
of trailing plants, seemed almost human ; and 
O'Brien drew forth his tablets and pencil. 



252 

and applied himself in the last glimmer of 
sun light, to sketch the gate. While thus 
occupied, he thought the head almost moved, 
and that the eye glistened with life and 
light. He sprang forward, to view it nearer, 
but it had disappeared ; and, convinced that 
something living had introduced itself among 
the nondescripts of gothic structure, he was 
resolved to hunt down the original he had been 
drawing. The fleetness of the object of his 
pursuit, evaded even his rapid bounds ; and 
just as he saw the figure skim along the walls of 
the refectory, and glide into what is still called 
the Abbey kitchen, he fell over a fragment of 
the building. The next moment, however, he 
was on his feet, and then he again saw the figure 
standing beyond the convent wall, on the bank 
of the river. Wrapped as it was in a closely 
veiling mantle, he distinctly recognised that the 
person before him. was short and square. There 
was something so suspicious in this evasion, that it 
reanimated his pursuit; when the low and melan- 
choly winding of a rural cornet or horn, arrested 
his steps, and he again saw the object of his 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 253 

curiosity, (as if startled from its covert by the 
sound,) spring forward and escape beyond the 
ruins. When again he perceived it, it was 
standing on a dreary heath ; but it was no 
longer of the same dimensions ; the short, square 
form, now stood lofty, gaunt, and erect. 

Though half doubtful of the identity of the 
individual, O'Brien still followed, till almost 
breathless with fatigue, he was within a few yards 
of his object; and then the vision or phantom, sud- 
denly sunk in the earth and disappeared. O'Brien 
stood thunderstruck and aghast. The spot to 
which his chase had led him, was a dreary 
heath, speckled with a few isolated white rocks, 
and fragments of a druidical Cromlech. No 
shrub, or tree, or patch of vegetation cheered 
the scene ; save that where the figure had 
vanished, a clump of old scathed oaks stood, 
woven and draped with ivy and creeping 
plants. O'Brien, as he slowly and breathlessly 
approached them, recalled the tales of fairies 
and Icpraghaims, with which the Irish nurse 
had amused him during his convalescence. 
He had now reached the spot where this 



254 THE O'BRIENS AND 

vision which " seemed not of the inhabitants of 
the earth, and yet was on it," had made its 
escape ; and he discovered a circular cavity, 
which as he looked down, appeared to afford a 
ready descent by rude steps, cut in the rocky 
sides of a perpendicular depth of more than an 
hundred feet. The gurgling of water was heard, 
and some brilliant points of light were visible 
beneath. He descended with eager haste, and 
found himself alone in a dark and vaulted cham- 
ber of the rock. The twilight whose rays fell 
from the aperture above, on the spot imme- 
diately beneath it, reflected in rich tints from 
the dripping verdure, which trailed in festoons 
and garlands over the interior of the cavern, 
and ghttered with the brilliant hues of the 
emerald. Further on, in the opening cavity, 
stalactites and sparry incrustations caught the 
fading light, and reflected it in silvery points. 
Beneath rolled a broad and limpid river, whose 
source and exit were alike lost in the distant 
gloom. 

O'Brien, as he proceeded with i mprudent fear- 
lessness, now first suspected that he was in the 



THE o'flaheetys. ^55 

Caves of Cong, which his kind hosts had in- 
duced him to defer visiting, until the more 
perfect restoration of his health. But neither 
health nor danger were now thought of. As he 
groped his way along, shadowy glimpses of the 
mysterious figure were caught, and lost in the 
windings of the cave, still urging him forward ; 
when his steps were suddenly arrested by a female 
form, which for a moment appeared to his daz- 
zled eyes, weird and wild as the sybil, that led 
^neas, in grottos scarcely more poetical. The 
apparition had darted from behind a projecting 
rock with a dimly-burning brand, which her 
breath seemed to kindle into flame. Then setting 
lire to a bundle of straw, which she took from a 
basket on her arm, she flung it on the water, to 
float down the streanu Casting ihe glowing brand 
upon the rocks as she retreated, its red glare 
was reflected on the sparry roof, and fell upon 
the walls of th^ far retiring cavity. O'Brien had 
heard that a person answering to this fantastic 
appearance, was the oracle of these Cumean 
mysteries; and, divided between the thick coming 
fancies of his excited imagination, and his dis- 



256 THE o'bhiens and 

position to laugh at them, he was about to 
follow, and to reward her, for the effect she 
had so ingeniously produced, when another 
object for the moment drew off his attention. 
It was the person, whose evident desire to 
escape had led him into the cave ; and who now 
rushing on him, seized him in his arms, and 
held him in an embrace of gigantic force, while 
he muttered in Irish what might be a blessing, 
or an incantation. He then as suddenly dis- 
appeared. 

In the deep guttural accents, and in that 
iron clasp of strength and tenderness, O'Brien 
recognised his foster brother ; but he called 
upon him in vain. Whatever was the cause 
of this reluctance to ap]:)ear, he found it im- 
possible, either by soothing solicitations to 
recall him, or by his own efforts to pursue him 
through the Cimmerian darkness, in which the 
extinction of the brands had left the cavern. He 
turned, therefore, to ask assistance from the 
priestess of the temple, but she too was gone. 
The event was singular ; for she had asked no 
gratuity, and the fleetness of her steps be- 




THE 0*f£ot1^11TYS 257 

longed not to the feeble linibs of age. Yet if 
he liad hunted Shane to these melancholy 
caves, who was the secret spy upon his solitary 
meditations in the ruins of the Abbey ? 

He now had only to grope his way back to the 
opening of the grotto. When he S'lherged, the 
mists of night were already fast settling on the 
dreary landscape ; and the gloomy ray of many 
a rushlight, streaming through the casements 
of the cabins of Cong, directed his steps home- 
ward. At the entrance of the -v^iHage he stopped 
to inquire of some children, |eh? the dwelhng of 
the guide to the caves ;%(J.QJ^e of the urchins 
led the way to her cabin, which stood lone and 
mouldering on the edge of the Abbey grounds. 
He found her at her wheel in the chimney corner, 
spinning by a rushlight fixed in a cleft stick, 
fastened in the smoaky beam, which traversed 
the chimney. He was struck by the contrast of 
her aged and haggard appearance, with the light- 
ness of foot, and celerity of movement which 
had evaded his pursuit. " I am come," he said, 
taking a piece of silver from his pocket, " to 
thank and remunerate you for the pleasure 



258 THE o'briens and 

you have afforded me, by lighting up the 
caves, and to beg that you will accompany 
me there to-morrow.*" 

*' Och, yez are welcome, and thousands,*' re- 
plied the old woman, snatching at the money, 
and dropping it eagerly into a pouch at her side, 
" and its when was it, that I did that same, a 
jewel machree ? for I never seed your sweet 
comely face afore, that I mind." 

" When .?" said O'Brien, in amazement : 
'' this evening, now, when you just left me in the 
caves, not half an hour back." 

" Is it me .?'* said the old woman, raising her 
voice to the shrill pitch of terror. " Oh ! mille 
murther ! A wurrustrew the day, and Jasus 
keep me, amen. It was my fetch you saw, 
surely; if you saw the hkes of me at all, at all, 
Mavourneen dhu ; for haven't cross'd threshol, 
barring once't to mass, since Easter, in regard of 
the rheumatrix. Och ! Jasus, queen of glory, 
look down upon me this night, and take me to 
comfort ; for the death watch is out for me," — 
and she wiped the stream from her eyes. " And 



THE o'flahertys. 259 

how is it I came upon yez, dear ?" she con- 
tinued ; " was it in my fine white winding 
sheet which lies there in the box convanient ? 
Or was it in my ould cloak, and binogue, and 
crutch, and basket, and flint, and rushlights ?'" 

" No," said O'Brien, " I saw nothing of all 
this ; you were wrapped in a mantle.'* 

He paused as the old woman had impulsively 
risen, her eyes and mouth extended on the 
stretch of superstitious curiosity and personal 
sohcitude ; and then added, " No, now I per- 
ceive it could not be you ; the figure was taller 
and slighter.*' 

The old woman reseated herself at her wheel, 
delighted to be restored to a life which, though 
in the midst of pain, poverty, and age, had still 
charms for her. " God is good, and his blessed 
Mother, amen," she said : " Glory be to the 
saints, I am to the fore still. No, honey, dear, 
it wasn't me, nor the likes of me, nor my arrach 
neither, but a great lady, glory to her name 
and memory, amen." 

" Indeed," said O'Brien, "and who was it?" 

" Och, there's no harm done/' said the old 



26*0 THE o'bRIENS and 

woman, turning round her wheel briskly, and 
casting a fearful eye round her desolate hovel, 
"there's no harm done, for she brings luck 
wherever she appears ; sure it's only the ahm- 
liasiher, the Abbess's ghost." 

" The Abbess ! what Abbess ?" 

" Why, the Abbess Beavoin OTlalierty/' 

O'Brien started. 

" Och, in truth," continued the old woman, 
" she comes over from the castle in Lough 
Corrib, Caisthla na Kirka, and is seen in Cong 
Abbey, and betimes in the caves too. But sor- 
row harm she'll do you, but great luck always 
follows the track of her traheens. There's them 
as would rather catch a sight of the Abbess 
Beavoin, than find the mark of a lepraghaun, 
aye, indeed faith."*^ 

O'Brien took leave of the old woman, but 
the vision of Shane, the lurking person in the 
Abbey ruins, the strange guide in the caves, and 
the Abbess Beavoin, occupied his thoughts, and 
gave a vein of wild and fantastic imagery to his 
sleeping dreams, which he could not wholly 
shake off when awake. 



THE o'flahertys. 261 

In a week from this adventure, OBrien 
parted from the amiable confraternity, with a 
regret natural to the sensible, in parting even 
from inanimate objects, to which they have been 
habituated ; but most natural in one alive, even 
to the very quick, to kindness and to unkind- 
ness. He forgot their possible speculations on 
his moral independence, in their attention and 
hospitality. Whatever might have been their 
secret opinion of his waywardness, or their dis- 
like of his principles, both religious and poli- 
tical, they had neither irritated him by dictation, 
disgusted him by interference, nor worried him 
by remonstrance ; and they had expressed their 
admiration of his talents, and their friendly 
regret at not being destined to benefit still 
further by his society, in such mild and insinuat- 
ing reproaches, that they left him in higher 
favour with himself, and consequently more 
pleased with them, than he had sometimes been 
tvith persons of more importance, and with 
associations of more beneficial tendency to the 
great interests of mankind. 



262 THE O'BRIENS AND 

His uncle, to whom he had announced his 
intention of proceeding to his aunts, in the 
county of Galway, had received the intelligence 
with the indifference of one, whose feelings were 
alike under the benumbing influence of age, and 
of systematic dissimulation. For his grand 
nephew he had no personal regard ; for his pre- 
sent vocation he had more contempt, than indig- 
nation ; and of his future adherence to a system 
of which he was himself the support, or the dupe, 
he had no doubt whatever. He looked on the 
hot-headed young man as a bird, who flutters and 
flies to a limited distance, at the end of a string. 
It is the peculiar quality of zeal, united with 
mediocrityj to cling with a desperate pertinacity 
to a favourite idea, or a darling hope ; and 
this modern St. Dominick was as ready for a 
crusade, and as certain of its success, as he who 
pursued conversion even to the verge of exter- 
mination. He refused to receive his nephew's 
personal adieus on the night before his de- 
parture ; but O'Brien had not then to learn that 
blood is no necessary tie, or that propinquity 



THE o'flahertys. 263 

and kin are no bonds, where bigotry has once 
sown her prohfic seeds of deep and bitter dis- 
sension. 

The wanderer's travelling arrangements had 
been easily made. His wardrobe and books 
had been dispatched by a Galway carrier to St. 
Grelian ; and a Connemara pony, (the camel of 
the Connaught deserts), presented to him by one 
of the brothers of the confraternity, afforded 
him the surest and pleasantest mode of passing 
through the mountainous wilds, to the coast 
scenery of lar Connaught, and its little capital, 
St, Grelian. The donor of this sure footed 
animal was one in whom O'Brien had taken 
much interest, and with whom he had much con- 
versed. He was the young Franciscan preacher 
of Tuam, whose eloquence had brought such 
crowded congregations to the private chapel of 
the confraternity. He was far gone in a consump- 
tion, a circumstance that deepened the interest 
his character and manners had begotten. Though 
a true Irish friar, zealous and vehement, with a 
broad brogue and a lounging gait, there was yet 
about him a certain indication of one, who felt 



264 

deeply, and might have been much loved — of 
one who had made evident sacrifices of natural 
passions, to some sense of duty ; which, whether 
right or wrong in its principle, called forth the 
pity and admiration, that such sacrifices ever 
exact. 

O'Brien, in return for his pony, had given 
him a miniature, on copper, of his favourite 
saint, St. Francis of Anisac, which he found in 
his writing-box, and which he had bought for 
a very trifle in the Piazza Navona at Rome. 

*' We shall meet again," said O'Brien, in some 
emotion, and ihaking him heartily by the hand. 

*' Yes !" said the young Franciscan, empha- 
tically, and throwing up his eyes to the starry 
heavens, under whose canopy they were stand- 
ing, " We shall meet again ; if not in this 
world, in the next." 

O^Brien had engaged his passage across Lough 
Corrib in a sail-boat, which was to start from a 
spot near the ruins of Cross Abbey, an old re- 
ligious house, known also by the name of the 
Holy-rood, between Cong and the now improved, 
but then miserable village of Headford. The 



THE o'FLAHERXrS. 9,65 

Stars were still twinkling in the firmament, and 
the dawn was but faintly struggling through the 
mists of a grey and loaded atmosphere, as he 
turned the head of his " hobler " from the court 
of '' the Retreat," and took the road to Cross. 
The day came heavily on, drizzling and dreary ; 
but as he proceeded, the weather, with all the 
uncertainty of the most uncertain climate in the 
world, suddenly changed — new objects cheered 
and charmed the loneliness of his way. It was 
the fair day of Galway, and the road soon be- 
came thronged, even at that early hour. From 
the mountains of Mayo, and the shorerl^f Lough 
Corrib, and even from the rugged heights of 
Ben Leven and Mam Turk, in the wilds of 
Connemara, came groups of cadgers, with their 
panniered asses, bog-trotters, with their turf 
kishes, and old women, in their binogues and 
mantles, laden with Connemara stockings ; while 
forms, which nature seemed to have intended for 
other associates and other regions, were occa- 
sionally visible among the rustic population. 
In whatever direction O'Brien looked, he met 

VOL. III. N 



^66 THE O'BRIENS AND 

bright black eyes darting their arch, yet timid 
glances, which alternately sought and bent be- 
neath his own : well-developed forms, thrown 
into such attitudes as the rural duties in which 
they were involved prescribed, were set off to 
advantage by a dress which (though of the 
rudest, coarsest texture) traditionally preserved 
the modes of better times, when the commer- 
cial wealth, which poured into the ports of 
Galway and Mayo, created an artificial pros- 
perity, in the midst of turbulence and factious 
warfare. Petticoats of bright scarlet and crim- 
son,* set in full thick plaits round the waist, as 
in the time of Granuail (who probably im- 
proved the fashions of her subjects by her trip 
to the court of Elizabeth), were contrasted by 
the blue cloak, or mantle, thrown back from the 
shoulders, to display the brown boddice or jacket 
beneath. Glossy black, or golden hair, such as 
Ossian sang, and Carolan delighted to celebrate, 

* The dress of the women, who are handsome, and have 
a good expression in their countenances, is peculiar ; 
scarlet, crimson, and purple, are their favourite colours.—* 
Walks through Ireland, 1817. 



THE 0"FLAHKRTYS. 267 

was drawn becomingly off the open forehead, 
and fastened behind, by that modern representa- 
tive of the old Irish bodkin, a stout, long, black 
pin ; while dark brows and rich colouring fre- 
quently presented such heads, as the traveller 
sees on the banks of the Tiber. Gazing on faces 
from which the bloom of youth and the blush of 
virgin modesty were not yet banished, by rude 
labours and matronly indifference, O^Brien saw 
such traces of Spanish origin, as justified the 
supposition, that the western coast of Ireland 
was colonized, if not by the sons of Milesius, at 
least by his Iberian descendants. 

The sun had risen in cloudless splendour, 
and threw a long line of quivering light upon 
the waters of Lough Corrib, the purple mists 
of the distant mountains rolled up from their 
bases, and jocund day stood tip-toe on their 
summits. As the noble scene came forth to 
vietv, andexpanded into beauty, the susceptible 
spirits of O'Brien sprang up vviih the breeze, 
which carried off upon its wing the vapours 
of the dawn, to that great receptacle of the 
elements, " the steep Atlantic." He drew up 



^6S THE O'BEIEXS AXD 

at the appointed place of embarkation, and was 
soon on board. The boat had already cleared 
the little creek, when a long, loud whistle, 
arrested the attention of the helmsman and crew, 
and a man running in full speed, with a kish or 
basket, pending from a long stick, that rested 
on his shoulder, appeared, hailing the crew, with 
many signs, both of hat and hand. The 
rowers rested on their oars, and the helmsman 
exclaimed, 

" Och, its Corny the cadger, come for 
a cast over to the mountains, if your honor 
plazes ; and troth, Sir, I'll engage, its himself 
will pay yez, with a good song ; for he is the 
finest poet on the lake, any how." 

"A poet," repeated O'Brien, laughing, "pray 

then put back and take him in, for the honour 

of the calling." 

*' Long life to your honor," said the helmsman, 

" sorrow a one but knows Cornelius O'Clum- 

maghan from Shannon river to Innis Bofin.""* 
'^And some to their cost," muttered a poor, 

pale, half naked creature, scarcely able to wield 

the oar he held. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 269 

" He is fine company, and has great wit," 
said another ; " though some take him for an 
innocent ; and he was welcome from Menlo 
Castle, to the poorest cabin in Connemara, mitil 
he got into trouble, poor lad, some years ago ; 
but now he has come back, and has taken up a 
taste, and is willing to put his hand to any thing 
in an honest way, betimes selling a basket of 
scollops, or a hank of Connemara stockings, 
betimes a few story books, ould ballads, holy 
pictures, and the like, and goes on errands 
through the country." 

While this biographical eulogy was pronounc- 
ing, a corricle or canoe, constructed of twiffs and 
hides, was sent ashore for the ])oet. The rowers 
mean time lay on their oars ; and O'Brien, in 
throwing his eyes over the miscellaneous jumble 
of dead and live cargo, stowed into the little 
bark, was struck by the appearance of a scarcely 
human form, gathered up like a hedgehog, on 
the floor of the hold. A ragged mantle was 
drawn over the whole figure to the very head, 
which was bent upon the upraised knees. The 



270 THE o'biueks and 

deep inspirations of one who slept soundly, 
alone intimated that this shapeless mass was 
human. 

*' It is a poor wild cratur,'' said one of the 
rowers, following the direction of O'Brien's 
eyes, and poking at the " delicate monster"" with 
his oar, as Trinculo does at Caliban. " He is 
getting a cast over, for the love of our lady of the 
holy rood." 

O'Brien's attention was now drawn off by 
the arrival of the lake poet : he however had 
nothing poetical in his appearance, and resem- 
bled less in his person, than his calling, his 
lackadaisical fraternity of modern times. He 
was a low, squat, square, but athletic figure, 
with a countenance undecided in its expression, 
between cunning and idiotism ; with a pent house 
brow, leering mouth, and small twinkling eyes 
that almost met (one of nature's sure indicationsof 
a rogue). It was observed by old Barnaby Rich 
(a traveller in Ireland, in the days of James 1st), 
that " the people of that country were most 
bountiful to rhymers and fools" — and in either, 
or in both, of these capacities. Corny the cadger 



THE o'flahertys. 271 

was most heartily received, by the helmsman and 
crew ; for he who amuses is the welcome guest 
of all classes. 

As soon as he had stowed himself and his 
ambulating library in the boat, he made a low 
obeisance to O'Brien, and then addressed him 
in a doggerel rhyme, to a sort of whining 
chaunt: 

" Glory be to your honor, both now and evermore ; 
Of health, wit, and wisdom, may God increase your 

store. 
For myself being here, which makes my drame coniii^. 

true, i. 

Poor Cornalius is bound in duty to pray for you." 

'' And pray, friend," said O'Brien, " what 
was your dream ?" 

" I dramed your honor rowed me over, without fee or 

pay, 

Then added a tester, to carry myself on my way." 

The rowers laughed and winked. 

" You seem to cap rhymes at will," said 
O'Brien; " have you any good old Irish 
poetry ?" 



272 THE o'bHIKNS and 

*' Flinty, your honour/' was the reply. 

" Have you Neilan the bard's famous invoca- 
tion to Lord Thomas Fitzgerald, called the 
Silken Thomas?" 

"' No, plaze your honour, but I have Caro- 
]an''s reysate for drinking."* Another laugh from 
the rowers, and sly wink from the improvi- 
satore. 

" Have you never heard," continued O'Brien, 
" of Ossian's chase, and dialogue with Saint 
Patrick ?" 

" Is it Oisin ? Och, I know him well. Sir : 
Oisin — Mac Fionne— Mac Cumhal — Mac Cor- 

mac — Mac , och sure I could repate it all, 

when I was a child, upon my fingers' inds." 

'' What have you got in your basket, friend ?"" 
asked O^Briea. 

Corny drew forth some dirty little books, and 
wetting his thumb, as he turned over one of the 
title-pages, detailed the contents and merits of 
each, with a genius for puffing that might have 
served the purpose of the first-rate London pub- 
lishers. *' Here's the surprising History of the 
Life and Actions of Redmond O'Hanlon, or 



THE oVlahertys. 279t 

Emunh Ecnuch, protector of the rights and 
properties of his benefactors, and Captain 
General of the Irish Tories, a most notorious, 
though a gentlemanlike robber. Here are, 

* The Feats and Actions of Phaidrig Mac Tighe,' 

* The Miracles of St. Patrick,' and ' The last 
Dying Speech of Cahier na Gapul, the re- 
nowned horse-stealer ;' but may be, your honour 
would rather have the history of my books in 
poetry," and clearing his voice, he fell into a 
sort of piperly drone, and ran over his little 
catalogue in a rambling rhyming measure, — a 
faculty by no means rare in the poor scholar, 
or bog poet and pedagogue of Ireland. 

•* Here's larning and wisdom for all ranks and all ages, 
For gassoons and scollcgs, and genteels and sages. 
Here's the seven wise maisters, Bellianis, of Greece, 
Which myself prizes more than great Jason's gold 

fleece. 
Here's holy Saint Bridget, more fair than Briomai tes, 
And pretty Mrs. Flanders, opus naturts non artis ; 
And here's our patron, Saint Patrick, whose glory was 

grate, 
Who left us the whiskej^ and forbid us the mate. 
So long life to his honour; here's the finest of stories, 
'Tis of Redmond O'Hanlon, the chief of all Tories. 

N 3 



274 THE o'bkiens and 

Here's the feast of O'Rourke, and the fight of O'Maras. 
And the battle of Aughrim, and the fall of O'Haras. 
Here's Cahier na gapul, and Manus M'Connell, 
With his merry man Andrew, and Randal O'Donnel, 
With other great tories, Irish rogues, rapparees. 
Once plenty in Ireland, as laves on the trees ; 
And here's miracles worked by ould father Casey. 
Songs, cronans, and ballads, which cannot but plaze 

ye. 

Here's the miners of Wicklow, the Calleen Dhas Dhu ; 
Here's Drimin Duh Deelish, and Bumper Squire Drew ; 
Here's the isles of Lough Corrib, like emeralds so green, 
Forenent Tory Island, in the rear Isle Potsheen. 
Here's sweet Gracy Nugent, and fair Bridget Cruise, 
The Hunt of Kilruddery, and Petticoat loose ; 
The Hair in the corn, and Molly Astore ; 
With planxties and cronans, and ballads guillore. 
And what need I more, or with rigmarole taze yez, 
For, if this doesn't plaze ye, the divil won't plaze yez." 

" One must be indeed difficult," said O'Brien, 
laughing; " but which is Tory Island ?" 

" There it is, your honour, with its fine old 
ruin and weather-beaten trees, bending from the 
sea blast. Och hone .' many a brave gentleman 
made a bould retrait there, in the troubles, and 
will again, plaze God ;" and he turned his disa- 
greeable eyes leeringly on O'Brien, "Och! 
there's hfe in a muscle, dead as he looks; and 



THE o'flahertys. 275 

many a strange story runs the country in regard 
of that island : and is well known that neither 
baste nor bird, though many bes in it, can 
bellow nor warble there, in regard of Abbot 
Giol's prayer. For this being an island of saints, 
and the noise of the birds and bastes and other 
four-footed quadrupeds disturbing the monks at 
their devotions, the Abbot prayed that the gift 
of tongues, voice, or whistle might never flou- 
rish in the island ; and it's pity but part of his 
prayer was put up for the fay males, and then 
it's to Inish Goil the boys would be looking for 
wives.'* 

" Inish Goil !♦' said O'Brien; " is Tory Island 
Inish Goil, of which I have heard so much ?" 

" 'Tis, plaze your honour, in good Irish, 
and Abbot Goil's tomb lies there to this day." 

The lake poet now deviated from the topo- 
graphy, to the biography of the country ; and 
having by his wandering life, les nottvelles a la 
main, he dealt out his eulogies, or vituperations, 
on the neighbouring gentry, according as they 
had administered to his wants or vanities,— as he 
had been feasted in the hall of an O'Connor, 



276 THE o'brIEKS and 

or banished from the kitchen of an O Kelly. 
Corny appeared to be, in fact, in this respect, 
no unfair specimen of the genus irritabile of a 
higher class ; the amour propre of his calling 
apparently determining his inspirations, vindic- 
tiveness was his muse, and a cruishkeen of 
whiskey his butt of sack. 

In listening^ with disgust to his scandalous 
chronicler, O'Brien mentally acknowledged the 
justice of those severe decrees of Elizabeth's 
sanguinary code, which were directed against 
" certen idle men of lewd demeanour, called 
rhymers or poets, from whose intercourse with 
the great, no small enormities did grow. " If 
his poetical patriotism, imbibed with his mother's 
milk, induced him to credit the influence as- 
cribed to the bards of ancient times, as he read 
the poetry of Ossian, or listened to the music of 
Carolan, he could detect nothing in the poet of 
Lough Corrib, that savoured of " the sweet and 
good intention " attributed to the bards of the 
O'Neils and the Fitzgeralds. He saw in him, 
indeed, a coarse, but not inadequate representa- 
tion of " the old Irish tale-teller/' who amused 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. Ti^ 

his patrons, "when they were melancholy and 
could not sleep ; and for a little reward or share 
of a stolen cow,'' praised or vituperated, with 
indiscriminate baseness. He soon, therefore, 
turned away with a feeling of antipathy excited 
by the rhymer's sinister and disagreeable coun- 
tenance, and gave up his undivided attention to 
the wild and splendid scenery of Lough Corrib. 
As he advanced, the lake appeared almost 
rounded by an amphitheatre of hilk, broken 
into every abrupt disunion, which could give 
variety to form, and effect to light. The primi- 
tive mountains, with their high conical peaks, 
formed an aerial back ground to the secondary 
range of hills ; -whose rugged declivities melted 
gradually into rich tones of the lowlands, w hich 
swept along the shore of the waters. He was 
already well acquainted with the aspect of the 
more elevated features of the Connemara moun- 
tains ; and in paddling his corricle among the 
rocks and breakers of their rugged shores, he 
had often taken the mighty Ben Leven for his 
landmark ; and had listened to die tales of the 
Clana Earla, as the fisher :Tien pointed to the 



S78 THE O'BRIEN'S AND 

twelve pins of Benbola, or the fortress rock of 
Granuaile. But he had seen them as distant 
visions, fleeting and airy as the clouds through 
which they gleamed. He was now penetrating 
their mysterious bosoms ; and was about to tread 
their tangled depths, in whose fastnesses his an- 
cestors had pursued the OTlaherties, and had 
been in their turn pursued by them, to their sea- 
girt realms of Arran. He remembered when these 
hills were to him as Alps and Appenines : for 
*' nothing is, but thinking makes it so ;" and 
accurate ideas are the result only of slow, sure, 
but often too painful experience. 

The bright, broad expanse of water, over 
which they had glided, was now gradually nar- 
rowing into a small creek, formed by a moun- 
tain stream ; against whose winding current they 
had some difficulty to contend, till the shallow- 
ness of the water, and the inclosure of the rocks 
prevented further navigation. They landed in 
a shady little cove, at the base of the Glan 
mountain, which formed the mouth of a pre- 
cipitous glen. O'Brien drew from, a purse, which 
still contained the greater part of the mysterious 



THE o'flahkktys. 279 

donation, enough to pay the crew, and more 
tlian realize the dream of Corny the cadger ; and 
the parties separated. 

The boatmen of Lough Corrib and their 
plebeian passengers, were occupied for a few 
minutes in drawing their vessel to its harbour ; 
and then moved onwards to a stream of blue 
smoke, which was curling gracefully in the sun- 
shine. Though no human habitation was visible, 
the smoke, in a place so wild and solitary, was 
a beacon never to be mistaken. It was there 
the " fire burnt and cauldron bubbled," whose 
secret distillation, pure and bright as it dropped, 
contained in its essence, the elements of rapine, 
perjury, and murder, — that bane of the morals 
as of the prosperity of the people ; encouraged 
directly by the government ; and indirectly by 
a religion, which forbids the wholesome nou- 
rishment, the wretched Irish peasant is unable 
to obtain, and permits the use of a poison, the 
source of his crimes, and the cause of much of 
his poverty. 



THE o buil:ns akd 



CHAPTER VIII. 



THK MOUNTAINS. 



Jam undiciue sylvse et £olitudo. 



Plinii Epitt. 



Meantime O'Brien, under the guidance of 
a lad, who was lounging near the creek, as- 
cended through the acclivities of Glan to a 
Shebean house, which, niched in a rock like an 
eaole's nest, exhibited in the turf and broom 
suspended over its door, an intimation that 
entertainment was to be had "for man and 
baste."" The mountain traveller availed himself 
of the notice, fed his pony, and took such 
refreshment as the primitive inn of Connemara 
afforded. Broiled trout from the Lough, with 
oaten bread, " laughing potatoes,'' milk hot from 
the coWj with spirits warm from the still, and 



THE oVlahertys. 281 

" faithful to its fires," and \vater, that looked in 
hue and brilliancy hke dissolved diamonds, fur- 
nished forth no contemptible feast. To this 
excellent fare, was added much information 
concerning the journey the traveller was about 
to take. From one of the shelving acclivities of 
the Glan, which rose high and sharp behind the 
house, the host pointed out to him, with as 
much importance, as if he had shewn the 
stranger " all the kingdoms of the earth," those 
unerring finger posts of Nature's own elevation, 
the headlands, and mountain peaks. The view 
was sublime ; it spread before the eye, far as hu- 
man vision could reach, marked and vivid, as on 
a richly coloured map. The mountains of Con- 
nemara were then savage and wild, as the absence 
of all cultivation could make them ; unexplored 
and almost unknown, save to their own inhabi- 
tants, and to the smuggling carriers who traversed 
their lower range, from the coast to the inland 
countries. Vast tracts had been made over to 
new proprietors in the beginning of the century, 
who had as yet made but few efforts to examine 
or reclaim them ; and they were inhabited only 



282 THE o'briens and 

by scullogs or petty farmers, whose best crops 
were derived from their intercourse with the 
smugglers of the coast; or by herds and cottiers, 
hovelled in ravines, which gave a scanty herbage 
in winter to the lean flocks, that in summer 
were fed upon the dried-up loughs. The castles 
of residence or defence, raised in their sheltered 
valleys, or on the summits of the sea-beat head- 
lands, by the factious Burkes, by the fierce 
OTlaherties, and invading O'Briens of Arran, 
now lay in ruins ; or if at all inhabited, it was 
only by the meadhain, or middlemen of some 
remote proprietor or distant absentee, uncon- 
scious of the resources of the soil he thus 
carelessly abandoned to his mercenary and ig- 
norant representatives. The comparative civi- 
lization derived from the presence of chiefs, even 
so wild and warlike as those, who in earlier 
times claimed the mountains as their territories, 
had long yielded to the abandonment and neg- 
lect, which from the epoch of the revolution, 
had fallen upon the most romantic districts, of 
the once most important and most interesting 
provinces in Ireland. All therefore was the 



THE o'flahertys. 283 

stillness and solitude of the desart, but not its 
dreariness ; for there was a bold breaking up of 
surface, an alternation of high shooting cliffs, and 
deep seated dells; of streams that issued in silver 
threads from their elevated sources, and con- 
gregated into foaming torrents as they fell into 
their channeled beds ; of vast stools of old forest 
trees sending forth their scathed scraggy arms 
through the young green underwoods, that 
sprung from their roots ; and of tracts of dreary 
moors and morasses, enlivened by those innume- 
rable little lakes, so peculiar to Irish moun- 
tains, gleaming in the sunshine or curling in the 
blast ; while troops of red deer looked down 
from the surrounding heights ; and flocks of 
birds, startled from their aeries, ascended into 
the clouds ! 

Such were the natural accidents which gave 
life and movement to a scene, destitute of all 
human industry. While the mountain regions, 
viewed from the elevated spot where O'Brien 
stood, seemed to swell and fade into distant ac- 
clivities, forming endless chains towards the 
north and west, the lowland plains, and narrow 



284 THE O'BRIENS AND 

strip of rocky coast, to which this rude region 
formed so bold a back-ground, were spread be- 
neath to the south . Misty and soft as they lay in 
the sunny mid-day lights, it was difficult to des- 
cry those land marks which were pointed out and 
named by the experienced host ; but the more 
remote headlands of Achille and Bencooler stood 
out, distinct and lofty above all, the watch-towers 
of the mightiest ocean of the universe, the land 
ramparts of the old world, and yet the nearest 
spot of earth to the new. 

" And now," said the host, pointing out the 
bird-s-eye-view of O'Brien's journey, " you 
must cross the mountains, by the mam or glen 
between Glan mountain and the mountains of 
Lough Ambro ; and then coming down on the 
Lakes of Ardcrow and Hindella, v/here you will 
go down the rapids with Emunh-na-Lung^* the 
ferryman ; and still keeping the Lcam mountain 
to the left or east, and the twelve pins to the 
west, you must go straight forward, down the 
bridle track, by the bed of the Sueeb river, 
and you will arrive at once upon lar Con- 

* *' Emnnh na Litng^" Ned of the oar. 



THE O'lLAIIERTYS. ^85 

naught ; and afore night you will find yourself 
with Lough Glenmurrough to the left, the Bay 
of Rosemuck to the right, and the town of St. 
Grellan, down convanient forenent you." 

O'Brien took down the wild names of this 
verbal itinerary in his tablets ; and assured by 
his cicerone that he would never want a clean 
shakedown and a '' caed mille faltha^'" while 
there was a thatched roof in Connemara, he 
mounted his pony, and began to take his soli- 
tary way. 

He gazed on all around with enthu- 
siastic emotion. National vanity and early 
associations influenced his picturesque percep- 
tions, which in themselves were strong and 
clear. Excited by the scene, by the rapid 
circulation of his blb'od, and by the rarified air 
he breathed, full of those spirits which engender 
liope and kindle fancy, his temperament re- 
sponded to his position; and impressions were 
received, and ideas combined, such as he had 
never before experienced. But while new and 
astounding views of nature, gave new and im- 
posing images to a mind the most creative and 



\ 



286 THE o'briexs and 

imaginative, still they excited sensations rather 
than sentiments. Confused, exalted, almost 
inebriated, he felt equal to any enterprize, and 
capable of any sacrifice, which had for its object 
that country, so strongly illustrated by the 
beautiful (but desolate and neglected,) scenery 
around him. With his mind, like his steps, 
wandering, from point to point, and from thought 
to thought, he wondered that in regions so 
sublime, the Irish heart ever quailed, the Irish 
spirit ever drooped ; and that men, who were 
masters of such natural ramparts, had not rather 
died in their defiles, than have submitted to the 
oppressor, " But, alas !" he added in soliloquy, 
'' minds, not mountains, are the true ramparts 
of liberty.'' 

Thus pre-occupied,he passed unwittingly from 
one steep to another (his mountain pony almost 
directing his march), like one who dreams and 
walks, where waking consciousness would shud- 
der to tread ; till reaching an elevated cliff, 
which, by stopping the pony, awakened him 
to self-possession, he smiled at the recklessness 
of his own enthusiasm. The defile unmarked 



THE o'flahertys. 287 

by any track, appeared to lead only to a pre- 
cipitous fall of rocks; and the sure-footed animal 
with instinctive caution, stood still. 

O'Brien, in utter forgetful ness of the instruc- 
tions of his host, and perplexed as he was, was 
yet free from the slightest suspicion of personal 
danger. He knew that in Ireland, the more 
remote the track of civilization, the safer is the 
way. There, crime, arising out of political 
misrule, is only directed against political oppres- 
sion : and though at that period, numerous 
bands of peasantry had in the south armed 
themselves, and were in open rebellion against 
the greatest of all Irish grievances, the tithes, 
yet in Connaught, where the wretched natives, 
in the early part of the century, had been 
" brayed as in a mortar," all was the peace of 
spiritless resignation, — the calm which broods 
upon the ruin of the tempest that has passed. 

O'Brien, thus puzzled as to the course he 
should pursue, sat patting the back of his pony, 
when he thought he heard a rustling in the mimic 
forest of brushwood, quickbeam, and witch- 
hazle, which richly covered the sides of the 



288 THE o'briens and 

rocks, to the left of the defile, from the summit 
to the base. Throwing up his eyes, he fancied 
he saw a figure moving through the masses of 
brambles and verdure ; but at that moment his 
attention was drawn off. An horseman sud- 
denly bounded across his narrow pathway, en- 
deavouring to rein in his steed, and " humbly 
axing pardon of the gentleman for startling his 
animal." It was Corny the cadger; he ap- 
peared to have issued, with a sort of pantomimic 
effect, from a fissure in a high, blacl^, dripping 
vock, which rose perpendicularly to the left of 
the pass ; but the furze and underwood he had 
cleared away, by springing his horse boldly 
through them, had concealed the mouth of the 
defile, which appeared to open in a bridle way, 
or short cut from the shore of the lake below. 
He was mounted on a stout garron, between two 
paniers ; and accounted for his appearance, by 
saying, that he had been dispatched in great 
haste by a dealer in fish below, on the lake, across 
the mountains to Killery Bay, where a great 
glut of turbothad been caught. His employer, 
he said, served the religious gentlemen of Cong 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 289 

and Tuam ; and the two next days were black 
fasts. He then offered his services to the travel- 
ler as far as their way lay in the same direction, 
with a simple earnestness, that almost obliterated 
the disagreeable impression made by his sinister 
countenance. He remarked, that instead of 
proceeding forward, "his honour must turn 
back a taste and take the little luib^ to the left, 
which would bring him to a bridle track to the 
head of Lough Ardcrow/"* 

OBrien gladly availed himself of this inform- 
ation, though somewhat startled by the cadger's 
appearance ; and Corny continued, 

" Och, sorrow step of ground from the foot 
of Mam Turk to the top of Ben Leven, but I 
know better nor my pater or credo. Jasus 
pardon me " (crossing himself devoutly), " and 
dioul would be in me, if I did not; for many a 
sore step I have made in 'em, as scholar, cadger, 
and cosherer.'' 

"Are you a Connemara man ? " asked O'Brien, 
with a scrutinizing look ; for, though glad to be 
guided, he still did not like his guide. 

* A glen. 
VOL. III. O 



290 THE o'briens and 

" I am not, plaze your honour, but am all as 
one; having served 'Squire Joyce, of Joyce's 
country, for two years and more, and carried 
the post, and had my bit, and my sup, and my 
rag, in regard of a trifle of a good turn I did 
the 'Squire, when he was high sheriff"." 

"AVhat was that?" demanded Murrogh, 
carelessly. 

"Why, I was walking the world, in them 
times, as a poor scholar, with my satchel and 
copies, (for larning was then in fashion, not all 
as one as since them schools were set up) ; and 
hearing that the Galway bailiff's were on the 
hunt for the high sheriff", in respect of a trifle of 
debt to a Galway marchant for limins and sugar, 
(all the daling, troth, ever he had with any of 
them; his estate finding every thing, barring 
the claret, which comes from his cou sin-germ ain 
in Bordeaux), what does myself do, but helps 
them to a boat to cross the lake in, taking care 
to let out the bottom, when they were little more 
than half way ; and being then a light bit of a 
gassoon, and swimming like a barnacle, it was 
not long till I got safe to 'Squire Joyce's, in good 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 291 

time to put the high sheriff on his diffince ; and 
when all the constables in the country came 
down upon him in a posse, myself carried his 
honour over to the Hy Tartagh or O'Flaherty's 
Mountains, and lodged him safe in the ould 
ruins of the Abbey, till the hue and cry was over ; 
and then brought him back in great state to his 
own place, and had the run of the house ever 
after ; and might to this day, only for a little 
trouble I fell into (and was a wronged man, and 
an innocent, if ever there was one,) in respect to 
a taste of smuggling."* Here Corny sighed cut an 
" Och hone !" " So, after that, when I came back 
from foreign parts, I took to cadgering, and 
crosses these mountains with a bit of fish, or a 
kish of kelp, or whatever is going, ten times a 
year, and more ; and sells a print of a priest, or a 
story-book or ballad to the fishermen; — any 
thing to get honest bread. But minds ever to 
keep the bridle ways and high roads, and goes 
straight from Balinrobe to Cong, and from Cong 
across the Lough, down upon fet. Grellan town, 
or the Killeries ; in respect of my accident, Jasus 
be good to us. Amen." 
o 2 



29% THE o'bJIIENS AKD 

" And what was your accident ?" asked 
O'Brien, more in courtesy than in curiosity. 

'•' Och I plaze your honour, I don't like to be 
discoursing about it. This a-way, if you plaze, 
Sir, dear, to the left. But its what I was never 
rightly myself after that, any how, though it's 
now fourteen years agone ; and it's far I have 
been, and much J have seen since then ; and the 
like of that, at home or abroad, never came 
across me afore or since." 

" And pray what was it, friend T' asked 
O' Brien, whose curiosity now was worked upon 
by this " swelling prologue of a mighty theme," 
which the cadger was evidently more anxious to 
relate, than he was to hoar. 

" What was it. Sir, dear ? Och, then to 
your left again, if you plaze. This Mam has 
the divil's own twists in it ; but once we track 
the neck of the mountain above, we'll see the 
whole bog and Turlogh of Ardcrow, like a 
sheet of paper before us. What was it, your 
honour .? Och, then it's a long story, and to 
this day sorrow night's lodging need I want, 
nor bit nor sup neither, as long as Td be willing 



THE o'flahehtys. 293 

to tell the cottiers, ayetroib, and the best scol- 
logs in Connemara, and was called into Miss 
Joyce's parlour to tell that same. And ould Mr. 
Martin, of Dangan, God bless him, when I'd 
bring a kish of fish to the gates, it's what he'd 
have me into Madam Martin's iligant room, 
and, Corney, he'd say, it's a long time since we'd 
have your story of the Abbey of Moycullen 
and the ghost of Abbess Beavoin O' Flaherty." 

At the mention of these names, O'Brien listened 
with an awakened interest, and increased curi- 
osity; and Corney went on in his rambling 
manner. 

" And so, then, I'd scrape my best bow, and 
stand with my caubeen in my hand, forenent 
the buffet, and every servant in the house with 
his head in at the door, and the quality sated 
on the setee ; I'd clear my voice, and — you may 
throw your reins on the haste's neck, your 
honour, and let her take her own way up the 
hill, for she'll never decaive you — I'd clear my 
voice, and just humouring it awhile, till I'd get 
into a proper tune, I'd begin this way. In the 
name of God, and the blessed Virgin, and the 



294 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

whole court of heaven, amen. It came to pass 
on the eve of the pattern of the feast of Saint 
Grellan, glory be to his honour, that I, Cornelius 
O'Clummaghan, scholar, cadger, and cosherer, 
commonly called the poet of Loch Corrib, 
having loaded my garron and kishes down 
below, among the caves of Killery Bay, and 
being bound to Balinrobe on a trifle of bu- 
siness for a frind, as often I was, and will 
again, plaze God, began my journey through 
the mountains of Connemara, fresh and fasting, 
with the wind full in ray teeth, and a say fog 
full in my back, my bit of a dudeen* stuck in the 
cord of my caubeen,t with a slip of sally in one 
hand, and my padreens in the other. Now 
every one knows, that the short cut from Kil- 
lery harbour to Balinrobe, is by the pass of 
Barnaderig, and through Joyce's country to the 
ferry of Cuffeen, at Loch Mask, which brings 
you down to Balinrobe town, in no time ; but 
having a raison of my own, for not going 
th'ould bridle track, which is well known to 
man and baste, I took my way by the skirts of 

* Short pipe. f Hat. 



THE o'flahertys. '295 

Lough Feo, striking into the heart's core of the 
Kylemore hills, and keeping my eye on the 
twelve pins of Benbola, by way of a mile-post, 
never losing sight of the track of Benknock, 
until I cleared the hills of Shannonayola, and 
found myself late and lone, in the great pass of 
Mamclogheleer, as myself thought ; for now yez 
will mind, I lost sight of the twelve pins, and 
took the sun as my guide, it going due-west, 
and I going due-east ; and thought I couldn't 
miss my way, barring the night came on, nor 
then itself, in regard of the stars, and so walk- 
ing on aisy and quiet beside the garron, she being 
heavily laden, and I beguiling the way as I 
could, betimes lighting my pipe ,from a smo- 
thered sod, that I stuck in one of the kishes, 
betimes taking a thimbleful out of my cruish- 
keen, which was belted with a suggan at my 
side — betimes dropping a bead, and saying an 
ave or decade, — and betimes lilting up an ould 
planxty, or repating a taste of Don Belianis, 
or the seven wise maisters, or any skreed of 
laming, that turned up in my mind, when what 
should I hear, as I thought, but voices talking 



^9S THE OBRIENS AND 

English among the rocks, on the top of me, 
which was remarkable; little English being then 
talked in Connemara, any how ; but couldn't 
see a christian, barring a great goss hawk, that 
came screaming down the cliffs, and then cut- 
ting along the rasach^* was soon out of sight. A 
bad sign it was ! and it wasn't for nothing the 
bird quit her nest ; and the next minute, what 
should I hear. Sir, honey, but the shot of a 
musket, and then another, and then a shout 
faint and far, like the howl of a hound at mid- 
night, and then a great rustling and floustering 
among the atharwood-f above, and then a floun* 
dering and a flapping down the cliffs, from 
rock to raith,^ and then comes tumbhng the 
carcase of a man, just like a wounded curlew, 
till all battered and bloody, he lies staked on the 
point of a crag, as close to myself, as yez are 
now, gintleman dear, at this present moment. 
Diabhal ! I thought the sowl would have left 
the body of me ; the more so, as the head of the 

• A wild place. 

f ** Atharwood,*' an old Irish term for hawthorn, quicks 
beam, birch, witch-hazle ; such as usually grow in moun- 
tains, ravines, and wild places. 

\ Brake. 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. 2!97 

corpse being turned to me, and the eyes of it 
staring out of the socket, in my face, what 
should I see, but th'ugly countenance of a great 
crony and cosherer of my own, one Darby Lynch 
of the Cladagh, who had been hunted in the 
mountains two days before, by them boddaghs of 
Revenues, who had been sent down to bring ruin 
upon the place, all in respect of a taste of tay, 
and a trifle of tobacco, that Darby, poor boy, 
forgot to inter in the port, and to save trouble, 
had landed them down among the rocks in the 
caves of Killery Bay. Och troth, then I saw 
it was time for myself to be on the scuirlang ,* 
and without waiting, to raise the 'keenthecaun\- 
over the dead man, I cuts the cables of my 
kishes, and jumping the garron, dashes down a 
bit of rasagh or shrubbery glen, and on I went 
over stone and stream, thinking of nothing at 

* On the move. 

t A corruption from the word caoinan, or Irish dirge, 
still howled at funerals in most parts of Ireland Although 
the re is no k in the Irish language, the professional Caoinans 
are called Keeners. Each province had formerly its own 
ullaluo, called the Munster cry, or Ulster cry, &c. &c. 
kc. and may still have. 

o 3 



^98 THE O'eRIEXS and 

all, but how to get rid of th^m boddaglis of 
Revenues, who brought me into trouble afore -j. 
and seeing at last that I had missed my mark, 
and was on th'ould channel of a torrent, that 
had taken it into its head to go another way, 
just for variety, (which often it does,) I turn? 
the garron up the first bit of a luih that I met, 
and short and sweet it was, like the road to sin ; 
for all of a sudden it opened into a sort of a 
bainseoch of a place, without track or trace, 
mark or mearn, but overgrown with loso wood* 
so that the garron couldn't make a step, without 
tearing through bosheens of fern and furze, ivy 
and thorn bush, the soul ! and looking up at the 
sun, it was then myself first seed that we were 
taking the same road, cheek by jowl, and that 
instead of getting on, it was backward I was 
going, as the divil tells his padrheens, God 
bless us ! but what had I for it ? sorrow thing ! 
so I takes the first turn, which led to a ghn or 
pass properly so called, and the way was broad 
below, the rocks were meeting and hugging 
above the head of me, like gossips at a fair, so 

♦ Creeping plants. 



THE o'flahertys. 299 

that what Hght was in it, came in at the far ind, 
at which myself wint out, as soon as I con- 
vaincntly could ; and if I did, where should I 
find myself, but in a four ways place, at the top 
of Glan Murrogh, and within sight of th'ould 
haunted ruins of the Abbey of Moycullen ; and 
then troth you would not give an Englishman's 
button, or what's less, an Irishman's skewer, for 
my life ; for now mind me well. Sir, dear, what 
should I see, standing bolt upright against a 
rock afore me, lone and lofty, grand and grey, 
but a fine ancient ould stone crass, and the crass 
in a circle ; and down the main trunk, the figure 
of a nun with her hands on her breast, cut out 
of the hard stone ; and above her head, cut in 
the same, these words in the finest of Latin, 
(yez understand Latin, Sir, dear,) " Orate pro 
me, Beavoin O Flaherty^'' and a little green 
rath, as green as ever grew on fairy ground, 
rising near; and a torrent which in regard of the 
rath, is called Pool na Fouika,* dashing down 
from a tall comely chfF behind all ; and it was 
then to my moan, I well guessed the place, it 

* The fairy's waterfall. 



300 TH^ O'BRIENS AND 

was my sore luck to stand in !" Here Corny 
paused, and taking off his hat, wiped his moist 
forehead with the sleeve of his coat. 

"And what place was it?" asked O'Brien 
anxiously. 

" Why what place could it be ? Wasn't there 
the four ways ! and the Abbess Beavoin's crass, 
and the Pool na Fouika, and the rath ; and put 
that and that together, and what place could it 
be, but Croisneer ny Croise^ that often I heard 
tell of, and never wished to see" 

"Well?" ejaculated Murrogh interrogatively. 

" Well, no, but ill, your honour, and the worst 
of luck that ever befel me, for if there is a hairi- 
seochf on the face of the creation, its that same, 
Go Dein Deudh — That it was in the stocks of 
Creag Grellan, I was standing that minute, or 
up to my neck in Lough Feo, in place of where 
I was. So putting myself under the purtection 
of God, and the whole court of Heaven, for 
what else had I for it, I dropt on my knees 
before the crass, to pray for the sowl of Beavoin 
O' Flaherty, as it was my duty and dewotion 

* The barrier of the cross. f -A. desert place. 



THE O'FLAHEllTYS. 301 

to do, taking a drop of the cruiskeeu just to 
raise the heart of me, which was sick and 
faint ; but what would you have of it, sorrow 
prayer, I could pray no more than if I was a 
Turk, or a heathen, or heretick — I that served 
mass, and could do it again with any boy within 
the verge of Mitre land. Och hone ! it was then 
I gave myself up for a lost man, a desolate 
christian, a raal Baintreahhah ,•* and flopping 
down upon my two bare knees, and thinking of 
nothing at that present time, better to do, I 
begins to thump my breast, as if I was saying 
my ' culpa mea,' and fixed my eyes on the crass, 
and rehearsed aloud '• Orate pro me Evelyn 
O'Flaherty,' M'hicli was all I could do, for the 
sowl of me ; and if I did, what should make 
response close at my ear, crying ' Amen," but a 
voice, if voice I may call it, that was like the 
moan of the Banshee in a stormy night, faint 
and fearful. And I, starting on the feet of me, 
not maniiig to do that neither, only couldnt 
help myself ; and saw as plain as this twig in my 
fist, standing in the woody pass forenent me, 

♦ An excommunicated person. 



302 



THE O BETENS ANB 



the figure of a faymale nun, the very moral of 
the stone image on the crass. Och ! then I 
pledge you my conscience, its little I saw or 
heard after that, any way ; for the sight lift my 
eyes intirely, and there came a roaring in my 
head you might have heard from this to Mam 
Turk ; and what happened then, or what was 
gone with me, body and sowl, or where I was, 
or what I was, its what I never could tell, to this 
blessed minute ; but believes its many a mile I 
travelled between that and day. And when J 
opened my eyes, one fine morning, I found 
myself lying as flat as a bannock on the bare 
soil, at the foot of the rock, with the sun shin- 
ing over me, and a tall, swarthy woman stand- 
ing beside me, in her smock and mantle ; her 
long grey coolun hanging down, after the fashion 
of the isles of Arran, and a leather girdle round 
her middle, and looking, as I thought, very like 
a seal.* This was more of the yarn ; for I knew 

* There is a popular superstition along the coast of 
Connenaara, that the islands of Clare and Arran were at 
one period peopled by a race half seal, half human, or as 
they called them, mermen. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 303 

her any how to be neither worse nor better than 
a Binied. 

" ' What call have ye here, ye Arabhallagh?'' 
says she ; which, in hard Irish, manes, ' ye divirs 
bit.' 

*' ' Sorrow call, at all at all, Maram,' says I, 
' and it wasn't with my own good will I came 
in it.' 

" ' Up, and away then, you gramog,"* says 
she, ' and the divil your master be your speed, 
for this is holy ground, not made for his imps 
to sport in.' 

" Sport, thinks I to myself; but I said 
nothing, only scrambled upon my feet, and 
nmde her a genteel bow. 

" ' There,' says the Binied, pointing to the 
garron, that was taking her morning male of a 
whisp of grass, * there's the garron; use her, 
while you have her, which won't be long ; for 
Feadhree's curse is upon him and his rider !' 

*' And so, troth, I wanted no more bidding, 
but mounting my garron, turned her head to 
the spine of the mountain ; but the Binied mak- 



304 THE O'BRIENS AND 

ing a snatch at the suggan that bridled him, 
twists him round another way. 

" ' That's your road/ says she, ' for it leads 
to the gallows of St. Grellan, to which you are 
bound, and that's my prophecy,' says she, • and 
mind the words of the Banfhaoh;' and then 
giving the garron a skelp of a long cipin she 
held in her fist, off it went, as if the divil wag 
her speedy sure enough, over stick and stone, 
hill and turlogh, till she landed me safe at the 
foot of gibbet hill. 

" And now, young gintleman, jewel, yez will 
little marvel, if the people would rather be 
afther taking a round of fifty cantreds of bog 
land, than make a short cut by the pass of 
Croisneerny Croise, for it's a marked place; and 
luck or grace never fell on him yet, that left the 
track of his foot in it ; as I know to my great 
moan and grief, in regard of my kishes, which 
was the ruination of me intirely, God help me ! 
to say nothing of my lovely fine garron, which 
died of the crupple, two days after I got back, 
as the Binied foretold !" 



THE o'flahertys. 305 

" But how had you roused the wrath of the 
Binied r" asked his auditor, insensibly interested 
in a detail so improbable, yet so much in keep- 
ing with the superstitious reminiscences of his 
early childhood. 

" Och ! then, an ould grudge to me and mine. 
For, do you see, my father had a hand in bring- 
ing Mor-ny-Brien's husband (for that was her 
name) to the gallows, a great rapparee and a 
wood hunter.'' 

'^ Mor-ny-Brien !" repeated her foster-son, 
endeavouring to suppress his emotion, as he ob- 
served the eye of Corny glancing at him under 
its penthouse lid. *' Was she the person you 
met in the mountains of the Hy Tartagh P" 

"Ay, in troth. Sir; a great follower of the 
O'Briens of Arran, and mother of that imp of 
the divil and fairy-begotten garlagh, Shanena 
Brien, who was hanged for murdering a pace 
officer at Michael's Cross, twelve years ago." 

At that moment a loud shrill blast from a rude 
mountain horn, repeated in endless echoes, 
came so close on the ears of the narrator, that it 
seemed to issue from the rocks, near which they 



306 THE o'briens and 

were riding. O'Brien's pony stood still as if spell- 
bound, but the cadger's horse became so unruly, 
that he was unable to rein it. He was, indeed, as 
much incapacitated for the effort, by the sudden 
diange which came over himself, as by the fear 
of the animal he rode. His hands trembled, 
a ghastly paleness overspread his countenance ; 
his eyes, strained from their sockets, were fixed 
upon some object on the rocks above, which 
fastened them with a basilisk's gaze ; and his 
quivering lips vainly endeavoured to mutter 
some incoherent prayer, when a second blast re- 
leased his horse from all restraint. Dashing 
forward with ungovernable violence, the animal 
soon carried him through the windings of the 
ravine, till he was lost to O'Brien's view. The 
mountain pony, on the contrary, remained 
quietly on the spot, as if the fearful blast which 
scared away " the horse and his rider," was re- 
cognized as a familiar sound. She neighed and 
pricked up her ears, and pawed the earth, as in 
reply to a signal not unknown to her. Mean- 
time O'Brien's eyes were intently fixed upon the 
spot, where the apparition stood, which had 



THE O'FLAIIERTYS. 307 

frightened the astounded cadger, and in which 
O'Brien distinctly recognized the figure of Shane 
na Brien. His gigantic form cutting darkly 
against the yellow sky, he stood leaning on his 
galb or staff, and looked like the very genius of 
the wild and solitary place, with the picturesque 
savagery of which, his form so well assorted. 

But while O'Brien gazed and hailed him, 
Shane drew back into the thicket, and the cry 
of '^faere ghimi faere ghimV notified that 
caution was neccessary and protection at hand. 
The wild and warlike cry was followed by the 
low and modulated tones of the Irish bugle or 
cornet, which softened down to a plaintive me- 
lancholy, as they descended the mountain. To 
his amazement O'Brien perceived that his intel- 
ligent pony followed the music till it ceased ; 
when he found himself at the foot of the moun- 
tain, and within view of the smoke of a human 
habitation. 

He was now convinced that Shane was 
accompanying him on his journey ; and that 
he was the unaccommodated individual who 
had lain mantled in the bottom of the boat. 



308 THE o'BUIENS and 

In the horn, whose tones were so skilfully mo- 
dulated, he recognized an instrument on which 
Shane had taught him to perform in his child- 
hood. It was the cornet, or as it is called in 
Irish, the "musical stick;"* and the soft, wild 
music which was produced from it, was an air 
still known to the peasantry of Connaught, by 
the name of the "gathering of the kine," whose 
rich, flowing, and somewhat melancholy melody, 
chaunted at eve by some female voice from a dis- 
tant style, draws the obedient cattle home by the 
spell of its magic sounds. The docile instincts 
of the acute little animal, whose properties were 
so well adapted to the region in which it was bred^ 
struck him with admiration ; and justified all he 
had heard of the once celebrated race of Conne- 
mara " hoblers." While caressing the pony 
with his hand and voice, as it stood to take breath 
after its arduous descent, he smiled as the notion 
crossed him, that the animal was a true Jesuit, 
and worthy, by its docility and intelligence, of 
the manege from which he had taken it. 

* The comae, or musical stick, is the horn of souie 
animal, with a brass mouth-piece ; and is still used. 



THE o'fLaHEHTYS. SOD 

While permitting his horse to drink from a 
spring which gushed from a rock, the lowest of 
the mass, O'Brien was struck with the wildness 
of the scene around him. It was a turlogh^ or 
dried up moss, encompassed by the steep hills 
that lie at the base of the Shannonfala mountains, 
and stretched between them to the very verge of 
the Loughs Hindillaand Ardcrow. Between these 
masses of water darted down one of those rapids, 
described by the host of the Shebean; but 
O'Brien looked in vain for Emunh na Lung, 
the ferryman ; and found no mode of crossing, 
save in a corricle laid up under a witch-hazle 
that dipped into the water. 

While standing in some perplexity, his ear 
w^as suddenly struck by a deep, low, and sobbing 
moan, that seemed to issue from a ravine that 
lay to the left of the rocks, through which he 
had descended ; and on approaxjhing the spot, he 
perceived an infant laid out upon a plank, just 
within the fracture of the mountains, leading to 
a little dell, which some wretched beings had 
apparently chosen for their last asylum, wherein 
to starve and die. Some loose stones and sods, 



310 THE ©""bRIEXS and 

heaped rudely together, against the side of a 
rough, but sheltering rock, intimated a human 
dweUing ; and a little stream of turbid smoke 
issuing from an aperture in the green roof, spoke 
it to be then actually inhabited. The appalling 
image awed, but by no means checked, the warm, 
prompt, and sympathising feelings of the solitary 
spectator. He dropt a piece of silver into tlie 
broken trencher, which was placed at the feet of 
the infant corpse, for the purpose of receiving 
the contribution of the wanderer, who might 
pass by a place so lonely and isolated. Fami- 
liar as O'Brien had been with such objects in his 
early youth, and well acquainted with the bar- 
barous Irish custom of exposing the dead, for 
the purpose of obtaining means of interment ; 
still influenced perhaps by feelings predisposed 
to sadness, he shuddered at the spectacle, and 
was again backing his pony into the main 
path, when it struck him that this might be 
the hut of Emunh na Lung. At this moment 
the thick fall of many feet arrested his attention ; 
a groupe of squalid, naked children, crowded to 
the door of the hut, followed by a tall, gaunt. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 311 

spectral figure, who paused upon its threshold, 
and looked the very genius of famine. It was 
evident, that this Irish Ugolino was the wretched 
father of these wretched children; one of whom, 
with its shoulders drawn up to its ears, its bristled 
hair standing an end, with all the traces of 
neglect and want marked on its pinched 
features and squalid looks, came slyly, and 
yet joyfully forward, to snatch the silver 
shilling, which glittered in the trencher: and 
then holding it up to the man, screamed " tighim^ 
tighim,'' (see, see). The father snatched the 
money, looked earnestly at it, then glancing his 
dark and sunken eye at the young and charitable 
stranger, he nodded his thanks, sullenly and 
dejectedly, but without making any further 
appeal to the benevolence he had awakened. 
O'Brien was deeply affected ; he feared to ad- 
vance — yet his feelings would not suffer him 
to retreat, without some effort to inquire into, 
and relieve such misery. 

" Is there a fever in your house .?" he de- 
manded doubtingly, while occupied in untying 
the knotted strings of his purse. 



312 THE o'bUIEKS and 

" No faver," replied the man, doggedly. 

"What did that child die of?*' asked O'Brien, 
pointing to the livid little corpse, which looked 
the victim of typhus. 

"' Hunger," said the man, sternly. 

O'Brien shuddered. " And that moan ?'"' he 
asked, with some diinculty of articulation. 

" 'Tis the woman !" 

" The woman ! your wife .^" Another sullen 
nod of the head was the distinct answer. The 
highest order of despair is but little demonstra- 
tive. 

" What is the matter w ith her ?" The man 
hesitated a reply, either from want of English 
or of power to express himself; at last he said — 

" Have you Irish .'"' 

" Enough to understand you," replied O'Brien, 
in the same language. The man pushed back 
the crouching children, with the humour and 
petulance of famished misery, and stepping up 
to O'Brien, told his story in the fewest possible 
words, and in that language, whose concise 
idiom gives emphasis to whatever it conveys. 
He had been a petty farmer down in the low- 



THE o'flahertys. 313 

lands : die old causes had produced the old 
effects : he was reduced to become a cottier, a 
turf cutter : marshy bogs and scanty mainte- 
nance had brought down disease upon himself 
and his family. He became a pauper, without 
strength, and with too large a family to *' walk 
the world," (the Irish pauper's usual resource). 
He raised, therefore, an hut, and constructed 
a buirling on the edge of Lough Ardcrow ; but 
the service of the ferry was inadequate to sup- 
port his family, which was starving around him. 
His wife had lately lain in, the infant had died 
for want of its natural nourishment, and the 
mother was fast following it to its untimely 
grave: *nhat was all," he said, taking up the 
oar of his little boat to prepare for his office. 

" All !" said O'Brien, dismounting and ar- 
ticulating with great difficulty. One of the 
children took his bridle, and he entered the 
cabin, scarcely conscious that he did so : for 
his heart was full, and his recollection not very 
perfect. The house was, as might be expected, 
destitute of all human accommodation. A bundle 

VOL. ITT. P 



314 THE o'briens and 

of furze smoked under an aperture in one 
corner; a dying woman, squalid and meagre, 
lay extended on a bed of heather in another, 
covered only by a torn blanket. The livid 
tints of dissolution already discoloured her face : 
she was evidently running down fast, and each 
moan was less audible than the last. A diffi- 
culty of breathing, a something that rose hys- 
terically to the throat, and prevented utterance, 
for a moment kept O'Brien silent. At last he 
said, addressing the man, who stood with his 
hands folded, his lips compressed, as one made 
up to suffering, 

'' Have you nothing to give her ?"'' 

" Nothing !" was the emphatic reply, uttered 
in a tone of reckless, but almost placid despon- 
dency. 

*' Gracious God ! what is to be done ? A little 
nourishment might yet save her. Is there no 
cabin, no farm house within reach, where we 
could purchase her a little milk, till something 
better is procured .?" 

" There is,'** was the cool reply. 



THE o'flahertys. 315 

'' Where ?" said Murrogh, eagerly, and 
hastening to mount his horse. " Direct me 
where to find it, and I will go myself." 

*' Will you ?"* said the man, falteringly, and 
following him to the threshold, ** will you ?'' As 
he spoke, his rigid muscles relaxing from their 
stern compression, every strong line and linea- 
ment of his haggard face yielding to the 
sudden impulse of long uncalled-on feelings, he 
'•wept Irish.*" That deep, convulsive sob, which 
the high wrought sensibility of the most sen- 
sibly organized people in the world, sends out 
from their labouring breast, now burst tumul- 
tuously from the quivering lips of one, in whose 
chilled, but still all human heart, neither want, 
contumely, nor despair, had been able to dry 
those fine sources of emotion, so falsely attri- 
buted to the civilized and the refined alone. 

In a moment O'Brien was mounted. The 
eldest of the children was placed before him as 
his guide ; the little animal they rode, picking 
his steps along the ridge of a gullet, perilous to 
tread and fearful to look at. In ten minutes it 
brought them into the slovenly bawn of a 
p 2 



316 THE O'BRIENS AND 

mountain scuUog's cabin, which lay sheltered 
in a little shp of valley, near Lough Hin- 
dilla, surrounded by all those symptoms of 
thriftless and negligent prosperity, M'hich dis- 
tinguishes the farming smuggler of Connemara. 
The baying of a cur dog brought an old 
woman from the cabin. O'Brien told his story in 
three words ; he wanted milk for a poor herd's 
wife in the mountains, who was dying for want 
of nourishment ; and he held up a half-crown- 
piece as a running commentary on his brief text. 
The woman readily filled a bottle with milk, warm 
from the cow, and added to it a small wheaten 
cake. While taking ample payment for all, she 
was beginning a string of gossiping questions in 
Irish- English, prologued by the remark of how 
impossible it was to feed the poor cottiers of the 
mountains for ever,— when O'Brien cut her 
short, by giving the spur to his pony ; and with 
a haste incredible, retracing the perilous path 
he came, he returned to the objects of his com- 
miseration. The eagerness with which the poor 
woman bit the vessel that conveyed the nutri- 
tion, for which she was perishing, was more than 



THE o'flahertys. 317 

a recompense for the service his charity had 
bestowed ; while his feelings were still further 
taxed by the prostration of the unfortunate 
father at his feet. 

In a few minutes, he was with his pony in 
the boat, and Emunh na Lung, standing erect, 
and governing with one oar the progress of the 
vessel, he made a rapid descent into the adjoining 
lake. O'Brien landed, and remounted ; and he 
did not refuse his hand to the wild Connaught 
ferryman, who pressed it to his eyes and lips. 
Under the protection of an heartfelt blessing, 
he proceeded on his journey. 

Pausing for a moment, to look back at the 
wild scenery he had passed, another winding- 
blast from Shane's bugle seemed to bid him 
adieu, as he now entered the lines of compara- 
tive civilization. The sun, as it reddened the 
vast bosom of the Atlantic, danced on some re- 
mote spire that sparkled like a meteor in mid- 
air : and the bridle track, which led to the beau- 
tiful coast, that lay in the distance, taking a turn , 
he soon came on the high road to St. Grellan. 
There again he paused for a moment : all the 
p3 . 



318 THE o'eeiens and 

associations of early life, all the feelings of that 
patriotism, which is so much made up of locali- 
ties, came out in full development. He saw the 
dark mass of building in the midst of a dreary 
plain, which he identified as Bog Moy House, 
his future residence. He saw the young planta- 
tions and rich woods of Beauregard (the long 
uninhabited, but magnificent seat of the Proud- 
forts), which lay on the road from St. Grellan 
to Galway. He saw the glittering sashes of 
the Bishop's palace, at a short distance from 
the town, and the heavy atmosphere of turf 
smoke, which hung over the town itself. Agi- 
tated by many feehngs of " good and ill to- 
gether," he struck into the rutted way, which 
was by courtesy called the high road : and as 
the last gleam of sun faded from the bay, en- 
tered the suburb, which was still called O'Brien's 
gate. 

At a period, when the largest cities of the Irish 
provinces presented images of the desolation and 
violence, which, down to the close of the last cen- 
tury, marked the general character of the country, 
the smaller towns consisted of little more than 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 819 

one or two good modern houses (the residences 
of the church and state authorities), a jail, a 
barrack, and a surrounding cluster of the vilest 
cribs, raised of dry stones,— with a few old 
houses, antique towers, and perhaps a battered 
castle, or a ruined convent. 

O'Brien having passed the gate which bore his 
name, and which still had the old inscription upon 
it — "• From the ferocious OFlahertys, deliver us, 
oh Lord I" and having waded through the long, 
dirty suburbs of mud hovels, called the Cladagh, 
the first object which struck his eye was the ruin 
of the old Nunnery of Mary, John, and Joseph, 
converted into a barrack ; where an English re- 
giment was mustered for evening parade, in its 
cloistered court. The contrast with the scenes, 
through which he had so recently passed, was 
striking; nor was he more prepared for the 
transmutation which, in traversing the main 
street of the town, he thought it had undergone 
since last he had seen it. Either his inexperience 
had formerly endowed it with a beauty and im- 
portance, which in fact it did not possess^ or it 
was now much decayed and deteriorated : for it 



3^20 THE O'BRIENS ANB 

appeared to him mean, old, filthy, and wholly 
without pohce. The trade of this second city 
of the county was indicated by an oaten cake, 
thrust out of a sashless window, on a deal board, 
or a pole stuck in the thatch of a cabin, with a 
turf at the end of it ; while " good dry lodgings'^ 
was scrawled over the door of many an hovel, 
whose threshold was washed by the overflowings 
of the unchannelled street; which ran in muddy 
torrents, as the acquired inequalities of the pave- 
ment directed. In other places, " entertainment 
for man and baste," indicated that whiskey and 
straw might be had for a moderate remuneration, 
by the equestrian, w^ho was not able to '* pay 
the damage" of the great inn. 

The great inn (itself a most dilapidated build- 
ing, and once the town mansion of the OTla- 
hertys), was distinguished by a shattered sign 
of the O' Flaherty Arms, which lay against the 
door-case of the squahd entry ; the walls, from 
which it had swung for half a century, being 
too frail to support any longer with safety so 
cumbrous an appendage. The long main street 
and market-place were peopled with a bare- 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 621 

footed, ragged population ; among whom a few 
ofRcers, looking like beings of a superior crea- 
tion, picked their way to the parade, at the 
sunuiions of a drum, whose roll alone disturbed 
the silence of this nest of ruin and wretchedness. 

O'Brien hesitated whether he should, or should 
not, put up at the O' Flaherty Arms ; for both 
himself and his steed were weary, after a voyage 
and journey of eighteen hours. A house of en- 
tertainment, however, on the opposite side of the 
way, by its appearance determined him to pass 
the night at St. Grellan, and to proceed to Bog 
Moy, a distance of five miles, on the following 
morning. It was a spacious and handsomely 
fronted fabric, newly built, and with some of its 
windows not yet glazed. Over the door was 
written, " The Tontine Hotel ;" and on a 
flaring escutcheon appeared the splendidly em- 
blazoned arms of the Proudforts, upon a field 
or, the pearl of Lough Corrib, with the motto 
of " Qui me cherche, me trouve." O'Brien read, 
and sighed. 

On dismounting, he was received, if reception 
it could be called, by a ragged, tipsey waiter. 



3S2 THE O'BRIENS AND 

who lounged at the door; and who tottered 
before him into a large, chill, and comfortless 
room, with furniture as old and battered, as the 
walls were fresh and new. 

*' I should be glad to have a supper and well- 
aired bed-room immediately," said O'Biien. 

"A supper and a well-aired bed-room," re- 
peated the waiter, carelessly, as he arranged the 
pepper, mustard, and vinegar cruets that stood 
on an old sideboard. 

" Yes," said O'Brien, *' I suppose there is 
no difficulty ?" 

" Difficulty; 'pon my credit I can't say." 

'' Send your master,'' said O'Brien. 

"My master," said the man, surveying the 
traveller, who had come in on a Connemara 
pony, with only a light valise strapped behind 
him ; " my master dines with the other revenue 
gentlemen at the collector's, and isn't at home." 

" Well then, send your mistress." 

" The mistress ! Och ! the mistress never 
attinds customers, if she's in it ; but she isn't. 
She and Miss Maria Theresa are gone to a dry 
drum, and won't be home the Lord knows whin. 



THE o'flahertys. 323 

It's my intire opinion/*' he added, putting his 
hands in his waistcoat-pockets, crossing his legs, 
and leaning back against the sideboard, " that 
the O 'Flaherty Arms would have answered ye 
better, than the Tontine ; for none stops here but 
the highest of quality." 

"It is my opinion, too,"" said O'Brien, laughing 
in spite of himself, at this specimen of the Irish 
mode of doing business, and of getting up crack 
inns under the patronage of the autocrats of the 
land ; and, hurrying out, he bade the boy who 
had charge of his pony, to follow him to the other 
inn. There, in spite of its appearance, he 
found a hearty welcome, a good bed-room (if 
not a particularly neat one), and a bill of fare 
consisting of the usual "boiled fowl, bacon-, 
and greens," which never fail at a genuine Irish 
inn : where the bacon lies on the hob ready to 
be cut, and the fowl in the roost over it ready 
to be killed. 

Before he partook of the fare, for which his 
mountain journey had so well prepared him, and 
which, as usual, required the preparatory opera- 
tions of "first catching the fowl," and then 
killing it, O'Brien went to visit his pony. It 



324 THE o'briens and 

was already under the hands of the baccah, who 
acted as groom in the stable-yard of the O'Fla- 
herty Arms ; and it was surrounded by some of 
those loungers, who are always to be found in the 
inn yards of Ireland. They were all considering 
the pony with curiosity and admiration. 

" It isn't for nothing you bought the gapul, 
plaze your honour.?'' said the baccah, as O'Brien 
examined one of her feet. 

"Do you think her of value.?" asked the 
owner. 

"Do I, is it, Sir.? — troth, I surely do," was 
the baccah's reply, as he rubbed down the sides 
of the little animal with renewed vigour ; " she'll 
bring her own price any day, in fair or market, 
in Galway county or out of it. I'll ingage it's 
herself carried you well over rock and rathe, 
bog and mountain ; for she's as cute as ever a 
baste in the barony.'* 

"You know her, then.?'' said O'Brien. 

" Know her ! It's few but knows gapul na 
plumka;* sure she's of the Shulah's breaking,'' 
he added, turning to the loungers. 

* The fairy's pony. 



THE O'FLAIIERTYS. 325 

" Then," said one of them, " it's herself's 
the luibhi* of a gapul; for it was his father 
before him had the notes for making a cute 
cratur of a Connemara pony." 

"Why, then,'' said another, "it's a pity but 
it's himself he would break in, instead of the 
gapuls ; for a wilder poor cratur doesn't breathe 
the breath of life this day. There be some 
wud tell you he's a fairy man, and others wud 
be afther saying he's the arrach of Shane-na- 
Brien : ay, by my conscience, or Shane himself, 
who was hanged for the murther at St. Michael's 
Crass; — Christ save us, and bless the mark." 

" I never seed the Shulah but oncet," said the 
baccah, " and that was last Lammas day, 'bove 
all the days of the year, in the mountains of 
Moycullen. And it was himself was taking 
that very pony, quiet as she stands there, down 
to the wood of Dim, on Lough Corrib, where 
the horse-dailers lays the pric'e for the ponies ; 
he breaks on the Claghan-na-tomparagh,-f and 
finds his bargain there the next day : for the 

* Cunning, crafty one. 
•j- The stone of the pirates. 

VOL. III. - Q 



THE BRIENS AVU 

Shulah will not put his comhluadar * upon any 
man, barring it's a priest, a friar, or a nun. 
And I'll ingage a good bargain it is ; for a gar- 
lagh in the cradle might deal with the Shulah, 
ay, indeed. So they say none ever saw the 
Shulah in town, or townland, which is mighty 
wonderful ; only in respect of the great penance 
and sore sin upon his poor soul ; for, do you 
mind, meet him where you will, by night or 
day, by Luib or Lough, it*s telling his padreens 
heil be, and going over his decades, and the 
seven penitentials.'* 

O'Brien, now perceiving that his steed was in 
good hands, and had all that prepossession in 
her favour, which is through life so serviceable 
to man or beast, left him to the baccah ; con- 
vinced that Gapul na phouka was a pupil of 
Shane's, who, it appeared, supported his wild 
existence, by breaking in those mountain horses, 
which hke himself, were indigenous to the 
regions, where alone the breed of ponies and of 
Shulah men were still extant. 

The suspicion of who Shane was, the con- 

* « Company." 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 827 

fidence placed in his probity, the indisposition of 
the common people to profit by their suspicion, 
and receive the reward for his apprehension, 
afforded O'Brien food for meditation, no less 
than Shane's mysterious conduct towards him- 
self. The fidehty to his pecuniary engagements, 
in his strange commerce with the horse dealers 
was nothing new or peculiar. In the midst of 
the most lawless burnings and destruction of 
property, the genuine Irish peasant is scrupu- 
lously honest in his intercourse with his neigh- 
bours : and O'Brien's heart bore ample testimony 
that the virtue was not sohtary in his foster 
brother. He knew him to be brave, persevering 
in action, and enduring of privation, faithful 
to the death in his attachments, an affectionate 
son, an incorruptible follower, with a heart that 
beat with a rude, but impulsive sympathy for 
the sufferings of others, and glowed with a 
genuine, though ill understood love of country. 
Yet is this man (he thought), a murderer, an 
outlaw, ready for every violence, — his hand armed 
against civilization, as civilization is armed 
against him,— and the whole tenor of his life at 
Q 2 



THE OBRIENS AND 

variance with the best interests of society ! The 
world may make its conventional virtues and 
vices, and civil associations may dictate forms : 
but the source of good is in the feelings and 
affections of the animal. Even when bad govern- 
ment, or the undue pressure of ill-arranged 
externals, turns them the most irresistibly aside 
fram their natural career, and enforces a disor- 
dered reaction, their principle itself- remains 
unchanged ; and the man thus situated, makes 
for himself a code of compensating morality, 
which fits him for the peculiar circumstances of 
his untoward and difficult position. 

In the midst of such reflections, intermixed with 
musings on Shane's perpetual watchfulness over 
his foster- brother'^s safety, and his inexplicable 
unwillingness to encounter him, even in the se- 
curity and remoteness of the mountain fastnesses, 
the supper appeared ; which his landlord set be- 
fore him with a flask of claret (then, for reasons 
unassigned by the venders, so cheap and so 
genuine in the county of Galway), and a county 
newspaper. In glancing his eye over the stale 
intelligence of this provincial journal, towards 



THE o'flahertys. 329 

the end of his repast, O'Brien was caught by 
the appearance of his own name in a conspicuous 
column. He read as follows : — 

" Died, on the first of June, at the retreat of 
the religious gentlemen of Cong, the Right 
Hon. Terentius O'Brien Lord Arranmore, the 
lineal descendant and representative of the Clan 
Tieg O'Briens, Princes of the Isles of Arran. 
His lordship was distinguished for his patriotism 
and loyalty, and, above all, for his great anti- 
quarian lore, and for the efforts he had made to 
revive the literature of his country, as it ex- 
isted in those times, when, if a learned man was 
missing from Europe, it was said, amandatus 
est in Hiberniam. 

" His Lordship having in his early childhood 
been seduced to abandon the rehgion of his 
fathers, he returned to it in mature life, from a 
sincere conviction ; and bent on ending his days 
in the odour of sanctity, he retired from the 
world and became a member of the confraternity 
of religious gentlemen of Cong. His remains 
were conveyed to the great Isle of Arran with a 
pomp suitable to his rank, and were attended to 



S80 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the water's edge by the greatest concourse of 
persons ever assembled in this province upon a 
similar occasion, since the funeral obsequies of 
the great Lord Clanrickard. 

" His Lordship is succeeded in his titles and 
estates by his only son, the Hon. Murrogh 
O'Brien, grand nephew of the celebrated Abbe 
Don Ignatius O'Brien, (secretary of the college of 
the Propaganda of Rome,) great great nephew of 
Field Marechal Count Taaf, of the Mac Taafs 
of lar Connaught, and nephew to the Misses Mac 
Taaf, of Bogmoy House, in the county of 
Galway, and Ballyslattery, in the county Mayo. 

" His Lordship has served with distinction 
in the armies of His Imperial Majesty the 
Emperor of Germany ; to which service it is 
supposed he will return, having settled his 
affairs in this country. His Lordship is in his 
twenty-fifth year and unmarried. His pre- 
sumptive heir is Turlogh Giol O'Brien, Esq. 
of the Isles of Arran." 

O'Brien read this paragraph with a moisture 
in his eyes that obscured their vision, and with 
a smile occasionally curling his lips, that indi^ 



THE o'flahertys. 331 

cated his opinion of this purely Irish exhibition 
of pride in all its hyberbole. The pompous an- 
nounce of titles and estates sounded in his ear 
like a mockery. The lordly appellation was, 
indeed, not new to him ; for the polite and punc- 
tilious inmates of the Retreat had not failed to 
give him, in conversation, all the additions to 
which they attached so much consequence: 
neither was he wholly insensible to the possession 
of a title, respectable for its antiquity in the 
eyes of the world. He had, however, hesitated 
on its assumption, under the total ruin of his 
fortunes, and the consequent necessity of earning 
his bread ; nor was he wholly uninfluenced by 
an abstract contempt for aristocratic distinctions, 
which formed part of his philosophy, without 
entirely destroying the prejudices of earl}^ edu- 
cation ; but, on more mature reflection, he 
changed his mind, and determined not to abandon 
his only possession — a possession which had 
caused his father the sacrifice of his independent 
fortune. The title was his right ; and though 
unsupported by wealth, was still a barrier be- 
tween him and that neglect, for which he was 



332 THE o'bkiexs akd the o'flahertys. 

not yet prepared ; while, by raising him above 
the mass, he beheved it would inevitably increase 
the utility of those efforts, which he was more 
than ever determined to make for the civil and 
religious liberties of his countrymen. 



EXD OF VOL. III. 
