TO

W. WILBERFORCE, Esq.

BY HIS PERMISSION,

TOTS LEGENB,

-WITH WARM AND SINCERE ADMIRATION OT? *«IS TRULY HUMANE AND PHILANTHROPIC EXERTIONS TO AUOLISH THE





THROUGHOUT THE CHRISTIAN WORLD, IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,

JBY HIS DEVOTED, OBLIGED, AND

"MOST OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT,

ANN OF SWANSEA.

Szcunsea, July 13, 1816,

Cam Street.





GONZALO DE BALDIVIA.



CHAPTER L



'' Tie masked the viilatiy of his heart under a specious exterior of virtue and humanity, as volcanoes conceal their mineral deluges and eruptive lightnings with coverings of Show. No discoverable vices rattled a warning from tlus monstrous serpent."

JL HE beautiful Rosaviva de Molines, whose eventful history I am about to narrate, was the only surviving child of a numerous offspring, which her mother, the lady Selina de Grey, had borne to don Henriques Minguel de Molines, with whom, at the early age of sixteen, she had •contracted a secret marriage, and fled her paternal roof, and her native England, for the sultry shores of South America, Don Henriques possessed a remarkably





fine person, high rank, and abundance of wealth; yet all these great advantages .were insufficient to recommend his alliance to the approval of the haughty earl of Avondale, who, suspecting the impression the handsome Spaniard had made on the susceptibility of his lovely daughter, sternly bade her remember he was a foreigner and a Catholic; and that a marriage with him could never take place but at the risk of his eternal displeasure and heavy malediction.

Lady Selina heard this harsh sentence, grew pale, and trembled; she would have knelt at his feet and implored his compassion ; but spurning her from him, with a dark frown, he bade her remember, that a virtuous daughter submitted the disposal of her heart to the wisdom of her relatives; that she had been warned, andon her own head would fall the peril of her disobedience.

Lad_y Selina stood aghast; she revered the earl, her father, though she knew him to be proud and unfeeling; she wished to reconcile duty and love, hut finding the effort unavailing, she wept on the bosom of Henriques, and, in an agony of sorrow, bade him relinquish the hope they had mutually cherished, for the earl of Avondale had pronounced their eternal separation.





The impassioned Spaniard kissed away her tears, and, with the successful rhetoric of youth and love, urged the utter impossibility of a parent withholding forgiveness from an only daughter, whose trespass was that most venial one, love;. till lady Selina, convinced by the arguments of her lover, and the tenderness of her own feelings, became persuaded that her father would relent and bless her union. Under this impression she clandestinely became the wife of don Henriques, and followed the fortunes of the husband of her choice to the new world, where the Spaniards were rapidly amassing wealth and gaining possessions. But, stern and inflexible, the earl of Avondale never withdrew the maledictions he poured on the head of his offending daughter. Had the many letters she wrote, imploring his forgiveness, spoke of ought but the unabating tenderness of her husband, his heart might have relented; but he had ever maintained" anv opinion, that wretchedness only could result from a union between persons of different nations and different religions: and: to learn that his daughter was happy in her marriage with a foreigner and a Catholic, was not only a refutation of his opinions, but a positive proof that his judgment was not infallible—crimes never to be pardoned by a mind like his. Lady Selrha obtained no replies; and even on his deathbed the earl of Avondale extorted from his eldest son a solemn oath, never to see, correspond, or hold communion of any sort, with a sister who had disgraced her honourable lineage by a marriage with air" alien and a Catholic. He also charged him to inform lord Ethelbert, his brother, then absent, that his dying father expected him also to. adhere to these injunctions. The heir of Avondale inherited with the title all the pride and prejudice of his deceased father; like him, he considered it a crime of the highest magnitude, that a female of their ancient house should have formed an alliance with any but at





native of Great Britain and of the established church; the command of his father, therefore, appeared to his judgment perfectly just and reasonable, and was, during his life, most scrupulously obeyed.

Lord Ethelbert was in his minority at the time of his sister's, elopement, and being the particular favourite of his mother's brother, whose name he bore, and always residing with him in Westmoreland, he knew but little of lady Selina —consequently was not sufficiently interested in her fate to risk a quarrel with his family, by corresponding with or espousing her cause:

Surrounded by powerful friends, idolized by her husband, and living in a style of princely magnificence, lady Selina might have been superlatively happy, had not the cruel malediction of her father dwelt en her mind. Naturally timid, and inclined to superstition, she cherished the belief that her beautiful children, consigned one after the other to the tomb, died in consequence of her disobedience to parental command, and that their loss was. the accomplishment of her father's curse, and the dreadful punishment of her sin.





Don Henriques, with manly sense, combatted this self-accusing opinion; with all the tender feeling of a father, he lamented the losss of his little ones, but attributed to the climate, not the judgment of Heaven, his deprivations.

After a mournful period of near ten years, lady Selina again clasped to her maternal bosom a female infant, and wept over it the mingled tears of fondness and apprehension. By the advice of their particular friend, the marquis de Baldivia,^ don Henriques removed with his lady from Lima to nurse their little treasure at his country residence, the Castle DeloricadV pleasantly situated on the banks of the winding river Guyaquil, where the west wind, blowing from the bosom of the clear wave, came winged with fertility and' health.

The marquis de Baldivia and don Henriques had, for many years, been attached, to each other by the strict bonds of a sincere friendship; and to draw the links of





this regard still closer, at the Castle Deloricad, Rosaviva, while yet an infant, was affianced to the only son of the marquis, a blooming, beautiful boy, who even then appeared delighted with the privilege of kissing the rosy cheek and dimpled hands of his little wife.

Lady Selina, as she beheld the glow of health on her daughter's cheeky and the rich sparkle of her dark-blue eye, began to hope that her tears and penitence had appeased the wrath of offended Heaven, and that she might venture to look forward to happiness in the preservation of her child,, as she was now past the age at which inexorable death had snatched from her arms her other cherubs; and her Rosaviva seemed every new day to acquire, with unabating health, increasing beauty.

The young Baldivia was seven years the senior of his affianced bride; and before Rosaviva had attained the age of fourteen* he had drank deep of the cup of licentious pleasure. The only child of weak and doting parents, his vicious propensitieshad met from them but feeble opposition, while his attendants and flatterers glossed ever his crimes, or entirely concealed them from the marquis his father.





The yormg Baldivia felt no inclination towards a matrimonial life; by nature of a fickle and inconstant mind, he considered a wife as an unnecessary appendage tohis rank, and in reality only a clog and restraint on the pleasures he might wish to indulge in. Soon aftes the decease o£ his mother, which took place about the period of his attaining the age of twentyone, affecting a melancholy he did not feel, he prevailed on his father to allow him to visit Spain, where they had relations high in rank, and large possessions,, which had been entrusted to the management of agents, whose accounts the marquis had long talked of examining in person—a task which, being of an indolent disposition, he considered as extremely irksome, and readily resigned to his son. —Absolutely forgetful of Rosaviva, hewould have quitted Peru without bidding her farewell, had not the marquis remind





ed him that it was a ceremony not to be dispensed with, and that don Henriques might justly feel offended at a conduct so disrespectful. Not without secret reluctance, Gonzalo followed the marquis to the Castle Deloricad, to take leave of his affianced bride, whom he thought of as a. mere child, without any other attraction than being heiress of all don Henriques Minguel Molines'" wealth..

Donna Rosaviva had not seen Baldivia for near two years, and his expected arrival at the. castle occasioned her young bosom much flutter-and emotion; she remembered he was tall„ handsome, and graceful; and living in retirement, the libertinism of his character had not reached the knowledge of herself or her parents; recalling to her imagination the fascination ef his manners,, the lovely, innocent Rosaviva thought it would not be a difficult task to love the handsome Baldivia.

The marquis and his son were received' by don Henriques with all the warmth off a sincere friendship; and while he viewed: the graceful person of Gonzalo Baldivia,, he acknowledged that nature had profusely lavished on it every attractive beauty and seductive grace; ignorant that this fair exterior was the deceitful covering of a disposition ostentatious, voluptuous, vindictive, profligate, and tyrannical, he mentally felicitated his daughter on the happiness which he believed awaited her, in becoming the wife of a person whom nature and fortune had combined to elect their favourite. Lady Selina and her daughter were abroad on visits of charity on the morning their guests arrived at the castle, and don Henriques, during their absence, had an opportunity afforded him of an hour's uninterrupted conversation with the young man, to whose care he was about to commit the future happiness of an only and tenderly-beloved child. In this short space of time, he became so charmed with the easy elegance of his manner, his cultivated understanding, and the graces of his conversation, that, again and again, he piously thanked Heaven that his beloved Rosaviva had so bright a prospect of felicity before her.





The young Baldivia had prepared his mind to meet an insipid child; how then was he astonished when don Henriques introduced to him a creature glowing in youth and beauty, whose personal charms were heightened by the polish of education, and rendered doubly interesting by the mingled graces of sensibility and modesty! Rosaviva Molines was lovely, elegant, and accomplished; to a complexion transparently fair, and eyes of sapphire blue, she united a figure of the middle height, exquisitely rounded and symmetrically formed; thus eminently beautifuL and interesting in person, Rosaviva was gifted by Heaven with a mind rich in eveiy feminine virtue, endowed with brilliant talent, improved by the refining polish of education; yet possessed of all the attraction of beauty, genius, and wealth, Rosaviva was gentle, artless, and unassuming; she listened unwearied to the tale of misfortune, had a heart full of tender compassion, and a hand ever ready to remove, as far as gold had power, the tear from the eye of necessity and affliction; delicate and timid,





she was ever fearful of the correctness of her own judgment, and relied implicitly on that of her parents, whom she consulted' on ail occasions where she feared her fancy might lead her understanding into error.

During the stay of the marquis and his son at the castle, don Henriques gave a rural fete in honour of his guests; the arrangements were planned by Rosaviva, and the decorations executed according to. her taste; in a few days the castle assumed the appearance of enchantment, and during the entertainment she presided oves the festivities like a fairy queen, displaying a thousand before-undiscovered graces to Baldivia, who, with enamoured gaze, led her through the delightful intricacies of the dance peculiar to the country.

Rosaviva was fond of dancing; her sylphic figure and airy motion held the senses of Gonzalo in a delirium of transport; his heart confessed her an object too beautiful to be seen without exciting sensations of the warmest admiration; her- voice was. harmony, her smile bewitching, and shewas at the age when, just no longer child,.





nature displayed itself in her person and manner in a thousand* beautiful and playful forms.

Baldivia gazed, listened, and believed he must be for ever miserable, should he fail to inspire the bosom of the fair enchantress with a passion fervid as that he felt for her; yet, much as he fancied he loved Ilosaviva, it was a difficult task to reconcile his mfnd to matrimonial fetters r the more he reflected on the restraints inseparable from the state, the more strongly he was convinced that the attainment of a woman, however beautiful, was not worth, the sacrifice of liberty, and the wide range of gratifications contained in its possession r but Ilosaviva Molines was of noble family,, surrounded by powerful friends, the heiress to immense wealth, and under the immediate protection of affectionate and watchful parents, and thus guarded, was not likely to yield to his seductions, or add to the long catalogue of unhappy fair ones, whose easy credulity his flatteries had imposed upon, whose virtue he had cruelly subdued, and whom, in violation of vows





solemnly pledged, he had inhumanly abandoned to all the horrors of too-late-awakened remorse.

The artless Rosaviva had not beheld the graceful Baldivia with indifference; she was charmed with the elegance of his person, but still more deeply captivated by his expanded understanding, which continually supplied his conversation with just and noble sentiments. To her unsophisticated mind, it appeared that his bosom was. the sacred repository of every manly virtue.

Hitherto the young Baldivia had determined to avoid, if possible, becoming a husband; but the almost-celestial beauty of Rosaviva—her-amber locks playing in shining rings upon her snowy forehead— the melting lustre of her dark-blue eyes— the dimples that smiled round her rosy mouth, fevered his pulses with maddening sensations of restless impatience and impetuous passion, and sa subdued his former resolutions, that, unable to resist his feelings, he expressed a wish to the marquis his father, that the projected marriage





.might take place previous to his departure for Spain, lest, in his absence, some artful suitor might win the affection of Rosaviva, ©n whose love the happiness of his life de* pended.

The indulgent marquis, accustomed to yield to the representations and persuasions ©f his son, was easily brought over to his opinion; he saw no reason- why the ceremony should be delayed, and, in conformity to his desire, endeavoured to prevail on don Henriques to consent to their immediate marriage; but to this precipitate request both the parents of Rosaviva strongly objected, on consideration of the extreme youth of their daughter, little more than fifteen, whom they resolved should not be hurried into marriage, before shehad an opportunity of convincing her1 heart that Baldivia was really the object of its choice; and to attain this important knowledge, it was their intention to returns to Palma, there to reside during the absence of the young man, that Rosaviva might mingle with the world, and judgefrom an acquaintance with others, whether he was truly the elected of her heart.





To this intention, worthy the tenderness of parents anxious for the happinessof their child, the marquis, on the part of Baldivia, offered many objections; but unmoved by his arguments, don Henriques replied—" My dear friend, when we affianced our children, it was with the selfish wish of gratifying our own feelingsof regard for each other by their union;, they were then infants, and our hearts were strangers to the strong affection they have since inspired by their virtuous dispositions, and duteous conduct towards us. I can readily believe that you, as well as ourselves, would make any sacrifice toensure the happiness of your child; but how are we certain we shall promote this most-desired object, by consenting to theirmarriage at ari age when fancy snatches the reins from the guidance of reason, before they have convinced themselves that they feel more than a mere inclination for each other? Suffer Baldivia to depart tinshackled. I here dissolve the contract,, entered into without their consent, and before they had reason to approve or dissent."





A few weeks before, Gonzalo would have rejoiced to hear the sentiments of don Henrique*; he would have been pleased to see a contract destroyed, which he considered a barbarous exertion of the parental prerogative; but now, when he beheld the paper torn in pieces, he felt offended; and pale with rage and disappointment, he censured the action as tyrannical and cruel.

Don Henriques smiled at what he considered the hasty ebullitions of impetuousyouth—" You will, perhaps, hereafter thank me for thus setting you at liberty," said he; "but if, on the contrary, you return to Peru- with sentiments unchanged"



** But who," interrupted Baldivia, impatiently, "who can answer for the stability of Rosaviva's sentiments?"

"Rosaviva," replied don Henriques," is a mere child;. as yet she can have no fixed'





choice; but still, my young friend, the• chances are infinitely in your favour; the impression made by Baldivia is not likely to be obliterated by an acquaintance with the young nobility of Palma."

This compliment was not lost on Gonzalo; but his wishes were disappointed, and his pride offended, at the refusal of his request; and while he affected to acquiesce with the prudent resolve of don Henriques, he meditated a crime, in the accomplishment of which he promised himself glorious vengeance.

Lady Selina had followed the impulse ©f her heart in her selection of a husband. She had married don Henriques, because she preferred him to all other men;- her own connubial life had been most happy,, and she was anxiously solicitous that her ©nly child should meet a fate equally fortunate—that she should bestow her hand only where her heart approved. With maternal tenderness she watched the eyes of her artless Rosaviva; she observed the modest glow that suffused her face and bosom, when the young Baldivia pressed





his lips on her hand, or placed her lute before her, and felt convinced that he was •not Indifferent to her. The alliance seemed flattering in every point of view, for no possible objection couid be raised against the rank, the fortune, or theperson of Gonzalo Baldivia. One only impediment ap•peared to oppose their union. Lady Selina had educated her daughter in the principles of her own faith; Rosaviva was a Prostestant, and the difference in their religious belief might present a serious objection to their union.

On this most important subject, lady •Selina resolved to be satisfied, before the affections .of her daughter were too deeply engaged to be withdrawn without endangering her peace; though having been herself allowed by her husband to follow the dictates of her conscience, she hoped that no obstacle would be opposed to the same freedom being permitted her daughter; nor was her hope deceived. The marquis -was sensible that lady Selina, though a Protestant, was an amiable woman, and had made his friend don Henriques an



r





exemplary wife; he was therefore perfectly acquiescent in the affair.

Religion made but a small part of the -reflections of Gonzalo, the gratification of whose passions appeared, in his estimation, matter of far higher importance; and .among a thousand other liberal proposals, he solemnly swore on no occasion to attempt to influence Rosaviva's opinions, but *lwa3's to allow her the free exercise of the religion she at present professed, stipulating only, that their first-born son, who must inherit the marquisate, should be bred a Catholic; all others that Heaven should be pleased to bless them with, he generously agreed to leave to the direction of their mother.

Having acceded to these points, don Uenriques pledged his word that Rosaviva should. be left entirely to her own direction in the disposal of her affections ; that she should be allowed to correspond with him during his absence; and that on his return from Spain, he should receive her hand, provided herself did not refuse to ratify the engagement.





Ttosaviva was not present at this j\rTangement; but lady Selina lost no time in laying before her these liberal testimonies of her lover's affection, and quickly discovered, from the agitation of her manner and her Washing emotion, that the intelligence was most pleasing, and that she was happy in the knowledge that the difference of their religious principles was not likely to be a bar to their union.

Baldivia considered it prudent to yield -an apparently-satisfied -acquiescence with the determination of don Henriques; he consented to defer the celebration of his nuptials till his return to Peru; but he secretly laid down a plan to accomplish his licentious wishes, without waiting forwijat he considered the idle ceremonies of the church. He had discovered that the chamber in which Rosaviva reposed was situated in the west wing of the castle, over the state apartments, and that a private staircase led from the corridor near her chamber to the grand hall, the arcade at one end of which opened on an extensive forest. Having minutely examined

f





the premises, he found there would be'but little danger or difficulty attending his villanous purpose, which was to enter her apartment ;at the still hour of repose, and bear her off to a cave in the adjoining forest, in the depths of which he had already stationed wretches, who, .bribed to his will, had prepared for the reception of his intended victim, and waited his signal to assist in the accomplishment of his infernal scheme. The cave, designed for the temporary habitation of Rosaviva, sunk in the bowels of the earth, was accidentally discovered to Baldivia by a favourite dog; the entrance to it was so concealed by the thick growth of low shrubs and twining plants, that no eye, unacquainted with the secret, could explore it.

Meanwhile Baldivia having free access to Rosaviva, professed himself the passionate and honourable adorer of the lovely innocent, whose virtue he was plotting to destroy; and while, with delighted attention, she ^listened to the honeyed flatteries that flowed from lips of glowing coralwhile he solemnly swore through life to he influenced only by a tender regard for her happiness, promised faithfully to be directed always by her opinions—while his dark and brilliant eyes streamed on her beams of the fondest solicitude—while, in every action, he appeared to anticipate her wishes, to hang with rapture on her smiles, and seemed to exist but on the hope of her favour and acceptance of his hand, the heart of Rosaviva must have been colder than the snows that hang on the chill bosom of the Cordilleras, had she not believed and returned a love so ardently professed, so confirmed by undeviating'Bttention, and so approved by the warm assent of her parents and friends.





The insinuating Baldivia had, by ceaseless prayer and fervid importunity, won from the lips of Rosaviva the blushing confession of a mutual passion; he had also obtained her promise not to delay their marriage, but to consent to its celebration immediately on his return from Spain. Again and again he called the saints and angels to witness that he was devoted to her alone, that his heart would never wander from her, and that the tender assurance of her affection, and the hope of calling her his wife, would alone enable him to sustain Existence during the painful period of their separation.



Vol. j. c

""





The days and hours now seemed to fly with unusual rapidity. In loving and being beloved, Rosaviva believed she had attained the acme of human felicity. Not so Gonzalo; his impatient desires languished for the victorious moment that should consign her to his power, when, free from the irksome restraints imposed on his wishes at the castle, he should compel her reluctant beauties to his embrace, and render her delicate form subservient to his sensual appetites.

Rosaviva saw the day of her lover's departure arrive with ill-concealed sorrow, and was only consoled by his reiterated vow of undeviating constancy, and his often repeated promise of shortening, as much as possible, the period of his absence. Checking her tears, she would whisper to her heart, "Baldivia is the soul of honour;





he loves me, and will be faithful. Our union will be productive only of felicity, for continually shall I draw from his mental stores information and improvement." The young mind is ever alive to hope, and with blissful credulity believes all it wishes.

At an early hour of the morning, the marquis and his son were to depart, for already the vessel had taken in her freight, which was to convey Baldivia to Europe, and only waited his coming on board to spread her sails, and pursue her destined course.

The evening repast was removed, and the marquis mentioned the necessity of retiring early to rest, when Rosaviva, at the instance of her mother, with trembling hands hung round the neck of Gonzalo a miniature of herself; he pressed his lips on the ivory as he concealed it in his bosom; jthen kneeling at her feet, he placed on her finger a rich circlet of diamonds, and passionately straining her to his bosom, repeated the vow of being hers alone and for ever. Rosaviva, pale and weeping, was





led from the apartment by her mother, who had before made her adieus, and bestowed much good. counsel on Baldivia.

Another hour passed before he got released from what he treated as idle admonition, and whieh he had most unwillinglybeen detained to hear from his father and don Henriques, both of whom he wished in the silence of the grave. In a fever of impatience, he listened at the door of his chamber, till the domestics of the castle were retired to rest; he then, with noiseless step, approached the chamber of Rosaviva: all was silent, and he concluded that she slept; he then stole down the private staircase, crossed the grand hall, and unbarred, the door that opened on the forest, thus preparing the way for the entrance of his emissaries, whom he found waiting his orders near the mouth of the cave. Having minutely repeated his instructions, he saw them depart, to bear from her bed the lovely, unsuspecting Rosaviva, whom he intended, disguised as his page, to make the companion of his voyage.

The night was gloomy, and the fitful





t

gusts of wind that shook the trees presaged an approaching storm, Baldivia, stationed near the entrance of the cave, with angry gaze beheld the vivid coruscations flash from the dark clouds, and heard the thunder roll heavily at a distance—" It approaches," said he, impatiently; " this infernal tempest will rouse don Henriques* and the pious lady Selina, who, foolishly solicitous to sooth the alarm of Rosa-viva,, will doubtless seek her chamber, and by their presence frustrate my design."

Again the lightning quivered on the branches of the tall trees, while louder crashes of thunder sounded through the depths of the cave—" Surely," said Baldivia, pushing aside the brambles from the entrance, and advancing into the forest— "surely Thomasio and Manuel will not think of proceeding to the castle—they will have sense enough to suppose this, storm will rouse the household—they certainly will not be such idiots as to risk discovery, by attempting to enter Rosaviva's. chamber such a night as this."

After some time spent by Baldivia, in;





all the torments of guilt, apprehension, and suspense, the rain fell heavily—" I may yet succeed," said he, " for the tempest dies away. But where do these miscreants linger?" For awhile he took shelter under the thick branches of a tulip tree, till his patience being quite exhausted, he hastily strode the path that wound towards the castle; but no approaching footsteps met his ear. One moment he feared the villains had betrayed him; the next, that, by some chance, the door leading to the grand hall was barred against their entrance.

Furious with suspense, he was rushing forward, resolved at every hazard to ascertain the cause of their delay, when his ear caught the murmur of distant voices. Baldivia paused to listen—" They come," said he, in a tone of triumph; " they have succeeded; Rosaviva is mine, without the aid of priestcraft;" for at that instant the hoarse tones of Thomasio were distinctly heard. Baldivia hastened back to the cave; he stirred up the dying-embers that yet faintly glowed, and lit a lamp, that his eyes might luxuriate on the charms of Rosaviva; and again he impatiently waited at the entrance, till he beheld Thomasio and Manuel bearing in their arms a female, closely folded in a cloak—" You have succeeded, my brave fellows!" said Baldivia, as he received into his own their inanimate burthen.





"Succeeded! yes, by St. Jago!" growled Thomasio, " if your lordship calls it success, to be clawed and scratched by a wild cat."

Baldivia paid no attention to the coarse reply of the ruffian, but proceeded to throw off the cloak in which his fair victim was enveloped. As soon as the air blew on her face, she opened her eyes, and uttering a loud shriek, exclaimed—" Blessed St. Catharina, where am I?"

In amazement, Baldivia held up the lamp, and beheld not her he had so anxiously expected, the lovely Rosaviva, but her little swarthy, squab attendant, Inis. With a look and voice of fury, he demanded why they had brought from the castlethat ugly witch? and where was the lady Rosaviva, for whom they had been dispatched?





The ruffians stood aghast at their mistake, dreading the rage of Baldivia, who again demanded an explanation. At length Manuel ventured to say, they had followed his lordship's directions in every particular, and thought, as they had taken her from the green and gold bed, that she must be the lady Rosaviva.

"No, I swear by St. Catharina," said Inis, staring wildly round the cave, " I swear I am not the lady Rosaviva, and I told you so again and again, you ugly wretches! but you would not believe me; you would persist I was she, just as if I was so ignorant as not to be quite certain I was Inis; and you know I begged and prayed you to have pity on a poor, innocent virgin, and not attempt to deprive her of"

"Silence this senseless prate!" interrupted Baldivia, fiercely, " and let these wretches satisfy me wiry I am thus disappointed."





"Your disappointment is no fault of ours," growled Thomasio, his natural ill" humour nothing amended by the scratches he had received from Inis, the marks of whose nails heightened the disagreeable Gast of his countenance. "Ask the wench here, why she had taken up her lodgingsin her.mistress's bed, where we found her?" "It was the devil, please your lordship," rejoined Inis, " put it in my head to go there to sleep—yes, I am certain it was the devil's doings, for your lordship must knowthat the lady Rosaviva sleeps to-night in the apartment of her mother."

"In the apartment of lady Selina P' repeated Baldivia; "and wherefore, on this night in particular, quit her own chamber?" "Why, my lord, they did not tell me the reason," returned Inis; " though, to be. sure, it is not very hard to guess."

"Guess what you will, you are never the nearer to a woman's thoughts," said: Manuel.

"That is all you know about the matter," replied Inis. "Any body might guess that the lady Itosaviva was in grief about his lordship's going to Spain, for her eyes were as red as my new pompoon; and her mother knew she needed consolation, and so she prevailed on don Henriques, who, to say the truth, is the most obliging husband in all Peru, to sleep in the cedarchamber, that my lady Itosaviva might remain with her."





"D—n—tion!" muttered Baldivia.

"And so, my lord," continued Inis, "you must know that Pedrillo, the son of Diego the gardener—your lordship no doubt has noticed Pedrillo, a tall, handsome young man with one eye"

"Wretch!'' interrupted Baldivia," what has this one-eyed fellow to do with Rosaviva?"

"St. Catharina be my guard!" resumed Inis, trembling. "Your lordship is so impatient, or I should have told you before this, that Pedrillo has been my suitor ever since the last festival of St. Jago, and has played the guitar under my window eveiy night, in all sorts of weather; and so as I had no very great objection to the young





man, I wished to know whether'he was upon honour" , »

"D n his honour!" vociferated Bal

divia; "what have I to do with your vulgar intrigues?"

"Intrigues!" repeated Inis; " St. Catharina knows I am innocent of any such wickedness. I would have your lordship to know I never had an intrigue with a man in my life, though don Alfonzo Pharsamund Tortola Zorantes tried with a purse of dubloons, and a lapis lazula rosary, to bribe me out of my virtue; but, the saints be praised, I was not to be deprived of my chastity."

"Silence, babbler!" exclaimed Baldivia, grasping her throat till she was almost strangled, "peace! or I shall deprive you of life!" The gasping Inis was some moments before she was able to reply to his repeated question of—" How came you to take possession of your lady's bed?"

"Oh!" groaned Inis, " it was an evil hour for me, I am sure, when I stepped between the sheets."

"Provoking wretch, wilFyou answer,"





said Baldivia, again advancing with a look of fury towards her, " will you answer what took you to your lady's bed?"

"St. Catharina protect me!" shrieked Inis, " I am coming to the bed as fast as I can—I wished, my lord—I am sure I meant no harm—I only wished to try a trick."

"A trick!" repeated Baldivia.

M Ay, ay," muttered Manuel, grinning, and displaying his long yellow teeth, " women are all full of tricks, young and old."

"A little innocent experiment, my lord," continued Inis, "just to prove whether Pedrillo was sincere, and designed to make me his lawful wife; and this, my lord, was only to be done in a strange bed; so having seen the lady Rosaviva retire, with her mother, to her apartment, and don Henriques to the cedar-chamber, I waited till all the servants were quiet, and then stole to my lady Rosaviva's chamber, where, having knotted my garter nine times, and laid my slippers' soles upwards, I jumped into bed, and soon fell to dreaming a sweet dream, all about roses and lilies, and grand





entertainments, and music, and dancing, when I was roughly pulled by the arm—I am certain it is black and blue from the shoulder to the elbow—and a voice growled in my ear—' Lady Rosaviva, you must go with us.' Up I started, and saw •"

'' Manuel and me," said Thomasio.

"I thought I should have died with fright, at beholding two such ugly faces leaning over me," resumed Inis. "I told them over and over again I was not my lady; but it was to no purpose to talk, for they would drag me along with them, though I struggled, and kicked, and scratched."

"As my face can witness," said Manuel.

"But as your lordship knows," continued she, " that I am only Inis, I suppose I may return to the castle, and finish my dream, for I shall be very glad to know whether Pedrillo will marry me or not." She then started on her feet, and desired Manuel to shew her the way out of that dismal hole, which, to her thinking, was worse than purgatory.

Manuel looked at Baldivia for instruc





tion. At a sign of his, she was dragged back; while in reply to her entreaties for freedom, he replied—" To your own folly you owe your fate; I had no wish that you should be brought hither."

"Nor I, the saints can witness," returned she, "and humbly beg your lordship's permission to depart."

"It may not be," said Baldivia; " imprudent wretch, to the castle you return no morel"

Inis wept in agony, and called upon Pedrillo to rescue her.

"Why thou art a fool, as well as a vixen," said Thomasio, taking advantage of Baldivia's silence, who stood with folded arms, meditating, " to mention a scrapeplatter fellow, such as Pedrillo, at this time."

"I wish he was here," sobbed Inis. "Oh.f Pedrillo, Pedrillo! little do you think what trouble has befallen me this night!"

"Trouble !" said Thomasio; " what perverse jades women are! Trouble quotha! good fortune you mean; you must be mad to think about a fellow with one eye, when his lordship, the handsomest cavalier in all Peru, intends you the honour of attending him on his voyage."





"I have no such intention," replied Baldivia, starting from his reverie. "Substitute this swarthy toad for the lovely Rosaviva—impossible! Believe me, I have no design to rival the peerless Pedrillo; how," darting a glance of displeasure on Thomasio, " how could such an absurdity enter your brain?"

"Nay," growled Thomasio, " to my thinking, one wench is as good as another; and as you could not get the mistress, why I thought you would take the maid; but if you don't fancy her, why she may go about her business, I suppose."

"What, to betray me to don Henriques? never!" answered Baldivia; "her doom is sealed; she must not prate of this night's transactions."

The wretched Inis, in tones of agony, offered to take any oath he should dictate, for the preservation of his secret from all the world—" I can keep a secret, my lord," said she, " indeed I can; only ask Gasper





the steward, whether I ever told a worct about the capons and bustard he sent to hiscousin Lopez the morning, he was married."

Baldivia,, with a contemptuous smile, answered—" I trust not my secrets to the frail tenure of a woman's oath."

Inis fell at his feet, and clinging to his? knees, implored him to let her depart; but, regardless of her supplications, he dashed" her from him; and as she lay sprawling* on the flinty bottom of the cave,.he beckoned his associates in villany to the entrance: —" The grey of morning," said Baldivia,. "glimmers in the east; I must away to the castle, where it is necessary I be found' by the attendants of the marquis, who have orders to rouse me at the dawn of day; for this prating woman, this plague's"

"Women, since Eve sinned;* said Manuel, " have all been plagues."

"1 know not how to dispose of her,'*'' resumed Baldivia; " to the castle she never, shall'return, and what to do with her *

"It is a puzzling business," rejoined Thomasio, " and must be settled at once,





as Manuel and I have resolved to set out directly on our return to Mexico: To be sure, the mouth of the cave can be closed 'upon her, and I warrant, when the great stone is rolled over, she will never remove it to carry tales to the castle."

"Famine," returned Baldivia, " famine is an excruciating death; and I have no desire to let her linger in torment." Baldivia paused, as irresolute what course to pursue with the unfortunate Inis.

"Famine is the most savage and barbarous of all deaths," said Thomasio; " it would be doing the wench a kindness to cut her throat, and put an end to her misery the shortest way."

"True," said Baldivia, " it would be doing her a kindness; you speak compassionately. Look, my noble fellows, here is gold," drawing forth a weighty purse, "and here are diamonds," taking from his hat a splendid buckle; " dispose of this troublesome woman's life, and these treasures are yours."

The rapacious ruffians gazed on Baldivia's offered bribe with greedy eyes. At





the same moment, actuated by the same murderous intent, they rushed into the cave. Baldivia heard their descending steps—" Her death," said he, " secures me from discovery." A shriek met his ear; . and callous as was his heart, he shuddered —" The work of death is doing," said he; "poor wretch! she has paid dear for her folly." He listened, and a louder shriek made him start from the entrance of the cave into the forest, to wait the return of the murderers, who, to his impatient fancy, were absent a much longer period than was necessary for taking away the life of a defenceless female.

At length the red glare of a torch flashed on the boles of the surrounding trees, and Thomasio advanced towards him— ** Where is Manuel?" asked Baldivia.

"He is digging a hole," replied the ruffian, " in the corner of the cave, to bury—" '"Hush!" interrupted Baldivia," did you not hear a noise?"

"I hear the wind rustling among the brandies," replied Thomasio.

"Every moment exposes me to danger/





said Baldivia; "go and hasten Manuel to receive his share of the reward. I must away."

"Give me the reward," growled Thomasio; "I have earned it; Manuel will not demur at my receiving it."

"Take it then," rejoined Baldivia, placing the purse and diamonds in his hands, "take it; commend me to your companion, and farewell."

Baldivia waited not the reply of Thomasio, but pursued his way to the castle, shuddering at the fate of Inis, and raging at his own disappointment. Having gained his chamber, he threw himself on the bedV not to sleep, but to repent having urged a voyage to Spain, which had baffled his wishes, deprived him, for some time at least, of the possession of Rosaviva, and cost him regret and mortification.

At an early hour, the attendants entered his chamber to inform him that don Henriques had risen to repeat his adieus, and that all was in readiness for his departure. The sun shone brightly on the lofty battlements of Deloricad when the marquis and Baldivia mounted their steeds, and followed by their attendants, wound up a steep that led to Lima. Having gained the height, Baldivia looked back, full of reflections on the occurrences of the preceding night; and as his eye rested on the west turret, he beheld a female figure; it was Rosaviva, who, stationed on the battlements, watched the departure of Baldivia, and waved him her adieu; she distinctly beheld him return her salute, and having watched the cavalcade till it was lost in distance, she descended to her chamber, to weep the departure of her lover, to pray for his happiness, and wish, his return.





Some time had elapsed in the indulgence of tender sorrow, when the castleclock warned Rosaviva of the morning repast. Wondering at the unusual absence of Inis, she sent a passing domestic to summon her, who soon returned to say,. Inis was not in her chamber, nor had been; seen in the servant's, hall that morning. Astonished at this intelligence, she hastily prepared herself for attending the breakfast-table, and was quitting her chamber, when the knotted garter of Inis met her *yes; she then discovered that her bed was much discomposed, and that the yellow boddice, worn the preceding day by her attendant, lay on the floor by her slippers. In extreme surprise, Rosaviva descended to .communicate the-circumstance of Inis being .absent, and the discoveries she had made in her chamber, to her parents, to whom it appeared, that whatever had induced her to absent herself on that morning, it was evident she had passed the night in the bed of her lady.





Don Henriques felt greatly perplexed; Inis, during ten years servitude at the castle, had conducted herself with so much propriety that she was held in high regard. Passing into the hall, he strictly examined, one by one, the domestics on the non-appearance of Inis, but could obtain no information respecting her. In the course of this investigation, Pedrillo confessed that he was in the habit of playing a few tender airs every night under the window of Inis, who used to reward his serenade with putting out her head, and saying—" Go to bed, you fool, and don't disturb me any longer with your hideous noise." "This," said Pedrillo, "I used to take for a modest way of paying thanks, and always went to bed as she desired me, happy in the thought that I was not altogether disagreeable to her; but last night, please





your lordship"

"Ay, last night," repeated don Henriques, impatiently, perceiving he paused, 4i go on—what of last night?" «. ;" Why, please your lordship," replied Pedrillo, "at the usual hour, when I sup, posed the lady Rosaviva had dismissed Inis, and that she was snug in bed, I took my guitar, and placed myself under her window, and there I played all my old tunes over and over again, with the addition of two new ones, that I learned from the marquis's secretary."

But what of Inis?" said don Hen





riques. . .:

"Why, she was so barbarous," replied Pedrillo, bursting into tears, "to let me 'depart without opening the window, to -call me a fool."





"She did you much injustice," returned don Henriques, dismissing him.

Rafael, the major-domo, said, that when he retired to rest, he had carefully fastened the doors of the estate hall; and that when he arose before it was well light, he had found them wide open, "and I suspect," .said Rafael, "that Inis is gone off."

"Your suspicion amounts to a certainly," rejoined don Henriques; "but I cannot believe she is gone alone; she must have a companion in her elopement."

"No doubt," said dame Ursula, "no doubt, my lord. I have often heard Inis praise the black shining mustachoes of Lazarillo, the young marquis's lackey. I should not wonder if he had persuaded her to take a voyage to Spain with him, for he was always filling the foolish girl's ears with a parcel of idle rodomontade stories, about the wonderful sights to be seen in the old world. Ay, ay, my lord, it is easy to guess what course Inis has taken."" * -. :. .."';,. ..." .





"For shame! dame Ursula," said a pretty young girl, who had listened to the spiteful old woman's ill-natured insinuations, " for shame! Inis was too prudent to listen to such an idle bragging coxcomb as Lazarillo; besides, do you think she would be so mad as to leave all her beautiful clothes behind her? and I am certain, poor girl, let her be where she may, she is the very next thing to naked."

<( How!" interrupted don Henriques, ** next to naked! are you sure of this?"

"Yes, my lord," replied Corally, blushing; "wherever Inis is, she has nothing on but her night-clothes; I know every garment she has, and there is not one missing; no, not so much as the dress she had on last night when we parted on the landing of the great staircase to go to our separate chambers; poor, dear Inis, she has been carried off for certain."

■ Have you any idea by whom, my good girl?" asked don Henriques, struck by the account and observations of Corally; "can you guess what villain has dared to commit this outrage?"





Corally turned pale and crossed herself— '' I am certain," replied she, "Inis did not go willingly, or of her own accord, for she had a great regard for Pedrillo, though she used to laugh at his singing and call him a fool; and indeed, my lord, I am afraid that Inis has disappeared through witchcraft, or by means of the devil."

"You are right, Corally," returned don Henriques, smiling; "the devil no doubt has been the chief agent in this strange affair,"

Dame Ursula, offended by the little attention bestowed on her suspicions by don Henriques, and nettled at Corally's vindication of Inis, tossing her head, and adjusting her veil, rejoined with a sneer— "The devil! yes, I believe he has put his eloven foot upon Inis; well, well, mark my words, my lord; time will shew who is right and who is wrong; but, for my part, I believe that the devil, in the shape of a powdered lackey, with a laced jacket, has persuaded the silly girl away; and as to clothes, she could easily be provided

Vol.. i. O





with new ones at Lima, or perhaps she has put on the habit of a boy, for I remember, about a week ago, I caught her and Lazarillo together in the apartment of the young marquis."

"Have a care, Ursula," said don Henriques; "be cautious what you say, and remember that a young woman's reputation-"

"The saints forbid, my lord," interrupted the old woman, "that I should take away any young girl's reputation! not I, by my faith! I have no such wish or intention; I was only going to say, that I caught Lazarillo shewing her a beautiful pink velvet dress, all laced and seamed, and embroidered with silver; and he said it was a livery the young marquis had ordered for a page he was going to take into his service to attend him to Spain; now you know, my lord, no such page ever appeared during his stay at the castle, and who knows but Inis may have preferred being page to the marquis rather than waiting-woman to donna Rosaviva ?'.

This was so improbable a supposition





that don Henriques made no other reply than an angry " pshaw!" but when he recollected how warmly Baldivia had pressed for the immediate celebration of his marriage with Rosaviva, and that, spite of his acquiescence with the delay he had insisted on, it was evident the young man was displeased; when he remembered the account his daughter had given of the deranged state of her bed, and the scattered articles of clothing, the property of Inis, a suspicion which he feared to encourage (because to the prejudice of Baldivia) rushed on his brain, that a design had been formed to carry off RosaViva, and that, by some unaccountable intervention of Providence, Inis had become the victim of this villanous scheme. Don Henriques now became doubly anxious to discover what had become of the unfortunate girl; he wrote immediately to the marquis, requesting a strict investigation among the retinue of Baldivia, previous to their embarkation for Spain, and he instituted a search for many leagues round the castle;





he also caused Rosaviva to remove from the apartments she had hitherto occupied to a suite next his own, in order to defeat any future scheme that might be agitated, for the more he reflected on the very plain person of Iriis, the more he became persuaded that Rosaviva had been the intended prey of the villain, who, during the deep repose of the night, had effected this mysterious outrage.

Dame Ursula had hated Inis from the time of her being promoted to the station of waiting-woman to donna Rosaviva, instead of her daughter, whom she considered more worthy, and for whom she had laboured to procure the place; and she felt no little exultation and pride in her own sagacity, when she found that every investigation instituted by don Henriques, to discover the fate of the unhappy creature, had proved abortive; and she now took an equal dislike to Corally, whom the 'lady Selina deputed to the situation of the absent Inis, and with whom the gentle Rosaviva frequently conversed on the. subject of her disappearance, which, in





spite of all her lady's reasonings, the simple girl never failed to attribute to supernatural means.

In the mean time, Baldivia had safely arrived at the magnificent city of his ancestors, and had plunged into all the dissipations of Madrid, where his fine person, his polished manners, and splendid style of living, rendered him an object of universal interest and admiration; surrounded by the luxuries and festivities of un* bounded wealth, he soon forgot the innocent Rosaviva, and his solemnly-pledged promise of hastening his return to Peru, for a very short period sufficed to settle the affairs that first suggested his voyage to Spain; and so much was his vanity flattered, and his ostentation gratified, by the countenance of his sovereign, and the favourable reception, he met with from females of high rank, who, spite of the jealous watchfulness of husbands, fathers, and brothers, contrived to make assignations with him, that the vows he had plighted to Rosaviva, the sacred engagement in which he was bound to her, seldom cross.





ed his memory. Donna Isadora de Tonnes, the wife of the marquis de Tormes, a Castilian nobleman, had superseded Rosaviva in his affections.

The marquis de Tormes had fought the battles of his country, and had received the hand of the beautiful Isadora, a ward of the crown, as the reward of his valour. The marquis was "brave and politic in war;" his figure was bold and commanding, but he was unskilled in the soft insinuations, the gentle flatteries, that win the female heart. He married because it was the wish of his sovereign, and because his estates, should he die without an heir, would devolve on a branch of his family to whom he had an unconquerable hatred.

Isadora had been bred in the gloom of a monastery, and little inclined to a religious life, gladly accepted the offered hand of the marquis de Tormes, whose valorous achievements she had listened to with an admiration almost amounting to love; her ambition was flattered by an alliance with a man whose fame was the theme of every tongue, and her vanity felt





delight in the idea, that as the wife of the distinguished favourite of her sovereign, she should mingle with that world for whose pleasur.es, in the seclusion of the cloister, her heart had palpitated, with all the anxious expectation of untried transport.

On the night of her introduction to the marquis de Tormes, their nuptials were celebrated; nor had the fair Isadora much reason to be satisfied with her husband, for cold in feeling, and haughty and repulsive in manner, their lives were passed in chilling distance and unsocial indifference, A year after their marriage, the marquis had the satisfaction of seeing himself the father of a fine boy, and the year following Isadora presented him with a daughter. The purpose of succession being now doubly answered, the marquis assigned to himself an apartment distant from that of his wrife. Women had ever been considered by de Tormes as beings of an inferior nature, weak in understanding, and in-, capable of forming or executing any noble plan; to bear children and superintend the nursery, was all that Providence designed in the creation of females; and when they attempted to soar beyond these narrow bounds, to tread the fields of literature, to enter into the politics of nations, or attempted to understand the arcana of government, he considered them as monsters, whom all wise men should avoid.





Isadora, when she married, had hoped to find in her husband a tender friend and social companion, who would have been proud of her enthusiasm, who would have delighted in her praise, who would have admitted her to his counsels, and gloried to share with her his renown; but, disappointed in these cherished hopes, Isadora lived in a state of gloomy magnificence, idolizing her children, and almost hating their father. She had been four years a wife, when chance introduced her to Baldivia at a bull-feast. Scarcely twenty, the beauty of Isadora was in its brightest bloom; her large dark eyes were full of melting tenderness, and over her whole person was diffused an air of voluptuous softness, that made Baldivia eager for an





introduction. He had before met the marquis at the Escurial, and was no stranger to his character; but though little desirous of the acquaintance of de Tonnes; the beauty of Isadora made him anxious to gain admission to his mansion; having caught the eye of the marquis,, he bowed respectfully; the cold and ungracious return made by de Tormes to his salute seemed by no means favourable to his wishes; but accident accomplished for him what the repelling hauteur of the marquis appeared to refuse; one of the bulls, mad with repeated wounds, leaped the barrier, and rushed furiously among the spectators, goring and trampling all that came in his way.

Overcome by terror, Isadora fainted, and it was considered by Baldivia as an instance of good fortune, thati unencumbered by the care of a female,. he was at liberty to assist de Tormes in conveying his insensible wife to her carriage. Politeness dictated, on the part of Baldivia, inquiries after the health of the lady in whose safety he had been instrumental; and the same sentiment compelled the frigid marquis to receive and thank him for his services. The ice being once broken, they entered into conversation, in the support of which de Tormes found Baldivia so intelligent, so very superior in intellect and education to the young nobility of Spain, that, giving him credit for a mind congenial with his own, he graciously accorded him a general invitation to his mansion, introduced him to his wife, and, completely deceived by his specious behaviour, allowed him undisturbed opportunities to perpetrate deeds that shortly destroyed the peace, and tarnished the honour, of the noble house of de Tormes.





CHAPTER II.

Why I can smile, and murder while I smile.

I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,

Deceive more slyly than Ulysses could,

And, like a Simon, take another Troy.

I can add colours even to the cameleon,

Change shapes with Proteus for advantage,

And set the aspiring Catiline to school.



Shakespeare.

Gonzai.o de Baldivia had sa minutely studied, and so artfully accommodated his sentiments, and the topics he conversed on, to the genius, taste, and opinions of the marquis de Tormes, that he absolutely considered the accident fortunate that had introduced to his acquaintance a young man of such superior mind and abilities.

In a short time the society of this accomplished hypocrite became necessary to the happiness of the marquis, who felt uneasy when he absented himself for a single day. Nor had his intended victim





escaped the contagious magic of his fascinations. Fatal to donna Isadora was the introduction of Gonzalo de Baldivia to the Palace de Tormes, for in him her youthful and enthusiastic fancy beheld the lover, whose assiduous tenderness would have called forth and cherished those exquisite feelings which the frigid marquis, by his reserve and apathy, threw back on her own disappointed heart. She beheld with wonder the ascendancy which Baldivia seemed every day to acquire over her husband, whose hauteur vanished before the graceful wit and manly eloquence of this newly-elected friend and favourite.

To donna Isadora the manners of Baldivia wore an air of respect, mingled with insinuating softness; the melting expression of his dark eyes, which frequently sought hers, created a tumult in her bosom, which respect for her husband did not enable her to repel. Every new day discovered a new grace in Baldivia, while even the valour of the marquis, his character of invincible courage, which had formerly excited her admiration, began now





to be considered as a ferocious quality, excited by hardy nerves, and a disposition delighting in tumult and carnage. To her romantic imagination, the wreath composed of olive and myrtle was more desirable than the victor's crown of laurel; and the soft voice of peace and love, far to be preferred before the loud-applauding shouts of conquest and fame.

Frequently the devoted Isadora beheld the designing Gonzalo gazing on her with an expression of tender pity, when some repulsive action or unfeeling negligence of de Tormes had caused a tear to start to her eye, or an indignant flush to mantle on her cheek.

The artful Baldivia soon perceived that his attentions were regarded by donna Isadora without displeasure; he felt her hand tremble beneath the gentle pressure of his when he led her to her carriage, and the bright blush that hurried across her cheek when their eyes met, he exultingly hailed as the confession of mutual wishes. —As yet no opportunity had presented of conversing with her alone, and he was





debating the means of conveying a billet to her hand, when a slight indisposition introduced him to the bedchamber of the marquis de Tormes, where, to his infinite satisfaction, he learned that donna Isadora's apartments were on the other side of the house, and ornamented with balconies that overhung the garden.

Baldivia lost no time in reconnoitring the wall that inclosed the garden; it was high, and defended on the top by spikes of iron; the wall might have been climbed,, but the ironwork opposed an insurmountable barrier. Baldivia was turning away, execrating the jealousy of the Spanish character, which placed such impediments in the way of intrigue, when he beheld, some paces distant, the gardener Sancho issue from beneath a rustic arch; he hurried towards him, and joyfully perceived a low door, which, concealed by twining shrubs, had before escaped his observance. Delighted at this discovery, he entered into conversation with the old man, and expressed a wish to see his garden. Sancho was proud of the honour; he threw open





the door, and they passed into the orangery together.

Baldivia presently won the heart of Sancho, by admiring the perfect order in which the walks were kept, and the rich luxuriance of the fruits and flowers.

"The marquis, our lord," said Sancho, "has but little delight in these things, but my lady spends many hours here, particularly on moonlight nights in yonder pavilion."

Baldivia sprung forward. In the ecstasy of this intelligence he almost forgot his usual cunning and circumspection; but instantly recollecting the imprudence of his conduct, to stifle any surmises that might have arisen in the old man's mind, he stopped before a rose-tree, affecting to seize a beautiful large butterfly, which was fluttering over the crimson flowers, and which he pretended he wanted to add to the collection of a friend.

The old gardener made a clumsy attempt to assist in the capture of the gilded insect, and tore off one of its painted wings.

"It is better to kill it out of its misery," said Sancho, stamping his foot upon it"*, "and if your lordship wants butterflies^ little Silvio, my grandson, shall catch you plenty."





They were now at the front of the pavilion, and Baldivia's foot rested on the steps that led to the entrance. The old man said it was locked, but he could'presently fetch the key from his daughter, Theresa, who had the charge of keeping every thing in order.—" To be sure," continued Sancho, "the inside is worth seeing, for it is full of pictures and them sort of nicknacks, all made by donna Isadora herself, who spends many hours here with her pencil, and her books, and her music.

Baldivia seated himself on the steps of the pavilion, and the old man hobbled away for the key. Having watched him out of sight, Baldivia flew with his utmost speed through' the orangery,, and having seized the key of the door through which he entered, he thrust it in his bosom, and hastily retraced his steps to the pavilion, to wait the return of Saneho.—" Fate," said he, exultingly, "fate aids, my wishes;





'with this little instrument will I obtain an interview with the beautiful Isadora. Valiant de Tormes, be thou victorious in the field of battle! be it mine to triumph in the bowers of love!" The return of Sancho gave him admittance to the pavilion. —" This," said Baldivia, mentally, "this is the temple of the Paphian goddess, and here will I devoutly worship her."

The building was of circular form, furnished, in the Moorish style, with gilded lattices, surmounted by draperies of rosecoloured taffeta, which served to canopy the low sofas stretched beneath them; the Avails were elegantly, stuccoed, and divided into compartments^ which were adorned with beautiful views of the adjacent country; a lute, surrounded by large vases of flowers, stood opposite the entrance, and on a slab of variegated marble lay a portfolio and materials for writing.

"This is most fortunate," said Baldivia. *' I have suffered the morning to steal from me, forgetful of a business of importance;" then seizing a pen, he requested Sancho to hasten and procure a lighted taper. "I





have no time to lose," continued he, affecting to write with rapidity; "quicken thy pace, good Sancho."—Having folded and directed a sheet of paper, he opened the portfolio, and found, among many ether beautiful productions of Isadora's pencil,, a Cupid sharpening an arrow. Instantly he wrote beneath the drawing—

* Deep in my trembling heart this arrow lies,

Barb'd by tiie fire of Isadora's eyes;

Oh, let thy smile a balm for anguish yield,

And be love's pangs by love's compassion heal'd !""'

He had scarce time to close the portfolio before Sancho stood before him with the taper, and asked if his lordsTiip wanted any thing else.—" The wind last night," said the old man, "has torn down the passion-flower—I must go and nail it up; for if my lady sees it trailing on the ground,, she will be displeased; it is such a favourite,, she sent for it all the way from Andalusia, from the convent where she was brought up—By the saints, I think it must be a melancholy sort of life the nuns lead, and yet I once heard my lady tell Theresa shewished she had taken the veil."





Baldivia cursed the garrulous old man, and rejoiced to see him depart, for to take the impression of the key of the orangery in wax, was the sole purpose for which he wanted the taper; having succeeded to his wish, he was in haste to be gone. Near the steps of the pavilion, he found the gardener, to whom he gave a piece of gold.

Delighted with this unexpected generosity, Sancho would have attended him through the orangery; but Baldivia, who wished to replace the key without his observance, forbad him, saying he would be careful to close the door.

The politeness of the old man was obliged to yield to the peremptory command of Baldivia, who having restored the key to its place, hastened to procure the means of accomplishing the ruin of the woman he fancied he loved, and the dishonour of the man he called his friend.

At the noonday hour the marquis always took his siesta. Donna Isadora, as usual, repaired to her favourite retreat, the pavilion; but though every thing round her seemed calculated to inspire pleasure,,



r





this fairy retreat no longer afforded her the innocent amusements which formerly beguiled the painful regret occasioned by finding the affections of her young heart usurped by a man, whose frigid nature was incapable of appreciating the value of melting sensibilities and feminine virtues, whose caresses seemed the effort of condescension bestowed by pride on an inferior. Isadora held in her hand the sonnets of a celebrated Spanish poet; her eyes rested awhile on the open page, but her imagination no longer wandered with enthusiastic delight in the regions of romantic fiction; she closed the uninteresting volume, and taking down her lute, struck a few chords of an air she had heard Baldivia sing. A conscious blush stole over her cheek, and a reproving sentiment, the silent admonition of the monitor within, heaved her bosom with a deep sigh. One white hand fell powerless on the strings of the lute, her other arm rested on the marble slab, and the long silken fringes of her eyelids concealed her dark eyes, whieh were bent on the marble pavement; she was silent, but





the graceful majesty of Baldivia's form, the witchery of his smile, hovered in her mental vision, and the touching melody of his voice sounded in the retentive ear of memory.—." Blessed Mary! Patroness of Chastity ! Virgin Queen! defend me from these sinful illusions!" murmured Isadora; "banish from my thoughts this dangerous form! may thy pure influence defend me, oh Virgin Mother! from this seductive intruder on the tranquillity of my soul.!"

After some time spent in prayer, Isadora, unable to find amusement in the pavilion, descended -to the garden•, but the heat of the sun was intolerable, and she quickly sought the shade of the orangery: the trses were gently agitated by a soft air, which wafted round her the rich delicious perfume of the fruits and flowers. Seated beneath the spreading branches of a bergamot, the odour she inhaled seemed, with every breath she drew, to increase the malady of her heart, and, like subtle poison, inflamed the passion she endeavoured to forget. The seat on which Isadora had sunk was opposite a pair of turtle-doves,



f





who, with mutual tenderness, were then nursing their scarcely-fledged offspring; the attention of Isadora was attracted by the caresses they bestowed on each other, her eyes filled with tears as she beheld the fond solicitude of the feathered pair; these doves had been reared from the nest by Isadora, and constantly fed by her hand; they knew their gentle benefactress, and obeyed her voice; for a moment they forsook their downy nurslings, and made airy circles round her head, then perched on the white hands she extended to receive them; their ivory beaks and shining wings allowed the tender pressure of her ruby tips; they rested on her bosom, and suffered her to smooth their beautiful plumage; but the strong, tender pulse of nature throbbed in their innocent hearts, and impatient of delay, they sought their little brood, and with outstretched wings, and plaintive cooings, hovered again over the downy nest of mutual love.

Isadora, as she beheld the endearments

, of her doves, sighed heavily—" Man," said

she, "whom the great Creator endowed "With a rational soul and reasoning faculties, -stifles the tender impulses of nature; he disdains to yield to the voice of affection; lie disclaims, as unworthy his dignity, the gentle offices of love, and neglects his mate and offspring to follow the mad incitements of ambition; to be called by the world a hero, he renounces the dearer duties of a husband and a father. Had it been my fate," continued Isadora, "to match With a mind affectionate as my own, I had been happy eVen in the humblest sphere; but now, what is my life, joyless and unblest! alas! at best but splendid misery! how fallacious was the supposition that the hero and the lover would combine in the marquis de Tormes, or that the flame of glory and the ardour of love could exist in the same bosom! Oh that I had never quitted the sanctuary of my infancy! oh that I had remained for ever secluded in the monastery! then had I escaped this bitter disappointment; then had I avoided the guilt of beholding, with partial eyes, this tootamiable stranger. Cold-hearted, unfeeling de Torroes! how unlike thy freezing look, thy haughty demeanour, tothe youthful fascinating Baldivia! oh, had my happy destiny bestowed my hand on him, how different had passed my days! Affluence would then have been a blessing, for genius, fancy, and art, would have united their various powers to express the feelings of two hearts mutually attached, and mutually endeavouring to promote each other's felicity. Not thus in solitude should I have pined; not thus should I have -shed regretful tears."





For a few moments Isadora gave way to her feelings, and wept the disappointment of her heart; but the approach of the attendant with her children compelled her to wipe away her tears, and assume a cheerfulness she did not feel. Isadora idolized her little ones; and as the blooming innocents clasped her neck, and covered her hands and cheeks with their kisses, while they gamboled round with artless endearments, she forgot the misery of her union with their unbending father. Some moments passed away, beguiled of their sadness by the prattle of her children-;





but no sooner had they left her, than her thoughts again took the same melancholy turn.—" Employment," said Isadora, "is the best antidote to affliction; I will be busy." Hastily gathering some of the beautiful flowers that enamelled her path, she reascended the steps of the pavilion, intending to amuse her thoughts by copying them. On searching her portfolio for drawing paper, she beheld with surprise the lines written by Baldivia. At first an emotion of indescribable joy rushed throbbing through her heart, a glow of brilliant crimson flushed her cheek, and her melting dark eyes sparkled with delight. —" I am beloved!" exclaimed Isadora, rapturously kissing the inanimate characters; "oh unexpected transport! Baldivia loves me! for who but Baldivia could thus elegantly express the sentiments of a heart subjugated by affection!" But short was this delirium of pleasure; in the next instant her feelings of ecstasy were damped by the distressing reflection that she was fhe wife of the haughty marquis- de

VOL. L JE





Tormes, the mother of his children. Isadora sunk back on a sofa, pale and trembling; she raised the diamond cross that hung at her bosom to her lips; then covering her face with her hands, she wept in agony. The voice of her husband roused her from the indulgence of this criminal grief; she started in dismay, and hastily placed the drawing in her portfolio; then snatching up the flowers that had fallen at her feet, she seized a pencil and "began sketching them, hoping by this employment, her eyes swollen with tears would escape the notice of the marquis; but another voice now met her ear, and caused a tremor that compelled her to lay down the pencil; it was the voice of Baldivia, who, with the marquis, was ascending the steps of the pavilion.

On perceiving donna Isadora, who, in the utmost confusion, rose as he entered, Baldivia bowed gracefully, and politely apologized for obtruding on her privacy.

Isadora felt the necessity of a reply, but unable, from the agitation occasioned by a variety of feelings, to utter a single sen





tence, she sunk back on the seat she had just quitted, nearly fainting. The inquiring glance of Baldivia read, in the alternate change of her countenance from white to red, and the tremor of her frame, that his confession of love had not escaped her observance; and as her manner evinced no displeasure, he flattered himself that only opportunity was wanting to the accomplishment of his triumph over the wife of de Tormes; but unwilling that the marquis should notice her agitation, he artfully .delayed him under the portico, to give Isadora time to recover her serenity and presence of mind; but in vain was this exertion of cunning; the disorder of Isadora was so evident, that even the negligent de Tormes, who seldom condescended to bestow a thought on her looks, bending from his usual dignity, inquired what had happened to discompose her?

The eyes of Baldivia, full of tender supplication, met hers; she blushed deeply, and in a faint voice replied she felt a sudden indisposition. The marquis recommended her retiring to her chamber and seeking repose, at the same time observing the day was uncommonly warm, and probably occasioned faintness.





Baldivia, with an air of commiseration, offered his services to conduct her; but Isabel, one of her women, being in sight, the marquis coldly replied, there was no occasion for his having the trouble; at the same time taking the arm of Baldivia, he descended to the garden, and ordered Isabel to attend her lady.

Isadora rejoiced to see them depart; the conduct of Baldivia displeased her; he had insulted her virtue by a declaration of love, and her conscience reproached her with not unmasking him to de Termes —" Yet should I denounce him to my husband," said Isadora, "the death of one or both will be the consequence; and, alas! by the fall of either, I should be rendered for ever miserable."

Dissatisfied with the marquis, with Baldivia, and herself, she was glad that the plea of indisposition would furnish an apology for her remaining in her own aparttnent during the remainder of the day, as she felt that in solitude only she could tranquillize her feelings, and reason her erring heart to duty and to peace. Isadora could not love de Tormes, but she remembered he was her husband, and that she had pledged to him the sacred vow of fidelity. Sensible of her passion for Baldivia, she shuddered at the encroaching weakness; she remembered too that she was the mother of two lovely children, on whose future life the conduct of their Jnother would reflect honour or disgrace.-Occupied by these reflections, she passed ©n to her oratory, where, meekly sinking ©n her knees before a picture of the Virgin, she bewailed, with floods of tears, the pleasure she had taken in the society of the dangerous Baldivia; she earnestly and devoutly prayed for grace to resist the criminal weakness that, like a baneful poison, infected her heart; she humbly invoked the preserving influence of the Virgin, that she might always continue a chaste wife, and that her erring passions





might never seduce her to sully her purity, or commit any action that might tarnish the fame of her hushand.

Her prayers being finished, she endeavoured to forget her sorrows in repose; but her couch was uneasy, for the remembrance of Baldivia banished sleep. Isadora rose unrefreshed from her couch; she sent for her children, and by joining intheir little sports, endeavoured to obliterate from her too-tenacious recollection Baldivia's confession of love; but the lines, so expressive of tender feeling, were not to be banished from her thoughts; they were impressed on her heart and brain, and while she folded the smiling innocents to her bosom, a sigh of regret escaped her, and the wish that they were Baldivia's children hovered on her lips. Though wearied with their prattle, she detained them with her till sleep stole on their sports. Never had day appeared to Isadora so long, so dull, and at its close she found, on examination of herj conscience, that she had sinned as much by





indulging the recollection of Baldivia's attractions, as if she had actually spent the day in his society.

Before he retired to rest, which was always at an early hour, the marquis dispatched his valet with an inquiry after her health. Isabel received the message, and delivered it to her lady, who replied —" Inform the marquis that I am better, and that I trust a night's repose will quite recover me." With this message the attendant withdrew.—" Had ,de Tormes loved me," sighed Isadora, "would he have contented himself with a cold formal inquiry? Unfeeling man! I could have loved you with all the ardour' of. affection* but you have disdained the effusions of tenderness—you have repulsed the emotions of feeling—you have denied me your confidence—you have treated me as a being of inferior order to yourself, as a creature destitute of mind and intellect. Is it then wonderful that I cease to love you—that my young heart selects another? Oh religion, oh duty, protect





me! shield me, save me from this.criminal passion—this guilty weakness!"

Isadora having dismissed her attendants, retired to bed, where her harassed senses sunk into a short repose; but waking about midnight, she found her chamber sultry, and that its heat increased the feverish irritation of her frame; quitting her bed, she repaired to her dressing-room, the balconies of which hung over the garden. Here the night-breeze, as she opened the lattice, refreshed her languid frame, as it wafted round her the odour of the flowers that now profusely exhaled their sweets. Fearful of exposing herself to the dew, she sat near the lattice, round which grew the rich Catalonia jessamine, whose clustering white blossoms seemed silvered by the moonbeams, which brightly illumed the flowery paths of the garden. The steps of the pavilion being of white marble, were a conspicuous object; and as her thoughts recurred to the amatory verse she had read underneath her drawing, Baldivia, with all the seductive grace of youth and beauty.





rushed on her fancy; she struggled to suppress the heavy sigh that heaved her bosom, but the bitter remembrance of the misery that had hitherto attended her married life, and was yet likely to pursue her, overwhelmed her with anguish.—" I am devoted to wretchedness," said Isadora, her eyes suffused with tears; "my youth consumes in regret. Hopeless of brighter hours, what remains for me but the horrors of despair—what refuge but the grave!" '.;,;

Sunk in deep despondency, she sat meditating a return to the monastery from whence she had been taken by her sove. reign to be united to the marquis de Tormes.—" Surely," said Isadora, " I shall not be opposed in this desire; at the foot of the altar I will weep, and repent the guilty weakness of my heart; I will pray for de Tormes and my children. Surely, there Heaven will have pity on me; and though happiness is denied, peace may yet become the inmate of my bosom, ^.last what has this world, I was so anxious fo

£3 ,,;,,,





enter, afforded me ?—disappointment and remorse; the state and splendour for which I panted are insufficient to purchase content; in the convent only can I expect tranquillity; by religion only can I be" eonsoled. To-morrow," continued she, ft to-morrow will I mention to the marquis my desire to return to Andalusia."

Her memory now reverted to the earliest days of recollection, when the pious sisterhood of St. Aganissa vied in acts of kindness to her; her fancy retraced the chapel, the refectory, the dormitory, and the gardens, along whose walks she had bounded, with thoughts as free as the painted butterfly, whose shining wings fluttered over the flowers she delighted to cultivate.

While sunk in these meditations, a few plaintive notes struck from a lute roused her from the indulgence of sorrow. She raised her head from the white hand on which it reclined, and remained for a few seconds in the attitude of listening; her eyes were directed towards the pavilion, on the marble steps of vvhich she beheld the figure of a man; a sensation of terror prompted her to ring and rouse her attendants, supposing the intruder to be a robber. While she sat gazing and irresolute what course to pursue, the lute again struck her ear, and the idea of the man being a domestic belonging to the marr quis, and probably a lover of Isabel's, kept her stationary, for certainly no robber would give notice of his approach, or consider music necessary to the purposes of plunder. The figure now descended the steps, and advancing towards the balcony near which she sat, Isadora no longer remained in doubt, for by the light of the unclouded moon she plainly distinguished the elegant features of Baldivia; his eyes were raised to the balcony, while he advanced and retreated, in order to obtain a view of the apartment whose lattice opened on the balcony; but the situation in which she sat, shaded by the silver drapery of the curtain, concealed her from his sight. Baldivia perceived the lattice was open; he also distinguished a faint light, that streamed from the lamp burning in the bedchamber,





and concluded, from these circumstances, that Isadora was not yet retired to rest; his presumptuous hopes suggested the possibility of luring her to the balcony, and once there, he relied on his own persuasive rhetoric, and her vanity and credulity, to complete his wishes. Again his hand gracefully swept the lute, and in a voice, low but full of melody, he sung—

"May love inspire the tender dream

Tn.it hover?, lady, o'er thy pillow,

While I, beneath the moonlight gleam,



Am tost on doubt's tempest'ous billow!

"Oh listen, lady, to the strain,

Fttm a devoted bosom flowing!

Give one sweet smile to ease love's pain,



While night's soft murra'ring gales are blowing.

"Still Ho thy fringed eyelids close;

Lady, from bleep one moment borrow;

Oh, bid the throbbing heart repose,



Of hhn who wanders here in sorrow!

",Cease, cease, my lute ! thy pensive strain

Floats unregarded o'er her pillow,

Ami he who meets her cold disdain



Must sink on doubt's tempest'ous billow."

Isadora recognised the soft melody of Baldivia's voice, and her senses, yielding to the delightful assurance of being beloved, were for a short time subjugated by a tumultuous delirium of wild transport; but virtue and reason had not yet resigned their empire in her mind, and starting from the guilty indulgence which had entranced her, she was about to express her displeasure, that Baldivia should insult her ear with the declaration of a love, which he knew was criminal in him to offer, and doubly so in her to receive with approbation. Glowing with resentment, she was rushing forward; her white hand was extended to draw aside the drapery that partially shaded the lattice, but reflection arrested her step before it touched the balcony. Her second thought considered it wisdom to let Baldivia depart with the belief that his serenade was unheard.—" If," said she, "I express my resentment, I shall be obliged to inform the marquis of th£ transaction, for secrecy would then wear the form of encouragement, and de Tormes would no doubt feel it necessary to avenge an insult offered to himself in the person of his wife;





the death of one or both would be the inevitable consequence, and by the fall of either my wretchedness would certainly increase; rest then, Isadora; breathe no whisper of this outrage; bury it deep in thy bosom, nor suffer the presuming Baldivia to think his guilty secret known; oh, let him not, from thy imprudence, believe his dangerous melody has pierced beyond the ear of Night!"

While this resolve of secrecy and these thoughts passed in the mind of Isadora, the wily Baldivia had cast many an eager and inquiring glance towards the balcony, which, filled with odoriferous shrubs and flowers, he thought might prevent his perceiving any object beyond the lattice. For a moment deceived by a passing cloud which shadowed the radiance of the moon, he fancied he saw the drapery drawn aside, and his exulting hopes brought the lovely form of Isadora to his ardent gaze; but finding himself disappointed, and that no form of beauty appeared, no approving voice replied to his amorous strain, he retired with lingering steps, frequently stop





ping to turn an anxious gaze on the balcony; and though mortified athis ill-success, persuading himself that timidity alone had prevented donna Isadora from replying .to his passion. The bell from the neighbouring monastery of Dominican friars informed him that it was time to begone; he therefore quickened his step, resolving not to relinquish the pursuit till success crowned his enterprise, and flattering himself that his next attempt would be more fortunate.

Isadora, with a beating heart, watched the retreating figure of Baldivia till it was lost in the thick shade of the orangery; she then ventured into the balcony; for a moment her eyes were rivetted to the spot where he had stood, and fancy gave to her ear the plaintive melody of his rich-toned voice.—" Blessed Mary, defend me from this witchery!" said she, shuddering at the latitude she had involuntarily allowed her thoughts. The moon was sinking behind the grey turrets of the monastery, and hastily closing the lattice, she again sought her bed; but the mind of Isadora was too full of uneasy reflection to yield to the soothing influence of sleep; her pride was offended by the presumptuous cqnduct of Baldivia, though her heart was too sensible of his power . she wondered by what means he had gained access to the garden, and how he had discovered her apartments; she had never observed him to speak to any of her women, except Isabel, and she was the daughter of a Castilian soldier, who had fought and died by the side of de Tormes, who had cheered his last moments, and soothed his expiring agonies, with a promise of providing for this girl, his only child. Isabel, therefore, attached to the marquis by the strong tie of gratitude, she conceived incorruptible; her suspicion fell on Theresa, the daughter of old Sancho, the gardener, whom she believed had been bribed by Baldivia to his interest, as it was evident he had obtained access to the pavilion, of which she alone had a key, being the person whose office it was to keep it in order; but to question Theresa on the subject was impossible; the inquiry donna Isadora was anxious to





make, she was compelled to suppress, from the dread of the marquis coming to the knowledge of Baldivia's midnight visit to the garden. "Caution and silence," said Isadora, "must be observed; for were this circumstance divulged, the haughty and inflexible de Tormes would never rest till he washed away the insult in the blood of the erring Baldivia, and I should be the occasion of murder. Oh, no, no! from the weight of such wretchedness, from such incurable calamity, ye blessed saints, defend me!"

On the following morning the marquis came in person to the dressing-room of his wife; the conscious Isadora trembled at his presence with all the painful apprehension of discovery, but the manner in which he inquired after her health restored her to composure, and enabled her to attend to his command respecting the state-apartments being prepared for the reception of his friend, don Gusman Loncillos, an officer of high rank and distinguished bravery, who had shared with hiia





the glory of " many a well-fought field," and whose arrival he intended to celebrate with all the pomp and magnificence suitable to his own rank, and expressive of the high estimation in which he held his guest.

Donna Isadora heard of the arrival of don Gusman with secret satisfaction; she considered his visit at that particular crisis extremely fortunate, as the chief of her time and attention would be occupied by him, and in providing for his convenience and gratification. In doing the honours of her house, she should escape the eyes of Baldivia, which, with a glance of flame, were too frequently fixed on hers, and spoke a language impossible to be mistfrken.

Only a few hours notice being given to the domestics, all was bustle and confusion.; even the stately de Tonnes himself bent from his high state, and appeared to glow with animation, while waiting the arrival of don Gusman de Loncillos. The chief of the household, in their superbly-laced liveries, lined the hall, while the marquis and donna Isadora received their guest under the portico of the palace.





To the great relief of Isadora, Baldivia did not appear during the day, and she was able to acquit herself to her own satisfaction and the admiration of her guest. At the hour of repose, Isadora had leisure to wonder at the absence of Baldivia—a circumstance so unusual that her fears were excited, lest having stood so long exposed to the night-air, he was suffering by indisposition for his imprudence. Her thoughts then turned on don Gusman; he was the friend of the marquis de Tormes, and on that account entitled to her respect; but for his own particular merits she felt no sentiment of deference; there was in his look and manner an undefinable something that displeased her, though she could not assign to any look or action the exact reason of her dislike.

The extreme beauty of his friend's wife was evident to don Gusman at the first glance; nor was he long in making a. discovery of the perfect indifference with which the marquis beheld her. Don Gusmart was not insensible to female loveliness, and, spite of his friendship for de Tormes, he thought him undeserving such a treasure, and wished that the hand of Isadora had been bestowed on him, whose heart would have warmly appreciated her charms.— Full of these ideas, he exerted himself to appear agreeable, and attract her notice by his polite attention; but don Gasman was "declining into the vale of years;" his person was ungraceful, his gait stooping* and his face much disfigured by a crooked scar on his cheek, an honourable testimony of courage, received from the stroke of a sabre when rescuing the standard of hi* country from the hands of the enemy.





The following day the marquis took don Gusman to the palace of Baldivia, whom he insisted should return with them to meet the friends assembled in honour of his guest. The blushes that mantled on, the cheek of Isadora did not escape the watchful Loncillos, who, while reflecting on the age and disposition of de Tormes, thought it not impossible that she might solace herself for his neglect in the arms of the young and handsome Baldivia. Seated opposite to her at the banquet, and com inced he had not obtained the place he wished in her favour, while the marquis, with much solemnity, detailed "the pride, pomp, and circumstance, of glorious war," he busied himself in observing Isadora's 'every motion; and following the direction of her eyes, he discovered they were frequently fixed on the elegant form of Baldivia. Mortified at the fancied preference, he determined on revenge; he felt enraged at the apathy of the marquis, and resolved to rouse him to the observance of what he believed militated against his honour; hut to suspect the mutual partiality of the youthful pair without proof, would avail nothing. Secretly he resolved to watch, and if possible detect, and this merely to be revenged on a silly girl, who could prefer an inexperienced stripling to him who had fought his country's battles, and gained "eminence in arms." Loncillos saw with surprise the ascendancy Baldivia had gained over the mind of de Tonnes.





In literature lie was his oracle, and his opinion, even on military subjects, met the approbation of a veteran in arms. In the eyes of the marquis, the artful Baldivia appeared a demigod; for, with persuasive eloquence, he charmed his attention, and by flattering his pride, with an empty shew of Tespect and deference, he blinded him to the passion which stimulated his conduct, and made him equally unconscious and unobservant of the evident predilection of his wife.

After a few days residence at the Palace <le Tormes, don Gusman learned that donna Isadora slept in an apartment distant from her husband, and that the balconies of her dressing-room opened on the garden; to a suspicious mind this discovery was " confirmation strong as holy writ."—" The cold de Tormes," said don Gusman, striding before a mirror, and contemplating his disfigured countenance, as he caught the unpleasant view, "the cold de Tormes resigns his beautiful wife to the happy Baldivia; it must be.so; every circumstance confirms his dishonour. "Glory is the mistress of de Tormes; his delight the tumultuous bustle of a camp; his thoughts are occupied by military projects, while the virtue of his wife becomes an easy conquest to this favourite, this presuming minion, who artfully flatters the credulous de Tormes, while he dishonours him."





Such were the suspicions of don Gusman, who fancied himself supplanted in the esteem of his friend by the acquaintance of a day, and that his . merits were totally overlooked by donna Isadora, whose youthful judgment was dazzled by the 6hewy accomplishments and specious manner of the handsome stranger. . The expressive countenance of the lovely, artless Isadora was an intelligent page, and, unhappily for her, too easily read by the crafty, presuming Baldivia. The heightened carnation of her glowing cheek,- the shining fluid trembling in her dark eyes, which constantly averted themselves from his gaze, were, to him, conversant in the symptoms of growing inclination, certain indications of the disorder of her thoughts, and the ascendancy he had already obtain* ed in her bosom. Her manner convinced him she had the night before listened to his declaration of love; there was no anger in the timid glances shot through the long silken fringes of her eyes—no displeasure in the soft tones of her voice, when addressing him. Was he not encouraged? To persevere was to be blest- -"And why delay the happiness that courts me?" said Baldivia, mentally, as from the windows of the saloon he beheld the brightly-illumined spires of the great church of St. Salvador. —" The night is sultry, and Isadora, before she retires to rest, will seek the refreshment of the balcony, to enjoy the mild splendour of the moon, and inhale the perfumes wafted by the midnight breeze from the orangery. Silence and the moon are favourable , to amorous adventures; this night then," continued he, pursuing the subject, " this happy night will I pursue my fortune."





Impatiently he waited till the throng of visitors, invited in honour of don Gusman Loncillos, departed from the Palace de Tormes. In the bustle of retiring* while the marquis was engaged in paying; the customary compliments to his. guests, Baldivia contrived to touch the hand of I sadora. Letting fall his glove, he stoopecl to raise it, and, at the same moment, hi* lips pressed a warm kiss on her trembling ringers. ,





This action, and the look Isadora be* stowed on the daring Baldivia, in which more of tenderness than indignation was expressed, did not escape the vigilance of the lynx-eyed don Gusman, whose suspicions mind felt assured, that unresented liberty was the absolute " confirmation of a foregone conclusion."—" De Tormes is, abused," said he; " Baldivia is a villain, his, wife a wanton; lulled in security, he dreams, not of his dishonour; the seeming ipno-* cence of his wife, and the sophistry of Baldivia, have sealed his eyes, and charmed his understanding; but I am truly his. friend, and will awake him from this disgraceful lethargy; I will unmask these hy7 poerites, and shew the deceived de Tonnes

VOL. i. F





their real characters: this night," continued he, " shall bring conviction; I will watch the movements Of Baldivia; I will assure my eyes whether "he returns home to rest, or if that'kiss, so cautiously impressed, so graciously received, was not the signal of an appointment to meet again, when the deluded husband, and the inmates of the palace, are retired to their xepose, and yield this guilty pair security,"

Unobserved by the marquis, Loncillos mingled with the departing guests, and at a distance followed Baldivia, till he saw him pass under the portico, and enter the magnificent hall of his own palace—" They meet not to-night," said the disappointed don Gusman, as he concealed himself under the shadow of a colossal «tatue, that stood in the square opposite the Baldiviaa palace; " they meet not to-night." As he spoke, he observed lights passing the windows.as if tfte domestics of the palace were retiring to their chambers—" I have mistaken the appointment," continued don Gusman, " and the detection of their cri





minal intercourse must wait a more propitious hour."

Displeased at not being able to substantiate his suspicion, don Gusman drew his cloak closely round him, and strode with deliberate step across the square. All was silent; the inhabitants of Madrid had retired to rest, and he had nearly reached the Palace de Tormes, when he beheld a man dart swiftly round an angle of the building, that led to the back of the orangery. Again the suspicion of don Gusman was in full force; though the transient view that he caught of the flitting figure did not allow him positively to pronounce it Baldivia, yet it was his height, and he determined, at every hazard, to be convinced; he therefore quickened his pace, till he entered on an avenue thickly planted with chesnut trees, through the luxuriant interwoven branches of which the moon shed but an imperfect light, while the dark shadows of the trees hid ever)' passing object, and the thick, short turf beneath, like a soft carpet, returned no sound of the foot that pressed it. The high-raised gardere wall appeared at the termination of the chesnut avenue; and here again don Gusman caught a view of the person whom he pursued, as he swiftly passed the trellissed gates of the garden.





"He cannot now escape me," said Loncillos; "and if it proves to be the vaunted favourite of de Tonnes, how will he, with all his sophistry, be able to account for his appearance here at such an hour? surprise at this unexpected detection will confound him."

The eyes of don Gusman glanced round in every direction, in search of the object of his pursuit; they rested on a low, rustic arch, and beneath it stood Baldivia, applying a key to the door that led to the orangery. The suspicion of Loncillos was now confirmed beyond the shadow of doubt; he sprung forward, and eagerly seized the arm of Baldivia, whose imagination, rioting on the beauties of Isadora, and impatient to gain her presence, had prevented his hearing a footstep near him.

"What!" exclaimed the exulting Loncil





los, " is it mine to develop the real character of the chosen favourite of de Tormes! can it indeed be possible that Gonzalo Baldivia is a midnight depredator! takes advantage," continued he, in derisive tone, "of the still hour of repose, and while the dragon sleeps, prepares to rob him of the golden fruit!"

"Whatever were my intents, whatever cause has brought me to this spot," replied Baldivia, fiercely struggling in the strong, muscular grasp of don Gusman, " you shall dearly repent having become the mean observer of my actions."

** Vain boy !" resumed lioncillos, " thy futile menace will avail thee nothing; I fear thee not; and if this well-proved arm abate not its accustomed strength of nerve, on the instantwill Idrag thee to the presence of the deceived, the deeply-injured marquis de Tormes, whose generous and confiding friendship thou hast repaid with base ingratitude, whose liberal hospitality rewarded with the seduction of his wife."

"Villain! slave!" retorted the enraged Baldivia, foaming and chafing like a lion.





in the toils, " miscreant! let go thy hold, and I will prove, upon thy dastard heart, the virtue of donna Isadora is, for me, spotless as angel purity, white as thy imagination is corrupt and hase!"

"Thy looks and actions belie thy speech," replied Loncillos. "Why thy ardent gaze pursuing her wherever she moves? those burning glances speak licentious thoughts and wanton wishes, ill reproved by her; thy artful blandishments, like damned witchcraft, work on Isadora's mind, and lure her from her duty; if she is virtuous, what meant the fervid pressure of your lips to-night upon her hand? those stolen kisses speak not much for Isadora's chastity, or for Baldivia's honour."

"Thinkest thou," returned Gonzalo, scornfully, "I mean humbly to bow before Loncillos, and give prompt and patient answer to his insolent interrogations? What! have thy vile insinuations, thy dark suggestions, roused the lethargic temper of the cold de Tormes ?—hast thou whispered in his dull ear the glaring truth, that his neglected wife has charms to fire the pulse of inclination in the throbbing breast of youth ?—hast thou persuaded him his wife is false, and, by thy stinging representations, stirred him up to jealousy? —fearing to declare the suspicions thou hast raised, does de Tormes depute thee, illustrious Gusman Loncillos, to the dignified office of spy? Truly, it well becomes thy rank and age to glide with thief-like step, and watch with envious eye, the assignation of a youthful pair, suggested only by thy envy, or thy loose imagination, which contemplates, with grudging thought, the bliss thou canst no more enjoy. What, if fevered with the rich FaIernian, too copiously imbibed at the latequitted banquet, I shun my couch, and wish to waste an hour in the cool shade of yon inviting orangery, must the officious don Gusman steal upon my privacy, and watch my steps? To bed, to bed, old man! the night air, blowing chill upon thy sapless limbs, will rack thy joints with cramps , and agues; away—seek necessary rest! and since thou art past the age to which voluptuous beauty yields its melting





charms, begone, nor interrupt the joy* thou canst no more participate."

The scorn that curled Baldivia's lip, the contemptuous irony of his speech, stung Loncillos to the quick; but masking his turning rage under affected composure, he coolly replied—" I thank Baldivia for his kind advice, but wish, before I seek my necessary rest, to prove whether this sapless arm has power to punish a presuming villain; but I will not deprive de Tonnes of the satisfaction he will feel in wiping out, with his own sword, the dishonour cast upon his noble house. Come on, and since your pride disdains to answer my interrogations, de Tonnes himself shall be your questioner; to him you shall declare, why, like a robber, I find you here in secret act entering his interdicted premises, to which, even at midday, strangers have no access. To him you will be compelled to answer what were your intents at the still midnight hour, when men of honourable minds, whether fatigue or wine fever their blood, seek on their beds the salutary refresh





merit of repose. The cold de Tormes will not be found lethargic when his honour isassailed; and should thy dainty form survive an injured husband's just resentment,. to me you then shall answer for the bold licence of your opprobrious speech."

Baldivia suddenly disengaged his arm from the gripe of Loncillos, and snatching a dagger from his vest, he plunged it to the hilt in hia unguarded bosom, exclaiming, with a demoniac laugh—" Be this my answer to de Tormes and to theet"'

Don Gusman made an effort to draw his sword; but unequal to the wish of vengeance, he reeled and fell to the earth, covered with the blood that spouted in a stream from the deep wound inflicted by Baldivia, who, with savage pleasure, beheld the expiring convulsions of don Gusman.

The dying man raised himself on his elbow, and endeavoured to address his murderer, but speech was denied; the terrific rattles of death choked aH utterance, and after a few struggles his head fell lifeless, v 3





and his shuddering limbs were deprived of motion.

"This interruption past," said Baldivia, wiping his bloody dagger on the cloak of Loncillos, "I may pursue my way to Isadora, and if propitious fortune smile upon my wishes, may in her arms forget the insolence of this officious spy." But ere he returned the dagger to its sheath, the deep-toned bell of a neighbouring monastery sounded the hour of two. "Unwelcome monitor!" resumed Baldivia, "you warn me that the hours which might have been employed in bliss are past; it is now too late—she has retired to rest. Curse on this busy meddling fool! he has delayed me from the rapture my glowing fancy promised; it were madness now to venture to the garden, for doubtless Isadora sleeps; I should encounter only disappointment. I must away, before the early-rising Sancho comes to pluck the ripened gold from the loaded branches of the orangery."

With rapid step, Baldivia had measured more than half of the chesnut avenue. when he recollected that he had incautiously left the key in the lock of the orangery door, and that on his repossessing it depended the future success of his designs on Isadora. Repugnant as he felt to return, the necessity of obtaining the key again brought him to the spot where the pale corse of Loncillos lay stiffening beneath the moonbeams, which shone full on the bloody figure; his glassy eyes were widely distended in terrific stare; and seemed to appeal to Heaven against . his murderer. A momentary sensation, of terror smote the heart , of Gonzalo, and gave a tremor to his frames but, disdainful of his own weakness, he spurned the life^ less Gusman with his foot, and possessed himself of the key-, mentally observing— "This busy, prying fool is happily'removed, and can foment no future mischief; he cannot now poison the ear • of de Tormes with suspicious tales; he cannot intercept my wishes, or be an obstacle tomy-success with Isadora."





While he yet gazed on the distorted features of don Gusman, he heard voices which seemed approaching; for an instant he listened, and the well-remembered tones of Lazarillo, his own valet, filled him with consternation. Darting from the archway, beneath which he had stood to contemplate the lifeless Gusman, he flew along the chesnut avenue. Unheedful of his steps, his foot struck against the jutting root of a tree, and he fell with violence against the knotted trunk ; compelled to pause, as well from pain as to recover breath, his apprehension of discovery was increased by hearing the alarm-bell sounded, by which, in cases of danger, old Sancho called the domestics of the palace to his assistance.— "If 1 am found here," said Baldivia, panting with pain and terror, "I am lost; I ehall be the convicted murderer of Loncillos, and my fate will be inevitable." With difficulty he raised himself from the turf, and with desperate resolution overcoming pain, again hurried forward. Turning the angle of the Palace de Tormes, he beheld lights in every direction. The grey light of morning glimmered on the eastern horizon as Baldivia crossed the great square.





—" The matin chime of St. Salvador," said he, "will presently call forth the votaries of religion; it will be an instance of peculiar good fortune if I escape an encounter with some of the pious fathers of the church. He had nearly reached the portico of his own palace, when the matin bell rose on the air, and a monk hurrying along saluted him with an unwelcome " Save you, son!"

Baldivia bowed to his courtesy, and as he entered his apartment, heaped execrations on the venerable man, who, in hastening to his devout ministry, had accidentally seen him.

Bruised and stiff with his fall, he could with difficulty divest himself of his habiliments, and when at length he stretched his aching limbs on his couch, sleep stole not from his harassed mind the fearful events of the night, which thronged his imagination, attended with the horrible deeds of other days; the bleeding form of Loncillos was constantly before his eyes.— "Yet why," said he, endeavouring to justify the act, "why should my coward nerves shudder at the reflection of having, destroyed an enemy? In a national contest, how many has the sword of Gusman deprived of life, while his applauding country rewarded him * with fame and wealth! In the field of battle, army meets army, strangers not only to the faces, but the language of each other. At.the command of their ambitious monarchs, with* out even understanding why they are foes, they madly shed each other's blood, and the survivors of this carnage are dignified with the appellation of conquerors; wherefore then should I repent having destroyed the insolent Loncillos? he was my enemy 4 the taking his life ought not to be called murder; it was actual self-preservation."





Before the usual hour, Lazarillo, eager to speak of the murder of don Gusman* appeared in the chamber of Baldivia, who was unable to rise, from the swelling that had taken place in his ancle and arm. Lazarillo, as he drew-aside the draperies from the windows to admit fight and air, continued to speak of the pitiable state in which don Gusman had been found near





the door of the orangery belonging to the . Palace de Tormes.

"Is it known by whom this murder was committed?" demanded Baldivia.

"No, not positively, my lord," replied the valet, his eyes rivetted on the bloodsprinkled vest, worn the preceding night by Baldivia; "not positively, but probably your lordship may be able to throw some light upon the subject."

", Audacious slave!" vociferated Baldivia, "do you accuse—do you dare suspect !*

"No, my lord," returned Lazarillo, with peculiar emphasis, and still gazing on the bloody vest, " I do not suspect; but as the grand inquisitor happens to be the near relation of the murdered don Gusmau, and a strict investigation of the mysterious affair will assuredly take place, it will be well if your lordship prepares yourself to give a satisfactory account of this rather suspicious appearance."

Of the tortures of the Inquisition Baldivia had heard sufficient to fill him with horror.—"That blood, Lazarillo," said he, in a mild tone, "that blood gushed from my nose, as returning from the Palace de Tormes, I accidentally twisted my ancle, and fell, from which I so severely suffer,that I am not able to quit my bed."





"And in your fall," resumed Lazarillo, '' your lordship lost this ring, a topaz set with brilliants, which you yesterday bade me select from your jewels."

Baldivia grew paler than ashes as Lazarillo extended the jewel towards him. —" That ring!" faltered he, the dew of" fear starting on his forehead, "that ring.! believe you it to be mine? where, good Lazarillo, where did you find it?"

"Under the body of the murdered don Gusman," returned Lazarillo; "when Sancho, Antonio, and Felix, raised him up, I beheld something glitter on the earth, and supposing it a trinket of value,. I picked it up, and placed it in my bosom for future examination."

"And de Tormes—that is—I mean Sancho and Felix," said Baldivia, in evident trepidation, "did they see the ring? did they know to whom it belonged ?"",





"No," answered Lazarillo, "for I forgot it was in my possession, till returning home to prepare for my attendance on your lordship, its fall to the ground brought back my recollection to the circumstance of my finding it."

A gold repeater, magnificently studded with brilliants, lay beside Baldivia—" I will exchange this watch with you, Lazarillo, for the ring," said he; "and if you will solemnly swear to forget the place where you found it, and that it ever was in your possession, this purse of gold shall also be yours."

Lazarillo obsequiously bowed, and resigning the ring, accepted the purse, and took the oath of forgetfulness prescribed by his lord. He then set about removing the spots of blood from the vest, which, with the rest of the habit he had worn that guilty night, Baldivia bestowed on him.

A surgeon was then sent for to administer to his bruises, who was told that having drank too freely at the Palace de Tonnes, the wine had disordered his head,





and rendering his steps unsteady, he had" accidentally struck his foot against the pavement, and in breaking his fall had sprained his ancle and his arm.

This fabrication was repeated by Lazarillo to the marquis de Tormes, who, while he lamented the murder of his friend, don Gusman de Loncillos, considered the accident that deprived him of the consolations of Baldivia as a punishment for some sinhe had ignorantly committed.





<c The devil doth assist his own with illusive good fortune."



"Though the deluded world sees not his secret guilt, and . he is permitted yet to run the course of seeming honour, Heaven winks not; the savage heart and bloody hand aie registered above, and at the dread tribunal of eternaljustice his crimes shall be disclosed."



* Vain is mortal wisdom, vain these superstitious trials; the great Eternal only knows the truth."

The skill of his surgeon,, the most eminent in his profession that the city of Madrid produced, could not prevent Baldivia from suffering much bodily pain from the violent sprains he had sustained by his fall; but his mind implicitly confiding in the purchased secrecy of Lazarillo, felt tranquillized. The circumstance of his finding the ring under the body of don Gusman, if divulged, would no doubt raise a strong suspicion of his having committed the bloody act; but the silence of the person who alone could implicate him was secured, and he stilled the uneasy upbraidings of his conscience with the belief, that by destroying Loncillos he had merely got rid of an enemy who thirsted for his life.





The confusion- of his thoughts at length yielded to the powerful opiate administered by the surgeon, and he sunk into a deep sleep. Meanwhile, intelligence of the dreadful fate of don Gusman Loncillos was conveyed by the marquis de Tormes to his relation Hernandez, abbot of the ancient monastic order of the holy cross, and at the period of this history, chief judge of the Inquisition. Hernandez, denouncing terrible vengeance on the head





of the assassin, had the murdered body of his kinsman removed from the Palace de Tormes, with all the gloomy pomp attendant on the institution, to the state hall of the secret tribunal, where, covered with a black pall, it remained an evidence to detect the guilt of the suspected murderer.

Sincere as was the grief of the marquis de Tormes for the untimely fate of his friend Loncillos, and bewildered as his thoughts were respecting the enemy by whom he had fallen, he was not forgetful of the situation of Baldivia; he had not observed him drink more than usual the preceding night, nor did he, when departing, appear in a state of inebriation; yet the air might affect his head.—" It is," said de Tormes, as he prepared to visit him, ** a most unlucky accident, for at this moment the consolation of his society would be most grateful to my wounded spirit."

The foot of the marquis rested on the step of his carriage, but a more important demand was made of his presence, and his intended visit to Baldivia was of necessity delayed.





The deeply-afflicted donna Isadora learned from Isabel, not only the distressing story of don Gusman's murder, but also the spot where his lifeless corse was found; a secret horror overcame her at the dreadful relation; an idea too terrible for her nature to bear rushed across her brain; she uttered a shriek of anguish, and sunk fainting into the arms of the terrified girl, who, unsuspicious of the real cause of her disorder, imputed the pale and motionless situation of her lady to concern for the melancholy end of Loncillos, whom she knew had, for many years, been the bosom friend of the marquis de Tormes; but a far different cause from that supposed by the faithful Isabel produced the swoon of donna Isadora, on whose imagination the terrible idea, that don Gusman had fallen by the hand of Baldivia, pressed with distracting force. She remembered, with sensations of horror, that Baldivia had some nights before gained access to the orangery, and it was too probable that Loncillos, whose suspicious eye she had remarked, at the preceding evening's banquet, fixed in strict observance of herself and Baldivia, had watched his steps, and finding them directed towards the orangery, some altercation might have ensued, when the fiery Baldivia, finding his secret haunt detected, had fatally secured the silence of don Gusman by his death.





While suffering this torturing suspicion, which she was obliged to confine to her own bosom, her agonizing grief was increased by another of her attendants declaring, that she had seen a man present the insignia of the Holy Office to the marquis de Tormes, as he was getting into his carriage to visit the poor, sick, handsome, young marquis Baldivia; and that the domestics in the hall had whispered to each other, that the Inquisition had instituted a strict search after the murderer of don Gusman, and that several persons, who were as innocent of such a wicked act as sucking babes, had been arrested by the officials; among the rest, poor old Sanchor the gardener, Antonio and Theresa, his son and daughter, and the marquis Baldivia's valet, the merry Lazarillo.





"This communication, too probable to be, ,doubted, added to the apprehensions of Isadora, whose fancy presented Baldivia stretched on the rack, and expiating the murder of Loncillos by tortures beyond the sufferance of mortality. In a state verging on distraction, she retired to her oratory, where, meekly prostrating herself, she endeavoured to pray for herself and for the wretched, .guilty Baldivia; but though her lips moved, her orisons rose not to Heaven, for the pale form of Loncillos, bleeding under the hand of Baldivia, arrested each pious aspiration, and the horrible tortures of the tremendous Inquisition, dislocating the fine-turned limbs, and mangling the beautiful person of Baldivia, continued to occupy her thoughts. Clasping her white hands, over which tears fell in torrents, she exclaimed—" Lost, undone Isadora! oh that thy eyes had been sealed in everlasting sleep, and never opened on this woeful day! oh that my death-closed ear had remained unconscious that through thee, Gusman Loncillos, the valued friend of de Tormes, has been deprived of life I





oh that, reposing on the silent bier, I had escaped the agonizing thought, the dread conviction, that, encouraged by my imprudence, Baldivia has become a murderer! Wretched, erring Isadora! hadst thou resented, with virtuous pride and scorn, as became a wife and mother, his presumptuous serenade, hadst thou repulsed his insolent profession of love, all had been well; now desolation, shame, and ruin, encompass thee on every side." The absence of the marquis de Tormes from his palace, at the moment of his deep lamentation for don Gusman, confirmed what Isadora had before suspected, that he was a member of the dreadful Inquisition, and acquainted with all its dark mysteries—" Unhappy Baldivia!" said she, shuddering at the recollection, that no rank or situation in life could exempt or shield from the influence of the Holy OflSce, " unhappy Baldivia! thy fiat is gone forth, thy doom is inevitably sealed! for warmly as de Tormes was once thy friend, so certainly will he now become thy implacable, inveterate foe. Gusman Loncillos, his brother in arms, was nearer his





heart than thee, so lately known to him! Miserable Baldivia, thou art lost! within the dark, impenetrable walls of the Inquisition, thou wilt groan unheard, unpitied, while revenge gluts its ferocious, savage appetite with thy tortures; and I—merciful Heaven, shield me from the horrorizing thought!—I also may be implicated in this murder! to appease the bleeding shade of Loncillos, my vindictive husband may offer me a sacrifice on the altar of vengeance; and should I be destined to this fearful end, shall I dare murmur, or call the decrees of Heaven unjust?—oh no! no! for I have nourished in my bosom a guilty passion—I have caused the death of Gusman—even now perhaps my name is enrolled among the victims marked by the secret tribunal, and the next hour may bury me in its dreary vaults. Oh my children! my innocent babes! your mother perhaps has clasped you to her heart for the last time! your stern, inexorable father will view my agonies unmoved! and Baldivia— rest there, distracting thought! for Baldivia I shall die!"

VOL. I. G





Some hours of profound sleep had been allowed the guilty Baldivia; but frightful dreams had harassed his distempered fancy, in which he had been exposed to dangers by sea and land, and encountered foes, from whom he had escaped with mutilated limbs, at the imminent peril of his life. From these horrible visions he had newly awoke, and was felicitating himself that the tortures he had endured in sleep were not likely to pursue him, when Lazarillo tore wide the curtains of his bed, and, with a countenance distorted by terror, exclaimed—" The palace is filled with officers of the Inquisition!"

To this alarming information Baldivia had no time to reply, for in the next instant he beheld his bed surrounded by officials, who held before him the dreadful badge of their commission. Overcome with weakness and horror, Baldivia lost the power to resist or expostulate; he sunk senseless on the shoulder of the little less terrified Lazarillo. How long he continued in this state of inanity, he knew not; but when his reasoning faculties were re





stored, he found himself in a gloomy dungeon, stretched on a heap of straw; a lamp, suspended from a high Gothic arch above his head, cast a dim light over part of the melancholy place, which, as far as met the eye of Baldivia, was composed of huge masses of dark stone, rudely piled upon each other, while all beyond the reflection of the faint lamp was involved in deep sliadow.

"" Fatal was the hour," said Baldivia, "when I quitted Peru, and cursed the inauspicious moment when the cold-hearted Henriques Molines refused me the hand of his daughter—fatal was the wish that impelled me to visit Madrid—disastrous the time when my foot touched the shore of Spain—cursed be the wandering impulse of my soul, the restless curiosity that led me from Peru, from innocence-and beauty! .Oh Bosaviva1. united to thee, I had been

happy—not now. Had I been"

"Accused of murder!" said a hollow voice,

"Who speaks?" demanded Baldivia, starting from his straw pallet, and then





first discovering a heavy iron chain was passed round his body, which only permitted him to walk a few paces from his resting-place—" Infernal tyranny ! execrable despotism!" continued he, breathless with the fruitless efforts he made to break the chain, which he found was connected by a massy staple to an immoveable iron bar, sunk deep in the thick wall of the dungeon, and on which the moment before his head had been pillowed—" In Vain," said he, "I exhaust my strength— it must be more than human power, or human policy, that can deliver me from the toils of the hellish Inquisition! Oh, my father, at this hour, perhaps reposing on a downy couch, you dream not your unhappy son is"

"A murderer!" said the same sepulchral voice, now apparently close to his ear.

Baldivia turned his head hastily, but beheld no one. During his life, Gonzalo de Baldivia had refused belief to miracles, and ridiculed, as idle superstition, the tales of ghosts he had from time to time heard repeated; but now sensations of terror as





sailed him—his heart knocked with convulsive throbs against his " seated ribs"— his bristling hair stood upright on his head, while, with frenzied gaze, his glaring eye rolled round, in the horrible expectation of encountering the bleeding spectre of Lonciiios; but all was vacancy—no shadowy form burst on his eye; and having again recovered self-possession, he began to recal to his memory the information he had collected at Madrid, respecting the various arts practised in the dungeons of the Inquisition, to terrify their wretched victims into confession of suspected crimes. These reflections reassured the mind of Baldivia, who resolved to fortify his spirits against assailing terrors.

"I must be wary," said he, mentally, "nor let the cowardice of fear betray me to the subtilty that is ever on the watch to take advantage of the unguarded wretch, whose least imprudent word may hurl him to destruction; let silence seal my lips, and courage guard my heart—be cunning opposed to cunning. Were I but assured of the stability of Lazarillo—could 1 but depend on the firmness of his nerves, all might yet end well, and I might hope to quit these gloomy walls, and taste again the sweets of liberty."





As these thoughts passed rapidly in his mind, a rustling noise roused him from his meditating posture. Fortifying his mind with desperate resolution, he walked to the utmost extent of his chain, straining his eyeballs to pierce the gloom that concealed the limits of his prison. Again a noise, like the drawing of a bolt in a distant part of the dungeon, struck a grating sound on his ear—" Who approaches?" demanded Baldivia.

A deep and lengthened groan replied to his question.

"This mummery," said Baldivia, scofP ingly, " can well be spared. Past the age of timid boyhood, I am not to be terrified by sounds or shadows; bold in conscious—""

"Guilt!" interrupted the voice.

"Who presumes toaccuse me?" resumed Gonzalo; " who dares tax Baldivia with guilt? whosoever thou art, come forth from thy lurking-place, and boldly face me*'





"The hour is not arrived," rejoined the voice.

"Quickly let it come!" said Baldivia. '' Appear before me; and though armed with all the hideous attributes of this mysterious den"

"Beware!" interrupted the voice.

"Beware of what—of whom?" asked Baldivia, worked into rage. "Come forth, thou lurking spy! thou d—d inquisitor, come forth, and hear me boldly!—curse your dark, mysterious ordinations—-—"

"Dark as a midnight murder!" replied the voice again.

An appalling groan smote the attentive ear of Baldivia; and at the same instant the lamp, which feebly lit his dungeon, went out, leaving him involved in darkness. Spite of his resolution, the nerves of Baldivia trembled; again the pale bleeding spectre of Gusman Loncillos crossed his imagination; his shuddering limbs refused longer to support his frame; and, bathed in cold perspiration, which hung in large drops on his forehead, he fell powerless on his straw pallet.





Meantime Lazarillo had also been arrested, and hurried to another of the dismal vaults pertaining to the Holy Office, where he was pressingly assailed by the attending officials, with artful persuasions and menaces, to criminate his lord; but certain that the circumstance of the ring was known only to Baldivia and himself, and remembering, with superstitious reverence, the oath of secrecy he had taken, he constantly replied to their various importunities and interrogations, that he knew nothing more of the murder of don Gusman Loncillos, than merely being one of the persons who found him dead, and covered with blood, near the door of the orangery belonging to the Palace deTormes.

Lazarillo had ever been a favourite with Baldivia; he had lived with him, and attended on his person, when they both were children. To the family of Lazarillo he had been the chief support; and when his voyage to Spain was projected, he had selected Lazarillo from his attendants to accompany him in the capacity of valet. Lazarillo was sensible that his lord was guilty





of great excesses; but he, whose own principles were by no means strict or austere, was never at a loss to frame excuses for the vices of a person whose favour he enjoyed, and by whose munificence he was enriched; and even while compelled to believe him the murderer of Loncillos, his strong attachment found palliation for this atrocious deed, by supposing that don Gusman, with some unbearable insolence, had urged Baldivia beyond patience, and provoked him, by nature irritable, till his fury was only to be appeased with the life of the offender. The mind of. Lazarillo was not inclined to sink in despondency; though his situation was dreary and comfortless, he encouraged hope, and in the future constantly pictured prosperity and brighter days.

Some hours had elapsed since he tasted food; he complained of the emptiness of his stomach; and when one of the attending officials placed before him a small loaf of very black bread, and a pitcher of water, he merrily observed, that hunger was the most piquant of sauces, for it rendered the coarsest viands savoury and delicious. Having eaten a slice of the bread and drank of' the water, he said, it was not the kind of food he had been aeciistomeci to, for he had fared sumptuously every day ; "but what does it signify? a meal is a meal; and as long as the stomach is eased of its cravings," said Lazarillo, " there is no occasion to grumble about it; besides," continued he, "the remembrance of these dingy walls, and this homely diet, wilt render me more sensible of my happiness, when I am feasting with my friends in the hall of the Palace de Baldivia."





"^Nb doubt," replied the rough-voiced official, "no doubt you will be sensible of the happiness, when you find yourself there again; but you know not whether it may be vour fate to feast again in the hall of the Palace Baldivia."

"I am certain 1 shall," rejoined Lazarillo, nothing depressed by the insinuation conveyed in the speech of the official," I am positive I shall; for have yon not repeatedly assured me, that the Inquisition only punishes the guilty? In that case I am sure of being restored to liberty, if you, my friend, speak truth."





"Do you presume to question the. word of an officer of the holy tribunal ?." interrupted the official, angrily.

"No," returned Lazarillo, " upon my soul, I do not question your word, for on that alone I build my assurance of being restored to the world, knowing that I am

innocent, and firmly believing"

"Your belief," interrupted the official, gruffly, " will be inquired into more strictly than you are aware, and on the proof after trial, will depend the future."

"I hope every thing from the future," said Lazarillo.

"It is well to live in hope," replied the official; " but nevertheless it would be wisdom to examine the foundation of that hope, lest you build on a sandy bottom."

Having thus spoken, he departed, swinging after him a heavy iron door, the ponderous bolts of which, as they shot into their staples, fell with no cheering sound on the shrinking ear of Lazarillo; yet





though left in utter darkness, with only a scanty bundle of straw to recline upon, his good spirits did not forsake him.

"I will endeavour to sleep," said Lazarillo, wrapping his cloak tightly about him. "Praised be the inventor of sleep! for in what better way can a man dispose of time, when it hangs heavy on his hands? This is but a sorry sort of a bed though," continued he, " and my limbs, so long used to down and fine linen, will not readily accommodate themselves to this hard exchange. Well, custom is every thing; for Diego, the merry, sturdy muleteer, with whom I travelled from Toledo, would not resign his truss of straw to repose under a velvet canopy. Hard, devilish hard," said Lazarillo, as he rolled from side to side of his uneasy, bed; " but patience and hope be my consolers; to-morrow," yawning, and closing his eyes, " to-morrow may restore me to the enjoyment of a good table, and a soft, warm bed."

All remaining dark and silent in the dungeon of Baldivia, he wearied his mind with conjectures, of how long he should be compelled to remain a prisoner in that loathsome vault, before he was summoned to trial by the secret tribunal, and how, on his refusing to confess, they would proceed with him, for, remembering that he was of ancient and noble family, and that his father had rendered the reigning king high service, he did not believe they would presume to put him to the torture; but while he felicitated himself with the hope of escaping racks and wheels, he knew not how long they might detain him a prisoner in their tremendous dungeons, or whether, being unable to prove his innocence, lie might not be condemned to linger out his days in dark and solitary confinement.





From the terrific prisons of the Inquisition, his thoughts wandered to Peru, where wealth and pleasure had nursed his infancy, and strewed the paths of his youth with their luxurious treasures. The passion that had once thrilled his heart for Rosaviva, which absence and other females had extinguished, now blazed anew, and deeply he regretted, and vainly wished, that he had fulfilled the promise, so solemnly pledged, of returning to love and her, as soon as the affairs that had instigated his voyage to Spain were concluded. The fate too of the unhappy Inis rushed on his memory; he recalled to mind her supplications for liberty, to which he had been deaf; her piteous shrieks again seemed to sound in his ear, and he shuddered at the horrible reflection that he was now stained with two murders. Of donna Isadora de Tormes he now thought with absolute hatred, as the sole cause of his present degraded state and misery. Silent, but bitter and fierce, were his execrations of female beauty, which, in that hour of suffering, he condemned as the incitement to every act of villany.





For many weary hours Baldivia had counted the melancholy strokes of a deeptoned bell, which, while it reminded him of the time he had passed in solitude and darkness, also informed him that the hour approached, in which his utmost cunning, as well as fortitude, would be required to extricate him from the perilous situation in which he was involved





—the dreadful hour of examination. For awhile, he busied his thoughts in framing answers to the questions that would probably be asked by the inquisitors, till, fatigued in mind and body, he sunk into a feverish sleep. Under the impression ot* recent circumstances, which busily haunted bis fancy, he heard himself accused of the murder of Gasman Loncillos, when not being able to invalidate the charge, the horrible sentence of condemnation was pronounced against him—he heard the deep tolling of the awful bell that summoned him to a horrible death—he beheld himself habited to suffer at an auto-de-fe —he was compelled to join a procession of shrieking wretches destined to the same fearful end—he saw the pile kindled, and felt the red scorching flames approach him, when suddenly the bleeding form of Loncillos stood before him; his damp cold hand dragged him from the burning pile, while his pale lips uttered—" Live Baldivia, and repent thy crimes! use well the time that the mercy of Heaven yet allows thee I hence from Madrid, and sin no more!"





In an instant the crowded procession, the burning pile, and all the fearful pageantry of the auto-de-fe vanished, and he beheld himself at the door of the orangery, eager for an interview with donna Isadora, when the icy hand of the spectre drew him back, while with the other he pointed to the still bleeding wound in his bosom, saying— "Gonzalo de Baldivia, beware of more murders!"

Starting from this dream of horror, he felt his hand actually clasped by one cold as ice; a faint light shone round him, and his eye fell on a face pale as marble—" Angels defend me!" ejaculated Baldivia, as he recoiled from the clammy touch of his appalling visitant.

"Amen!" responded the person, who was still bending over him; " may your prayer, my son, be received of Heaven!"

Baldivia, cheered by the piety of this response, took courage to survey the speaker. His complexion was deadly pale, his features stern, and his eye expressed malignancy and cunning; his habit was that of a monk—" I come," resumed he, " by or





der of the holy brotherhood, to examine your hurts, and administer to their cure/' Baldivia expressed his thanks, and submitted to the inspection of the monk, who bathed the bruises of his arm and ancle with a volatile mixture, and bound them up.—" My office ends not here," said he, solemnly ; " it also belongs to my ministry to cure diseases of the soul." Baldivia was silent, and the monk continued to say— "An hour hence you will be summoned before the august tribunal. Shall I pass the intervening time with you in prayer ?* "Father, I humbly thank your zeal," replied Baldivia; "but so wonderful is this imprisonment, that my confused thoughts will not compose themselves; in truth, my mind is occupied so fully by this most strange occurrence, that, at the present moment, I lack devotion to give fervency to prayer."

"In every situation, however perilous," veturned the monk, " in every danger, however great, the innocent mind continues placid; no earthly storms shake its serenitv; it rests secure in the assurance





that Heaven will not forsake the guiltless."

"If you suppose my mind contaminated by guilt, father, because I own it not disposed for prayer, your inference is illiberal and unjust," rejoined Baldivia. "My body, full of pain from a late accident, communicates its irritable feelings to my mind, which, I again repeat, is full of wonder— ay, and indignation too, at this disgraceful imprisonment."

"Patience and moderation, son, will best befriend you here," replied the monk.

"Patience!" repeated Baldivia, contemptuously; " I lack your age and stoicism, father. Where is the man that could be patient under such indignities? Why have I been dragged from the palace of my ancestors, and plunged into this loathsome dungeon?—of what am I accused, that, like the vilest felon, I am chained to this mean pallet, at a time too when my hurt limbs demand indulgence and repose?"

"Know you not of what you are accused?" asked the monk.





"Knowing no guilt," replied Baldivia, "I am a stranger to my accusation."

"It will be well," returned the monk, "if it so proves."

"Boldly I affirm," resumed Baldivia, "that it will so prove; and I demand, is this the return that grateful Spain makes to the marquis Baldivia my father, whose services have poured into the coffers of the state the treasures of the new-discovered world?"

"Better you bridled this intemperate heat," interrupted the monk; " on this occasion it will little serve you."

"I demand to know," resumed Baldivia, unheeding the admonition of the monk, "I demand to know why I, a nobleman of ancient title and high rank, am torn from my sicklied, and confined in this damp dungeon, at the imminent risk of my life?"

"This Holy Office," replied the monk, coldly, " is-instituted not to answer, but to interrogate, in cases that require their cognizance: no matter how high the rank.





how exalted the situation of the person they deem it necessary to examine."

"May curses deep and rooted follow—"

A loud and lengthened groan, issuing from underneath the spot on which he stood, arrested the hitter execration that was bursting from the lips of Baldivia. With a look of horror, which he strove in vain to hide, he asked of the monk— "From whence proceeds that groan?"

"From a criminal," replied the monk, "who contumaciously refuses to make confession of his guilt."

"Well may he groan," returned Baldivia, " if, like me, he has been torn from the chamber of his repose, from the comforts of his home, ignorant of crime, and guiltless of offence."

"He is. a murderer," replied the monk, fixing his eyes with scrutinizing gaze on the face of Baldivia; "and what guilt can equal that of depriving a fellow-creature of life?—what punishment too great for an offence, against which the Eternal Judge has denounced his vengeance?"





Baldivia shuddered, and asked—" What is the punishment inflicted on this miserable wretch—what is he suffering, to extort those dreadful groans?"

"Come and behold," said the monk, who at the same moment unclosed the spring that clasped the chain; it fell from the body of Baldivia, and gave him liberty to follow him to a trap-door in the dark part of the dungeon, by which they descended to a vault beneath, the huge dark arches of which reflected the red glare of an enormous brazen furnace, from the sides of which flew sparks of fire, and communicated a heat so intolerable, that Baldivia, nearly suffocated, gasped for breath. Beneath the ponderous arches stood various instruments of torture, invented by the diabolical cruelty of the Inquisition; and extended at length, before the burning furnace, lay a tall, emaciated man, whose legs and arms were confined to the heated floor by strong rings of iron, and whose head, entirely divested of hair, was supported by a collar of the same metal, that held it in an upright posture, while water, drop by





drop, was slowly distilled on his bare skull from a pipe suspended over him; the excruciating torture thus inflicted on the resistless victim of inventive cruelty, extorted the harrowing groans which Baldivia had heard, who, recoiling from the dreadful spectacle of suffering, inquired how long that barbarous punishment was to last?

The monk replied not to his question; but advancing to the suspected criminal, he said—" Gasper de Cormes, has this salutary punishment, inflicted by the mercy of the Holy Office for the salvation of your immortal soul, yet made you sensible of the enormous magnitude of your crime? Will you now confess yourself the assassin of Roderigo Las Cassas?"

"" Never!" murmured from the lips of the sufferer; " I am innocent of the deed; and righteous Heaven will punish my tormentors."

The monk then felt his pulse, and instantly motioned to the officials in waiting to suspend the torture, the victim being able to endure no more at that time—" The Holy Office," said the monk," is an institution of mercy ; the soul of a criminal is its chief care; the holv brotherhood will not suffer this miserable, hardened wretch to die in his contumacy; they will extort confession, and then give him time to repent his guilt." But the merciful intentions of the Inquisition were overruled by a mightier power; the wretched Gasper de Cormes was carried to his cell by the officials; when laid on his straw pallet, a single groan escaped him, and his soul flew to a higher tribunal, to appear against his inhuman tormentors.





"Is it not too probable," said Baldivia, surveying the various implements of torture, "that, to avoid the anguish of suffering, men may accuse themselves of crimes they never committed?"

"That sin be on their own heads," answered the monk. "The holy tribunal acts from motives of justice, and on the side of Heaven."

"Bather on the side of hell," thought Baldivia.

The monk continued to say—" And as





my duty prompts, I advise you, before you are condemned to punishment, to make confession, and, by declaring your guilt, throw yourself on the clemency of the holy fathers."

"Before I make confession," returned Baldivia, " it is necessary I feel conscious of guilt—before I implore clemency, I must have knowledge of the crime with which I stand accused."

"What!" asked the monk, looking steadfastly on him, "does no compunctious feeling remind you of a crime committed? —do you pretend to be ignorant why you are detained a prisoner here?"

"Pretend!" answered Baldivia, indignantly; " I do not stoop to mean pretences. Hitherto no mortal has presumed to brand my name with crime; you vaunt the justice of this dark tribunal, whose mysterious judges are unknown, whose secret examinations are held at midnight hours, and in the depths of vaults, against whose horrible decisions no appeal can rise, save to the ear of Heaven." The monk would have spoken, but Baldivia prevented him





by asking—" Where, I pray you, is the justice of dragging me to trial, who have never heard my accusation, consequently can have prepared no defence?"

"The innocent are assisted by Heaven," said the monk.

"Then am I," returned Baldivia, "bold in innocence."

"The moment approaches," said the monk, "when it will be proved whether yours is the boldness of innocence or the hardihood of guilt."

A loud bell sounded through the vaulted chamber, of which Baldivia would have demanded the meaning, but a thick covering was thrown over his head, his arms were pinioned, and he was hurried along a length of passages, the damp and chill of which were sensibly felt after the heat of the place he had just quitted. All was silence on the way, save the sounding footsteps of those who led and followed him. Some words unintelligible to Baldivia were pronounced by his guides; he heard bolts undrawn, and felt he was de

Vol. i. . H





scending still deeper into the centre of the earth. Having at length reached the place of destination, he was made to ascend nine steps, and in the next instant his legs and arms were tightly embraced by similar rings to those he had seen in the dungeon he had recently quitted. The covering was now removed from his head; he found he stood against an elevated pillar in the midst of an extensive hall, the dome of which was supported by colossal arches and columns of black marble; the walls and pavement were of the same material; there were no windows, and the only light diffused over this dismal place was emitted from nine golden lamps, that were suspended before a black velvet canopy, the front of which was concealed by thick folding draperies falling in awful sweep to the ends of a table, at which sat two figures enveloped in sable cloaks, their faces concealed by visors. These men had pens in their hands, and books before them, but no motion of their limbs gave an assurance of life, and at the distance they were beheld by Baldivia, they appeared like sta





tues. Upon the table was a golden embroideiy of justice with appropriate emblems, and under an arch, opposite the canopy, stood an elevated bier, covered with a black sweeping pall, above which appeared the ghastly countenance of don Gusman Loncillos.

The deep tolling of a funeral bell, and the hollow roll of a muffled drum, sounded at intervals through the hall, while the astonished eyes of Baldivia wandered round its extent and gloomy ornaments. With a heart sinking, and senses appalled at this solemn preparation for examination of a deed which his conscience, at that solemn crisis, loudly reproached him for committing, but hardening his soul against compunction, and aware of the precipice on which he stood, from whence a single imprudent word might hurl him to infamy and destruction, he constrained his agitated nerves to composure, and by the strong exertion of mental energy over corporeal weakness, he compelled his eyes to fix a steady gaze on the pallid corse of





him he had murdered; and supposing from^ past occurrences that he was narrowly observed and every gesture noted, with hypocrisy equal to that practised by the Inquisitors themselves, he exclaimed—> M Alas, unhappy Gusman, how altered is thy appearance! when last I saw thee, thine eye was animated by the recollection of victories obtained over the foes of thy country; thy tongue, now mute in death, recounted the battles in which thou hadst fought side by side with the valiant de Tormes; alas! and is this the end of a hero? thou shouldst have fallen amidst the glorious tumult of war; though lately known, thou wilt be lamented by none more than by Baklivia! Yet wherefore am I here? can it be possible that I am suspected of thy murder?"

At this instant the black curtain was drawn aside, and he beheld his judges, nine in number, seated under the canopy; their faces were concealed by visors, and their forms disguised by large cloaks.

At the head of these, on. the most elevated seat, was placed the abbot Hernandez, who replied to the soliloquy of Baldivia—" Thou dost accuse thyself; who told thee, Gonzalo de Baldivia, thou art brought before the holy tribunal on suspicion of murder?"





"No one has so presumed," replied he; '' but do not my eyes behold the body of Gusman? and what can I suppose, from this spectacle and the circumstances that have attended my arrest, but that his murder is my imputed crime?"

"At the late banquet given by the marquis de Tormes, at which you were an invited guest," resumed Hernandez, "did no event arise that gave occasion for discontent between Loncillos and yourself? answer, Baldivia; did no dispute between yourselves take place—no secret displeasure to be accounted for at a future time ?rr "No, on my soul!" replied Baldivia; "no dissatisfaction, no offence, on either side, was given or received."

"Consider well," said another of the judges, "how you reply, and answer truly; detected falsehood will to your body ensure such punishment as the lenity of





this most sacred institution would wish you to avoid, and for your soul"

"It is heyond your power to punish," interrupted Baldivia; "and it is consolation for the innocenj, that when your tortures terminate his mortal being, his soul escapes your tortures."

"This freedom of speech is irreverent," rejoined Hernandez, "and ill becomes the lips of a suspected criminal. Answer, Gonzalo Baldivia, did you not, at the Palace de Tormes, quarrel with don Gusman Loncillos ?—so we are informed."

"The information," returned Baldivia, "is as false as hell; I appeal to the marquis de Tormes; let him be questioned, for he can answer that I left don Gusman in perfect amity, when, at a late hour, the guests departed from the Palace de Tormes."

"But afterwards," inquired another of the judges, "afterwards, did you not meet, and, in combat with the deceased, obtain the hurts of which you now complain?"

"To this again I answer no," replied





Baldivia; "against don Gusman I had no enmity, no motive for dissension; and here I repeat, and call his bleeding shade to witness^ I never had a combat with him."

"Then, like an assassin," said Hernandez,- "voir stabbed him; the inference is plain."

A shade of horror passed over the features of Baldivia, but it gave way to rage, as he answered—." Your inference is false; is such my character in Madrid, that I, the only son of an honourable father, high in rank and dignity, am, without evidence produced, or cause assigned, accused of murder; of midnight broils, and black assassination! If indeed your tribunal boast the support of justice, and- maintain the boast, confront me with my accusers; produce the man who will declare he saw me do this deed." «

"Bring before us Lazarillo Corbona^ the confidential servant of Gonzalo Baldi-via," said the abbot Hernandez; "let us again hear his deposition."

At this command several officials crossed in every direction; again, the heavy, deep-toned bell resounded through the hall, and dismay fell on the heart of Baldivia—" I am betrayed," said he, mentally; "my confidence has been misplaced; the evidence of that deceitful villain, Lazarillo, will condemn me; no hope now remains for me to cling to; I am inevitably lost."





The tolling of the bell ceased, and was succeeded by the harsh grating of doors, which were opened and shut with violence; the judges appeared deep in argument, and the figures at the ends of the table, whom Baldivia had taken for statues, dipped their pens into ink, and began to write in the books before them. Baldivia, who had wished the instant annihilation of Lazarillo, beheld him led across the hall by two officials, and placed opposite himself.

*' Lazarillo Corbona, approach," said Hernandez; "humbly kneel, and kiss this extended crucifix."

Lazarillo having obeyed this ceremonial, was told to rise. "On your late examination," said the abbot, "you took the oaths





required by the right reverend judges of this supreme tribunal."

Lazarillo, with much seeming humility of mind and body, silently bowed, and the abbot proceeded to say—" You cannot already have forgot their great importance to your soul's eternal salvation; answer, what did those solemn oaths impose?"

"Inviolable secrecy respecting the transactions of this place," said Lazarillo, "and an obligation to reply, truly and faithfullyy to all and every question proposed by the holy fathers who support and constitute this dread tribunal."

"Your comprehension is most apt," returned Hernandez; "now answer, on the faith of those tremendous oaths, what know you of the murder of don Gusman Loncillos?"

Baldivia now believed himself lost, and he listened for the answer of Lazarillo with all the terrible apprehension of a man waiting to hear his certain condemnation ..

"Nothings" replied Lazarillo; "of the murder of don Gusman I know nothing; H 3 •: ,





and I again repeat, what I before have sworn, it was merely my fate to be one of the persons who first discovered his lifeless body."

The hopes of Baldivia revived, as he beheld the steady countenance of Lazarillo, and heard his unembarrassed answer.

"What," demanded a voice, which sounded on the ear of Baldivia like that of the marquis de Tormes, "what brought you, Lazarillo Corbona, at that hour, to the door of the orangery?"

"I had been making merry," replied Lazarillo, "with Antonio, at the house of his father, Sancho, who is gardener to the marquis de Tormes; Antonio was to go earlier than usual to his labour at the arsenal, and he proposed to accompany me on my way home; and old Sancho, hearing us preparing to set off, requested wo would wait for him, as he wished to gather a basket of pomegranates and oranges while the dew was on them. We set off together, and were laughing heartily at a mistake made by Theresa, who, more than half asleep, had brought us a flask of oil instead of wine, when our mirth was» changed to horror at beholding the unhappy don Gusraan deprived of life*—~ Lazarillo paused.





"And know you not,"" said Hernandez,"by whom this bloody deed was committed?"

"Ignorant of any enemy that don Gus^ man might have in Madrid, how is it possible," answered Lazarillo, "that I should know his murderer?"

Lazarillo . was, on a motion of the abbot, removed from the hall, and Antonio and Sancho were brought forward, whose testimonies agreeing in every particular with the deposition of Lazarillo, they were ordered,, having repeated the oath of secrecy, to be conducted in safety to their, home.

The legs and arms of Baldivia were now released from the rings that had confined them,.but, overcome by pain and fatigue, he fainted, as he was led by the officials from the pillar to which he had been.confined. In this state he was remanded to his cell, where his bruises were





again attended to with skill and care. He was also constrained to swallow an opiate, which, though stretched on straw, composed the fearful agitation of his spirits, and sunk him in a sleep that lasted manyhours; when he awoke, he felt considerably amended in health; the fever had left him, the swelling of his limbs had subsided, and he could, without much pain, move in any direction the arm that the day before he had believed for ever disabled.

The first thoughts of Baldivia reverted to the examination of Lazarillo, to whom he accorded much praise for the adroitness of his answers, and his unvarying features, which had, throughout the whole, preserved the steady look of innocence; he knew that Antonio and old Sancho were set at liberty, and it was probable Lazarillo had been dismissed with them—" And if Lazarillo has left these horrid cells," said Baldivia, "the faithful fellow will devise some means to liberate me." For a moment he was cheered by this hope, till recollecting the depth of Ae walls, and





that the dungeon he was then in appeared to be excavated out of the bowels of the .earth, he groaned, while conviction pressed on his brain the utter impossibility of Lazarillo penetrating the secret cells of the Inquisition, or delivering him from the power of men, to whom every law was .subordinate, and at whose formidable name the mightiest in the land trembled.

The keen cravings of hunger succeeded these thoughts; but the day passed on, the long hours wore heavily away, and no one approached to bring him food; and it was not among the least of Baldivia's apprehensions that the merciless Inquisition had ordained him to perish by famine. Again, in the wildness of despair, he heaped curses on Madrid and its inhabitants, particularly Isadora, whose* beauty had placed him in the grasp of fiends, who acknowledged no law but the suggestions of their own diabolic nature; "but I will' disappoint their meditated vengeance," said Baldivia; "With my own power will I free myself from their hellish machinations." He started from his hard pallet,





desperately resolved to add to his already-committed crimes the heinous guilt of self-murder, when he beheld the monk-. who had been his surgeon, bearing: a small basket,.

"Save you, son!" said the monk, placing food and wine before him; "the holy fathers eVer remember mercy in their severest judgment; they wish you to exculpate yourself from the charge of crime— to prove yourself free from the imputation of guilt,. The holy brethren, in their abupdant clemency, have considered that. pain and abstinence may deprive you of the strength necessary for the awful trial you have yet to undergo—a trial that will need your utmost fortitude. Eat therefore of the food, and drink the wine, which I, in the capacity of your physician^ have declared- necessary for you,.that you.may not, from want of nourishment, be faint, and through. weakness utter your own condemnation;"

The wily monk spoke without obtaining the regard of Baldivia; his salutation of " Save you, son!" alone met the ear of the prisoner, who, while he devoured the viands with the keen appetite of hunger, revolved, with anxious solicitude, where he had heard that salutation uttered in those very tones before. Like lightning it flashed on his memory, that the bell ef the Dominicans was chiming for matin prayers, and that a monk, in the self-same whining tone, had bestowed that salutation on him, as he crossed the portico to enter his own palace on that fatal morning, when he was Jiurrying to avoid being suspected of the murder he had just committed. By whom and how he had been denounced to the Inquisition was now. evident; the sanctified hypocrite who had brought him to his present state of wretchedness, the instigator and promoter of all he had yet to suffer, stood before him^ alone and unarmed, and scarcely was he restrained by the knowledge that officials were posted within call, from rushing on his accuser and perpetrating another murder; but stifling the malignant passions qf his heart, he continued to eat till his hunger was. appeased. He then artfully thank





ed the monk, hoping the hour would arrive when he should be able to give hint proof that all his favours were rooted in a grateful soil.

The monk was not deceived by the smooth speech of Baldivia; he read in his> countenance the rancour of his thoughts. Retreating a few steps, he applied a silver whistle that hung at his wrist to his mouth j two of the officials appeared, who, on a motion of the monk's, seized the arms of Baldivia, and conducted him to a remote vault, where four of the familiars were binding'an old woman to the wheel, who, with shrieks, and tears, and supplications, besought them not to torture her: In the midst of her ravings, she acknowledged having been seduced into the sin of eating mutton on the last Ash-Wednesday; she also, being closely questioned,, owned that she did not believe in transvvbstantiation, and, on that account, had not' been to confession for near a year. Having thus, under the influence of terror,, convicted herself of heresy, she was taken from the wheel, the torture of which she





had avoided only to insure to herself a death more horrible than thought can picture or imagination conceive. The miserable victim of religious barbarity was immediately placed under the direction of an officiating monk, to terrify her into repentance and revocation of her errors in faith, and prepare her for a dreadful death at the approaching auto-de-fe.

During this exhibition of savage fanaticism, Baldivia remained a silent spectator; he minutely observed the effect that terror had produced on the poor miserable victim of religious despotism; he believed she had accused herself falsely, and to avoid the torture of the wheel, had devoted herself to horrible and certain destruction; he knew that he had been made a witness of this scene to terrify his mind: but sights of anguish, and shrieks of suffering, gave desperate fortitude to his mind, and steeled his- nerves against the weakness of fear; he gazed around him with undaunted eye, and smiling contemptuously on the instruments of inventive cruelty, resolved, with his own hand, to stop the eurrent of





life the instant they should attempt to inflict their tortures on him.

While revolving these thoughts, the monk, pointing to the wheel, said—" It is a dreadful punishment; at every turn, it not only breaks the bones of the criminal, but the sharp spikes, which surround the edge, lacerate the flesh, which is not unfrequently torn from the bones."

"I pity those," replied Baldivia, "who have so endured."

The monk understood not the drift of his answer, and turning quick upon him, he said—" What if the holy brotherhood have appointed me their messenger, to offer you the choice of instant confession of your guilt, or"

"Pause there," returned Baldivia.— "Once place me on that hellish wheel,

and you shall witness"

"Contumacious, murderer!" interrupted the monk, "presume you to menace the Holy Office? seize and bind him to the rack!"

The officials were advancing to perform the order of the monk, when their pro





gress was arrested by a tall figure closely enveloped in black, who, placing himself before Baldivia, held up a broad golden signet.

The officials knew and obeyed the sign; they crossed themselves devoutly, and instantly fell back to their former stations.

The hand of his unknown friend tightly grasped that of Baldivia, who felt it tremble; as the friendly grasp was withdrawn, he perceived a small roll of paper left on Jiis palm.

"What should this mean?" said Baldivia, mentally; "that all hearts are not savage, even in the dungeons of the Inquisition—-joyful knowledge! for out of the weakness of compassion will I extract liberty."

The unknown, by signs, gave directions to the monk, whose malignant countenance expressed displeasuse and disappointment. The unknown having departed, the monk, addressing Baldivia, said— "For the present, the compassionate fathers suspend the torture; use their cle-mency well by a candid confession of your guilt, which, if proved upon you ",





"Spare your menaces," interrupted Baldivia; " they affect not the settled temper of my mind, which has acquired the tranquillity you lately told me was the constant attendant upon innocence."

The monk turned on him a glance of incredulity.—" Happy are the innocent," said he, "for dying guiltless, they receive the crown of martyrdom."

"In your idea then," said Baldivia, "guilty or innocent, I am certain of death; how accords this with the justice of the Holy Tribunal?"

"I come not here to answer, but to question," replied the monk; "w31 you now, while leisure is allowed, resort to prayer, and make confession of your sins?"

"As my physician, father," returned Baldivia, "you have my grateful thanks; and were I now at liberty, my gratitude should appear in more solid form than words; but for my soul, again I must decline your aid; sinful we are all,, but to none, except the pious Vincentio, chosen my confessor when first I entered Madrid, will I disburthen my conscience."





Having received this answer, the monk made a sign to the officials, who conducted their prisoner to a small square room; the floor of it was covered with a thick mat, and it was furnished with a table and a comfortable couch. Like the cells he had before seen, it had no windows, but was lit by a lamp suspended from the roof.

Being left alone, he examined the paper left in his hand by the unknown. The characters it contained were traced by a pencil, and ran in these words—" Be not dismayed; you have a friend among your judges, who will rejoice at the manifestation of your innocence; and that you are innocent I trust and believe. Destroy this paper, and prepare for the decisive trial."

Baldivia was inspired with fresh courage as he read. Having again examined the characters, he destroyed the paper, and threw himself upon the couch, to consider





who this friend could be, whose timely interposition had stepped between him. and the torture, at the very moment of imminent peril. He had heard that many of the nobility of Spain were members of the Inquisition; and while he remembered what had passed at his late examination, he believed that he had heard the voice of the marquis de Tormes among the judges. Conscience for a moment smote his heart with the reflection of how unworthy he was of such friendship—he who had intended the seduction of his wife, who had actually murdered the man who had for many years been the chosen friend of his bosom; but this momentary compunction gave way to the hope of life and liberty, to pursue the career of pleasure.—" Be not dismayed," said Baldivia, reverting to the advice conveyed in the mysterious paper; "be not dismayed; this is an assurance of safety; yet," continued he, pondering, " it is but the assurance of one, and there are besides eight others, on whose judgment, or rather prejudice, my fate must depend. To prepare myself for the approaching de





vision was the injunction of my unknown friend ; but how prepare? The fatal deed is done! Loncillos lies a breathless corse; and could my eyes rain blood instead of tears, could my heart feel contrition's deepest pang, and. should my tongue make open confession of the murder, all this would not rekindle the extinguished spark of life. Hence then, remorse! eyes, be steady in your gaze! be bold, my lips, to utter stout denial! and you, my nerves, be doubly strung to hold me strongly up, that no weak tremor shake my frame, or give suspicion of the guilt that stains my soul!"

Scarcely were these resolves formed, before he heard the massy chains fall from the door of his prison. He started from the couch, and boldly met the officials, who came to conduct him to the state-hall, which was performed with the same ceremonials as on the preceding night, except that he was not, as before, confined to the pillar. When the covering was taken from his head, he beheld the ghastly corse



r





of don Gusman divested of the blaek velvet pall; his vest and shirt were thrown open, and the wound on his breast laid bare and exposed. Baldivia passed the body with a firm step, and was placed by his conductors to the front of the tribunal.

Hernandez, the abbot, arose and thus addressed him—" Gonzalo de Baldivia, for the last time, you are brought hither, either to make a full confession of your guilt, and throw yourself upon the mercy of the Holy Office, or by trial, such as we, your judges, shall appoint, approve your innocence."

Baldivia raised his eyes to the speaker, and answered firmly.—" As yet, most holy father, I am to learn the guilt of which I 6tand accused." > .

"Look on that pallid corse," resumed Hernandez; "was it not your dagger made that gaping wound? did not the brave Loncillos fall by your assassinating hand?"

"Who dares accuse me of this bloody deed?" demanded Baldivia; "confront





me with them; then shall the judges of this high tribunal decide between the innocent and the guilty."

Another of the judges then rejoined—. "If you are not guilty of this atrocious act, manifest your innocence. It is known you departed with the rest of the guests from the late entertainment given by the marquis de Tormes; where had you remained till the chime of the Dominicans announced the hour of matin prayer?"

A heavy curse against the salutation of the officious monk swelled his heart, but instant in reply, he said—" In returning from the palace de Tormes, where, with shame, I own my lips had too freely drained the goblet, I struck my foot against the pavement at the corner of the great square, and fell; how long I lay, I know not, for I was stunned by the fall; and when, with difficulty, I reached the portico of my palace, I heard the matin chime."

"What colour," demanded another of the judges, " was the dress you wore that day?"

VOL. L I



r





"It was blue," replied Baldivia, " a velvet of the looms of Genoa."

"And the blood that stained it—" said Hernandez.

"Was mine," resumed Baldivia; " it gushed from my nose, as sense returned, after my fall. Alas! and is it on such slight evidence the heir of the ancient and, let me add with pride, the honourable house of de Baldivia stands suspected? Could you see my heart, you would learn it loved don Gusman far too well to be his murderer; yet how to prove my innocence appears impossible,unless all-seeing Heaven inspire my lips with eloquence to speak conviction to your hearts. Alas! my own is sorely punished, for the pride it felt in calling men of such high renown as the marquis de Tormes and don Gusman Loncillos friends. On my arrival at Madrid, it was my good fortune to obtain the notice of the marquis de Tormes; he invited me to his palace; he honoured me with his friendship; from his lips I learned the private merits and excellencies of don Gusman Loncillos, for public praise had long





before informed rne of the warrior's triumph and the hero's fame. Prepared by private friendship, and by public report, to respect and admire the brave companion of de Tormes' battles, a stranger to his person, but a lover of his worth, at my first introduction to him, my heart acknowledged he was worthy of the world's homage, and, what to me appeared of higher value, the friendship of de Tormes. Bred in luxurious ease, and unacquainted with the art of war, I listened to his tale of hard-earned conquest, till I wished that fate had linked me by some sacred tie to Loncillos and de Tormes, that, beneath their conquering banner, I might have fought, and, with my blood, have purchased the glory of having my name enrolled with theirs in the records of my country. Is it probable that I, who exulted in his victories, who would have gladly placed my own person as a shield before his bosom had danger assailed him, is it probable that I am his assassin? Holy fathers, if I have failed to gain your belief





I have no more to say but tins—Heaven knows the heart, and will not permit the innocent to suffer.""

Baldivia ceased, and a murmur arose nmong the judges; but the sounds, though loud, were indistinct and unintelligible to the ear of the criminal, who shortly after was bade advance to the table at the foot of the canopy. He was then ordered to make bare his left knee, and kneel upon the black cushion that was placed before him, while his right hand rested on a crucifix. The abbot Hernandez then waved over his head a black banner, in the centre of which was embroidered in large gold letters the two words blood and fire, pronouncing in his appalled ears this sentence —" Gonzalo de Baldivia, you are called upon by the holy brethren of the secret Inquisition, to prove your innocence by the ordeals of fire and blood, from which, if you escape unscorched and unstained, you will be declared innocent of the murder imputed to you, and, having taken the requisite oaths, will be set at liberty, and allowed to depart wheresoever it pleases you; but, on the contrary, having despised and refused the grace offered yon by confession, if you are now found guilty, the laws of this institution, against which there fs no appeal, condemn you to be plunged into utter darkness, there to remain till your miserable existence shall terminate in flames at the approaching autode-fe; and may He who died for the sins of mankind have mercy on your soul!"





The resolve of Baldivia was already taken, and this tremendous sentence was divested of its terrors, by the well-remembered words of the mysterious billet, " Be not dismayed." Hernandez having furled the banner, Baldivia, with a towering port and steady voice, exclaimed—" I am ready —on to the trial!" He was immediately surrounded by officials, who made bare his feet and arms; meanwhile the muffled drum and deep-tolling bell added their solemn sounds to the gloom and horror of the scene. Being prepared for the ordeal, the officials led Baldivia to a ranije of iron bars, which, red and sparkling, were placed between him and the bier that supported





the body of don Gusman Loncillos—" It is but to die at last," said Baidivia, mentally, as his eye fell on the burning bars. With desperate resolution he placed his naked feet on the glowing iron, and passed over.

The superstition of that unenlightened era inculcated the belief that a lifeless body, touched by the hand of the murderer, would bleed afresh. It was this trial Baidivia had yet to undergo. The still-unclosed eyes of Loncillos seemed to glare reproach, and his stern features yet wore the expression of menace; but callous to remorse and fear, Baidivia approached urtawed; bold in guilt, he laid his hand on the wound; no blood followed the touch, and the deceived, credulous officials shouted—" Gonzalo de Baidivia, unscorched and unstained, has undergone the ordeals of fire and blood; Gonzalo de Baidivia is innocent!" Baidivia was then conducted to the foot of the canopy; he pronounced, as they directed, the oaths of secrecy; he was declared at liberty to depart; but, unequal to the transport of this intimation, hrs





brain whirled; he stood a moment without sense, and then fell motionless at the feet of his judges.



CHAPTER IV



The dark-wing'd bird that scents the bed of death,

Screams not for him who sleeps to wake no more;

It is for thee, exulting in proud health,

The harrowing note is pour'd presagoful

Of thy own sad fate. A. I. a.



False of heart, bloody of hand. Shakespeare.



"To delude the ear of credulous woman,

He had a tongue wily as a serpent;

Then he would sigh, and weep deceitful tears,

And shoot from eyes of flame love's amorous

Glances."

Afteb Baldivia had been tried, according to the superstitious ceremonies of the Inquisition, by the ordeals of fire and blood, he was removed to a light and elegant apartment, where a skilful physician attended to restore his suspended faculties. Meanwhile Lazarillo was remanded to the hall, and underwent -an examination, in which every artful expedient was made useof to entrap and throw him off his guard; but steadily adhering to his first-given deposition, no inference could be drawn front his countenance, manner, or answers toquestions proposed to entangle and confound him, that could at all authorise a suspicion that he was in any way privy to the murder of don Gusman Loricillos; he was therefore commanded to repeat anew the solemn and tremendous oaths he had before pronounced of preserving undeviating silence, and inviolable secrecy, in all that related to the transactions of the Holy Office.





Being dismissed from the presence of his. mysterious judges, of whose faces he had never obtained a glimpse, he was again conducted to his dungeon, and for some time left in darkness and solitude, to the amusement and consolation of his own reflections. Hope had not yet abandoned the light-hearted Lazarillo; but as he lay on his straw pallet, he began to discover that confinement and inaction did not aj





together agree with him—" My health will suffer," said he, springing up, and pacing with quick steps the narrow limits of his prison. Twice he struck his head against the flinty wall; but rubbing his bruises, he observed—" A man cannot pass, through life without being thumped and jostled; and the evils of to-day may produce happiness to-morrow.'"

At length he grew weary of coming every instant in contact with the cold, damp wall; and throwing himself on the straw, he said—" If I had only a light and a book to. beguile the time, it would be something; but the Inquisition, I fancy, allows of no indulgence. No matter—I defy them to make me miserable; and if I could but learn the fate of my lord Baldivia, I should'be quite content. Well, St. Jago preserve him! I trust he is at liberty; and as for me, hope and patience must support me. I wonder though," continued he, " that these kind-hearted, hospitable signiors do not recollect it is supper^time; I really begin to feel a sort of craving after theit delicate black bread and pure crystal."





As he spoke, the iron door of his prison was thrown open, and two officials entered; but seeing that they brought no food, he could not forbear expressing his disappointment at not receiving his accustomed allowance.

"You must bear with an empty stomach," said the man, to whom Lazarillo had addressed himself; " you will have no more food brought you."

"The saints forbid f replied Lazarillo. "No more food I why, surely it is not the intention of the Holy Office to starve me to death! Come now, you are jesting."

"This is no place for jesting in," returned the official, the torch he carried flashing on the bare, ragged walls. "I am not commissioned to reply to questions, but to bid you prepare-——"

"For death," interrupted Lazarillo, turning pale; " but that will put an end to suffering, and I shall certainly prefer instant death to lingering starvation. But why is this ?—of what crime am I accused, that I am sentenced to die, which is really doubly hard at this moment, when I had





cheered up my mind, and was looking forward to a long life of happiness."

"ITou may look forward to happiness," said the other official," if your conscience is free from stain."

"Ay," replied Lazarillo, " you mean inthe other world; but, bless your heart, I am not prepared for so important a change; instead of celestial happiness, I was planning terrestrial delight in a snug cabin with a pretty little wife, and a brace or two of sturdy boys, rosy as their mother,, and merry as their father."

"Silence! This idle prate," said the official, sternly, " avails nothings Follow me instantly."

"To death," thought. Lazarillo; but stiffened with apprehension; his limbs refused to move, and the officials were obliged to support,, or rather drag him along a damp vaulted passage, at the dusky end of whieh he beheld a low arched door. Here, chilled by cold, and the apprehen, sion of approaching death, he was unable to resist, when they bound a handkerchief over his eyes, though, in a faint voice, he





entreated to be allowed a sight of the instrument that was to dispatch him.

Again he was commanded to be silent; he heard the creaking of rusty hinges; and being impelled forward, he supposed he had passed through the door he had indistinctly beheld. In a few moments he was sensible of a change of atmosphere; he breathed more freely, and felt a sweet, fresh breeze fan his cheek. Suddenly his guides bade him stop—" This then," thought Lazarillo, " is the place where my existence is to terminate; well, I will suffer silently* and courageously;" but this apprehension was quickly removed, by one of his conductors saying—" In another moment you will be set at liberty ; but be careful to observe the sacred oaths of secrecy you have sworn, the slightest deviation from which will be certain and tremendous death; acrain I repeat, beware! indulge not your loquacious disposition, for the Inquisition has eyes everywhere."

They now bade him keep his eyes closed while he counted an hundred, and then he should be at perfect freedom to turn his





steps wherever his fancy directed. While the official spoke, he removed the bandage from the eyes of Lazarillo, who instantly began to reckon as he had been commanded. Having completed the hundred, he opened his eyes, and beheld above him the sky thickly studded with stars; before him was a narrow street, which led to the' great square, in which stood the Baldjvian Palace Lazarillo scarcely felt the earthunder his feet, as he fled from the terrific power of the Inquisition. A thousandtimes he thanked Heaven and all the saints for his liberation; and panting, covered• with perspiration, his beard long, and linen.tumbled and soiled, he rushed into the hall' of the palace, as the domestics were spreading the board for supper.

Instantly every eye was turned upon him. "Lazarillo is returned! St. Jago be praised! Welcome home, my good fellow !" resounded from every mouth.

Lazarillo extended his hands to them as he sunk on a bench; but before he thanked them for the friendly joy they express





ed at his return among them, he inquired if Baldivia their lord was at home?

"At home!" repeated Sebastian the steward, " at home!—no! and being, as we know, in the hands of the damnable Inquisition, we never expect him to come home again ; though as you are restored to us by miracle, why St. Jago may effect another,, to be sure, if he pleases, in favour of my lord,"

All culinary preparations were now suspended, while the domestics thronged round Lazarillo, with inquiries he was unable to resolve, whether he thought it likely their lord would escape with life from the fangs of the inquisitors?—whether his flesh, had been torn with red-hot pincers,, and his limbs broke upon the wheel?

Lazarillo shook his head, and was silent. "Why you could not look more dismal," said Flora, a smart little brunette, to whom Lazarillo had been in the habit of talking nonsense, " if you were condemned to suffer at the next auto-de-fe. Heaven preserve thee, Lazarillo-! art thou struck dumb?"





"No," said he, mournfully, " I am not dumb."

"Heaven be praised," resumed Flora, ** that the barbarous monsters have not cut out thy tongue! I should not have wondered though, if the savage devils had taken that method to make thee keep their wicked secrets."

"By which you prove," rejoined Sebastian, "that the only way to make sure of a woman's secrecy is to cut out her tongue."

"Why there could be no suspicion of her telling tales in that case, eh, Flora?" said Diego the cook.

"There you are mistaken," answered Lazarillo, " for though she could not speak, she might write; and to make all sure, they should lop off her hands, as well as cut out her tongue."

"St. Jago be praised," returned Flora, "thy tongue and thy hands are safe! and many a merry tale and many a game at romps I should have lost, had it been otherwise; but come, man, prithee cheer up, and be thyself again; we have sadly missed thee, especially me, the nights have been so dull and so long."





A general laugh, at the expence of Flora, succeeded this speech; but perceiving Lazarillo unwilling to talk, the domestics crowded in a circle round him; and in order to urge him to speak, a thousand questions were preferred at once; but, to their amazement, the merry Lazarillo, who was wont to be as communicative to the full as they were inquisitive, remained buried in. thought, and absolutely dumb to their urgent solicitations, and often repeated— "Do now, dear Lazarillo, give us a description of that horrible, dismal place, the Inquisition. Ay do, that is a good fellow h tell us all about it—describe to us the length and width of the gridirons that they broil heretics upon, and the dimensions of the fryingpans in which the savagewretches toss up a man, till he is fried brown and crispas an omelet."

These requests, so pressingly urged,, roused Lazarillo to reply—" It must appear evident to you, my friends, that I have neither been broiled like a steak, or fried like an omelet; and of the magnitude: of the fryingpans and gridirons made use





of by the Inquisition, I am incompetent to speak, for I promise you I never was permitted to peep into their kitchens."

"By St. Jago, I believe you," returned Diego the cook, " for you look as pale and as thin as if you had kept a long Lent upon stewed garlic and roasted chesnuts; but come," continued he, slapping his shoulder, "supper is on the table, waiting for us to fall to; and perhaps when you have picked the breast of a fine fat capon that has been fed upon pistachio nuts and almonds, and drank a flask of your favourite vintage, you will be able to talk a little, and entertain us with an account of the strange sights you have seen since that terrible night when the hall was Med by"

"Come," said Lazarillo, " let us go to supper,—the capon will be colcL"

Flora, as usual, sat next to Lazarillo, and was officiously attentive; but Diego was mistaken in his expectations, for when the smoking breast of the capon was placed on his plate, and with its savoury smell seemed to invite his appetite, he no. longer remembered how hungry he had been an hour before; but pushing the plate from before him, Lazarillo leaned his elbow on the table in a melancholy attitude, and instead of feasting and making merry with his companions, he felt oppressed by sorrow, and continued to muse over the probable fate of his lord, whom he feared would be found guilty of the murder of don Gasman, and condemned to suffer, with other wretched criminals, at the approaching auto-de-fe.





Finding him obstinately averse to speaking of the Holy Office, Diego ceased to question him. Other subjects were introduced; and the little coquette Flora endeavoured to provoke him to jealousy, by flirting with Sebastian; but Lazarillo, fully occupied in conjecturing the fate of his lord, was alike insensible to love, jealousy, and wine. Wearied with their attentions and their noisy mirth, he complained of indisposition, and retired to his chamber, refusing the proffered attendance of Flora, who wished to arrange his toilet, and bring him up sack whey.

The luxurious comfort of his down-bed,





the loss of which was so sensibly felt in his late-quitted dungeon, he did not enjoy; and for the first time in his life, Lazarillo beheld a dark cloud on the horizon of futurity; he believed that Baldivia was the murderer of Loncillos, and that the perpetration of this crime would bring him to a terrific end. Convinced that the Inquisition would never release him from thengrasp, till they had seen his mortal part consigned to the flames, he felt assured he should in this world behold his lord no more; and not only wept his horrible doom, but the anguish of the old marquis Baldivia, who in vain was wishing the return of a beloved son, for whom he was extending his possessions, and whose return to Peru he intended to eelebrate with princely magnificence and pomp.

"Early to-morrow," said Lazarillo, "I will wait upon the marquis de Tormes; he was the friend of my unhappy lord; I will request his advice as to the disposal of his affairs; and having faithfully taken care of his' effects, I will hasten from this detestable Madrid, where even an honest





man is not secure from the power of the Inquisition."

Lazarillo, though restored to his own bed, tossed uneasily from side to side; his limbs yet ached with their late hard lodging, and his mind was haunted by a remembrance of his dark, narrow dungeon, and the deplorable situation in which Baldivia at that moment lay, to whom it was impossible to convey relief, or point out a method of escape. Worn out with fatigue, at last the eyes of Lazarillo closed; but, from a short sleep, he was roused by loud and repeated knockings at the hall-door.. Starting in terror from his bed, by the light of the lamps still burning in the square, he beheld a carriage drawn up close to the portico. At length, having roused the porter, an inquiry was made of who, at that late hour, demanded admittance?

"Your lord, Baldivia," was the welcome reply.

Frantic with joy, Lazarillo waited not for his garments; but flying down the stairs, he unbarred the doors, and was the first to welcome his lord, whose return not aa hour before he had utterly despaired of. The joyful tidings of Baldivia's liberation were instantly made known, by the porter, to the rest of the domestics, who were hastening to the hall to express their happiness at seeing him again in his own palace, after sm absence they feared would be eternal, so very few being allowed to escape, innocent or guilty, from the clutches of the Inquisition *, but guessing their intention, Baldivia hastily quitted the hall, and bidding Lazarillo follow, he proceeded to his own chamber, where he commanded him to inform the household, that on pain of his eternal displeasure, they were never to mention the Inquisition, or allude, by the most distant hint, to his ever having been a prisoner within its walls—" And this prohibition, Lazarillo, must also extend to you, for reasons perfectly well understood." Lazarillo bowed. "But," continued Baldivia, kindly pressing his hand, "do not believe me insensible to your attachment, or ungrateful for the eminent service you have rendered me. On our return to Peru, or here, if you prefer re





i

maining in Spain, I will promote your fortune to the utmost of my power."

Lazarillo kissed the hand of Baldivia, and said—" His only wish was to follow him to Peru—his only hope that they should quit Spain immediately."

Baldivia assured him he felt an equal impatience with himself to quit the country, and would expedite their departure. Again he repeated his injunctions respecting the Inquisition, and dismissed the happy Lazarillo to his rest.

"I can sleep now," said Lazarillo, shaking up his pillow, "for my lord is returned; and to-morrow, at the morning repast, I shall repeat his commands to the household; no doubt I shall have trouble enough to charm the tongue of that little pert, curious, inquisitive minx "Flora, he

would have said; but sleep cut the chain of his ideas, and imposed a pleasing silence.

At the morning repast, before they had time to prefer a single question, Lazarillo communicated to the disappointed domestics the command of their lord, imposing on them an eternal silence respecting the inquisition. However the mandate was felt, the whole household had discretion enough to declare their obedient acquiescence with the injunctions, all but Flora, who, as Lazarillo believed, felt it very difficult to observe silence on a matter that so much excited her curiosity; and she many times protested it was an extremely despotic mandate, and very hard indeed to be observed—" I suppose," said she, "his lordship has grown as gloomy and silent as Lazarillo; but for my part, it makes no sort of difference to me; I don't care—every body knows I am neither curious in prying into secrets, nor at all inquisitive, not I; if I had, I might have known all the intrigues of Madrid; so I hope no person will think that my lord's prohibition is a punishment to me."





"Certainly, no one will, or can think so, my charmer," replied Lazarillo; " you never can be accused of curiosity, for you never were detected with your ear at a keyhole, or peeping into a dressing-case, or endeavouring to soften the seal of a letter."





"You are an impertinent coxcomb!" interrupted Flora; " and if I was once silly enough to try to discover your amour with signora Isabel, it was only to find out your deceit. But I want no more conversation with you, signior Lazarillo; silence is the word, you know; and you, the bearer of his lordship's commission, ought certainly to set us a good example."

"His lordship," replied Lazarillo, " has enjoined silence on only one subject, my dear."

"My dear!" repeated Flora, scornfully; '' no liberties, I request, signior Lazarillo; it is my intention to be silent on all subjects henceforth with you, and you shall find that my resolution is at least strong as my curiosity."

Lazarillo laughed, and offered a wager that before night her curiosity would overcome her silence. Flora nodded her head disdainfully, and retired without deigning to reply.

The first visit Baldivia paid after his liberation was to the Palace de Tormes; he was sensible that the marquis had





been . his friend, and that to his influence he was indebted for his so speedy emancipation; and though restrained by oaths of dreadful import from expressing his thanks, he wished to convince the marquis that he was sensible of his kindness and interference. While in the dungeon of the Inquisition, Baldivia had felt "an absolute hatred of donna Isadora, but the additional interest her beauty received from the melancholy of her countenance, and the mourning habit she wore for don Gusman Loncillos, revived again the passion that he believed danger and suffering had entirely extinguished.

"Though the heart may appear to have foregone its preference, there are secret .agents in the soul that rekindle at the sight of a once-beloved object."

His situation was now different to that in which he had execrated the charms of Isadora, as having led him from guilt to peril; he was at liberty; the pain and danger he had incurred were forgotten, or only remembered to strengthen the resolve

VOL. i. K





of subduing her to his wishes, of repaying himself by the possession of her beauty for the hazard he had run in the endeavour to attain it. Favourable to his wishes, he found the marquis de Tormes preparing to head the funeral procession appointed to convey, with all possible pomp, the remains of don Gusman Loncillos to his hereditary castle in Grenada, where he had left a daughter, by his untimely end, an orphan, whom the marquis intended to bring back with him to Madrid, that she might remain under his guardianship till it should please the king, her sovereign, to bestow her in marriage,

Baldivia felt a strong desire to speak to de Tormes on the interdicted subject of the Inquisition, and most particularly respecting the ordeal of Jire, for it was evident to him that this was an illusion designed merely to intimidate and enforce confession by the appearance of a torture. The iron over which he had passed glowed with a fire, that communicating no heat, had not power to burn, as his feet had received no injury from the apparently red





hot bars. Was this a chemical secret, known only to de Tormes, and did he owe his escape from this torture to his friendship? It was probable that he did, for he was convinced, from the height and tone of voice, that he was the friend who had prevented his being stretched on the wheel, and to whom he owed the encouragement conveyed in the little billet; but his desire to be satisfied on these points met no encouragement from de Tormes, who carefully avoided the remotest allusion to the Holy Office, and even appeared watchful to defeat his intention of inquiry.

When Baldivia rose to depart, the marquis kindly shook his hand, expressed the most friendly wishes for his happiness, and requested that he would be frequent in his visits to the marchioness during his absence, which he apprehended would be long, and donna Isadora had fallen into habits of melancholy, which, if indulged, might essentially affect her health, which was of the utmost consequence to her chil





clren, yet too young to be separated from the attentive care of their mother.

Isadora, at the side of Baldivia, had felt emotions that nearly deprived her of recollection. She rejoiced to find that his innocence had been manifested to the judges of the Inquisition, but her mind, far from acquitting him, considered him with horror, nor relinquished the suspicion that he was the actual murderer of Loncillos. She heard the invitation so pressingly given by the marquis, her husband, with fear and regret, for while she considered Baldivia a murderer, she could not divest her heart of its tenderness, or remembering his guilt, forget her fatal attachment. All that remained for the satisfaction of her conscience was to avoid his dangerous society, and she resolved, during the absence of her husband, to plead indisposition, and so escape the certain temptation which opportunity and solicitation would present.

The promise Baldivia gave the deceived de Tormes, to be constant in his visits to the marchioness, was delivered with all the hypocrisy of which his heart was capable, while it exulted in the prospect of repaying his friendship by wounding him in the tenderest point, by an act of the basest villany, the seduction of his wife.





With all the ostentatious pomp and pageantry that unbounded wealth could lavish on a funeral procession, the body of don Gusman Loncillos was conveyed by his friend, the marquis de Tormes, to his ancient castle in Grenada, where his only child, donna Olivia Loncillos, lived in retirement, amid the rude scenery of her father's extensive domain.

Donna Olivia met the corse of her murdered father with well-affected sorrow, but her heart secretly rejoiced to be emancipated, by any means, from the power of a tyrant, who had shut her from society, denied her every indulgence, and rendered her life nothing better than a state of slavery.

The body of don Gusman lay in state in the hall of his castle till necessity compelled de Tormes to consign it to its pa





rent earth. The family vault was opened to receive this its most illustrious branch, and with all due ceremonies, the body of the ill-fated Gusman was laid in the grave; but before the dust could be thrown upon the splendid coffin, while yet the officiating monk pronounced an oration, descriptive of his martial achievements—while he detailed his victories and extolled the warrior—while he praised the virtues, public and private, of the illustrious dead, an enormous raven, napping its dark wings, with discordant note, settled on the yet uncovered coffin.

The superstitious crowd of vassals, assembled round the grave, whispered to each other the wild and extravagant belief of their own weak and alarmed fancies. Being forcibly driven from its restingplace, the coffin, the ill-omened bird perched on the inverted banner held by the marquis de Tonnes, and thrice repeated its presageful croak. The assembled crowd, with looks of horror, fell on their knees; the monk looked aghast; he stopped short in his eulogium of don Gusman,





and with trembling hand made the sign of the cross.

De Tormes smiling at their superstitious credulity, shook from the banner the object of their alarm, which, spreading its large black wings, flew screaming from the vault, and scarcely could the authority of the marquis de Tormes detain the vassals to fill up the grave, so eager were they to quit the vault, devoutly believing the raven to be the devil, or the spirit of don Gusman Loncillos, condemned, for his unrepented sins, to wander in that form over his domain.

Baldivia having returned to his accustomed pursuits, with an avidity that almost deprived Lazarillo of the hope that he had cherished of immediately returning to Peru, he took an opportunity, being alone with his lord, to fall at his feet, when bursting into tears, he conjured him to quit Spain and return again to Peru, not only in compliance with the wishes of his father, but also for his own safety. " While we remain in Madrid," continued Lazarillo, * I shall be in constant dread lest some unguarded word or adventure should place us again in the power of that cursed"





"Beware, Lazarillo!" interrupted Bal•divia, "never mention, as you value your existence, past occurrences; never think of them, if possible."

Lazarillo sighed heavily, and his countenance spoke the impossibility of performing that injunction.

"Beware, I again repeat," resumed Baldivia, "lest you rush upon destruction. Keep, I conjure you, a seal upon your lips, and be assured it is my intention to quit Spain, and return to our native Peru, as -expeditiously as the arrangement of my affairs will admit."

For several days after the departure of the marquis de Tormes for Grenada, themarchioness, adhering to her resolve, kept closely to her apartment, and the constant inquiries of Baldivia were answered by her thanks for his politeness, and apologies for not seeing him, on the plea of indisposition.

These excuses were at first admitted by Baldivia; she appeared unwell when he





saw her previous to the absence of the marquis, for his vanity, excessive as it was, never suggested the idea, that donna Isadora confined herself from the apprehension of becoming a victim to the passion he had inspired, till Lazarillo accidentally mentioned that he had met the marchioness de Tormes, with her children and attendant, in a little pleasant wood near the cabin of old Sancho, and that he had assisted Theresa to cany fruit and coffee to a bank where they sat to refresh themselves.

Baldivia inquired how the marchioness looked, whether she was pale?

Lazarillo thought he had never seen her look better.

Baldivia was pleased with this intelligence, and instantly repaired to the Palace de Tormes, nothing doubting, as the health of the marchioness was restored, he should be admitted to her presence; but to his extreme mortification, he was told that donna Isadora was not yet sufficiently recovered to admit company. The tme meaning of her repeated excuses now flashed





on Baldivia's mind; he perceived she was apprehensive of her own power of resistance, and feared to meet him alone.— "But she shall meet me," said Baldivia; "this timid, trembling dove shall herself seek my bosom; the favourable opportunity her husband's absence affords must not be lost; to-day Isadora avoids me, but the time will arrive wl en she will eourt me to her arms, with all her sex's wiles and blan? dishments. Come forth, thou trusty friend," said he, "at the same moment opening the secret drawer of a cabinet, into which he had thrown the key ef the orangery; "come forth! this night shalt thou admit me to happiness, to the possesT sion of beauty."

Scarcely had he laid his hand on the key^. when he recollected his terrific dream in the dungeon of the Inquisition; he remembered, and not without a slight degree of horror, the warning given him by the bleeding spectre of Loneillos; the ghastly look, the sepulchral tone, in which he had bade him avoid the commission of further crimes, yet seemed present to his eye and ear; but, hardened in guilt, Baldivia ridiculed the admonition given in an idle dream, as the mere workings of a distempered brain, affected by pain and the perilous situation in which he was then placed.—" Gusman Loncillos," said he, "sleeps quietly in the vault of his ancestors, and his ghost will not burst the monumental marble of his tomb to guard the virtue of his friend's wife. De Tormes: most opportunely isabsent, and this night, maugre dreams and spectres', will I pursue the burning wish that agitates my soul. This night, Isadora, admits me to thy presence, let good or ill betide."





Having made up his mind to the adventure* and determined that very night should see him received a favoured lover by Isadora, or banish him from her presence for ever, he placed the key of the orangery carefully in his breast, and went to an entertainment given by the wife of an Englishman, of distinction, then at Madrid in a diplomatic situation. Baldivia neither admired nor was interested by the beauty of the English lady; to his fancy





she appeared an insipid unmeaning doll; but the young nobility of Madrid crowded her levees, and he, among the rest, poured into her ear all the senseless, heartless adulation which female vanity receives, and considers its due homage.

The safety of his lord, united to his repeated promise of speedily departing from the hated shores of Spain, had effectually restored Lazarillo to his natural good spirits; he was again cheerful and lively, and his facetious humour diffused mirth among the domestics of the palace; but Flora, who considered Lazarillo's silence and reserve respecting what had taken place during his confinement in the Inquisition a particular affront to herself, who had been far from reserved to him, resolved to convince him she could exist without his confidence. In pursuance of what she believed would greatly mortify and punish him, she assumed an air of great distance; and when he would have returned to his former pleasantries and flirtation with her, she repulsed his caresses with all the dignity of disdain and





contempt of insulted consequence; tossing' up her little saucy nose, she requested the merry Lazarillo, who enjoyed her anger,, to keep his fooleries for those to whom he communicated his secrets

"That is to thee then," said Lazarillo, attempting to kiss her; "thou art acquainted with all my secrets;" but still repulsing him, she replied—" As great a fool as you suppose me, I am not to be imposed upon in this way; your secrets are for a sensible learned signora, one who, reads plays and madrigals, and to her jo\x. may carry your kisses, for they are by no> means acceptable to me, I promise you."

Lazarillo laughed, but protested he had; no secrets to tell; he continued to coax, but Flora, flattering herself that she had an ascendancy over him, remained sulky and disdainful, till Lazarillo, tired of her silly airs, said—"Well, Flora, if my attentions are really disagreeable to you, I will instantly release you from the disgust and trouble of receiving them." But this was not what Flora wished; to exert all the tyranny of power, and yet retain her slave,





was her intention; and finding her hopes like to be disappointed, she burst into tears, and sobbing replied—" Yes, yes, I know very well what you mean; you can. carry your attentions to that tall, awkward^ gawky Isabel, who tosses up her nose at her betters; she thinks much more of herself than other folks think of her, with her coarse red hair, and her skin, all freckled, like the back of a toad—I should be very sorry," spreading her petticoats, "to have such thick ancles, and such a big broad clumsy foot as Isabel; why, I am certain," holding up her foot, "I could put both my feet into one of her slippers."

"Thy feet," said Lazarillo, perceiving, from the falling of the rain, that the storms was nearly at an end, at the same time catching her in his arms, "thy feet are assmall and delicate as a Chinese woman of quality's, and thy skin is as smooth and dear."

"Nay, for the matter of that," replied. Flora, proudly bridling, "for the matter of that, Lazarillo, my lord himself"

"How L my lord!" repeated Lazarillo, affecting to be angry in his turn, and releasing her from his clasp, "my lord I mighty fine indeed! but to be sure, if my lord takes notice of your beauty, it is net wonder a poor fellow, like me, only his: valet, am rejected and despised. You will pardon my freedom; I thought you were not as affable as usual, and that there was a strange alteration in your manners;. but if my lord pays you attention, no wonder; you are certainly quite right to discard your more humble admirers." passions, and wont give a person a fair hearing."





Flora simpered and replied—" You are so hasty, Lazarillo, and put such odd constructions on one's words; I am sure I never once thought of such a thing as to* be noticed by my lord."

"No!" returned Lazarillo, "why did

not you. say "•

"I said no such thing," interrupted Flora; "I only meant to tell you that my lord remarked to uncle Diego, that I was a smart pretty girl, and might, if I took care, make my fortune by marrying wellj and that was all, though you fly into such





"And was that all, really and truly?" asked Lazarillo.

"Yes,, really and truly, St. Lucia be my witness!" said Flora; "and you know, Lazarillo, what my lord said about marrying well was very true, for Aveydo, the silversmith, made me an offer."

"But he was old enough to be your grandfather," returned Lazarillo.

"What of that? he is immensely rich,'r resumed Flora, "and if it had not been for my foolish regard for somebody, I might have made my fortune."

"And yourself miserable," said Lazarillo, "for he would have starved thee in the midst of plenty, and his jealousy would not have suffered thee a moment out of his sight; why thou wouldst have been a living soul chained to a dead body; down* on thy knees, and thank all the saints that thou hast escaped the claw of old Mammon."

"Why I should not repent," said Flora,., "if I was quite sure"





"Of what?" asked Lazarillo.

"That you are not fond of Isabel," replied Flora, hesitating.

"Thou dost an injustice to thy own charms by the supposition," said Lazarillo; "I am only fond of thee."

Flora's countt nance brightened up.

"Come," continued Lazarillo, "let us kiss and be friends." Flora did not refuse the kiss of reconciliation. "And now," said he, "you shall go with me to put my lord's dressing-room in order."

"But I remember," said Flora, drawingback as he led her towards the door, "I remember you would not let me arrange your chamber the other night when I offered; the night, you know, Lazarillo, that you returned from the"

"Repeat no old grievances, child," returned he, hastily interrupting her; "I was then sick and out of humour, not with you though, my pretty Flora, but with"

"The Inquisition," resumed she, eagerly; "now you know I asked you that night to tell me about that dismal place, and you answered me quite cross and huffish; but now we are alone, do, dear Lazarillo, tell me what you saw there, and what they did to you?"





"It is evident they did me no harm,"' said Lazarillo, "as I am returned to you safe and sound, and once for all, I reply, I have nothing to relate."

"I am sure," rejoined Flora, "I was never in the least inclined to be curious, or given to ask questions, only you need not be so reserved to me, and 1 should like"

"I know, my love," interrupted Lazarillo; "I know you are not at all curious, therefore we will, if you please, talk of something else."

"Oh, certainly, with all my heart," replied she, pettishly, " though I must needs observe, with air your pretended regard for me, that you never think me worthy of keeping your secrets."

"I have none to repose with you," said Lazarillo; "if I adhere to truth, I have





Ho communications to make, and I am too stupid to invent a marvellous tale for thy entertainment."

"You are as close as a miser's strong box, I perceive," replied Flora; "well, it does not signify to me, to be sure, only I can't help saying, I think it rather strange."

"Very strange indeed," said Lazarillo, "that Nicholas should marry Lothe, who is as deaf as a post! but then he has a powerful reason."

"A reason !" said Flora, eagerly; " what reason, dear Lazarillo?"

"Why you know," replied Lazarillo, smiling at her impatience and curiosity,

"you know he is notorious for but

you wont repeat it."

"Me repeat!" said Flora, "not for the world! you know I never repeat; notorious for what?"

"Gallantry," replied Lazarillo; "and as. his wife is deaf, why her misfortune will keep a quiet house."

Flora laughed.—" And now," continued. Lazarillo, "let us go to my lord's dressingroom?"





Flora suffered herself to be conducted by Lazarillo, though she was not altogether pleased at not being gratified with an account of the Inquisition, particularly as she had not only fancied, but boasted, that she could get any thing she pleased out of Lazarillo. However, he continuing inflexible, she did not choose to quarrel in earnest, and was obliged to cease her importunities, rather than offend the merry Lazarillo, whom, of all her admirers, she liked the best.

At the hour of midnight, Baldivia stole from the crowded assembly that were obsequiously bowing round the English beauty, and hurried on by his impetuous and licentious passions, threw a disguise over his splendid habit, and full of impatient wishes, began the way. The wind sighed through the thick branches of the chesnut-trees as he flew along the avenue, and in mystic murmurs seemed to warn him from his base intention; but, unawed by the appearance of an approaching storm, he gained the door of the orangery. As he applied the key to the lock, his





horrible dream again recurred to his memory, and the admonition of the spectre seemed to vibrate on his ear. The lock resisted his efforts. Uttering an execration, he turned round, almost persuaded that he should behold the bleeding shade of Loncillos at his side; but devoted to perdition, no spectral form opposed his entrance, no voice warned him to desist.

At the second trial, the lock yielded to his strength, and he entered the orangery, like an evil spirit with the malignant intention of transforming Eden into hell. Insensible to its delicious fragrance, he hurried along the bowery paths, till he came in view of the pavilion; a light streamed through the gilded lattices, and Baldivia, in a tumult of transport, recollected that Sancho, the gardener, had said the marchioness frequently passed whole nights there. But how to ascertain whether she was alone? he appoached near, and drawing aside the favourite passion-flower, that turned its 'beautiful blossoms over the lattice, he gained an imperfect view of the interior, but .saw no one; he listened, and all was silence: from the observation he obtained, he concluded that Isadora was seated opposite the door, a situation that concealed her from his sight; he cautiously ascended the steps; the door stood a-jar, and he had a full view of the marchioness, who reclined in a pensive attitude ort one of the sofas. The night was sultry, and her dress was a loose robe of grey silk thrown open at the bosom, and confined to her waist bv a zone of black velvet; part of her luxuriant hair was drawn up in a black silk net, and the rest hung in long glossy ringlets upon her alabaster shoulder; over her person there was diffused an air of voluptuous languor, more alluring to the taste of Baldivia than all the smiles and dimples of more animated beauty; her lute lay negligently beside her, and one snowy hand struck from its strings a few soft melancholy notes, expressive of a restless and unhappy mind. Baldivia was in the act of entering, when, sighing deeply, she caught up the lute, and in a voice of plaintive sweetness began to sing; he listened with mute attention, for the words she warbled were





interesting to his feelings, and encouraging to his hopes.

"Peaceful rest, spirit of the brave!

Oh ! rest within thy narrow grave,

While sad o'er thy untimely bier,

I heave a sigh and drop a tear.



The sighs I breathe, the tears I fched,

Are not for hours of-transport fled;

A secret sorrow swells my breast,

A silent grief destroys my rest.



<Jh, would that, ev'ry woe resign'd,

Death's chilly claip my form entwin'd,

And binding o'er my peaceful grave,

The long green grass might mournful wave!"



As the last notes trembled from the lute, Baldivia perceived she wept, and that tears hung on her cheek.—" How tedious and melancholy are the hours of night!" said Isadora, mournfully; "but alas for me! sad are my days also."

."And wherefore sad?" replied Baldivia, advancing towards her; "shriek not, Isadora; be not alarmed; it is I, Baldivia." He threw off the cloak which had concealed his rich habiliments, and falling at her feet, he continued to say—" And wherefore, loveliest of women! wherefore are you,





sad? Oh that it was permitted me to remove every sorrow from that angelic bosom! oh that it were allowed me to contribute to your felicity!"

Isadora spoke not, but her features expressed horror and apprehension, as recoiling from him she waved her hand for his departure.

"Yes," said Baldivia, starting up, "yes, I will be gone, sufficiently punished by your scorn for my presumptuous intrusion; yet, ere I depart for ever, before an eternal separation takes place, and the unhappy object of your hatred can offend no more"

The solemnity of his manner, and the dreadful insinuation conveyed in his words, alarmed the timid nature of Isadora, who fearfully exclaimed—" Gracious Heaven! what more have I to suffer! my lord Baldivia, what do you mean?"

"To die," said he, "to end at once a life of misery, since I have incurred the contempt of the marchioness de Tonnes."

"Alas!" replied Isadora, "your words .are wild, for little have my actions evinced contempt; I scorn you not, but rather pity your unhappy passion; yet let not this encourage you to speak what duty and virtue must condemn; and oh, imprudent! wherefore are you here? should any busy eye have marked your entrance, think of the fatal consequences; de Tormes, jealous of his honour, will seek revenge, and I, though innocent of crime, shall have my fame involved in irremediable disgrace."





"?kTo busy eye has marked my entrance," said Baldivia; "I came unthinking, unhoping this dear encounter; at midnight's solitary hour I came, to breathe the sighs of hopeless love beneath the shades where you so often wander, to fancy the delicious gale that fanned my throbbing temples came fraught with the perfume of your breath; to watch with anxious eye your balcony, if I perchance might catch a glimpse of that fair form so fervidly adored; to offer up a prayer for your repose, and wish myself the meanest of your slaves, so I might live beneath the sunshine of your eye."

VOL. I. L





Isadora, young and romantic, was not insensible to this artful flattery ; it was but too pleasing to her vanity and her tenderness; but virtue admonished her of the danger and guilt she incurred by lending a willing ear to this adulation. Struggling to repress the encroaching softness that was taking possession of her heart, she replied with dignity—" My lord Baldivia surely forgets that he addresses the wife of the marquis de Tonnes."

"No," said Baldivia, in a tone of vehemence, "no, I cease not to remember that cruel fate has united you to another. Alas! from the consciousness of this disastrous tie arises my distracting grief—my utter despair; yet de Tormes, cold and unfeeling, prizes not the inestimable treasure he possesses, while I, fatally enamoured of your beauties—I languish"

"Forbear, my lord," interrupted Isadora, "nor wound my virtue with these unhallowed professions, injurious to your own honour and the friendship of de Tormes."

"My love for you," resumed BaHivia,





*" is honour—I glory in my passion, fct where could I offer the homage of a devoted heart to an object more beautiful, more amiable, than Isadora?"

"Oh pride! oh virtue! assist me to repel this dangerous invader of my peace!* prayed Isadora, mentally, as Baldivia continued to assail her with those -seductive flatteries which experience had taught hint were so pleasing to the ear of female vanity.—" You presume too much on my forbearance," replied the marchioness; "but I have merited this fresh insult, by not informing my husband, that, by unwarrantable means, you had gained admittance to the garden, and invading my privacy, had dared offend my ears with the licentious gallantry of a midnight serenade."

"Acquaint him with my passion!" said Baldivia; "inexorable fate denies that I should live for you; and the wide world, without you, Isadora, appears to me, wretched and hopeless as I am, a cheerless blank. Inform de Tonnes I adore you, and let me expiate my offence, since such





unhappily it is, by my death; yes, let the sword of de Tormes restore to my bosom the peace your beauty has destroyed!"

"Leave me, 1 entreat you," returned the marchioness, with increased agitation; "I wish not your death, nor joy in your misery; but begone, I conjure you; the friends of don Gusman Loncillos are numerous; they are unceasingly on the watch to discover his assassin, and should you be detected entering or departing from this place, you might again be compelled"

"To remove a contemptible spy," said Baldivia unwarily.

"Shield me, protecting Heaven!" said Isadora, gazing on him with horror; "am I so miserable? do I indeed behold the murderer of Loncillos? Oh, Baldivia," continued she, sinking on the sofa, an agony of terror shaking her frame, "are you indeed stained with the blood of don Gusman?"

"What mortal will be hardy enough to accuse me?" replied he; "was there no hand but mine to deprive him of life? and if I had been urged to this unhappy deed.





must Isadora's lips arraign me—her whose beauty maddens my brain—to attain whom the sacrifice of a thousand lives seems little? The unhappy Gusman, it is probable, provoked his fate. But, cruel Isadora, what crime have I committed, except adoring you be accounted criminal, not only to excite your hate and scorn, but, deeming these a punishment too light, you wound my fame with cruel and unjust suspicion?" "Unjust!" repeated Isadora, casting on him a look of blended doubt and hope," unjust! oh, were 1 sure of that, all other wretchedness were easy to be borne!"

The storm which had rolled its awful burthen at a distance now approached; a stream of vivid lightning flashed through the opposite lattice, and while she spoke, a crash of thunder, deep and loud, seemed to burst the dome of the pavilion. "Now*, Baldivia," continued she, her face pale a§ marble, and her dark eyes lit up with the fire of enthusiasm, "now, while the omnipotent Ruler of nature hurls his destroying lightnings from the sky, now swear thou art not the murderer of LonciUos."





Baldivia was awe-struck; she stood before him like the accusing spirit that was to register his guilt in the records of eternity: unable to deny, yet resolute to deceive, he replied—" And wherefore should T swear? marked by your hate, and destined to endure your scorn, what matters it how guilty I appear in your idea? wherefore should I swear? Farewell! the wretch whom your suspicion stains with blood shall shock your sight no more."

He turned from her, and made a feint totlepart, when Isadora, wildly catching his arm, exclaimed—" Stay, Baldivia ! oh leave me not in this uncertainty ! were I assured Loncillos fell not by your, hand, it would remove a weight of anguish from my heart."

"Don Gusman Loncillos, it appears, was happy in your love," replied he, gently endeavouring to remove the white hand that grasped his arm, "and thrice blest, most enviable his fate, for he is lamented by you. Who would not think it bliss to die, if certain that his corse would be embalmed with the tears of Isadora ?tt





** Oh, widely you mistake!" rejoined the marchioness; "my tears fall not for Loncillos, though I lament his fatal end—cut off from life, with all his sins upon his head, without a moment's preparation—I weep indeed, but not for him; cruel Baldivia! my tears are shed for you.tt

"For me!" repeated Baldivia, falling at her feet, "for me ! yet wherefore, why are Isadora's tears shed for Baldivia?"

He would have pressed her hands to his lips; but exerting all her power, she withdrew them from his hold. "Swear to me," said she; "if your fervid professions of love are not deceitful, solemnly swear you are not the murderer of Loncillos."

Baldivia perceived the advantage he had gained; the agitation of her bosom, the tremor of her voice, had not escaped his observant eye; he no longer hesitated to add to his guilt by falsehood, and again clasping her hands, his lips uttered—" I swear it, Isadora! I swear that Loncillos met not his death from me!"

Again the vivid lightning darted its angry fires through the lattices; a tremendous gust of wind burst open the door, and the thunder, in loud and lengthened peal, seemed to threaten the demolition of the pavilion;' but at that moment "the wreck of matter and the crush of worlds" was indifferent to Isadora. Baldivia had sworn he was inndcent, and her soul enjoyed one of those moments of ecstasy in which bliss is too powerful for the weak organs of mortality. "Oh happy assurance!" murmured from her lips, as she sunk fainting into the extended arms of her betrayer.





"What is to me the raging of the angiy elements!" said he, gazing on the insensible Isadora; "I triumph! to obtain this lovely, fragile ereature, I have braved the vengeance of Heaven; and did the bleeding ghost of Gusman stand beside me, thus would I seize the earnest of my joys." His licentious lips pressed hers with eager kisses, and his unhallowed arms closely embraced her unresisting form till life and sense returned. Subdued by artful blandishments and lavish tenderness, the devoted Isadora wept on the bosom of the exulting IMdivia; she bewailed the indis





soluble bonds which fettered her to the marquis de Tormes, whose disposition, taste, and pursuits, were in every particular dissimilar to her own; won by the flattery and caresses of Baldivia, who vowed to her everlasting faith and constancy, she acknowledged the dominion he had obtained in her heart; she also weakly confessed, that not indisposition, but the dread of adding strength to a guilty and already-powerful passion, had prevented her receiving his visits since the absence of the marquis, her husband.

"But you will not now refuse-to admit me," said he, covering her hands with kisses; "you will not now condemn me to wander in darkness,, for even noonday will be dark to me, if not illumined by your presence."

Isadora promised to admit him when he called at the palace at the usual hour— "And now, Gonzalo," said she, releasing herself from his embrace, "farewell! be the interview of to-night buried deep ia your heart; be not you, like your misjudge





ing, inconsiderate sex, ready to believe, that feeling a passion for you, my heart will readily admit another impression; respect^ the weakness you have occasioned, and guard my fame from the malignant scoffers of the world."

A thousand ardent professions of faith, truth, and honour, were sworn by Baldivia, ever to adore her, and to guard her fame more carefully than his own life.

"Suffer me now to depart," said Isadora, "or the morning will dawn upon us; be assured every sigh you breathe, every pang you feel in absence, will meet with sympathetic suffering in my bosom; release my hand and farewell; let me hasten to my oratory, where, in the prayers I offer for myself, be certain I shall remember you; yes, dearest friend, I will entreat of pitying Heaven to extinguish in our bosoms this unhappy passion, or if its ordinations decree us still to love, it may be with Platonic fervour—with a flame which ansjels may approve, pure, innocent, and holy."

Ealdivias mind was too grossly organized, to wish either to inspire or feel a Platonic passion; the beauties of the soul he left for the contemplation of metaphysicians; his adoration went no further than the person, and he suffered not his fair victim to depart, till, with plausible argument and wily sophistry, he had convinced her infatuated mind, that her husband de Tormes was the only guilty person, who, with chilling apathy and mortifying neglect, had failed to secure to himself her warm affections; "affections," continued he, clasping her fondly to him, "which Heaven designed to constitute your own happiness, adored Isadora, and the selected of your choice."





The ill-fated, credulous marchioness gazed on the youthful, fascinating Baldivia, listened to the baneful witchery he uttered, and believed, with as true devotion as though his words were holy writ.

On all subjects Ealdivia spoke with graceful eloquence; but here, where the subjugation of female virtue was the point to gain, his tones were touching and melodious, and his well-arranged arguments*





tender, persuasive, and impassioned, impressing on her soul the belief, that theirs was the rare union of genius, love, and sentiment, and that the perfect congeniality conspicuous in their minds was a positive proof that Heaven smiled approval of their attachment, and ultimately designed them for each other.

The grey of the morning warned them to separate, but not before Isadora had again repeated the promise of admitting him to her presence, when he made his accustomed visit to the palace at noon»

As Baldivia secured the door of the orangery, he again remembered his appalling dream; but its recurrence to his mind produced no feelings of compunction or remorse, that Loncillos had fallen by his dagger; he rather rejoiced that a troublesome spy on his actions was effectually removed from his, path.—" The beautiful marchioness de Tormes is securely mine," said he, as he threw himself on his downy couch, "and who, to obtain possession of such transcendent loveliness, would hesitate to act as I have done? Sleep, valiant Loncillos! thou hast had thy trophies; victory in battle has been thine, and on thy tomb shall be proudly sculptured thy laurels, while fame shall engrave thy name on the column reared to immortalize the heroes of thy country; this glory have I procured thee. Sleep then, valiant Loncillos! and leave to me the pursuits of love and beauty."





Such were the tlioughts of Baidivia, while his depraved heart anticipated the moment, when Isadora should become a convert to his base principles, and no longer oppose or restrain his libertine wishes.

The tempest had died away, but dark clouds hung heavy in the sky; and as Isadora surveyed the heavens as she passed along the garden, her superstitious fancy considered their black and lowering appearance presageful of her future fate; the tempter was no longer near her, and conscience reproaclied her with criminal weakness; she thought of de 'formes, of hei* children, and her heart, which had so lately yielded itself up to the seductions of love, now sunk in sorrow and dismay.





The lamp was yet burning when Isadora returned to her chamber; she stole to the couch of her children; they were fast locked in the balmy sleep of innocence; she pressed a kiss on their rosy lips.—" Oh, my cherubs!" said she, "yet the arms of your mother may embrace you; as yet my crimes have not separated me from my children; may the guilty weakness of my heart remain for ever hid from your knowledge! may the errors of your unhappy mother never raise on your cheeks the blush of shame!"

Again she kissed the sleeping babes, and passed on to the oratory. A picture of the Virgin, which had hung near the altar, had fallen from its place, and lay reversed on the crimson cushion, on which she knelt at her devotions. Isadora, weak by nature and unnerved by the events of the night, beheld this fall of the picture as a certain omen of impending evil; with trembling hand she raised the painting and replaced it, but as her terrified eye glanced on the face, she fancied it frowned upon her; uttering a loud shriek, she covered her face





with her hands, and remained in a state of indescribable terror, till the bright sunbeams illumined the oratory, and the early carols of the birds encouraged her to look up and steal a timid glance at the picture. The features were now placid, and bowing her body to the earth, she supplicated, in tearful agony, forgiveness of her transgressions. But the repentance of Isadora was the fear of worldly consequences, not the deep conviction of error; her prayer was insincere, for, while she supplicated pardon for her late weakness, she could not resolve to avoid a repetition of her crime; but yielding to the tenderness that enfeebled her virtue, she believed that Heaven would pardon a passion it had itself ordained, and that, by the death of de Tormes, she should yet be happy in loving and being beloved by Baldivia.— "Love," said Isadora, as she pressed her pillow, "love is an emanation of Heaven, a spark diffused into our souls by the Divinity, and in loving Baldivia, I obey not only the powerful influence of nature, but the express command of Heaven; in yield





ing my hand to de Tormes, I committed a heavy sin, for I loved him not; my youthful and inexperienced mind was charmed with the fame he had acquired; my vanity was seduced by the splendour of his rank, and in giving him my hand, I obeyed the will of my sovereign, rather' than the dictates of reason, which ought to have pointed out the disparity of our ages; alas! how bitterly have I proved

"Such hearts as ours were never pair'd above;

III suited to each other, join'd, nut mutch'd;

Mark but the very frame arid temper

Of our minds, how very much we differ."



Isadora considered the circumstances of her marriage till she became persuaded her love for Baldivia was not criminal, and that while her chastity remained inviolate, Iter conscience might l-emain tranquil; but as the hour drew near when she was to receive Baldivia, fresh doubts and apprehensions assailed her fluctuating mind; she with deep blushes repented her imprudent , confession of tenderness; she regretted having promised to see him; in vain she attempted to satisfy her uneasy thoughts





with the delusive arguments used by Baldivia; but while she recalled and endeavoured to credit his dangerous sophistry, all was tormenting anarchy in her bosom— her love for Baldivia was unconquerable; but reproving conscience ceased not to represent to her the precipice on which she stood—the enormous guilt of violating her vows to de Tormes, her marriage vows, plighted at the altar to the husband she had solemnly sworn to love through every vicissitude of life—the inevitable disgrace which she was about to entail on her lovely children, and the unceasing remorse to which she was devoting herself. "And wherefore disgrace? and why remorse? hence, ye terrifying ideas! has not Baldivia sworn to respect my virtue? and surely," said the self-devoted Isadora, "surely I shall never cease to respect myself." While caressing her beautiful children, she believed it impossible to- injure them by committing an act of imprudence; though their father no longer interested her heart, she idolized his offspring, and while she fondly pressed them to her bosom, she thought,





for their sakes. die could relinquish Baldivia, and unmurmuring devote her youth and beauty to that monastic seclusion on which she had so recently meditated. * And what,~ said the romantic Isadora, "what prevents me making this sacrifice to the fame and happiness of these beloved ones? what withholds me from devoting myself to religion, and passing the remainder of my days, at the foot of the altar, in peace and innocence? Alas! should I thus devote myself, the impetuous Baldivia, what would be his fate? sole heir of an illustrious house, might not he also, driven by d?spair, seek a cloister, and would not the curses of his father pursue me, the fatal cause of his affliction? and oh, thought of horror! might not my innocent children be included in his malediction?"

While the imagination of the marchioness de Tormes was thus tormented and assailed, while it wavered between superstition, propriety, and love, the arrival of Baldivia was announced. Blushing and embarrassed, Isadora, with faltering steps, entered the saloon, where, glowing with all the graces of nature, aided by the tasteful adornments of wealth, he waited to receive her; the countenance of Isadora was an intelligent page, in which appeared all the uneasy workings of her mind; and again all the blandishments of love, all the sophistry of determined villany, were exerted to seduce her from duty and virtue; and if not convinced by his eloquent pleadings, Isadora was subdued, for so entrancing was the idea of being beloved, of directing the actions, and governing the fate of the object of her passion (for to this height Baldivia artfully protested she was adored), that she no longer opposed his influence, but abandoned her reason and affections to. his government. Isadora no longer wished the return of her husband; she only prayed that the arrangement of don Gusman's affairs might prolong his stay in Grenada; the hours that Baldivia was of necessity absent from her were dull, tedious, and uninteresting; every day his visits were repeated, every day his ascendancy over the unhappy Isadora became more con.firmed, till completely infatuated by the





beauty of his person, the brilliancy of his wit, and the ardency of his love, long before the return of the injured de Tonnes, there remained no more for him to solicit* or for her to bestow.



CHAPTER V



.' I cannot praise him truly, for in truth

He doth enceed all praise.

Be this his honour's commendation—

Verona boasts not so fair a gentleman."



"An artful woman may entangle the heart of an unwary youth, without the aid of wit or the allurement of beauty."

While the profligate Baldivia was secretly pursuing the broad career of vice, his public conduct was fashioned to attract and obtain popular applause. By the artful observance of forms and ceremonies, he obtained the approbation of all ranks of society. Accomplished in the arcanum of hypocrisy, he deceived the wary and suspicious, with the same facility that he imposed on the simple and ignorant. With well-affected devotion, he was a constant attendant at mass, and his confessor, completely deceived by his pretended piety, declared him an honour to religion, and that the church, to which he was a liberal patron, had not so zealous a supporter in all Madrid. To the necessities of the indigent Bildivia gave with unsparing generosity * he bestowed marriage portions on orphan girls, gave rewards to the industrious excelling mechanic, and sought out and relieved the aged and the cripple. He enjoyed the favour of his sovereign; his society was courted by the noblest in the land; he was mentioned as an example by parents, to restrain the excesses of their sons; the poor invoked blessings on him, and all Madrid spoke of his piety, his charity and munificence, in terms of admiration and respect.





Such was the triumph of hypocrisy! such were the arts by which Gonzalo Baldivia, a murderer! the betrayer of friendship! and a seducer! spell-bound the senses of the





deluded inhabitants of Madrid. All excellent was the character his exulting father received of him, from a friend at Madrid, whom he, in his parental concern for the honour and credit of an only son, had requested to have an eye to his conduct and pursuits; and so enamoured was the marquis of the fame of his beloved Gonzalo, that it rendered him averse to command his return to Peru; but though his own heart was warmly attached to Spain, his native country, yet he was now too far advanced in life to take 'so long a voyage, and on every slight indisposition he trembled lest death should cut him off, and he should never again behold the object dearest to his affections.

Another cause, almost as powerful, also urged the old marquis Baldivia to desire the presence of Gonzalo. The lovely Rosaviva, every day more captivating in person, and amiable in manners, was surrounded by impassioned admirers, and report had declared that, offended by the negligence and long absence of Baldivia, she was not averse to the addresses of don Alfonso Minguel, a young nobleman of Mexico, whose person, age, and fortune, rendered him, in the idea of the old marquis, a formidable rival to his son. But the gentle heart of Rosaviva was still, after a two years separation, faithful to its first election; and while she wore a face of placid cheerfulness to her parents and friends, she secretly repined at the long absence of Gonzalo; her heart was not free from jealous pangs, Jest some Spanish beauty had rendered him forgetful of the vows plighted to her. The marquis Baldivia spoke continually of the happiness he promised himself in the union of the houses of Baldivia and Molines, and flattered himself with the arrival of his son by the first ship that sailed from the old world; and the heart of Rosaviva fluttered with hope and pleasure at the joyful prospect of again meeting him whose image was cherished in her heart with undiminished tenderness. But don Henriques, who had penetrated into the inconstancy of Gonzalo's character, did not expect his speedy return, or the fidfilment of his vows to Rosaviva; he





foresaw the various attractions Madrid would hold forth to a mind like his, enamoured of splendid gaiety; and while ho recollected the simple beauty of Rosaviva, he thought it was not of a character to remain impressed on a heart like Baldivia's; the rank and wealth he possessed would be passports to families of the first distinction in Spain, and every art would be exerted to induce him to marry and settle in the country of his ancestors.

Don Henriques had no belief that Gonzalo Baldivia would hold himself bound to perform the vows of inconsiderate youth, plighted to a simple child, the remembrance of whose native graces would weakly oppose the studied fascinations of females tutored to attract, and adepts in the wiles with which the affections of men were enslaved; nor were these suspicions subjects of uneasiness to the mind of don Henriques.

The cheek of his Rosaviva wore the bright bloom of health; the rich sparkle of her blue eye, and her dimpled smiles, spoke, to his attentive observance, content





within. He trusted her attachment to Goozalo Tlaldivia had yielded to the neglect evinced by his protracted absence, and that, won by worth, she would bestow her hand on Alfonso Minguel, with whose mild and tender disposition, similar to the gentleness of her own, he thought she would be infinitely more happy, than in a union with the fickle, impetuous Baldivia; but though such were his wishes, he carefully confined them to his own bosom, out of regard and respect for his friend the marquis, whose heart he perceived was bent upon the accomplishment of the marriage between their children, and also because he would not wound the pride of Itosaviva, by pointing out to her the breach of faith observant in Gonzalo's conduct; but rather wished her rejection of him .should be unbiassed, and according to the dictates of her heart, which he prayed Heaven might direct her choice to a more deserving husband.

The health of the amiable lady Selina at this- period declined rapidly, and an as

VOL. I. M i





surance pressed heavily on her mind, that she should not long be an inhabitant of earth. Possessed with the melancholy idea of speedy dissolution, she ardently wished to breathe her last sigh in England, the still dearly-loved country that had given her birth; but many circumstances combined to render a voyage to Europe at that time impracticable; and she contented her mind, and tranquillized her feelings, with addressing a letter full of tender wishes, and pathetic representations of her declining health, to her younger brother, then earl of Avondale, her elder brother having died without issue. Lady Selina, with all a mother's fondness, described the virtues, graces, and beauty of her Rosaviva, whom she had brought up in the faith of her ancestors; she expressed a strong wish that this darling child should, at a future period, visit England, when, she was convinced, her amiable disposition would win from her relatives the warm affection that had been denied her exiled mother, who, notwithstanding they had so many years rejected her fervent solicita





tions that she might again be restored to them by tender reconciliation, had never for a moment ceased to love them, and pray for their felicity.

This letter, accompanied by rich presents, the costly produce of the new world, among which was a picture of Rosaviva, enchased with brilliants, safely reached the hand of the earl of Avondale. His heart was affected by the pleadings of his sister; for though a weak, he was not a bad man; and as he gazed on the miniature of his niece, he remembered so lovely, and so innocent, her mother, lady Selina de Grey, had looked when he last embraced her; but though inclined to the reconciliation she so much desired, he feared to transgress the command so solemnly enjoined by his dying father; and that he might not be tempted to draw upon himself the malediction pronounced by his^ inexorable parent, he carefully placed the letter and picture in his private cabinet among papers seldom resorted to.

Another reason also actuated the coti





duct of the earl of Avondale; he had an only son. Lord Wjlloughby de Grey was looked up to as the handsomest and most accomplished nobleman of his day; but, unlike other young men of his rank and age, despising frivolous pursuits and amusements, de Grey had given a large portion of his time to studies, which, while they improved his understanding, enlarged his heart, and made him at the same time wise, benevolent, and just.

Willoughby de Grey inherited from nature the firm, virtuous disposition of his mother, whom it was his misfortune to lose before his education was completed; but not before she had taught him to respect virtue, and despise vice, and properly directed his teste to all the grand and sublime in nature; and by her example, as well as precept, taught him that superior talents, high birth, and large possessions, were given by Heaven, not to engender pride, or for the indulgence of selfish gratifications, but to assist the unfortunate and oppressed, to relieve the indigent, and diffuse blessings among the classes of so





eiety to whom Nature and Fortune had been niggard of their gifts.

The earl of Avondale possessed neither a strong understanding nor a very liberal mind; and during the lifetime of his lady, he had considered her amiable qualities as romantic, and her widely-diffused charities as ill-bestowed profusion; nor was he inconsolable when death called her to a better world, as he by no means wished his son to imbibe notions so ill calculated for the attainment of worldly honours and possessions. The earl wished to see his son ambitious of power; and as he was heir to one of the most ancient, he was desirous that he should possess the wealthiest earldom in the kingdom.

In many points lord de Grey had, though in terms of respect, opposed the opinions of his father; and the earl was convinced it would militate against his ambitious schemes, to acquaint his son with the letter he had received from South America, or to let him behold the miniature of Rosaviva. De Grey, he knew, would strongly urge a reconciliation, and on a heart vi





sionary and enthusiastic as his, he knew not what impression the mere resemblance of his lovely cousin might make; and as he had, in his own mind, fixed on a wife for him, he resolved not to defeat his own schemes, by what he considered an impolitic disclosure.

The duke of Saxelby was a popular character, high in power, and had much court influence. On his daughter, lady Gertrude Luthridge, the choice of the earl of Avondale had fallen, as a wife exactly suited to de Grey. The person of lady Gertrude was not remarkable for beauty; her features were masculine, and her figure tall, bony, and thin; but she dressed well, and had imposing manners. To the world, lady Gertrude Luthridge appeared affable, amiable, and highly accomplished; and her friends gave her credit for being a sculptor, a poet, a musician, and a painter.

The handsome person of lord de Grey had not escaped the notice of lady Gertrude, and she took no small pains to ingratiate herself in his good favour. Unsuspicious of the alliance projected by his





father, de Grey had for some time been of all lady Gertrude's parties, not because he was in the least enamoured of her person or accomplishments, but because she had become acquainted with some of his particular friends; and the fame of her poetic and musical compositions had made her house the resort of the scientific and literary amateurs. The brilliant genius and versatile accomplishments of lady Gertrude Luthridge were the theme of universal approbation; the exquisitely-fancied embroideries of her dresses, the beautiful drawings that ornamented her boudoir, the elegant musical compositions dispersed among her friends—all bore testimony to her transcendent talents.

Lord de Grey continually heard lady Gertrude Luthridge extolled; but he trusted to his own understanding, and never took the accomplishments, the good or evil qualities of a person, on the credit of public opinion; he determined for himself; he acknowledged the costume and ornamental parts of her dress evinced a correct and elegant taste; as his eye examined the drawings that adorned her boudoir, he admired the bold and delicate touches of the pencil that had so ably delineated the classic scenery of Italy; he was delighted with a series of busts, which almost persuaded him the marble breathed; yet his judgment refused to believe these exquisite specimens of art were produced by lady Gertrude, who appeared to him to want the mind capable of such sublime and tasteful efforts. Lady Gertrude's partiality for the handsome de Grey was loo apparent to escape observation; and while he had never entertained a matrimonial idea, the public had entirely concluded the alliance. The duke of Saxelby had long found a marriageable daughter a troublesome and inconvenient inmate in his^mansion. It was the first of his wishes to settle her in life; but untoward circumstances had hitherto arisen to disappoint his hopes. The frequent visits of lord de Grey induced the duke to interrogate lady Gertrude on the nature of his apparent attentions; but this was a question she was unable to reply to with certainty, for de Grey had





made no professions, though she encouraged the hope that her charms were the attractive magnet.

The duke of Saxelby beheld an alliance with the house of Avondale too important to be trifled with, and he gave much serious advice to lady Gertrude respecting her conduct towards de Grey, whom he spoke of as an eccentric character, but very desirable for a husband for her; he recommended to her to bring the affair to a conclusion, with all the speed that decorum would admit, hinting that his fortune was much deranged, his popularity on the decline, and that her only prospect of continuing her present expensive mode of living was by securing a wealthy husband. Nor did the politic duke let pass the earliest opportunity of speaking to the earl of Avondale on the subject of the attachment said to exist between their children, his entire approbation of lord de Grey, and the mutual advantages that would arise on both sides from their union.

The pride of the earl of Avondale wag

MS .





flattered by the proposal of an alliance coming first from the duke; and having expressed his pleased acquiescence, he spoke highly of the charms and accomplishments of lady Gertrude, and had no doubt but de Grey was fully sensible of her extraordinary value, and would properly estimate the honour of her hand. The duke of Saxelby returned to his daughter with this to her delightful intelligence; but the earl of Avondale had deceived himself, as well as given them false hopes; he knew that his son spent much of his time at Saxelby House; and as the heart is too apt to believe what it wishes, he nothing doubted that a preference for lady Gertrude instigated his visits; but de Grey, without any particular interest or attention, attended the levees of lady Gertrude; but when the earl his father proposed her to him for a wife, he respectfully replied, at present he had no inclination towards matrimony; and whenever he determined to resign his liberty, it would not be in favour of lady Gertrude Luthridge.

The earl was as much astonished as die





pleased at this declaration, and repeated— "Not to lady Gertrude Luthridge! why the duke of Saxelby has himself made proposals for an alliance."

"The house of Avondale has received much honour by his condescension," said de Grey, rather ironically.

"Why," resumed the earl, " you have been a constant guest at all the entertainments given at Saxelby House."

"And so have most of the young men of fashion in town," replied de Grey; "but they cannot all marry lady Gertrude."

"But the public," returned the earl, "the public has long observed your particular attention to lady Gertrude."

"The observations of the public, my lord," replied de Grey, " are nine times in ten erroneous; they judge merely from appearance, and every day's experience proves how fallacious the opinions are that have no better foundation. I am constantly seen in lady Gertrude's parties, because the friends I esteem, the men of genius whose talents I admire, are found in her circle; but I again beg to repeat, I have no sort of partiality for lady Gertrude—I have never paid her more attention than politeness demands, and feeling towards her no warmer sentiment than the general respect and regard I entertain for the whole sex, J shall never be induced to become her husband."





The earl of Avondale was not more vexed than surprised, to hear his son express himself in terms so little consonant with his own wishes; he had always supposed the acknowledged genius of lady Gertrude, independent of every other consideration, would have rendered her an object of warm regard in the mind of an enthusiast like de Grey, and he hastily replied—" What then, you, whom I have so frequently heard extol stability of mind, at last prove yourself as fickle and changeable in your approbation and dislikes, as the rest of the weathercock young men of the age."

"Your lordship will, I trust, pardon me," said de Grey, " if I request an explanation of that censure, as I really do not comprehend to what you allude."





"You are conveniently dull of apprehension," returned the earl, with some asperity in his tone of voice. "Plainly, then, have I not heard you a thousand times declare, that an enlightened and accomplished mind would have more attraction for you, than the most perfect model of beauty, to whom intellectual attainments were denied?"

"I confess it," replied de Grey. "I am devoted to sense and genius, and shall never depart from their worship."

"Whence then," resumed the earl, "your coldness to lady Gertrude Luthridge, and your refusal of her hand? Does she not possess the very mind you profess to worship, sense, genius, taste?" De Grey smiled incredulously, while the earl continued—" I really supposed the universe could not have produced a person more exactly formed according to your own notions of female perfection. Is she not a poetess, a musician, a painter, a sculptor? and does she not possess a heart full of tender sensibilities, an amiable disposi





tion, united to manners highly polished and refined?"

"Half these perfections and endowments were sufficient to captivate and subdue a stoic," replied de Grey ; "but though public report speaks highly of the genius of lady Gertrude, I am by no means convinced that she merits the fame she has obtained. I have certainly seen in her boudoir some beautiful specimens of painting and sculpture; but I am not sure the pencil or chisel of lady Gertrude was employed in their production; I have also listened to pieces of tasteful music, the notes of which were so skilfully combined, that they affected me even to tears; but yet I remain a sceptic, and doubt whether lady Gertrude has capacity sufficient to appreciate the beauty of a landscape, to distinguish the bust of a Sappho, or enjoy the melody of sweet sounds."

"But if her taste and attainments are doubtful," returned the earl, pettishly, " if your mind hesitates upon allowing her claim to genius, the rank, fortune, and consequence in life, of lady Gertrude Luthridge, are established facts, which even you, sceptical as you profess yourself, must allow; and as to the fine touches of a pencil, the chipping of a marble block, or the scientific arrangement of minims and crotchets, the daughter of a duke who brings a portion suitable to her rank may be a very desirable wife, notwithstanding she is ignorant of the science of music, and the arts of painting and sculpture."





"I shall not take upon me," replied de Grey, " to refute your lordship's opinions; I only beg leave to decline, for the present, any matrimonial engagement; be assured I will never form one without your concurrence; and I trust I shall not be compelled to withdraw myself from the presence of my father, by having an alliance urged which I never can, never will, accept." The earl looked displeased; de Grey affectionately - took his hand, and pressed it to his lips—" My dear father," continued he, " I am grieved to the soul to disappoint and thwart your plans, particularly as I am convinced they originate in the desire to promote ray happiness, and extend my interest; hut wait patiently, I entreat you, a few weeks, and if you do not find cause to approve this my rejection, I am content to lose your confidence, and live for ever an alien to my father's love."





The earl of Avondale was struck with the steady refusal and serious manner of de Grey; he had no reason to believe that any imprudent attachment made him averse to a marriage with lady Gertrude Luthridge, and he was certain, without some very powerful motive, he would not have given a hint that the accomplishments of lady Gertrude were deceptions, or that a cause existed why her alliance was not desirable.—" A few weeks," said the earl of Avondale, musing on his son's request, "a few weeks de Grey has desired me to wait patiently for the cause of his refusal. Well, be it so; a few weeks will soon elapse; and a son like Willoughby de Grey may demand such forbearance without arrogating too much."

Some mornings after this conversation*





lord de- Grey, as usual, appeared at the levee of lady Gertrude Luthridge; an elegant harp stood beside her, and her hand every instant touched the strings, as if expecting to be asked to play. Unwilling to disappoint her wish, he placed the harp before her, and requested she would oblige her friends with one of those charming melodies of her own composition, which had so deservedly been admired. Lady Gertrude, with all the confusion of modest merit, declared herself by no means equal to public execution—that she had not sufficient confidence in her own abilities; but after a thousand such excuses, she suffered herself to be persuaded, and played over one of her own compositions. The company were loud and, as is customary on such occasions, extravagant in their praise, all but de Grey, who never sacrificed truth to politeness; his accurate ear had sensibly informed hiin she was considerably out in time, and struck many false notes. Lady Gertrude received the compliments that were lavished on her, as the just tribute due to her extraordinary





abilities. Sir Henry Levison, one of her most ardent admirers, pronounced her a goddess, who, assuming a mortal form, had descended to earth to restore the arts and sciences to their primeval lustre.

Lady Gertrude thanked sir Henry for his compliment—" But, alas!" said she, sighing, " however elevating the praises of my friends may be to my fancy, they will never induce me to believe myself a deity, while the weakness of my heart assures me I am only a woman." As she said this, her eyes were fixed on de Grey, to whom her conduct became so particular, that he felt not a little disconcerted; and to avoid such very pointed attentions, he found it necessary to shorten his visit.

Convinced lady Gertrude was not a wife for him, he was meditating, as he walked slowly homeward, on the very slender claims she had to the fame she had acquired—" Rank and wealth," said de Grey, "have the powers of necromancy—they spread a magic circle round them, which deceives the eyes and ears of all who come within the influence of their spells; hap





pily for me, I have escaped the. general delusion."

Sir Henry Levison made an excuse to depart as soon as de Grey left Saxelby House; and having overtaken him, he began congratulating him on the triumph he had gained over the rest of lady Gertrude's adorers.

De Grey professed himself ignorant of his meaning.

"Your affected modesty will not serve you in this case," resumed sir Henry; "you cannot be blind to the partiality, so evident to the world, and mortifying to those who have so long paid her their devotions."

"Among whom," said de Grey, "you include yourself?"

"No," returned sir Henry. "Lady Gertrude Luthridge is a genius, and it is become fashionable to express rapture at her great endowments; yet as I have sense enough to know that I possess no great talents myself, why I am more humble in my desires than to aspire to the tenth muse." De Grey smiled at this declaim





tion, while sir Henry continued—" But as all the world, and I with the rest, believe that you are her destined husband, and that a mutual attachment subsists between you, why come with me," taking his arm, " and I will shew you the less brilliant star that attracts me."

De Grey suffered himself to be conducted to an obscure street, where sir Henry, pointing out the corner-house, said— "There resides one of the loveliest girls that ever struck my fancy."

"And what then?" asked de Grey, attempting to walk on.

"Nay, stop a moment," said sir Henry; "she will perhaps come to the window."

"I have no wish to be caught impertinently staring at a window," replied de Grey.

"Have you no wish to see a beautiful girl?" said sir Henry, endeavouring to detain him.

"Yes," replied de Grey; " but not to insult her modesty, by rudely planting myself before her window, nor to expose myself, for mere idle curiosity, to the





chance of being called to account by her relatives."

"What a stoic!" returned sir Henry; "you are too prudent by half for the age you live in; but your darling reputation will run no hazard in this business, I promise you, for Julia Montalban has no relations, I understand, but an old blind grandmother, whom she supports by her industry."

"And is it for the base purpose of insulting an amiable, virtuous girl, that you have brought me hither?" said de Grey, warmly. " Shame on you, Levison! Have you no heart—no feeling?"

"Yes," returned sir Henry; "I have a heart to love, and feel ready to remove Julia Montalban to a situation where"

The door of the corner-house opened, and the fair subject of their conversation came forth with a small basket on her arm, and, with hasty steps, pursued her way along the street.

"Let us follow her," said sir Henry ;• but de Grey forcibly prevented his intention.





The modesty and elegance of Miss Montalban's person forcibly struck de Grey; and having succeeded in drawing him from the house, he asked sir Henry by what employment Miss Montalban supported herself and her grandmother?

"By her needle, I believe," answered sir Henry, " though I never inquired into particulars; but, by-the-bye, I am extremely sorry I have pointed out my little Julia to you; for, moral as you wish the world to believe you, I have my suspicions that you are not in reality more a Joseph than myself; and as I confess I have designs—"

"Designs!" interrupted de Grey. "Do you design to marry this amiable girl?"

"Marry! ridiculous!" said sir Henry; "who would fetter himself to one woman, while the possession of variety is to be purchased?"

u If I understand you right," returned de Grey, " your intention is to seduce this lovely creature."

"And if I understand you right," said sir Henry, " it is your intention to outbid me; but I deserve disappointment for bringing you hither, on the reliance of your attachment to lady Gertrude. I perceive I have but little chance of success, opposed by you, who carry the prevailing argument of a heavy purse; and she, like the rest of her venal sex, will no doubt be won by him who offers most gold."





"You greatly mistake," replied de Grey, sternly, "if you suppose my gold ever was, or ever will be, made subservient to the vile purpose of seducing innocence; but this I will not deny, sir Henry, the account yourself have given me of this amiable young creature excites in me a strong interest."

"Oh, no doubt," returned sir Henry, "her beauty is calculated to excite strong interest; and she is under infinite obligations to me," continued he, in accents of displeasure, " for having interested you in her favour."

"Stay, and hear me tell you plainly," resumed de Grey, " that I will place Miss Montalban beyond the reach of your de~ signs."





"What an idiot I was," said sir Henry, walking away, " to make this puritan my confidant! but is he the champion of virtue that he pretends? and while he preaches against the indulgence of passion, may he not secretly revel in sensuality? this is yet to be learned. Meantime lady Gertrude shall be informed, that while he addresses her for a wife, he scruples not, with all his morality, to keep a mistress."

The noble-minded de Grey went instantly to a friend of his deceased mother's, the countess of Hartcourt, to whom he briefly related the adventure of the morning. The benevolent countess bestowed on his conduct the eulogium it deserved; and instantly acceding to his wishes, ordered her carriage. De Grey saw her depart, and returned home with a bosom light and elastic as his step, for his approving conscience told him he had done an act enjoined by Heaven; and as he gazed on the picture of his mother, which hung in his chamber, he softly whispered —" To thee, oh blessed spirit! I owe all the virtuous feelings of my heart, for thine were ever the precepts of religion and humanity."





The countess of Hartcourt proceeded to the lodgings of Miss Montalban. A richlyemblazoned carriage, at the door of a house in an obscure street, could not fail of crea-. ting surprise; but the mistress of the house, who knew the employments of Miss Montalban, rightly concluded that she was the person to whom the lady in the fine coach came. The countess would not suffer her to be called down stairs, but, without ceremony,.entered her little, neat apartment, where, in an armchair by the fireside, sat her blind grandmother, a remarkably fine-looking old woman, "platting straw, to be worked by the ingenious Julia, when her more lucrative avocations should fail to give her full employment.

The doubts of de Grey, respecting the accomplishments of lady Gertrude Luthridge, had found their way to the countess of Hartcourt's mind; and when she beheld in a frame a piece of splendidly-embroider





ed crape, representing com, flowers, and poppies, entwined with ears of wheat, wrought in gold, she immediately remembered the much-admired court dress of her ladyship, which had been universally admired as her own design and work.

Observing the eyes of the countess fixed on her frame, Miss Montalban would have removed it to an inner room; but the countess prevented her, by admiring the richness and beauty of the work. Julia looked confounded, and said—M When I was employed to embroider this dress, I was strictly enjoined not to let it be seen by any one, and when it was finished, to destroy the pattern."

"The pattern then," asked the countess, "was sent by your employer?"

"No, madam," returned Julia; " it is my own design, and is one of the many I have had the honour of inventing for the same lady." :.

The accent of Miss Montalban was foreign, though she spoke English correctly; her grandmother could only converse in French. The countess seated herself beside her, to watch the facility and neatness with which she combined the different-coloured straws, and soon drew from her a little affecting history of domestic misfortune, which had driven her, with her two orphan grandchildren, Theodore and Julia, to England, where they had been told persons of talent were certain to make their fortunes; " and indeed," continued madame Montalban, " as a sculptor, or a professor of music, the abilities of Theodore might have provided handsomely for us all, had he not imprudently engaged himself to instruct a lady, whohas, I fear, turned the brain of the unfortunate youth."





"And what is the name of this lady?" asked the countess.

"There," replied madame Montalban, ** we are entirely at a loss; her name is a mystery, as well as her residence; her woman is related to the person who keeps this house, and through her hands we receive the orders of her lady, who at first paid very handsomely; but latterly we have suffered not a little inconvenience, through not knowing to whom or where to apply. The gold spangles, employed in the embroidery of the wheat'ears on that amethyst crape,1 have completely exhausted poor Julia's purse-; and if she had not luckily disposed of a pair of landscapes this morning, we should have been in want of bread." Madame Montalban wept as she gave' this account, while the blushing Julia seemed to wish their distresses confined to their own bosoms.





The countess requested to see some specimens of Miss Montalbah's painting. Julia placed her portfolio before her; and the secret of lady Gertrude's accomplishments was at once explained, for she beheld the same Italian scenery, executed in exactly the same style, as that which decorated the walls of herboudoir. • Julia Montalban had invented and exquisitely embroidered her dresses; to her taste she was indebted for the beautiful inventions that composed the ornaments of her boudoir, which she taught the admiring world to believe were all the produce of her genius, arid the execution of her fingers. The classical pencil ©F Julia Montalban had supplied the exquisite landscapes—her brother's skilful hand had produced the highly-finished' marble busts, and composed the beautiful' melodies, for which the unblushing lady Gertrude Luthridge had arrogated, and accepted the applause and admiration due' only to excelling genius.





The countess of Hartcourt, though convinced beyond doubt of the art and meanness of lady Gertrude, did not feel at liberty to speak her suspicions; but confining herself to the motive of her visit, she briefly unfolded (concealing the name of her informer) the licentious designs of sir Henry X«evison against the virtue of Miss Montalban, who could only weep her thanks for the timely warning so kindly afforded her. Madame Montalban, though greatly moved, expressed her grateful acknowledgments —" Yet how to escape the wicked designs of this vile man," said madame Montalban, "I know not, for Theodore, who ought to have been the protector of his sister, has abandoned us. My poor Julia is unavoidably exposed to danger and insult, from being necessitated to go continually out on our domestic business; unfortunately, we are not in circumstances to keep a person to attend us; and though the mistress of the house condescends to clean our apartments, she will, on no account, degrade herself to go on an errand."





"If it had not been my intention," replied the countess, " to remove Miss Montalban to a place of safety, I should not have obtruded myself on your acquaintance."

"I cannot leave my grandmother," said Julia, folding her arms about her; " unfortunately, madam," continued she, " my venerable parent is blind; and if I were to quit her, she would suffer unnumbered inconveniences. Believe me, I am most grateful for your kind intention. Having been apprised of my danger, I trust I shall always be prepared to repel any insult offered to my virtue; but I will not, cannot consent to a separation from my grandmother, whose loss of sight subjects her to so many inconveniences." Madame Montalban, strongly affected, returned the em





ace of her duteous Julia, and prayed the i. aAwr of the fatherless to bless and reward iier.

The countess, wiping the virtuous drops of sympathy from her eyes, said—" Compose yourself, my child; I am not so hard of heart as to wish to separate you from your grandmother. Go, Julia," continued she, placing her purse in the hand of the agitated girl, " go and settle your account with the woman below, and prepare yourself, as speedily as you can, to return with me to a habitation more suited to your merits, and former style of living."

The mistress of the house, though she received the whole of her demand, expressed much displeasure when she understood she was to lose her lodgers; but not being able to prevent their departure, she said to a neighbour, as the carriage of the countess turned from the door, she was mighty glad to get rid of such troublesome trumpery; which was doubly a falsehood, for the payment she had received for her lodgings was necessary to her circumstances, and she dreaded the rage and dis





appointment of her niece, when she returned her the unfinished embroidery left in her care by Miss Montalban. For some time she debated, whether it would not answer her purpose best to say they run away from the lodgings, and appropriate the gold on the embroidery to her own use; but this scheme was quickly relinquished, on the recollection of the countess of Hartcourt, who had taken madame and Miss Montalban away, and the dread of punishment, not a principle of justice, kept her honest.

The removal of Miss Montalban to the protection of the countess of Hartcourt was soon known to sir Henry Levison, who, in addition to the utter failure of his Own libertine design, was defeated of the revenge he meditated against lord de Grey, whom he intended to ruin with lady Gertrude Luthridge, for whose ear he had prepared a fabrication, injurious alike to de Grey and Miss Montalban. But great as was sir Henry Levison's mortification and disappointment, it was nothing compared with the tempest that shook the





bosom of lady Gertrude, who, in the patronage Miss Montalban had found, saw exposure, contempt, and utter ruin to herself, by the total annihilation of all her matrimonial projects.

While jealousy, envy, malice, and hatred, gnawed the hearts of lady Gertrude Luthridge and sir Henry Levison, madame Montalban and the amiable Julia would have enjoyed perfect happiness in the kind protection of the benevolent countess of Hartcourt, had not their uncertainty respecting Theodore created sorrow and uneasiness; they had not seen him for more than a week previous to their quitting the lodgings, and then his altered appearance had filled them with alarm and anxiety; he was thin, and his cheek no longer boasted the rich glow of health, which used to animate the manly brown of his complexion; his eyes had lost the vivacious lustre, that formerly spoke hope to the drooping spirits of Julia; his lively, cheerful conversation was exchanged for reserve and deep thought; yet to the





tender inquiries of his alarmed relatives he replied he was quite well, and very happy, though, while he spoke, a look of melancholy and a smothered sigh contradicted his assertion.

Again madame Montalban pressed to be informed where he was to be found, in case any unforeseen circumstance should render his presence necessary, but this question he evaded by replying, that a short period would put an end to the mystery in which he was engaged. He made no inquiry respecting their circumstances —a confirmation to Julia that he was himself without money, for Theodore Montalban was generous an/3 liberal to excess. At parting he pressed his sister and grandmother to his heart, and said, he trusted, when they met again, it would be to part no more. Julia inquired anxiously when lie would come again, but all thtf'reply he made was—" Soon, very soon."

The frequent visits of lord de Gtey to the countess of Hartcourt brought him acquainted with madame Montalban and her lovely granddaughter; and as their





characters became known to him, he rejoiced that he had been the agent of Providence in procuring them the friendship of a woman as exalted in virtue as she was high in rank and fortune. At every fresh interview de Grey became convinced that Julia Montalban's beauty was her least charm; and that though actually possessing superior genius and acquirements, she was humble, modest, and unassuming; and that, so far from ostentatiously displaying her various elegant accomplishments, she timidly suffered them to be drawn forth: for madame Montalban he felt the sincerest respect; she was of high family in France, and bore her reverse of fortune with uncomplaining fortitude, the true characteristic of a noble mind. Seated between her grandmother and the countess, Julia appeared to de Grey's fancy like Innocence supported by Wisdom and Truth. It was after one of his visits, when madame Montalban had been warm in admiration of lord de Grey, that the countess informed her guests that it was through his means she had been induced





to invite them to her house.—" Willoughby de Grey," said the countess, "is. the son of a dear, departed friend; in person and in mind he resembles his angelic mother; like hers, his heart is the seat of every virtue* Differing in principles from his fashionable acquaintance, lord de Grey is even more solicitous to support virtue than they are to destroy it."

Miss Montalban spoke but little, yet her eloquent eyes expressed volumes of gratitude and respect. Young and susceptible, the elegant person of de Grey had made an impression on her heart, to which the discovery of how much she was indebted to his goodness and honourable principles added fresh force; but the feelings of Julia Montalban were under the guidance of reason; she forgot not that lord de Grey was a nobleman, and that the difference of their birth and fortunes rendered an attachment to him wild, hopeless, and extravagant.—" How weak, how presumptuous, would lord de Grey consider me," said Julia, "could he read the sensations of my bosom, when he honours me by noticing any simple production of my pencil or my needle! already happy in his friendship, what would I more? I will conquer my idle wishes—I will respect and admire lord de Grey, but I will not love him." Yet every day put the fortitude of Julia to fresh trials, for every day presented some new instance of the worth, the generosity, and humanity, of lord de Grey. Having minutely examined the ej^es of madame Montalban, he became persuaded, that if she would submit to the operation of couching, her sight would be restored. Julia eagerly caught at this hope. Madame Montalban felt averse to the experiment, but yielding at length to the united persuasions of de Grey, the countess, and Julia, she submitted to their wishes, and the event confirmed the judgment and opinion of de Grey; madame Montalban again beheld the light of heaven, and in a few days she could readily distinguish objects. This was a new debt of gratitude on the heart of Julia, and while, with tearful acknowledgments, she pressed the hand of. de Grey to her lips, and called him th#;





preserver of herself, and the restorer of livr venerable parent, her heart experienced all the pangs of rectitude struggling against the innovations of love.

The countess of Hartcourt had introduced madame and Miss Montalban to her numerous friends, and having no children of her own, made no secret of her intention to provide handsomely for her young protegee; the loveliness of Julia Montalban's person, joined to her amiable manners, gained her many admirers, to the no small envy and chagrin of lad)" Gertrude Luthridge, who frequently met her in public with the countess of Hartcourt, She beheld, with jealous malignancy, the attention paid her by several men of fashion, whom she had failed to attract, but particularly she envied her the attention of de Grey, who had certainly never failed in, respectful politeness to herself, but whose behaviour to her had never evinced the tender solicitude which he appeared to bestow on Miss Montalban, to whom she fancied him seriously attached; and this idea clung, with scorpion fangs, to her





bosom, crushing the dazzling hope she had indulged of sharing his title and fortune; but while these tormenting imaginations crowded the brain of lady Gertrude, lord de Gi'ey, professing and feeling a brotherly regard for Miss Montalban, was pleading the cause of his friend lord Monteith, who, through the countess of Hartcourt, had made proposals of marriage to Julia.

The person of lord Monteith was manly, and his face, though not strictly handsome, expressed sense and goodness; but, prepossessed as Miss Montalban was in favour of de Grey, it cost her many tearful, sleepless nights to conquer her rebellious feelings, and bring herself to yield submission to the wishes of her friends; her heart felt bursting when de Grey advocated the cause of lord Monteith, but, accustomed from the earliest days of infancy to submit her own wishes to the wisdom and direction of her grandmother, at length, after some excuses, formed on the absence of her brother and the uncertainty of his fate, she consented to become the wife of lord Monteith.





This marriage was a relief both to the earl of Avondale and lady Gertrude Luthridge, who had both undergone no inconsiderable share of uneasiness, on account of Miss Montalban, of whom they had both supposed de Grey warmly enamoured.

Lord Monteith, with his lovely bride and her grandmother, settled in a splendid mansion near the countess of Hartcourt's; and had not the mysterious conduct of Theodore Montalban clouded her happiness, Julia might have been said to enjoy a felicity seldom tasted by mortals; but her beloved brother was yet absent, and though the public prints must have informed him of her marriage, he had never appeared or sent to congratulate her. Unknown to Julia, lord Monteith had endeavoured to find-out the residence of this strange young man, who hid himself from their inquiries; but his search had been unsuccessful—he could obtain no trace of Theodore Montalban, whose fate seemed to be involved in the thickest clouds of mystery, though the countess of Harteourt and de Grey suspected lady Ger





trude Luthridge to be the person who had engaged him for an instructor, and who had artfully bound him to secrecy, which his high sense of honour rendered inviolate. • .

The time had nearly expired which lord de Grey had solicited from the earl of Avondale, who now began to renew the subject of his marriage, to which he appeared more averse than ever, and repeated persuasions, on the part of the earl, and refusals on that of his son, had taken place.

From his first introduction to Saxelby House, the duke had treated de Grey with studied respect and solicitous attention, but the mind of his guest was superior even to this species of flattery; he knew the character of the duke perfectly—he was a statesman, a courtier, and, in every sense of the word, a man of the world; and de Grey was convinced that these condescensions were not without design.

At this period too the genius of lady Gertrude, his daughter, became first known to her friends and the public, in a beautiful sonnet to Inspiration, which she afterwards





set to music; she next produced a marble bust of Ovid, and by degrees astonished and charmed the admiring world, till she obtained the appellation of the tenth Muse; but when or where she pursued her studies, no one knew; she was seen at every public entertainment, and Saxelby House was perpetually thronged with visitors;, therefore the busts, paintings, music, poetry, and embroidery, of lady Gertrude, seemed almost the work of miracle to the public, who were taught to believe that she allowed but very few hours to repose.

Lord de Grey, who thought and acted differently from the generality of his acquaintance, had obtained the character of eccentricity; it was also rumoured that he had made a vow never to marry, unless he could meet a female endowed with all the genius to which he was devoted, and possessing all the accomplishments he admired. At this report de Grey had frequently sighed, and wondered in what part of the world he was to discover this vara avis; but when the wonderful genius of lady Gertrude Luthridge was disclosed,





lie, whom her superior attainments were designed to captivate, became wary and observant. In his presence, lady Gertrude spoke but little, it was true, but that little led him to doubt the brilliancy of her understanding; he was indeed introduced into the apartment where she pursued her studies, but lady Gertrude had too much of the delicate timidity of merit to employ the chisel or the pencil while he remained by her side; alone, and in the deep silence of night, she moulded the grand, impressive features of departed heroes and poets, or gave to the canvas its mellowed tints and sublime beauties. De Grey was not to be the dupe of the politic father, or the victim of the designing daughter; he was aware of their duplicity; and when he solicited the patience of the earl of Avondale, it was to gain time for the exposure of their united machinations.

To the countess of Hartcourt alone, de Grey had disclosed his suspicions and intentions, and they had mutually agreed in opinion, that by some as yet inexplicable arts, the unhappy Theodore Montalban, whose residence yet remained undiscovered, was the tool of lady Gertrude's deceptions. ,/'.,, ,.-' .jr..





On the subject of this young man's unaccountable absence from his family, de Grey and the countess were conversing, when the earl of Avondale, with terror in his countenance, interrupted their tetc-atete with an account of a dangerous illness that confined lady Gertrude Luthridge to her bed. The earl added, that public report pronounced her disease love of de Grey, which unhappily was likely to terminate in madness, for her brain being disordered, all her ravings were of his insensibility and coldness.

De Grey, in spite of his natural humanity, could scarcely suppress a smile, while the countess, equally incredulous, inquired from what authority the earl had obtained his intelligence?

"From the best and truest source," replied the earl, producing a note from the duke of Saxelby, in which the immediate presence of himself and lord de Grey was requested.





. Compelled by the entreaties of his father to obey this summons, de Grey bade the countess farewell, promising to return to suppee. i .',', .. , ,,''•' " . • .'•ii'i'i:

. The duke of Saxelby received the earl and his son in an apartment so contiguous to the chamber of his daughter, that ha* ravings were distinctly heard; he also received the opinion of her physician in their presence, who informed the afflicted duke, -that if the fever did not -abate before •morning, not the smallest hope was to be entertained of her life.

The duke sunk despondingly on hte chair, while the physician continued— ** And should her life be spared, unless some means could be adopted to restore her mind to speedy tranquillity, he feared it was more than probable the unhappy lady would remain a maniac all her days. 'The duke started from his seat, ex*eMnHng^f'Ohv my unfortunate Gertrude! is this the lamentable fate of genius and sensibility!";; The duke paced the floor m all the agofty of parental feeling. •:-The eftrl'frfiAvtmdale cast an imploring





look on his son, who remained leaning against the wainscot, in the attitude of deep attention. Suddenly the duke approached him, and wringing his hand, besought him to have pity on his poor child, whom love of him had reduced to this state of dreadful suffering.—" I, the duke of Saxelby, condescend to solicit your alliance," said he, "and surely lady Gertrude Luthridge, nobly descended, and highly gifted, is not an object to meet refusal, even from lord de Grey, who is looked up to as the flower of our nobility. Surely my child, my Gertrude, would not be rejected by the proudest in the land."

De Grey was silent, but his father, taking the tone of the duke, asked if his heart was transformed to marble ?—" Can you withstand," said he, "the affecting delirium of this unhappy fair one, whose sensibility in your favour has overcome her reason? can you resist the agonies of her father, and the supplications of your own? I demand not the sacrifice of your affections, for you have repeatedly declared your heart is free; I only require your consent to an alliance which, from the acknowledged virtues, graces, and accomplishments of the lady, must ensure your happiness, while it adds new honours to your rank, and extends your interest."





De Grey felt ashamed of the earl's importunity, and unwilling to increase his apparent agitation by a peremptory refusal, he caught up his hat, and coldly, but politely, bowing to the duke, he said —** To-morrow, when the crisis of lady Gertrude's fever is past, your grace shall have my decision; in the mean time, I beg you to believe, I am truly sensible of all her virtues, graces, and accomplishments, and that I properly appreciate the high honour you design me." He then withdrew, leaving the earl of Avondale to condole with the afflicted duke.

It was dusk of evening when de Grey quitted Saxelby House; his nearest way to the countess of Hartcourt's was through the Park; once or twice he fancied he heard footsteps following him; but as the hour was early, he paid no attention to the cir





dumstance, till a man hastily rushed past him. In the next moment, he heard the report of a pistol, and a ball, whizzing past him, slightly wounded his temple, as he was in the act of raising his hat to wipe his forehead.

De Grey, though somewhat alarmed at this circumstance, proceeded on his way, till a second report made him rush forward, regardless of the blood that trickled from his temple. ;,'.'

At the distance of a few paces he beheld two soldiers, endeavouring to raise a man from the earth who appeared motionless; on his approach, one of the soldiers said— "This man, sir, has shot himself." Being raised between them, the unhappy man gave a convulsive struggle, and faintly articulated the wish to be left to die.

By order of de Grey, he was bome to the first public-house, when the landlord having looked at him, exclaimed—" Bless my soul! as sure as I live, this gentleman is Mr. Dubois, the Frenchman, who lives at my aunt Drawley's, at Knightsbridge."

Lord :de Grey having sent for a sur»





geon, it was discovered that the pistol, having been fired with an unsteady hand, the ball had torn the flesh of the wretched man's cheek, and sunk into his shoulder. Previous to extracting the ball, lord de Grey proposed removing the gentleman to his lodgings, if it could be effected without danger.

The wounded man, unable to speak, appeared by his gestures to oppose this mersure, but the landlord protesting he had not a spare chamber in his house, a carriage was sent for, and, supported by the surgeon and lord de Grey, the unfortunate Frenchman was conveyed to a neat-looking house at Knightsbridga

The door was opened by an elderly woman, who screamed at seeing her lodger and another gentleman covered with blood. lie was borne to his chamber and laid upon the bed, when the surgeon, looking at lord de Grey, discovered he also was wounded.

Lord de Grey, who did not wish to be suspected of a duel, found it necessary to

Vol. i. o





inform the surgeon of his quality, and the manner in which he had received the wound on his temple. Having occasion for water, Mrs. Drawley opened the door of an inner room, and de Grey discovered a pianoforte and several blocks of marble, one of which the chisel had been employed upon, and was designed for a head of Sappho. The truth flashed on his mind; he was certain the wounded man was no other than Theodore Montalban, though he was known to Mrs. Drawley by his fictitious name of Dubois only. His compassionate bosom sincerely pitied the sufferings that had urged him to attempt so desperate an act as suicide; and he was not a little anxious for the development of the mystery with which Mr. Montalban was surrounded, as existing circumstances assured him that lady Gertrude Luthridge was deeply implicated in the unfortunate transaction, which had brought him to the knowledge of a man who had so long concealed himself from his inquiries.

By the exertions of the surgeon, the miserable Montalban was restored to recollection, when he violently opposed the extraction of the ball from his shoulder.— Recognising lord de Grey, he exclaimed —" Father of mercies, I thank thee! I am not a murderer!"





The surgeon would have asked what he meant, but lord de Grey, unwilling that he should expose his affairs, or criminate himself, observed his head wandered, and that it would be better to proceed to the operation.

"I entreat to die," resumed the sufferer; '" it is barbarous tyranny to wish to chain to the world a wretch so pursued by misery; leave me, and let me die."

"Die!" repeated Mrs. Drawley, " I say die indeed! the fathers forbid! it is vour duty to try to live; or what, I wonder, is to become of that poor helpless babe that was born only yesterday? Mercy on me! the world grows wickeder and wickeder every day, I think; for young men make no bones of leaving their base-begotten children to the mercy of any compassionate body that will give them a morsel of bread for charity's sake."





"Cease to torture me," said the young man; "my sister, my gentle, virtuous sister, will compassionate my errors, and protect my child."

"Very fine talking about sisters taking care of one's children," said Mrs. Drawley; "folks, now-a-days, have enough to do to provide for their own. You had better try to live, and take care of the poor thing yourself."

The advice of Mrs. Drawley probably had its effect on the mind of the sufferer, for he no longer opposed the extraction of the ball; which being performed, and an opiate administered, the surgeon dressed the wound on the temple of de Grey, who then dispatched a note to the earl of Avondale, to excuse his absence for the night.

For about an hour the wretched young man remained tranquil; he then began uttering incoherences that confirmed the surgeon's apprehension of an approaching ^ver. From the ramblings of Montalban, it appeared that he was jealous of de Grey, that a criminal intimacy existed





between himself and lady Gertrude Luthridge, and that the child mentioned hy Mrs. Drawley was the fruit of this illicit intercourse.

At early morning the surgeon left the house, to call in the aid of a physician, as he entertained fears for the life of his patient; when Montalban, having raved himself to forgetfulness, de Grey stole from the chamber to interrogate the loquacious Mrs. Drawley. He found her busily relating to a young woman, who held an infant to her bosom, the dreadful situation of Mr. Dubois; "and what is to become of the poor child?" said she; "I am sure I can give you no account."

"But I can, Mrs. Drawley," rejoined de Grey, seating himself on a stool between them, and looking at the child, which was a healthy female infant. "If this unfortunate babe lives, it will be handsomely provided for." He then gave the nurse five guineas, and bade her take the child the following morning to the countess of Hartcourt's, who would settle every thing to her satisfaction.





The young woman departed, greatly pleased to find she was likely to be well paid, though the child was, as Mrs. Drawley said, "base-born."

De Grey found Mrs. Drawley full as eager to communicate as he was to be informed.—" I know but little about Mr. Dubois," said she, "for he is a Frenchman, and one stands but a poor chance to find out the families of folks from foreign countries; however, sir, about two years ago, he hired this house of me, and shortly after he told me he was married, but the relations of his wife being against the match, he was obliged to keep the matter secret, and to let his wife remain at home with her friends, while he saw her only now and then, as circumstances allowed."

"And did you ever see his wife?" asked de Grey.

"Oh yes, sir, often," replied Mrs. Drawley; " a fine, tall, grand-dressed lady used to visit him here, sure enough; she frequently came in a coach with the blinds drawn up, and he used to call her"

"What did he call her?" demanded de Grey, eagerly, perceiving the old woman hesitated; "what did he call her?"





"I am trying to recollect; it was an odd name," said Mrs. Drawley; "Ger— Gert—Gertrude; ay, that was the name, sure enough; and they used to seem so fond and so loving, that, for my part, I thought it a pity the relations were not agreeable to the match: twice, and twice only, she remained here all night."

"Can you remember when those nights were?" asked de-Grey.

"Not exactly," replied Mrs. Drawley, "but it is about a year since. Well, sir, all went on mighty agreeable, till I began to fancy the lady was in the family way, and so one morning I began to joke Mr. Dubois on his prospect of soon being a father; but, mercy on us! he started as if he had trod on a snake, and turning as white as my apron, he said—' Heaven avert from me such a misfortune!' Now, for my part, I thought this mighty odd, because most young men are proud to' have their wives in that situation: however, from that time, Mr. Dubois grew very melancholy; and afterwards, when I observed Mrs. Dubois increased in size, he said I was mistaken, for she had assured him it was no such thing. After this her visits here were not so frequent, and once or twice I heard very high words between them; but it was all in a language I did not understand, so I was none the wiser, though I clapped my ear to the keyhole of the drawing-room door; but not being able to make out their dispute, I peeped through a crack, when I saw him kneeling at her feet, and crying like the rain. The table was covered with guineas, and she was talking very fast, and seemingly in a great passion, for her face was as red as scarlet. I was greatly puzzled to guess what they were quarrelling about, for want of money often breeds disputes between men and their wives; but here that could not be the case, for, as I said before, there was plenty of gold on the table. From that day," continued Mrs. Drawley, "Mr. Dubois became quite a different man; he lost his appetite and his sleep, for I have often heard him walk back





wards and forwards in his chamber for hours together in the night, and in the day he looked so pale and miserable, that I was quite sorry to see him, and thought it a pity that such a fine-looking young man had married to make himself unhappy, though his wife was ever such a great person; don't you think so, sir?"

"Most certainly it was a pity," replied de Grey, "but pray proceed."

"I have come nearly to an end of my story," resumed Mrs. Drawley, "and have little more to tell, only that madam came here the day before yesterday, and quarrelled, as usual, with Mr. Dubois, who I heard with my own ears say, in as good English as I speak—' Beware, Gertrude; you will drive me to destruction,' when, behold you, as she was hurrying down stairs, her foot slipped, and down she fell to the bottom, where she lay for a minute as dead as a stockfish. The poor young man, terrified out of his wits, raised her in his arms and laid her on the sofa, where, after a little while, she came to herself, and was again departing, when, lo and behold I she was taken in strong labour. Mr. Dubois was like a madman—I was called up stairs, and to make short of the story, before night, that poor infant you saw just now came into this- wicked world. I wrapped the poor babe in some tiiings of my daughter's, and took it to madam, but she no sooner clapped her eyes upon it, than she bade me carry away the ugly bastard, and never let her see it more."





"Unnatupal woman !" said de Grey.

"Unnatural, sure enough!" resumed Mrs. Drawley; "the poor terrified father kissed and blessed it, and he would have caressed her, but pushing him from her, she said—' I am disgraced and dishonoured—would I had never seen your cursed face!' She then insisted on having a carriage sent for, and in spite of my persuasions and his tears, for he cried like a child that had been whipped, she would go to her own home, to prevent, if possible, as she said, her disgrace from being known: and this, sir, is all that I can tell you about the matter, for who the unfeeling hussey is, I know not; but as to wife, she is no





more the wife of Mr. Dubois than I am yours, sir."

The return of the surgeon, accompanied by a physician, put an end to this conference, interesting in the extreme to lord de Grey, whose suspicions were how transformed to certainties.

The report of the physician was favourable; he hoped every thing from the youth and apparent good constitution of Montalban: having fixed A decent elderly woman by his bedside, in quality of nurse, lord de Grey hastened home, to astonish his father, by assigning his reasons for refusing the hand of lady Gertrude Luthridge, and to send his decided rejection to the duke of Saxelby.



END OF VOL. I.



Printed by 1. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.





PRINTED FOii

+4* K. J¥E¥FM*dJV k CO.

AT THE

LEADENIIALL-STREET, LONDON.

£s. A.

Bachelor's Miseries!!! by an Old Maid of Distinction,

4 vols 1 40

The Clergyman's Widow and her Young Family, second

edition, by Mrs. Hofland 0 40

The Sisters, by the same Author 0 4*

Visit to London, or Emily and her Friends, by the same

Author, 4 vols 1 4 0

Prison-House, or the World we live in, by Mrs. Bridget

Bluemantle, 4 vols 1 2 0

E*helinde, or the Recluse of the Lake, by Charlotte

Smith, new edition, 5 vols 1 5 0

Scotchwoman, by A. F. Holstein, 3 vols 0 15 9

Tales of the Passions, by G. Moore, second edition, 8vo. 0 10 6 Vaults of Lepanto, a Romance, by T. R. Tuckett, Esq.

3 vols 0 15 9

Midnight Weddings, by Mrs. Meeke, second edition,

3 vols 0 15 0

Conscience, by Mrs. Meeke, 4 vols 140

Conviction, or She is Innocent, by the Author of Cambrian Pictures, &c 1 4 0

Auberry Stanhope, by Jane Harvey, 3 vols 0 15 0

Kthelia, second edition, by the same, 3 vols 0 15 0

Santo Sebastiano, or the Young Protector, 5 vols 1 10 0

Ferrandino, a German Romance, 2 vols 0 10 6

Trecothick Bower, or the Lady of the West Country,

by Mrs. Roche, 3 vols 0 18 O

Conduct, a Novel, 3 vols 0 18 0

S





li





Snismbrtr,

Sr PERMTSSTOX,

To WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, Esq.

By The AUTHOR Of



CAMBRIAN PICTURES, SICILIAN MYSTERIES, CONVICTION, SECRET

AVENGERS, CHRONICLES OF AN ILLUSTRIOUS HOUSE, *c. *«.





Uonfton:

Printed ml the Minerva Pretl/er

A' K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALl-STREET.





GONZALO DE BALDIVIA.



CHAPTER I.



"Farewell, and from thy lamentable fute

May we be taught the end of guilt is death!"





• " Murder! it has a sound



Most horrible! but she must die, for I

Am weary of her love: the dead can tell

No tales."





• " I do know,



"When the blond burns, how prodigal the soul

lends the tongue vows; these blazes,

Giving more light than heat,

You must not take for fire."



_t-/ONNA Olivia Loncillos, though content to quit Granada, and the solitary castle of her ancestors, where she had lived immured in even worse than monastic secln. sion, felt but little pleasure at finding her

VOL. II. B





self the ward of the marquis de Tormes, whose disposition towards females she had learned from report, and already looked upon as another tyrant, to whose imperious authority her inclinations were to be sacrificed.

The figure of donna Olivia was dwarfish and ill-proportioned, her complexion swarthy, and her countenance repulsive; yet notwithstanding the extreme plainness of her person, Olivia Loncillos possessed no inconsiderable stock of vanity. Happy in self-approbation, she encouraged the belief, that if allowed to appear at Madrid unrestrained, and in a style of splendour equal to her fortune, she should not fail «f being surrounded with suitors, who would celebrate her charms in madrigals, and compliment her with serenades—the modes which she had learned the young cavaliers of Madrid took to make their adoration known to their fair enslavers.

The youthful mind out of every circumstance extracts hope; and while donna Olivia reflected on the reserve and austerity of the marquis de Tormes, she also





considered that residing at his palace would give her an opportunity of meeting men more suited to her taste as lovers than the boors by whom she was surrounded on her own domain; she therefore quitted the tranquil abode of her childhood without experiencing any very poignant sensations of regret; the magnificent style too in which she travelled was flattering to her love of ostentatious parade; and she proudly arrogated to herself, and the striking effect of her charms, the respectful homage paid on the road to the marquis de Tormes.

The return of her husband to his palace put some restraint on the guilty commerce of the marchioness and Baldivia, who, weary of the uninterrupted possession of her beauty, felt happy at being released from an attendance which had lost its stimulating ebarm. The fickle heart of Gonr zalo was grown insensible to the lavish tenderness of Isadora, and languished after novelty.

The elegance and beauty of the marchioness de Tormes gave severe pangs to the bosom of donna Olivia. She beheld, with sickening envy, a face she was obliged to acknowledge fair—dislike followed this conviction of undeniable loveliness— and every word and action of the marchioness became subject of debate to the malicious Olivia, in the hope of discovering some spot on what the World appeared to consider the sun of perfection.





Baldivia was among the first to congratulate the return of the marquis de Tormes. He received his warm embrace with unshrinking turpitude, feeling neither shame nor remorse at the recollection of the injury he had done him by so basely abusing his friendship; but when he was introduced by the marquis to donna Olivia Loncillos, an involuntary shuddering seized his frame—she was the express image of her father, the man he had murdered! and when she spoke, his appalled ear heard the very tones of Gusman Loncillos.

The ashy paleness of his face—the tremor of his limbs, did not escape the observant eye of de Tormes; but, unsuspicious of the guilt that shook his nerves,





the marquis recollected what Baldivia had suffered in the prison to which the mysterious fate of her father had consigned him, and his agitation at the sight of Olivia became easy to be accounted for; and in spite of the unfavourable impression she appeared to make, the marquis entertained not only the wish, but the hope, of bringing Baldivia to accept the hand of donna Olivia— an alliance which he, in the warm zeal of friendship, considered would be greatly to the interest of both, as well as favourable to his own desire of fixing the future residence of Baldivia at Madrid.

Though the person of Olivia inspired in the bosom of Baldivia only sensations of disgust, yet,' with his usual hypocrisy, he brought himself to treat her with such polite attention, that she easily persuaded herself she had made a conquest of his heart; and under this impression she gave strength to the scheme of de Tonnes, by the warm admiration she expressed of the handsome Baldivia, whose common attentions, with an excess of vanity and weakness, she attributed to love.





Anxious to get rid of an amour that, no longer delighting, became troublesome^. Baldivia seriously resolved to return to Peru, as the only means of escaping the now-wearying fondness of the wretched Isadora, whose passion for her betrayer every day acquired more force. She existed but for Baldivia, who in every interview evinced the rapid decrease of a passion he had a thousand times sworn should be eternal; be had succeeded beyond his wildest wish, and, with the natural inconstancy of his sex, he no longer valued the conquest be had obtained, but, with restless impatience, longed to engage in a fresh pursuit, to which dispatches from the marquis his father spurred him on. He learned that Rosaviva, his affianced bride,. was all " that youthful poets fancy when they love;" and that, having ceased to expect his return, her father urged her to select a husband from the numerous adorers that anxiously solicited the honour of her hand.

While the wretched marchioness wept in secret the waning passion of Baldivia* and her own dereliction of virtue, Olivia waited, night after night, in the vain expectation that the handsome Baldivia would, by a tender serenade, declare the passion which she fancied she had discovered in his looks and manner. Angry, at length, with her prolonged disappointment, she grew suspiciously observant, till her jealous imagination became persuaded that criminal glances were exchanged between Baldivia and the marchioness de Tormes*





Mollified beyond measure at supposing Isadora preferred to herself, she was continually on the watch for an occasion to humble her rival with the detection of her guilt; nor was this much-wished opportunity long wanted. In drawing out his handkerchief, Baldivia let fall a small folded paper. As this was unobserved by all present except herself, donna Olivia cunningly placed her foot upon it; and having watched a favourable moment, she secured what, she had no doubt, would unfold to her the secret of an adulterous amour.





Burning with curiosity, she withdrew to examine her prize, which she found to contain these words:—

"You no longer love me, and I am miserable! Many nights I have waited for the sound that used to breathe the impatience of love—alas! I no longer hear it! Had I not a secret of the utmost importance to us both to communicate, I would not invite you; but, woe for me! it , must be told. Hasten then, at the usual hour, and speak consolation to the bosom which you have for ever deprived of peace."

This billet had neither superscription* nor signature; but Olivia saw it drop from the handkerchief of Baldivia, and the writing, though evidently disguised, very much resembled the characters of the marchioness de Tormes.

Rage, envy, and jealousy, whirled. the brain, and took possession of the heart of donna Olivia. Her first revengeful impulse was to carry the guilty paper to the marquis—" This billet," said she, musiug,





"is undoubtedly an assignation; but having no date, whether it is past or to come, I know not; neither has it address or signature. The marquis, with blind infatuation, suffers Baldivia to direct his judgment; and so fondly does he value his friendship—so highly prize his honour, that the attempt to unveil his eyes, would be attended with hazard to myself; the guilty pair may each of them deny their knowledge of this paper, and I become the object of hatred to them all, from the wish to acquaint de Tormes with the villany of his favourite and the incontinence of his wife. No, no—much as I desire the discovery of this adulterous intercourse, it is not I that must rouse the supine de Tormes."

Another idea now struck Olivia; and with a malignant smile she passed on to the dressing-room of donna Isadora, who had retired to weep over her own fatal error, and the visible decline of her seducer's affection.

Olivia, with spiteful pleasure, noticed the





redness of her eyes; and unfolding the billet, placed it on the table before her; then, with a scrutinizing look, asked if she had not seen writing that much resembled those characters?

The face of the marchioness, at this abrupt question (conveying much more than the mere words expressed), changed alternately from red to pale, while, with a faltering voice, she replied—" No, I think not, Olivia—I do not recollect ever having seen writing that resembled it."

Olivia bade her look again, adding, with pointed emphasis—"Well, really I thought you could not fail to recognise it at once, for, if I mistake not, I have in my possession some verses written in a hand extremely similar."

The tone and manner in which this rejoinder was made convinced the marchioness of the suspicion entertained by donna Olivia; she therefore endeavoured to re-gain her self-possession, while she replied —" That is not impossible, for the writing of many persons is similar; but where might you find this paper?"





"In the banquetting-hall," returned Olivia.

"Most likely," resumed donna Isadora, tearing the paper into' small pieces, "most likely it was dropped by some of the young cavaliers who this morning visited the marquis."

Donna Olivia could scarcely restrain the rage that swelled her bosom at being thus defeated in her scheme of placing the billet where it should meet the eye of the marquis. Her eyes flashed fire, and, in a voice almost choked by passion, she furiously exclaimed—" I beheld the infamous scrawl drop from the handkerchief of the marquis Baldivia, and I am no stranger tothe guilty writer; and had you not so. artfully prevented my intention, I would have learned"

"I should have supposed," said the marchioness, interrupting her rage, at the same time crumbling the pieces between her fingers, and affecting a calmness she did not feel—" I should suppose the billet was too inconsequential to demand either thought or inquiry. The marquis Bal





divia, no doubt, like other men of his age and rank, has his private appointments; but with matters of this nature, my dear Olivia, what have I or you to do?"

"Nothing, certainly," replied donna Olivia, trembling with rage; "I certainly have nothing to do with his villanous appointments—I only designed, as I considered it my duty, to unmask this phoenix —this model of friendship—this mirror of human perfection, to the deluded marquis de Tormes."

"Of whom are you speaking?" asked the marchioness, astonished at the rancour and vehemence with which she uttered the workings of her malignant mind.

"I am speaking of the marquis Baldivia," replied Olivia; "that viper—that worst of hypocrites! but though he escapes detection now, the hour of his punishment will arrive. The eye of offended Heaven will not always wink at his crimes—a terrible retribution will overtake his atrocious deeds, and that at the moment when he least expects it."

As she spoke she retired, leaving donna





Isadora in a state of the utmost alarm, lest the jealousy of Olivia (for jealous she was —too surely certain she was of Baldivia) should rouse the lethargic spirit of the marquis to a participation of her suspicions before she had concerted the means to escape from his power, to which she was urged by a dreadful necessity; her criminal intercourse with Baldivia could not long remain concealed—with shame and horror the unhappy, frail Isadora found herself in the way to become a mother; and this was the important secret she wished to repose with Baldivia, whose absence for many nights had rendered it necessary for her to invite him to a private conference, by the billet he had so carelessly dropped.

Baldivia was even more fickle• than the generality of his mutable sex; satiated with the possession of beauties which no longer demanded importunity, nor occasioned trouble, he began to hint that his access to the orangery exposed her reputation to hazard, and being continually in the night air was injurious to his own health.





From these and other such insinuations, the wretched Isadora perceived the diminution of his love; it was now she felt all the agonizing remorse attendant on guilt; she found she had fatally yielded her honour to a man who had ceased to value the sacrifice; he no more breathed the warm vow of everlasting love—he no longer wished to live in her presence; he was now coldly respectful in his behaviour— his eye no longer sought to mingle its glances: when they were alone, he was in haste to depart—was full of fears for her reputation, and apprehensions of discovery. While the weeping Isadora hung upon him with increasing fondness, he appeared cold and abstracted, and meditated the resolve of quitting Madrid for some distant province, till he could find a ship ready to sail for Peru. He had perceived the partiality of Olivia, and was disgusted by its indelicate exposure, as well as horrorized by her likeness to her father; and these causes combined had made him absent himself from the Palace de Tonnes for some time; but the billet of the mar





chioness again brought him to her presence, \\ hen, after tears and tender upbraidings, she disclosed to him what, for a few moments, gave him uneasy perplexity, but while, with dissembled fondness, he soothed her apprehensive agonies, he resolved on the measure to be pursued, by which alone her reputation and his own were to be secured from imputation of guilt. Resuming the soft, insinuating behaviour which had reduced the marchioness to her present state of wretchedness, he renewed his vow of unceasing love; with dissembled fondness he kissed away her tears, and cheered her desponding mind with a prospect of happiness that awaited her in a distant land; he artfully laid down a plan for her escape with him to Peru, and assured her a vessel would be ready for sailing before her situation could possibly be discovered. • By the united hypocrisy of caresses and persuasions, he succeeded in calming her agonizing fear of his dereliction, and left her with the assurance, that regard for her fame had inspired the caution in his. con





duct which she had mistaken for coldness and neglect.

The devoted Isadora, after this interview, felt more at ease, and the following day was past in greater tranquillity than many antecedent ones; she relied with confidence on the assurances and promises of BaWivia; he had solemnly sworn she was, in his eyes, the fairest of her sex, and that his soul was wedded to hers by the sacred tie of voluntary affection: secure in the possession of Baldivia's love, and cheered by the hope of living with him in blissful retirement, she busied herself in arranging and separating the jewels and rich ornaments which were really her own, from those which had been given her by the marquis de Tormes, resolving to take with her no- memorial of having been his wife—a circumstance which it was necessary to her peace she should, if possible, obliterate from her memory.

The birthday of donna Olivia Loncillo* had been celebrated at the Palace de Tormes in a style of magnificence which had drawn together all the young and gay of Madrid; the fame of Olivia's wealth had spread abroad, and there were many whom the consideration of her great possessions made anxious to obtain her preference, and who, notwithstanding the very small attraction of her person, were so profuse in flattering compliments on that day, that the weak-minded Olivia not only forgot the indifference of Baldivia, but also her own resolve of narrowly watching his behaviour to the marchioness. The entertainments were conducted with much pomp, and the guests departed, gratified and delighted, from the palace, at an unusually-late hour.. ther who has disgraced, hut can never cease to regret, never forget to love yon. Oh, Baldivia, to what have you reduced me! Alas, what dreadful sacrifices does love demand from this devoted heart! The unconquerable passion I feel for Baldivia divides me from my children—from my native land! Oh, may Heaven graciously preserve my innocent babes, when their deeply-erring mother is separated from them for ever!"





The marchioness, before she retired to, rest, paid her accustomed visit to the couch of her children; she kissed and blessed them, while the sad idea that she must shortly part with them for ever, produced an agony of tears—" I go," said she, "my beloved ones!—I banish myself from the delight of beholding your expanding graces —from the transport of receiving your endearments; I remove from vou a rao»





Again and again she pressed agonizing kisses on the lips of the sleeping cherubs,, from whom she reluctantly tore herself away; but though it was now morning, she felt no inclination to sleep; her thoughts were sad, and an oppressive weight, a sorrow presageful of dreadful calamity, hung on her spirits; she repaired to her dressing-room, and divesting her head of the splendid gems that had adorned it, she unfolded the luxuriant bonds of her long glossy hair; and wrapping round her a loose robe of white taffeta, she sat down to indulge the melancholy of her soul, and revolve her departure with Baldivia; she



A





then took from a golden casket the letter which her sovereign had written her with his own hand, to inform her of his intention to hestow her hand on the marquis de Tormes, the first of Spanish heroes, by whose valour the safety of the kingdom had been secured.

As the marchioness read the letter, she felt a chill run through her veins, and a faint sickness seize her heart; but supposing these feelings were occasioned by the recollection of the irreparable injury she had done her husband, she endeavoured to combat the increasing illness; she took up the miniature of himself which the marquis had sent her previous to his introduction, but a dreadful pain shot across her eyes, and she could not distinguish a feature; in the next instant a cold trembling seized her limbs, which was succeeded by a drowsiness, so Overpowering that it was the utmost effort her strength could command to drag her tottering frame to her couch, where a heavy sleep fell instantly upon her, numbing her fo~



r





culties, and obliterating from her memory past joys and present misery.

Isabel had anxiously waited her accustomed summons to the apartment of the marchioness; but the day being far advanced, she became alarmed, and ventured to unclose the door; all was profoundly still—" She sleeps," said Isabel, stealing out of the chamber, "and I will not dis* turb her." But another hour elapsing, she resolved to inquire of her health, and inform her of the lateness of the hour. Isabel drew aside the velvet drapery of the couch, and (horrible to the feelings of the affectionate girl!) beheld the young and beautiful marchioness de Tonnes a pale and lifeless corse!

The shrieks of Isabel soon alarmed the household; and the palace in the next instant was a scene of distracted lamentation.

The marquis was shocked at the sudden manner of his wife's death; he felt concern for her loss, because his children were yet flo very young; but having settled his mind as to their disposal, he bore the death





of the marchioness with the calm, uncomplaining composure of a philosopher.

The deeply-affected Isabel, who was sincerely attached to donna Isadora, deplored the suddenness of her removal on various accounts, but on none more than its having deprived her unhappily of the benefit of confession, and the spiritual consolation so necessary to a soul about to separate from all its earthly attachments, and enter on a hew life; but when the faithful girl assisted to prepare the marchioness for the tomb, a new horror assailed her mind—the chest ,of donna Isadora was discoloured, and a frightful blackness was spreading over her body.

The marquis being informed of the circumstance, attributed the change, which so alarmed Isabel, to the uncommon heat of the weather, and gave orders for hastening the interment, lest the disease which had so suddenly taken off the marchioness should be infectious, and extend to himself; but Isabel, and many of the household with her, were of opinion that the unfortunate marchioness was poisoned;





and though no one spoke openly on the subject, donna Olivia was beheld by them all with mistrust and hatred, for several of them recollected expressions that had fallen from her, in which envy and dislike of the ill-fated marchioness had been evident; but as a suspicion of this sort had not entered into the imagination of the marquis, the opinions of his domestics were not mentioned out of their own circle.

Donna Olivia Loncillos also believed the marchioness died by poison; and being weakly superstitious, the horrors of her mind were dreadful, from the idea that she alone had been the means of precipitating the miserable, guilty creature to the rash act, by the discovery of the fatal billet; but this terror she carefully concealed, though she was in momentary expectation of meeting the unquiet spirit of the unhappy suicide. Yet though assailed by these weak fears, Olivia felt little sorrow for the death of a person whose beauty was a perpetual source of envy to her, who experienced constant mortification in hearing it extolled.





After the interment of the marchioness, »a considerable change took place in the Palace de Tormes; Isabel was sent, with the children, to Andalusia, -and it became necessary that donna Olivia should be placed under female protection, as the habits of the marquis rendered his guardianship improper for a young female, who, in a residence under his roof, would be left almost always alone.

The necessity of quitting the Palace de Tormes had not been foreseen by donna Olivia, while she calculated on receiving the undivided attentions of Baldivia; and she learned, with rage and mortification, that the marquis de Tormes had proposed her to Baldivia, who had declared himself already affianced to a lady whose hand he was to receive immediately on his return to the new world; and that in consequence of this intelligence, the abbot Hernandez, Iter relation, had been apprised of her unpleasant situation in the Palace de Tormes, where there was no female society; and that he was preparing for her reception in the convent of Ursulines, where she was





to be placed under the immediate eye of the abbess.

This arrangement by no means met the approbation of donna Olivia; she disliked and dreaded the abbot Hernandez, and detested the confinement of a convent, where there was so little chance of seeing or captivating a handsome man.

Baldivia affected much concern when the beautiful marchioness de Tormes was consigned to the tomb; he also appeared to deplore the impossibility of accepting the wife proposed and approved by his respected friend the marquis de Tormes, whose regard he was ambitious to deserve and retain; yet with all these professions, he rejoiced that his secret guilt was buried with the marchioness, and that her death removed from his. sight Olivia Loncillos, who alone, of all created beings, gave him sensations of horror, and renewed on his memory deeds he wished the thickest shade of oblivion to cover.

Donna Olivia Loncillos entered the convent of Ursulines with tears and ill-dissembled repugnance, and not without the mortifying apprehension, that, with all Tier wealth and charms, she should fail of securing the devotion of one heart, as no deeply-enamoured youth had solicited her love since her arrival at Madrid, though many young and noble cavaliers had frequented the Palace de Tormes. The marquis, however, was her guardian, and the abbot Hernandez her relation and spiritual director; and she was obliged, in spite of her dislike and reluctance, to submit to their authority.





The thoughts of Baldivia were now fully occupied in preparing for his departure from Spain, and, hardened in guilt, he secretly rejoiced that his knowledge of poisons had enabled him to get rid of a female whose person had long ceased to be desirable, and, from her pregnancy, was likely to involve him in trouble, disgrace, and danger.

At the entertainment given in honour of the birthday of donna Olivia Loncillos, the cruel, unfeeling Baldivia insinuated the fatal, death-giving drug, into a pomegra

VOL. II. c





nate, which being full ripe, and particularly beautiful, he presented to the infatuated marchioness, who, doting to madness on her destroyer, eagerly ate the fruit selected by his hand; and while she imbibed death with its juice, thought the flavour of the fruit delicious, merely because his hand had touched it.

Unsuspected of crime, and securely rooted in the friendship of the marquis de Tormes, Baldivia, laughing at his easy credulity, took an opportunity of burying, near the steps of the pavilion, the key of the orangery, now no longer necessary to his amours; and as he recollected his dream in the dungeon of the Inquisition, he exclaimed—" Gusman Loncillos rises not, though Isadora de Tormes sleeps to wake no more—though my hand prepared the eternal opiate; henceforth, my soul, pursue thy pleasures, unawed by the ideal terrors of weak superstition. Farewell, Madrid! I leave behind me a reputation unimpeached. Such is the glorious triumph of successful hypocrisy!"

Lazarillo, half wild with joy, saw the





valuable effects of Tteldivia shipped for J'eru; and though he really was sorry to leave Flora behind, yet he could not prevail on himself to marry; nor, much as Flora liked Lazarillo, could she conquer her apprehensions of the seas, and being shut up in a wooden house, where, if a storm arose, there was no back way to escape at; she therefore having shed abundance of tears, suffered Lazarillo to place lier hand in Sebastian's, who had long been his rival; for though she preferred Lazarillo, he being younger, handsomer, and richer, yet she thought it wiser to accept Sebastian's offer, rather than be without a husband.

When Baldivia bade the marquis de Tonnes farewell, he was presented by him with a curiously-wrought gold casket, which he had often seen on the toilet of the ill-fated Isadora—" When you wed, 'Gonzalo," said the marquis, "give this -casket to your bride; it contains the miniatures of the deceased marchioness and myself; tell her they are the pictures of friends who loved you—say also that I live in the hope of your return to Madrid."





Baldivia was profuse in acknowledgments and regrets.

The marquis strained the seducer and murderer of his wife to his heart, and saw him ascend the deck of the ship with emotions of sorrow, such as he believed himself incapable of feeling; he invoked on him every earthly blessing, and prayed that he might live to see him return to Spain, which, though faithfully promised by Baldivia, he had not the remotest intention of again visiting a country where the Inquisition was tolerated, and exercised its mysterious terrors.

As the shores of Spain retreated from his view, Lazarillo loudly thanked the saints; he also remembered the Holy Office, and what he had endured in mind and body while in its clutches, and rejoiced to be out of its jurisdiction.

Baldivia, as Madrid vanished from his sight, thought of Loncillos and Isadora— "They sleep securely," said he; " nor will they rise to cross my pleasures, or tarnish my yet unsullied fame. Rest, valiant friend of de Tormes !—wake not, Isadora! willingly I yield your beauties to the embrace of death. Blow, prosperous breezes! swell the wide-stretched sails. I long to breathe the air of my native land—to hail the silver-crested mountains of Peru; impatiently I pant to triumph over presuming rivals—to claim my promised bride, my lovely Rosaviva—and prove that Baldivia was formed to reign a sovereign over female hearts."





To his friend Monteith, lord de Grey made no secret of his adventure with the unfortunate Theodore Montalban, and the disclosure of Mrs. Drawley, relative to the conduct of lady Gertrude Luthridge, I

The liberal-minded Monteith listened to the account given by his friend with equal astonishment and pity; but knowing how much the unhappy young man was beloved by his grandmother and sister, he considered it most prudent to conceal from them his present deplorable situation.

The countess of Hartcourt being informed of these circumstances by de Grey, readily undertook to provide every necessary for the poor, helpless, innocent infant, whose wicked and unnatural mother, at the moment of its birth, disclaimed it; and while she justly condemned the profligate conduct of lady Gertrude, she sincerely rejoiced that the timely discovery of her abominable duplicity would release de Grey from any further importunity and uneasiness on her account.





For some days the wretched Montalban continued delirious; and during his raving fits, had sufficiently informed lord de Grey, that, furious with jealousy, supposing him favoured by lady Gertrude, it had been his fixed determination, first to blow out his brains, and then his own.

The fever left Montalban in a state of infantile weakness ; and when sufficiently restored to reflect on past events, he was shocked, surprised, and affected even to tears, to learn the generous conduct of the noble-minded de Grey, who seldom had left his bedside, and not only had supplied his necessities from his own purse, but had watched over hira with the attentive tenderness of a brother. Unable to support this weight of obligation, so unmerited by the being who had sought to destroy him, Montalban again meditated to escape from a world which to him had presented only disappointment and misery; a deep melancholy took possession of his mind, and whenever he heard the voice of de Grey, he shuddered with remorse, and at his approach he covered his face with his hands, while deep and agonizing groans were all the replies he could make to his kind and compassionate inquiries.





It was now that de Grey, more than ever alarmed at his situation, introduced the husband of his sister to his chamber, without giving him any previous notice, as he feared that he would have shrunk from, and opposed an interview with a stranger.

Lord Monteith, by persevering attention, gained upon the sensibility of Montalban, and won his confidence; by tender persuasion and religious argument, he brought him to see how ill-prepared he was for that eternal world into which he was impiously rushing, where peace and happiness are the reward of a life well spent on earth. .'





Montalban listened and was convinced; he confessed the extent of his obligations to lord de Grey, who had snatched him from perdition-—he promised to bear his misfortunes with fortitude, and to live, whatever might be lus destiny.

By degrees Montalban was brought to unfold the secret history of his connexion with lady Gertrude Luthridge, with all the unhappy circumstances that had driven him, with desperate hand, to attempt the life of lord de Grey as well as his own.

"When I first arrived in England," said Montalban, "I was gay; my spirits were lively,.'and my heart full of hope; I rejoiced in the thought, that the united talents of Julia and my own would not only enable us to live handsomely in this country ourselves, but also provide for our dear and respected grandmother, who has bestowed on our education a large portion of the property she had succeeded in preserving from the merciless gripe of that





oppression which had reduced our family from affluence to poverty. I had advertised to teach sculpture, painting, and music, and was busily employed in preparing materials for the immediate commencement of my labours, when I received a letter, desiring me to attend a lady at Richmond, who wished to engage with me for tuition.

"I punctually obeyed the appointment, and need I inform you, I was introduced to lady Gertrude Luthridge, who engaged, at the end of one year, to pay me ten thousand pounds, on condition that I supplied her with a certain number of marble busts, paintings, and musical compositions, all which, under my oath of secrecy, were to be passed upon her friends and the public as her own productions.

"The hope of securing to my beloved relatives a genteel independence prompted my compliance with lady Gertrude's proposition; I took the oath she required, on receiving from her a bond for the stipulated sum, and at the same instant not





only made a sacrifice of my fame, but bound myself the slave of an artful woman, who only used me as the tool and dupe of her designs on other men.

"With shame I confess," continued Montalban, " the deceptive smiles bestowed on me by lady Gertrude soon gave her a tender interest in my heart. I was young, and unaccustomed to the wily flatteries of the sex; and so fascinated was I by her assumed affability and gentleness, that to purchase her the public praise she wished, I would have sacrificed not only my abilities, but my life.

"Lady Gertrude soon perceived the ardent passion she had inspired; yet so far from being offended at my presumption, she encouraged my hopes by increasing familiarity, till an avowal of reciprocal affection was mutually made. Lady Gertrude now informed me, that it was at the instigation of the duke her father she had engaged me; and that it was solely to gratify his pride, and in obedience to his peremptory command, and not to indulge any vanity of her own, she consented to impose on the world, and receive from its judgment the approbation due only to my genius and skill.





"After this explanation had taken place, I proposed to lady Gertrude to become my pupil, and suffer me to instruct her in the management of the chisel and the pencil; but, alas! small was the progress she made with either, for the hours allotted to improvement were employed in love—in mutually vowing lasting tenderness and eternal fidelity; till at length, with tears and distraction, she disclosed to me her apprehension of being in a situation that must inevitably discover our intimacy to the world.

"I now urged her to become my wife; and if she really loved me, as she had ten thousand times professed, the heartless pageantry of grandeur would be well exchanged for the solid delights of connubial bliss and domestic happiness: she then informed me, that by the will of a distant relation, she inherited an estate, called Norley Abbey; and that if I would consent to relinquish the bond she had given





me for ten thousand pounds, she should be enabled to pay off a mortgage that encumbered the property, and we should then have a residence, and the means to support not only ourselves, but my sister and grandmother.

"I joyfully acceded to her proposal, and returned her the bond, which she instantly thrust in the fire. While the paper blazed, I observed the countenance of lady Gertrude, and its expression displeased me, for I fancied I read in it the exultation of successful deceit. '-'..

"For some days the subject of our marriage was not renewed by lady Gertrude; but yielding to my importunity, she at length admitted to her confidence the sister of her waiting-woman, a Mrs. Ridgeway, by whose contrivance, and in whose presence, we were married."

"Married!" repeated lord Monteith; " is this unfeeling woman in reality your wife?"

"As truly as the rites of the church can make her," resumed Montalban; "and it was at the period of our marriage I engaged these lodgings, that we might meet





with more security, till lady Gertrude saw a proper moment m which she could venture to disclose our union to the duke of Saxelby, when, if he refused to acknowledge the husband of her choice, she would release me from my oath of secrecy; and that, having informed my sister and grandmother of our marriage, we should retire together, a little family of love, to Norley Abbey.

"For a short time I was suffered to indulge in visions of future happiness, from which I was first roused by discovering that lady Gertrude had imposed on me with respect to her situation, which she explained by thanking Heaven she was not in the way to become a mother. 1 could not help expressing the disappointment I really felt, because I foresaw this declaration would delay the promised disclosure to the duke her father. Nor was this the extent of my wretchedness—her looks, her tone, her manner became visibly changed —she no longer met me with smiles and caresses—she no more sought occasions of retiring from Saxelby House, to pass whole





days with me at Knightsbridge; but all her actions seemed to indicate a wish to forget the sacred ties by which we were united.

"In vain I supplicated to be acquainted with the cause of this (to me distressing) alteration in her behaviour; but all the explanation I could obtain was, she had spies about her—the duke was suspicious —and it was necessary we should be particul°rly circumspect, as this was by no means a favourable crisis for declaring our marriage.

"In addition to the grief the unkind conduct of lady Gertrude occasioned, I was compelled to bear the complainings and pathetic remonstrances of Julia and my venerable grandmother; for I was bound by solemn oaths; and however my nature was shocked to appear unfeeling to those beloved ones—much as my agonized soul was pained by concealment, my honour constrained me to silence.

"It was about this period lord de Grey returned from Italy, and was introduced to lady Gertrude; nor was the public voifie long in announcing their mutual passion,, and settling an alliance between the illustrious houses of Avondale and Saxelby. 1 had seen lord de Grey, and report had informed me of his genius and character—I knew he was a frequent guest at Saxelby House, for I had frequently to undergo the mortification of being hastily and unfeelingly dismissed by lady Gertrude, who attempted not to disguise her impatience to receive her noble visitor.





"At length, stung to the quick by her indifference, I insisted on an explanation of her conduct. For some days she contrived never to be alone with me a moment; but finding she had exasperated me beyond further sufferance, she came hither, but not with the intent of removing my jealousy—not to dispel my doubts, but to confirm them. She insolently called me a villain, who had artfully taken advantage of a momentary weakness on her part to dishonour her, in order to trepan her into a marriage far beneath her rank in fife—that her father should be made acquainted with the whole of my





seductions, and his power should quickly release her from a man who had sought to aggrandize himself by her disgrace—that the hour of her infatuation was at an end, and she would at once dissolve a marriage so repugnant to her feelings—so derogatory to her rank.

"You will," said the agitated Montalban, " despise my weakness, and call me contemptibly mean, when I confess to you I fell at her feet—I wetted her hands with the burning tears her cruelty extorted—I supplicated her pity, and bade her remember her vows of everlasting love. Unmoved by my agitation and distress, she emptied on the table a purse of gold, and laid beside it a roll of banknotes.

* Montalban,' said she, coldly, * we must part. It is the command of my father that I marry lord de Grey.'

* You cannot,' replied I, clasping her knees;* you are my wife. Oh, Gertrude! remember your faith plighted to me at the sacred altar—while I live you cannot marry another. Be patient yet a little while; my sufferings will shortly break my heart, and





my death will give you the liberty yon wish.'

'You must be worse than mad,' resumed she,' to hold me to an engagement so imprudently made, and so little to the interest of either. Take that money,' continued she, pointing to the table, 'return to France; and in lieu of a wife who no longer desires to restrain, or be restrained, you shall receive yearly a sum sufficient to make you happy with some other female, whose rank in life shall be more equal with your own.'

"Need I say I spurned the infamous proposal; and wild with jealousy and indignation, swore to challenge lord de Grey, and publish my wrongs to the world?

"Terrified at this unexpected menace, her high tone began to lower; and seeing she had wrought me to the defiance of all personal hazard, she had recourse to those arts by which she, in the early days of our intimacy, subjugated my reason; she soothed, caressed, and left me persuaded that she had only been probing my affection— the true extent of which she was anxious to prove, previous to acquainting the duke with our marriage, which she had resolved on doing as soon as Norley Abbey came into her possession, for which she had now only a few weeks to wait—a delay occasioned by some necessary forms of law.





"Though the stormy passions of my soul," continued Montalban, " were lulled into a temporary calm by her dissimulation, I was far from happy, and more than ever lamented the oath that forbade my communicating my situation to those on whose tried affection I knew I could rely —my sister and my grandmother, whose advice would have assisted me in my perplexed affairs.

"Many weeks wore away, and I pereeived that lady Gertrude had still a ready excuse for putting off the confession of our marriage, while the powers of language must fail to describe the excessive misery I endured from her imperious temper, the want of money, and the burning jealousy I endured on lord de Grey's account. Yet still I loved her with doting fondness, which acquired fresh force from





believing her again in the way to make me a father—an event which, I supposed, would restore me the affection which the giddy pursuit of amusement, and the voice of adulation, had chilled, but, I trusted, not destroyed; but when I spoke to her on the interesting subject, with all the tender solicitude of love, she denied the fact, and persisted to affirm I was mistaken, though at the same time her appearance contradicted her assertion.

"Certain in my own mind of her situation, I was distressed beyond measure at her continued denials, and was revolving what she could possibly mean, or intend to do with the infant, when I was accosted, as I crossed the park, by Mrs. Ridgeway, who, having expressed much pleasure at our accidental meeting, informed me she had long endeavoured to find out where I lived, as she "had something of importance to communicate.

"I felt faint, and dreaded I knew not what—a cloud swam before my eyes, and I was obliged to seat myself, while Mrs. Ridgeway resumed—* My brother, a poor curate with a large family, was the person who married you to lady Gertrude Luthridge; and, presuming on his poverty, she has offered him, through me, a large sum to tear the leaf on which your marriage is registered from the church-book. John Harley, to be made a bishop, I am certain, would not do an unjust act. Unfortunately for us, my sister and myself are chiefly supported by lady Gertrude; and I have not yet had courage to inform her that her bribe will not be accepted.'





"I could scarcely persuade myself I was awake," said Montalban, "while I listened to this scheme of infamy, and exclaimed —* You are abusing my ears with falsehood—she cannot be so base—it is impossible !'.

"Mrs. Ridgeway saw and pitied my sufferings, but assured me she had uttered nothing but truth, adding—* Her ladyship has also ordered me to prepare an apartment at my house for her confinement, and has agreed with me to bring up her child as a relation of my own, extorting from me a vow, never even to disclose to you its birth; but at the moment I gave this unnatural promise,' said the worthy woman, * I resolved to acquaint you with lady Gertrude's designs, that you might be prepared against proceedings which certainly do not mean well to you.'





"I thanked Mrs. Ridgeway, and gave her my word of honour that I would not expose her to the resentment of lady Gertrude, by betraying the confidence she had reposed in me.

"That very evening lady Gertrude came to my lodgings, agreeably to her own appointment, where she had scarcely seated herself, before she renewed her offer of settling on me a handsome annuity for life, if I, by immediately quitting England for ever, would allow her to marry; she also informed me that my refusal would avail me nothing, as she had taken care that no document existed to give me the remotest claim to her person or fortune; and that the duke her father, and the earl of Avondale, had finally arranged a union between herself and lord de Grey, to which any opposition on my part would





be the height of folly, and would only bring disgrace and destruction on myself, as she had taken care to remove every proof by which I might hope to substantiate my assertions.

"At that moment she was the object of my scom; and I saw her quit the room with no other feeling than that of utter contempt. My soul seemed abhorrent of a woman so lost to every principle of honour—so dead to every tender feeling. In her haste to depart, while rage made her careless of her steps, she twisted her foot, and fell to the bottom of the stairs—the consequence of which was, that in less than two hours she brought into the world an infant, to partake the hatred she had conceived against its unhappy father. Her sufferings excited my pity; but, spurning me and her child, which she falsely declared illegitimate, she insisted on returning to. Saxelby House.

"This was the night preceding my desperate and impious attempt on my own, and the life of lord de Grey. In a state of distraction I was pacing the floor, when my eye rested on a paper which lay beside the sofa on which I had reposed lady Gertrude after her fall. I caught it up, and read the infamous design of having me sent out of the kingdom, and placed in such confinement as should for ever prevent my becoming, a bar to her future prospects. This was an unfinished letter to some person, who was ordered to seek a vessel ready to sail for any foreign port, whose captain, for a stipulated remuneration, would bind himself to the performance of this service.





"At the same moment," continued Montalban, " I despised, loved, and hated this abandoned woman. One instant I resolved to give her the freedom she desired, by departing immediately from England, and the next I meditated to expose her to public scorn, and oblige her, in the face of the world, to acknowledge me her husband. Against lord de Grey I felt a jealousy so strong, that I believed my resentment could only be appeased by his blood.

"The whole of that miserable night I passed in working up my mind to the desperate resolve of first blowing out the brains of my rival, for such I considered lord de Grey, and then my own; for in my determination to rid lady Gertrude of the husband she hated, I bitterly swore to deprive her of him to whom she sacrificed my happiness, and to obtain whom she had unnaturally disclaimed and abandoned her helpless, unoffending infant.





"You have now," said Montalban, " the history of my errors and my weakness before you. To lord de Grey's unequalled compassion and generosity I owe the preservation of my wretched life—but how dare I hope that he can pardon the base attempt I made on his, when I can only offer the excuse of loving to desperation a worthless, unprincipled woman, and of acting under the torturing effect of jealousy, which had wrought my brain to madness?"

Lord de Grey kindly pressed the hand of Montalban, assuring him of his forgiveness and his friendship; at the same time acquainting him with the overtures made





by the duke of Saxelby, and his own determined rejection, from the first it was hinted, of the alliance.

The consolation afforded by the friendship and company of lords de Grey and Monteith soon restored the wounded mind of Montalban to composure, though they failed to eradicate from his bosom the deeprooted passion that it still cherished for the unworthy lady Gertrude, who, governed by vicious inclinations, had indulged in what she called love for him, till lord de Grey effaced the impression made by him from her inconstant heart, and the new flame his person kindled urged her to the commission of new crimes-*—to disclaim and abandon her husband and child.

As soon as Montalban was able to bear the motion of a carriage, he was removed to the house of; lord Monteith, where the tender attentions of his beloved relatives reconciled him to life, and enabled him to support the loss of her on whom his heart doted, though his reason convinced him

VOL, II. 1)





she merited only abhorrence and scorn. On his child, which was named Laurette, after his own mother, he lavished the fondness he still felt for her unworthy mother, whom, in spite of past circumstances, he believed, could she behold the expanding beauty of her infant, it would innocently assert its right to her affection, and successfully plead against the pride and fickleness of her disposition.

Madame Montalban saw the deep regret that preyed on the mind of her beloved Theodore, and in the tears that filled his eyes when he pressed the little Laurette to his bosom, she read the unextinguished passion for its mother •, and while she considered the youth of lady Gertrude, she wished to palliate her errors, by placing them to the account of fashionable example and inexperience, rather than absolute depravity; and since the happiness of Theodore depended on her love, she could not suppress the wish that lady Gertrude should become sensible of her imprudence, and by a repentance of error reunite herself to her husband and child.





The compassionating de Grey saw with sincere concern the debilitating weakness of Moritalbarfs heart; and to him he at length expressed a wish that a reconciliation could be effected between himself and his wife.

"It is in vain," said he, *' I struggle with my passion; she is my fate,

'And so conjunctive with my life and so'O,

That, as'Hie star moves not but in his sphere,

I could nut but by her."



De Grey was convinced of the depravity of lady Gertrude's mind, and opposed many arguments against Montalban again placing himself in a situation to be rendered miserable by her arts.

Montalban owned she had greatly erred, but at the same time expressed the belief that the ambitious projects of the duke of Saxelby had overruled the real wishes of lady Gertrude, and in great measure actuated her conduct; yet notwithstanding ,all that had past, he flattered himself he still had an interest in her heart, and that





she might yet become an affectionate wife and a tender mother.

Lord Monteith at first warmly opposed the wishes of Montalban. He denied the possibility of a mind so depraved as lady Gertrude's ever becoming virtuous; and he warned Montalban against the endeavour to conciliate the regard of a serpent, who would assuredly make him sensible, when too late, of her deadly venom.

For some days the subject was entirely dropped; but the grief of Montalban needed not the expression of language—it spoke in his dim eye and dejected mien.

The gentle Julia, grieved to behold the gloom and melancholy in which the onceanimated Theodore was plunged, by tears and entreaty prevailed on her lord to join the efforts of the generous de Grey, in effecting the reconciliation he so much desired; nor did this seem impossible to be brought about, for the duke of Saxelby, detected in some malpractices, had been disgraced, and dismissed from the high offices he held, which had not only les





sened his consequence, but considerably diminished his revenue.

The earl of Avondale, at the urgent request of his son, took upon himself the unpleasant task of revealing to the duke the marriage of lady Gertrude, who at first refused credence to what he looked upon as an improbable fiction; but having that morning treated her ladyship with much asperity, commanding her to discharge many of her attendants, and retrench her extravagant expences, she, to prove at once her utter disregard of parental authority, on being questioned, made no attempt at denial, but at once confessed her marriage with Montalban; and, to the utter astonishment of the earl of Avondale and lord Monteith, she burst info tears, and protested that, misled by the ambition of her father, she had been persuaded to give up Montalban, who was at that moment, and had ever been, the object dearest to her heart, and the husband she preferred before all created beings."

The duke, before irritated by some unexpected demands made by the trades





people of lady Gertrude, grew outrageoirs at this declaration, completely defeating his scheme of retrieving his shattered fortunes, by forming, through her, a splendid alliance. Foaming with rage, he ordered her to quit his house immediately, and look lor support in future from the beggar with whom she had united her destiny; and that, when next her creditors assailed .him with clamourous demands, he should direct them to her husband—" For never from this hour," said the duke, swearing a. tremendous oath, " will I, in any shape, consider you my daughter."

Little affected by this harsh menace, lady Gertrude left Saxelby House in the carriage of lord Monteith, who strongly, >though delicately, urged the necessity of a thorough reformation in her mind and conduct, if sl*e wished to regain the good opinion of the world, and retain the affection of her husband, who, though his heart was still fondty attached to her, might, by a repetition of injury,be brought t» hate and cast her off for ever.

Lady Gertrude listened, wept, arid pro





mised, while at the same moment she ridiculed and despised in her heart the friendly admonition.

Montalban received her with open arms —her former behaviour was forgiven, and consigned to oblivion, in the firm persuasion that, however her youth had been misled, he was really and truly beloved by her.

Madame Montalban and lady Monteith were completely duped by lady Gertrude's affected contrition for her husband's sufferings, and joy at their reconciliation, but de Grey and Monteith were not deceived by the professions of lady Gertrude; and much as they wished the happiness of Montalban, they foresaw its inevitable wreck, convinced that the affability, condescension, and tenderness of his wife were artfully assumed, to answer present circumstances and particular ends, which, when fully answered, the mask of amiableness would be thrown aside, and she would again appear a fiend in human shape.

The debts of lady Gertrude were to a large amount, and her estate of NorleyAbbey was obliged to be deeply mortgaged to satisfy the demands of her creditors, who, as her marriage gained publicity, became impatient for payment, being disappointed in their expectation of splendid orders whenever that event took place, under the notion that she would marry richly and grandly.





The duke of Saxelby, deaf to every solicitation and remonstrance, refused to contribute to the support of his daughter, whose disobedience, he declared, had severed every tie of consanguinity, and rendered her, in his estimation, a stranger to his blood, without claim on his heart or his fortune.

This communication being made to lord Monteith, who also beheld the public contempt that followed the name of lady Gertrude, and the sneering pity bestowed on Montalban, he strongly recommended their retiring to the south of France, as well for the recovery of Montalban's health, as for the purpose of living with economy, till the mortgage on Norley Abbey could be paid off, and enable them to live in England.





In spite of all the caution that had been observed by de Grey and Monteith, the deceptive conduct of lady Gertrude had got abroad; and when she ventured into public, she found herself avoided by her fashionable acquaintance, or annoyed by their whispered sneers at the prodigy of genius, and their ridicule of the tenth muse. Unable to stem the torrent of contempt that everywhere obstructed her steps, she joyfully acceded to the proposal, made by Montalban, of spending some years abroad. Lady Monteith would gladly have persuaded her lord to accompany her brother to Marseilles, but she was soon to become a mother, and lord Monteith would not hear of his heir being born in a foreign land.

Madame Montalban, during a few months residence under the same roof with lady Gertrude, became sufficiently acquainted with her real temper to lament the infatuation of Theodore, and to perceive too clearly his small chance of future comfort -in the society of the woman he had in*D 8 .«....♦





prudently made his wife; she, however, confined her suspicions to her own bosom, convinced that he had linked his destiny with a scorpion, who would inevitably poison his felicity.

Lady Gertrude made no opposition to Julia's wish of keeping the little Laurette with her. She knew that a young- child was a troublesome companion, particularly when travelling, and she rejoiced to be .. released from what she considered a disagreeable charge. This evident deficiency in maternal affection did not escape tire observance of lord de Grey, who, with his friends, felt confirmed in the opinion, that the heart which felt no affection for the child could have but little for the father.

Montalban suffered much regret to leave his child in England; but perceiving how little notice lady Gertrude bestowed upon .the innocent babe, he reconciled himself to. the separation, by reflecting on the tender care in which he left it. :. . - Madame Montalban wept bitterly as -she received the farewell embrace of Theodore, whom she foresaw had devoted his





youth to suffering; and being herself far advanced in years, she feared she should never again behold him; but her blessing and prayers went with him, and she cherished the religious hope, though fated to meet him no more on earth, they should be again united in heaven.

Lord de Grey admired the talents of Montalban, while he pitied the imbecility of his mind. He acknowledged that his genius was brilliant, and his understanding good, but he wanted fortitude and decision to give energy to his character, and render him an object of respect as well as of admiration. Like Madame Montalban, de Grey feared that the evil propensities of lady Gertrude would involve her husband in difficulties and disgrace, and eventually poison the felicity, and destroy the comfort of his life.

"And this,"said lord de Grey, " is love! if remorse and contempt are its attendants, may my bosom remain for ever unacquainted with the degrading passion!"

The earl of Avondale had scarcely congratulated himself on the timely discovery





of lady Gertrude's character, and the providential escape of his son from her snares, before he felt an alteration in his health, to which at first he paid but little regard, till his malady increasing, he consulted his physician, who recommended change of air. While getting into his carriage lie was seized with a fit, from which he only recovered to bless his son, in whose arms he shortly after expired.

I)e Grey, now earl of Avondale, mourned the loss of his father with a sorrow that exceeded show; and it was some time before grief permitted him to examine his affairs, and look over papers that demanded his attention. In the earl's private cabinet he found the affecting letter of his aunt, the lady Selina Molines, and the miniature of the lovely Rosaviva, whom the letter described with so much truth and tenderness.

De Grey had never in his life heard these relations mentioned, and he repernsed the letter with increasing surprise, at the * silence and mystery that had been observed relative to these persons, so apparently





deserving of affection and respectful attention.

Having hastily arranged his papers, he carried the subjects of bis curiosity, the letter and miniature, to his friend the countess of Hartcourt, from whom he learned a large portion of his family history, which till that thour he had never even received a hint of, so closely had the earl his father adhered to parental injunction.

The story of lady Selina de Grey impressed itself on the memory of the young earl, whose eye never wearied of gazing on the lovely features of Rosaviva, till at length the quickened pulsations of his heart assured him he could never love another female, or ever bring himself to marry, unless he obtained the hand of Rosaviva Molines.

The countess of Hartcourt ridiculed the visionary passion inspired by a picture, on which, she observed, the artist frequently bestowed charms not to be found in the .original; but the impression it had made on the heart of de Grey was not to be ef





faced by argument or raillery—h's dreams, his waking thoughts, were full of Rosaviva—every hour his passion became stronger, till, unable to resist the wish of beholding her, he resolved to embark for Peru; and if her heart had not yet made its election, to offer himself to her acceptance, and by a union with her, cement the reconciliation her amiable mother had so much wished, and so earnestly solicited.

In the sober idea of the countess, the determination of de Grey to quit his native country in search of a bride appeared like insanity; and with all the energy of love, almost maternal, she opposed argument and persuasion against so romantic and perilous a voyage; but love and hope had fixed themselves too deeply in the youthful bosom of the earl, for any advice of wisdom or friendship to overcome their flattering suggestions.

De Grey speedily arranged his affairs; he appointed trusty stewards over his estates, and taking an affectionate farewell of the much-respected countess of Harteourt, the family of Monteith, and his





other numerous friends, with a suite and equipages suitable to his rank and fortune, he embarked for the New World, his bosom buoyant with the hope of persuading his lovely cousin to share his title, and dwell with him in England, the land so dear to the heart of her mother—the land of happy freedom.

De Grey hung the miniature of Rosaviva on his bosom; and when allured from his cabin by the mellow moonlight and the song of the helmsman, he gazed on the mild blue eyes and dimpled mouth that seemed to smile upon his wishes; he felt assured, if she returned with him to England, she would delight to quit her couch, in such calm and heavenly nights, to watch with him the rippling waves, silvered by the moon—with him would listen to the pensive song of the mariner, and delight in those tranquil pleasures which can only be enjoyed by souls tempered by virtue, and united in mutual love—" Sweet Rosaviva, be thy heart but mine," said de Grey, "and I would not resign the dear





possession for all the wealth contained in the rich mines of thy native Peru!"



CHAPTER II.



•* Injured virtue and successful vice are objects that continually appear on the staa;e of life; but we must not from hence inter that Providence upholds villany or forsakes goodness; the destinations of this world are inscrutable

. to man, but the Sovereign Director, who permits the oppression of worth and the triumph of guilt, orders all for the best and wisest purposes."

The voyage of the earl of Avondale to South America was performed much more expeditiously, and with far less inconvenience, than he had been taught to expect; good weather and favourable winds, for the most part, had attended the course of his vessel, and he reached the destined port in high health and spirits; the same hope that had suggested and urged the enterprise accompanied him across the ocean, while the smiling image of the beauteous





Rosaviva seemed to invite him to happiness and wedded love. •

When free from obtrusive gazers, his enamoured eye dwelt on her miniature; a thousand transporting visions of future bliss swam in his youthful fancy, flushed his cheek, and panted in his bosom, which every hour throbbed with increasing emotion and impatience to behold the relations so recently discovered, the amiable lady Selina, but still more than her, Rosaviva, whom he devoutly believed Heaven had destined for his wife.

It was evening when he reached Lima; and without announcing his arrival, he entered the magnificent city, the principal streets and squares of which he found hung with garlands of luxuriant flowers, formed into arches, reaching from house to house; the porticoes of the palaces belonging to the nobility were brilliantly illuminated, and displayed a scene of unequalled splendour and gaiety ,while the sound of various instruments of music, and the firing of cannon, seemed to announce the grand festival of





some saint, or the commemoration of an event of national importance.

The benevolent heart of the earl of Avondale partook the sentiment of happiness that seemed impressed on every countenance he met—" I arrive," said he mentally, "at a joyful period—a presage, I trust, of my own good fortune,"

When his carriage stopped before the gate of the palace of don Henriques Malines, he observed it still more splendid in decoration than any he had yet seen; over the grand entrance was an arch of differentcoloured lights, in the centre of which, beneath a crown of myrtles and roses, were visible the names of Gonzalo and Rosaviva.

A faintness seized the heart of Avondale as he read these names so united; he felt the fond hope that he had cherished during his voyage receding from his bosom, and he had scarcely power to announce his title and relationship to the lady Selina Molines.

On entering the palace, his worst fears were confirmed; he learned, that a few hours previous to his arrival, donna Rosa





viva had bestowed her hand on the young marquis Baldivia, at whose palace her parents were partaking the nuptial feast, aiid joining in festivities which all Lima were invited to partake.

The earl of Avondale resisted the solicitations of the domestics, who were respectfully anxious to conduct him to the bridal party, or to apprise don Henriques and lady Selina of his arrival; he also refused the refreshments they would have set before him—he pleaded fatigue, and requested to be shown to a chamber where he might repose, giving at the same time a peremptory command that his arrival should not be made known till the return of don Henriques and lady Selina.

The superb decorations and magnificent adornments of the suite of rooms, of which his bedchamber made a part, was lost on the disconsolate Avondale. Rosaviva married!—Rosaviva lost to him for ever!— . solely possessed his brain. For some moments he yielded to the agonizing grief of disappointment; he regretted having given way to the- romantic wishes of his heart,





which had imprudently led him to resist the sensible advice of his maternal friend, the countess of Hartcourt, who had vehemently opposed, with every prudent argument, his leaving England on such a visionary project: but though fated to experience the annihilation of his dearest wishes, the mind of the young earl was too well fortified by religion and reason to sink under disappointment; the earl of Avondale did not suffer his feelings to degenerate into weakness—he was one of those to whom, with truth, might be applied—

"And blest are those

Whose blood ami judgment are so well commingled,

That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger

To sound wl»at stop she please."



The earl remembered that man was bom not to indulge his own short-sighted schemes, but for the promotion of general good; he remembered that his rank and fortune gave him the means to diffuse happiness, and he formed at once the virtuous resolve, though deprived of her he considered essential to his own felicity, to promote that of others to the utmost limits of his power.





He had not yet ordered his luggage on shore; and his first thought was to return to the ship, and proceed with it to Mexico; but soon dismissing this idea, he resolved to be guided in his stay at Lima by circumstances. He pressed the miniature of Rosaviva to his lips, and breathed a prayer to Heaven for her felicity with the husband she had chosen; he then took the picture from his bosom, which but a few hours before had beat with the rapturous hope of meeting her unengaged, and at liberty to accept his addresses—" I cannot be the husband of Rosaviva," said the earl, endeavouring to recover serenity, "but I may be her friend; and though nobly married, and at present surrounded by all the luxuries and enjoyments of life, who, in the revolutions and chances of this strange world, can take upon them to say the young and beautiful marchioness Baldivia will never want a friend?" The earl did not sleep much on his sumptuous couch; but during the hours allotted to repose, he fortified his mind, and reasoned it into submission, teaching himself to believe that his present disappointment was a wise decree of Providence, leading to some ultimate, though unseen good.





On the following morning don Henriques Molines entered his apartment, and gave him the welcome of a noble heart, rejoicing to prove that he retained no enmity against a family who had for so many years treated him with indignity. Don Henriques embraced the youthful Avondale with an affection truly paternal, and led him to the presence of lady Selina, who, delicate and fragile, received him with agitated nerves, mingling tears with her embraces, her surprise, warm congratulations, and expressions of high-wrought pleasuite, at his .50 unexpected arrival.

The beauty of lady Selina was not yet impaired by age, though it was evident consumption was making innovations on her health; while Avondale pressed her hands to his lips, he thought of Rosaviva, who strikingly resembled her mother, and a regretful sigh swelled his bosom.





Lady Selina, firm in the faith of her fatliers, had anxiously wished her daughter to marry a Protestant, and the arrival of lier nephew revived and introduced many uneasy feelings and reflections on the future fate of her tenderly-beloved and only child, who had been suffered by parental fondness to marry agreeable to her own inclination, rather than their approval.

The judgment of lady Selina, though she could assign to herself no reasonable cause of objection, did nJt approve Baldivia; and while she gazed with virtuous pride on the fine person of the earl of Avondale—while she remembered his affinity, and the high rank he held in his native country, she regretted that his voyage to Peru had not been undertaken before Baldivia quitted Spain—" My Rosaviva," said lady Selina, "might then have been his, and their union would have cemented the reconciliation I have so earnestly requested of Heaven."





The earl of Avondale shared in all the emotions of lady Selina; but he wished to persuade himself that it was the peculiar circumstances under which they met, that occasioned the tremor of his nerves; he wished not to confess, even to himself, that disappointed love introduced the almost-suffocating emotions that rose in his bosom, and deprived him of his natural eloquence: but his greatest trial was yet to come—he was yet to meet Rosaviva; he felt reluctant to join the nuptial party, for he doubted his own fortitude; but as no reasonable excuse could be made—as no means of avoiding an introduction appeared, he suffered himself to be conducted by don Henriques and lady Selina, who introduced him to Baldivia and his lovely bride, when, having paid and received the customary compliments, his mind confessed that Gonaalo's person was a model of manly grace and symmetry; but his countenance, though decidedly handsome, did not please him; he traced in it lines of deep hypocrisy, and in the splendour of his dark eye





lie discovered flashes of villany and the' fire of libertinism.

In the young and beautiful marchioness" he beheld an assemblage of every feminine charm; and as her melting blue eyes were bent upon him, he read in their mild beams truth, innocence, and sensibility—" May they be happy!" sighed Avondale; "may the marquis Baldivia deserve the blessing he enjoys! may he prove worthy the love of the peerless Rosaviva!"

The declining health of lady Selina gave the earl an opportunity of observing the amiable character of the marchioness, whose tender solicitude and duteous attention to her mother gave her, in his eyes, new charms; but Baldivia, who had not yet grown weary of the ostentatious pomp and (splendour of his nuptials, who was yet pleased to receive the unmeaning compliments paid by the heartless throng that crowded his palace, as much to be partakers of his sumptuous entertainments and costly banquets, as to welcome his return from Spain, and congratulate him on his

VOL. n, E





marriage, felt offended to see his newmade bride withdraw herself from the gaze of an admiring multitude, to attend to what he termed the vapourish complaints of her mother; the earl ,of Avondale's society, who devoted much of his time to lady Selina, Baldivia could readily, and with much content, relinquish, for a very short acquaintance discovered to him that no two persons under the wide-.stretched canopy of heaven were more opposite m principlethan himself and the Englishman, whose noble, ingenuous disposition and virtuous character, he secretly despised and ridiculed.

The delicate frame of lady Selina was not equal to the fatigue of attending the continued entertainments projected by Baldivia; and at length she found it necessary to retire from noisy festivity, to the peaceful shades of Deloricad, where the pure air might again restore tone to her relaxed and languid nerves.

The earl of Avondale's mind was too deeply lacerated to enjoy, or enter into the spirit of the amusements, prolonged and promoted by the old marquis Baldivia, who seemed, in the union of Gonzalo and Rosaviva, to have gained the highest perfection of felicity; but in the midst of a crowd, all alive to gaiety, and eager for amusement, Avondale felt a sadness he could with difficulty conceal; and being present when lady Selina declared her intention of retiring for a short time to Deloricad, he immediately expressed a wish to accompany her, an offer highly gratifying to don Henriques, who did not wish to quit Palma so soon after the marriage Of his daughter, and yet was unwilling that his wife should go without a protector. Baldivia cast on the earl a glance of contempt, and his thoughts recurred to what he had been frequently told of the cold, phiegmatic constitutions of Englishmen-— "Here is a proof,"said he mentally, "thatI have been taught to estimate their characters truly, for here is a nobleman, young, handsome, and rich, dull in the midst of gaiety, and insensible to the charms of beauty; he views the glowing fair ones of Peru with the eye of a stoic, and is about to,resign the splendour of pageantries, the diversions that court him, here in all the various forms ,of pleasure, for the dull monotony that perpetually reigns at Deloricad—to exchange the gay society of youth and beauty for the whining complaints of a woman old enough to be his mother.





When the.hour, of separation.arrived, IiosaViiya wept as she hung on the neck of her another, and don Henriques, fancying she looked worse than she would, acknowledge, would have entered the carriage with her, hut. Rosaviva was in agonies, at the. thoughts <af being deprived of both her parents, and lady Selina insisted that he should remain at Lima, #s she was convinced her present indisposition was entirely owing to fatigue and the heat of crowded rooms; she returned the tender embraces of her husband and daughter, assuring them, that, under the protection of her nephew, she should feel quite secure, and much more content than if the marchioness was rendered unhappy by their





both quitting her so soon after her nuptials.

The earl of Avondale beheld in lady Selina the same gentleness of manner, the same tender and amiable qualities, that he had idolized in his own mother; and while he gazed on the beautiful hectic that brightened her cheek, and lent her eyes a dazzling lustre, he became convinced that she also was hastening from earth, to a happy immortality in heaven; the natural goodness of his heart led him to pay unremitted attention to the interesting invalid; he drove her in a low carriage about the beautiful grounds that surrounded the castle—he read to her the books she approved, ahd exerted all his various talents to enliven her languid spirits, and sooth the malady that was evidently bending her fair and fragile form to earth.

It Was at the close of a sultry evening, lady Seliha, in eveh deeper depression than usual, reclined on cushions near an open lattice^ that, with the refreshing breeze of evening, admitted the rich perfume of a tall magnonia, while Avondale, seated near





her, read aloud an English poem. A restless movement of lady Selina made him lay down the book, to arrange more commodiously the cushions that supported her head; with a sweet but faint smile, she thanked him, at the same time observing, that his attentions greatly softened the absence of her beloved Rosaviva—" You have arrived too late, Willoughby," said she, " to view the character of your cousin in its most amiable lights; you should have seen her duteous attention to her parents —her unassuming charity, that led her to the poorest hovel on this extensive domain, to administer, with angel meekness, to the sick and necessitous. Alas! my gentle Rosaviva, never did she, in her whole life, occasion me regret till the hour in which she bestowed herself on the marquis Baldivia."

"And is it possible," asked the astonished Avondale, "that you do not approve this marriage? Was not the marquis chosen by my cousin from numerous suitors? Is it not considered a great and splendid alliance?"





"Alas! yes," returned lady Selina mournfully; "Baldivia is tenderly beloved by the artless Rosaviva; his rank is high, and his wealth immense; but splendour does not constitute or ensure happiness; and

much I fear "Lady Selina paused;

but her countenance still spoke the solicitude of maternal feeling.

The earl respectfully pressed his lips on her hand—" My aunt," said he, "surely will not deny me her confidence; am I not, by nearness of blood, interested in all that concerns the happiness of Rosaviva? You have awakened in me a painful curiosity—tell me, I beseech you, what is it vou fear?"

"The wavering, inconstant disposition of Gonzalo Baldivia," replied lady Selina; '" I fear my timid, innocent child will have much to endure from a temper, imperious, fiery, and capricious. During his longprotracted absence from Peru, Rosaviva proved the sincerity of her affection, by rejecting many noble offers; her heart is truly Baldivia's, while his, alive to every new impression, will not long, I fear, preserve the faith so lately plighted; and when this dereliction takes place, my unhappy Hosaviva will have no maternal bosom to repose her sorrows on, for I shall have quitted the busy scenes of life; and should her father suspect this darling of his age neglected by the man on whom, against his better judgment, he has bestowed her,





1 feel, nay I am too certainly assured, the consequences must, to one or both, be fatal. My foreboding heart," continued lady Selina, "sees in this marriage, formed under such apparently-fortunate auspices, the extreme of wretchedness for my angelic child, who, when Heaven deprives her of her parents, will be left alone in a land of strangers, whose religion, differing from her own, will too certainly expose her to hatred and persecution. Oh that you had been her husband, dearest Willoughby! my soul would have had then no regrets in this world—I should have met death tranquilly, assured of the happiness of her, whose fate will now imbitter every remaining hour of my existence."

. The emotions of the earl of Avondale-. were too poignant to be concealed; he pressed the hands of lady Selina to his agitated heart, while his tears fell fast upon them. It is seldom men shed tears, and Avondale seemed ashamed of the weakness he betrayed, though the salutary drops relieved his overcharged heart of its suffocating feelings; and he soon recovered sufficient self-command to sooth the alarmed lady Selina, who had never before seen him so strongly moved. After renewing the subject of Rosaviva's marriage, which no bosom so much lamented as his own; he solemnly assured his aunt that he would never quit Peru, but, devoting himself to Rosaviva, he would watch over her happiness, and in every situation and circumstance of her future life, prove himself her brother and her friend.





"Not quit Peru!" repeated lady Selina: "Avondale, you are not aware of what you say; your commiseration for the feelings of a mother leads you to promise what it would be injustice to your family, your rank, and your country, to perform." E &





"I solemnly swear," resumed the earl, elevating his eyes to heaven, "never to return to England while Rosaviva continues an inhabitant of Peru; wherever she resides shall be my country—to avert, as far as human power shall be permitted, the evils of her fate, shall henceforth become the employment of my life; again, in the face of Heaven, I repeat, I will be her brother—her friend!"

In this declaration lady Selina discovered that the youthful Avondale had met a disappointment of the heart; but much as she would have rejoiced in the idea, when death should separate them, to leave her Rosaviva in such protection, she considered it her duty to oppose the determination of his becoming an alien to his country, by representing the injury he would do an ancient house, by living unmarried, and remaining in a foreign land.

"I shall never marry," replied the earl mournfully; "I could have loved with truth and tenderness, but the object of my wishes is lost to me for ever!" Lady Selina would have interrupted him; but with increasing emotion he resumed— "Question me not, I beseech you, on this distressing subject; endeavour not to alter resolves that are immutable; my destiny is fixed—I shall never marry for the sake of perpetuating a name; no, I will never make a cold offer of my hand to a female who might probably deserve, though she never could possess my affection."





This conversation occupied the thoughts of lady Selina through the night; by some unwary expressions that had fallen from the lips of Avondale, she discovered his unhappy, hopeless passion for Rosaviva; and while she reflected on all the happy advantages that would have arisen from their union, she more than ever lamented that he had not arrived before the return of the marquis Baldivia from Spain. Towards the dawn of morning she fell into a restless slumber, from which, about midday, she arose, so much altered for the worse, that the earl of Avondale thought it necessary to dispatch a messenger to don Henriques, with, information of the alarm





ing state of lady Selina's health, who repeatedly fainted during the evening.

The marchioness Ealdivia would not be restrained by any persuasions or representations of her husband, she insisted on accompanying her sorrowing father to Deloricad—" My mother, my angel mother," said Rosaviva, " is dying—shall I not hasten to receive her blessing? Oh, Baldivia, if indeed you love me, you will not oppose my departure; should my beloved mother die, and I not be near to sooth her last agonies—rfco close those eyes that never looked on me but with indulgent fondness, I should never again know peace or happiness."

Seeing it a vain attempt to offer argument or opposition, the marquis accorded an ungracious assent to her wish. The countenance of Baldivia wore an appearance of gaiety to which his bosom was a stranger; the beauty of his bride, her gentle, amiable disposition, her elegant deportment, and suavity of manners, drew a succession of guests to his palace, and only in. a crowd did the guilty Baldivia experience a cessation of mental torture; he was therefore averse to parting with the magnet that secured him from the horrors of solitude.





Contrary to the earl of Avondale's expectation, the lady Selina again so much recovered, as to regret having alarmed her husband and daughter with the account of an indisposition that seemed to be passing off without any serious consequences; but the sight of these beloved ones appeared to inspire her with new life; the gentle Kosaviva supported her languid head— her hand administered her medicines—and she had the satisfaction to find her duteous solicitude repaid by the cheerful tone in which the invalid spoke—in observing her pale lips again resume their roseate colour, and her eyes beaming with the mild radiance of virtue and tenderness.

Don Henriques was not long a stranger to the vow made by the earl of Avondale respecting Rosaviva, and he sincerely sympathized in the regret of lady Selina, that destiny had not allotted them for each other, whose ages, dispositions, and talents





were so similar. Every day gave hind fresh reason to admire the noble character of the young Englishman, while that of Haldivia continually sank in his estimation. Aware of the uncertainty of life, don Henriques instantly set about the arrangement of his temporal concerns; and finding the earl of Avondale immoveable in his resolve of remaining in Peru, he so disposed his wealth, that Rosaviva remained entirely independent of her husband, and in some degree under the guardianship of her cousin.

The marchioness Baldivia had not been many days at Deloricad, when she was informed, by a letter from the marquis her husband, of the sudden death of his father. This event recalled don Henriques, his most attached friend, to Lima, to attend his funeral obsequies.

It was at this period that the lovely marchioness and the earl of Avondale became acquainted with the abilities and accomplishments of each other. The heart of Rosaviva, though fondly attached to her husband, beheld the fine person of her cousin with virtuous admiration, and bestowed on his character and genius the friendship and esteem her innocent and amiable mind considered due to a near relation and friend, whom her mother so highly respected, as to bid her consider him her brother.





Every day the beautiful marchioness mourned the absence of her husband, and spoke of the affliction his heart felt in losing a father who absolutely idolized him, the business of whose life was to promote his wishes.

But far different were the sentiments of Gonzalo Baldivia! he actually rejoiced at the death of his father, who, in his idea, had lived many years too long—he was pleased that a spy on his actions was removed; but, above all, that his decease gave him absolute and uncontrolled possession of the immense wealth contained in the silver mines of Potosi, where, among the female slaves employed in collecting the splendid ore, he had committed barbarous outrages, which, from time to time; had drawn upon him the severe reproof of his parents; but all this was at an end, after the funeral of the old marquis was over, on which all the ostentatious pomp of wealth had been bestowed, not to evince respect for the memory of the dead marquis, but to gratify the pride and vanity of the living one.





Instead of departing with don Henriques for Deloricad, where he was anxiously expected by Rosaviva, he pretended that business of the utmost importance demanded his actual presence at Potosi. In reality, his young and lovely wife no longer occupied his thoughts* or inspired his wishes; Baldivia, though possessed of genius and a&complishments, had no delight in chaste and rational pleasures; the domestic circle had no charms for his depraved mind; and to avoid what he considered wearying and insipid society, he took from the labour of the mines a woman of colour, and remained with her at Paluda, a sumptuous palace he had built purposely for his licentious pleasures; but disgust soon succeeded satiety, and from a life of splendid indolence, he dismissed the wretched victim of his vices again to the drudgery of the mines, rendered now more dreadful than ever by contrasting it with the indulgence to which she had of late been accustomed; and here the scorn and ridicule of her sable brethren pursued her, till rage and shame prompted her to terminate an existence which the monster Baldivia had reduced to insupportable wretchedness.





After an absence of six weeks, an age itt the calculation of his afflicted wife, the marquis began to reflect that propriety demanded his appearance at Deloricad; and he sent Lazarillo forward with letters to the marchioness, announcing his approach; being within a few leagues of the castle, and perfectly acquainted with the road, he suffered his only attendant to remain at the cabin of his father, who at that time had met an accident, that rendered the arrival of his son most fortunate and welcome.

The marquis had calculated to reach the castle an hour before nightfall; to ascertain the distance, he rode up to a miserable hut; but before he could prefer a question. he was astonished to hear himself addressed by his name; he looked towards the entrance, and beheld, stretched on a bed of newly-gathered leaves, a man apparently dying with dropsy; stooping to examine the squalid features of the miserable object, who, in piteous tones, implored his charity, he discovered in the mendicant a being hateful to his eves and dreadful to his remembrance, the once-ferocious ruffian Manuel.





Had the ghost of the murdered Inis stood before the marquis, his nerve's could not have endured a greater shock; he drew forth some pieces of gold, and in tones of ill-disguised alarm, demanded what had become of his comrade Thomasio?

"He is prowling about our old haunt, the forest," replied the gasping Manuel, "endeavouring to learn whether you are at the castle, from whose gratitude for past services he expects liberal relief, from the ill luck and poverty which has followed us up ever since we did that bloody job for your lordship in the cave."





"No more of this," said the marquis angrily; "I wish not to remember"

"No, nor I either, if I could help it," resumed Manuel; "but I never close my eyes without thinking I see the poor wench, with the half of my dagger sticking in her breast."

Baldivia caught up his hat, which had fallen to the earth, and Manuel continued to say—" Nothing has ever prospered with us since we shed the blood of that wench —her shrieks sound for ever in my ears; I drank wine as long as I could get it, to drown thought; but at last being obliged to take to water, you see what has come of it—I am swelled as big as a tun. Water may be good drink -for fishes, but it does not agree with my constitution."

Baldivia, though he appeared to listen, heard not the wretch's complaints; "a project peered darkly on his brain;" he told Manuel he should shortly see him again, and clapping spurs to hishorse, he darted into the forest, along the beaten track of which he had not proceeded far, when he beheld at a distance the never-tobe-mistaken gaunt figure of Tho'masio, who was leaning against the bole of a wide-spreading oak; the determination of the marquis had been formed before; levelling a pistol, he fired at the miscreant, whose return to Deloricad foreboded the discovery of the murder of Inis, and other atrocities necessary to his character to re*> main undivulged.





Having, as he supposed, silenced thifc enemy, he returned again to the hut where he had left Manuel, with the diabolic intention of dispatching him also; but death had already seized the miserable wretch, and the convulsive struggles of departing nature rattled horribly in his throat; as Baldivia approached the entrance, he gazed on the distorted countenance, and listened to the sound of dissolution, and his unsteady hand could scarcely hold the reins, or curb the impatient animal he rode, who wished to take a road contrary to that which led to the castle.

Night was now advancing, and something like terror smote the heart of the maqjuis, as he reflected that he must either remain by the corpse of Manuel, or,by crossing the forest, encounter the bleeding form of Thomasio, newly murdered by his hand, whom he had sent to his account with all sins upon his head; he preferred the latter, and ridiculing his own fears, he boldly entered on the forest.





The sun was sunk below the horizon; and the deep, solemn gloom of evening every moment increased; obscurely he be* held the form of a man stretched at the root of a tree, whom he supposed to be Thomasio; he buried his spurs deep in the sides of: his horse, which sprang past the* miserable object. His ear caught a faint groan—" He is not dead,*' said Baldivia, "not quite dead, and it would- be merciful to put him out of pain"

With this thought he endeavoured to check the speed of the animal he had the moment before barbarously urged to pro* ceed; but in vain were now his utmost efforts; the horse regarded not the reinorl voice of the marquis, but flew over the' turf as if impelled by some invisible power r this unaccountable speed continued for half





a league, when an object indistinctly seen by Baldivia seemed to communicate to the terrified animal the same feelings of horror that nearly paralysed his own bosom.

The horse snorted, reared, and endeavoured to turn back, but the bridle was suddenly seized by a strong arm, and a well-remembered voice gruffly sounded in the ear of the marquis a demand of his purse. . . ...

"Illusion of hell! what should this mean!" said Baldivia; "art thou really the living Thomasio, or some damned spirit? Speak, if thou art Thomasio, say who lies bleeding yonder?"

"Don Henriques MoHnes," replied the ruffian; "be lies mortally wounded at the root of an oak, further in the forest. I need not now inquire," continued Thomasio, "by whom, or for what intent, the balls were fired that have entered his side. Your surprise at encountering me, together with your questions, inform me I was the person your pistol aimed at. What, the noble marquis Baldivia fears me—he wishes: the poor Thomasio out of his path! you designed to put the seal of death upon your secrets, by destroying me. Well, marquis, revenge is sweet."





As he spoke, he plunged a knife into the side of Baldivia, whose hand had already seized a pistol; he fired, and the ball entered the brain of Thomasio; he reeled, and grasping in his fall the thigh of Baldivia, he dragged him from his saddle; the terrified horse new off at full speed, while the head of Baldivia falling with violence on the stump of a decayed tree, received a severe contusion, and his shoulder, which was crushed beneath him, underwent dislocation.

The absence of don Henriques from the castle after nightfall was a circumstance so unusual, that it affected lady Selina with unconquerable terror; while the marquis Baldivia not having arrived at the appointed hour, occasioned much alarm and uneasiness to Rosaviva, and increased the agitation of her mother, who, pale and trembling, entreated the earl of Avondale to send out a party of the domestics, with torches, to search the forest.





Glad to escape the distress of Rosaviva, as well as anxious for the fate of don Henriques, the earl, attended by Lazarillo andseveral domestics, made directly for the forest, into which they had' scarcely penetrated, when they beheld the horse of- the marquis quietly grazing on the aromatic turf; at sight of the animal, which with-' out resistance suffered himself to be caught, Lazarillo uttered loud exclamations of grief and apprehension—w The marquis," said he, " has met some dreadful accident; most likely he i6 dead. Oh, why did he venture to travel alone! had I been with him, the unhappy fate which now seems but too certain might have been prevented! Oh, too surely the marquis Baldivia hasr lost his life in this forest!"

Again they proceeded along the tangled' paths, when the musings of the earl, and the sorrow of Lazarillo, were interruptedby one of the servants stumbling over the" breathless body of the ruffian Thomasio, and in the next instant Avondalebeheld Baldivia, covered with blood, lying across' the trunk of a decayed larch, to all adpearance dead.





Yet though the marquis alone opposed an obstacle in the way of his happiness, in a union with his lovely and beloved cousin, the noble-minded Avondale felt neither joy nor exultation as he beheld his pale countenance and motionless form—the only sentiment of his bosom was commiseration—" The marquis has been beset and murdered, no doubt," said Avondale, "by this ruffian who lies beside him, whose own life appears to have been the forfeit of his crime. Prepare, as expeditiously as possible, a litter to convey the marquis to the castle, while I, with those who can be spared from the melancholy office, proceed in search of don Henriques, for whom I am now more than ever alarmed.".

With tenderest pity he assisted to raise Baldivia from the earth; his fine hair was dotted with blood, and pointed out the wound in his head. Some strong branches were speedily torn from the trees, across which the body of Baldivia was laid, and

Vol. n. F





/



in this state borne to the castle; while the afflicted Avqndale, with a few of the domestics, continued his search after don Henriques, whom they found still lying at the root of the old oak, where he had unfortunately received the shot designed for Thomasio from the murderous hand of the marquis Baldivia.

The unfortunate Henriques was alive, but utterly speechless, and insensible to the.kind offices of the earl, or the sorrow of his people, who tenderly bore him in their arms to the castle, where his hopeless situation added to the grief and distraction of lady Selina and the marchioness, who had already received a dreadful shock in beholding the marquis borne into the hall, covered with his own blood, and to their belief past hope of recovery.

The senses of Baldivia had only been suspended; life was not extinct, for the agonizing pain occasioned by the rough motion unavoidable in the mode of his conveyance to the castle recalled him to life; but it was only to utter groans, extorted by suffering, and to pierce the heart of the





tender Rosaviva with the reflection, that he was only restored to sense, that she might have the misery of seeing him writhe with torture hefore he was snatched from her for ever. , But here, as in most other instances, was proved the fallibility, weakness, and incertitude, of human foresight and perception; the marquis Baldivia, the measure of whose guilt was not yet complete, contrary to all hope and expectation, recovered daily; the wound in his head wore a favourable appearance— his shoulder was reduced—and though he was still pale and weak from the great loss of blood, yet every dangerous symptom vanished, and Rosaviva, as she hung over his couch with watchful tenderness, poured a silent prayer of gratitude to Heaven for his preservation.

Meanwhile don Henriques, speechless and paralytic, exhibited a mournful spectacle of fast-approaching dissolution. A tedious month had nearly elapsed, and no word or look of consolation had he been able to bestow on his weeping wife and





equally-afflicted daughter, who watched over him with that painful solicitude which only hearts tenderly attached can suffer; two others also were in constant attendance on the unhappy Henriques, his confessor, the benevolent and pious Velasco, who had been attached to him from early youth, and the kind, commiserating Avondale, in whose arms he was constantly supported, while the little nourishment he was capable of receiving was administered by the duteous Rosaviva, who, while busied in offices of love about her helpless, unconscious parent, appeared more lovely than when arrayed in bridal splendour — her smile seemed to diffuse happiness to all around her.

Early in the evening don Henriques had fallen into a deep sleep, and Velasco had noticed he was less agitated than usual—" Heaven," said the pious man, "Heaven will yet, I trust, restore him to our prayers."

The observant Avondale shook his head; his only prayer entreated release for the sufferer, who, to his judgment, appeared "past hope—past cure." Some changes





had already taken place in don Henriques, which had escaped the eye of Velasco; but being pointed out by the earl, he declared those alterations were the precursors of death. The skill of Velasco had been exemplified in the cure of Baldivia's wounds, and he lamented with tears, that he had no specific to restore the health, and lengthen the days of his respected friend— "These changes," said the good father, examining attentively the countenance of don Henriques, "are indeed the heralds of death; before sunrise this beloved sufferer will be released from pain; he will be happy; for if a well-spent life—the strict performance of every earthly duty, gives a claim to eternal felicity, I know not a man who breathes, with higher pretensions to blissful immortality than don Henriques Molines." >

The good Velasco having visited the marquis Baldivia, and administered to his complaints, joined the persuasions of the earl of Avondale; and after much reasoning and entreaty, the lady Selina and her; daughter retired, to seek that repose which.





was necessary to restore their exhausted frames, and enable them to bear the death of don Henriques.

Avondale, though his lips joined not the prayers of Velasco, who knelt beside the sick couch, in his heart sincerely and devoutly offered a petition to Heaven for the dying man; nor were lady Selina and Rosaviva forgotten; he begged the Dispenser of all good to bestow on them resignation.

About midnight don Henriques awoke, and in a thick voice asked for drink.

In an instant his attentive friends, the earl and Velasco, were at his bedside. Having eagerly drank, in the same inarticulate voice he begged them to raise him to a sitting posture.

The hopes of Avondale revived, the recovery of his speech appearing to him a happy change: but the more experienced Velasco stood meekly and silently, with his arms crossed on his breast, watching what he considered the almost-extinguished taper of life emittthg its last faint sparks.

Henriques motioned them to draw near;





lie faintly grasped the hand of Avondale, and fixing his eyes on his face, uttered, with much difficulty, in the same thick voice—" Rosaviva! protect her from a monster—Inis—cave in the forest—Baldivia, murderer of both—same hand—suffer not Rosaviva—live—go to England— my wife, my child, bless,—be you their friend—they will need—Baldivia is my— I die by—monster's bloody hand. Oh, my Rosaviva!—remember your promise to protect—mercy—mercy, Heaven!"

These broken sentences, scarcely intelligible, were the last efforts of expiring nature. Don Henriques, though unable to speak, appeared sensible of the vow uttered by Avondale, who, pressing his cold hand to his lips, solemnly renewed the promise of continuing, through life, the friend and protector of the young marchioness.

A placid smile hovered on the lipS of the dying man, who breathed his last sigh on the shoulder of his confessor, Velasco.

The disjointed sentences uttered by don Henriques neither Velasco nor Avondale could clearly understand; the pious monk





supposed the dying man meant to say the same ruffian had murdered him and attacked the marquis, which, from the circumstance of the villain's body being found near Baldivia, appeared very probable; but what he designed to express respecting Inis, and a cave in the forest, he could by no means comprehend; the good father had never heard of any caves in the forest, with every path of which he was well acquainted; he therefore concluded that the head of don Henriques must have wandered while he was speaking.

The earl of Avondale did not attempt, to contradict this opinion, but his own thoughts considered the matter more deeply; he strongly suspected that the marquis Baldivia was in some way concerned in the murder of dori Henriques; he had before heard of the mysterious disappearance of Inis—she might be confined in some cave, unheard of by Velasco—and he determined, if possible, to discover this cave, if any such there was in the forest of Deloricad.

Thomasio had set off from the hut, with





sm intention of seeking the marquis Baldivia, whom, from the discourse of some passing peasants, he learned was at the castle, well knowing that he was not likely to return without ample relief from a person in whose important secrets he was so intimately concerned.- On his way he encountered? don Henriques, unattended, taking his accustomed walk in the forest. The first idea that occurred to the ruffian was to rob him; but struck with unaccountable remorse, he humbly entreated charity for his sick comrade, whom he described as dying in~the last fearful stage of a dropsy.

Ever humane, liberal, and compassionate, don Henriques placed his purse in the hand of Thomasio,. promised to send assistance to the hut, and was turning homeward for this charitable purpose, when the eye of the ruffian glanced on the entrance to the cave; he fell on his knees, and impelled by momentary contrition, entreated don Henriques to hear his confession of a. horrid crime.





"Such a confession," replied don Henriques, "will be better made to the holy man whom I will send to the hut; he will administer to the diseases of the body and the soul; him it concerns to hear"

"You it concerns to hear," interrupted Thomasio; "for it relates to your daughter, the marchioness Baldivia, and by the love you bear to her—by your regard for her happiness, I request you to hear me."

Thus adjured, don Henriques turned again towards .the ruffian, who disclosed to his horror-struck and afflicted auditor the terrible fate of Inis.

, Thomasio had just concluded this dreadful narration, when the report of the pistol, fired by Baldivia, caused him to look back; he beheld the murderer, and was -certain it was his own life that had been aimed at; to the wounded don Henriques he pointed out the marquis, and communicated, with oaths of A'engeance, his belief that the ball was designed for him.

To summon assistance for don Henriques, and denounce his murderer, the ruffian was hastening to the castle, when he was overtaken by Baldivia, whom at first, shadowed by the thickly-interwoven trees, he did not know.





The dying Henriques made a fruitless endeavour to disclose the enormous guilt of Baldivia; but the funeral obsequies were performed, and the marble monument closed over the remains of don Henriques and the amiable lady Selina, who survived her beloved husband only a few days, and the guilt of the marquis was suspected by none, except the earl of Avondale, in: whose memory the last expressions of don Henriques were recorded.

The lovely marchioness, while she wept the deprivation of her respected parents, gave Heaven grateful thanks that Baldivia was spared to her supplications.

The pious Velasco, whose surgical skill had been so happily exerted in the cure of Baldivia, was retained by him as his confessor, because, being of a nature simple and ingenuous, and always occupied by religious studies, he thought he should have little to apprehend from his curiosity or observation; while, by this particular





respect to the memory of his lady's father, he should ohtain from the world a character of piety and gratitude.

Every evening Rosaviva wept at the tomb of her parents; and with the prayer she offered for the repose of their spirits, was mingled her grateful praise for the restoration of her husband, whose eyes shone with renewed splendour, and whose cheek was recovering the glow of health.

The violence of Rosaviva's sorrow yielded to reason and religion; she ceased not to regret the loss of' her parents, but she believed they were removed to a region of eternal felicity; and she resigned herself to the ordinations of Heaven, with the stedfast hope of a reunion with the beloved and respected authors of her being.

But while the marchioness regained tranquillity of mind, the earl of Avondale every day became more disturbed; various reports had reached him unfavourable to the character of the marquis Baldivia; and the certainty that Rosaviva, the virtuous Rosaviva, the beloved of his soul, was united by indissoluble ties to a man of such dreadful principles—a man stained, as he believed, with the blood of her father, was agony almost insupportable. The dying words of don Henriques appeared to him to implicate the marquis in the mysterious disappearance of Inis; to ascertain this fact appeared now impossible, since he slept in the silence of death, who alone appeared to have dived into a secret which hitherto had never been divulged.





The belief that the forest contained a cave, took possession of the earl's thoughts; and frequently, when all in the castle were retired to repose, he stole from his chamber, and, attended by a confidential servant, explored the deep recesses and most untrodden parts of the forest; many times morning broke on his unavailing search, and compelled him, though reluctant, to seek his couch.

In one of his rambles by daylight, accident threw in his way the hilt of a dagger, which appeared to be crusted with blood, and to have been broken by some act of violence. Avondale shuddered as he surveyed the implement of outrage; he care





fully marked the spot, resolving to return at night and renew his search.

The presence of Baldivia became every moment more hateful to him, and he rejoiced when the hour of separation released him, to muse in solitude over his own unhappy passion, and the disastrous union of Rosaviva; a more than usual restlessness possessed his bosom on the day he found the hilt of the dagger, and he waited with uneasy impatience till the profound stillness of the castle left him at liberty to pursue the adventure of the forest.

Attended by his faithful servant,, andprovided with tha means of obtaining light, the earl reached the spot which he suspected led to some subterraneous cavern. Having, with much toil, burst through the underwood and twining brambles, they found their progress stopped by a large stone, which, covered with moss, appeared to the eye like the turf that covered the paths of the forest; for some time it resisted the united efforts of Avondale and his attendant, but persevering with their utmost strength, they succeeded in remov





ing it from the hollow into which it was sunk.

Having lighted the torch, the earl discovered a steep descent, formed by narrow, rude steps, down which he instantly proceeded, followed by his servant. They now entered an extensive cave, where a noisome stench convinced the earl that he had a spectacle of horror to encounter. Having fortified himself and his attendant against the dangers of putrefaction, he entered the inner excavation, where his suspicions were horribly realized. He beheld a spectacle shocking to humanity—, the body of the miserable Inis, nearly naked, and eaten in many places to the bones by numberless reptiles, that were crawling over and feasting on her corrupted flesh. In the bosom of the wretched creature stuck the blood-rusted blade of the dagger, the hilt of which Avondale had picked up near the mouth of the cave. "This then was thy miserable end, unfortunate Inis!" said the earl, as he watched the worms drag their slimy folds over her face; "and this is then the final destination of our perishable bodies! oh that the vain, the proud, and the ambitious, could survey with me this spectacle of horror! would they could behold, as I do, the worms crawling forth from the sockets that once incased eyes which they have made their food! would they could see the black and venomous toad gnawing cheeks that once glowed with the roses of health! sure such a terrible lesson, would teach the vainest and most arrogant humility!"





Near the entrance of this inner excavation lay a handkerchief. By the command of Avondale his servant took it up—the crest of the marquis Baldivia was curiously worked on the cambric..

This handkerchief was, in the mind of Avondale, a strong corroboration of the guilt of Baldivia. A thousand conjectures and suspicions crowded the brain of the earl, as he stood mournfully contemplating the remains of Inis, among which the idea that the marquis had seduced, and then murdered, or caused the unfortunate creature to be murdered, appeared most probable. Having carefully explored the dis





mal excavations, without obtaining any real elucidation of the mysterious murder of Inis, they left the cave, carefully closing up the entrance.

On the return of Velasco, who had been some days absent on•a charitable mission, the earl acquainted him with his discovery of the cave and the body, which the monk at once concluded was the! mortal part of Inis; but by whom carried to that concealment, or by what villain murdered, he could form no idea.

"The girl," said Velasco, "was generally beloved; I have no reason to suppose she had an enemy."

Avondale produced the handkerchief found in the cave.

"It bears the crest of Baldivia," said Velasco.

"Ay, of Baldivia^ father," rejoined the earl, at the same time attentively watching the countenance of the monk, which preserved its usual placidity, betraying neither surprise nor suspicion.

"It is most curiously wrought," said



r





the good and simple-minded Velasco, at the same time placing the handkerchief before Avondale, to whom it presented a strong eA idence of Baldivia's guilt.

"No doubt," continued the monk, "this handkerchief was stolen from the marquis by the villain who murdered the unfortunate Inis."

Avondale's thoughts were busy, but he made no reply to this conjecture.

"I am going to the chamber of the marquis," resumed Velasco, "whom I have not seen since my return. If I find him in a state to bear the melancholy relation, I will take occasion to mention the discovery of the cave; at which, doubtless, he will be as much astonished as I am, who never suspected subterraneous caverns in the forest Deloricad."

"Stay, father!" said Avondale, detaining him; "grant me a few moments longer! I have important reasons, which I will hereafter disclose to you, for not wishing my name to be mentioned in this business."





Velasco appeared perplexed—" What then can I say to the marquis ?" demanded he.

"Say the actual truth," replied Avondale; "say the stone that covered the entrance to the cave was discovered by my servant Bernard, who afterwards descended, and saw the body of a female, which, from foregoing circumstances, he supposed to be the unfortunate young woman who had mysteriously disappeared from the castle."

Thus instructed, the good monk promised a strict observance of the earl's wish, and left him to visit the marquis Baldivia, who, though his wounds were perfectly healed, yet remained in a state of weakness that prevented his taking other exercise than short rides about the castle.

Baldivia heard the relation of his confessor with an agitation of nerves and wildness of look, that on any other mind, save his, would have stamped an absolute conviction of his guilt; but fearful of betraying himself, he exerted all the cunning of his nature, making it appear to the unso





phisticated monk, that commiseration for the ill-fated Inis, and detestation of her murderer, caused his extraordinary emotion.

Velasco now informed the marquis of the strange sentences uttered by don Henriques in his dying moments, which proved his knowledge of the secret of the cave, and the murderer of Inis.

The eyes of Baldivia were frightfully distended, as, completely thrown off his guard, he seized the arm of the wondering Velasco, who beheld his face of an ashy paleness, as his trembling lips articulated—" The murderer of Inis then was known to don .Henriques?"

"Of that," replied the monk, " there remains not a doubt; he was also certain by whose hand he was himself deprived of life."

Ealdivia sunk back on the supporting couch, that shook with the tremor of his frame—" Who," said he, "shall presume to hope that his crimes will for ever escape detection? the hour of extermination will arrive! Eternal justice permitted the re,covery of his speech to don Henriques, that he might demand vengeance on his





assassin—that he might accuse"

"There you greatly err," interrupted Velasco; "don Henriques, unfortunately, accused no one."

Baldivia eagerly listened, while the monk continued—" His voice was -choked and thick, and all that could be gathered from words spoken at long intervals, and very imperfectly pronounced, was his knowledge of his own murderer, whom, if I understood his meaning, Jie declared to be the destroyer of Inis also •, but the name of the monster who perpetrated these •bloody acts still remains undivulged. Heaven will yet, I trust, disclose the villain, and deliver him up to the punishment .which crimes of so black a nature demand from outraged humanity."

While Velasco uttered these sentiments, which justice, as well as love for his deceased friend prompted, Baldivia regained composure. The dead he knew could tell no tales; his guilty secrets safely reposed in his own contaminated bosom; but anx



.





ious to learn every word that had fallen from the lips of don Henriques, he artfully questioned Velasco, whose hearing not being very clear, had not understood sufficiently to inform him that the marchioness had been recommended to the protection of the earl of Avondale by her dying father.

Baldivia being restored to composure, directed his confessor to have the body of Inis removed from the cave, and laid in consecrated ground; he also ordered masses for the repose of her soul, hoping by these acts of piety not only to deceive the world, but to speak peace to his own accusing conscience, from which neither wealth nor luxury could exempt him.

The earl of Avondale, in requesting Velasco to avoid the mention of his name, when relating to the marquis Baldivia the discovery of the cave in the forest, was not actuated by any fear of displeasing a man whose character he held in abhorrence, but he wished to avoid giving occasion of offence for what, on his part, might be deemed unwarrantable curiosity*





Avondale had, in more instances than one, remarked the fiery temper of Baldivia. He had seen it hurry him into acts of outrage and expressions of insult such as no honourable mind would bear, without resenting, in a way that might lead to fatal consequences. Avondale could not withdraw from the intimacy of the marquis, whom he despised, without deserting Rosa viva, whom he adored, and of whose happiness he considered himself, by promise, solemnly pledged to her departed parents, the guardian. To fulfil this sacred engagement, it was necessary he should remain always near the marchioness, and this could only be effected by remaining on terms with her husband, whose vices he wished should even be concealed from her knowledge.

The remains of the wretched Inis were removed from the cave, laid in consecrated ground, and received the rites of the church; but the part of the forest that contained the cave was abandoned by all; not a domestic of the castle, nor a peasant in the vicinity, would pass near it. Fear and superstition invented a thousand improbable tales, till at last it was reported the forest was haunted by a woman who appeared with naked feet, like a person who had just stepped from bed.





The pious Velasco attempted to reason them out of their idle fears, but he preached in vain, for the old woman, who on the disappearance of Inis had accused her of eloping with Lazarillo, now positively affirmed, that as she sat in her high-backed chair, composing herself to take a nap, the spirit of Inis whisked by her in the shape of a grey cat, and shrieked in her ears— "Repent having accused me with Lazarillo!"

This ridiculous story was j-eligieusly believed, and spread universal consternation through the household, who earnestly besought Velasco to exorcise the unquiet spirit, who, no doubt, would discover to him the murderer, who being punished, she would afterwards rest quietly in her grave.

The marvellous stories circulated in the castle had not yet reached the ear of the





marchioness; but to Baldivia they were mentioned by Velasco, as a subject of much vexation to him. The marquis ridiculed the gravity of his confessor, and to those domestics whose business it was to attend about his person, he spoke with unusual severity, at the same time treating their weak credulity with the utmost contempt; but though outwardly unconcerned at these reports, and affecting a total disbelief of supernatural appearances, his guilty mind did not escape the dreadful scourge inflicted by terror; with the decline of day his spirits declined also, and he swallowed large goblets of wine, to drown the terrible imaginations that haunted his uneasy pillow.

The castle of Deloricad at length became insupportable to him, for in every apartment his diseased fancy beheld the pale, bleeding shade of don Henriques. In change of scene he could alone hope relief from mental torture, and he gave orders for his superb palace at Potosi to bi prepared for his reception.

VOL- II. G





The affectionate, gentle Rosaviva would not oppose a measure likely to conduce to the establishment of her husband's health, though she silently regretted quitting the tranquil shades that had nursed her infancy; but above all, she lamented that her orisons could not be paid at the tomb of her parents—" But the temple of heaven," said Rosaviva, elevating her tearful eyes, "is all space; and the prayer breathed from a devoqt and confiding heart, though uttered in the remotest region of the world, will reach the throne of grace."

At this time two ships were freighting for England, and Baldivia not only wished, but expected the departure of the earl of Avondale; but, contrary to his hope, the earl declared his intention of remaining some time longer, in a country, with the antiquities and curiosities of which he designed to become intimate.

Politeness, as well as policy, constrained the marquis to express pleasure at what in reality displeased him; his near relationship to his wife not only rendered him an





Improper companion in his dissolute pursuits, but might perhaps justify him in becoming the censor of his actions.

The lovely marchioness, ever artless and ingenuous, warmly expressed her joy at the determination of the earl of Avondale; and turning, with an angelic smile, to her husband, she bade him recollect the promise he had made her of taking a voyage to England.

"It is more than probable your wishes may be indulged," replied Baldivia.

"Dearest Gonzalo," resumed Rosaviva, "you delight me—I shall be so happy to visit the country of my ancestors."

"You forget," replied the marquis," that your English ancestors disclaimed you, and that all your affection and gratitude are due to your Spanish ones."

"Ah, pardon me, Gonzalo!" returned she, affected by the severity with which. he spoke; "but my heart is English."

"I am sorry for it," replied the marquis; "for though I admire the wisdom of• the laws by which England is governed, I de





test the character of the people—cold, suspicious, and reserved."

"Surely you wrong them," said Rosaviva; "my angelic mother was an exception to this character; and in my cousin, the earl of Avondale, you behold"

"An Englishman!" replied Baldivia, coldly interrupting her.



CHAPTER III.



"In the days of wooing, though they should last for thrice seven years, the re:il disposition of a in.in would never be known; it is only when he becomes a husband that he .throws off the mask, and appears in his true character."



"In midnight gloom the tortuous Pings

Of deep remorse his bosom tear;

Then round his couch the vision hangs



Of shapes that breathe not mortal air."

The day appointed by the marquis Baldivia for quitting the domain of Deloricad had but newly dawned, when the sorrowing marchioness left her couch, and bent her solitary steps to the chapel that contained the monument of her parents, to pay her early devotions, to shed the tears of regret, and endeavour to reconcile her mind to the decision of the marquis, before they met at the morning repast, from whom she had already endured much ridicule, on account of what he termed her childish attachment to her paternal abode.





The knee of Rosaviva pressed the pale insensate marble; her blue eyes, glistening, with tears, were raised to heaven; she supplicated' for resignation to the loss of those beloved parents, who had formed her mind to piety and virtue—who had fondly indulged her every wish. She entreated that her wishes might yield submission to the will of her husband, and that she might be endued with power to fulfil all the duties of a wife.

As this prayer passed her lips, the head of Rosaviva sunk on the marble tomb— an agonizing pang swelled her bosom. Her fond partiality had pictured Gonzalo Baldivia as the most perfect and unerring of mortals; the wild caprices and intern





perate impatience of his temper had been artfully concealed before marriage, and during the life of her parents; and the fits of outrageous passion in which she had lately seen him indulge had terrified her beyond measure, who, in the conduct of her deceased father, even on the most trying occasions, had never witnessed unseemly passion—had never seen his countenance distorted by rage, or heard his lips utter execrations. Rosaviva wept bitterly as she remembered that even herself- had jiot been exempt from the violence of Baldivia's temper, which had been displayed on such trivial occasions as gave the gentle, timid Rosaviva distressing apprehensions for the felicity of her future life.

The striking of the castle clock warned the marchioness of the hour—" Farewell, my dear, my respected parents," said she, pressing her lips on the marble that contained their ashes; "a long farewell .f I quit my once-happy home, perhaps for ever! the t>rphan Rosaviva goes to mix with a world of strangers—oh, may your blessed shades, my parents, hover over and direct my conduct in the hours of severe trial that my foreboding heart tells me I am fated to endure!"





A sigh caught the ear of the marchioness. She raised her eyes, and beheld the earl of Avondale, who had also entered the chapel, to breathe a farewell orison at the monument of his departed friends— ** May the prayer of innocence and virtue," said he, "be accepted of Heaven! You have been weeping, I fear," continued he, gazing anxiously on her face; " I fear you are ill."

"My only complaint," replied the marchioness, endeavouring to smile, "is reluctance to quit Deloricad, where every spot on the domain reminds me of lost happiness, and every tree that waves its green head appears like a friend; but at Potosi, where I am an absolute stranger, what have I to expect but cheerless splendour! alas! I shall there, even more than here, feel the loss of my parents! My days will be spent in unmeaning ceremony; for surrounded by crowds, 1 shall not have a single friend to whom 1 can



r





speak of the happiness of my childhood, or lament my orphan state."

"Yes, there is one," said Avondale, "one friend, who will participate in all your joys and sorrows—on whose fidelity you may rely with implicit confidence. Does Rosaviva forget the command of her sainted mother?"

"No," replied the marchioness, "no, I have not forgotten—I can never forget her slightest command. She bade me consider you my brother."

"Most true," resumed Avondale; "and while I, your brother, live, you can never be destitute of a friend."

The venerable Velasco seemed equally reluctant with the marchioness to quit Deloricad. It was a peaceful and romantic seclusion, that suited his age, his habits, and his taste, which led him to prefer the beautiful scenes of nature to the fantastic adornments of art, however splendid and expensive. He sincerely lamented being compelled to leave the solemn shades of the ancient forest, in whose green recesses he had so often poured forth the prayer of





grateful praise to the munificent Creator. He regretted the converse of the simple, happy peasantry, and left them with earnest persuasions not to be negligent in their duties, moral or religious, when he was no longer near to exhort them to labour or prayer.

The morning repast was taken hastily; little was said by any of the party, who seemed each to be anxious to conceal their emotions from the other. The marchioness and Velasco were full of sorrow at . the thoughts of quitting a place endeared to them by so many tender recollections— the mind of the earl of Avondale was occupied in mournful presages; but hopeless as he was of happiness, all places to him were the same—he carried the burning arrow in his heart, and knew that the anguish would be equally severe at Potosi as at Deloricad;.

The marquis Baldivia busied himself in giving orders to his people, and hurrying their departure, till the carriages were drawn up before the gates.





The earl of Avondale and Velasco entered the first, proposing to hasten forward to prepare accommodations on the road for the marquis, who, still an invalid, could not travel with equal speed.

The domestics who were to remain at Deloricad wept aloud as they beheld the marchioness ascend the carriage, into which the marquis haughtily followed, without condescending to speak to any of them. Having bade his own attendants proceed, he drew up the glasses; then, in a tone of displeasure, addressing the afflicted Rosaviva, he said—" The domestics of your house, madam, coidd not bewail your departure with louder or bitterer grief, if you had been forcibly carried off, and made the slave of an Algerine corsair."

The marchioness, though hurt by the stern manner of the marquis, endeavoured to excuse the grief of her people, by pleading the strength of their attachment to her, with whom they had constantly resided from the hour of her birth.

* In their attachment to you, madam," replied he, proudly, "they forget the re





spect due to the marquis Baldivia, who is no barbarian."

It was evident the marquis was irritated; and his gentle wife, stifling the emotions of sorrow that heaved her bosom with sighs, and filled her eyes with tears, endeavoured to sooth and tranquillize him; but in vain she pointed out the sublimity of the mountains, that reared their purple heads to the clouds, or spoke of the rich fertility of the valleys through which they-travelled; not even the mention of his great possessions at Potosi produced a relaxation of the gloom that hung darkly on his brow, Baldivia continued regardless of the affectionate solicitude of the lovely being who exerted all her powers to amuse and restore him to good-humour. He answered her only with monosyllables, or peevish complaints of the uneasy motion of the carriage, and weariness of the way; till at length, perceiving all her efforts to dispel his chagrin unsuccessful, she leaned back in the carriage, and drawing her veil over her face, gave way to the anguish that swelled her heart. However unwilling to discover





errors in the man she loved, she could not help being wounded at the arrogance of Baldivia, which demanded the sacrifice of feeling, and selfishly expected the observance of respect towards his person should suppress the emotions of gratitude and sensibility in her retainers.

The marquis, closing his e3res, slept, or pretended to sleep, while Rosaviva's thoughts were busily contrasting the present morose behaviour of her husband with those delightful days in which he fondly swore, that blest with her society, he should never experience lassitude—" I too," said she, sighing at the recollection, "supposed it impossible I should ever wish the presence of a third person necessary to furnish agreeable topics of conversation; but, alas! either I or Gonzalo are sadly changed—would that-Avondale or Velasco made a third in our carriage! their conversation would perhaps render the journey less tedious and wearying to the marquis."

The wild and majestic scenery of the country through which they passed would have delighted the tasteful eye of Rosaviva, had her mind been happy; as it was, she was sensible only to the grief of having left her own domain, and her faithfullyattached domestics, and to the unkindness of her husband.





At noon they reached the foot of a mountain, where, near a cabin, shaded by a thick plantation of mulberry and chesnut trees, the earl of Avondale and Velasco had provided refreshments, which were spread in a romantic nook, between two hills, on a bank luxuriantly carpeted by the hand of nature with vivid green moss, thickly interwoven with lavender and other aromatic plants. On one side rose a pyramidical rock, from whose summit gurgled a stream of pure water, which fell sparkling into a bason, scooped at the base of the rock; and there dividing into numberless branches, preserved perpetual verdure and fertility round this romantic dell.

On the other side the rock was an excavation, remarkable for its astonishing echo. Here the earl of Avondale, who delighted





in the wonders and beauties of nature, had placed a mountain musician, who, as soon as the party were seated to their repast,, regaled their ears with a concert, which seemed the effect of enchantment.

The lovely, artless marchioness expressed surprise and admiration; and the marquis, resuming his good-humour, was eloquent in commendation of a spot where all the sublime and beautiful in nature seemed combined—" Here," said Baldivia, "the eye reposes on soft, pastoral scenes; the murmur of bees, the bleating of flocks, and the gurgling of water, all lead the reflective mind to meditate on the early ages of innocence and simplicity, when the wealth of man was estimated by the number of his children and the largeness of his flocks and herds, ere ambition and luxury had taught kim to be cruel and rapacious. Skirting yon wide-spread savannah," continued the marquis, pointing with his finger, "we behold the majestic mountains, whose shining entrails have been torn out by various adventurers, whom avarice has tempted to explore the





dangerous seas, that are dimly perceived in the distant horizon."

"Can this man be a libertine—a murderer?" thought the earl of Avondale, as he listened to Baldivia, who, with the taste of a painter and the eloquence of a poet, dwelt on the beauty and sublimity of the surrounding- scenery.

A sweet smile dimpled the glowing cheek of the marchioness, while her blue eyes sparkled with delight, to see Gonzalo resume what she believed his natural character, to which belonged, united with a graceful, affable demeanour, the extensive information that rendered him an instructive and pleasing companion to his own sex, and charmed her young heart, to consider him, in talent as well as person, the first of created beings.

The marquis, reverting to the rock's fantastic shape, which, at a short distance, in the obscurity of evening; might have been mistaken for the ruins of a tower, spoke of its astonishing echo.

Velasco acknowledged it admirable, but mentioned a grotto near Quito, the echo of which was superior—" In this grotto/ said the good father, "the lowest whisper is seven times repeated, with additional force, till the last sound is louder than Jhe report of a cannon."





The marchioness expressed a desire to see the interior of the rock, and the musician, whose tasteful management of the flute had procured them so much pleasure.

Velasco remained with the marquis, who was afraid of the humidity of the cavern; and the happiness of conducting his fair cousin devolved on the earl of Avondale; when they entered the cave, deep sunk in the bottom of the rock, she beheld, elevated on a high, craggy point, a beautiful peasant boy, whose loose white dress and redundant golden hair flowing over his shoulders, gave him the appearance of a spirit of the air rather than a being that the earth holds. The place on which he reclined, rather than sat, rose in what to the eye appeared inaccessible jutments, many feet from the bottom of the cave, which, by the hand of nature, was richly inlaid with granite and porphyry.





As Rosaviva surveyed the wonders- of this beautiful cave, and listened to the sweet harmony drawn from the flute, she could have fancied the simple peasant boy the genius of the rock, who, by the powerful charm of music, was commanding, from their secret haunts, his attendant sylphs.

Near the base of the rock Avondale found some elegant specimens of petrifaction; and the marchioness would gladly have remained to view the effect of torchlight on a spot so beautifully fantastic, for near the middle of the cave, where the water constantly oozed, wonderful petrifactions had been formed, which in figure exactly resembled trees, beneath whose wide-spreading pendulous branches the water stole away in a narrow stream, so translucent, that the various-coloured marbles of which the rock was formed, displayed their rich and many-tinted veins to the delighted eye.

Here the marchioness would have been pleased to linger much longer, for every moment presented new objects for admiration; but she knew the marquis had, pre





vious to quitting Deloricad, planned his different resting-places, and she readily relinquished her own wishes to his, who, not yet restored to strength, she feared to discompose, by hinting a contradiction to his will.

As the earl of Avondale listened to her amiable excuses for the impatience of her husband's temper, his wounded heart acknowledged her not only the loveliest but the most angelic-minded .of women— "And this gentle being," said he mentally, "fondly loves, and is wedded to, a monster;" for such, in spite of his specious behaviour, he considered the marquis Baldivia.

At the root of a tree, as they returned from the cave, Rosaviva beheld a cluster of large strawberries, whose vivid scarlet, peeping from between the broad green leaves, offered a dessert of which she knew Baldivia to be particularly fond; she hastily gathered the beautiful-looking berries; and so delighted was she at the idea of presenting an unexpected treat to the beloved of her heart, that she refused the offered assistance of Avondale to gather them; has





tening forward with the tempting fruit, she placed them before her husband, saying—" How fortunate I consider myself in meeting with the very fruit you were wishing for, my dear Gonzalo! I have gathered them for you with my own hand, and am only sorry I could find no more."

Baldivia expressed his gratitude for her attention, admired the size and beauty of the fruit, and then inquired how many she had herself eaten of the strawberries?

Avondale, who had heard her affectionate remarks while gathering them, threw on him a look of contempt, at what he considered a selfish and gross question; but with artless sweetness the marchioness answered—" I gathered them for you, Gonzalo, because I knew you wished for strawberries this morning. Believe me, I thought not of myself."

"Come, Rosaviva, this is being too disinterested," replied the marquis, with increasing earnestness, at the same time fixing his penetrating glance on her face; "confess you indulged your own appetite before vou remembered me."





The indignant Avondale could bear no more, and he hastened from what he considered the interrogations of an absolute glutton, to join Velasco, who was advancing towards the marquis.

Rosaviva felt wounded; but endeavouring to smile, she answered eagerly—" No indeed, my love; I was so pleased when I saw the fruit, I thought only of indulging the wish I had so recently heard you express."

"What!" said Baldivia, turning theN strawberries about, "have you not tasted one?" •

"No, not one," replied Rosaviva, tears swelling in her eyes at being so closely examined on so trifling a matter.

"Heaven is gracious and merciful!" "said Baldivia, pressing her passionately to his heart.

Velasco had now reached the bant, and beheld the fruit, and the agitation of Rosaviva, who felt considerable alarm at the exclamation of the marquis, and at the manner in which he folded her in his arms.

"Who," said the monk, in a voice of





^larm, "gathered this fatal poison? Heaven in its grace forbid that any one present sliould have tasted the deadly mildecia!"

The earl of Avondale now clearly understood the drift of Baldivia's inquiries, and felt ashamed of his own suspicion, that had attributed the earnest questioning of the marquis to the mean apprehension that any of the fruit had escaped himself.

The marchioness grew pale at the exclamations of Velasco—" Merciful Providence!" said she, "" have I been gathering poison to present to my husband! oh, beloved Gonzalo! pardon my "ignorance,

she would have added, when overcome by strong emotion, she fainted. When restored to sense, she thanked Heaven in tearful gratitude that she had been spared the misery of administering poison to him whose life was infinitely dearer to her than her own.

The marquis had no reason for wishing the death of his wife; he was therefore sincerely glad to find she had not eaten of the deadly mildecia; and being touched by the affection she displayed in not wishing to deprive him of a single berry, he exerted those tender and persuasive arts by which he had, even in childhood, won her love, and was soon successful in restoring her to composure.





"One of these beautiful scarlet berries," said he, addressing the earl of Avondale, "contains a sufficiency of poison to intro* duce into the strongest frame a fever, attended with convulsive shudderings, to the violence of which the severest ague is not to be compared. In a few hours the throat and tongue are covered with ulcers, and swell to a degree that prevents the admission of any antidote, if such could be found, which as yet I have never heard of, and in twelve hours the miserable victim dies in agonies unspeakable."

"And such," said the marchioness, clasping the hand of her husband, " such was the horrible fate my ignorance offered you, dearest Gonzalo!"

"And from such horrible fate," replied





Baldivia, kissing her white forehead, "has Heaven miraculously preserved my Rosaviva."

The pious Velasco, though differing in faith from the marchioness, was sensible of her virtues. He had witnessed her amiable disposition from infancy, and loving her for her own sake, as well as that of her deceased father, he was much affected by her narrow escape from a fearful and agonizing death. The good monk, at the same time, was much pleased with the marquis, who, with unusual piety, had given the praise to Heaven for the preservation of his wife.

Rosaviva thought not of herself—she regarded the beautiful berries with horror, and fervently thanked the watchful care of Providence, that had preserved her from witnessing the effect of poison on her husband.

Avondale beheld the marquis again saved from a violent death; and he also rejoiced, because he knew, had he died by the hand of Rosaviva, innocence of intention would havet failed to console her—





she would have condemned herself as guilty, though all the world acquitted her of crime; in his idea, therefore, it was far better he should live, than by his death devote the angelic Rosaviva to cureless wretchedness and unavailing woe.

During the rest of their journey the marquis shook off the gloom that had rendered him morose and abstracted. He pointed out to the marchioness the aspiring mountain of Potosi, hiding its conical head in the clouds; and remembering his own consequence in the eyes of the people among whom he was going to reside, a smile of self-gratulation played on his ripe lip, and gave a proud satisfaction to his heart, that communicated cheerfulness and animation to his manners and conversation. He was also pleased with the idea of displaying his wealth to the earl of Avondale, who, though a nobleman of distinguished rank and large possessions, could not, in his own country, reside in such a style of luxurious magnificence, or be attended by kneeling slaves, whose very lives depended on his nod.





Such were the vain and ostentatious reflections of the marquis Baldivia, that soothed his pride, calmed his impatience of fatigue, and rendered him again the fascinating being who, as he pleased," won all hearts with softness."

On approaching Potosi, the feelings of the earl of Avondale were wounded by the remembrance of the fatal evening, when the marriage of Rosaviva was announced to him. The same brilliant illuminations, the same flowery colonnades and arches, on every side met his view. The earl sighed heavily, and would have shut out such distressing mementoes by closing his eyes; but Velasco, gratified by so splendid a spectacle, added to his anguish by pointing out to him the names of Gonzalo and Rosaviva, everywhere conspicuous amid the magnificent display of different-coloured lights.

A triumphal car, blazing with gold, lined with rose-coloured velvet, and drawn by six white Arabian horses, whose trappings were velvet, gold, and diamonds,

Vol. it H





waited to convey the marquis and his fair bride to his palace.

The streets were strewed with flowers; r"i i rr

groups ot virgins, habited in white transparent robes, -their glossy tresses confined by garlands of roses, carried golden vases in, their hands, from which they scattered on the populace the most costly perfumes, while music, and the firing of cannons, spoke aloud the spirit of rejoicing.

"The heart of the marchioness," said Velasco, "will be gratefully affected by this testimony of his people's respect for their lord."

"I have a distracting headache," replied the earl, endeavouring to dismiise his feelings, "and shall go immediately to the house which I have had prepared for ray reception/ My indisposition must plead my excuse for not complimenting the mar. quis on his arrival, as I really find it necessary to seek immediate repose."

Yelasco kindly felt'Ids pulse, and commended his intention of going to rest, observing the dryness of his palm and fulness of his pulse indicated fever—" the





progress of which," said the good monk, "I will stop, by mixing you up a medicine, which you must take without delay."

Avondale promised to attend to. the prescription ; • but his heart told him, that while memory remained, his pulses would never cease to throb for Rosaviva—never cease to regret that cruel fate had given her to a wretch unworthy the possession of such transcendent virtue and loveliness.

The pride of Baldivia was gratified by his reception at Potosi, where his arrival was celebrated with a pomp and splendour hitherto unknown even in that region of wealth. . t

The palace of the marquis was built of the finest marble; its furniture and adornments consisted of the rare and costly materials produced by every quarter of the globe, on which genius, taste, and art, had exhausted their richest inventions.

Here, as at Lima, Baldivia was surrounded by adulative crowds, for report having widely circulated his marriage with a lady of exquisite beauty, endowed with wealth and accomplishments far superior to the females of Peru, his palace was for many months thronged with guests.





The arrogant-minded Baldivia was gratified by the admiration and envy his choice excited; and the homage he saw his friends ambitious to pay his beautiful wife rekindled, for awhile, in his capricious and inconstant bosom, the flame which uninterrupted possession had nearly extinguished.

Delighted at the return of his affection, and the perfect restoration of his health, Rosaviva ceased to regret the pleasant shades of her native Deloricad, as its abandonment seemed to revive the tenderness of her husband, which she, with uncomplaining anguish, had believed for ever lost in the chill of apathy.

But a very few months of love and happiness were all the severity of fate allotted the young and beautiful marchioness Baldivia; for when curiosity was satisfied, and a constant residence at Potosi had rendered her beauty familiar to the eyes of the people, the marquis found that many days





must unavoidably be passed without company. It was now he became acquainted with the character of his wife; but this knowledge awakened neither esteem nor admiration in his callous bosom. Her virtues displeased him, for they were a continual reproach to his depravity. He had always thought with rage and contempt on the law that fettered the lords of creation to one woman—" Rosaviva's person," said he, "is not destitute of charms, but she is my wife, and that very remembrance creates indifference; she is submissive also, and gentle, and of course insipid."

The sylphic figure and transparent complexion of the marchioness no longer excited passion; she was his wife; and possession produced satiety. The fickle heart of Baldivia anxiously throbbed for novelty.

The hours that the forms of life com pelled him to pass in the society of the marchioness appeared tedious and uninteresting. The superior attainments of Rosaviva—her exalted understanding—her genius and accomplishments, had no longer charms for his gross mind; and all that now claimed his respect, and restrained him in his dissolute pursuits, was the wealth secured to herself by the will of her father, and the presence of the earl of Avondale, whose near affinity to the marchioness might make him bold in her quarrel.





The affairs of the earl, however, demanded his presence in England; and he hoped, in the course of a few months, to get entirely rid of a person whom he regarded as an inquisitive observer and censor of his actions, of which he wished no investigation to be made.

The marchioness, even from childhood, had desired to visit England. Her mother had inculcated in her young mind a love for that country, and awakened her curiosity by repeated descriptions and explanations of the advantages it possessed, though only a small island, over all other nations.

The period of his destined embarkation having been mentioned by the earl of Avondale, Rosaviva reminded her husband of the promise he had made her, before and after marriage, of taking a voyage to England; but the capricious marquis had altered his former determination; and though, in the presence of his. own and her deceased parents, he had pledged his honour to pay the most sacred deference to the wishes of her he was then soliciting to become his wife, he now affected to ridicule the weakness that could have put confidence in promises made under such circumstances; without even attempting to apologize or soften his refusal, he at once informed the astonished Rosaviva that he had changed his mind.





The marchioness felt grieved and mortified. She had, before this unqualified avowal, fancied the ardour of his love was chilled—she had also painfully discovered that his character was by no means so perfect as she had fondly believed; but this caprice, so opposite to her wishes and his former tender professions, gave her at once the afflictive conviction, that in the mutable bosom of man love is but a shortlived passion—that self-gratification ever





trampled on humanity, and made him forgetful of truth and honour.

Tears trembled in the mild blue eyes of Rbsaviva, as she timidly replied to his rudely-expressed, " I have changed my mind"—" May I beg to know what has altered your former intention, and necessitated you, unwillingly I trust, to break the promise you have so often repeated to me?"

"Affairs of importance," answered the marquis; " affairs which would weary you to hear explained, for women are only regardful of their pleasures."

The marchioness blushed, though she did not deserve his reproach —" Our voyage to England then," said she

K Must unavoidably be postponed," interrupted the marquis, "for the present year."

"And we remain here?" resumed Rosaviva; "is that your intention?"

"I," replied Baldivia, with chilling indifference, " I have affairs of the utmost importance, that demand my actual presence here at Potosi; but if you object— if you have more pleasurable schemes in contemplation—if you believe you can be happier in England—if you prefer—"





"No," interrupted the marchioness, with difficulty restraining her tears, "no, dearest Gonzalo; Heaven is my witness! I prefer that country where I shall continually reside with you. I confess I did hope you would remember you promised we should sail for England with the first ships."

"It is impossible," said the marquis, in the same cold manner; "quite impossible for me to take the voyage; but, as I before observed, if you wish"

"My affection for you," replied Rosaviva, "is far more powerful than the wish 1 have so fondly cherished of visiting England."

As she spoke she held out her hand to Baldivia, with the smile of an angel, her eyes moist with the mingled drops of regret and tenderness.

The marquis politely raised her hand to





his lips, but no fond pressure accompanied his cold kiss; and the pulses that glowingly throbbed round the heart of Rosaviva, as she declared her preference of remaining with him, grew chill and faint, as negligently letting her band drop, he answered, at the same time withdrawing from the apartment—" You are at liberty to act in the way most consonant with your own ease and pleasure. I have resolved to be perfect master of my own time and actions, and am too liberal-minded to form the remotest desire of putting constraint on yours; and I again repeat, if your wishes point to England"

"And could you," asked the afflicted Hosaviva, "could you, Gonzalo, indeed be happy in my absence? should you not be'miserable during our separation?"

A smile, almost contemptuous, curled the lip of the marquis, who, as he passed from her presence, replied—" I beg, madam, nay, I insist, that no tender consideration for my feelings may induce you;to forego your more pleasurable intentions."

Rosaviva sat for some moments after





the marquis quitted the apartment in a state of absolute inanity; but when her reasoning faculties returned, she wept bitterly the dereliction of a heart which she had hoped, while it beat with life, would, have known no will, no wish, but hers alone—" Gonzalo no longer loves me," said she, in tones of piercing sorrow; "the impulses of his mind are no longer inspired by me; his determinations are formed without any consideration for my peace— without even a wish for my approval. Alas! and is this matrimony—is this the happiness that was to terminate but with our lives? oh Gonzalo, how art thou changed! wretched Kosaviva, what a fateis thine! My mother, my sainted mother!" continued she, while tears fell in showers on her clasped hands, " too late for my repose, I reflect on the advice yon gave me, to investigate the mind of Baldivia before I bound myself to him by ties which death alone could dissolve. Woe is me! blinded by love, I could discover no errors—to me he was all perfection !*

After some moments of mental agony had elapsed, Itosaviva began to reflect* that the dispositions of men, their natures, were different from those of women; more ardent, bnt far less sincere. She believed the generality of men were, like the marquis, capricious and inconstant. She remembered that among the circle of her acquaintance, she had seen husbands extremely polite,, but very far from affectionate, who, no doubt, when lovers, had, like the marquis, been prodigal of professions, and, Tike him also, little observant of the vows pledged under the influence of passion, which men, it seems, consider 44 violent and void."





"Matrimony, then," said the marchioness, with a sorrowing sigh, " matrimony damps the fervours of love, satiety succeeds to transport, and cold civility take* place of rapturous profession; the vision of happiness dissolves — alas! how transient its endurance! but pride forbids complaint; though he is changed—though he forgets vows pledged in hours of fand entreaty, when, assuming every fascinating perfection, he wooed me to be his, never





let me forget the duties of a wife; let me, if possible, hide his errors even from myself, but most of all from the earl of Avondale! Oh, never let him discover that the wretched Rosaviva mourns the neglect of her husband—that she weeps his lost affection! Oh, never let bim suspect that I regret the hour that made me the wife of Gonzalo Baldivia—never let him learn the romance of love has found a period!"

The marquis took an early opportunity of mentioning the utter impossibility of taking a voyage to England that year; at the same time observing, that he regretted the disappointment, because the marchioness seemed to have set her heart on erointj to Europe.

Rosaviva remained silent.

The marquis perceiving that no one replied, continued to say—" Though really I see no reason why my not being able to take the voyage should prevent the marchioness, who, under your protection," addressing the earl, "who are her near relation, might safely indulge her wish."

"A young and beautiful woman," re





plied Avondale, "is nowhere so safe as under the protection of her husband. The marchioness could not make a voyage, under such circumstances, without incurring great injury to her reputation—injury that would entirely exclude her from those devoted circles where I should wish my relation to move."

"I thought," said Baldivia sarcastically, "the people of your nation had been more favourable to the fair sex."

"The people of my nation, marquis," replied Avondale, "pity the errors of the fair sex, but do not afford them countenance."

"It is not my intention," said the marchioness, " to incur their censure. Whatever are my wishes respecting England, I will not indulge them at the expence of propriety; the wealth of the world would not bribe me to take such a voyage without my husband."

Baldivia bit his lip, and turned towards an open lattice to hide his vexation.

"I could not bear," resumed the marchioness, "to have it thought by the ladies of England, that I had voluntarily separated myself from my husband for such a length of time."





"I am happy to find sueh are your sentiments," replied Avondale, "because you will experience no sort of disappointment in learning that I received dispatches this morning from England, which have fixed me in the determination of remaining in this country another year; by that time perhaps the marquis may so arrange his affairs, that, he will be able to take the voyage with you."

Ealdivia heard this declaration with rage and disappointment; but policy obliged him to smooth his brow, and say it would afford him much pleasure to indulge the wish of the marchioness, as well as to gratify his own ardent curiosity.

"It is my intention," resumed the earl, "to gather all the information I can respecting the character, customs, and religious ceremonies of the Peruvians—a people whose oppressions have much affected and interested my feelings; and in this task I have engaged the services of





father Velasco, that when I return to England, I may convince my countrymen that the whole period of my absence has not been passed in absolute inaction."

Itosaviva heard the earl's intention of remaining in Peru with a pleasure, the expression of which offended the marquis, who hoped he would have pursued his original designation, and taken the marchioness with him, of whom he was weary, and whose undeviating virtue he fancied laid a restraint on the manners of her female acquaintance, whose principles he had reason to believe were not naturally so reserved.

The mind, temper, and pursuits of the earl of Avondale and the marquis Baldivia were so expressly different, that Baldivia every hour expected to incur the censure of the young cynic, for such he considered him, though he used every art, and took every precaution, to conceal from him as much as possible the intrigues he was constantly engaged in. Considering the earl as little differing from a spy, he remarked the joy of the marchioness, at the putting





off his voyage to England, with a displeasure he could scarcely conceal; and notwithstanding the warm friendship he affected towards him, the virtues conspicuous in the earl of Avondale rendered him, in the heart of Gonzalo Baldivia, an ohject of dislike, nearly amounting to hatred.

Hitherto the innocent Rosaviva had borne the freezing politeness and cold respect of Baldivia with uncomplaining gentleness and patient sweetness; for though grieved and wounded by his indifference, she consoled herself with the belief, that if insensible to her affection, his own was not lavished on another object; but the calm produced by this opinion was of short duration, and a tempest was at hand, whose impetuous course swept away every hope of future happiness with Baldivia; another object had taken possession of Gonzalo's fancy; and his deeply-wounded wife had the misery to see him yield himself to this new passion, without having delicacy enough to endeavour at concealing it from her observation, except when in the presence of the earl of Avondale, before wlunn





he kept a careful guard on his looks, his words, and actions.

Rosaviva had been little more than a year a wife, and in the rich bloom of early youth she beheld herself forsaken—treated with a negligence almost amounting to contempt—for an ignorant, fantastic, swarthy Portuguese, the wife of a grandee, of whom the marquis professed himself the friend; a woman whose only attraction seemed to arise from consummate pride and unbounded vanity. This vanity for some time was her preservation, for it made her receive the adulative homage offered by the marquis as only the just tribute paid to her exalted charms, while her haughty deportment, passing iii his eyes for inflexible virtue, made him eager and solicitous to subdue what he believed impregnable; at length, however, the proud Elvira grew weary of denying, and having once overstepped the boundaries of chastity, she grew as regardless of public opinion and censure as the marquis, who having contrived to'have her husband removed for a. time to Quito, she gave herself up, with





out regarding the eternal sacrifice of her fame, to a criminal intercourse.

To the indulgence of this intrigue Baldivia devoted not only whole days, but many nights, which were passed by the marchioness in tears and sleepless wretchedness.

When in company, the lovely Rosaviva compelled her face to wear a gaiety foreign to her heart; and though in the presence of the earl of Avondale, Baldivia constrained himself to behave with respect and propriety to his injured wife, yet the earl was not deceived by his specious conduct; his scandalous amour was publicly talked of at Potosi, and his penetration discovered that the smiles of ltosaviva were only efforts at cheerfulness, to which her bosom was a stranger; and in the suavity and politeness of the marquis he read the insulting coldness of, his feelings towards a woman he had once affected to adore.

The heart of Avondale bled for the grief which he knew the marchioness must endure, by the cruel abandonment of her profligate husband; and while with a sincere



f





antl pure regard he gazed on her beautiful and interesting countenance, and remembered her virtues, her graces, and her talents, he was astonished at the weak infatuation, the gross depravity of her husband, who could desert the chaste embrace of elegance and loveliness, the pure bosom of modesty and innocence, to riot in the licentious arms of vice, and far, very far inferior charms. It was on this occasion that it became evident to the afflicted Avondale, that

"Lust, though to a radiant angel liuk'd.

Will sate itself in a celestial bed,

And feed on garbage."



As yet the deeply-injured, suffering Ko>saviva had uttered no complaint; she lived in magnificence, was attended by a numerous train of obsequious domestics and slaves; but Gonzalo Baldivia, to whom the affections of her youthful heart were devoted—he, insensible to her beauty and worth, profusely lavished on vice and ignorance the love she, with all her accomplishments of person and mind, was unable to retain. .





"The marchioness spent the weary hours of night in tears and prayers, and by day assumed an appearance of cheerful content, which, though it deceived the world, gave to the heart of Avondale indescribable pangs; he remembered the prophetic spirit with which lady Selina had spoken of the fickleness of Baldivia's disposition—" The hour her amiable parent foresaw," said Avondale, "has arrived, and the gentle, suffering Rosaviva has no bosom to repose her sorrows on."

The earl forbore to increase her anguish, by seeming to remark the continued absences of her husband; he had also some reason to believe that his presence had an influence on the conduct of the marquis towards his wife, who was restrained in his brutal career by the knowledge that he, in -quality of her guardian, could step in to preserve her from personal insult and outrage—" The avenging arm of offended Heaven," said the earl, "will punish this monster's crimes. Be patient, my indignant soul! the exterminating blow will





fall, and happiness will yet smile on Hosaviva."

The good Velasco, shocked beyond measure at the dissolute conduct of the marquis, took upon himself to remonstrate; but in vain were his representations and admonitions; Baldivia ridiculed his counsels, and bade him preserve his lectures till ace save him leisure to listen to them.

Velasco retired from his apartment with grief, to pray that Heaven would make him sensible of the treasure he enjoyed in the lovely Rosaviva.

A thousand extravagances had been committed by the marquis Baldivia—glaring evidences of the unbounded dominion the profligate Elvira held over his mind. Entirely forgetful of her absent husband, her rank in life, and the reputation which even the most abandoned resign with regret, her triumph over the injured ltosaviva was incomplete, while his visits to her were made in secret; the beauty of the marchioness had excited her envy—her virtues offended her—and to





draw from her the husband she adored, was the first wish of her soul; but unless the public eye beheld the subjugation of the infatuated marquis, the conviction her own mind felt, of having made his wife miserable, was not sufficient.

Elvira had witnessed the triumphal entry of Baldivia and his bride into Potosi, and "with every art of wilful woman labouring for her purpose," she caressed, persuaded, and entreated, till Baldivia weakly consented to drive her through the chief streets and squares in the same open car, drawn by the Arabian horses.

A moment's reflection made him aware of the censure he should incur by this open violation of propriety; and he would have withdrawn his incautious promise, or deferred the exhibition of his infidelity to a future day; but the tears, frowns, and blandishments of'fhe sorceress prevailed, and his perpetual banishment from her sight Was made the* condition of his breach of promise. • •

On the appointed morning, Elvira bound the long tresses of her jetty hair





with fillets of diamonds, and voluptuously arrayed her person in a transparent robe of azure, through which the proud swell of her exulting bosom was plainly discerned; a richly-embroidered veil, artfully disposed, hung over half her face, not designed to conceal, but to add brilliancy to her dark eyes, which she taught to languish with a tender expression of sensibility to which her heart was a stranger.

Thus prepared, and expecting to meet public admiration, the marquis assisted her to mount the gold-emblazoned car, before which her own slaves strewed flowers, while others, from golden censers, scattered delicious and costly perfumes on the air; but as the glittering car rolled along, the restless eyes of Elvira beheld on every countenance disgust and displeasure; the females turned their backs in contempt, and the men shook their heads in scorn of the disgraceful procession—instead of the applauding shouts that rent the air when the lovely Rosaviva, covered with the blushes of modesty, graced his side, hisses and murmurs of disapprobation sounded





on the ear of the mortified Baldivia, who himself felt disgust at the effrontery of his undaunted companion, who repaid the contempt of the populace with glances of indignant scorn.

Popular applause was dear to the pride of the marquis Baldivia; and the dissembled tenderness and studied smiles of the Circe who sat beside him did not compensate for its loss. In an instant his spellbound senses were disenchanted—the vehement passion he had felt for her was extinguished—his altered eye beheld her as a demon who was tempting him to disgrace, and precipitating him to ruin; while to complete his utter detestation, at a short distance he saw the marchioness, like an angel of light, assisting Velasco to lead an old, white-headed, blind man to a seat, shaded by orange and myrtle trees. The earl of Avondale followed, leading a beautiful rosy boy, who held out his dimpled hands to Rosaviva, who having seated the old man, stooped to caress him.

At the sound of approaching wheels

VOL. II. I





the interesting group raised their eyes, and the malignant mind of Elvira was gratified at hearing a loud shriek escape the •lips of the marchioness, who, overcome by this public display of her husband's infidelity, sunk pale and fainting in the arms of the afflicted Velasco. But the malicious triumph of Elvira was of short duration, lor letting fall the purple reins on the backs •of the panting horses, Baldivia leaped from his elevated seat, and casting himself at the feet of Rosaviva, buried his face in her robe, exclaiming, in a voice of agitation—" Rosaviva! dear injured excellence! forgive your erring but repentant husband!"

But insensible alike to her own heartrending grief and his self-accusation, she was borne to the palace; and to the additional mortification and remorse of the marquis, in a few hours brought into the world a dead male child.

During her confinement Rosaviva resolved to separate herself from her libertine husband, and retire to the Castle Deloricad, where if she should fail to regain hap





piness, she should escape the agony and insult of beholding his licentious pursuits; but this intention was strongly opposed by the worthy Velasco, who entertained the hope that the transcendent virtues of the marchioness would reclaim her husband.

The penitence of the marquis appeared so sincere—his errors were so openly acknowledged and so deeply lamented, that even the earl of Avondale, knowing tlje love the marchioness still cherished for him, wished their reconciliation. Another motive also operated on the mind of the earl—he knew, if the marchioness retired to Deloricad, delicacy, and a regard for public opinion, would exclude him from her intimacy. To gaze on her fair form *—to listen to her harmonious voice, was all the happiness that fate allowed him. He knew that Rosaviva would be miserable separated from Baklivia—he felt that his little all of felicity consisted in beholding her—and he wished their reconciliation. Nor was it long before the gentle Rosa.'.' .' i.' -12.





viva yielded to the professions of her husband, and the persuasions of her friends; with angelic sweetness she pronounced his pardon, and again Baldivia renewed his vows of faith and eternal constancy.

To find herself publicly deserted by Baldivia, at the moment too when she hoped to torture with jealousy his innocent wife, was too much indignity for the fiendlike spirit of Elvira to brook. Casting on the prostrate Baldivia a glance of fury, she snatched up the floating reins, her hands trembling with rage and disappointment', but unable to govern the impatient steeds, who disdained the curb of so feeble a guide, they dashed forward with a velocity that whirled her brain. In vain her breathless slaves attempted to arrest their speed; the animals, tearing up the earth, flew on, till, giddy and nerveless, the haughty Elvira was hurled to the earth; while the horses, free from restraint, dash~ ed the magnificent car to pieces, as if revengeful of the pollution it had received from the depraved Elvira, who, bruised and bleeding, with one arm broken, was carried by her terrified slaves to that home, which in the morning she had left exulting in the homage of the marquis Baldivia, and planning a triumph over his amiable wife.





The disastrous accident of Elvira was heard by the marchioness with commiseration, who forgave her own injuries, and wished her reformation; while the unfeeling Baldivia, unmoved at the recital of her sufferings, only lamented the demolition of his magnificent car, which had been constructed and ornamented after an antique model, by an artist who had long since departed for Europe.

For some weeks the marquis appeared to devote himself to the society of his wife, and that circle of rational friends which her graces and accomplishments had drawn round her; and here Baldivia displayed those talents and attainments which had so long been sunk in debasing sensuality^

The mind of Avondale contemplated his superior talents with astonishment, for when he spoke,





"The air, a eharter'd libertine, was hush'd,

To steal his sweet and Uonied sentences;"



and while he viewed the rare combination of personal beauty and intellectual endowments possessed by the marquis, he ceased to wonder at the adoration of his wife— "He is formed," said the earl, "to enslave the affections of woman. The majesty of his height, the graceful flexibility of his limbs, the lustre of his eye, and, above all, his eloquence, captivate the eye and senses. In the splendour of his talents even I forget my suspicions, and shrink from believing him a murderer?

Among the intimate friends of the marchioness was the widow of an officer of high rank, whose sister, a lively Spanish coquette, fancied herself in love with the earl of Avondale. Donna Violante, previous to her quitting Valencia, had engaged herself to a nobleman, who fell in love with her in his visits to his sister, at the convent where they Avere both educated; but though really intending to marry don Carlos, Violante saw no reason why she should not amuse herself with the handsome Englishman during the period of their separation, which was to continue till the affairs of her widowed sister allowed her return to Spain.





Donna Violante had a pretty voice, and played the guitar with infinite taste; hut her love canzonets were lost on him to whom they were addressed, for the heart of Avondale, though utterly destitute of hope, was devotedly and irrevocably attached; and while Violante warbled in thrilling strains the miseries of an unfortunate passion, he sighed and thought of Rosaviva.

Meantime Elvira had quitted her bed, to which her bruises had for some time confined her, her person retaining little mark of injury, but her soul maddening with rage, jealousy, and hate. The perfidious Baldivia had deserted her, nor had once made inquiry after her since the moment of his abandonment. To rush into his palace, and stab the deceitful monster in the arms of his wife, was a scheme that for many days agitated her brain; but the difficulty of gaining access to his presence rendered this mode of revenge impracticable. To convey him a poison that should lurk insidiously in his blood, and cause him to linger months in torture, next presented itself to her malignant mind; but this could only be effected by agency, and to brave the destroyer of her virtue and fame in person—to revenge her injuries with her own hand, was what the vindictive Elvira panted to achieve.





In various disguises, restless and watchful, she wandered about Potosi, eager to seize an opportunity of vengeance. Chance directed her steps to the retired spot where she had seen the marchioness Baldivia lead the blind man to the seat beneath the orange and myrtle trees, on the fatal, never-to-be-forgotten day, when she experienced the scorn and desertion of the villain Baldivia. Resentment almost frenzying her brain, she threw herself on the seat, commanding her attendant slave to wait at a distance.

In a short time the blind man was led forth by a young woman of pale but interesting countenance, at whose side gam





boiled the rosy, smiling infant Elvira had seen in the arms of the earl of Avondale. Entering into discourse with the old man, she learned that the young woman was his daughter, and, unhappily, a- widow—a lingering sickness having carried off-her hus* band before the birth of her- son.

The young woman pressed a kiss on the cheek of her child, while a tear fell to the memory of its buried father.

"1," continued the. old man," have been a soldier in my youth; but being struck blind by lightning, I became a burthen on the love of my children."

The young woman affectionately clasped his neck, and declared she was never so happy as when'attending him.

The old man returned her embrace, and continued-*—" The charity of the-beautiful marchioness Baklivia found us in the hour' of poverty and affliction."

"She is an angel, father," said the young: woman.

"May the Ruler; of the universe blessher,and multiply her comforts!" resumed





the old man, elevating his sightless orbs to heaven.

"And the generous Englishman her relation also," said the young woman.

"Ay, may Heaven bless him, and lengthen his days!" continued the blind man. "As soon as my little grandson Oranzo can speak, he shall learn to pray for them."

"And for the marquis too, father," rejoined the young woman; "you know he is quite reclaimed now; he has left off his bad courses, and never goes near the wicked woman who was near costing the virtuous marchioness her life."

Elvira gnashed her teeth with rage, and inwardly cursed the virtue she abhorred.

"But the marquis is an altered man," continued the young woman; "and Lazarillo told me this very morning, that his lord mortally hate6 to hear even the name of the vile wretch whose arts inveigled him from his beautiful wife."

"He shall feel my vengeance," murmured Elvira, as the old man replied— '' And truly he does hot hate her without





sufficient reason; for as the marquis was caressing our rosy Oranzo, I heard him sigh deeply, and say, * If it had not been for my own cursed folly, and the arts of that witch, Elvira, 1 also might have been the happy father of a ^.niling boy."

"May his race be extinct!" thought Elvira, scarcely able to contain the fury that inflamed her bosom.

"But the marquis and his lady are stilr very young," resumed the garrulous old man; "and Heaven, I trust, will bless them with many children."

"Amen !"' responded the young woman, with fervency, " that is a very good prayer. I hope they will have two children, at least—a girl to resemble the marchioness m beauty and goodness, and a boy"

Her prayer was interrupted by the little Oranzo, who, in catching at a butterfly, fell on the turf; but her prayer was finished in the mind of Elvira, who wished, if the marchioness had a son, it might be the heir of all Baldivia's vices*

Placing a piece of gold in the hand of the child, she quitted the seat, beckoned her slave, and withdrew, leaving the honest peasants in admiration of her generosity.





Altering her disguise, she every day frequented the same spot, in the hope of meeting Baldivia; but being constantly defeated in her projected revenge, she began to fancy that in spite of all her caution, she was known, and purposely avoided. At this time, too, she was on the eve of departing from Potosi, her husband having informed her, that the air of Quito agreeing perfectly with his health, he determined to remain there, and commanded her to repair to him immediately.

Elvira was not sorry to depart from Potosi, where she found herself shunned, and knew her conduct was universally condemned; but to go without revenge on Baldivia tortured her to madness. To throw him off his guard, she caused her slaves to send off her most valuable effects, and to report that she was gone to join her husband at Quito; but this stratagem also proved unsuccessful, and she could no longer put offher departure, when, through





a favourite slave, she learned that the marquis Baldivia, the earl of Avondale, Velasco, and another monk, were going the following day to examine the ruins of a temple of the sun, situated a few leagues distant from Potosi.

Possessed of this intelligence, Elvira tinged her skin of the deep colour of the native Peruvians, and disguised her person in male habiliments; then arranging all things for her final departure from Potosi, she took with her the slave on whose fidelity she knew she could depend, .and at the dawn of morning sought the ruined temple, that before the arrival of the marquis and his party, she might acquaint herself with every winding avenue, secret recess, and deep-sunk vault, in the superb ruin, that, still grand in desolation, reared its mutilated arches, and half-demolished pillars, on a beautiful plain, skirted on one side by a majestic forest, and on the other by the waves of a broad lake, which the ships of the Spaniards had navigated, when they first discovered the devoted country.





The sun was high in the heavens before the marquis Baldivia and his party appeared; the watchful slave of Elvira first discovered a gilded yacht on the lake, which he pointed out to his mistress; her flashing eye soon discovered Baldivia, who was the first to spring on shore. Having previously instructed her slave, she retired with him into the interior of the temple, and, prostrating herself before the broken altar,, remained till the entrance of the party.

The sight of Peruvians in the very temple where they had formerly worshipped, appeared to the enthusiastic Avondale a touching circumstance; and as Elvira rose from her prostration, he thought her figure,, seen through the broken pillars, added considerable effect to the picturesque beauty of the scene.

Entering into conversation with the feigned Peruvians, he questioned them of their religious ceremonies, and obtained what he believed much genuine information. At length the earl drew forth his pencils, and began to sketch the east side of the temple. The monks were disputing





respecting the first invasion of the Spaniards. The marquis Baldivia made inquiries respecting the secret avenues that led to the apartments once occupied by the virgins of the sun.

The heart of Elvira beat with quickened throbs as she offered to be his guide to the secret recessess, where the hand of rapine had not entirely torn aw^y the monuments of former grandeur.

Unsuspicious of danger, the marquis followed down a dark narrow avenue, where the perpetual lamps, fed by consecrated fire, no longer shed a splendour equal to the blaze of meridian day.

The slave, previously instructed, retired to the forest, where the travelling carriage of Elvira waited her return.

Having led the marquis to a gloomy vault, she paused, and said—" It was here that the weak, deluded fair ones, who, seduced by the deceits of man, sacrificed their chastity, met a terrible punishment— they were buried alive! And here," continued she, plunging a dagger in his side,





"" a female revenges her base desertion on the brutal destroyer of her honour."

Baldivia groaned and fell.

"Look on me, wretch!" continued she; "behold Elvira! and while yet the fiends of hell forbear to snatch thy guilty soul, confess that my revenge is just!"

Having satisfied her vengeance, by trampling on his prostrate body, she stole unobserved from the temple, gained the forest, and, entering her- carriage, quitted Potosi forever..

The absence of the marquis- being at length observed, some degree of alarm was excited for his safety;: the Peruvians had also disappeared; and Velasco was not without suspicion that they had decoyed the marquis to some distant spot, and murdered him. The name of Baldivia was repeated in every direction; but no answer being returned, the earl of Avondale proposed descending to-the fowerparts of the ruin> to which curiosity might have led the marquis,., who,' it was probable, had met some accident that prevented his r©turn.





Stretched on the earth, and covered with his blood, they found Baldivia, who, pointing to his wound, faintly uttered the name of Elvira; "disguised as a Peruvian, she has"

He fainted on the supporting arm of Velasco. Being borne to the lawn, the good monk examined the wound, which, though deep, he pronounced was not dangerous.

The earl of Avondale listened to this opinion with amazement—" Surely," said he, "this man is immortal; though liable to accidents, he cannot be killed; surely his 'is a charmed life."

Velasco having stopped the effusion of blood with a styptic plant, that grew in profusion round the temple, carefully bound up his wound. Assistance being procured from the yacht, the marquis was then conveyed on board; and at the close of the evening presented to the terrified marchioness, in a state between life and death. The undiminished love of Rosaviva appeared in her grief for his sufferings (though confessedly the reward of his crimes), and her unwearied care to restore him to health.





As Velasco predicted, the wound soon healed; but his miraculous preservation effected no change in the vicious habits of Baldivia, which were restrained by neither love nor gratitude, though he had transient fits of both.

The pious Velasco, together with the earl of Avondale, was convinced of his profligate disposition; and considering him absolutely irreclaimable, were only anxious to preserve the peace of the amiable Rosaviva from being utterly destroyed by the .knowledge of her husband's enormous vices.





CHAPTER IV.



"Never o'er the flowing tide,

Again thy light canoe shall ride;

Ne'er shale thou, at blush of morn,

Wake the wild woods with thy horn j

Or rushing down the mountain slope,

Oe'rtake the nimble antelope;

Or lead the dance 'mid blissful bnuds,

On cool Andracte's yellow sauds.'*



The golden beams of the setting sun, retired from the verdant bosom of the widestretching savannah, yet partially illumined the bold and lofty summits of the Sierra Leone mountains, throwing a gigantic shadow on the dangerous tracks made by the hardy and intrepid hunter, who, along its dizzy precipices, follows the perilous chase, rousing from their secret lairs the lion, the panther, and the leopard, when, after encountering death in its most hideous shape, he bears away their skins in triumph, to adorn his person and





line his couch, the hard-eamed spoils of fatigue, danger, and valour.

The refreshing breeze of evening sprang up as the sun declined, and flattering over innumerous groves of cinnamon, orange, and cassavia, scattered from its wings a glistening dew of rich and renovating odour. It was at this tranquil, cool, and fragrant hour, that Ozembo, a youthful chief of the sable race, entered the pleasant habitation which his industry and skill had tastefully constructed of the slender bamboo and umbrageous palmetto, whose broad-spreading leaves formed a verdant canopy over the elegant enclosure, which the scorching beams of a vertical sun could not penetrate.

On one side of this beautiful retreat rose a gently-swelling hill, from whose mosscovered slope a stream of limpid water gurgled, and joined its soothing murmurs with the songs of the painted cardinals, who formed their nests in the surrounding cedars, and bathed their golden beaks in its cooling wave, which, while it supplied the unvitiated taste of the simple African with a delicious beverage, gave a glowing lustre to the aromatic plants and flowering shrubs which Ozembo had taught, with graceful flexibility, to entwine the cane pillars of his dwelling, and mingle their odorous, many-tinted blossoms with the pomegranate, the date, the anana, and the •guava.





The bright, inquiring eye of Ozembo eagerly glanced round the outer apartment; then passing on, he anxiously examined the inner recess, where, at that peaceful hour, he was accustomed to meet his bosom's dearest treasures, his all of happiness; with frantic action his trembling hand tore the covering of leopard skins from his couch—his expecting eye encountered not the beloved forms of his wife and .child—nor did his ear receive the tender salutation for which he impatiently listened; all around was .dreary vacancy and unbrokai stillness—" They are gone tor ever!" groaned Ozembo, dashing his body to the earth, cold drops of perspiration starting on his forehead; M they are gone for ever! Spirit, who rollest the thunder along the black clouds, who givest wings of flame to the lightning, where did thy terrors sleep, when my beloved ones were ravished hence! I forgot not to worship thee in the dark wood, and at the confluence of streams, yet thou hast permitted me to be despoiled of my soul's treasures. Oh, spirit of vengeance, for what guilt of Ozembo's hast thou punished my unoffending ones! too surely they are torn from my arms for ever—the murderous white men have my innocent, helpless ones in their merciless grasp! Yarilla! Roseb! adored objects of my tenderest love, you hear not the groans of Ozembo—we shall embrace on earth no more! Alas! no; we meet not again, till the Great Spirit unites us in those happy realms, which barbarous white men will not be permitted to invade. Yet why has Ozembo escaped their toils ?—why am not I the partner of your miserable captivity ?—oh, why am I left to deplore your loss?—why am I suffered to remain here in lingering wretchedness ?—the soul of Ozembo is with Yarilla and Roseb!" ,Starting from the earth, he stood jn speechless anguish; then suddenly striking his forehead with his clenched hands, he resumed—" And what prevents my participating their lot? I will instantly seek the cruel monsters who have forced hence my wife and child! Yes, yes, my beloved ones, we will be slaves together! Ozembo will live or die with Yarilla and Roseb."





Full of these affectionate resolves, he rushed from the bower, till that fatal moment the happy abode of innocence, uninterrupted peace, and love—desperation flashing from his eye, and the wild speed of frenzied feeling marking his unequal steps.

At the extremity of the romantic dell, in which his habitation stood, Ozembo encountered the objects dearest to his heart, the tender Yarilla and her infant son, whose imaginary loss had nearly hurried him into the jaws of destruction; for, frantic with grief and despair, he was hastening to throw himself into the power of his fiercest enemies, the barbarous Spaniards, whose ships infested their shores, to enslave the guileless Africans, and compel them to endure oppression, tyranny, and toil, by whose sufferings they accumulate unbounded wealth, pamper their licentious appetites, and revel in luxury.





The graceful Yarilla bounded over the smooth, mossy turf, light and agile as the antelope, cradling on one polished arm her smiling boy, while on the other she bore a garland of the scarlet flowers of the pomegranate,mingled with the white and shining blossoms of the cassavia, which, fresh and odorous, she had newly twined for the brows Of Ozembo, when he should return, languid and fatigued, from the labours of the chase. Descrying him at a distance, she quickened her step, and sprang to his embrace.

"Eternal Spirit, I thank thee," said Ozembo fervently; "they are here—the treasures of my soul are safe," continued he, clasping them in strong emotion to his heaving bosom,

"Safe!" echoed the wondering Yarilla, returning his caresses; "safe! my beloved, what mean you? has then any danger menaced us?" , ., .





"Alas! yes; the greatest evil, the very worst of dangers, that thought can guess, or imagination conceive," answered Ozembo, "consign our darling Roseb to my care, and quicken thy steps, my Yarilla; ask me not now for explanation of my conduct, but follow me in silence, assured that love for thee and our boy stimulates my resolves and conduct."

Yarilla silently obeyed, and placed her child in the arms of his father.

Roseb's jetty arm, encircled with brace'lets of the Angola pea, clasped the neck, while his little head nestled in peaceful slumber on the manly bosom of Ozembo, who, taking a contrary road to that which led to his own pleasant bower, hastily struck into a path, almost impervious, from the thick growth of underwood and interwoven shrubs, whose long luxuriant branches swept the fragrant turf that grew beneath them.

The timid Yarilla followed in silence the steps of her husband, her astonished mind perplexed and alarmed with uneasy suggestions; painfully she endured the re

VOL. II. K





striction that forbade an inquiry of whither they were going, and. why they had thus suddenly deserted their own delightful habitation, doubly dear to the affectionate Yarilla, for having been reared by Ozembo, when he chose her from among the virgins of her tribe to be his wife— from virgins all enamoured of the majestic person of Ozembo—all full of tender and anxious wishes to unite their destinies with his—all eager to be the wife of a youthful chief, who had valiantly distinguished himself in war, in the toils and dangers of the chase, and in the milder, sweeter duties of filial affection; but convinced by experience that his was a mind not lightly or easily disturbed—knowing that his actions were ever the dictates of reason and the result of prudence, she was certain that, in the present instance, he was actuated by powerful circumstances, and endeavoured to calm the impatient curiosity their present wandering excited.

The full-orhed moon had now risen, and with unclouded radiance silvered the path %hey made for themselves through the thick Wood, which, covered with aromatic plants, at every pressure of their feet, exhaled delicious perfumes round them.





Frequently Ozembo paused to listen, and turn his head to certify himself that his beloved Yarilla was near, and to bestow on her a smile of fond encouragement; yet under this smile she discovered alarm and doubt—a dark foreboding of evil, to which Iter imagination could give no shape, pressed heavily on her spirits, and gave a tremor to her frame, that, making her steps unsteady, retarded her speed.

The distant dashing of water now met the ear of Yarilla, and an opening before them gave a view of clustering rocks, whose lofty and jagged summits silvered in the moonbeams, and whose dark base was laved by the broad waves of the yellow]STiger,from whose sands was frequently gathered the gold washed from Abyssinian mountains, ibr which shining dust the avaricious Europeans not only hazard their own lives, but sacrifice millions of their fellow-men.

Ozembo now slackened his speed, and pressing his lips on the soft cheek of the K 2





yet-sleeping Roseb, he gently placed him on the palpitating bosom of his mother— "Wait here, my beloved," said he, in a whispering accent, to the trembling Yarilla, who, fearfully breaking silence and clinging to his arm, exclaimed—" Do not, dearest Ozembo, do not leave us? Whither, my husband, oh, whither do you go?"

Ozembo felt for her distress, and fondly enfolding her slender form, he replied, pointing with his finger—" No further than to yonder rocks, my Yarilla; compose your spirits—be not thus agitated, my soul's beloved!"

"Alas!" rejoined Yarflla, " I am greatly terrified, and I know not wherefore. Your absence at this hour, and in this unknown place, will be insupportable; let me, I entreat you, Ozembo, let me go with you!"

"Not so, my adored," returned Ozembo; "you must remain here with our infant; it is necessary I explore the rocks alone. Rest on this verdant bank; my absence will be very short; in a few moments you may expect my return."

** Oh, how long, how dreadful, will those moments appear!" rejoined Yarilla, as, releasing him from her embrace, her tearful eye followed his retreat, by the agitated motion of the branches under which he passed. Yarilla, dreading she knew not what, looked round her, with alarm in every glance; but her eye encountered only the gigantic boles of the surrounding trees, or their luxuriant branches, chequered by the moonbeams; she pressed her unconscious babe to her bosom, who, still locked in the balmy slumber of innocence, enjoyed uninterrupted repose, nor felt the fastfalling tears of his mother bedew his little face. Unable to account for her excessive terror, or reason her feelings into tranquillity, the silence that reigned in the lonely spot, where she had no remembrance of ever having been before, joined to the absence of Ozembo, appeared dreadful to her imagination; while every instant, rendered more terrible by suspense, seemed extended to an age. A thousand times she was on the point of calling on his name; but while Ozembo hovered on her lips, the almostescaping sound was restrained by the re





collection of the extreme caution with which he had conducted her thither, and the silence he had himself observed and imposed on her.

One moment Yarilla yielded to the most fearful imaginations, and fancied herself separated from Ozembo for ever; her trembling lips would then press the cheek of her infant, while her agonized heart put up a prayer for its protection to the Great Spirit—the next instant she would start, and listen to the breeze of night rustling through the tangled branches, that hung in wild arches over her child, forming an odorous canopy above the verdant bank on which she had laid him, while fancy, in every fluttering gale that passed, gave to her beating heart and listening ear the approaching step of her husband; but far as her straining vision reached, she encountered only disappointment.

At length, unable longer to command her distracting apprehensions, she snatched her child from the bank where he reposed, and was advancing towards the opening made by Ozembo among the low bushes* when a rustling behind her, louder than the sweeping breeze could make, impelled her hastily to turn her head, with the horrid idea that some ravenous beast of prey, or equally-to-be-dreaded poisonous serpent, was on the point of darting from its recess to rush upon her; but what language is adequate to describe her terror at beholding, what to her imagination appeared far more horrible than a famished panther or scaly-crested serpent, two men, of complexions and habits such as she had never before seen, but frequently heard the people of her nation describe in terms of terror and detestation, and whom she at once recognized for the dreadful white men who tore the Africans from their peaceful bowers, and conveyed them to a land watered with their tears, and fertilized with their blood.





The objects of her alarm advanced hastily towards her, speaking loudly in an unknown tongue,

Yarilla gazed on the strangers with sensations of horror that deprived her of the power to fly. She clasped her child tightly





to her bosom. Ozembo's conduct was now clearly understood; his silence, his caution, flashed conviction on her brain—he was seeking a place of concealment for them from their direst foes—" Ozembo I haste! save me! save your child !" shrieked the distracted Yarilla; "save us from these cruel white men, who quit their own country, and cross the stormy ocean to traffic for human blood."

Pitiless of her agonizing shrieks and frantic gestures, the unfeeling monsters approached her; they were Spaniards, and rejoiced in the prospect of possessing a prize which their base employers would gladly exchange for gold.

Yarilla, with all her little strength, held her child to her bosom; for one of the monsters roughly grasped her arm with menacing action, while the other endeavoured to tear the shrieking Roseb from her maternal clasp.

At this tremendous moment, while the tender, despairing Yarilla struggled in the hold of two ferocious, hardened villains, and the wide-extended wood echoed with



N





her frantic cries—while in a voice of piercing agony she invoked the beloved names of her husband and kindred, an arrow whizzed past her cheek, and buried its barbed point deep in the merciless heart of him whose strong and brutal arm impelled her forward.

The villain reeled, groaned, and fell. His savage companion, turning to investigate what had caused his fall, received a second dart in his throat. His black blood bubbled from the wound. He endeavoured to drag-Yarilla with him to the earth; but failing in his purpose, he uttered inarticulate execrations, and, writhing with pain, dropped on the outstretched body of his already-lifeless associate.

The callous monster met his doom at the very instant when his inhuman fingers grasped the polished neck of the little Roseb, whose loud cries he attempted to stifle by strangulation.

Ozembo, followed by Zoan, the brother of Yarilla, now flew forward, and received into his protecting arms the fainting form





of his beloved wife, for whose safety he had trembled, and to whose rescue he had so fortunately arrived.

"Accursed white men!" exclaimed the youthful Zoan, as his gaze was rivetted on the lifeless bodies of the Spaniards, who lay weltering in their own gore, and whose faces the pale light of the moon discovered distorted with rage and pain; "accursed white men! what evil spirit possessed your thoughts, directed your course, and impelled you to these islands? the African, content with his own groves and mountains, steers not his canoe to your shore— comes not to your country, to tear from your arms your wives and children. Accursed white men! we want no slaves— we compel you not to toil for our avarice— we despise the yellow dross for which you persecute an unoffending people. -Our food is supplied by the groves and by the chase—our drink by the pure stream that gurgles from the rock, or trickles from the mountain. An African's only treasures are his kindred and his friends, and these you would barbarously deprive him of. May





the Great Spirit, who marks your actions from his cloudy throne—who beholds how wantonly you destroy his worshippers, sink your proud vessels in the foaming ocean !—may your wives look for your return with tears and lamentations! and may your children remain fatherless, and be made slaves!—thus may the Great Spirit punish your attempt to drag an African from his native land! May the arrow of consuming vengeance sink deep in your merciless hearts !;—may your black blood be lapped by the famished lioness and her young!—may your abhorred carcases become a prey to the screaming vulture! and may your detested bones whiten beneath the hottest beams of the meridian, sun!"

Thus vented the youthful warrior the indignant feelings of his soul; while Ozembo, a husband and father,, thanked the Great Spirit for his timely aid, as he fondly clasped to his overflowing heart the treasures of his love, so preserved from the grasp of the enemy. In the softest, kindest accents of affection, he soothed the still-trembling Yarilla, and caressed his





smiling boy, who with artless action pointed to his polished neck, which the hand of the savage Spaniard had so roughly grasped, and which his doting mother now covered with the fondest, tenderest kisses of maternal affection.

Casting many a fearful look behind, Yarilla was conducted by her husband and brother to a recess excavated in a beetling rock on the edge of the Niger, in the dark shadow of which, on the smooth, yellow sand, rested the light canoe of Zoan, the prow of which he had skilfully carved with ingenious representations of animals and flowers.

Zoan had that evening sailed from the opposite island, to warn Ozembo of the enemy, whose vessel had been descried by a hunting party, who quitted the chase to give notice to their friends of the lurking danger. Zoan had found the habitation of Ozembo deserted; but observing no traces of violence, he supposed him informed of the descent of the white men on the island, and was returning to the rock, to wait the flowing of the tide, when happily they encountered each other, hut had scarcely exchanged the fraternal embrace, before the shrieks of Yarilla called them to her rescue from the villains who justly merited the death they met.





It was now, when quietly seated in the recess by the Niger, that Ozembo had leisure to answer the anxious inquiries of his wife, why they had exchanged the pleasant bower, their own delightful habitation, for that dreary cavern?

"I trust," replied Ozembo, "we shall return again to that pleasant home in peace and safety; but for the present hour, my beloved Yarilla, this recess must of necessity afford us shelter. We wait the returning tide; when that permits, Zoan's canoe shall waft us to the island where our kindred dwell. There, should the white men dare intrude, collected in a body, we may defy their power, and either exterminate, or force them to seek their safety by abandoning our coast."

"Alas! then," said Yarilla, "we are beset by danger, and the dark clouds of





calamity hover over us! before the cruel white men quit our shores, many of our devoted race shall bleed."

", Happier to die," interrupted Zoan, "than be the white man's prisoners; but let Ozembo proceed."

"Returning from the chase this evening," resumed Ozembo, "with consternation I beheld a large vessel, in bulk and shape unlike our African canoes, moored in the creek below our grove. I also saw another vesseL of different shape and smaller size, quit the superior's side, andi filled with white men, make for the shore. I need not say I trembled for the safety of Yarilla and Roseb, for from the oft-repeat* ed story of my venerable grandsire, who in his youth was treacherously decoyed on board a European vessel, and by these acr cursed white men made a slave"

"Your grandsire, my Ozembo!" repeated Yarilla; "the venerable Orano, had he been a slave to these detested monsters?" ,." He had," replied Ozembo, "and bore about his honoured person scars, from wounds inflicted by the savage white man's hand, from whom he suffered torments such as would turn thy brain to hear."





"May the Great Spirit fix these white men on the burning height of Sierra-Leone! may famine gnaw their vitals, while the ravening vulture scoops out the eyes that gazed with merciless beam on an African's torments!"

"After years of suffering," continued' Ozenibo, " the intrepid Orano effected his escape; and unsubdued by hardship or fatigue, with unshrinking fortitude wan*dered from shore to shore, till at length he regained his native ishrad, and long survived to warn his kindred and his friends of European treachery and cruelty."

"May the Great Spirit preserve us from their power P' said Yarilla, clinging to the arm of her husband. . .

"No sooner," resumed Ozembo, "did their tall vessel meet my astonished view, than recollecting the fate of Orano, I guessed the dreadful purpose for which these white men seek our shores. Not content with the gold they purchase on,

J





the distant coasts, they impose on the simplicity of our countrymen, and, with an artful show-of kindness, inveigle them on board their vessels, from whence, alas! they are never permitted to return, but are conveyed to a far-distant land; and urged by whips and tortures, are compelled to labour for these monsters, whose appetite for gold increases with its accumulation. It was this cause," said Ozembo, tenderly embracing his wife, " that occasioned my extreme alarm when I met you, my Yarilla, in the grove; it was the dread of encountering these savage white men made me hurry to explore this recess, from whence I hoped to seize an opportunity of conveying you and my boy to a place of security, till these barbarians, quitting our coast, should leave us at liberty to return to our peaceful habitation."

"Let us begone," replied Yarilla, snatching up Hoseb; "let us instantly fly, my Ozembo, and put our kindred on their guard against these monsters."

"The alarm," returned Zoan, ". has already reached them. Our warriors have sharpened their lances, and fitted the arrow to the bow. Our island, my sister, is prepared to repel the enemy."





"Away then!" resumed the impatient Yarilla; "oh, why do we linger here? let us hasten to join our friends."

Ozembo, folding his arm round her slender waist, pointed to the canoe, which yet stood dry on the sands under the rock —" Till the tide returns, my Yarilla," said he, "we are constrained to wait. Meantime do thou repose thee, my beloved, on this bed of weed, that Zoan has prepared —it is soft and dry. Already Iloseb's sparkling eyes are closed; sleep thou also in peace, my Yarilla; thy husband and thy brother will be thy watchful guard."

Fatigue and terror had overcome the spirits of the gentle Yarilla, her wearied frame felt the necessity of repose, and yielding to the persuasion of her husband and brother, she folded her infant to her bosom, and reclined on the weedy couch.

For some moments her hand clasped that of Ozembo, as if fearful of losing him; but as sleep weighed down her eyelids,





her fingers relaxed their hold, and enabled the cautious and vigilant Ozernbo to provide against the danger of intrusion.

Near the entrance of the recess, opposite Zoan, he took his station; arming against surprise, their hands applied the unerring arrow to the nerve of the bow, while their upraised eyes alternately surveyed the planets as they rolled their shining and majestic orbs along the blue and cloudless arch of heaven, and watched the undulating waves, silvered by the moon, and listened to their murmurs, as yet a distant sound.

Anxiously the youthful chiefs waited the returning tide, to waft them to expecting relatives—to security from monsters

"More savage and inexorable for,

Than empty tigers, or the raging sea;"'



from beings who,, wearing the form of humanity, had bosoms harder than adamant, hearts savage and cruel as fiends ; for they were utterly merciless to their fellow-men —pitiless of their agonizing grief, considering the wretched Africans as brutes, ordained by the forming hand of Nature ta toil for their advantage, to suffer for their pleasure, and to die at their will, as though they had neither feelings, affections, nor susceptibility of joy or grief.





Yarilla sighed frequently and heavily as she slept, and seemed as if oppressed by some distressing dream. Ozembo moved softly to her side, and as his lips gently pressed the velvet of her cheek, he found it wet with tears; yet he was reluctant and unwilling to awake her.

"The terror she has endured," said Ozembo, " creates uneasy visions; but these will vanish with the first beams of rosy morning; and long before our -parent sun gains his meridian height, my beloved will embrace her father and the virgins of her tribe, and in their rapturous, welcome lose remembrance of the perils and the Soitows that are past."

The sparkling eyes of Zoan kindled with the same animating hope, to which he replied by an assenting smile.

Ozembo spoke as he wished; but Fate had written in its immutable and eternal page the disastrous destinies of Ozemba

> and Yarilla in characters of blood, and ordained that they should furnish posterity with a record of horrible suffering, at the recital of which, though ages should have rolled over the guilty history, every heart of feeling would shudder, and wish to forego the splendid luxuries that must be purchased by the groans and blood of helpless, unoffending Africans.





Ozembo had but a moment left the side of Yarilla, and resumed his watchful station at the mouth of the cavern, when they were disturbed by the loud and clamorous voices of men, whom, from their unintelligible language, they recognized for foes.

The impatient and resentful Zoan prepared to draw his arrow to the head; but the more prudent Ozembo restrained his fiery spirit—" Hold, my brother," whispered he; "remember we are but two, and know not what number of the enemy we may have to contend with; let us not, by discovering our retreat unnecessarily, put the safety of ourselves, and these stilldearer ones, to hazard."





Zoan was convinced of the wisdom of Ozembo's counsel, and silently acquiesced.

Scarcely breathing, they listened to the strange voices of the Spaniards, whom, from the loudness of their tones, they concluded were high in dispute.

Nor were they mistaken. The Spaniards stood near the entrance of the recess, and were quarrelling about the division of the few valuables belonging to the two villains they had found dead in the adjacent wood.

One of the party observed, that instead of disputing about what could be settled at a future time, they aught rather to think how they were to dispose themselves for the remainder of the night—" and here,"said he, "seems to be a commodious lodging, large enough to hold us all; and in my opinion so much the better—I like to sleep in company, as well as to rob.— What say you, comrades? shall we take possession of this cavern?"

Some of the party stood hesitating whether it would be safe to enter, while the proposal was warmly approved by the rest, who, being sleepy and weary, observed,





that having lost the tide, it would be many tedious hours before they could possibly return to the ship—that the cave certainly did present itself very invitingly, as they were much in want of lodgings, and might repose there in perfect safety till morning.

But this scheme was vehemently opposed by the majority of the party, who strongly argued against its safety, observing that the cave was most likely the den of some wild beast or venomous serpent, who might make the first that entered pay for intruding.

Not choosing to be embraced by the scaly folds of the one, or encounter the rending talons of the other, they agreed to repair {.gain to the wood, to strip and bury their dead comrades, hoping that fraud or force would add to the number of wretched captives they had already secured in the unwholesome confinement of the hold of their ship, where the wretched Africans, in addition to the misery of being for ever separated from their distracted families, had to deplore the privation of the common benefits of nature—light and





air, which only, according to the cruel caprice of their brutal oppressors, is bestowed upon them.

1 The voices of the Spaniards died away at distance, and Ozembo and Zoan warmly congratulated each other on their having departed without compelling them to act on the defensive, by attempting to enter their retreat; they also rejoiced that the profound sleep of Yarilla had prevented her from suffering alarm.

"I would it were morning!" said Ozembo; "for myself I have no fears, but I dread any fresh danger assailing these beloved ones. I would we had doubled the coral rock! I should then consider all peril past."

"True," replied Zoan; "from theiice we can behold our native island, where our anxious friends expect us."

As he spoke, Yarilla, with loud and piercing shrieks, sprang from the weedy bed, and would have rushed from the cave, had she not been prevented by the tender restraint of her husband—" Alas! what terrific vision disturbs thy repose?" said the afflicted Ozembo; "what alarm occasions thy wihl demeanor? whither art thou flying from the protection of thy husband and thy brother, my Yarilla? we sleep not, my adored, but keep a careful watch that thou and ltoseb may repose in safety."





It was now that Yarilla started from sleep, for she had been actuated by a fearful dream, and was unconscious that the protecting arm of Ozembo enfolded her.

Trembling, and in extreme agitation, she threw herself on his bosom, and was many moments 'before she became composed, or could be persuaded she was in safety—" My child, my ltoseb!" said Yarilla, starting from the clasping arms of her husband; "where is my babe?"

"He is here—he is safe!" replied Zoan, pointing to the weed}- pillow on which his little jetty limbs were stretched in the happy forgetfulness of sweet and tranquil slumber.

Alternately Yarilla lavished the tender-est caresses on Roseb and Ozembo, at the same moment weeping bitterly.

." Why art thou thus moved, my Ya





Villa?" said Ozembo; "what aflflictipn thus provokes thy tears? dost thou not behold thy protectors near thee? why art thou thus strangely agitated? speak to me, my adored; unfold the cause of thy distress."

"Am I indeed safe?" said Yarilla; "do I indeed clasp the neck of my husband? —do I behold my brother and my darling Roseb?—oh yes, yes! I feel his sweet breath upon my cheek! my babe is safe! he lives to bless the doting heart of his mother."

Having fondly kissed him, she replaced the babe on the weedy pillow; then seating herself between her husband and brother, she exclaimed—" Oh, eternal Spirit! who shall turn aside thy arrow—who shall Vesist thy decree? the lesser spirits who execute thy will have hovered round my head—in the darkness of night they have pointed out a miserable fate for Yarilla!"

Ozembo and Zoan would have reasoned on the wildness of dreams, and the small reliance to be placed on their representa-, tions; but Yarilla, still under the influ

VOL. II. L





.ence of terror, disregarding the consolation they would have offered, continued to say, while the shudderings of terror shook her frame—" Oh, what a fearful vision has disturbed my slumbers this dismal night! for never to me was night so horrible—so long. Ozembo, Zoan, dear possessors of Yarilla's affection! listen and say whether such a frightful dream is not the precursor of future woe—of certain calamity. Methought, awakened by the shrill voice of the sigarra, I arose, and quitting our delightful bower, repaired to the smooth, shelving banks of the Andracte, where, having dipped myself and Roseb thrice in the shining wave, I prayed that Ozembo, escaping the fangs of the panther and the talons of the lion, might return successful from the perilous chase. I then drew water from the stream, and placing Iioseb at the foot of an orange-tree, I began to tie up the bending flowers, and twine the flexile branches of the shrubs round our bower, at the same time refreshing their buds with the water I had brought from





the stream. While thus employed, me. thought a flood of light, more lustrous than gold, hung on the shrubs and flowers. I raised my eyes upwards towards the glorious sun, and beheld a form of dazzling brightness emerge from the golden orb; and swiftly descending from the sapphire throne on which it rides upon the clouds, it rested with wide-stretched wings upon the waters of the Andracte, which instantly arose in high and foaming billows, and with a tremendous roar covered the smooth yellow sands.

"Trembling and amazed, I fled the bower, and prostrated myself to the earth, with Roseb in my arms. Again I raised my eyes, and beheld bright waving plumes starting from the back of my babe—a voice, loud, deep, and awful, thrice pronounced his name—the downy plumes, forming quickly into wings, expanded wide from his polished shoulders; and in spite of all my efforts to detain him, he soared across the foaming waves, and was instantly lost to my view in the brilliant





rays that issued from the form yet resting on the water.

"Words cannot explain the anguish of that dreadful moment when my Roseb was lost to my despairing eyes. I extended my arms towards the effulgent being, affection for my lost child overcoming the awe it had inspired; I wept, I supplicated; but my agonies were unavailing, and rejected by the inexorable spirit, at whose command the waves lashed each other in tremendous rage—a thin vapour inclosed the shining orb—it slowly arose to the sky, and was hid from my straining sight, which followed its course, though veiled in dark clouds.

"Wild with horror and distracting grief, I dashed my bosom on the earth, and wished for instant annihilation, since deprived for ever of my smiling Roseb, At this distressful moment, methought a hideous monster, in which the shape of man and beast was strangely mingled, rose from the foaming waters, and darting his long crooked talons in my bosom, made two deep wounds; I rent the air with my shrieks, while, faint and bleeding, I attempted to fly. In agony and despair I lifted np my eyes towards the sky—I called on the Great Spirit to save me from the fangs of the monster, who still menaced me with frightful gestures.





"The sky was no longer dark—the sun appeared in all his beamy splendour, and, leaning on a cloud of fleecy whiteness, I beheld my Roseb. His head was wreathed with flowers of a thousand glowing colours —ethereal smiles brightened his countenance; with his little hand he beckoned me —I stretched out my arms despondingly towards him—in agony I shrieked his beloved name—I attempted to spring from the earth, and seemed to fall with violence against a rock, bruised and exhausted. Again I felt the murderous talons of the monster, who, pursuing me with the swiftness of the wind, strove to enfold me in his grasp. In the struggle to escape, this terrific vision was dissolved.—Oh, answer me, beloved of my soul!" said Yarilla, clasping the hand of her husband, "portends not this





dream death, or sufferings worse than death, to Roseb and to me?"

To the recital of this terrific and extraordinary dream, Ozembo listened in far more alarm than he considered prudent to express. The happy years of his early youth—the days of bliss he had known with Yarilla, passed in rapid succession through his brain, and a dark presentiment, that his happiness was fled for ever, filled his mind. Yet though his thoughts were full of sadness, he spoke cheerily to Yarilla. He talked of their return to their pleasant bower—of the period when Roseb would be able to follow him to the chase, though his heart presaged an eternal separation from his bower, and the pleasures and dangers of the chase.

Concealing the deep interest her dream excited, Ozembo assumed a composure he did not feel, and strove, with all the rhetoric he possessed, to reason away the tormenting fears that still agitated the timid bosom of Yarilla. Certain it was, Ozembo considered the vision of the night presage





ful of impending calamity—of death, or, what to his idea was far worse than death, slavery.

Anxiously did the sable chief listen for the rippling tide, and many a fervent wish breathed in the sigh he wafted towards the island where his aged father had convened the youthful warriors of his tribe, under whose protection he thought his gentle Yarilla and infant Roseb would be safe from European tyranny—from the degradation of debasing slavery.

The loud grief of Yarilla having sunk into pensive murmurs, Zoan ventured from the cave to survey the position of the planets, and ascertain the hour. While yet his eyes were fixed on the shining orbs, he was alarmed by the voices of men" seemingly near at hand. Looking cautiously round, Zoan fell on his face, and crawled into the recess, where he repeated to Ozembo what he had heard, and cautioned Yarilla, whatever might befall, to preserve unbroken silence.

The maternal affection of Yarilla led her to the weedy couch, where her infant





still slept, unconscious of the alarms that its parents suffered.

Again Ozernbo and Zoan took their stations on each side of the entrance of the cave, prepared to repel an invasion on their recess.

In a few moments the voices of the white men struck the trembling heart of Yarilia with dismay. They stood opposite the mouth of the cave, and their shadows concealed the bght afforded by a brilliant moon—" I tell thee," said one, "it was not a negro, but a monkey, or some other beast.—Did I not watch him as he entered this cave?"

"Into which place," replied another, " I will instantly discharge this carbine."

"Thou wert always foolhardy," rejoined ft third speaker; "what if it was a panther or a tiger? some of us would fall victims to your rash folly. Come away, I advise you. Only a madman would think of firing into a cave at night."

"Ay, or by day either," said a fourth Spaniard; "so distant too from any human habitation."





"I believe," resumed the first speaker, "that the black dogs who killed our comrades in the wood yonder are lurking hereabout. I should like to pepper their jackets."

"Jackets, you fool!" repeated another voice; "the negroes know nothing about jackets. For my part, I believe this cave to be the residence of some ravenous beast, and before our noise disturbs his repose, I move that we take our departure." . "I shall not depart," said the first Spaniard, "till I have fired into the cave. Beast or no beast—negro or no negro, comrades, here goes!"

Ashe spoke he discharged his piece. The contents lodged in the back of a female panther, who, enraged by the wound, rushed from its secret hiding-place, and, uttering a fearful yell, pursued the flying Spaniards.

No sound escaped the lips of the terrified Yarilla. She clasped Roseb convulsively to her bosom, and sunk, fainting, on the bed of weed.

Ozembo and Zoan rushed into each. other's arms, and gratefully thanked the Great Spirit for their wonderful escape from the ferocious panther, as well as from the fire of the Spaniards, whose destructive weapons they had heard the aged Orano describe, but had never before seen the effects of. With bows prepared, they waited the return of the panther, whose appalling yells echoed along the shores of the Niger. At length they beheld the approach of the dreadful animal, her hideous jaws all smeared with blood, and dragging along the mangled body of a white man, which every moment she let fall to the earth, while she tore from the Weeding trunk the yet-quivering flesh, and greedily devoured it.





The hearts of Ozembo and Zoan were not savage. They shuddered to behold the horrible fate even of an enemy; and at the same instant letting their arrows fly from the twanging bow, they beheld them enter the side of the panther, who again let fall the half-devoured body of the Spaniard, and uttered cries that might have struck the stoutest heart with dismay. A second discharge of arrows entered the brain of the sanguinary beast, and, no longer able to pursue her way, she fell beside the mangled body, and with a roar of agony expired.





Zoan then carefully examined the cave, lest in any part another beast might lurk, from whom they might not escape without incurring wounds; but finding every space clear, he assisted Ozembo to recall' to life the fainting Yarilla, who was longbefore she could be persuaded of her safety, or listen to the recital of the peril from which she had been preserved.

"My child yet sleeps," said Yarilla; "tranquil are the slumbers of babyhood. Oh ! had I known my Roseb was reposing; in the den of a panther, my brain would have maddened at the thought of his danger."

"And of thine own, my sister," said Zoan_

"No," replied she, gazing fondly on her infant, "no; to my own peril I should have been insensible; those dearer to Yarilla than her own existence would haveexcited her apprehensions; but you are safe,



S





my beloved ones; and I thank the Great Spirit that he has preserved the life of Yarilla, in that of the dear objects of her affection."

Ozembo pressed her to his heart, while Zoan employed himself in collecting the arrows that remained sticking in the flesh, and brain of the panther, who, seen by the glimpses of the moon, looked terrible even in death.

Zoan wished to bear away the skin of the beast; but to possess himself of that trophy would be a work that would take up more time than prudence allowed him to remain on the naked sands, where he might be surprised by the enemy; he therefore returned again to the cave, and restoring Ozembo his arrows, observed, that Yarilla's dream was explained by the panther, which was the horrible beast by which her sleep had been disturbed.

"I do not wish," said Yarilla, "to render our present situation more gloomy by presaging evil to come. No, let me bury in my own bosom the explanation my fancy gives to this terrific dream; since anticipation will not lessen calamity, why should we be sad before the time?"





"It is wisely said," replied Zoan; "I never yet have had cause for sadness, nor can I see reason to expect it in the future. The white men, who escaped the rending talons of the panther, have doubtless warned their companions to avoid this spot; from their intrusion I believe we have now little to fear, and soon as the returning tide permits, my swift-sailing canoe will bear us to our expecting friends. There, my Yarilla, no danger can reach you or your child. By this time our warriors line the beach, and certain death awaits the European who attempts to land. Would thou wert there, my Yarilla, then should I see thee smile again. I would it were morn, and we were once afloat; my dearest wish would then be gratified.

"And mine," rejoined Ozembo, who anxiously watched the melancholy countenance of his wife.

The soul of Yarilla felt convinced that she should never reach her native island; her only answer was a deep-drawn sigh.





The warm wishes of the youthful Zoair had also another motive, besides the safety of his sister and her child, to waft them towards his native island, for there dwelt the lovely maid whom the tender whisperingsof hope assured him anxiously expected his return, the graceful Ora—her in whom the soft affections of his heart centered— who, during all the tedious hours of night, had stood upon a sedgy bank, and gazed with straining eyes upon the deep, to catch the first imperfect view of Zoan, .as his light canoe, cutting the yielding waves, made for the well-known shore. His lovely, ebon-coloured maid, for whom he had reared a bower in the fragrant shade of a tall cedar grove—the gentle maid, who, with equal love and mutual impatience, waited the hour that should make her the bride of Zoan, whose valour had alreadytorn from leopards, slain by his hands, skins to adorn his bride and line her couch.

Delusions of hope, how exquisitely sweet you are! and though your fairy fabrics constantly dissolve, and leave theheart that cherished you to bitter disappointment, yet are you again folded to the bosom, with a confidence as firm as if yon never had deceived.





Of the dream of Yarilla Zoan thought but lightly; to him it appeared only as the natural result of the extreme terror she had undergone from the brutal white men in the wood; and he looked forward to their arrival at the island for the banishment of every uneasy remembrance and gloomy presentiment from her bosom.

Zoan was a lover, and his thoughts dwelt not on present danger, but busily occupied themselves in delightful visions of happiness to come, when Ora should dwell in. his newly-erected bower, the cane pillars of which he had carved into various fanciful devices, and with the simplest of implements, the bone of a shark, and embellished with the most fragrant shrubs and the fairest flowers that enamelled the fertile plains of Africa.

The heart of Zoan thrilled with delight and blissful expectancy, as his anxious and watchful eye turned on the approaching tide, whose distant murmurs were sweetest





music to him, who thought that love ami happiness were waiting him on the opposite shore.

Already Yarilla had caught her babe to her arms, and leaning on the shoulder of her husband, impatiently watched the movements of Zoan, who was pushing his canoe from the shelter of the dark shelving rock, under whose broad dark shadow it had escaped the notice of the Spaniards.

The mind of Yarilla chid the tardy waves, that yet delayed the floating of the light-constructed bark that was to convey her from the island, endeared to her by love and Ozembo—" The song of the almavuda," said Yarilla, "will wake me no more to inhale the breath of early morning, beside the clear fountain encircled by cedars. I shall no more place the sharpedged lance in the hand of Ozembo, or prepare him to hunt the brindled lion on the lofty summits of Sierra Leone. Beloved bower, sweet retreat of tranquil innocence, the eyes of the wretched Yarilla have beheld you for the last time! ye fragrant shrubs, soon will you droop and wither, for never again shall the band of Yarilla twine your verdant stems round the slender canes—never more shall she water your blossoms, or admire your glowing colours, as they expand to the sun. I depart from you, dear abodes of peace and love! I have beheld your beauties for the last time—I depart from you, fertile island, but never again shall I retrace my steps—never again shall I repose in the pleasant bower of Ozembo."





The tears of Yarilla fell fast on the cheek of her babe, as she breathed this farewell to her home.

"Why is thy mind thus sad, my beloved," said Ozembo, "and ungrateful to the Great Spirit, who has preserved us from the fire of the white man, and the fury of a famished panther? Cheer thee, my Yarilla, and encourage the hope that we shall be permitted to return again to our home, which will be rendered more blissful by this temporary absence; and see, the distant horizon is streaked with the purple of morning; the night, which appeared so long and dreary, is past, and





soon will the bright sun arise, to dissipate thy fears, and illumine the shores where our kindred anxiously wait to greet our arrival."

The mind of Yarilia was neither cheered nor consoled; but she returned the caresses of her husband with a pensive smile, and endeavoured to still the palpitation of her bosom.

Near the carcase of the panther, Zoan beheld a glittering substance; it was a piece of gold coin, which had been dropped by some one of the Spaniards in their flight from the pursuing beast. Zoan had never before seen gold in that form, and he inquired of Ozembo the meaning of the various figures and letters with which it was encircled.

Ozembo was equally ignorant of their meaning with himself; but he supposed it was that accursed bane of human happiness, which he had heard his granclsire call money—" To accumulate a heap of shining baubles like this," said Ozembo, "white men will quit their native land—will leave their wives and children—will sail over un





known seas—encounter pain and peril— brave the pangs of famine—and support incredible fatigues. For the love of this pernicious metal, Europeans make war upon each other, and deluge their country with human blood. To procure them gold, they land upon our coast, seize on the defenceless Africans, and force them to become their slaves. Spirit of vengeance, bury them deep in the bowels of the mountains that contain this fatal dross!—plunge them in streams of boiling gold!—make it their drink and food!—and let their avarice become their punishment!"

"And can these men be happy?" asked Yarilla. "Can they enjoy pleasure, while absent from their kindred?—can they rejoice in blood and desolation?"

"No," replied Ozembo; "for the guilty attainment of one wish introduces fresh desires, which must be accomplished by the commission of new acts of cruelty and oppression; their minds, like the waves of the ocean, are for ever restless and agitated; by day they are harassed with fears of losing, or not increasing, their hoards of gold, and at night the remembrance of the blood they have shed to attain it, banishes the sweet refreshment of sleep from their burning eyelids. Such was the account given by the venerable Orano of these Europeans."





"Unhappy men!" replied Yarilla, " how few are their enjoyments, even when possessed of heaps of gold! How blest, my Ozembo, are the children of Africa, whom their own fields and streams supply with all that is necessary for the enjoyment of life!"

Zoan, with a sharp stone, attempted to perforate the piece of gold.

Yarilla inquired for what purpose he designed it when he should accomplish his intent?

"I will fasten it round the neck of Roseb," said Zoan, "to commemorate the strange adventures of this night."

"It shall not be, my brother," returned Ozembo. "That gold has been the property of these barbarous white men, and shall not pollute the neck of my innocent babe; hanging constantly in his sight, he might learn to prize the glittering in ischief, and to obtain more, might become the scourge of his race—the murderer of his fellow-men."





"Never," said Yarilla, raising her humid eyes to the sky, now blushing with the roseate tints of morning, "never will my Roseb be the oppressor of his race; the Great Spirit has otherwise disposed the destiny of my child]"

Yarilla spoke with emotion, for her prophetic mind beheld the future; but Ozembo, continuing to address Zoan, said— ** Retain it not, my brother; let it not draw upon us the anger of our God—let the waves of the Niger whelm it to the unfathomed bottom, where, concealed from the sight of men, it may no more incite them to deeds of outrage and blood."

Zoan beheld the gold with the same detestation that filled the breast of Ozembo, and, obeying his wish, hurled it in the waves that rolled at his feet—" Perish," said he, "thou bane of happiness—thou instigator of cruelty, of oppression, and murder! thus mayest thou ever vanish from the grasp of





the white man, and be in his hands like the rolling waves of the Niger!"

The canoe of Zoan was now touched by the murmuring billows, that swelled to bear it from the shore, and fancy pictured to the enamoured African the bright eye of his Ora, watching the east for the first streak of blushing light, casting her tributary garland into the dashing tide, to propitiate the spirits of the deep, imploring them to still the winds and calm the waves, that her Zoan might return in safety to his native island, to climb for her the tall cocoa-tree, to range with her the green savannah, and share with her the pure delights of innocence and love.





CHAPTER V.



**** *****



*' Oh, righteous God! how long shiill vengeance sleep,

While b!ood-stain'd vessels plough the billowy deep?

How long, alas! shall prostrate Afric mourn

Her frantic children from her bosom tornf

How long, amid her golden groves, deplore

The forms belov'd iier eye shall view no more."



." Hark!" said Yarilla, in an attitude of alarmed attention, while one slim graceful foot rested on the edge of the canoe; "hark! ^dearest Ozembo—listen, Zoan, to that cry of disastrous omen. Alas, alas!" continued she, shuddering, "it is the wild shrill .scream of the famished albatros, too certain harbinger of woe, dismay, and death. Look there, Ozembo," her eye following the flight of the bird; "see how he flaps his broad dark wings, pointing his course to our once-happy grove, within whose pleasant bounds my sad heart tells me we never more shall dwell. Hark again!





how fearfully he screams! Spirits, who guard the good, protect my husband, my child, and kindred!"

Ozembo gazed on the alarmed countenance of Yarilla; he observed tears rapidly coursing each other down her cheeks, but he continued silent, for he feared his faltering voice would contradict the sentiments of consolation he wished to offer to his afflicted wife. In the furv of battle the soul of Ozembo remained firm and unshaken; in the perilous chase he faced the furious leopard without an emotion of fear; but now his spirits were depressed—a foreboding of approaching calamity shook his bosom, and cast on his features the heavy gloom of sadness; but Zoan, whose spirits were light as the air he breathed, whose thoughts were gay as the morning song of the almavuda, seized his bow with determined hand, and pointing an arrow at the ominous albatros, still hovering in midair, in an instant transfixed his feathery breast. The wounded bird, with loud screams, ascended above the clouds; but unable to dislodge the pointed barb, they again beheld it fluttering in the air, and at last, exhausted, fall among the rocks.





"Alas!" said Yarilla, in the soft accent of pity, "alas! that poor bird perhaps has a tender mate and little nurslings; he returns to dye their downy nest with his heart's blood—to expire in agonies."

Zoan smiled—" That ill-omened voice," said he, "is mute for ever; it was his own death-note he screamed; already his flutterings. cease, his agonies are past, and with the albatros perish thy idle fears, my sister; behold the east reddens, and the glorious luminary we adore already tinges the tops of the mountains with golden light—the floating mists that hung upon the bosom of the waves, wreathed in fan . tastic forms, disperse, and leave a wideextended prospect to our view on either shore. The face of nature seems to rejoice, my sister; the wind is prosperous, the waves are calm, and swiftly sails my light canoe along the glassy surface; having doubled yonder beetling rock (whose dark

VOL. II. M



pi





front projects across a bed of coral, for which Ozembo, when he wooed thee for his bride, has often dived, to bring thee Shining branches to adorn thy grotto), we Shall plainly view the pearl island, where bur lovely maids, the dear companions of thy sportive youth, prepare the-feast of welcome—the ample produce of the chase, the grove, and stream, and twine, of every bright and odorous flower, the wreath of friendship for their dear, expected Yarilla. Encouraged by the virgins, our intrepid warriors sharpen their missile lances, and head, with keener points, their unerring arrows. Soon," continued Zoan, dividing with vigorous stroke the green waves that foamed against his paddles, " soon we shall join them to partake the feast, and there, a sacred band of brothers and of friends, be able to repel these white men, should their daring feet presume to touch our island."

Yarilla was sensible of the kind intention of her brother, who wished to inspire her with hope and courage; she thanked him with a smile, but it was a smile of woe, and tears hung trembling on the dark





fringes of hej- eyelids; a sad presentiment pressed Or her mind, that'shershould never reach her native island?—never join the dear companions of her youthful sports— partake their feast—or wreath her brows with.the.odorous garland twined by the hand of friendship.

Ozembo stood with his arms folded on his breast, his eyes bent on the despairing countenance of Yarilla, who, while she wept, fondly caressed the little playful Roseb. The thoughts of Ozembo dwelt on the happy tranquillity of his past life, now so cruelly interrupted by the appearance of Europeans, whose barbarous intentions had been plainly declared by the. wretches from whose ruffian grasp himself and Zoan had rescued Yarilla and her infant; he revolved, in his troubled thoughts, the possibility of destroying their vessels by stratagem, or, by openly defying them to battle, compel them to leave the coast, along which their appearance had spread confusion and universal alarm.

While the mind of Ozembo was thus





disturbed and occupied, it partook in a considerable degree the presageful depression of Yarilla. Zoan, animated by hope and love, forgetful of the danger to be apprehended from the barbarous Europeans, gaily paddled his fast-sailing canoe along the unruffled bosom of the liquid plain, which, at every stroke, sparkled with the bright radiance of an unclouded sun, his impatient wishes dwelling on Ora, whom, before the meridian hour, he expected to fold in his embrace; and to whom, with mellow voice, he raised the artless song of love and nature.

"Spirits of the billowy deep,

Who the winds at pleasure guide,



Bid the angry tempests sleep,

Let my bark in safety glide.



Sweet at morn the musk-bells flower,

Sweet the almavnda's note;

But sweeter jar at evening's hour,



Gra's-songs of gladness Hunt.

Swiftly sail, my light canoe,

•Gentle breezes blowing;

Zoan hastes, dear maid, to you,



His heart with love o'erflowing.





Ere the star of evening burns—

Ere the stream reflects its glance,.



Zoan to his love returns,

Joins with her the festive dance.



For her he brings the milk-white plumej

Which the tropic bird did deck;

For her the amber's rich perfume,



To hang around her polish'd neck.

Ora, ere the noontide hour

Glows along the sultry sky,

When thou seek'st thy cedar bower,



Zoan to thy arms will fly.

Spirits of the billowy deep,

Who in pearly caverns stray,

Who on coral couches sleep,



Waft a lover on his way."

Such was the lay of the heart which the" simple, affectionate Zoan warbled, while his ardent youthful bosom thrilled with delicious sensations of increased hope; and his animated eyes became resplendent with pleasure, as the amber island, the late tranquil abode of Ozembo, lessened to his view, as every nervous stroke of his paddles brought him nearer the tall rock, which darkly stretched its broad base far into the deep, the coral rock, which having doubled, he should plainly behold the wished-for haven, his native home, whera



s





happiness, in the form of Ora, the worshipped of his heart, dwelt, the lovelymaid, to whom, with straining nerves, he urged his canoe.

Ozembo, lost in thought, had observed an unbroken silence; his feelings were too complicated to be conveyed in language— the husband and father throbbed tumultuously in his bosom, and hope and apprehension held alternate dominion in hi& agitated mind; like Zoan, he anxiously wished to double the coral rock, and reach the opposite island, considering it a certain safe asylum for his wife and boy, where, surrounded and guarded by relatives and friends, they might defy European force and treachery; but the terrific dream, the presageful sadness of Yarilla, had communicated an alarm to his hithertoundaunted bosom, which his utmost efforts failed to conquer; and the youthful chief gazed alternately on his wife and his .boy, then looked with anxious expectation at the point bf :the rock, towards which jthey were rapidly approaching, while the mingled sensations that agitated his frame





gave to his countenance an expression of melancholy that added force to the fears palpitating in the tender bosom of Yarilla, who held in her arms the smiling, playful Roseb, utterly unconscious that every moment, bending over the edge of the canoe, he plunged his little jetty fingers in the sparkling wave, and sprinkled, with artless, sportive action, her face, already dewed with the tears of apprehension.

With a smile of congratulatory pleasure, Zoan turned his eyes towards Yarilla, as his canoe, with the swiftness of lightnings shot round the projecting point of the rock.

Ozembo, with the action of despair, raised his arms to the sky; a shriek, loud and piercing, burst from the lips of Ya^ rilla; and Zoan, with equal astonishment and dismay, beheld, moored to the side of the rock, a large Spanish ship, whose exT ulting and inhuman crew no sooner beheld the hapless Africans, than they discharged a shot; the loud astounding report, the smoke, and fire, suspended for a moment the faculties of Zoan, but vaguely informed





of the use of cannon, and their destructive effects.

Yarilla, in a voice of despair, murmured —" My terrific dream is explained; the appalling note of the albatros was fatally presageful; death or slavery is our inevitable fate."

She sunk, faint and terrified, on the shoulder of Ozembo, who, roused by the imminent danger of their situation, suffered her to sink to the bottom of the canoe, while, with a desperate effort of strength, he snatched the paddles from the nerveless hands of the dismayed Zoan, and endeavoured, by accelerating their speed, to avoid the rapacious and cruel Spaniards; but already their long-boat was filled with ruffians, whose hearts were insensible to pity—whose thoughts were resolute to secure the prize so unexpectedly thrown in their way.

Shooting their boat across the waves, the politic Spaniards maintained a station between the shore and the devoted canoe, at once intercepting its destination and cutting off the possibility of flight.





At this tremendous moment of peril, when the naturally-timid Yarilla beheld herself, and the friends dearest to her heart, on the point of becoming, a prey to the horrible white men, she started on her feet,, and gazing on her danger; rallied the spirits that were retreating round her heart; she placed the little Roseb behind her, and in tones of severe reproach reminded Zoan of the expecting Ora, who stood on the beach, anxiously waiting his return; she pointed to the bow that hung useless at his shoulder, and bade him remember that their enemies were as vulnerable to the arrow as the panther he had. skin on the shore of the amber island..

Zoan felt, ashamed of his consternation; the reproach . of Yarilla animated him to action; he started, as if newly awakened from a dream; his desperate fingers tightened the strings of his bow, while Yarilla defended the. canoe, by directing her arrows against the bosoms of the Spaniards; already had her unerring hand sent to an awful and eternal account three of the ene





tny who had eagerly pressed forward to %eize the head of their little fragile bark, when a shot from the boat entered the forehead of Roseb, who had clung, shrieking with terror, to the knees of his mother; she beheld the spouting blood of her child—she felt his hold slackened—she saw his quivering frame fall at her feet.

The bow, which had hurled the shafts 'of death, dropped'from her powerless hand, and the frantic cries of Yarilla mingled with the exulting shouts of the savage Europeans, whose superior numbers, with the aid of their fire-arms, soon made them conquerors, and placed in their possession the fragile canoe and its devoted freight.

Ozembo and Zoan, recovering their native intrepidity and courage, fought and struggled for liberty with the furious strength of enraged lions, while the shrieking, frenzied Yarilla, tightly, hekl 'in the Herculean grasp of a brutal Spaniard, was prevented from leaping into the waves after !hef child, whose body, crimsoned with blood, 'and with'limbs yet quivering in the convulsions of death, her despairing eye's beheld, first trampled under the feet of the inhuman foe, and then dashed with merciless outrage into the boiling waves, which, tinged with his blood, yielded the murdered innocent a peaceful refuge from the cruel tyranny of man.





The senses of the hapless YariHa were unequal to such a dreadful conflict; they receded in terror from a scene of aggravated horror; and when the light of reason again returned to illumine her memory, it was to behold herself, her husband, and brother, with many others of their miserable, enslaved countrymen, strongly attached.by heavy iron chains to huge beams of wcwd, in a narrow, suffocating hole, which only admitted a faint stream of light, just sufficient to disclose to her harrowed sight the wretched hopelessness of their condition', the motion she felt, and the noise of the dashing waves,.gave her the anguished knowledge, -that she was still on the element that engulphed her child; while the uheasy/gr3%.rf&Sfte rusty irons, confining her slender limbs> informed her too surely she was a captive to the barbarous white





men, torn for ever from the islands where her early youth had passed in tranquil innocence, in the happy enjoyment of friendship, in the blissful endearments of love— "Roseb, my babe! my beloved Itoseb!" were the first words uttered by the parched and fevered lips of Yarilla, as, with unavailing effort, she attempted to stretch out her manacled arms towards Ozembo.

"Thy tender babe, thy Roseb, sleeps in peace, my beloved," replied her afflicted husband; "the Great Spirit has translated our child from earth, and graciously placed him in a bower of never-fading flowers; a milk-white antelope offers her milk to his rosy lips—the golden waves of eternity bathe his tender limbs-^ and a cooling breeze, wafted from groves of perpetual fragrance, fans our beloved Roseb."

"The treasure of my doting heart, my Roseb!" resumed Yarilla; " inhuman monsters!—savage white men!—restore my child!"

"Beloved Yarilla, thou dost afflict thyself in vain," said Ozembo; "our Roseb is beyond the reach of human restoration;





and tranquillize thy bosom, my adored, with the sweet reflection, he is also beyond the reach of human persecution. Cease then, dearest Yarilla, to mourn for him, who happily has escaped the direful fortune that awaits his miserable parents, and these our hapless countrymen, fallen like us into the white man's power. The tender flesh of our darling Roseb will not rankle with debasing fetters—he will not be compelled to labour for these monsters. Thy child, my Yarilla, will not be a white man's slave."

"My babe P said Yarilla, in tones of frenzied anguish, "my babe is murdered! the blood of my precious Roseb spouted in a crimson stream on the wretched bosom from which his lips drew sustenance! I saw his lovely eyes close in the deep sleep of death! My child, my beauteous babe! the inhuman ruffians trampled on the body of my expiring innocent—they tore him from his mother's powerless arms. Oh, my Roseb! the deep waters rush over thee—the pitiless waves entomb thee!"

"For that mercy," interrupted Ozembo,





"I thank the Great Spirit. Our Roseb lives in the realms of bliss. Rejoice, my Yarilla, that he partakes not the -wretched destiny of his devoted parents. The soul of Ozembo is consoled for his loss in the certainty that he will not suffer our degradation."

The harsh grating of bolts suspended the speech of Ozembo. The eyes of Yarilla were turned towards the spot from which the discordant sound issued, to which she listened with increased dismay. Three dark, ferocious-looking men descended from a hole above their heads; the -first carried a lamp and a large pitcher of water; the second was loaded with an enormous wooden bowl, filled with coarse food for the unhappy Africans; and the third, as his form became visible to sight, held, fro the view of the shuddering captives a wlrip composed of many thongs, whose knotted lengths were dyed and clotted with the blood of those devoted beings, who, resisting their oppressive tyranny, and preferring death to ignominious slavery, persist>ed to refuse the food destined to prolong





their sufferings; these the barbarous Spaniards denominated obstinate and refractory^—these unhappy creatures they considered it necessary to subdue, by inflicting on their fettered bodies, incapable of resistance, disgraceful stripes.

As they approached, Yarilla recoiled in dismay from the first ferocious glance of these hardened villains, whom custom' and avarice had rendered altogether callous to the mental and corporeal sufferings of the miserable Africans. The timid Yarilla closed her eyes to shut out the view of objects so horrible to her memory, for in him whose brutal arm brandished the lacerating whip, she recognized the pitiless barbarian who with savage force had torn the bleeding, murdered Roseb from her arms, and hurled him in the yawning flood; but her terrified gaze was forcibly impelled by the near approach of him who carried the -lamp, for setting down the light, which glaring on his face discovered the deep lineaments of cruelty, he roughly unlocked the irons from her bruised hands, while his





ruffian companion presented the food, and in harsh tones commanded she should eat.

His words were unintelligible to the trembling victim, but she readily comprehended his action; and being fixed to die, to follow her lamented Roseb to those happy climes where murderous white men have no power to oppress and subjugate their fellow-creatures, she resolutely refused the proffered aliment, disgusting to her sight, and loathsome to her smell.

Failing by menacing gestures to subdue the determination of Yarilla, they unlocked the massy chain that bound Gzembo to the beam, and dragging him to a post directly in view of his shuddering wife, they made fast his limbs, and prepared with the torturous lash to inflict on the back of her unshrinking husband the dreadful punishment she had incurred by refusing food.

"If thou art fixed to die, my beloved," said Ozembo to the shrieking Yarilla, "fear not my constancy. These barbarians, with their utmost tortures, shall not shake the fortitude of an African chief—they shall





not extort a tear—their merciless ears shall not be gratified with a single groan. Thou shalt behold me suffer, with unshrinking nerves, all the torture their demon cruelty can inflict. They may barbarously tear my flesh—with giant force may dislocate my bones; but my unconquered spirit shall triumph still, and bursting from this frail and suffering frame, will soar with thine to join our Roseb in the realms of everlasting peace and happiness. Fear not for me, my tender Yarilla; 1 am prepared to suffer—doubt not the fortitude of Ozembo."

The degrading stroke was about to fall on the shoulders of the sable chief, for with a gesture of demoniac fury the lash was elevated above his head by the malignant villain, when with piercing cries, and tears of agony, the distracted Yarilla snatched the food from the hand of his unfeeling associate, and with frantic eagerness devoured it, though to her unpalatable and nauseous.

This point gained, the remorseless Spaniards led Ozembo back to his former con





finement; and the terror of seeing each other endure the debasement of the whip prevailed on the rest to receive the loathsome food that sustained their lives and prolonged their misery.

After each of the wretched Africans had swallowed their allotted portion of food and water, their ruffian oppressors again departed, leaving the unhappy captives in utter darkness to deplore their native land, and the blessings from which they had been inhumanly torn—to which no hope promised a future restoration; but busy imagination figured to their distressed minds the toils, the hardships, the sorrows, and indignities, they assuredly had to encounter when landed on a foreign shore, when separated for ever from the beloved homes, where tender relatives yet anxiously waited the return of those whose eyes were no more to behold the scenes of former felicity.

The piercing grief of Yarilla was at last succeeded by stupor. Ozembo, in gloomy silence, revolved the future, when Zoan proposed, as the only probable expedient by which they might escape the disgraceful state to which it appeared they were designated, namely, to be slaves to the detested Europeans, that when they were next dragged on deck to inhale the fresh breeze, and cool their fevered bodies, they should seize a favourable opportunity of emancipating themselves from the horrors of slavery, by bravely seeking death in the surrounding waves.





Ozembo heard and approved the plan that promised a release from tyranny; but Yarilla was silent. Her imagination be held but one-object—her murdered child, and she listened not to the proposal of her brother; and to live or die with Yarilla was the resolve of Ozembo. She was the spring of his actions—the pulse of his heart; and to die at once, or to live and suffer through years of slavery, depended solely on the will of Yarilla.

"Alas! alas! it is hard to die!" said a young African, with a hollow groan, whose languid eyes could scarcely raise their heavy lids, and whose emaciated frame seemed nearly exhausted by the sufferings he had





endured from heat and confinement, buf who clung with tenacity to life, though divested of every hope that eould render its future prospects desirable; "alas ?y said he, "it is very hard to die!"

"Live then!" replied Zoan, indignantly, "and be the white man's willing slave: The mind that fears to die is fit for servile toil and abject services; such be" thy lot, disgrace of Africa! Ozembo, Yarilla, beloved friends, and partners of my wretched fortune, if it is my chance to be led forth first, expect not the return of Zoan. I fear not death—the foaming ocean shall deliver me from the chains of these barbarians—its billowy waves shall restore to freedom one dauntless African. Ozembo, friend of my heart! Yarilla, my beloved sister! be this our everlasting farewell!"

"Not so," replied Yarilla, recovering recollection, "not so, my brother; we shall meet again."

"Yes," rejoined Ozembo, "yes, Zoan, we shall assuredly meet again. The white man's power terminates with life: we shall meet again in those realms which the Great Spirit guards fcom iiis invasion. There happiness awaits the persecuted children of Africa: together, my brother, we shall follow the chase, and live again in bowers of never-fading verdure."





At the close of the evening, Zoan again -took a hasty farewell of Ozembo and Yarilla, for with three others, his companions in suffering, he was dragged upon deck, and compelled, in spite of the rolling of the ship, labouring through a sea swelling mountain high, to walk incessantly.

The poor youth who had expressed so much unwillingness to die, unable to drag his feeble limbs along the deck, fell twice at the feet of his tyrants. Again with brutal force he was raised, and impelled to motion by the application of the lash, which fell with torturing stroke on his back, yet gashed with cruel stripes, inflicted when his loathing stomach refused to receive food. Again the wretched creature, unable to sustain his own weight, sunk down; and in the rude effort to raise him, the quivering lamp of life became extinct, and the agonized spirit was enfranchised from European bondage.





Gasper, the commander of the ship* gave ord«rfc4q, his crew to throw the corse of the African overboard, at the- same time venting horrible execrations, because death had deprived him of a youth whose athletic form and firm-knit limbs had promised to fetch a large price, now entirely lost to him and his employers.

At the moment the body of the poor African was hurled into the ocean, the wind raged with tremendous fury, the wide-spread sails were split, and the boiling sea angrily lashed the tough sides of the tall vessel, as if impatient to roll its billows over the emancipated slave.

On the deck all was uproar and confusion, for a storm had come on with unexpected rapidity and violence. The Africans were remanded to their place of confinement—the unwholesome hold.

Zoan heard the deep plunge made by the body of his countryman thrown from the deck, and, strengthened, by despair, he





rushed to the stern. His feet, though loaded with irons, had quitted the deck— his wishful eyes beheld the agitated waters that he designed his grave—his lips uttep«d—" Ora, beloved maid! in death As ift ftfe,- Zoan is wholly thine T' '*' m L '.-.'.

As he prepared to spring into the waves, his legs were forcibly seized; and in the midst of his determined struggles* and the loud curses of the Spaniards, he was again secured in the noisome hold.

During the long hours of night the tempest raged with increasing violence. The ship lost her mainmast, and sprung a leak, which necessitated her crew to work incessantly at the pumps for the preservation of their lives. Dismay was on every countenance, for the wind raved with deafening fury; and the vessel, tossed from billow to billow, refused the guidance of the helm.

It Avas in this awful situation that remorse struck the bosom of Lopez, the chief mate. He reflected, with sensations of the deepest horror, on the crimes he had committed, even from boyhood. His conscience loudly upbraided him with the





assistance he had lent to decoy the innocent, unsuspecting Africans into bondage. He remembered the wanton cruelty with which he had added to their sufferings— the torments his merciless hand had inflicted on the wretched captives; and the storm which threatened the destruction of the ship, appeared to his awakened conscience the awful retribution of offended Heaven, for treachery, rapine, and murder.

But Gasper, whom long habitude with villany of every species had rendered incapable of compunction, and callous to remorse, with a demoniac laugh, impiously ridiculed the penitence of Lopez, who, almost paralyzed with horror, gazed on the boiling billows, which, rolling in mountains, one moment tossed the helpless ship with their angry swell, till she appeared to touch the clouds, and the next breaking under her with tremendous roar, threatened to engulph her in a black and yawning abyss.

In Lopez the terror of quick-approaching death was aggravated by agonizing reflections on his ill-spent life, which rendered him totally unfit to meet the awful judgment to which he believed he was -hastening, where he must render up the black account of crimes, which would decree him to everlasting reprobation. It was now the recollection of a murder he had wantonly committed tortured his memory. He beheld the hapless female whom he had stabbed—his horrorized fancy saw the blood streaming from the victim of his brutal fury—his ear again rang with her dying groans; and unable either to supplicate Heaven's mercy, or assist the dripping, toil-worn mariners, he lay on the deck, absolutely enervated by horror of his past guilt, and apprehension of his present danger, while Gasper, spurning him with contempt and indignation, endeavoured to inspire the desponding crew with courage. His long dark locks streaming on the blast—his meteor eyes gleaming scorn and rage, he stood like the demon of the storm, undaunted by the waning elements, and with colossal strength straining his tough





VOL. II. N





sinews to save the shattered vessel, while ,his rough voice, loud and deep as the passing thunder, directed-the exertions of the toil-exhausted sailors.

During this night of terror many of the wretched Africans expired; and when with .the morning light the boisterous wind died away, and Gasper commanded to open the hold, the only survivors who appeared likely to sustain the hardships of the voyage were Ozembo, Yarilla, and Zoan, whose constitutions yet bore up against the misery of their situation, to whom death, by releasing so many of the companions of their wretchedness,had given much wider space, and allowed a freer circulation of air in their dismal prison.

With the danger the fears of the villain Lopez vanished; and as he beheld the bodies of the ill-fated Africans plunged in the yet-agitated ocean, he joined with Gasper in execrating their feeble spirits, and lamenting the loss their employers would sustain by the death of so many of the negroes.

"Thou art a cowardly knave, and thy





own spirit is more feeble than theirs, for thou art afraid to die, which they are not. The dread of the negroes is life, not death," said Gasper, with a look of contempt.

"Yon assert more than you can prove," replied Lopez, "and what no man but yourself would dare affirm to my face." .."Then the whole ship's crew are fools,"

'returned Gasper; " for every man of them has witnessed thy dastardly behaviour. Wilt thou pretend to despise a feeble spirit—thou, whom a puff of wind renders in-.

icapable of action?" . .i,. -,

../'if'iA. puff of wind!" repeated Lopez; "do you call the tempest of last night only

iapuff of wind?" ,,

." Little more, truly," answered Gasper^ scornfully; "but thy fears magnified it into

iaifcempest. Thou canst look fierce now, and no doubt hast conceit enough to fancy thou art valiant; but the. wind has ceased raving,, and the sun shines—we are not

-now surrounded either by danger or darkness."'

'"Boiyou mean to .say.that I am only





courageous in daylight," asked Lopez, "and where there is no danger?"

"Thy pusillanimous conduct last night is a sufficient answer to that question," returned Gasper; " did you not lie on the deck, pale and trembling, conscience-jstruck no doubt, and fancying the devil at thy side, ready to carry thee off—seeing the ghosts of all the Africans thou hast helped to escape from slavery prepared with fiery whips to ksh thy back, as thou hast often done theirs?"

"No more of this discourse," growled Lopez; "it is far from agreeable, I promise you."

"Perhaps so," replied Gasper; "but answer me one question, and I have done —didst thou see the ghost of the black wench who refused thy offers of kindness in the river Amazon?"

Lopez turned pale, and would have passed forward; but Gasper, placing himself in his way, intercepted his intent, continuing—" You know, after having flogged her till her back was bruised to jelly, you stabbed her in the side, and commanded her to be thrown into the sea."





"Enough, enough," interrupted Lopez, his eyes glaring round.

"Why, ay," resumed Gasper, " any body but you would have thought you had punished the poor wench enough by flogging her; but as she clung to the side of the vessel, you know, you chopped her hands off with this hatchet," snatching one Up from the deck *„ " and see here—the handle is still stained with her blood. Thy head had but an uneasy pillow, I guess; for I perceive thou wert laying on it during the storm last night."

Lopez cast a shuddering glance on the blood-stained hatchet; and making an effort at firmness, answered—" The obstinate black devil deserved the death she met."

"Whether or not she deserved it, your conscience can best tell," replied Gasper; "but I know your friend Pedro, who assisted you in throwing her overboard, isgrown as thin as a skeleton, and as melancholy as an owl-'





"And what is that to me?" said Lopez< "can I help his getting thin and dull?"

"I did not say you could," replied Gasper; "but you might have helped constraining him to assist you in murdering a poor, inoffensive creature, whose only crime was a dislike of your handsome person."

"You know nothing of the matter," returned Lopez, "and would show your wisdom in being silent on the subject."

This speech being uttered in a tone of menace, Gasper hastily replied—" Why, what have I to fear? I never saw the wench when living; and it is not likely that she will visit me, as she does Pedro, every night, holding up her bleeding stumps, and shrieking * murder!' in his ears. I have heard him say that he never goes aloft to hand a sail, but she is there before him ; and I should not wonder if she stood close by thee last night, for nothing but fear could have made thee such a coward."

** The dead do not rise again," said Lopez.

"Then Pedro lies confoundedly," returned Gasper; "but this I will affirm.





on my own knowledge—if thou wert dead, I know no loss our owners would sustain, for," looking at him contemptuously, "I tell thee to thy teeth, thou art a coward."

Lopez replied, he should not forget, at a proper time, to demand satisfaction for his insulting language.

Gasper scowled disdain from under his dark brows, but made no answer.

Lopez slunk away, ashamed of having betrayed his fears to Gasper, who was a hardened villain, utterly disbelieving the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, and whose callous mind ridiculed alike the assertions of Pedro and the fears of Lopez.

His openly-avowed contempt stung Lopez to the quick, and he resolved not to forget the insult, whenever a proper opportunity for revenge occurred. He had been called a coward; and however he might have deserved the appellation during the recent storm, there were many instances of his courage, which Gasper could have recollected, and he looked forwards to a time when he might make him bitterly repent his forgetfulness.





The attempt at self-destruction made by the hapless Zoan had failed; and this act of desperation, of consequence, occasioned a more strict observance of their every action and movement, so as to render futile every future effort that might be made by the devoted Africans to obtain emancipation by death from the horrors and hardships of slavery. Through the long hours of the dreary and tempestuous night, Zoan never ceased to deplore the cruel disappointment of his project—to execrate, with bitterness of soul, the barbarous Europeans —and to supplicate the Great Spirit for instant annihilation.

At length Ozembo, who had listened in silent agony to the heart-breathed groans of his miserable fellow-captives, and the energetic supplications of Zoan, seemed suddenly inspired with fortitude to combat the wretchedness of his condition; and, addressing them in a firm voice, said— "Wherefore, my countrymen, should we madly rush on death? why suffer our spU rks to sink in cowardly despondency,- Of evaporate in weak complainings? The venerable Orano, my revered grandsire,, when treacherously enslaved by Europeans, wasted not the vigour of his youth—the energies of his spirit, in idle wailings or vain laments. No, my friends; he acted a wiser, nobler partr He watched and waited with unwearied patience, endured the white man's cruelty with unshrinking firmness, till he gained an opportunity of escaping from their toils. With untired perseverance, with unshaken fortitude, he travelled alone over burning sands and barren deserts, swam across lakes and rivers, bore thirst and famine as he wandered over stranger lands, in search of that dear native home from which he had been, under show of amity, decoyed. At length his toils were recompensed, for he regained the island from whence he had been torn— he was again united to those beloved oneswhose smiling images had blessed his dreams, and cheered his ardent fancy, during the weary years he laboured in a dis.





tant land, the white man's slave.—Yarilla, Zoan, let the example of Orano rouse you from despair. We are yet but in the morning of our days—let us not waste our strength in useless struggles, or in vain regrets. What force cannot perform, stratagem may effect. Let us endure with patience, and bear our present evils by binding to our hearts the hope, for us an hour will certainly arrive, when we may seize an opportunity to fly from European tyranny. Meanwhile let us bend all our powers to learn the white man's customs, laws, and habits; and turning our present misfortunes into means of future good, by knowledge and experience hardly purchased, let us secure our native land from future invasion and oppression."

Yarilla, languid and faint, listened to the words of Ozernbo; but her chilled bosom kindled with no ray of his illusory enthusiasm. No blissful hope of emancipation from galling slavery, or return to the abodes of her early happiness, illumined the dark despondence of her soul, immediate death was its chief wish, for death only to her mind presented a refuge from present and impending wretchedness.Her Roseb too was for ever lost to her on earth; in another happier world she believed he would be l-estored to her maternal bosom. In death alone Yarilla expected felicity; but Ozembo, her husband, had resolved to live, and to partake his fate, whether joy or misery, was instantly the settled determination of the doting Yarilla.





Zoan also attended to the advice of Ozembo; and the desire for death subsided as he weighed the arguments of his friendr and considered the possibility of escape. The hope of again clasping his adored Ora thrilled his heart. This fond imaginationgave a new spring to his torpid spirits— his heavy eye again sparkled with the gay but deceitful promises of hope.

Ozembo having, with simple but affecting eloquence, succeeded in reviving a desire of life in his wife and friend, lost not an instant in speaking to the feelings of the rest of his sable brethren. He represented to the companions of his slavery the madness of yielding their faculties to the dark subjection of despair—he pointed out the extreme folly of rushing on selfdestruction, when it was not only possible, but highly probable, that some as-yet-unthought-of event would spring from the constant revolution of time, which might not only restore their liberty, but means of glorious revenge on their enslavers.





The inspiring voice of Ozembo was listened to with mute attention; his words fell like healing balm on their wounded hearts. The desponding Africans raised their dejected heads, determined to preserve life for the glorious purposes of vengeance and freedom.

Their voyage to South America was retarded by adverse winds and furious storms. Yet, in spite of grief, sickness, and danger, Ozembo, Yarilla, and Zoan, though manacled, and dragging out the tedious hours in darkness and pain, contrived to gain some knowledge of the language of their enemies; and Gasper and Lopez, from the quickness of apprehension, and docility of mind, they discovered in the wretched Africans, flattered their avarice with the sordid hope of obtaining for them a much higher price than that usually given for slaves, considering them their own particular property, not having been purchased, as most of the other negroes had been, from the petty kings, who assume monarchy on various of the African islands, and arrogate the cruel power of selling their prisoners taken in battle. Ozembo, Yarilla, and Zoan, were conquered by themselves, and were not by them considered as belonging to the merchants who fitted out the vessel for the inhuman purpose of trafficking for men.





Many tedious weeks had elapsed, ir* which the unhappy Africans had suffered incredible hardships, from the wretched food allowed for their subsistence, as well as from the privation of exercise and air,, when the ship, almost a wreck, entered the Rio de la Plata, and the Africans, sick from confinement, their limbs swelled and festered with the weight of galling fetters, were marched to a village near Potosi, in the audience of Los Charcos.





Here Ozembo, Yarilla, and Zoan, were separated from the companions of their, voyage; and the deep sorrow they felt at being thus suddenly compelled to bid farewell to their unfortunate countrymen, with whose fate it was but too probable they should never become acquainted, damped the wonder and curiosity every passing object would otherwise have excited: their fatiguing march at length terminated at a large, rude building, on the border of a winding river, where they were placed in; the charge of Gasper's mother, an old woman of disgusting appearance, who was attended by persons of African complexion, but whose language was Spanish.

Here, under strict guard, they were allowed the refreshment of bathing their tired and lacerated limbs in the cool stream;. a large bowl of boiled rice, roasted yams, and fruit, was then set before them, of which, being wholesome food, and not made nauseous to their palates by a mixture of salt, they ate heartily; they were afterwards conducted to a light, spacious apartment, thickly spread with soft rushes, where the entrance being strongly fastened, they were left to repose their wearied frames, to dream of Africa, and the happiness they were to enjoy no more, save in the feverish visions of the night, when busy fancy transported them to the spicy groves, and engaged them in the innocent pursuits that used to occupy their hours in their native land.





For some days they were permitted to enjoy repose, to recruit their harassed frames, and establish the health which a variety of sufferings had injured.

The fear of being separated from her husband and brother filled the mind of Yarilla, and prevented her regaining strength'; while Ozembo, tall, majestic, and commanding, had, spite of the difference of colour, attracted the fancy of old Urganda, the mother of Gasper, who, by officious kindness, endeavoured to win his notice.

Ozembo, ignorant of her design, and insensible to her invitation, bestowed all his solicitude on Yarilla, who, bashful and apprehensive, shrunk from the rude gaze





of those whom curiosity induced to visifc and examine them.

It was with much secret uneasiness the old woman heard the intention of her son and Lopez, to take the slaves to Potosi, inorder to dispose of them; and with much art she endeavoured to prevail on Gasper to leave Ozembo with her, as superintend dant of her slaves, who were employed in the cultivation of cotton; but Lopez obstinately resisted all her hints, and openly expressed his expectation of selling the three together, at the same time observing Ozembo was worth more than the other two.

The anxiety and vehemence of Urganda awakened the suspicions of Gasper, who not thinking it politic to indulge the wish of his mother, concluded a bargain with Gusman Ahnagro, who purchased Ozembo, Yarilla, and Zoan, in the name of Gonzalo, marquis de Baldivia, and were, by him, to the great disappointment of the old woman, sent to labour, in the silver mines of Potosi.

In the midst of the wretchedness to





which she saw herself devoted, Yarilla was grateful to the Power she worshipped, that she was not separated from her husband and brother; and they, while condemned to a laborious task, were equally thankful that they were able to cast on her a commiserating glance, or cheer her with a smile, which, though proceeding from hearts overwhelmed with sorrow, encouraged her to support her toils.

More than a hundred lamps gave light to the deeply-excavated mine> which originally was a solid rock of silver, but now worked away according to the different fancies of the slaves, exhibited a confused but shining mass of pillars, arches, and pyramids, rudely shaped by the stroke of the hatchet, the only implement used by the unfortunate beings compelled to break the silver from the rock, which is separated in large flakes, and remains in glittering heaps, to be removed by the females, whose work it is to bear it to a place where each slave's daily task is weighed.

A wretched hut, rudely constructed on the brow of the mountain (in whose centre they toiled from the early dawn of morning till the setting of the sun), was allotted for the residence of the new-made slaves.





The anguish of Yarilla seemed redoubled as she surveyed the barren mountain, where not a shrub or tree reared its green headr and the dismal hut, dark and comfortless, so unlike the elegant cane-bower, her former happy home; as her eye wandered over the dreary, sterile prospect, her afflicted thoughts recurred to the aromatic groves of the amber island, where, at every step, the eye was delighted with rieh ripe fruits and glowing, flowers, whose perfume, wafted in every breeze, regaled and refreshed the languid spirits.

Fatigue and sorrow took from Yarilla the power to speak her regrets; but the mournful expression with which she surveyed this dismal habitation was understood by Ozembo; he pressed her burning hands to his heart, and kissed away the tears that dropped slowly on her eheek:. while Zoan prepared their coarse, scanty meal, he endeavoured to animate her with the hope of escaping from their tyrants— of regaining their native Africa, and dwelling again in their pleasant bower.





Yarilla strove not to damp the hope encouraged by her husband and brother, though she felt assured it was a delusive one, and that the golden groves of Africa would never again bless their eyes; the thoughts of Yarilla were with Roseb in the world of spirits, but she wished not to add to the afflictions of Ozembo and Zoan. The burst of grief being past, occasioned by contrasting their present dreary situation and wretched abode with the beautiful scenes that, on every side, met the view from their former home, their pleasant bower, she endeavoured at composure—» she ate of the food presented by their hands, and gratefully acknowledged that every blessing was not torn from her, for the Great Spirit had not permitted Ozembo and Zoan to be separated from her embrace: but her pensive smiles, her uncomplaining patience, did not deceive her husband or brother; the anguish of her heart was visible in her dejected countenance— her delicate frame was unequal to the toil imposed on it—her weak arm could scarcely wield the heavy hammer with which the silver was broken for melting—and her eyes, once brilliant as the morning star, were now dim with fatigue.





Ozembo and Zoan, alive to the tenderest feelings of affection and sympathy, exerted all their powers to accomplish, before the given time, their portion of labour, that they might assist and lighten hers.

From the hours devoted by the rest of the slaves to sleep, they borrowed intervals, which they industriously employed in attempts to cultivate and render productive the barren ground that circled their miserable hut, which,. wretched as it still was, exhibited a superior appearance to the dwellings of the other slaves, who, on their quitting the mines, hopeless and inert, sat motionless, brooding over the hardships: of their condition, or courted at once the happy forgetfulness of sleep, which gave them a transient and shadowy enjoyment of their former freedom, on those shores they were fated to behold no more, except in dreams.





During the still hours of night, when all around her were sunk in the heavy sleep produced by incessant fatigue, the tearful .eyes of Yarilla were raised .to the spangled canopy of heaven; she watched the moon majestically sailing along the unclouded .expanse, and thought, with many a regretful sigh, on the calm and brilliant nights, when she had wandered with Ozembo in the aromatic groves of Africa, or sat with him beside the fountain near their bower, to listen to the soft cooing of the doves—to watch the water,, like a sheet of 'silver, tumbling from the mountain, and hear Ozembo relate a perilous combat with a lion or panther, on the dangerous heights of Sierra Leone—" Dear happy groves," said Yarilla, " never more shall my fingers weave into chaplets your odorous flowers —never more shall I repose under the arching boughs of your tall trees I Beloved fountain, never more shall my lips drink of your pellucid wave! Roseb, treasure of thy mother's breaking heart, my murdered innocent! never again shall I fondly teach thy little tender feet to press the verdant





turf! Oh. never more shall I watch, with emotions of dehght, thy artless gambols— never more will .thy arms entwine my neck! Oh, never again shall I clasp my Roseb to my transported bosom!"

The restless anguish of Yarilla passed not unmarked by Ozembo; the sufferings of her so sincerely beloved added poignancy to his own feelings, and rendered the iron yoke of slavery more heavy and insupportable. . . >

Ozembo had also shuddered at the barbarous punishments inflicted on the unhappy wretches whom sickness, or any other cause, incapacitated from performing

(their daily tasks; he had seen the lash descend, with lacerating stripes, on every sex and age; and he contemplated, with maddening horror, the moment when he should see the bosom of Yarilla disfigured and torn by the disgraceful whip; but as yet Ozem

- bo had witnessed only gentle punishments, from which himself, and those even dearer

'40 his heart than himself, had happily escap

1 'ed; he saw the dissatisfaction of his countrymen-J-he heard their murmurs—and anxiously waited for some occasion that might rouse their torpid spirits, to revenge their injuries on their inhuman tyrants; when, ripe for revolt, he should encourage them to assert their rights as men, and nobly •spurning the debasing shackles of slavery, he should animate them to rush upon their foes, and, by an act of retributive justice, dare to be free—" How long," said Ozembo, "will the Great Spirit permit the necks of his children to be trampled by the oppressor! Will he not rouse them to vengeance?—will he not inspire them with courage to resist ?—will he not give them strength to prove to the pallid Europeans that Africans are men?" ,,.-i Su'.'-.





The mother of Gasper saw the Africans depart for Potosi with disappointment and rage, which urged her to use so many'opprobrious terms to Lopez, that, irritated and disturbed by her virulent language, he insisted on an immediate division of the money, that he might expedite his departure for Lima. , »•

Gasper had received the money, but/being of a covetous disposition, he was tin





willing to part with it out of his own hands, and contrived excuses to put off the settlement from day to day, till at length a quarrel arose between him and Lopez, which the old woman, not yet reconciled to the loss of Ozembo, took pains, by artful insinuations, to foment.

Gasper, cool and sarcastic, threw out hints against the courage of Lopez, who being alone with Gasper in a remote part of the building, suddenly plunged his dagger into his throat.

Gasper had yet power to seize his assassin in his strong arms; and though his life-blood was issuing in black streams, he dashed his head with such violence against a block of marble, that the brains of Lopez flew from his fractured scull.

Gasper, with dying eyes, beheld the convulsive struggles of Lopez, and the last feeling of his heart was exultation that he had not given up the money for the sale of the Africans, and that Lopez lived not to triumph in his fall.

Such was the fate of two hardened ruffians, the punishment of whose guilt and barbarity overtook them, at a moment when they considered themselves secure from danger, and about to enjoy the fruits of their villany.





Urganda forgot to bewail her son Gasper, when she beheld the shocking fate of Lopez, whom she particularly disliked; and being now released from the restraint in which she had been held by her son, on whom she was dependant, she resolved to remove to Potosi, and enjoy, in her own way, the wealth Gasper had toiled to accumulate, but which he avariciously hoarded up, being of a nature too penurious to use the gold he had braved the dangers of flood and field, and plunged deeply in guilt, to obtain.

To have known the fate of these atrocious wretches, would perhaps have been some small solace to the wounded heart of Yarilla; but no intelligence reached the depth of the mines of Potosi; and seldom did the unhappy slaves behold any other countenance but that of a merciless overseer, whose barbarous hand brandished over their heads a blood-stained whip.

VOL. II. o





One of the wretched negroes having accidentally stumbled against a basket of silver which was prepared for weighing, fell to the earth, where the inhuman overseer severely lashed him, venting, between each savage stroke, furious execrations on his carelessness: the unhappy creature being at last released (the overseer having exhausted his strength, and could no longer use the whip), crawled, bruised and bleeding, to his hut, where, with streaming eyes, and a heart burning with indignation, Ozembo heard his offence, and beheld the effects of the punishment he had received.

From the commiserating slaves who crowded round, he learned, that plunging the leg or arm of an offender into boiling silver, or roasting them before a slow fire, had but too frequently been practised by the Spaniards; and that the whip, though every stroke cut to the bone, and was followed by the blood of the offender, was considered by these tyrants a mild and gentle punishment.

The considerate Zoan had prevented





Yarilk from being shocked with this spectacle of horror; he had led her to their own allotted ground, to observe that a few of the seeds he had cast into the earth had taken root, and were shooting up—" In a short time," said Zoan, "we shall sit under the shade of our trees."

"Alas! yes, my brother," replied Yarilla, with a heavy sigh, "we shall sit and lament fairer trees and a happier shade; we shall sit and deplore the freedom we shall never again obtain."

Yarilla turned into the hut, to prepare their scanty and homely fare; and Zoan, full of pensive thought, of love, and Ora, proceeded to the hut of the suffering Zambo, to whose lacerated back his compassionating friends were applying the cooling leaves of a plant, which experience had taught them was of a lenient and healing quality. Near the entrance of the hut he found Ozembo, buried in deep and terrible thought. Zoan spoke to him, but he replied not, though he followed his steps along the winding path that led to his dwelling. t



o . - , ,





A crash of thunder burst above their heads, and the vivid lightning ran along the scarred brow of the mountain—" May the Great Spirit," said Ozembo, " melt the mountain to a river!—may the boiling silver whelm these monsters, even though the rushing wave, in its ruinous course, destroy the Africans; for better such a death at once, than drag a length of year* in slavery!



'Oh that annihilation were a god,

To hear my prayer! then should each living thing

fie straight involv'd in universal ruin!"

END OF VOL. U.

Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Strcet, London.
