A MARRIAGE 



IN HIGH LIFE. 



T2DITED BY 



THE AUTHORESS OF ' FLIRTATION; 



" I was compelled to her — ^but I love thee 
By love's own sweet constraint." 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



LONDON: 
IBOTSON AND PALMER, PRINTERS, SAVOY STREET, STRAND. 



V' 1 



PREFACE. 



The following pages, which I now 
offer to the public, may, perhaps, not 
attract general interest; they contain 
merely a few passages in the history of 
the heart and feelings of an individual 
placed in singular and trying circum- 
stances; but those who should recog- 
nize beneath the feigned name of Lady 
Fitzhenry, one whom they may remem- 
ber to have seen in the gay scenes of 



9f29Jld^ 



iv PREFACE. 

fashionable life, will probably feel some 
interest in the events which occasioned 
her first introduction into the world, 
and her sudden disappearance from it. 



THE EDITOR. 



MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER I. 



A mon avis, I'Hymen et ses liens 

Sont les plus grands, ou des maux, ou des biens ; 

Point de milieu ; I'etat du mariage 

Est des humains le plus cher avantage. 

Quand le rapport des esprits, des coeurs 

Des sentimens, des gouts, et des humeurs, 

Serre ces liens tissus par la nature 

Que I'amour forme, et que I'honneur epure. 

L'Enfant Puodigue. 

Towards the end of a London spring-, 
that is to say, about the middle of Au- 
gust, was married by special license, 
VOL. r. B 



2 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

at her father's house in Harley Street, 
Emmeline Benson to Ernest, Lord Fitz- 
henry, only son of the Earl of Arlingford. 

The ceremony was like most others 
of its kind ; the drawing-room was 
crowded with relations and friends on 
both sides, dressed in congratulatory 
smiles, and new bridal finery. 

Emmeline's father, an opulent city 
merchant and banker, appeared arrayed 
in a complete new suit for the occasion. 
The first gloss was not off' his coat, 
which hung stiff" upon him, as if not 
vet reconciled to the homely person to 
which it was destined to belong, while 
each separate bright button reflected 
the collected company. His counte- 
nance glowing with happiness, he busied 
himself in attentions to his guests, pro- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 3 

yoking, by his remarks, those congra- 
tulations which flattered his pride and 
parental fondness ; and, with bustling- 
joy, making the necessary preliminary 
arrangements for the ceremony about to 
take place, which was to raise his only 
and beloved child to that elevated situ- 
ation in life, in which it had ever been 
the first wish of his heart to see her 
placed, and which his partial affection 
thought her so well fitted to grace. 

Mrs. Benson's feeling^s seemed of a 
less joyous nature, and sometimes, even 
a tear started into her eye, in spite of 
herself, when she endeavoured to smile 
in return to the kind wishes of her 
friends. She was too fond a mother not 
to feel painfully the loss of her daugh- 
ter ; and that feeling was not unmixed 

B 2 



4 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE.. 

with anxiety, in giving her to one of 
whom (of late years at least) she per- 
sonally knew but little. 

All were now assembled excepting 
the bride and bridegroom. The father 
of the latter, apparently as much de- 
lighted as Mr. Benson himself with the 
intended union, being of course among 
the company. But Lord Fitzhenry did 
not appear! Various conjectures were 
formed as to his absence. One person 
declared he had observed his carriage at 
the door of his lodgings as he had 
passed ; another, that he was certain he 
had seen him in a distant part of the 
town not long before. The delay was be- 
o-inning to be awkward, and at every dis- 
tant sound of wheels, both fathers looked 
anxiously along the street, but in vain. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. O 

Gradually the conversation of the 
guests lowered itself into whispers, as 
some new surmise was started with re- 
gard to the possible cause of this strange 
absence of the most important personage 
at so important a moment. But even 
these whispers died away from lack of 
new ideas on the subject, and the now 
total silence was only occasionally 
broken by the rustling of the clergyman's 
surplice, when he left his post before 
the large family prayer-book (laid open 
ready at the marriage ceremony) with 
the benevolent wish, by some common- 
place observation, to dissipate the un- 
pleasant feelings which seemed to infect 
all present; or when he followed Mr. 
Benson to the window, whither he had 
taken up his station of observation in 



6 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the hopes of being the first to give the 
much wished-for news of the approach- 
ing bridegroom. Poor Mrs. Benson's 
cheeks became momentarily of a deeper 
and deeper dye^, and she betrayed her 
anxious agitation by the nervous twitch- 
ing of the gold chain round her neck, 
to which was suspended her daughter's 
portrait, and the constant arranging of 
her lace shawl, which she regularly each 
time pulled off her shoulders. At last, 
the welcome rattle of a carriage driving 
furiously was heard. It stopped at Mr. 
Benson's door, and in a minute Lord 
Fitzhenry, with a flushed cheek, hurried 
into the drawing-room. 

Awkward as such an entrance must 
naturally be, still his agitation seemed 
even beyond what the circumstances of 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 7 

the moment would have been likely to 
produce on a young man of the world. 

Lord Fitzhenry, at twenty-seven, was' 
remarkably good-looking ; and on his 
countenance and whole figure was that 
stamp of high birth, which, even where 
beauty does not exist, more than com- 
pensates for its absence. The general 
character of his countenance was that of 
openness and good humour ; but an 
agitated, even a melancholy expressipn 
now clouded it, which all noticed. 

** Marriage is certainly an awful cere- 
mony," whispered an elderly lady to 
Mrs. Benson ; " and 1 am glad to see his 
lordship betraying so much feeling and 
seriousness at such a moment. It is a 
good sign in a young man." The poor 
trembling mother scarcely heard the 



8 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

remark, nor was there much time for 
more observation, for Mr. Benson had 
ah'eady left the room, and in a few 
minutes returned, leading in his daugh- 
ter. 

Emmeline was nineteen. She was 
slightly formed, had a most winning 
countenance, innocent laughing eyes, 
and a delicate, fair complexion, al- 
though now deepened into crimson, in 
her cheeks, by the agitation of the mo- 
ment, as was very apparent, even through 
the folds of the beautiful lace veil that 
hung all over her. 

The marriage ceremony commenced 
immediately. As it proceeded, the 
bridegroom trembled violently. When 
called upon to pronounce his vow, his 
voice was scarcely audible ; and as he 



A MARRTAfJE IN HIGH LIFE. 9 

placed the ring on his bride's hand, he 
nearly let it fall to the ground. 

But all was soon finally said and 
done — so few are the words which, once 
read over, totally change our existence, 
and fix our fate in life for ever! The 
usual congratulations passed, and the 
chaise and four, decorated with bridal 
favours, rattled to the door. 

Emrheline threw herself sobbing into 
her mother's arms — the first sob, since 
those of childhood, which had ever been 
wrung from her light heart. Her proud 
father gaily kissed her cheek, address- 
ing her by her new title of ** Lady Fitz- 
henry ;" then, drawing her arm within 
his, hurried her down stairs, placed her 
in the carriage, into which the bride- 
groom followed, and the "happy pair" 

B 5 



10 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

drove off as fast as four post horses 
could convey them. 

How blank such moments are to those 
who remain behind ! The company soon 
separated after the usual breakfast, and 
Mr. and Mrs. Benson were left alone. 

All excitement, over the deserted mo- 
ther's spirits then sank; mournfully she 
paced the now silent room, and mecha- 
nically removed from the table Emme- 
line's work-box, which she had left 
behind her, gazing on her name, en- 
graven on the lid, till her tears burst 
forth. Her distress roused Mr. Benson 
from the trance of exultation in which 
he had been lost as he watched the last 
bridal carriage that had driven from the 
door, and he kindly hastened to his 
wife. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 11 

•' Why, my good woman, crying! 
and on such a day! when you should be 
so happy — for shame! for shame!" 

Mrs. Benson shook her head mourn- 
fully. ** God grant it indeed prove a 
happy day! may our beloved child be 
so!" and she sighed deeply. 

" Why, how can you doubt she will ?" 
said her husband; " she has everything 
this world can give; rank!" (and he laid 
a great stress on that word,) ** riches, 
youth; and, for a husband, a most ex- 
cellent and accomplished young man, of 
whom every one speaks well. None of 
your gamblers, jockies, spendthrifts. I 
am sure Emmeline and ourselves are the 
envy oi all our acquaintance. Any one 
might be pleased and proud to see his 
daughter so well married." 



12 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Mrs. Benson again sighed, wiped 
away her tears, and then quietly re- 
turned to her usual avocations. 

Meanwhile, Lord and Lady Fitzhenry 
travelled on, and a few hours brought 
them to Arlingford Hall, which, on his 
son's marriage. Lord Arlingford had 
given up to him, meaning to reside 
himself at a villa at Wimbledon ; his 
health, which had of late been very pre- 
carious, making a near residence to 
town advisable. 

Arlingford Hall, which was in Hamp- 
shire, had been completely repaired and 
refurnished for the new married couple ; 
Lord Fitzhenry having himself been 
much there lately, superintending the 
alterations. At least, that occupation 
was always mentioned as an apology for 



A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 13 

his absence from town, and for his not 
attending more assiduously on his future 
bride. 

During the journey, Lord Fitzhenry's 
agitation and abstraction rather en- 
creased, and it could no longer escape 
Emmeline's observation. His conver- 
sation was forced ; in his manner towards 
her he was punctiliously attentive and 
civil — but perfectly cold and distant. 

When they arrived at Arlingford, all 
the servants were assembled in the hall 
to receive them ; a numerous and re- 
spectable group, who, by the tears of joy 
wdiich some of them shed, seemed most 
sincerely to partake in the supposed 
happiness of their young master. One 
of them, who stood apart from the rest, 
even ventured to address him with par- 



14 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ticular congratulation as with the fami- 
liarity of an old friend, and Jo give 
Emmeline his blessing. 

'* Thank you, Reynolds, thank you," 
said Fitzhenry hastily, as he shook the 
old man by the hand. 

Emmeline's heart was cast in nature's 
best mould, and this simple action of 
her husband found its way to it. She 
smiling raised her tearful eyes to his 
face, but the expression she there found, 
soon made her again cast them down. 
The scene seemed to have totally dis- 
composed him ; and, in an awkward, 
hurried manner, thanking the rest of 
the servants, he led the way to the 
drawing-room. Dinner was ordered 
directly, and all seemed so zealous to 
serve their young master and mistress, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 15 

that it was not long coming, but still 
there was an awful pause. 

Lord Fitzhenry walked up and down 
the room, forced himself to speak, then, 
suddenly, as if recollecting that some 
degree of gallant attention was to be 
expected from him, a bridegroom of only 
six or eight hours, he hurried up to 
Emmeline and helped her off with her 
shawl; but his manner was so odd, so 
unlover-like, that it at last alarmed even 
her innocent, unsuspecting mind, and 
she timidly asked if he was not well. 
He started at her question, and seemed 
much embarrassed ; but, after a mo- 
ment's pause, replied, " The journey, 
the hurry, I suppose ; indeed, I hardly 
know what, but something has given me 
a dreadful headache," 



16 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

And then, as if roused by her remark 
to a sense of the strangeness of his be- 
haviour, he put more force upon himself, 
showed her the public rooms, her own 
sitting room, in which were collected 
books, musical instruments, and every 
possible means of amusement. In an- 
swer to her enquiries, explained to Em- 
meline who were her new relations that 
hung framed on the walls; and, when 
she admired the comfort of the house, 
and particularly of her own boudoir, he 
said something about hoping she would 
be happy in it, but the phrase died 
away in uncertain accents. 

Dinner at length came to his relief; 
he then was attention itself, but the re- 
past could not last for ever ; and, when 
the servants had left the room, Lord 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 17 

Fitzhenry's embarrassment returned 
worse than before. Emmeline had lived 
so little in society, and, consequently, 
had so little the habit of general conver- 
sation — and the six years during which 
she and her husband had been sepa- 
rated, had so entirely broken off the first 
intimacy which had existed between 
them when children, that, timid in his 
company, and now unassisted and un- 
encouraged by him, she felt it impos- 
sible to keep up any thing like conver- 
sation. It was, therefore, no small relief 
when, after an awkwardly protracted 
silence, she saw him leave the room. 

As the door closed upon him, Emme- 
line involuntarily fell into a reverie not 
of the most pleasing nature. " This is 
all very strange!" thought she; and over 



18 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

her usually gay countenance a sadness 
crept. She sighed, she hardly knew 
why; and, when her thoughts wandered 
back to her former happy home, her 
parents, and their doating fondness, 
some ** natural tears " stole down her 
cheek, and she felt herself, as in a dream, 
neglected and deserted. 

But Emmeline was not i?i love; and 
her husband's behaviour, though it as- 
tonished her, and though she felt it was 
not what it ought to be, did not wound 
her heart as it otherwise would have 
done. 

Emmeline was very young, even for 
her age. With a most superior mind and 
character, with tender, even romantic 
feelings, her innocence and simplicity of 
heart were so great, and all her qualities 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 19 

had as yet lain so dormant, that her cha- 
racter was scarcely known even to herself; 
and, to common observers, she passed 
for a mere gay, good-humoured, pleasing 
girl. She was, however, no common 
character, nor what one would have sup- 
posed the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. 
Benson to have been. Nature sometimes 
seems to amuse herself with playing 
such fanciful tricks; and Emmeline's 
natural superiority made it appear as if 
she had been thrown into a sphere to- 
tally different from that for which she 
had been originally designed, and that 
she now was only restored to her own 
proper station, when raised, by her 
marriage, to be the companion of Fitz- 
henry. 

To explain how such a being came to 



20 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

be thus passively united to a man who 
seemed already to have repented the 
step he had taken, it will be necessary 
to go back a little in our narrative. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 21 



CHAPTER II. 



Do I entice you ? do I speak you fair? 

Or rather, do 1 not in plainest truth 

Tell you — I do not, nor I cannot love you ? 

Midsummer Night's Dkeaim. 



Lord Ar ling ford had, early in life, 
entangled himself in pecuniary difficul- 
ties by every species of thoughtless ex- 
travagance, in which an expensive, 
fashionable wife had assisted him. Her 
fortune and health both soon declined, 
and a consumption rapidly carried her to 
the grave while still in the prime of life. 



22 A BIARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and when her only child, Ernest, was but 
ten years old. That which extravagance 
began, indolence soon completed ; and 
long before his son came of age, Lord 
Arlingford found himself, in the language 
of the world, to be totally ruined. 

Mr. Benson had been always much 
employed and consulted by Lord Arling- 
ford's family in all matters relating to 
business; and to him, in the present des- 
perate situation of his affairs, his lordship 
was obliged to have recourse for advice 
and assistance. Mr. Benson had toiled 
all his life as a merchant, and was 
now one of the most opulent bankers 
in London. He had an only child ; and 
to her he meant to oequeath all his 
wealth, provided she made a marriage 
to his choice ; by which, he meant one in 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 23 

that rank of life, which Mr. Benson, with 
all his useful good sense, he had the folly 
to imagine essential to human happiness. 
Being every way an excellent man of 
business, Mr. Benson was appointed to 
be one of the trustees, into whose hands 
it was now deemed necessary to consign 
Lord Arlingford's estate; in order, if 
possible, to retrieve his affairs, and pro- 
tect the interests of his son. 

One day, when talking over his difficul- 
ties with his client, and when Emmeline 
was but seven years old, Mr. Benson 
first proposed, in the form of a joke, 
as a means by which all might be set to 
rights, that their children should be 
united in marriage. He finished his 
speech by a loud laugh ; but it was one 
of mere agitation, for he anxiously looked 



24 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

into Lord Arlingford's face to see how 
such a proposal agreed with the ancient, 
aristocratic pride of the Fitzhenrys. 

Lord Arlingford for a minute made no 
reply ; he kept his eyes fixed on the 
parchment he held in his hands. The 
table before him was covered with deeds, 
bonds, mortgages, and every awful sign 
of the irretrievable state of his affairs ; 
and, strange as it may appear, he caught 
immediately at the idea, as to that which 
alone could save him from utter ruin. His 
answer, when at last it came, transported 
the ambitious banker with joy ; and by 
degrees, and by constantly treating of the 
subject, the two fathers seemed to think 
it was a matter they had but to settle 
between themselves, and that there could 
be no difficulty whatever in a scheme 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 25 

which was to give to both, what they 
both wanted. Mr. Benson's promises 
were most liberal, and Lord Arlingford 
subdued all the hereditary pride of his 
feelings, and seemed quite content to 
lay himself and his family under obliga- 
tions to a man on whom he in return 
conferred so much honour. 

As a first step towards bringing* about 
this favourite scheme, Ernest, when at 
home for his holidays, was constantly 
sent to Mr. Benson's, where he was of 
course indulged in his every boyish 
fancy, and every species of amusement 
imagined for him in which little Emme- 
line could take a part. 

On her birthday every year, a ball 
was given by Mrs. Benson, which was 
opened by her and young Lord Fitz- 

VOL. I, c 



26 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

henry, while the two fathers looked on in 
admiration, and declared that they were 
born for each other. 

At twenty, Fitzhenry left Oxford ; he 
was then to remain abroad for three 
years; and, at his return, it was settled 
that the marriage should take place ; 
although as yet, nothing had been said 
on the subject to either of those most 
concerned in the plan. 

Before his departure, however. Lord 
Ariingford thought it proper to open the 
business to his son, and also to lay before 
him the embarrassed state of his affairs. 

Such disclosures make little impres- 
sion on young minds, to whom, as yet 
unacquainted either with its value or 
want, money is but a vague sort of bles- 
sing ; and Lord Ariingford was forced to 
overcharge the picture to give it due 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 27 

influence on his son. He talked much 
of his own distresses, his sacrifices for 
the sake of his dear Ernest, and, when 
he had worked on his filial affections, 
mentioned merely as a passing thought 
the long projected plan of his union with 
Miss Benson. Ernest, starting, co- 
loured, and stammered out some unde- 
cided words. But finding no positive 
objection made. Lord Arlingford pushed 
on the affair — praised Emmeline — (then 
only thirteen years old,) extorted from 
Ernest first, that he thought her a fine 
girl, and at last a sort of agreement that 
he would think of the proposal, and, on 
his return from abroad, marry her, and 
make his father happy. 

Mr. Benson was informed of the fa- 
vourable progress of their scheme, which 

c 2 



28 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

he furthered by every means in his 
power; and Emmeline was soon taught 
to look upon Ernest as her future hus- 
band. On his taking leave of them be- 
fore his departure for the Continent, he 
kissed her smooth young cheek, ad- 
dressing her by the name of his little 
wife. But neither the kiss nor the ap- 
pellation brought even an additional 
tinge of colour into that cheek ; although 
she might childishly have grieved at the 
loss of her almost only companion. 

During the first months of his absence. 
Lord Fitzhenry wrote two or three times 
to Emmeline, once when sending her a 
watch from Geneva, and again with a 
chain from Venice; but he soon found 
more interesting occupations than com- 
posing letters for the capacity of a mere 
child ; the boy had grown into a man, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 29 

and if he did not actually forget the en- 
gagement into which his father had 
drawn him, he allowed it but little to 
occupy his thoughts. 

Lord Fitzhenry first visited Italy ; at 
Naples, he formed an intimacy with the 
English minister then residing there ; 
and, on the removal of that minister to 
Vienna, Ernest followed him. 

The three years allotted for his re- 
sidence abroad, had already nearly 
elapsed; but, having acquired a taste for 
the habits of the Continent, Ernest beg- 
ged for longer leave of absence ; and by 
his letters, no less than by the accounts 
of all those who met with him, his foreign 
life seemed so much to have improved his 
mind and manners, that Lord Arlingford, 
whose purely worldly character saw little 
beyond such acquirements, agreed to his 



30 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

f 

proloi^iiig his stay ; and he N^^as the 
more willing to acquiesce in his son's 
wishes, as Emmeline, soarcelv vet six- 
teen, was still in appearance and man- 
ners so much of a child, that any con- 
templation of her immediate marriage 
would hare been premature. 

Lord Fitzhenrv. at twenty-three, with 
excellenr and even superior abilities, 
naturally noble fee lings, strong sentiments 
of honour, and a warmlv affectionate 
heart, wunted only those serious princi- 
ples of conduct, which his father had 
neither bestowed on, nor ever required 
firtHH him. Had Lord Arlinofbrd been 
asked whether or no he was an atheist. 
he wc-^ld have resented the question as 
an affiront: but, nevertheless, religion 
\iaA. ncTer occupied his own thoughts. 



A MAEEIAGE IK HIGH LIFE. 31 

and had never in any distinct form al- 
tered into the education of his son. Tiie 
companion he selected for him during 
his residence on the Continent, was a 
voun? man of considerable abilitie-. ^ „ j 
had been destined for the law : bit who, 
having been early led abroad, and having 
a decided turn for a wandering life, was 
too happy to return to scenes in which he 
delighted, and to give utj Lincohi's Inn, 
and studies, for which he had no relish, 
for the existence he preferred, inpres^:-: 
and the future chance of Lord A: -...;..? 
patronage. 

Such a companion, gay ai.1 .1: .0:- 
less as himself, was nc: . i^ : . t 
the neglected part of L ::i F .z_-Lry"s 
education ; and thus, 1. . 1 : _ , 7 : 7 
natnre with a min: eart formed 



32 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

for virtue, in its highest acceptation, 
Fitzhenry was turned adrift on the world 
without any help or defence against its 
snares, except those common rules of 
worldly honour by which men, who may 
infringe nearly every law, human and 
divine, fancy themselves to be guided. 

At Vienna, Lord Fitzhenry became 
acquainted with Lady Florence Mostyn, 
and that chance acquaintance influenced 
his whole future life and conduct. 

Lady Florence, who had early in life 
been married to a man whom she had 
never loved, and whose understanding 
and character she could not respect, had 
every allurement, every charm to capti- 
vate, except that of innocence. Such a 
deficiency one might have hoped would 
have preserved a refined mind like that 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 33 

of Fitzhenry's from her chains ; but, un- 
der the influence of passion, artfully ex- 
cited, and the example of the society in 
which he lived, he fell completely into 
the snare purposely laid for him, and be- 
came the slave of an artful, bewitching, 
and violent woman. 

In the intoxication of her society, 
every thing was forgotten or disregarded. 
In vain were his father's repeated in- 
junctions, that he should return home; 
in vain his self-reproaches at losing, in 
idleness, some of the best years of his 
life. And it was only when alarming ac- 
counts of Lord Arlingford's health roused 
his better feelings, that he was induced to 
tear himself away from Greece, whither 
Lady Florence and her passive, accom- 
modating husband had accompanied 

c 5 



34 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

him ; and, in the middle of winter, to 
set off for England with the hope and 
promise that they would join him there 
early in spring. 

Six years had now elapsed since Lord 
Fitzhenry had left home. His person, 
character, manners — all had changed. 
His "Little Wife" was nearly forgotten; 
and when she did chance to cross his 
mind, he looked upon his engagement 
with her as a mere joke of childhood, and 
trusted his father would do the same. 

From Italy, where he found the ac- 
counts of Lord Arlingford were still very 
alarming, he travelled day and night to 
make up for past negligence, and found 
his parent on his arrival, but slowly re- 
covering from a very dangerous illness. 

Real feelino' and affection broke forth 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 35 

from Fitzhenry's selfish, worldly father, 
on again beholding his son ; and behold- 
ing him, as in truth he was, a son to be 
proud of. 

Lord Arlingford's illness, by weaken- 
ing his nerves, had given to his manners 
an appearance of sentiment unusual to 
him ; and Ernest almost wondered how 
he could have been such a monster as so 
long to have deserted him. A constant 
visitor in his father's sick room, he found 
Mr. Benson. With a feeling not un- 
mixed with remorse he warmly thanked 
him for having supplied his place, and 
inquired after Mrs. and Miss Benson, as 
after old friends of his boyhood. 

" Well, quite well," said Mr. Benson; 
" but Emmelineis so grown, that you will 
hardly know her again:" however she 



36 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

is not altered in any way, I assure you ; 
she has not forgotten her old playfellow;" 
and he looked cunningly into Fitz- 
henry's face, to observe the effect of this 
flattering assurance. " You have been 
a sad rambler, Lord Fitzhenry," he con- 
tinued ; " but now you are returned to 
old England, we shall, I hope, all live 
comfortably together ; and I am sure 
you will be quite delighted with Emmy, 
although perhaps she is notjust like your 
foreign madams ; but none the worse for 
that I suspect — they don't make such 
good wives ; and now that you have, as 
I may say, sown your wild oats," he 
added with a laugh, ''you will not be 
sorry to sit down at home and enjoy a 
little home-bred, quiet English comfort." 
Fitzhenry saw but too plainly the drift 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 37 

of all this, and he was totally at a loss for 
an answer. His eyes, fearful of meeting 
those of Mr. Benson, wandered round 
the room, till they fell on a view of Na- 
ples which hung over the chimney. The 
sight was not favourable to the picture of 
English /lapphiess which Mr. Benson had 
just been presenting to him. Hours of 
rapture produced by the first intoxication 
of passion, beneath an Italian sky, and 
amid scenes calculated to enhance every 
feeling of romantic enjoyment, rose up 
before him in an instant, and formed such 
a contrast to the homely, domestic com- 
fort just held out to him, that his very 
soul sickened at the thought; and, mak- 
ing some awkward sort of vague answer 
to Mr. Benson's very pointed xenvAvk, he 
abruptly left him. 



38 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Ernest had expected to have found his 
father irritated against him, in conse- 
quence of his long absence and his fre- 
quent excuses for not obeying his sum- 
mons to return home. He also feared 
that the real cause of his protracted stay 
might have reached England, and he 
dreaded how much of his story, since 
they had parted, might have been made 
knovi^n to Lord Arlingford. But the 
manner of his father was so perfectly kind 
and cordial, that it reassured Ernest as to 
his secret being as yet safe, and at the 
same time filled his aifectionate heart 
with gratitude and self reproach. 

Some days after his arrival, when 
talking on various subjects connected 
with the place, estate. Sec, Lord Arling- 
ford suddenly said, " Mr. Benson, as 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 39 

soon as I am a little better, and fit for 
visitors, you must write in my name, and 
invite Mrs. Benson and Emmeline to 
come here. Ernest must be impatient 
to see his little wife. Eh, my boy ? " 

Ernest did not parry this second at- 
tack any better than the first — he started, 
and stammered out something about 
" pleasure, honour." But his father did 
not, or would not, see his reluctance to 
touch on the subject; he returned again 
and again to the charge, said his happi- 
ness, his life even, depended upon the 
marriage ; and by the nervous irritation 
which illness had produced, and which 
opposition to his will increased, Ernest 
feared he spoke truly. 

Harassed and perplexed, Ernest at last 
took courage, and resolved to confess to 



40 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

his father the attachment he had formed 
abroad — his unalterable, violent, de- 
cided devotion to another. Lord 
Arlingford seemed breathless with an- 
ger and anxiety, and imperatively 
desired him to inform him who was the 
object of it. 

Lord Fitzhenry cleared his voice, rose 
from his chair, paced the room, and 
twice, in vain, tried to speak ; but at 
last making an effort, '' she is a married 
woman," he said, ** Lady Florence 
Mostyn." The name was scarcely au- 
dible. 

" And is thattt//.^" replied his father, 
much relieved. " Don't think you are 
telling us any thing new ; we have heard 
of your pranks abroad, my boy ; but you 
will not make the worse husband for 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 41 

having passed through the fire. And as 
for your unalterable attachment, that is all 
nonsense. So I thought, at your age, 
with wzj/ first love; for I had two or three 
affairs of the sort before I was married ; 
and, indeed, never quite forgot one of 
my favourites." 

" But surely, Sir, with such feel- 
ings !" 

** Feeling! stuff again," replied Lord 
Arlingford. *' Why really, Ernest, 
you have learnt little of the world in 
your travels ; I am sure any one of your 
young friends would laugh to hear you 
give such a reason for refusing a most 
excellent, and, I must add, advan- 
tageous marriage." 

Although without principles, Ernest 
was shocked at his father's levity; he 



42 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

was in all the heroic romance of passion ; 
to love more than one, to plight his faith 
to another, did not strike him as morally, 
religiously wrong, but as sacrilege to 
the one adored being. All he could ob- 
tain, however, was delay, and that his 
father would allow him some little time 
for reflection. 

Thus passed some months. Lord 
Fitzhenry occasionally met the Benson 
family; but Emmeline he hardly looked 
at, hardly noticed; although, when in 
her society, his manner towards her was 
perfectly civil ; but it was the civility of 
indifference; his thoughts were fixed on 
another, and had he been asked the 
colour of Emmeline's hair or eyes, he 
probably could not have answered. 

Spring arrived, and with it Lady Flo- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 43 

rence. This event did not further Lord 
Arlingford's plan. Fitzhenry was more 
and more decided in his objections, and 
in his determination not to fulfil what 
his father called his engagement. 

Many violent altercations passed be- 
tween them, and, at last, in one of these 
agitating scenes. Lord Arlingford was 
seized with an apoplectic fit, and (as 
Ernest thought) fell dead at his feet. 
Horror-stricken, he raised him from the 
ground; medical assistance was pro- 
cured, and life and hope returned after 
some days of dreadful apprehension and 
suspense; but the impression left was 
too strong on his mind to allow of fur- 
ther resistance ; and, in an unguarded 
moment, Fitzhenry, attacked on every 
side, gave his reluctant consent to the 



44 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

hated union. His father allowed him 
no time to retract. His proposals were 
immediately made; though not without 
a secret hope, on Fitzhenry's part, of 
their being rejected, which, owing to 
the marked neglect with which he had 
ever treated her whose hand he claimed, 
seemed not unlikely. But, contrary to 
his expectations, his offer was accepted. 
Emmeline, as has before been stated, 
was remarkably young and innocent for 
her age; she had been brought up in 
the idea that Lord Fitzhenry was to be 
her husband; and, although without any 
very decided preference for him, and 
with a heart perfectly free, she had 
looked to her marriage as to a thing of 
course, and as to an event that was to 
secure her happiness. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 45 

His indifference, however, had not 
escaped her observation ; and, her cheek 
reddening with offended pride, she men- 
tioned it to her father, when, breath- 
less with delight, he came to announce 
to her that Lord Fitzhenry claimed her 
as his bride. 

Mr. Benson ridiculed what he called 
her conceit, her romance; exaggerated 
into compliments many a simply civil 
thing which Fitzhenry had, or possibly 
had 7iot, said of her; set forth all the ad- 
vantages of the marriage ; used every ar- 
gument which he knew her affectionate 
deference to him would give weight to; 
even hinted at his word being pledged, 
till he succeeded at last in silencing her 
doubts and scruples. The good and 
pious Mrs. Benson too was not quite 
free from worldly vanities; she told her- 



4G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

self, and she told Emmeline, that so 
good a son must make a good husband ; 
that it would be such a comfort to see 
her settled in life with one whom she 
had known since a boy, and of whom 
she knew so much good. 

At last, with something between a 
smile and a sigh, Emmeline gave her con- 
sent, and all was thus finally arranged : 

Seven thousand a-year was firmly 
settled on Lord Fitzhenry, and the resi- 
due of Mr. Benson's immense property 
promised at his death. He added like- 
wise a few thousands of ready money for 
plate, jewels, equipages, &c.; "in order," 
as he said, ** to set the young people 
a-going." 

Every one was satisfied but poor 
Ernest. To his feelings, all this was 
hateful ; and he was doubly shocked 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 47 

^vhen he found, during the legal details 
into which he had now to enter, that 
Arlingford Hall, the abode of his child- 
hood, although it had been long in the 
family, yet from not being entailed like 
the rest of the property, had only been 
saved by Mr. Benson's liberality ; and, 
that in the involved perplexity of his fa- 
ther's affairs and the urgency of his cre- 
ditors, all the expenses of his late elec- 
tion had been defrayed from the same 
source. 

Sick at heart, as soon as he could ex- 
tricate himself from lawyers and papers, 
Ernest signified his intention of leavino- 
town, in order, as he let it be under- 
stood, to superintend the repairs at 
Arlingford, but, in fact, to fly to Lady 
Florence, who was still in the country. 



48 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

It was their first meeting since his 
marriage had been declared; and with 
an unprincipled, impassioned woman, he 
had to undergo scenes still more agoniz- 
ing than those with his father. 

Fitzhenry's love for Lady Florence 
was far beyond her power of appreciating 
— unable to do justice to his character, 
she could not trust to such devotion 
as he expressed, and as he really felt. 
He believed that for his sake she had 
sacrificed both honour and virtue, and 
his whole life, his every aftection, he 
conceived would hardly repay the debt. 

Ernest's heart was capable of love of 
the purest, noblest kind; and, even 
towards so unworthy an object, it par- 
took more of the nature of his own 
character than of her's who had inspired 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 4[) 

it. During the period employed in pre- 
parations for his nuptials, instead of 
attending on his bride, Fitzhenry never 
left Lady Florence. Her power seemed 
strengthened by the very circumstances 
that should have lessened it ; he accom- 
panied her to town; and, even the 
morning of his marriage, on her entreat- 
ing to see him, if but for a moment, he 
had flown to her bewitching presence. 

A most violent scene ensued ; it ended 
by a solemn vow on his part to remain 
true to her, his first, his only love, in 
thought, word, and deed. That Em- 
meline should merely be the mistress of 
his house ; that, in public, he should be- 
have to her with perfect attention and 
civility, but nothing more. 

Hardly knowing what he did, and hot 

VOL I. D 



50 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

till long after the hour appointed for the 
celebration of his nuptials, he left Lady 
Florence for Mr. Benson's house. 
Hence his flushed cheek, and his agi- 
tated manner, the too true indications 
of his troubled soul. 

Fitzhenry had no distinct religious 
feelings ; but still, when he heard the 
sacred vow he was to pronounce, (and of 
which he had never thought,) with his 
lips still vibrating with that he had 
pledged to Lady Florence ; no wonder 
those lips quivered. Although no dread 
of the anger of his God appalled his 
mind, yet, as a man of honour, he felt 
the atrocity of the act. Of Emmeline, 
of the poor victim, who stood trembling 
beside him, he hardly thought. He 
looked upon her as a mere obedient 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 51 

child without a character; perhaps, even 
worse, an ambitious, worldly being; and 
all his thoughts, all his compassion, 
were bestowed on Lady Florence and 
himself. 

Fitzhenry wanted neither decision 
nor character. During tlieir melan- 
choly journey to Arlingford Hall, he 
had sufficiently surmounted his agita- 
tion to have decided on his conduct. 
He resolved to tell all to Emmeline, to 
let her fully enjoy the honours, the 
worldly advantages of the situation he 
thought she had in her union with him 
sought; to assure her he would ever en- 
deavour to make her happy, but that she 
must never hope for his affections. 

Often, after an awful pause, he re- 
solved to speak, but each time his cou- 

D 2 



52 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

rage failed him ; and finding all expla- 
nation by word of mouth impossible, he 
then resolved on writing to her. It was 
to compose this letter, therefore, that, 
after dinner, he left his bride, as has 
before been said. 

Such a letter was not easily written ; 
and Emmeline had some time to rumi- 
nate on her situation, before he returned. 
At last he came. He seemed in the 
feverish state of one who has taken a 
desperate resolution : he hurried up to 
Emmeline ; asked her if she was not 
fatigued? if he should ring for candles ? 
and then, without waiting for an answer, 
rung the bell violently till it broke. His 
hand shook so much, that he tried in vain 
to tie the string together again. Emme- 
line smiling said, she supposed she was 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 53 

more used to strings and knots, and 
begged to assist him. As she took the 
cord, her hand accidentally touched his — 
it was icy cold. 

Reynolds, the old servant, brought 
in the candles, and asked, if his lord- 
ship, '* if my lady," would not have any 
supper? any wine and water ? "Yes, 
some wine directly," said Fitzhenry, as 
if hardly conscious of his demand. 

When it came, he endeavoured to 
pour out some for Emmeline ; but twice, 
from the nervous shaking of his hand, 
he was forced to put down the bottle. 

Emmeline was really alarmed. " Sure- 
ly," again, she said timidly, "you are 
very unwell." He did not seem to heed 
her, but drank off a large goblet of wine, 
and then, with a steadier voice and 



54 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

manner said — " I have something on my 
mind which I must make known to you — 
perhaps I should have done it sooner — 
I thought it best for both of us to write 
it," and he held out his letter—" Take 
it with you into your own room," he 
added, seeing she was going to break 
the seal. He took up a candle, gave it 
her, went with her to the door, put his 
hand on the lock, and said — " When 
you have read this, forgive me if you 
can ;" then hastily seizing her hand, 
which he almost convulsively grasped, 
he left her. 

What poor Emmeline's feelings were, 
can be better imagined than described. 

In one short moment, a thousand 
vague fears and horrors passed through 
her mind. It was her turn now to trem- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 55 

ble, as, with the dreaded letter in her 
hand, she hurried to her own room. 
She there found her maid, whose pre- 
sence disconcerted her much ; but she 
resolved to take oft' her gown speedily, 
and then dismiss her. Never before, 
she thought, had her attendant been so 
slow and tedious. She entangled or 
pulled every string into a knot. At 
last, her gown off"— that beautiful lace 
gown in which her poor mother had that 
morning, with so much pride, arrayed 
her — all her bridal finery laid aside, 
she told her maid she wanted nothino- 
more. 

"Nothing more, my lady!" said the 
maid astonished ; " shall I not put up 
your ladyship's hair? Shall I not wait 
to take away your candle ? Mrs. Ben- 



56 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

son desired me to" and she stop- 

jDed short. 

" No, I want nothing," again said 
Emmeline, in a voice she could hardly 
command. The woman stared, busied 
herself still some time in the room, and, 
at length, reluctantly departed. 

When she was gone, Emmeline sat 
for several minutes with the letter in her 
hand, before she had courage to open 
it. At length, taking a violent resolu- 
tion, she broke the seal, and read as 
follows : — 

*' When you have read this, you will, 
I fear, be tempted to upbraid and curse 
the writer ; but I act according to my 
conscience, to my sense of honour, in 
imparting to you what I am going to un- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 57 

fold — at least, you shall not now accuse 
me of deceiving you — I think, I trust, I 
never have done so ; for little as you 
have, I believe, lived in the world, still, 
unless purposely, artfully concealed from 
you, you must have been aware, that 
my affections have long since been dis- 
posed of, and that, at my return from 
abroad, they were no longer mine to 
bestow. 

'' Under such circumstances, I never 
should have renewed the offer of my 
hand; but parental authority, and the 
distressing and perplexing situation in 
which 1 found myself placed, extracted 
from me my consent to our marriage. 
But even in so doing, I did not attempt 
to deceive. You cannot accuse me of 
having, in any way, endeavoured to gain 

D 5 



58 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

your affections. You saw me as I was, 
indifferent to you, and you were at liberty 
to refuse me : but you were content to 
become my wife on these terms — that is 
to say, of bearing my name, and sharing 
the poor advantages which rank affords. 
"These you still may, still shall en- 
joy : but nothing more can I offer 
you ; for every feeling of my soul is 
another's — forgive me for saying so; but 
this is no moment for disguise of any 
sort. To that other, I am bound by 
every tie, every vow of affection and 
honour. You will be shocked at hear- 
ing such sentiments from we— from your 
liusbaiid ; and 1 should consider myself 
to be indeed the unprincipled villain you 
may deem me, if, with such feelings, 1 
could, for a minute, look upon you in any 



1 



A .MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 59 

Other light than that of a sister. 1 know 
full well what love is ; and you do not, can- 
not love me. Therefore I feel not your 
njuries to be what they otherwise would. 
You shall enjoy all the worldly ad vantages 
you have sought in your marriage with me 
— all the happiness which wealth— your 
own wealth— can bestow ; and it shall be 
my endeavour, as far as I can, to make 
your life happy. You shall be com- 
pletely mistress in your own house, and 
of all your actions. Your comfort shall 
ever be consulted ; and 1 think I can 
venture to say for myself, that you 
may depend on my kindness, and even 
on my friendship ; but my affections as 
a lover, as a husband, while the same 
heart beats in my breast, can never be 
yours. 



60 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

** If I may venture, claiming no other 
right of a husband, to make a request, 
it is that this subject may never, in any 
way, directly or indirectly, after this 
fatal day, be mentioned between us. 
With regard to your own parents, and to 
my father, your own good sense and 
delicacy will, I dare say, dictate to you 
what conduct to pursue. But if you 
cannot agree to these, I confess humili- 
ating terms — if you desire an immediate 
separation, you have but to name your 
wishes. I will tell all to the world, bear 
all the blame, and agree to any arrange- 
ment which you and your father may 
choose to dictate. 

" Whatever you have to say, write im- 
mediately, and put your letter into the 
adjoining room. In a short time all will 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 61 

be at rest in the house. I will then my- 
self go for it. If possible, every thing 
must be fully settled and understood 
between us before we meet to-morrow 
morning. 

"FiTZHENRY." 



62 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER III. 

My husband ! no not mine — but we v/ere wedded ; 
This ring was here in hallowed nuptial placed ; 
A priest did bless it. 

Ellen. 

Al l those who have had trials in this world 
—and who has not ?— must know that 
there are moments inour life during- which 
we seem to live centuries ! and that a few 
hours sometimes are sufficient to rouse, 
influence, and form a character for ever. 
So was it with poor Emmeline ! She 
who had never known a sorrow — she 
who had looked to her future life as to 



A MARRIAGE I^ HIGH LIFE. 63 

one scene of bright enjoyment, on a sud- 
den saw the picture changed, and be- 
held nothing but trials, disappointment, 
mortification, and sorrow. She had at 
once to decide, and on one of the most 
important steps probably in her life, 
without a sinde friend to counsel and 
uphold her : and he, who should have 
been that friend, that support, was the 
one against whom she had to arm her- 
self, and exert energies of character, of 
which she did not even know herself to 
be possessed. 

What Fitzhenry had said was true — 
she did not love him ; that is to say, 
was not in love with him ; but she had 
entertained a sort of girlish affection for 
the companion of her early youth, and 
it was impossible not to admire the hand- 



G4 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

some, accomplished, informed being he 
now was. Her innocent mind adding 
to these prepossessions, the light in 
which she had ever been taught to con- 
sider him, of her future husband, gave 
to her feelings something sacred and 
tender, so that she had looked to her 
union with him with stronger anticipa- 
tions of happiness, than those which 
mere obedience to her father's wishes 
could have given. 

Fitzhenry's letter fell from her hands, 
and almost hysteric sobs escaped from 
her heart. " What have I done to be so 
cruelly used, so scorned, so upbraided!" 
she could not help ejaculating ; and 
again she seized the fatal letter. " He 
despises me for having trusted him ; he 
even reproaches me for that, in which 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 65 

he alone is to blame. She would leave 
him ; leave those paltry honours which 
he thought had been her object ; leave 
him that wealth which had been the mo- 
tive (she could no longer doubt it) of her 
having been sought in marriage by him ; 
and with the vehemence of indignant 
feeling, she directly seized on a pen, in 
order to demand an immediate and total 
separation. 

But scarcely had she written the first 
Vy-ord, when, with the natural timidity 
of a young girl, she shrunk from the 
responsibility and enterprise of so des- 
perate a step, and from all the publicity 
which she would, by it, draw on her- 
self. She laid down her pen ; pressed, 
with both hands, her throbbing tem- 
ples, as if to quiet their agitated pulsa- 



GG A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 

tions ; and then, returning to the fatal 
letter, she perused it again and again, 
till gradually her most angry feelings 
were calmed. She cou/d not curse him — 
woidd not upbraid him. His language 
to her, though harsh, was so open, so 
honourable ! and then, with the happy 
buoyancy of youth, and of an innocent, 
unbroken mind—" I will make him love 
me yet," she thought—** I will so consult 
his wishes in every thing ; so play my 
hard part, that he shall see I am not 
the mere child, the worldly insensible 
fool he thinks me ; he must in time love 
me, and we shall still be happy." 

This was what her feelings dictated ; 
and this line of conduct she told herself 
her duty to her parents required of her. 
She would not break their hearts by let- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. G7 

ting them know how they had been de- 
ceived ; but, for their sakes, she would 
submit to her fate. 

Happy in having thus reconciled her 
duties to her inclinations, she could not 
help picturing to herself that future to 
which, with such fortunate credulity, she 
fondly looked, when she should have 
overcome her husband's unfavourable 
opinion of her, and won his affections ; 
and, in indulging such flattering dreams, 
Emmeline sat some time lost in thought, 
till roused by the sound of hurried steps 
in the adjoining room. That room was 
Lord Fitzhenry's. 

The drawing-room opened into a gal- 
lery, the first door in which, was that of 
Emmeline's dressing-room ; her bed- 
room was beyond ; and beyond that 



68 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

again, but, having no communication 
with Emmeline's apartment, was Lord 
Fitzhenry's ; it had been his when a 
boy; and that now allotted to Emme- 
line had been his father's. 

The sound of measured steps in that 
room, like those of a person suffering 
from impatience and anxiety of mind, 
reminded her that she must answer her 
husband's letter. But, what could she 
write ? She took her pen, but for long 
had not power to express a thought. At 
last, not trusting herself to look a second 
time at what she had said, she hastily 
wrote, and folded up a paper, containing 
the following words. 

" I will not curse, I will not upbraid 
you ; yet I have been most cruelly used 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 69 

and deceived. Your wishes shall be 
laws to me. You need apprehend no 
childish weaknesses or complaints on 
my part. In time, you will learn better 
to know her whom you have made your 
wife. And to God alone shall I apply 
for relief or assistance under any trial 
that may assail me. 

" Emmelixe." 

She opened the door into the gallery 
— all was silent. With hurried, trem- 
bling steps, she went into the drawing- 
room, placed her letter on a conspicuous 
part of the table, involuntarily looked 
round the room, as if to recall some of 
those gay, bright anticipations with 
which she had that day first entered it ; 
and then, with noiseless steps, regained 



70 A MARRIAGE ll'i HIGH LIFE. 

her own apartment. As she went to it, 
she saw light beneath the door of Lord 
Fitzhenry's room. Satisfied that he was 
still up, and that he would look for her 
letter, she closed her door, and sat 
breathless, with flushed cheeks, to hear 
him pass into the drawing-room for it. 
In a little while, she heard him tread 
softly along the gallery. At the door of 
her room he paused — then went hastily 
on. On his return, he again paused. 

" He listens," thought Emmeline, " to 
hear if all is quiet, and whether the in- 
sensible fool whom he has made his wife 
sleeps soundly ;'" — and tears of mortifi- 
cation aofain made their wav down her 
face ; again the door of her husband's 
room closed, and all was quiet. 

The dawn of day found poor Emme- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 71 

line in the same listening attitude in 
which she had sat when Fitzhenry 
passed her room — her hands clasped to- 
gether, her eyes fixed on vacancy. She 
was roused by the extinguishing candle 
falling into its socket, and looked up 
a.stonished to see broad day light. She 
went to the window to throw open the 
sash, that the fresh air might cool her 
eyes and cheeks : in drawing up the 
blind for the purpose, the string caught 
the rings on her finger. She started on 
seeing her wedding ring, and, above it, 
the circles of diamonds, rubies, &c., the 
presents of doating parents, and perhaps 
envious friends, on the morning of that 
ceremony, which was, they imagined, to 
secure her future happiness. " Alas ! " 
thought she, " how they were mis- 
taken ! " 



72 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Emmeline soon felt chilled by the 
fresh morning air. She hastily bound 
np her loose locks, laid herself on her 
bed, and the fatigue of her mind, (a feel- 
ing so new to her,) procured for her the 
rest she needed. 

She awoke with that confused impres- 
sion of distress, which the unhappy 
know so well ; which oppresses the 
mind even before we can clearly remem- 
ber what occasions it. Still she was 
refreshed by those few hours of sleep, 
and felt better able to encounter the 
dreaded meeting with her husband than 
she could have thought possible. 

She got up and rang for her maid. 
From her window, she had seen Fitz- 
henry out before the house, and she 
hurried herself to be in the breakfast- 
room before his return. While she was 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 73 

dressing, she schooled herself in the part 
she was to act, and resolved to meet 
him with the unembarrassed kindness 
of friendship. Had she had to expect 
him one minute longer, her nerves would 
have failed her ; but she saw him hurrv 
towards the house. The servants had 
fortunately left the room. She heard 
his footsteps on the stairs, the door 
opened, and in he came. He was 
deadly pale ; Emmeline went up to him, 
— held out her hand. Hardly knowing 
what she said, she made some remark 
on the weather, the heat, and, without 
pausing, in a hurried voice, asked him 
some other indifferent questions. 
. Fitzhenry returned the pressure of her 
hand, once looked in her face, appa- 
rently with surprise ; tried to speak, 

VOL. I. E 



74 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and at last, in time, overcame his agita- 
tion ; but never again did his eyes meet 
hers, or were they even ever raised 
towards her. He had brought into the 
room with him some greyhounds, appa- 
rently as subjects for conversation. 
They fawned and jumped on their mas- 
ter ; and the noise and bustle they made 
— the feeding them, and Emmeline's 
endeavours to ingratiate herself in their 
favour, was a something to do, and a 
relief. 

During that melancholy breakfast, of 
which neither eat, Emmeline was the 
one who played her part the best. When 
it was gone, Fitzhenry said, " I have 
some letters I must write" — and, struck 
with the possible interpretation of his 
own words, he coloured deeply; ''but 



\ 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 75 

they will soon be written," he added 
hastil}^ " and probably you too will wish 
to write to tell your mother of your safe 
arrival ; and,"— again embarrassed, he 
stopped short. However, in a minute, he 
recovered himself, and said, '* The post 
leaves at one ; after that, if the day con- 
tinues fine, you will perhaps like to go 
out and see the place. I don't know 
what sort of a horsewoman you may be, 
but I have a very docile animal, if you 
will venture to mount him." 

Emmeline, who had ridden much, 
and thought that that species of exercise, 
with a groom attending, would, under 
their awkward circumstances, be better 
than a ttte-a-tete walk, directly said she 
had no fears, and would prefer riding. 

Thus they parted; and Emmeline went 

E 2 



76 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

to her own room to write to her parents. 
It was then that the melancholy of her 
prospects overcame her with a bitterness 
she had not before experienced. 

She had taken her pen in her hand — 
placed the blank paper before her ; but 
the moment she was going to address 
her mother, an involuntary burst of tears 
escaped from her, and she laid her head 
down on the table, unable to write ; for, 
alas ! what could she write to that doat- 
ing mother? what feelings express, but 
those of mortification, and the anticipa- 
tion, the conviction, indeed, of certain 
future unhappiness to them as well as to 
herself? Perhaps equally, if not more 
poignant, would be the feelings of many 
women, were they but a few years after 
their fate in life is thus fixed, to re-peruse 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 77 

the letters written during the early period 
of their marriage, breathing nothing but 
the belief of continued felicity and of 
unalterable love. But no such even 
transient dream of bliss existed to poor 
Emmeline. Again she took her pen, 
wiped away the tears that had blotted 
her paper, and, as well as she could, 
made out a letter to satisfy her mother's 
anxious heart. 

There was no lover at her side, fondly 
to follow each motion of her hand, each 
thought that her pen traced, and with 
the playfulness of overflowing love and 
happiness, to guide that hand when, for 
the first time, signing his name as her 
own. 

When the hour fixed on for their ride 
arrived, Emmeline went to the appoint- 



78 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ment with as cheerful a countenance as 
she could command. Fitzhenry left it 
to the groom to put her on her horse, 
and never looked at her when mounted ; 
but, otherwise, was careful of her safety ; 
and this cold neglect on his part she at 
the minute rejoiced at, as she had feared 
he must have observed the trace of her 
tears. The fresh air and a new and 
agreeable country revived her spirits, 
by nature at all times inclined to cheer- 
fulness. The awkwardness and mental 
absence of her companion also a little 
\vore off, and, on the whole, they got 
through the morning better than she had 
expected. 

Fitzhenry told Emmeline that his fa- 
ther was coming to them the Wednesday 
following, and that he had invited some 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 79 

friends for the end of the week. She re- 
joiced to hear of these arrangements; 
not but that her feelings towards that 
father had much changed since the 
truth had begun to break in upon her; 
but then, any third person would be 
such a relief! 

When she thought of the way in which 
their honeymoon was to be passed — that 
after hurrying away from town and the 
world with all accustomed bustle — and, 
although only married four and twenty 
hours, they both already looked to so- 
ciety for relief, the absurdity of their 
situation struck her for an instant as so 
ridiculous, that involuntarily a smile, 
which she saw did not escape her com- 
panion, stole over her features ; but, as 
it faded, a deep-drawn sigh succeeded, 



80 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and she averted her head, to conceal 
from Fitzhenry, the revolution of feeling 
which she was conscious was painted in 
her face. A long train of reflections 
passed through her mind, as, absorbed 
in thought, she carelessly with her whip 
brushed from the bushes, as she passed 
them, the drops remaining from a late 
shower ; and so deep was her reverie, 
(the first almost in which poor Emme- 
line had ever been lost,) that Lord Fitz- 
henry twice spoke to her before she 
heard him, and when she did, the tone 
of her voice in answer, had in it, (per- 
haps unknown to herself,) a something of 
repulsive coldness, unusual to her. Whe- 
ther it so struck him or not, cannot be 
ascertained ; but the remainder of their 
ride was performed nearly in total silence. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 81 

Emmeline at once wisely took to her 
own occupations, and allowed her hus- 
band to go his own way. It would be 
often wise and prudent if even new-mar- 
ried lovers did the same ; for, shocked as 
they may be at the idea, even real love 
will at last become dull and wearisome ; 
and many a fondly devoted bride has, 
I dare say, during the very first week, 
often wished for her usual occupations, 
as much as her lover has for his gun 
and pointers. But with Lord and Lady 
Fitzhenry, there was no form, no farce 
of sentiment to keep up. Each felt hap- 
pier when apart from the other; and, by 
having many an hour for reflection, Em- 
meline was enabled to school her mind 
to the trials to which she felt she must 
be exposed — trials but too likely to in- 

E 5 



82 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

crease ; for gradually her irritated feel- 
ings gave way. When Fitzhenry's 
letter, and its harsh expressions of de- 
termined indifference towards her re- 
turned to her recollection, then her 
offended pride enabled her to act her 
part with spirit ; and she could talk, and 
even laugh, with apparent gaiety, to 
show him he had not had power to 
wound her feelings deeply. For, amia- 
ble as was Emmeline's disposition, 
enough of human infirmity lurked about 
her — enough of the " Woman scorned," 
to allow her a degree of pleasure in mor- 
tifying one, who had shown so little 
scruple in more than mortifying her. 

At moments, too, her natural gaiety 
was not to be restrained ; and when, on 
the third evening of their residence at 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 83 

Arlingford, her laughing eye caught the 
look of astonishment in the old butler's 
countenance, when, as he entered the 
room, he found the supposed lovers oc- 
cupied with their books at opposite ends 
of the apartment, apparently as uncon- 
scious of each other's presence as any 
indifferent pair after a dozen years' mar- 
riage, — she could not command the in- 
clination to laughter that overcame her. 

Lord Fitzhenry looked up astonished. 

" I am much diverted with what I am 
reading," said Emmeline, to account for 
her sudden burst of mirth, (colouring at 
the same time, with the consciousness of 
her departure from truth,) although per- 
haps not sorry of an opportunity of show- 
ing him, that even in his society, when 
so totally neglected by him, and after all 



84 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

he had said and done to depress her 
spirits, she was still disposed to cheer- 
fulness. 

" May I ask what book you are read- 
ing, that I may benefit also by the enter- 
tainment/' replied her husband. 

'* Perhaps you would not be equally 
amused by it," said she. " Sometimes 
little things tickle our fancy, without 
our being able to say why ; and much 
depends on the humour we are in." 

Lord Fitzhenry looked a little discon- 
certed, and Emmeline could not be so 
generous as to regret it. 

But in his society, she soon ceased 
to show either spirit or triumph ; soon 
forgot to be angry. The mildness of 
his manners, the charm of his conver- 
sation, when sometimes for a little he 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 85 

seemed to forget their peculiar situation, 
and to give way to his natural habits and 
disposition, soon won upon Emmeline, 
and, with a sigh, she thought, " How 
she could have loved him !" When gal- 
lopping on before her, and when certain 
she should not be observed, her eyes 
were fixed on his manly, graceful figure, 
and she admired the ease, and inde- 
scribable elegance (if one may use a word 
so degraded) of all his actions. 

There is something in the manners 
and conversation of an intelligent man of 
the world, which it is impossible ade- 
quately to describe, — which, without 
being either information or wit, pleases 
more than either. It is, perhaps, the 
art of giving to each subject no more 
than its due proportion of time and 



86 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

thought, which prevents conversation 
from becoming tedious, and hinders any 
idea, however serious, from weighing too 
heavily on the mind. Fitzhenry pos- 
sessed this art in a superlative degree ; 
and Emmeline, to whom such conversa- 
tion was almost totally new, and who 
by nature was formed to appreciate every 
refinement, was powerfully captivated 
by it. And, added to this, there was a 
certain foreign gallantry of manner, (that 
among her father's acquaintance she had 
certainly never experienced,) and a ha- 
bit of attention to women, which, in 
Fitzhenry, was so strong, that his beha- 
viour, even to Emmeline, partook of it — 
to her, whom he never looked at, nor 
apparently noticed. 

The whole plan of his present life, the 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 87 

footing upon which he meant Lady Fitz- 
henry and himself to live together, was, 
perhaps of foreign growth. A true-bred 
Englishman would never have behaved 
with the civility of good breeding to a 
wife so forced upon him. He could 
never have thought it possible to have 
established any one in his house on the 
terms on which Emmeline was to be 
placed. But although Lord Fitzhenry 
looked upon the observance of English 
customs in a total retirement after mar- 
riage as particularly irksome, it never 
could make him wanting in respect, and 
even in kindness, to one of Emmeline's 
sex. His will once made known, — told, 
as it had been, very plainly and de- 
cidedly, — there was nothing more to 
settle between them, and he behaved to 



88 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

her with that sort of general observance 
and attention due from a man to a 
woman. 

In short, he could not help being agree- 
able, although differing so cruelly from 
the animated, enthusiastic Fitzhenry, 
known to his friends. 

Perhaps such conduct was more cal- 
culated to excite despair than even ap- 
parent dislike would have been to one, 
who, like Emmeline, aimed at winning 
his love ; but, quick as she was, her 
inexperience prevented her from being- 
aware, that these attentions of civility 
were paid by him from mere force of 
habit ; she therefore gave way to the 
charm which daily captivated her, and 
did not always suspect that those words 
on which her ear delighted to hang, and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 89 

which sometimes even wore the sem- 
blance of gallantry, were uttered by him 
generally in total absence of mind, with 
his thoughts fixed on another. 

Who that other was, Emmeline no 
longer doubted. Something she recol- 
lected having heard of Lord Fitzhenry's 
admiration for Lady Florence Mostyn, 
when abroad ; but he had then been 
so long out of England, Emmeline's 
thoughts were little occupied about him, 
and the intelligence had made but slight 
impression on her young mind. Now, 
putting various circumstances together, 
she could no longer doubt that Lady 
Florence was her favoured rival, if in- 
deed a rival she could be called, where 
there was no competition. 

For, much as Emmeline might wish 



90 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

to propitiate her husband, and though 
even a little vanity and pique might enter 
into the feeling, yet she had no idea of 
any of the arts of coquetry, and if she 
now exerted all her powers of agree- 
ableness, it w^as from the simple wish 
to make their present melancholy life 
pass as well as the awkward circum- 
stances in which they were placed al- 
lowed. If she might hope in time to 
loin her companion's affections, she gave 
up, as perfectly hopeless, all attempts to 
captivate his imagination. And that very 
feeling made her more at ease, and 
therefore more agreeable than she could 
otherwise have been. On all general 
subjects, Fitzhenry was more than will- 
ing to converse. The publications of 
the day opened a wide field for discus- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 01 

sion. It was neutral ground, on which 
they could meet and parley. There was 
a peculiar liveliness, and originality in 
all he said, which Emmeline was not 
only able to appreciate, but, by taking up 
his ideas with quickness, to encourage 
fresh remarks, and even improve upon 
them. The merits of Sir Walter Scott, 
Miss Edgeworth, and Southey, were all 
thoroughly commented upon. Lord By- 
ron came too near home, and, as if 
by mutual consent, they always avoided 
him and his writings. 

One evening — the last they now had 
to pass alone — Emmeline had somehow 
wandered in her conversation to Italy ; 
but she immediately observed a cloud of 
recollections darken her husband's brow, 
and, making rather an awkward retreat, 



92 A 3IARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

she resumed the book she was reading, 
and which had given rise to her unlucky 
remark; and never took her eyes from it 
till the usual time for retiring to her own 
room. Fitzhenry had also remained si- 
lent ; but the moment she moved, he 
started up as if roused from a reverie, 
lit her candle for her and wished her 
good night, hoping the slight headache 
she had complained of would be better 
next day. The tone of his voice was 
so agreeable, the expression of his 
countenance so mild, that she felt with 
Juliet, 

" Parting is such sweet sorrow, 
That I could say good night till it be morrow." 

When she reached her own room, un- 
conscious of what she did, she leant her 
head on her hand, and stood thus for 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 93 

some time at the chimney-piece, on 
which she had placed her candle, lost 
in thought. Had she been asked what 
those thoughts were, perhaps she could 
not have defined them ; but at length, a 
deep sigh escaped her as she ejaculated 
to herself " How pleasant he is ! and if so 
to me, whom he dislikes, despises, what 
must he be to her, to whom his whole 
mind and heart are laid open ? With me 
it is almost impossible to avoid forbidden 
subjects — Italy, I see, I must never touch 
upon. Not only the present but the past 
belongs to Lady Florence ; / am only 
connected with the future in his mind, 
and a future to which he looks with dis- 
like and dread." 

The next day was that on which they 
expected Lord Arlingford ; and Emme- 



94 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

line, when she met her husband at break- 
fast, was concerned to see that all those 
miserable, agitated feelings, which had 
apparently much subsided, had now re- 
turned worse than ever. Durino' that 
meal, he was so hurried, so abstracted, 
that when after it was over, he had 
placed himself at the window to read 
the newspaper, she ventured to go up 
to him, and purposely said something 
about his father's arrival, hoping that she 
might dispel the anxiety which seemed 
to oppress hirn, by showing him how 
little Lord Arlingford's presence would 
add to her awkward feelings. She 
therefore, to open the subject, asked at 
what time he thought he would arrive. 

Fitzhenry, without taking his eyes off 
the paper, said he did not expect him 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 95 

till dinner-time — there was a pause, Em- 
meline not knowing well how again to 
begin — at length, Fitzhenry himself broke 
the silence by saying, " Had you not 
better write to Mr. and Mrs. Benson, and 
propose their making us a visit here soon? 
1 ou will probably be anxious to meet 
them before long." 

" Thank you very much," exclaimed 
Emmeline, quite moved by the kindness 
of his proposal, and feeling as if she could 
have seized with affection on the hand 
that rested on the edge of the window 
near her. Fdr a minute, the temptation 
was strong; her breath came quick, and 
the blood rushed into her cheeks. But 
those cruel words in Fitzhenry's letter, 
" my affections can never be yours," 
flashed like lightning across her mind, 



96 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and prevented her from forgetting her- 
self. Still lost in thought, there she 
stood. It seemed as if he felt the awk- 
wardness of the moment, and made a 
motion to go. " Perhaps then you will 
give me a frank for my father," she said 
timidly, and wishing to detain him. 

'* Certainly, with pleasure;" and he 
sat down to the table to write it. As he 
save it her, his hand trembled. Asfain 
Emmeline's better judgment failed her — 
again her feelings, unused to conceal- 
ment, got the better of her prudence. 
Sorry to observe his excessive pertur- 
bation, and wishing as far as she could 
to alleviate it, while taking the frank 
from his hand, and without raising her 
eyes from the writing, she said in a tre- 
mulous voice, *' Don't distress yourself — 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 97 

indeed you may trust me." Alas ! these 
words had the direct contrary effect from 
what she had meant and hoped. Fitz- 
henry started up, and hurried out of the 
room. 

*'What have I done!" thought poor 
Emmeline, as the door closed upon him. 
" I have forgotten my promise, broken 
my word — I have displeased him!" and 
she sank on the chair he had quitted. 
She hoped he would return; but he did 
not come. She then thought she would 
write to him, but, fortunately, nothing 
which she could express, satisfied her feel- 
ings ; and, at length, she resolved that 
she would rather try and make him forget 
one unguarded word, by never referring 
to it, and never again so offending. 
Sadly she retired to her own sitting- 

VOL. I. F 



98 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

room, and saw no more of Fitzhenry, till, 
at their usual hour for riding, a servant 
came and told her the horses were ready, 
and that my lord was at the door waiting 
for her. Emmeline hurried down stairs. 
She dared not even look at her husband, 
for the wish to please had begun already 
to make her timid ; but, by the tone of his 
voice, she soon judged that all anger at 
least, if ever entertained against her, was 
gone. He even exerted himself more than 
usual to talk on indifferent subjects. 

Lord Arlingford arrived to dinner — 
Emmeline met him with the cordiality 
of a daughter. He seemed in high spirits, 
delighted with her, with the improve- 
ments in the house, with every thing. 
Many a time, did the blood rush into 
Emmeline's cheek at the allusions he 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 99 

made to their late marriage, his railleries 
on the honey moon, and such common 
hackneyed subjects, which, trifling as 
they are, generally possess a power of 
pleasing where happiness really exists, 
but which to her and Lord Fitzhenry 
were torture. She turned all this off as 
well as she could ; sometimes almost 
hating herself for having already become 
so artful. They thus got to the end of 
the first day of Lord Arlingford's visit 
better than she had expected. The father 
and son had much to look at, much to 
talk over about the place, plantations, &c. 
and after the first two days, their party 
was enlarged by some young men, friends 
of Fitzhenry. 

Emmeline now found her task com- 
paratively easy ; she was of course the 

f2 



100 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

object of much attention with all her 
new guests ; all were anxious to please 
her, and to court her acquaintance as 
Lord Fitzhenry's wife ; all, too, seemed 
surprised at finding Emmeline Benson, 
the banker's daughter, the agreeable, 
intelligent, and perfectly well-bred per- 
son which, in truth, she was. 

At first, timidity made her feel em- 
barrassed in her new situation ; but that 
soon wore off, and, naturally gay, her 
spirits rose with the gaiety and lively 
conversation of those around her. She 
could not be indifferent to the flattering 
attentions paid her; and, to her own 
surprise, Emmeline soon found herself 
at her ease, and happy. For Emmeline's 
heart was as yet comparatively free ; an 
all-engrossing passion had not yet de- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 101 

stroyed its happy tranquillity, and a gay, 
joyous laugh often showed the innocent 
lightness of that heart. Once, from the 
other end of the dinner-table, she found 
Lord Fitzhenry's eyes fixed upon her, 
but whether it was surprise at the part 
she was able to take in conversation, or 
displeasure, perhaps even disgust, at the 
gaiety which had thus attracted his at- 
tention towards her, she knew not. But 
that look — although his eyes were imme- 
diately withdrawn on meeting hers — had 
power instantly to check her mirth ; and 
her neighbour scarcely recognised in the 
absent, silent person that now sat be- 
side him, the gay companion, who, a 
few minutes before, entered so readily 
into all his ideas. 

Emmeline now, nearly for the first 



102 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

time, heard herself called by her new- 
name. Her husband, too, forced some- 
times to designate and address her, called 
her " Lady Fitzhenry." To hear oneself 
spoken to by a name so dear, that form- 
erly one hardly dared pronounce it — to 
be thus reminded, each time, that we 
are indissolubly bound to that being we 
adore, is delightful. But in her hus- 
band's mouth it was to poor Emmeline 
an insult. It only seemed to cast her 
further from him, and remind her of the 
distant footing of mere form on which 
they lived, on which they were ever to 
live ; for " Emmeline," the name which 
when a child she had so often heard him 
pronounce, when she cared not for the 
endearing intimacy of the aj)pellation, 
now never passed his lips. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 103 

She now saw him but little, and never 
alone ; for he never came into her own 
sitting-room, and seldom into the draw- 
ing-room, except at those hours, when he 
was certain of finding some of the rest 
of the party there also. She felt that 
since they had had society in the house, 
she had rather lost than gained ground 
with him, and she now regretted the 
week they had spent t^te-a-t^te, much 
as she had wished it over at the time, 
as then they were compelled to have some 
sort of intercourse tos^ether. 

Gradually, Emmeline's abstraction in- 
creased, and her spirits changed ; for, 
almost unconscious to herself, when in 
Fitzhenry's society, her thoughts and 
attention were entirely occupied by him. 
The most flattering compliments that 



104 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

gallantry could suggest, had sometimes 
to be twice repeated to her, and were 
at last received with a vacant smiley for 
if she caught the distant tone of Fitz- 
henry's voice, she heard nothing else ; 
and if, during the day, he had more than 
usually spoken to her, or paid her some 
attention of mere civility, her spirits rose 
even beyond their natural level, and thus 
gave to her manner at times an appear- 
ance of caprice far from her nature. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 103 



CHAPTER IV. 

" Unhappy Psyche ! soon the latent wound 

The fading roses of her cheek confess, 

Her eyes bright beams in swimming sorrows drown'd, 

Sparkle no more with life and happiness. 

Her parents' fond exulting heart to bless." 

It was now about six weeks since the 
fatal day on which Lord and Lady Fitz- 
henry were married. His feelings to- 
wards her, to all appearance, remained 
the same ; but, with Emmeline, the hap- 
piness which depends on insensibility 
was gone. 

f5 



106 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Business had hitherto always prevent- 
ed Mr. and Mrs. Benson from accepting 
the invitation to Arlingford Hall ; but 
their visit was now fixed to take place 
as soon as the present company in the 
house were gone. Emmeline respected 
her father, and dearly loved her mother ; 
but still she had by nature so nice a tact, 
that she was soon aware that herself, as 
well as Lord Fitzhenry, would be better 
pleased that they should not fall into a 
set and style of society which they could 
not suit, and which would not suit them. 

Emmeline rather dreaded her mother's 
visit, dreaded the quick eye of tender 
affection, and the gossip of servants. 
'* But," thought she, ** this visit once 
over, I have nothing more to dread ; all 
will then go on smoothly — smoothly and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 107 

sadly to me," she added. " But I will 
hope a time may come when he will care 
for me — already I think he is used to my 
society; at least, he does not dislike it, 
for I am no longer a constraint to him — 
I must be patient." And with a deep- 
drawn sigh, she turned over the leaves 
of her as yet unopened music-books, and 
sat down to practise some of her father's 
favourite songs, which since her marriage 
she had neglected ; for Fitzhenry had 
never asked her to play or sing, and, unso- 
licited, she had not had sufficient courage. 
Since Lord Arlingford had been with 
them they had dined late, and cards and 
conversation had filled up the evenings. 
At length, the day came on which Mr. 
and Mrs. Benson were expected. Em- 
meline's heart beat thick the whole of it. 



108 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and her eye was on the road which led 
to the house, her ear watching for every 
sound all the morning, although it was 
impossible they could arrive till late in 
the day. Fitzhenry sent his horses to 
meet them at the last stage, watched for 
their arrival, was at the door of the house 
to receive them, helped them out of the 
carriage, and himself conducted them up 
to Emmeline's room. There, for a few 
minutes, he left them to fold to their 
hearts their beloved child. For it was 
not a scene that he wished to witness, or 
in which he felt, circumstanced as they 
were, he had any part to play. 

Emmeline's feelings were worked up 
to the utmost. Joy, fear, a thousand 
confused ideas conspired to weaken her 
nerves, and she fell quite overcome into 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 109 

her mother's arms. It was some time 
before she could compose herself. But 
agitation at that moment was so natural, 
that it seemed to cause no astonishment, 
nor raise any suspicions. 

*' My own dear Emmeline !" exclaimed 
Mrs. Benson, as she kissed her again and 
again, '* how happy I am to see you once 
more, and to see you, as I trust I do, 
everyway so happy;" and she looked 
round with complacency on the refined 
comfort of her room. 

Emmeline pressed her mother's hand, 
she could not speak, and with difficulty 
forced a smile. 

" And how well my lord looks," said 
her father : " the last time I saw him, on 
your wedding-day you know, Emmy — 
LadyFitzhenry, I mean; I beg your lady- 



110 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ship's pardon," said he, chuckling, while 
making her a formal bow in order to pass 
off for wit, what was in fact the real 
overflowings of his vanity at her newly- 
acquired rank : — " on that day, the nine- 
teenth of August, eighteen hundred and 
twenty-three, I did not like his looks at 
all. I really was afraid he was not well ; 
but I was told it was natural agitation. 
Now I can't for my life conceive why a man 
is to look red and yellow and melancholy 
on the happiest day of his life. I dare 
say I did not when I was married to my 
good woman there — Eh, Mrs. B. ? — How- 
ever, now a wholesome country life, and 
true domestic English happiness, you 
know, my Lady Fitzhenry, seem to have 
made quite another man of him. 
Emmeline tried again to smile. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. HI 

" It was SO good of him," continued 
Mr. Benson, '' to press us so often to 
come — but it was impossible sooner; 
business must be attended to — my old 
saying, you know ; — and then the kind- 
ness of sending his horses for us, although 
I dare say there were plenty to be had 
at the inn ; but still your old father liked 
very much to be brought to Arlingford 
Hall in a manner in triumph, driven by 
two postilions in the handsome old Fitz- 
henry livery, with the coachman on be- 
fore to show the way, although I suppose 
the drivers knew it quite well ; but it did 
not signify, I liked all that, egad I did — 
and I am not ashamed to own it. And 
then, thought I, a man so full of pretty 
attentions to his father-in-law, must 
make a good husband to my dear girl." 



112 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Luckily a kiss of rapture, whicli he then 
imprinted on that dear girl's face, saved 
the necessity of a reply. 

By this time, Fitzhenry again made 
his appearance, apologizing for his ab- 
sence under the plea of having had some 
orders to give his coachman. 

" No apology, my lord," said the ex- 
cellent old citizen, seizing his hand, 
which he heartily shook ; *' I consider 
myself at home here ; you and Emme- 
line are one, you know, and it would be 
hard indeed if I did not feel at home in 
my daughter's house." 

Fitzhenry endeavoured to say some- 
thing in return, but failed, and as a 
retreat from observation, walked to the 
window. 

" She is a dear, good little girl, this 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 1 13 

daughter of mine — is she not^ my lord ?" 
continued Mr. Benson, patting Emme- 
line's cheek ; •'* and happiness, and your 
good care of her, have given her such a 
colour, that I declare I think you must 
have already taught her to wear rouge, as 
your fine ladies do." And Mr. Benson 
laughed heartily, in gaiety of heart, at 
his own wit. Alas ! poor Emmeiine's 
colour was the flushed crimson of nervous 
agitation. Again Fitzhenry had recourse 
to looking out of the window at the 
horses and carriages, which luckily had 
not yet driven off. 

" Ay, they are beautiful animals," said 
Mr. Benson, following him ; " bred here 
I believe ; and then they are so well 
matched. I have been admiring them all 
the way here. Do you ever drive them 



114 A iMARRIAQE IN HIGH LIFE. 

yourself? though now 1 suppose Emmeline 
has taken the reins into her own hands — 
Eh, Lady Fitzhenry ?" 

'' This will never do," thought Emme- 
line ; her heart sank within her, and to 
put an end to the present trying moment, 
she proposed showing her mother her 
room ; she trusted that her father's exu- 
berant spirits would before long vent 
themselves, and at any rate, separately, 
both she and Fitzhenry could better bear 
such attacks. So leaving her father and 
husband together, she went out of the 
room with Mrs. Benson. The house — 
her apartment — the view from the win- 
dows — the attentions of the old house- 
keeper who, in a rustling silk gown, 
came to make her reverence and offer 
her services, all delighted the latter. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 115 

They had much to talk of, aunts, uncles, 
cousins to enquire after, and Emmeline's 
spirits became more composed. 

At length, it was time to dress for 
dinner, and Emmeline retired to her 
own room. But when there, alone, her 
head sank on her hand ; and a shiver of 
unhappiness — (I write only to those who 
have hearts, and to all such these sensa- 
tions are but too well known) — the cold 
deserted shiver of unhappiness crept over 
her frame — ** Oh ! mine is a hard fate !" 
thought she, ** to have eternally a part to 
act, a secret to conceal, with one, for one, 
whose heart is for ever closed to me." 

The sight of her father and mother had 
revived all the affections and associations 
of Emmeline's early youth ; and, dis- 
appointed in all her dreams of happiness, 



116 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the mad, the desperate thought of con- 
fessing her real situation, of leaving Fitz- 
henry and Arlingford for ever, and return- 
ing to her parents, crossed her mind. 
But a feeling which every day was gain- 
ing ground in her heart, almost unknown 
to herself, made her, the next minute, 
start with horror at the thought; and, 
almost terrified at the idea of the irre- 
trievable step which in a moment of 
hopeless depression she might have been 
tempted to take, she resolved that she 
would keep her word with her husband, 
conceal and bear all, and trust to time 
and heaven. 

Emmeline cooled her burning eyelids, 
rang for her maid, and dressed for dinner. 
Fitzhenry was perfect in his manner and 
attentions to Mr. and Mrs. Benson. He 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 117 

seemed instinctively to know how to 
please the former ; sent for the oldest 
wine out of the cellar for him, filled his 
snuff-box on purpose, bore with his bad 
jokes, adapted his conversation to him, 
asking him questions — the replies to 
which perhaps he never listened to — 
but which gave the appearance of seek- 
ing information from him ; and, in the 
gratitude of her heart for all this kind- 
ness, when she ventured to raise her 
eyes on her husband's handsome, manly 
countenance, smiling in goodnature on 
her parents, Emmeline wondered how 
the idea of leaving him, betraying him, 
ever could have entered her mind, and 
she thought that to live with so amiable 
a being, on any terms, would be hap- 
piness. 



118 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

As soon as the servants had left the 
dining-room, Mr. Benson filled his glass 
to a bumper. Emmeline, who observed 
the smile on his face as he deliberately 
poured in the wine, dreaded what was 
coming. " I am an old fashioned old 
man," said Mr. Benson, " and I love all 
old customs, so I must beg leave to pro- 
pose a toast — My Lord and Lady Fitz- 
henry," said he, bowing to them exult- 
ingly, " and may they, and may I, see 
many happy returns of the nineteenth of 
August." 

Emmeline coloured, and fixed her 
eyes on the table before her. 

" This is the happiest day of my life 
I believe," continued Mr. Benson, '' not 
even excepting my own wedding-day; 
my heart had been so long set on seeing 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 119 

my Emmy happily settled as your wife ; 
and I must congratulate myself, as well 
as you, my Lord, at its having at last 
come to pass. For you too have had it 
long in your head, or I am much mis- 
taken," added Mr. Benson, nodding sig- 
nificantly to Lord Fitzhenry. " Well 
do I remember, when Emmy was not 
above so high, your calling her your 
little wife, and saying you had a right to 
kiss her, when you took leave of us, on 
going abroad. I warrant you have not 
forgot that any more than myself." 

And in the exuberance of his joy, he 
again held out his hand to his son-in-law. 
Emmeline dared not look up to see how 
her husband stood this trial ; her heart 
beat so violently that she felt as if its 
pulsations must be heard during the 



120 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

dead silence, which for an instant fol- 
lowed Mr. Benson's speech. 

Lord Fitzhenry was the first to break 
it ; and, hastily drinking off his glass, 
as he bowed in return to Mr. Benson, 
" You will find this wine very good, I 
think," said he ; *' it is some which a 
friend of mine brought me from Madeira, 
and has never been in a wine-merchant's 
hands." 

*' Yes, indeed, most excellent," re- 
plied Mr. Benson, *' and I hope by this 
time next year I may drink some of it, to 
the health of a little heir to the family." 
On poor Emmeline's cheek, a deadly 
paleness so rapidly succeeded the deep 
crimson of a minute before, that it caught 
even Mr. Benson's eye, who, although 
not quick at observing such dumb indi- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 121 

cations of feeling, was sorry to have 
distressed her, though he hardly guessed 
how he had done so. His spirits were 
elevated by the exultation of the mo- 
ment, and the '' excellent wine" beyond 
his usual hilarity— and even beyond his 
control. 

" Come, come, Emmy," said he, 
smiling on her — " I meant no offence ; 
but you know such things often, indeed 
I may say commonly do happen, as peo- 
ple having little boys and little girls 
after they are married ; and I hope you 
may have a little boy some of those days, 
that's all ;" and he winked his eye face- 
tiously at Lord Fitzhenry. 

The latter however was, as well as 
Emmeline, examining the pattern of the 
China-plate before him ; so that poor 

VOL. I. G 



122 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Mr. Benson meeting with no encourage- 
ment from any one, was forced to 
change the subject of conversation, and 
Emmeline soon proposed to her mother 
to leave the dining-room. 

Mrs. Benson took no notice of what 
had passed ; and Emmeline gradually re- 
covered herself, although, on the gen- 
tlemen joining them, she found it im- 
possible to encounter her husband's 
eyes, and, hastily getting up, she went 
to the pianoforte. At first, her hand 
trembled, but a feeling of pride steadied 
it; and on her father asking for one 
of his old favourite songs, she com- 
plied. 

Fitzhenry gradually approached her, 
and when she had finished singing — 
" That is very beautiful," said he, " You 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 123 



have never before indulged me with any 



music." 



" No!" replied Mr. Benson, *' that is 
a great shame, when I paid I don't know 

what to a Signor what do you call 

him? for teaching her. She can sing 
you any of your fine bravuras; but a 
plain English song, for my money ; it is 
worth all your Italian airs, for there is 
some sense, some meaning in that, but, 
as for your foreign nonsense, one can't 
understand what the words are about; 
no one can make head or tail of them." 

Emmeline could not help smiling; and, 
looking up, her eyes met Fitzhenry's. 
He too smiled, and smiled so kindly on 
her that, for an instant, she fancied 
there was affection, even fondness in 
their expression. 

g2 



124 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 

" Perhaps," said he, " you will never- 
theless indulge me with one of the un- 
meaning songs Mr. Benson complains 
of." 

Emmelinesang one of Rossini's. Fitz- 
henry sat down by the pianoforte op- 
posite to her, his head leaning on his 
hand ; and, at first, he looked attentively 
at her, but when the song was over, he 
seemed so lost in thouo-ht as to have to- 
tally forgot the singer. He said no- 
thing ; suffered her to leave the instru- 
ment without making any attempt at 
detaining her, and soon after left the 
room. 

On his return, he proposed a game at 
whist ; Emmeline had early learnt it to 
make up her father's party, so a card- 
table was rung for. Of course, Mr. and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 125 

Mrs. Benson were to play together, and 
many cruel things were said about not 
parting husband and wife, &c. But 
Fitzhenry's behaviour that evening had 
been to Emmeline (in spite of his dis- 
regard of the song he had asked for) an 
additional draft of love, and she bore all 
most bravely, for she felt it was for him 
she was bearing it ; she did not venture 
to observe him while all this was pass- 
ing, but by the tone of his voice, he 
seemed to endure these trials with pati- 
ence and unruffled temper. 

Mr. Benson and his wife won every 
game, for their adversaries knew little 
of what was going on, trumping and 
taking each other's tricks with the most 
perfect mutual indifference. But Mr. 
Benson only exulted in his superior play, 



126 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

as chuckling, he put his daughter's 
money into his pocket, and he retired to 
bed in high good humour. 

The next morning, after breakfast, 
Fitzhenry took Mr. Benson to show him 
the farm, stables, &c. and Emmeline and 
her mother were left together. Mrs. 
Benson for some time fidgetted about the 
room, giving dry laconic answers to all 
Emmeline's observations, which she knew 
well, was a symptom of her working her- 
self up to say something unusual, and she 
dreaded what it might be. At length, 
Mrs. Benson came up to her daughter, 
and folding her to her heart, as she 

printed a fond kiss on her forehead 

" Well, my dear child," she said, ** I 
trust I see you as happy as heart — as 
even my foolish heart can wish ?" 



A. MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 127 

" How can you doubt it?" answered 
Emmeline, greatly embarrassed by so 
direct a question. " You see how kind, 
how excellent he is" — and to avoid her 
mother's anxious gaze, she stooped down 
to caress an old poodle of Fitzhenry's 
that had lately established himself in 
her room. " Speak, Tiber," said she to 
the dog — '* Have we not a most kind 
master?" 

There was a pause, but Mrs. Benson 
returned to the charge. 

'' I find you live quite fashionably, in 
separate apartments. I must say I think 
that is a silly new fangled refinement 
which I don't approve of at all, and I 
hope it is no fancy of yours?" 

Emmeline coloured deeply. — *' Lord 
Fitzhenry," she replied, ** had so long 



128 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

lived abroad, was so used to foreign cus- 
toms, that she did not wonder he liked 
to adopt them at home." 

" But, Lord Fitzhenry was not a mar- 
ried man abroad, I presume ?" said Mrs. 
Benson, forcing a laugh. 

Emmeline forced one too, but her lip 
quivered, tears came into her eyes, and 
again she was obliged to stoop and coax 
the dog. 

'* By the bye, Emmeline," said Mrs. 
Benson, after a moment's silence, " I 
have brought you your work-box which 
you left in Harley-street; I wonder you 
did not miss it, for I suppose you have 
a good deal of time to yourself now, 
and are more alone than you used to be 
with us?" 

'* All women must be a good deal 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 129 

alone when they leave home," replied 
Emmeline, with as steady a voice as she 
could command, — " for the occupations 
and amusements of men are so differ- 
ent, particularly in the country." 

" Then you are chiefly by yourself," 
said Mrs. Benson, hastily, as if catching 
at the confession, as something she was 
seeking for. 

" Oh dear no, I go out riding with 
some of the gentlemen nearly everyday." 

" Oh, you do, do you ?" said Mrs. 
Benson; " and Lord Fitzhenry, does he 
go too?" 

" Yes, generally." 

" I thought he had not," said Mrs. 
Benson rather vacantly, and appearing 
to be engaged in some ruminations of her 
own. 

G 5 



130 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Emnieline took advantage of the mo- 
mentary pause that followed, to start 
a new subject of conversation. She 
trusted, that when her mother saw how 
perfectly good humoured and indulgent 
Lord Fitzhenry was to her ; in all things 
allowing her to be her own mistress, as 
well as mistress of his house, that the 
doubts and suspicions which she saw 
had been raised in her mind, either by 
her own observations, or her maid's gos- 
sipping reports, would subside. For, as 
Emmeline suspected, this conversation 
had, in fact, been brought on by some 
stories which Mrs. Benson had already 
heard. Her maid and Emmeline's were 
old acquaintance ; and what maid or mis- 
tress can help talking over her neigh- 
bour's affairs ? The truth was, that Mrs. 



A AIARRIACiE IN HIGH LIFE. 131 

Brown, the old housekeeper, and Susan, 
Emmeline's maid, (now promoted to 
Mrs. Jenkins,) had already quarrelled ; 
for the latter soon began to throw 
out hints, which Mrs. Brown, think- 
ing herself bound to stand up for 
her master, resented violently ; so that 
by the time Mrs. Benson arrived, 
Mrs. Jenkins and Mrs. Brown were 
open enemies; and the former lost no 
time in securing on her side her 
old companion Warren- — Mrs. Benson's 
maid. 

As soon, therefore, as they had swal- 
lowed their tea, at which solemn and 
important ceremony Mrs. Brown had 
presided in all the pomp of housekeeper 
civility, the two friends retired ; and 
while Mrs. Benson's clothes were ar- 



132 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ranged in the drawers by the maid, Jen- 
kins, with many a sigh over poor Miss 
Emmeline, and many an exaggera- 
tion, gave an account of the dreadful 
way in which Lord and Lady Fitzhenry 
lived together, and of my Lord's shame- 
ful neglect of her. " In short," she 
ended with saying, '^ things are come to 
such a pitch, that Mrs. Brown and I are 
scarce on speaking terms, and I am, as 
you see, very distant even with Mr. 
Reynolds. People must see what they 
does see, except those people who wo'nt 
see, and I am quite resolved on one 
thing — which is, to be as uppish as pos- 
sible both with Mrs. Brown and Mr. 
Reynolds till I see my lord behave bet- 
ter to my lady. I am but a servant, 
certainly ; but I can't for all that, help 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 133 

thinking it a very strange thing the way 
they go on," 

** And what does Mrs. Brown say to 
this ? " enquired her auditor. 

" Oh she says, forsooth, that it is all 
my vulgar notions, and because I have 
not been used to quality." 

" Quality, indeed ! " echoed her 
friend. *' Fine airs, upon my word. 
Miss Emmeline was as good as Lord 
Fitzhenry any day in the year, I am 
sure. I should like to know who had 
the most money, and the best of the 
bargain ? Poor thing ! she is much 
changed ; and when she said to me, 
* How do you do, Warren ? ' I could 
plainly see that all was not right between 
her and Lord Fitzhenry. You know / 
was always against the match." 



134 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

The conversation was here interrupted 
by the entrance of Mrs. Brown, who 
came to enquire whether any thing was 
wanted in the rooms. 

'* Nothing ma'am, thank you," said 
Warren dryly, endeavouring to throw 
into her manner that dignity which Jen- 
kins said she was determined to keep up 
till Lord Fitzhenry was a better husband, 
and which Warren, as her sworn ally, 
thought it right to adopt also. And 
then pretending to be busily occupied, 
she took no notice of Mrs. Brown. 
Warren's behaviour was so different from 
what it had been when they had parted 
at the tea table, that the consequential 
housekeeper guessed directly to whose 
influence the change was owing. She 
said nothing; but settling the shawl that 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LTFE. 135 

was pinned on her shoulders, and cast- 
ing an angry glance at Jenkins, she 
bustled out of the room, saying, she 
would send the housemaid to attend upon 
them ; and resolving to be revenged on 
the two friends. 

*' You have affronted Mrs. Brown 
finely," said Jenkins, as soon as she 
had, with somewhat of a jirk, closed the 
door after her; '' but I am glad of it, for 
really that is the only way to mend mat- 
ters, and I feel it my duty to my lady, 
to quarrel in a manner with Mrs. Brown, 
though, as far as T am myself concerned, 
I am, as you know, the most good 
naturedest of people, and willing to 
live in peace and harmony with every 
one." 

" That you are," replied Mrs. War- 



136 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ren ; for, at that moment, she thought it 
good policy to forget, as well as Mrs 
Jenkins did, the many regular pitched 
battles they had fought, when the latter 
was simple Susan, and nominally under 
Warren's controul. 

The result of this conversation was a 
mysterious and sorrowful expression on 
Warren's countenance when she at- 
tended her lady, Mrs. Benson, at bed- 
time ; and a significantly melancholy 
tone of voice when she said, " I hope 
you find Lady Fitzhenry pretty well, 
ma'am ? " 

" Quite well," said Mrs. Benson. 
*' She has not been ill that I know of. 
Susan does not say she has been unwell, 
does she ? " 

** Oh no ; Mrs. Jenkins says her lady- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 137 

shijD's health is wonderfully good, con- 
sidering," replied Warren. 

" Considering ivhatl said Mrs. Ben- 
son, turning quickly round, and looking 
her in the face, " What do you mean by 
considering ? " 

" / mean? dear me, how should / 
mean any thing ? " 

*' Why, you speak as if you did mean 
something; and I desire if you know any 
thing about Emmeline's health, that you 
will tell me." 

" La, ma'am ! there is nothing the 
matter with Miss Emmeline as I know 
of, only I thought perhaps she might 
not be so lively-like as she used to be, 
living so much alone." 

*' What do you mean by alone ? I 
suppose Lord and Lady Fitzhenry are 



138 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

as much together as other married peo- 
ple are? I don't expect he sits all day 
at home with her, any more than Mr. 
Benson does with me." 

*' I believe you will find it is very 
different from you and my master," said 
Warren, with a significant sigh. 

** What can you mean by all this ? " 
said Mrs. Benson, alarmed. 

*' Why, I mean, ma'am, that Miss 
Emmeline, (Lady Fitzhenry, that is to 
say,) is always alone." 

"Always alone ?" repeated Mrs. Ben- 
son ; " really Warren I don't know what 
you would be at — and I don't believe 
you know yourself." 

" Yes, ma'am," said Warren, bridling 
up ; " and 1 only say what I know to be 
true. Lord Fitzhenry sleeps in his own 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 139 

room alone all night, and Lady Fitzhenry 
sits in her room alone all day ; and, if 
that is living like a married pair, I don't 
know what a married pair is." 

*^ Who tells you all this nonsense ? " 
said Mrs. Benson, angrily, and yet wish- 
ing to hear more. 

** Why, Mrs. Jenkins, to be sure, 
ma'am. She says, that my lord quar- 
relled with my lady on their very wed- 
ding-day — for that she herself heard 
high words between them and doors 
shut in a passion-like — and ever since 
that terrible scene — which Jenkins can 
swear to — they have continued to live 
in this strange way. For my part, I don't 
think if I was Mrs. Jenkins I would re- 
main in so unpleasant a family, although 
to be sure all is in very high style, and 



140 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the housekeeper's room as good as many 
ladies' drawing-rooms, with a nice Turkey 
carpet ; but still all can't be right. How- 
ever, I should be sorry to tell tales and 
make mischief; but you know, ma'am, 
you forced me to speak, otherwise I am 
sure I should have held my tongue about 
it all to my dying day, for I am sure I 
would not for all the world make you 
uneasy, ma'am." 

" Well, I desire you will hold your 
tongue to every body else," said Mrs. 
Benson gravely, " and bid Susan come 
to me to-morrow mornins"." 

Susan told her story, heightening the 
picture as much as she could ; and, after 
all this, it will not be wondered at that 
Mrs. Benson endeavoured to discover 
the truth from Emmeline. Her answers, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 141 

her praises of Fitzhenry, staggered her ; 
and, as Emmeline had anticipated, the 
appearance of perfect good humour on 
the part of her husband, often even of 
gallant attention towards her, made 
Mrs. Benson think the whole was no 
more than the common gossip of ser- 
vants ; and, at any rate, she had too 
much good sense to endeavour to pry 
into matrimonial secrets and arrange- 
ments, which her daughter did not seem 
to wish to have noticed ; so^, resolving 
to be very watchful, she said no more. 

A day or two after, several of the 
neighbours, who had been invited, came 
to Arlingford. Mr. and Mrs. Benson 
were of course delighted on seeing the 
deference and court paid to their daugh- 
ter; and the bustle occasioned by the vi- 



142 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



\ 



sitors, the driving about in the morning, 
viewing the country, and returning visits, 
occupied Mrs. Benson's time, if not her 
thoughts, so entirely, that she and 
Emmeline being seldom alone together, 
the latter was spared any more distress- 



ing conversations. 



At the end of about a week, Mr. Ben- 
son received letters which obliged him 
to return immediately to town on some 
mercantile business. ** But," said he, 
casting a doubtful, enquiring look on Lord 
Fitzhenry, " I need not carry off my 
good lady wife, if you will give her 
house-room a little longer, and I can 
perhaps return for her ; of, at any rate, 
I think I may by this time trust her to 
travel alone, whatever other husbands 
may" — winking his eye at Emmeline. 



A MARRIAOE IN HlCAi LIFE. 143 

Lord Fitzhenry directly expressed 
great pleasure in Mrs. Benson prolong- 
ing her visit, and then, after a moment's 
pause, added, ** Indeed it will be par- 
ticularly kind to Lady Fitzhenry if she 
will, for I myself shall be obliged to leave 
home in a day or two." 

Emmeline gave a start, and involun- 
tarily looked up towards her husband. 
For an instant their eyes met ; but, as if 
by mutual consent, both were instantly 
withdrawn. " He catches at the first 
opportunity to leave me," thought she. 
** Glad his penance is over." 

Whither he was going, Fitzhenry never 
said, and Emmeline dared not ask ; in- 
deed, she hardly knew whether, during 
his absence, he would expect her to write 
to him; and therefore, if even under that 
pretext she could venture to enquire. 

VOL. I. G 12 



144 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

On the day settled for his departure, 
when the carriage was ready at the 
door, he came into the drawing-room to 
take leave. Mrs. Benson was there with 
Emmeline. 

** If there come any letters for me," 
said he, ** I have desired Reynolds to 
send them to the house in town, and 
I shall leave word there to have them 
forwarded." Still he said nothing about 
her writing to him. He staid some time 
in the room, seemingly uncertain what 
to do or say, or how to take leave of 
her. At length, apparently summoning 
courage for a disagreeable effort, he 
walked hastily up to Mrs. Benson, 
shook hands with her, came up to Em- 
meline and did the same, adding, in 
rather a low voice, " I shall be glad 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 145 

to hear from you ; " and, not waiting 
for any answer, he hurried out of the 
room. 

It was the first time their hands had 
ever met since that morning after their 
marriage, when she had herself offered 
hers to Fitzhenry in token of forgiveness 
and goodwill. Since then, now nearly 
two months, her sentiments towards him 
had taken a totally different character ; 
her face blushed crimson ; but he, whose 
slightest touch had thus thrilled to her 
heart, and had power to raise that 
blush, almost before the " eloquent 
blood " had reached her cheek, was 
already gone. 

From the window she sadly saw him 
drive off; whither and to whom he was 
going, she could not doubt. 

VOL. I. H 



146 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Several days passed, and she heard 
nothing from him ; at last, a letter, 
franked Fitzhenry, was put into her 
hands; she opened it hastily — her heart 
beating with emotion — but it merely 
enclosed a printed one from some trades- 
person in London, applying for her cus- 
tom. In a fit of vexation, almost of 
anger, she was nearly throwing the whole 
into the fire, when some writing on one 
of the flaps of the cover caught her 
attention, and she found these words. 

" The longer Mrs. Benson can stay 
with you the better ; I believe I shall 
not be home for a fortnight. Should she 
not be able to remain, perhaps you had 
better go and pay your father a visi ; 
and I will let you know when I am 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 147 

likely to be at Arlingford again ; but 
now, and always, do whatever you your- 
self like best. I hope soon to hear you 
are well. 

** Yours, 

*' FiTZHENRY." 

** So you have got a letter from your 
husband," said Mrs. Benson; '* and a 
fine thick packet. I hope he is well? " 

*' Quite well," said Emmeline, sadly. 

" What news does he give ? what has 
he been about?" 

'* News ? " repeated Emmeline, ab- 
sently — 

" Yes ; I mean — what does he say ? " 

** Say? oh, nothing." 

" What ! nothing in all that quantity 
of paper and writing ? Lord, child ! 

II 2 



148 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

you are quite in a dream" — and Mrs. 
Benson took off her spectacles, and her 
eyes from the newspaper she was read- 
ing, and fixed them attentively on her 
daughter. This roused her from her 
reverie, and suddenly recollecting her- 
self, she said, "Oh yes, I forget; he 
says, he can't come home yet, and we 
had better go to Charlton to my father 
till his return." 

*' Well, I think that will be a very 
good plan," said Mrs. Benson : ** some 
business, I suppose, detains him." 

•* I suppose so," echoed Emmeline. 

Mrs. Benson still kept her eyes fixed 
on Emmeline, and both remained for 
some time in silence and abstraction. 
Again all her former doubts and suspi- 
cions returned to her mind ; and when 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 149 

she looked on her absent, dejected 
daughter, who still sat gazing on the let- 
ter in her hand, she almost resolved to 
speak to her, and force herself into her 
confidence. But though with little of the 
outward refinement of the world, Mrs. 
Benson had great delicacy of feeling, as 
well as excellent sense : she felt that when 
she was not called upon to give advice, or 
to reprehend what was wrong, she had no 
business to interfere between her daugh- 
ter and her husband ; and indeed, here, 
what could she say ? Emmeline was cer- 
tainly changed ; she was no longer the 
gay, light-hearted being she used to be, 
but apparently her husband behaved per- 
fectly well to her; at least nothing had 
ever passed, that Mrs. Benson could have 
named as a proof of unkindness ; and 



150 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

as for Emmeline, she was to him gentle- 
ness — acquiescence itself ; but still, 
Mrs. Benson could not help feeling 
that all was not right, although she 
could not perhaps have given any po- 
sitive reason for her suspicions. How 
she longed to bid her confide to her 
every feeling, every care of her heart, 
as in days of yore, when she hushed 
her young sorrows to rest on her bosom, 
and kissed away her childish tears ! 
But when a mother resigns her darling 
child to him who is to be the arbiter 
of her future destiny, she loses, in a great 
measure, that dear prerogative of affec- 
tion. Mrs. Benson, feeling this, wisely 
forbore ; and the next day, without any 
thing more passing between them on 
the subject, they set off together for 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 151 

Charlton, where Mr. Benson had, shice 
Lady Fitzhenry's marriage, chiefly re- 
sided. 

When there, Emmeline wrote to her 
husband. There is something so private, 
so sacred, in a letter — we can, in writing, 
express so much, which, either from 
shyness, or emotion, we cannot bring 
ourselves to say by word of mouth, that 
Emmeline longed to give way to her 
inclinations, and pour out on the paper 
her feelings towards him ; but she felt 
that the utterance of one word which 
could in any way be interpreted into an 
allusion to her painful situation, would 
be breaking her agreement ; and she 
merely told him of her journey and her 
safe arrival ; glad of having even such 
uninteresting subjects to treat of, and 



152 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

that to Fitzhenry ! to whom she could 
have written volumes ! 

In about ten days she got an answer ; 
it had no date : (his letters to her never 
had beyond the post town on the frank.) 
In it, he named the day for his return to 
Arlingford. Two days previous to it, 
notwithstanding Mrs. Benson's remon- 
strances, and her father's railleries, Em- 
meline would return home. ** He might 
possibly arrive," she thought to herself; 
" something might bring him back be- 
fore the day he had fixed upon, and she 
was resolved on departure/' 

But, exactly the contrary happened 
from what she had anticipated ; that day 
passed in anxious but vain expectation ; 
and the next — and the next. At length, 
on the fourth, Reynolds, with a counte- 



A. MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 153 

nance expressive of the share he had 
taken in the disappointment, put a letter 
into her hand, with the well-known, 
well-beloved signature of Fitzhenry. 
And it did not, this time, merely enclose 
a printed petition, but was from himself. 
He said in it, that the unexpected ar- 
rival of his friend Mr. Pelham, (the 
minister at Vienna,) had detained him 
in town, as he had waited till he could 
accompany him to Arlingford, which he 
now hoped he should be able to do in 
a couple of days. Mr. Moore, his for- 
mer travelling companion, would also 
come with him, and they would soon be 
followed by his cousin. Lady Saville, 
her husband, and sister. Emmeline had 
just seen Lady Saville, when she had 
paid a visit of form to the Benson family, 

H 5 



154 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

on the match being declared ; and on the 
wedding-day she was present at the 
ceremony. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 155 



CHAPTER V. 

As t'other day my hand he seized, 
My blood with thrilling motion flew : 
Trembling all o'er, like one ill pleased, 
Perhaps I from his hold withdrew. 
T'was fear alone — he read me wrong: — 
Had he retained my hand, ere long 
He had felt its pressure too. 

Gay. 

Two tedious solitary days were still to 
be passed before Emmeline expected 
Fitzhenry at Arlingford. Being secure, 
that she had the house all to herself 
she felt a strong inclination to go into 
his room, which she had never yet en- 



156 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

tered. It would be, she thought, the 
next best thing to seeing himself. 
Treading softly, as if fearful he might 
hear her, she put her hand on the lock — 
looked round to see if she was observed, 
and then hastily turned it. The door was 
locked. 

The noise she made brought a house- 
maid out of an adjoining room ** The 

door is locked my lady : when my lord 
went away, he desired the housekeeper 
to keep the key, but I will step to Mrs. 
Brown and fetch it, if your ladyship 
wants any thing." 

** Oh no, it is of no consequence," 
said Emmeline, colouring deeply, as if 
detected in some crime. 

Emmeline was the most single-hearted 
of beings. She had not sufficient pre- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 157 

sence of mind to think of any excuse 
for wishing to go into her husband's 
room ; and with a feeling of awkward- 
ness, almost of shame, she returned to 
her own. Disappointed, and dispirited, 
she knew not what to turn to ; and for 
the first time in her life, felt it impossi- 
ble to occupy herself; the day appeared 
endless, and her time, an insupportable 
weight. As she wandered about her 
own room, her eyes fell on a petition 
she had had from a poor man residing 
on the estate, whose house and mill had 
been nearly destroyed by fire. He lived 
a few miles off, and Emmeline deter- 
mined to enquire of Reynolds about him, 
and, glad to have found an object, to ride 
to his abode in order to see what could 
be done for the family — rather ashamed 
of herself for having allowed her mind 



158 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

to be SO entirely engrossed by one sub- 
ject, that she had totally forgotten this 
petition which she had received while at 
Charlton. 

Emmeline went into the dining-room 
and summoned Reynolds. In this room 
hung a picture of Fitzhenry, painted at 
the time of his leaving school, when a 
boy about sixteen. It was much less 
handsome than he now was ; his cha- 
racter was not then, as now, marked on 
his countenance, giving it that look of 
manly openness, and yet of feeling, for 
which it was so remarkable; but, (as 
the eyes looking out of the picture seemed 
to smile on the beholder,) it was so agree- 
able to Emmeline to gaze on it, that, 
lost in thought, she forgot entirely what 
brought her there. How long she had 
remained, she knew not, but on turning 



A MARRLAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 159 

round she saw Reynolds in the room 
quietly waiting her orders. 

" Did you ring, my lady," said the 
old man, with a benevolent smile. 

*' Oh yes," said Emmeline, rather 
embarrassed. *' But at this moment I 
have forgotten ." 

" Ah, many a time have I forgot my- 
self looking at that picture," answered 
Reynolds. " It was considered an ex- 
cellent likeness when it was done ; it 
was just when we left Eton." 

*' Why, were you there with Lord 
Fitzhenry ?" 

" Oh yes!" my lady, I have been 
with my Lord ever since he was seven 
years old ; Lord Arlingford did not like 
to have nursery-maids about him, so I 
had entire charsre of him— went with 



160 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

him to school, to Oxford, and then 
abroad; so no wonder I love him, I may 
say as my son. I hope no offence," 
added he, tears starting into his eyes. 

** What, you were abroad with him ?" 
said Emmeline, hastily catching at the 
word; ivhy she did not know, except 
that it seemed always as if that word 
contained the history of her husband's 
life and affections. 

" Yes, my lady, I was in Italy and 
at Vienna with him. I was three years 
abroad, and then, when he returned 
again to Italy .... (he paused) — I 
felt I was too old to begin again ; I 
thought some younger servant would 
suit my lord better, and I begged leave 
to come home ; and though certainly it 
was not my place, yet I tried hard to 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 161 

persuade my lord to come home too ; for 
I own I thought little good would come 
of living so much out of one's own 
country — people get a love for rambling, 
never can settle, and learn bad foreign 
ways ." 



And again he stopped short, as if he 
feared he might already have said too 
much. Emmeline longed to hear more, 
and yet she also thought perhaps she had 
allowed him to go too far ; and making 
no comment on what he had said, she 
hastily ejaculated — " Oh ! I remember 
now what 1 rung for. I want to know 
where that man of the name of Rawlins 
now lives, who wrote me this petition, 
and if you know any thing about him, 
and what can be done for him." 

" Rawlins whose mill was burnt .^ 



162 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Oh yes ! my lady, I know him very 
well, but all that is settled. My lord, to 
whom he also applied, wrote to me to 
find him employment, and to give him 
and his family, for the present, a cottage 
that chanced to be vacant, and he also 
desired me to give the wife some allow- 
ance weekly till they had a little reco- 
vered themselves, and till he could see 
what more could be done for them, for 
they are honest industrious people, and 
my lord is so good. I have his letter 
somewhere about me, if your ladyship 
would like to see it," added Reynolds, 
searching in a large pocket-book, in 
which among heaps of bills and papers 
he at last found it, and gave it to Em- 
meline. 

Her heart overflowed towards her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 163 

husbiind. '* How good ! how kind he 
is ! thought she, and she almost added, 
" kind to every one but me." 

The letter said nothing more than 
what Reynolds had repeated ; but still, 
even to see his hand-writing* was agree- 
able. She was just going to return it 
to him, when on the other side of the 
page, a postcript and her own name 
caught her eye, and with a beating 
heart, she continued : — 

*' I hope you have attended to those 
alterations in the greenhouse which 
Lady Fitzhenry wished to have made — 
and desire the groom to exercise her 
horse properly for her before her return, 
for when I last rode him he was much 
too spirited." 

Emmeline read and re-read these few 
words expressive of care and thought 



164 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

for her, till she exaggerated their mean- 
ing far beyond their original import, and 
on them built many a visionary castle 
of future happiness. She mounted her 
horse, and many an additional caress 
and kind word she addressed to the ani- 
mal, now that it was connected in her 
mind with Fitzhenry, and with the first 
expression of interest about herself that 
had ever escaped him. She found the 
Rawlins family overflowing with grati- 
tude, and offering up prayers for her 
husband, in which it cannot be doubted 
she most heartily joined. 

Buoyed up by all these exhilarating 
feelings,she had almost forgotten her real 
situation, and the terms on which she and 
this beloved Fitzhenry lived ; and in 
these flattering dreams, the two inter- 
vening days quickly passed, and that on 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 165 

which she was to expect him at last ar- 
rived. The whole of the morning was 
spent in restless anticipations of happi- 
ness, picturing to herself their meeting, 
fancying what he would say to her, how 
he would look at her, till she actually 
heard his carriage drive up to the door. 
With a beating heart she flew to the 
window, and her delighted eye caught 
the first glance of the face she loved. 

His two friends were with him, and 
all three entered the room together. 
Emmeline was so overjoyed at seeing 
him again after a month's separation — 
(a century in love's calculation of time,) 
that fearful of expressing too much, she 
remained as if spell-bound in her place. 
Fitzhenry came up to her, but his man- 
ner was, if possible, more cold, more 



1G6 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

embarrassed than ever. How unlike 
the meeting that she had indulged her- 
self in acting over and over in her own 
mind ! He introduced his two compa- 
nions to her. Mr. Pelham had one of 
those calm but expressive countenances 
which directly obtains our interest ; and 
when he held out his hand to Em- 
meline, claiming the friendship of his 
friend's wife, the interest seemed reci- 
procal. Indeed, his look of anxious 
curiosity when presented to her, would 
have been embarrassing, had not his 
manner been marked with a peculiar 
appearance of kindness. 

Very different was the impression 
made on Emmeline by Mr. Moore. Al- 
though he looked clever and lively, she 
shrunk at once from him ; the glance of 



A MARRIAGE IIS HIGH LIFE. 167 

his eye had something penetrating and 
satirical which she dreaded. With a 
pure guileless heart, and an unreproving 
conscience, poor Emmeline could not 
help fearing a quick observer of feel- 
ings in all the little daily occurrences 
of life. 

The rest of the party that Fitzhenry 
had announced followed the day after. 
Lady Saville was what might be called 
agreeable in society, although more from 
possessing the polish and easy manner 
of the world, than from any decided 
talents or accomplishments. At first, 
she and her sister had, with the true im- 
pertinence of fine ladies, settled be- 
tween them, that Emmeline could only 
be fit to laugh at ; and they anticipated 
no little amusement in quizzing the 



168 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

banker's daughter. But when they 
found her, as even they were them- 
selves obliged to allow, quite on a 
par with themselves, perfect in man- 
ners, and in fact possessing the outward 
good breeding of the world, although 
free from that falsehood and selfishness 
which so often destroys its charm, they 
changed their tone, and resolved they 
would patronize her, declaring, *' she 
was quite a person to be brought for- 
ward." And they soon, found real 
pleasure in her society and conversa- 
tion. 

Some of the county neighbours, with 
whom Lady Saville was previously ac- 
quainted, joined the party, and the 
house was quite full. This, Emmeline 
plainly saw was now Fitzhenry's plan of 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 169 

life when forced to be at Arlingford ; 
and she was compelled with a sigh to 
own it was the best for them both ; for 
in so numerous a society of course they 
were necessarily apart, and any cold- 
ness was little remarked. She could 
not help being aware that the distance 
between them, and the awkwardness of 
their manner, had rather encreased than 
worn off. And could it be otherwise? 
Two people no way connected can live 
under the same roof mutually cold and 
careless, and still be perfectly good 
friends, for the one would think so little 
about the other, that, when thrown toge- 
ther by chance, their manners would 
wear the ease of indifference. But be- 
tween Fitzhenry and Emmeline, this 
was impossible. Both entirely en- 

I 



170 A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE* 

grossed by one feeling, which was to be 
concealed from the other, they had no 
point de ixuniouy no neutral ground on 
which to meet ; and the more poor Em- 
meline's affections became engaged, the 
more — and she felt conscious of it her- 
self — the more timid and cold her 
manner grew towards her husband, and 
that of course reacted on Fitzhenry's. 
He evidently too was now much out of 
spirits, and looked ill. Mr. Moore's 
gaiety seemed too much for him; he ral- 
lied him too much on his gravity, and on 

his lately acquired married importance, 
as he called it, appearing to Emmeline 
purposely to take pleasure in tormenting 
him. 

Mr. Pelham seemed the friend he pre- 
ferred, and yet, after their being long 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 171 

together, Fitzhenry always appeared 
more than usually abstracted and de- 
jected. Mr. Pelham too was the person 
who seemed to pay the most attention, 
and to take the greatest interest in her- 
self. She fancied, indeed, that he 
watched them both ; but it was always 
with such a kind, compassionate, benig- 
nant look, that she did not, as with 
Mr. Moore, shrink from his scrutiny. 

The winter was now far advanced ; 
hunting and shooting kept the gentlemen 
almost entirely out of doors, and Em- 
meline and her female companions were 
generally all the mornino- left to them- 
selves. One rainy day, on which it was 
impossible for them to leave the house, 
and when Lady Saville had run through 
or yawned over every novel and review 

I 2 



172 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

in the drawing-room, she proposed, for 
the sake of exercise, to go all over the 
house. " I have never yet even been 
admitted into your sanctum sanctorum, 
Lady Fitzhenry, pray let me go." 

" Oh ! pray do," echoed a young lady, 
starting up from a table at which she had 
been seated the whole morning, with 
most laudable industry engaged in work- 
ing a purse, and endeavouring to make 
a hearts-ease out of invisible blue and 
yellow beads. ** Do let us go ; it will get 
us through this dull morning so nicely ; 
and really without Mr. Moore and the 
battledoor and shuttlecock, one don't 
know what to do with oneself." 

Emmeline, always wishing to be 
obliging, led the way to her apartment. 

" How comfortable ! how pretty !" all 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 173 

exclaimed. " Did you fit up this room 
yourself?" enquired Lady Saville. Em- 
meline answered, that she found it as it 
was when she first came to Arlingford. 
" What a delightful, gallant husband!" 
said Lady Saville. " Now that was his 
foreign education ; all men should be 
sent abroad before they marry, to be 
properly drilled ; it improves them won- 
derfully." Poor Emmeline could not 
quite assent to this observation. 

*' Oh! dear, dear Lady Fitzhenry!" 
said the purse-making young lady, (by 
name Miss Selina Danvers,) flying up 
to her and seizing her hand with ecsta- 
tic fondness, " I have the greatest pos- 
sible favour to ask of you ; pray, pray 
grant it — it is to let me see your wed- 
ding-dress ; I shall be more obliged to 
you than I can express." 



174 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

'' There is nothing remarkable to see," 
said Emmeline, coldly, not feeling the 
smallest wish to behold, or have dis- 
cussed, what brought back so painfully 
to her mind the day on which she 
wore it. 

'' That is really being very modest," 
said Lady Saville, **for it was beautiful, 
and, moreover, you looked remarkably 
pretty in it ; and I own I was rather pro- 
voked at my worthy cousin Fitzhenry's 
excessive stupidity or bashfulness, for I 
don't think he ever looked at you. 1 
never saw a man appear so completely 
stupified, and put out as he was at his 
marriage ; and when I wished him joy, 
he stared, and looked as silly and sheep- 
ish as possible. Love certainly had upon 
him the direct contrary effect from what 
it had on Cymon." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 175 

" Dear, how odd !" exclaimed Miss 
Dan vers ."But who is Mr. Cymon, and 
what did it do to him ? Now don't laugh 
at me so, one can't know every body ; 
and I don't go every year to London as 
you do." 

This new scent about Cymon, however, 
could not put the wedding finery out of 
Selina's head, and she teazed poor Em- 
meline till she obtained from her a re- 
luctant consent that her maid and the 
gown should be rung for ; and soon the 
whole paraphernalia was exhibited with 
pride and pomp by Mrs. Jenkins. 

Miss Seiina went into ecstasies at each 
separate flower and flounce, and putting 
the veil over her head, she flew to the 
glass to look at herself. " What a beauty 
it is !" she exclaimed. " Dear, how I 



176 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

should like to be married ! one looks so 
interesting in a lace gown and veil. 
Lady Fitzhenry, were you very much 
frightened at the ceremony? did you 
cry ? For my part, I don't think I should 
be able to keep my countenance for 
laughing." 

*' At what?" demanded Lady Saville. 

" Oh ! I don't know at what, in parti- 
cular ; but I think it would be so odd for 
me to be married." 

'* Why should it be more odd to you 
than any one else?" rejoined Lady Saville. 

'• Oh ! I can't tell, only because I think 
it would be so droll — but I should like 
it of all things — and then the new chaise- 
and-four, and the favours, and driving 
off in such a bustle, and all the people 
in the street staring at one ; and one's 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 177 

wedding-ring, and one's new name ; it 
would all be so charming. If I was you. 
Lady Fitzhenry, 1 think I should have 
rung the bell the minute I was married, 
to have had the pleasure of hearing the 
servant say, ' Yes, my Lady.' Oh! I have 
another great favour to ask," continued 
Miss Selina, who had by this time satis- 
fied her curiosity about the gown and 
veil; "do let me see your picture of 
Lord Fitzhenry." 

Emmeline assured her she had none 
to show her. 

" No? Dear, how odd! I thought when 

people were married, they had always 

their picture painted in miniature as a 

thing of course, and I had even settled 

beforehand how ours should be done — 

I all in clouds and thin drapery by Mrs. 

Mee, you know, and he in armour." 

J 5 



178 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" And who is the he whose costume 
you have ah'eady fixed upon ?" enquired 
Lady Saville. 

^* Oh ! I don't know ; whoever I may 
chance to marry. But, Lady Fitzhenry, 
how did it happen that you had no minia- 
tures done ? for yours was a regular mar- 
riage, was it not ? Every body delighted, 
and jewels and plate, and all that sort of 
thing; and then Lord Fitzhenry is so 
handsome. Lady Saville, don't you think 
Lord Fitzhenry is the most beautiful man 
you ever saw, and the most agreeable ?" 

'' Why I don't know how far I may 
venture to answer that question. What 
would Sir George say?" replied Lady 
Saville,' laughing. 

" Oh ! Sir George is very tall and good 
looking too, and dresses himself very 

well ; but still he does not put on his 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 179 

neckcloth near so well as Lord Fitz- 
henry ; and after all, the neckcloth is the 
principal thing in a man, and Lady Fitz- 
henry is certainly the most fortunate of 
people; but she takes her good luck 
very quietly, I must say — not even to 
have talked of her wedding gown ! was 
it not strange ?" 

By this time every thing was tho- 
roughly admired, examined, and de- 
scanted upon in Emmeline's room, and 
many a question put to her, which she 
found rather difficult to answer. 

" Well, where do we proceed to next?" 
said Lady Saville, going out into the gal- 
lery. *' What room is this ?" pointing to 
Ernest's. 

" Oh! that is Lord Fitzhenry's," an- 
swered Emmeline hastily; ** we had bet- 
ter not go there." 



180 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

** Why not?" enquired Lady Saville. 

" He may be engaged with business," 
replied Emmeline, conscious she was co- 
louring. 

*' Engaged ? why you know he is out 
hunting twenty miles off; but at any 
rate, we may knock and demand admis- 
sion." And she knocked at the door. 
No sound was to be heard, and she turned 
the lock. " Why I really believe. Lady 
Fitzhenry," continued she, " you are 
afraid of going in, for fear of finding all 
my worthy cousin's former cfieres amies 
hanging round the room on pegs, like 
Blue-beard's wives." 

At this sally. Miss Danvers laughed 
violently. " I am dying to go in. — Dear 
Lady Saville, pray, pray open the door; 
I am sure we shall find something odd." 

Emmeline could think of no further 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 181 

reason to give for not entering ; and, in 
truth, felt rather glad of the opportunity 
so forced upon her to visit that room 
where Fitzhenry had passed and still 
passed so many hours of his life. A per- 
son's apartment is certainly the next best 
thino: to their society, and even ranks in 
the gratification of our feelings before a 
letter ; we seem to be admitted into all 
their occupations, even into their very 
thoughts. Then the little things belonging 
to them scattered about identify them so 
much to us. Every one must have expe- 
rienced this when going into the room 
that has been inhabited by some dear 
friend immediately after their depar- 
ture ; the pens they have used still ly- 
ing wet on the table, the books they had 
been reading — a glove, or handkerchief 



182 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

forgotten. How strongly do such trifles 
sometimes affect us, and give us a de- 
ceitful feeling of their presence ! 

Lady Saville had opened the door into 
Fitzhenry's room, and Emmeline had 
gone in with the rest, when luckily, 
after Miss Selina had expressed her 
astonishment at Lord Fitzhenry's sleep- 
ing in the little couch bed, and had en- 
quired of Lady Saville whether it was 
not very droll — a book of French carica- 
tures attracted and fixed the attention of 
the whole party, and Emmeline was thus 
left at liberty to look at every thing in the 
room, and indulge in her own reflections. 

There was the table at which he 
wrote, the chair on which he sat, and 
she placed herself in it. On the ta- 
ble, among a confusion of parliamentary 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 183 

papers, pamphlets, bills, &c. was a vo- 
lume of Petrarch, lying open, as if 
lately read, and by it the cover of a 
letter recently torn open. It was di- 
rected to Fitzhenry, and in a woman's 
hand. On the seal, were the words—- 
" Tout oil r/e/i"— words that said vo- 
lumes to poor Emmeline's heart. She 
tried to make out the post-mark, but it 
was so blotted over that she could only 
decypher the date, which convinced her 
it had been that very day received ! 
With a sort of shudder she threw it 
down again, and, getting up from her 
seat, her eye was attracted by two 
drawings that hung over the chimney- 
piece — they were evidently views in 
Italy and Greece. In both these, were 
the same two figures : below one of 



1S4 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

the drawings, these Ihies from Lord 
Byron were written : — 

" Sweet Florence ! those were pleasant times 
When worlds were staked for ladies eyes. 
Had bards as many realms as rhymes, 
Thy charms might raise new Anthonies. 

" Though fate forbids such things to be. 
Yet, by thine eyes and ringlets curled, 
I cannot lose a world for thee. 
But would not lose thee for a world." 

Beneath the other drawing, was a 
Greek inscription. They were slight 
sketches, and the figures were small ; 
one of them had an air of Fitzhenry 
not to be mistaken by her who knew 
his every look and gesture. The other 
was a female figure. Emmeline's eyes 
were rivetted on the drawings; she could 
not doubt who, and what they reprc- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 185 

sented; some days of peculiar enjoy- 
ment, some tender moments were thus 
recalled, and poor Emmeline's spirit 
oToaned within her. 

On the mantle-piece, lay Fitzhenry's 
pencil-case, pocket-book, and several of 
those sort of trifles that seem so inti- 
mately connected with the person to 
whom they belong. Emmeline had a 
gratification in taking them in her hand, 
and examining them minutely : at last, 
she found a small turquoise brooch 
which she had often observed in his 
neck-handkerchief; it had apparently 
been originally meant for a woman's 
ornament. Emmeline had on one al- 
most exactly similar. The temptation 
to exchange them was too strong to be 
resisted— with trembling fingers she un- 
did her own pin; but again carefully 



186 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

examined Fitzhenry's, for fear of his de- 
tecting the exchange. At the back of 
his, in small letters, she saw " Firenze," 
but they were almost worn away ; her 
courage however nearly failed her, 
although she thought she might con- 
trive to scratch something on her own 
broach to resemble the inscription, 
but, just at that minute, Lady 
Saville, who had finished her book of 
caricatures, and looked at every thing in 
the room, coming up, proposed their 
proceeding to the rest of the house — 
Emmeline almost started with the em- 
barrassment of guilt: she had no time 
for further doubt, she hastily threw 
down on the marble-slab her own 
brooch, and carried off her husband's. 

Almost terrified at what she had done, 
when they met in the drawing-room be- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 187 

fore dinner, she looked anxiously at 
Fitzhenry's handkerchief, and, when he 
turned towards the light, she had the 
satisfaction to see her own pin placed as 

i 

usual, and, consequently, that he had not 
discovered her robbery. 

To those who may be inclined to 
think the feelings of Emmeline on such 
a trifle exaggerated, we have only to 
say, that proving themselves never to 
have been in love we can no more attempt 
to speak to their feelings than to describe 
colours to a person born blind. 

Delighted and elated with her prize, 
poor Emmeline's spirits rose above their 
now usual state, and when, after dinner, 
Lady Saville declared she wanted ex- 
ercise to get rid of a headache, and 
proposed dancing, Emmeline readily 
forwarded her wish and offered her 



188 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

service as musician. Every one will- 
ingly acquiesced, and they soon made 
up a quadrille. Fitzhenry and Mr. Pel- 
ham were the only two who did not join 
in the dance, but continued standing 
over the fire, seemingly engaged in very 
earnest conversation. When the qua- 
drille was ended, Emmeline played a 
waltz ; this was still less to be resisted, 
and the whole party immediately swung 
round the room. 

" I can play a waltz," said Mrs. Dan- 
vers, the purse-making young lady's 
mother, who had just then entered the 
room — *' I can't bear to see you. Lady 
Fitzhenry, labouring at the pianoforte, do 
let 7iie play who can do nothing else; 
and do you go and join the dancers." — 
And she insisted on Emmeline resigning 
her post. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. ISO 

All were engaged : there was no 
one left to waltz with. Emmeline was 
young ; by nature gay, she liked dancing 
as all gay young people do. The music, 
the sight of others dancing, all had re- 
vived her former love for the amuse- 
ment, and, not liking to deprive any one 
else of her partner, she set off alone 
after the rest. Unsupported, and lately 
out of practise, she soon grew giddy, 
the room turned round, she knew not 
where she went, and, to save herself 
from falling, she caught hold of some- 
thing she had run against, putting her 
other hand over her eyes till the dizzi- 
ness had gone off. When it had sub- 
sided, still keeping her hold, she looked 
up to see where she was. 

It was her husband's arm she had 
hold of. 



190 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE, 

She could scarcely check a scream 
of alarm which burst from her on seeing 
what she had done: she hastily with- 
drew her hand, her flushed cheek turn- 
ing deadly pale. Fitzhenry was looking 
at her attentively, but with apparent 
surprise, and indeed, even apparent dis- 
pleasure. 

The whole occurrence, which did not 
occupy above a minute, had been mis- 
taken by the dancers. They thought she 
was proposing to him to waltz with her, 
and Mr. Moore hastily said, " That is 
right, Lady Fitzhenry ; make that lazy 
fellow dance. No one waltzes so well 
or was so fond of it ; and it is too ridicu- 
lous his giving himself already the airs 
of an old married man ! " 

'' Lord and Lady Fitzhenry dance to- 
gether! Oh! that will be charming," 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 191 

exclaimed Miss Selina, clapping her 
hands in foolish ecstasy. 

** Come, come along, Fitzhenry," re- 
joined Mr. Moore : " don't be bashful ; 
ask Lady Fitzhenry in proper form to 
do you the favour of dancing with you." 

** Certainly," said Ernest, rather em- 
barrassed : " certainly — with pleasure, 

if Lady Fitzhenry wishes 1 mean, 

if she will waltz with me, and can eet 
no better partner." 

'• Oh! I never meant that — I was onlv 

giddy ," said Emmeline, hardly 

knowing what she said or did. The 
other waltzers stopped. '* Now, Lady 
Fitzhenr}'', we will follow you," said the 
persecuting Mr. Moore. Any further 
explanation or objection was impossi- 
ble : waltz together they must — and 
Fitzhenry put his arm round her. 



192 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

All those who talk of the waltz as of a 
dance possessing no other attraction, no 
more interest than that of any other, 
and owing the ill name it bears merely 
to a cry raised against it by prejudice 
in a country where as yet it is but newly 
introduced, have never waltzed with him 
or her they love ; for then their own feel- 
ings would answer, and silence them. 

Emmeline felt her husband's arm 
round her waist ; her hand was clasped 
in his, and his breath played on her 
forehead. Her feelings almost overcame 
her! Her heart beat so violently that she 
could hardly breathe, and again her head 
turned round. 

Fitzhenry, as Mr. Moore had said, 
was an excellent waltzer — he had waltzed 
much at Vienna, where his intimacy with 
Lady Florence had commenced by her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 193 

teaching him this very dance. Without 
any seeming eftort, he bore along Em- 
meline's slight form — for already she 
could hardly support herself. She fan- 
cied he pressed her more closely to him 
— it could, alas ! be only fancy ; but quite 
overcome, and complaining of faintness, 
she begged him, in a scarcely audible 
voice, to stop. He immediately with- 
drew his arm, took her to a chair, and 
seeing her really near fainting, fetched 
her a glass of water. 

Every thing conspired to overpower 
poor Emmeline : it was with difficulty 
she restrained her tears, and as soon as 
she could trust herself to walk, she left 
the room. But no Fitzhenry followed to 
ask an explanation of her conduct ; and 
in darkness, and alone, she no longer 
endeavoured to stifle her feelings. Fitz- 

VOL. I. K 



194 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

henry was evidently not pleased: there 
had been an expression of displeasure, 
of formal, almost ironical civility on his 
countenance, when forced to offer him- 
self as her partner, that she had never 
seen before, and which penetrated her 
heart. And then, though mere common 
compassion had made him assist her 
when unwell, yet it was almost beyond 
his usual coldness to allow her to leave 
the room alone, careless of what had 
affected her, or whether she had reco- 
vered or not. 

It was impossible to endeavour to ex- 
plain herself before others, and Fitz- 
henry now carefully avoided their ever 
being ttte-a-tete. " Thus ends," thought 
Emmeline, '* the vain dream — the last 
hope of ever winning him ! Indifference 
is growing into dislike ; and soon we 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 195 

shall be more than total strangers to 
each other." 

As she uttered these words, a gentle 
knock at the door made her heart beat. 
It could only be him — and in an instant 
passing to the most delightful anticipa- 
tions, with a trembling voice, she gave 
leave to enter. The door opened: but even 
through the darkness of the room, she soon 
saw her mistake, for it was merely Lady 
Saville who came to enquire after her. 

** My dear Lady Fitzhenry," said she, 
" I fear you are not well, so I ventured 
to come and doctor you a little." 

" Oh! it is nothing," replied Emme- 
line, with difficulty restraining fresh tears 
of disappointment: *' I have not waltzed 
lately, and it made me very giddy, that 
is all." 

** And perhaps you should not have 

K 2 



i9G A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

waltzed now," added Lady Saville; **for 
really you have not been looking well 
lately ; we have all remarked it. You 
overfag yourself with your constant en- 
deavours to amuse our good country 
neighbours, and with those long rides 
which you will take, for I am sure you 
are not strong." 

Emmeline, wishing to avoid all con- 
versation on the subject of her looks and 
health, conscious that both had suffered 
from her loss of happiness, hastily got up, 
declaring she was quite recovered ; and, 
after bathing her eyes and temples with 
some cold water, she proposed returning 
to the drawing-room. 

'^ But are you quite sure you are well 
enough?" said Lady Saville — " had you 
not better lie down a little, for you still 
look pale." 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 197 

Emmeline insisted on going. 

" Well, I understand your not liking 
to make a fuss and excite enquiries ; for 
one's friends will teaze one so with reme- 
dies : so if you are really able, come 
along, lean on me;" and she drew Em- 
meline's arm within hers. 

When they entered the room, Fitz- 
henry went up to them : hoped Emmeline 
was quite recovered, and brought a chair 
for her ; but all was done in cold civility, 
and no more passed. Mr. Pelham came 
immediately and sat by her, evidently 
and purposely entering into conversation 
to save her from being an object of at- 
tention to the rest. The dancing went 
on ; but Emmeline's spirits were gone, 
and she took no more part in what 
passed around her that evening. 



198 A MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 

"What capital fun we have had!" 
said Selina, as they all left the 
drawing-room for the night. I am sure 
I could dance all day long: could not 
you. Lady Fitzhenry? Don't you like 
dancing of all things ? I am sure you 
must, you dance so well." 

Emmeline absently answered — " I 
have liked it, but it is a taste that soon 
goes off." 

'* Soon, indeed !" said Mrs. Danvers, 
who had been playing the waltzes and 
quadrilles to them for the last hour, ** if it 
is already gone with you : why you talk 
as if you were an old woman. Lady 
Fitzhenry. I don't think it is many 
months since I saw you apparently 
enjoying the amusement as much as 
any one — indeed, not many minutes." 



A marrtaoe in high life. 199 

Emmeline, vexed at her forgetful- 
ness, did not answer. She saw her hus- 
band's eyes were fixed upon her ; and, 
anxious to put an end to so disagree- 
able an evening, wishing them all 
ROod niffht, she hastened into her own 
room. 

When there, she found that the 
brooch — the precious brooch, was miss- 
ins:. She dared not tell her maid of her 
loss, for fear that any enquiry after it 
would lead to a discovery of her theft ; 
but, as soon as she was gone, and all 
quiet in the house, Emmeline examined 
every part of her own room, of the gallery, 
and of the drawing-room ; but all in 
vain. Tired and annoyed, she was at last 
obliged to give up the search, trusting 
that daylight would betray its hiding 
place. 



200 A MAP.RTAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 



CHAPTER VI. 



It grieved her not a little, tho' 



She seemed it well to beare. 

And thus she reasons with herself — 

' Some fault perhaps in me, 

' Somewhat is done, that so he doth : 

'Alas! what may it be? 

' How may I winne him to myself? 

' He is a man, and men 

' Have imperfections ; it behoves 

' We pardon nature then. ' 

The Patient Countess. 

The next morning, before her maid 
came to her, Emmeline renewed her 
search, but with as little success as on 
the night before. It delayed her dress- 
ing ; and when she entered the break- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 201 

fast-room, all were assembled — Mr. 
Moore coming in at an opposite door at 
the same minute. 

''AYho owns a turquoise pin?" said 
he, in a loud, sententious voice, as he 
approached the breakfast table, *' with 
some mysterious, and, I conclude, very 
sentimental letters at the back." 

Fitzhenry, who was reading the news- 
paper, instantly laid it down. He felt 
for his brooch, and forgetting that he 
had not put on any that morning, ex- 
claimed, at the same moment v.'ith 
Emmeline— "I do!" Both looked at 
each other, and coloured. 

*' Well, I never knew such a pattern 
pair," said Moore ; '* they have so con- 
scientiously every thing in common, 
that they have but one brooch between 

K 5 



202 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

them, and I suppose wear it alternately. 
Pin of my pin — brooch of my brooch," 
added he, laughing : *' without the help 
of Solomon, I really don't know how to 
decide the matter between you, for it is 
quite a law case in his line, and much 
beyond me." 

*' Pray give it me," said Emmeline, 
in a low voice, inexpressibly annoyed. 

** The brooch is mine," said Fitz- 
henry, holding out his hand for it, and 
apparently not much less discomposed. 

** Hold, if you please," said Moore; 
" I have not studied the law, up three 
pair of stairs in Lincoln's Inn, and 
poured over musty books for nothing. I 
must have proofs and witnesses before 1 
adjudge the disputed prize. Let us call 
into court the letters at the back, they 



A UARRTAGE IN HICxH LIFE. 203 

may throw some light on the subject — 
Let me see," continued he, putting on 
his nose the spectacles of one of the com- 
pany, and affecting an important, legal 
tone, " Fi is very easily distinguished, 
but what the deuce is it that comes be- 
tween that and ze, which are plainly the 
letters at the end. F i looks a little as 
if it really did belong to one Lord Fitz- 
henry, I must own ; (if he is so unsenti- 
mental as to wear his own name next 
his heart ;) but even under that extra- 
ordinary supposition, I can't turn ;: t 
into r y by any trick of law or logic — so 
I am still at a loss ; for do what I will, 1 
cannot, with these letters, speWJidele, or 
Jidelita, or any of those pretty words." 

Emmeline said no more ; she tried to 
busy herself with the breakfast-things. 



204 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

but poured out every thing wrong, and 
made all sorts of strange mistakes. Fitz- 
henry got up, and went to Mr. Moore. 

** Come, Moore^ no more of this non- 
sense ; give me the brooch, and Lady 
Fitzhenry and I can afterwards settle to 
which of us it belongs." 

"As lord of the manor, I suppose 
you claim all stray goods/' rejoined 
Moore ; ** otherwise I must say yours is 
a most despotic measure, and a little 
like the lion in the fable." 

At this, Miss Danvers, who had been 
some tinie tittering, burst into an immo- 
derate fit of laughter. 

" How droll Mr. Moore is !" she ex- 
claimed : " pray. Lord Fitzhenry, let me 
look at this brooch ; there is such a fuss 
about it that it must be something very 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 205 

extraordinary, and I am sure I could 
make out the letters," said she, looking 
significantly at Moore, " for I know all 
sorts of mottos, and sentiments, and those 
kind of things, for brooches, and brace- 
lets, and purses, and seals," — and she 
held out her hand for the brooch. 

'' It is not worth looking at," said Fitz- 
henry, coldly, as he put it into his 
pocket. 

" I think the lion is a little gruff," 
whispered the young lady to her neigh- 
bour at the breakfast-table, and again 
laughed violently at what she imagined 
to be wit. 

" Well," she continued, " I give notice, 
that when I marry, I mean to have my 
own way, and be my own mistress, and 
not be so submissive as Lady Fitzhenry. 



206 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

I shall have as many brooches as I please, 
given me by whom I please ; for I sus- 
pect," added she, significantly, " there is 
some story about this brooch— some mys- 
tery we none of us know ; but I am de- 
termined I will find it out: it is just the 
sort of thing I like — and see how Lady 
Fitzhenry blushes — I am getting near 
the mark, I suspect." 

** Don't rattle on so foolishly, Selina," 
said her mother, trying to check her 
talkative daughter. 

" That is what mamma always says," 
retorted Miss Danvers, pettishly, and 
looking round for support in her denial 
of the charge of folly. '* Mamma never 
lets me speak, which is very hard, for 
I am sure I am saying no harm," 
added she, addressing Mr. Moore, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 207 

whom she seemed to have dubbed her 
champion. 

" I never presume to contradict mam- 
mas," answered he ; " otherwise I should 
say that such a mouth could never utter 
any thing which it would not be agree- 
able to hear." 

The young lady giggled, and, encou- 
raged by the compliment, went on — 

'* Pray, Mr. Moore, seriously, as you 
are a lawyer, will you tell me, have 
husbands a right by law to read all their 
wives' letters, as well as seize on their 
naughty brooches .'' Lady Fitzhenry, 
does Lord Fitzhenry read all your let- 
ters ?" 

*' I should think he would be sorry 
to take the trouble," said Emmeline, 
forced to reply to so direct a question, 



208 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

although from the quickness with which 
one silly idea chased another in Se- 
lina's mind, she seldom required any 
answer. 

** Why ? have you a great many cor- 
respondents ? I do so like correspon- 
dents, don't you ? and to get letters all 
crossed, and written under the seal, and 
every where ; is it not delightful ? I 
have so many friends I doat upon, that 
there is not a day I don't write two or 
three long letters, and tell them every 
thing I feel and think ; and then it passes 
away the morning so well; don't it, 
Mr. Moore ?" 

*' Why, I really cannot boast of as 
many confidential friends, or as much 
capacity of heart as you seem to be 
blessed with," said he ; *'and, moreover, 



A MARRTAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 209 

I have nothing to confide ; so that I fear 
a very small note would contain all my 
feelings and thoughts." 

" Dear, how shocking ! and how odd! 
I have so many charming friends, to 
whom 1 have so much to say, that I 
could write to them for ever ; and then, 
when we have nothing particular to tell, 
we suppose ourselves people in a novel, 
and so carry on a story, you know, under 
feigned names : mine is Celestina." 

" It must be very interesting ; and 
may I ask," continued Moore, ** who is 
the hero worthy of such a heroine ? " 

" Oh, that I won't tell," said Miss 
Danvers, slyly— "that is a secret; but, if 
you choose to guess, I will tell you when 
you are wrong. So far I will go ; but 
I won't allow of any questions about tall 



210 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and short, and fat and thin, and that sort 
of thina^." 

Here all laughed ; and Selina, quite 
satisfied that it was at her wit, glanced 
round the table with an eye of triumph, 

till, encountering Fitzhenry's grave, pre- 
occupied countenance, which, plainly 
showed that he had not joined in the 
applause, the said : " Ah, Lord Fitz- 
henry is still thinking of his brooch, 
and of that blush of Lady Fitzhenry's, 
which seems to stick in his throat." 

" I am sure you are very good to take 
so much interest in what concerns us," 
replied Fitzhenry, dryly. 

" Oh no, it is not good at all ; for it 
is my greatest amusement to find out 
every body's little secrets, and I am 
determined I will get at the bottom of 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 211 

this somehow." After a pause, she ad- 
dressed Emmeline. ** By the bye, now 
I recollect, you were very busy poking 
about all Lord Fitzhenry's things in his 
room, yesterday morning ; but what that 
may have to do with all this, I can't 
just now make out." 

Fitzhenry looked up astonished, and his 
eyes were fixed on Emmeline's crimson 
cheek ; but, though he looked at her 
attentively for a few minutes, he said 
nothing ; and, by this time, the frowns 
from Mrs. Danvers had become so re- 
peated, and so decided, that they at last 
succeeded in checking the exuberant 
loquacity of the lively Selina. 

An awkward silence ensued ; every 
one seemed disconcerted, and Fitzhenry, 



212 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

for the first time, to Emmeline's observ- 
ation, appeared totally out of humour. 
He soon got up from the breakfast-table, 
and left the room. 

It was a thoroughly wet day ; even the 
gentlemen could not go out — and, to pass 
the morning, Lady Saville proposed 
practising some songs, in which one of 
them took a part. Poor Emmeline, who 
could not rally her spirits at all, felt 
little inclined to sing — but she complied, 
till at length, fatigued and harassed, she 
gave up her place at the pianoforte to 
Selina, and w^ent to her own room. 
There on the table she found a note ad- 
dressed to her, in Fitzhenry's hand- 
writing. She trembled as she opened 
it — it contained her own brooch, and 
these words : — 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 213 

*' I return you, what I suppose to be 
yours; how it came into my possession, 
I know not. I have kept to my promise 
— I do all in my power to promote your 
happiness— do then the same by me, and 
respect feelings which I have honestly 
confessed to you. 

*' FiTZHENKY." 

Emmeline read this over and over, 
scarcely knowing what the latter words 
could refer to ; so perfectly innocent 
did she feel of any infringement of their 
asfreement, and so satisfied that she had 
never, directly or indirectly, to him or 
others, hinted at her cruel situation. 
However, at last, calling to mind the way 
in which Selina had that morning so 
provokingly entertained the company 
with her silly remarks, she felt convinced, 



214 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ill spite of Fitzhenry's well-known con- 
tempt for the person who made them, 
that they had raised suspicions in his 
mind of her having taken advantage of 
his absence to invade his apartment, and 
pry into his secrets ; perhaps had even 
led him to imagine that she had stolen 
his favourite brooch with the foolish in- 
tention of wantonly tormenting him. 

Wounded tenderness, and oifended 
pride, alternately wrung her heart. To 
clear herself was impossible, without 
confessing feelings, which she could not 
bring herself to avow to one who evi- 
dently despised and abhorred her. In 
total despair at the cruelly unfavourable 
light in which untoward circumstances 
always placed her before him, whom it 
was the first, almost the only wish of her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 215 

heart to conciliate and please, poor Em- 
meline wept in bitterness of soul. 

Some explanation on her part, how- 
ever, was absolutely necessary, but it 
was long before she could resolve on 
what to say. At length, entering into no 
particulars, she wrote merely these words. 

'' You do me great injustice, and to- 
tally mistake me : explanation, how- 
ever, is impossible — indeed, would pro- 
bably be only uninteresting and irksome 
to you, and therefore I shall not attempt 

any." 

" Emmeline." 

How to give this to Fitzhenry unno- 
ticed was the next difficulty, without the 
risk of a ttte-a-tete interview, which in 
the present nervous and irritated state 



216 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

of her feelings, she had no courage to 
seek. She heard him in his room, which 
joined to hers, and there he remained 
all the morninsf alone. 

With her note concealed in her hand, 
and with tell-tale eyes, Emmeline joined 
the party at the usual hour of luncheon, 
in case her absence might create sur- 
prise. Mr. Pelham's attention was soon 
attracted towards her. 

** I fear you have not yet recovered your 
waltzing of last night," said he kindly, as 
if to account for her disordered appear- 
ance, which no one could help observing: 
" you have still a headache I am sure, 
and I am not surprised at it. When you 
give balls, you should put out your stoves ; 
I wonder how any of the dancers could 
stand the heat of the room last night : a 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 217 

walk would do you good ; I think it is 
clearing up ; will you let me accompany 
you ? " 

Emmeline feeling, in spite of her endea- 
vours, that tears still forced themselves 
into her eyes, and aware that she was not 
quite in a fit state to make the agreable to 
her company, readily agreed. The fresh 
air revived and composed her, and, by 
degrees, her usual spirits returned. Pel- 
ham first talked on indifferent subjects. 
At length, some improvement in the 
place which he was observing, brought 
in Fitzhenry's name, when, after a mo- 
ment's pause, he said — " I see my friend 
Fitzhenry has no patience with that poor 
silly girl. Miss Danvers. I have often 
lectured him on the subject of his want 
of toleration for folly, and of the way 

VOL. I. L 



218 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

that he is apt to take things that should 
only be laughed at, au grand serieu.v. It 
is the fault of all grave, substantial cha- 
racters like his ; and he allows trifles to 
go too deep with him. To be sure, the 
poor Selinais a fool, comme on en voit peu ; 
but it is not necessary to attend to her, 
and I should be almost tempted with 
regard to her, to give you the same ad- 
vice as to Fitzhenry, not any way to 
notice the nonsense that flows from her. 
There are some people who can make 
themselves important in society only 
by teazing others ; and if they once 
find out this power, they never let it rest 
unemployed. I am very impudent I 
think," added Pelham, ** in presuming 
to give you advice ; but, as the friend 
of Fitzhenry, I feel that I have a sort 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 219 



of established right to lecture even 
you." 

Emmeline looked up and smiled, to 
show in what good part she took what 
was so kindly meant. 

" You are very young, my dear Lady 
Fitzhenry," continued he ; " very new to 
the world, and your own character is 
naturally so open, so natural,— that you 
are perhaps too artless. Some part we 
almost all must, to a degree, act in this 
world. We are all sometimes obliged 
to put a mask on our features and feel- 
ings. You know I am a diplomate by 
profession," said Pel ham, endeavouring 
to give a light turn to his advice, seeing 
how much at the moment his thin skinned 
auditor needed the mask he talked of. 
** Fitzhenry has been much used to the 

l2 



220 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

world— to women of the world," con- 
tinued he, with a quick, embarrassed 
manner. '' Perhaps you are too much 
without art, for him to believe you art- 
less, paradoxical as this may sound. In 
short, as you are destined to live in a 
wicked, unfeeling world, I could, I be- 
lieve, wish you to be a little more wicked 
and unfeeling yourself." 

At this moment, Fitzhenry, with his 
gun and dogs, appeared at a little dis- 
tance, and when he saw them, came 
towards them. It was fortunate, for it 
would have been difficult for Pelham and 
Emmeline to have extricated themselves 
from the conversation in which they were 
engaged ; for, vague as it might have 
appeared to any third person, those con- 
cerned both feared they had gone too 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 221 

far ; the one, in what he had said, the 
other, in what she had listened to. 

As Fitzhenry approached, Emmeline 
resolved she would endeavour to exert 
that degree of self-control which Pel- 
ham recommended, and a feeling of 
offended pride, and of injustice towards 
her on Fitzhenry's part, enabled her to 
succeed. She drew her bonnet over her 
face, and though her heart beat, and at 
first her voice trembled, she forced her- 
self to speak on indifferent subjects, as 
if nothing had past, or rather, as if what 
had passed, had not had power to wound 
her ; and, taking an opportunity when 
Pelham was a yard or two behind, she 
held out her note to Fitzhenry. For a 
minute, he seemed reluctant to take it ; 
but the next, received it from her hand. 



222 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and putting it hastily within his waist- 
coat, immediately began talking with 
Pelham about the view he was then 
looking at. 

When they met at dinner-time, Fitz- 
henry's manner to her was as usual ; 
but the party was so large., that they 
could have little intercourse. In the 
evening, to avoid any possibility of the 
waltzing scene of the preceding night, 
Emmeline immediately took out her 
work, about which she pretended to be 
particularly interested, and left the rest 
of the party to provide for their own 
amusement. 

She and Fitzhenry still appeared to 
be the objects of Mr. Moore's particular 
observation, and for that purpose, seating 
himself by Emmeline, "I hope Lady Fitz- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 223 

henry," said he, '* you have forgiven me 
for not proving myself a better advocate 
for you this morning ; but really Fitz- 
henry's frowns were so very eloquent and 
convmcing, that I could say no more on 
the subject." 

" And you need not say more now," 
answered Fitzhenry, rather impatiently, 
without taking his eyes from the Review 
he was reading ; *' that foolish affair is 
settled ; we have both our own, and both 
are satisfied." 

" Alas !" thought Emmeline, ** how 
much he is mistaken \" 

Moore looked at them alternately with 
an air of incredulity. " Well, you are 
strange mysterious people," said he ; 
" but if you are content, I am sure so 
am I ; " and, laying his hand on the first 



224 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

book he saw, and which proved to be 
Childe Harold, he read some lines of it 
aloud. 

" Are you a great admirer of Lord 
Byron, Lady Fitzhenry ?" said he. 

" Of course," replied Emmeline, forcing 
a smile. 

" Of course of his poetry," continued 
Moore ; " but I hope ?iot of his sen- 
timents : his descriptions of scenery are 
beautiful, and sometimes those of feeling 
and affection ; but when he comes to 
paint his own dark, venom-spitting 
mind, he is hateful ; and it always pro- 
vokes me, that he should feel the beau- 
ties of nature so deeply, and not be the 
better for that feeling. Have you ever 
been in Italy, Lady Fitzhenry ?" 

" No, never," said Emmeline shortly, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 225 

not much liking to get on such tender 
ground. 

" I should have sworn you had ; I have 
heard you talk as if you knew all Italy 
by heart ; and you have in your compo- 
sition, that suavity of mind and temper, 
which the sun, the air, the beauteous 
scenes of Italy, the dark blue of its seas 
oive. I should have been ten times 
more detestable than I am, had I not 
passed so much of my life in the pure, 
soft atmosphere of Italy. I don't know, 
by the bye, that my friend Fitzhenry 
there proves my doctrine true ; I don't 
think he has benefited much by such 
education; vide the pin affair. But I 
suppose it is only the effect of change 
of climate, and that the cold, dark fogs 
of this country, have again contracted 

L 5 



226 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

his heart, and made it selfish and En- 
glish." 

Fitzhenry said nothing, and appa- 
rently was engrossed by his book. Mr. 
Moore continued. " Many a battle Fitz- 
henry and I have had about Lord Byron 
— I wonder what side you would take. 
I never can feel for his imaginary woes. 
What the deuce is the matter with the 
fellow ? what does he want ? He has 
had every thing this world can give. All 
the fools and fine ladies running after 
him, and paying him court a Venvi fun 
de rautre ; and yet he went grumbling 
and whining about, despising, and turn- 
ing up his nose at us all, wlio are ten 
times better than himself. He chose, 
too, to hate and ill-treat his wife, after 
he had insisted, almost against her own 



X MARRIAOE IN HIGH LIFE. 227 

will, or at least against her judgment, 
to marry her, and she an heiress, into 
the bargain. This was to be a new dis- 
tress; and on this he begun, de plus belle, 
to grumble and whine, and moreover to 
blackguard. Now, Fitzhenry, how do 
you defend all this?" 

*' I don't pretend to defend him in 
any thing," said Fitzhenry, very impa- 
tiently ; '* I only say, that persons with 
totally different feelings and characters 
cannot judge of each other. What 
would be keen suffering to one, might 
be none to another. I might an- 
swer you in the words of Madame de 
Stael — " Les s:ens mediocres ne cessent de 
s'etonner que le talent ait des besoms dif- 
fer ens des leurs ; and as for Lord Byron's 
private history, neither you nor I have 



228 A MARRIAGE IN HIOH LIFE. 

any business with it, or know any thing 
about it." 

''The deuce we don't?" said Moore, 
" many thanks, par parenthese, for your 
pretty compliment to me, an sujet de la 
mediocrite; but we will let that pass: I 
am well used to such from you," said he, 
laughing; " but I cannot give up so qui- 
etly Lord Byron, who certainly has had 
the bad taste (to say no worse) to take 
pains to tell us all what a villain he is, 
so that few of us can be ignorant of his 
private history." 

Fitzhenry said nothing; and resuming 
his book, turned away, as if the light 
hurt his eyes. 

" Lady Fitzhenry, don't you agree 
with me about Lord Byron," continued 
the indefatigable Moore. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 229 

" I believe not," said Emmeline with 
a tremulous voice — " I should not — I 
think no one can, or should presume to 
judge of the feelings, hardly of the situ- 
ation and conduct of another." An in- 
voluntary sigh finished the sentence ; 
fortunately it escaped her neighbour's 
ear, as he was hastily turning over the 
leaves of the book, reading a line here 
and there. 

*' // faiit pourtant ttre juste,'" said 
Moore; " and, to give the devil his due. 
Lord Byron is in truth a most delightful 
poet. We all find that he describes 
our own thoughts and feelings, which 
we have not had the wit to put into 
rhyme ourselves. Here is a pretty 
specimen of sing-song sentiment, for 
instance : — 



230 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

^ Florence, whom I will love as well 
As ever yet was said or sung, 
(Since Orpheus sang his spouse from hell,) 
Whilst thou art fair, and I am young ; 

'Sweet Florence, those were pleasant times 
When worlds were staked for ladies eyes ; 
Had bards as many realms as rhymes. 
Thy charms might raise new Anthonies. 

' Though fate forbids such things to be, 
Yet, by thine eye and ringlets curled, 
I cannot lose a world for thee, 
But would not lose thee for a world.' 

Prudent vows those, making them to 
depend on his own youth, and his fair 
one's beauty. What think you of that 
-moral sentiment, Lady Fitzhenry?" 
^ Emmeline dared not speak ; she feared 
a double meaning might be given to 
whatever she said ; but the crimson on 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 231 

her cheeks betrayed how well she knew 
the lines. Fitzhenry, for an instant, 
looked up — his face was scarcely less 
suffused than hers^ and hastily rising 
from his seat, he left the room. 

"Alas!" thought Emmeline, "again 
he will accuse me of braving him ; of 
purposely wounding his feelings !" and it 
was with difficulty she could conceal 
from Mr. Moore how much he had dis- 
composed her. 

The next day, when she went through 
the gallery, the door of Fitzhenry's room 
chanced to be open, and as her eyes 
eagerly wandered into it, she observed 
that the two drawings had disappeared 
from over the chimney. What this meant, 
she could but too well guess : she plainly 
saw that he suspected her of meanly 



232 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

endeavouring to pry into his feelings, 
and to trace each thought inimical to 
herself, with a view (perhaps he con- 
cluded) to gain at least the power of tor- 
menting him, when hopeless of obtain- 
ing any other. " Oh, Fitzhenry !" 
thought she, " will the time ever come, 
when you will know me better, and learn 
to do me justice?"' 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 233 



CHAPTER VII. 

Call ye the city gay? its revels joyous? 
— They may be so to you ; for ye are young 
(Belike) and happy. She is young in years, 
But often in mid-spring will blighting winds 
Do Autumn's work : and there is pain of heart 
That doth the work of time ; can cloud the brow. 
And pale the cheek, and sober down the spirit. 
This gewgaw scene hath fewer charms for her, 
Than for the crone, who, numbering sixty winters, 
Pronounceth it all folly.— Wonder not 
Tis left thus willingly. 

Old Play. 

Parliament met early this year, and 
Lord Fitzhenry signified his intention 



234 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

of being in town at its opening. The 
party at Arlingford, therefore, before 
long, dispersed different ways; and, 
with a heavy heart, Emmeline went to 
settle herself in Grosvenor-street. 
Young as she was, and disposed for 
gaiety as she had been but a few 
months past, she could, in her circum- 
stances, only look to the world and to 
the routine of fashionable life in London 
with dismay. She would be thrown 
into a totally new society, where she 
had not a friend, scarcely an acquaint- 
ance. Had Fitzhenry been to her what 
he ought, how proudly would she, at 
her lover's side, have shown herself to 
an admiring world, as the being he had 
chosen. But this was not the situation 
of Emmeline, and she shrunk with a 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 235 

feeling of apprehension from the tumult 
in which she would be left deserted and 
solitary. 

She foresaw, too, that a London life 
would necessarily throw her and her 
husband more apart; for, little as she 
saw of him in the country, yet still 
in the course of the day she was cer- 
tain of being in his society and of 
hearing his voice, although seldom now 
addressed in conversation to herself. 
In town, it would be easier for him to 
avoid her, and she much feared he 
would take advantage of the opportu- 
nities offered. 

And Emmeline was right in her conjec- 
tures. Under pretence of business, and 
attendance at the House of Commons, 
he was so constantly from home, that 



236 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

they rarely met. Their hours, too, were 
different ; breakfast was no longer a 
certain moment for meeting ; for, as it 
would now have obliged them to a daily 
Ute-ci-tete, it was brought to them in 
their separate apartments. During the 
morning, therefore, it was only by acci- 
dent that they were ever together. Fitz- 
henry rarely dined at home, except when 
there was company ; and, of course, liv- 
ing so much apart, Emmeline did not 
even know what his evening engage- 
ments were ; and often they met by 
chance, for the first time, during forty- 
eight hours, in some distant place of 
amusement. If then he chanced to give 
her a look of kind recognition, poor 
Emmeline went home with her spirits 
raised, resolving to improve the ad van- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 237 

tage she fancied she had gained ; but 
again, forty-eight hours passed in the 
same manner, and, perhaps, if then 
again they accidentally met, he would 
scarcely notice her. 

Thus deserted, she saw she must 
submit to endeavour to make to herself 
an independent existence ; but it was 
a vain attempt when every thought, 
every feeling was with him. Lady 
Saville had offered herself as Emme- 
line's chaperon, on her first entry into 
the world of London society, and she 
could not have had a better compa- 
nion ; for Lady Saville had just feeling 
enough to enable her to perform all 
her social duties without a shadow of 
blame, and even in her own set to 
obtain the character of being remark- 



238 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ably goodnatured;— but she had none 
of those refined sentiments, which 
could lead her to read and detect 
the emotions of Emmeline's heart. 
Pre-occupation of mind, variation of 
spirits and complexion, on a look 
or word ; all such symptoms of a 
stricken heart she attributed to mere 
physical causes ; sometimes rallying 
Emmeline on her vapeurs, but gene- 
rally too much amused and occupied 
herself to doubt her companion being 
equally so. Had that companion's 
heart been gay and free as it was but 
a few months back, what attractions 
the world, into which she was now, for 
the first time, introduced, might have 
had for her ! 

Emmeline's beauty had much im- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 239 

proved since her marriage, and even by 
her loss of happiness ; for, in the place 
of the mere expression of youthful joy 
and good-humour, was a look of senti- 
ment, almost of languor, over her whole 
countenance and person, that added 
inexpressibly to its charm, and gave 
additional effect to her own peculiarly 
bright smile, when it was sometimes 
for a moment recalled. 

As Fitzhenry's wife, she first at- 
tracted attention ; and, with pleasing 
manners, rank, riches, youth, and 
beauty at once to recommend her, she 
was soon sought for, admired, and 
courted ; and had she been willing to 
take advantage of the universal cry in 
her favour, Emmeline might, with litUe 
or no trouble on her part, have been 



240 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE.. 

raised to that envied distinction, ob- 
tained no one knows how, or why, of 
being the fashion. For the world is 
so capricious and wayward in its pre- 
ferences, that it often greets beings like 
Lady Fitzhenry (from circumstances re- 
gardless of its favour) with those win- 
ning, gracious smiles, which it perversely 
withholds from others most indefatigable 
in their efforts to obtain them. Witness 
the anxious and fatiguing labours of so 
many candidates for its patronage, their 
eternal struggles to grasp at what con- 
stantly escapes them, if for a moment 
they pause to take breath, or relax the 
little hold they have secured. 

When individuals are blamed for either 
too much or too little love of the world, 
the diiferent welcome it bestows seems 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 241 

little considered. How little does the 
situation of a courted, fashionable gir], 
surrounded by partners and admirers, 
and thus at liberty to give herself every 
impertinent air, which a vain mind, and 
a selfish, unfeeling heart dictate, resem- 
ble that of the unobserved, disregarded 
being, who, night after night, follows 
some elderly, undistinguished chaperon 
through the regular round oi London 
amusements, and, seated by her hour 
after hour in dull neglect, seems at 
last to become a part of the bench she 
rests on, till reduced, perhaps, to be 
even envious of its insensibility ; yet 
the same enlivening music plays to 
both ; the same bright lights are cast 
on both, and the same glittering, buzz- 
ing crowd surrounds them ; but ques- 

VOL. I. M 



242 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

tion them, after their night's dissipation, 
as to the entertainment at which they 
were both present, and how different 
will be their accounts of the same scene 
— of what is called the gay world ! of 
all worlds the most melancholy to 
those who are not gay. 

And Emmeline, in spite of her general 
popularity, was among that number : 
how far she might equally have re- 
sisted its snares, and despised its plea- 
sures, had there been corresponding 
joy within, we cannot pretend to say; 
but, as it was, the first transient amuse- 
ment produced by novelty, very soon 
went off, leaving her mind wearied 
and depressed, and, at any time, in 
the gayest scene, the sight of Fitz- 
henry at a distance, in the crowd of a 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 243 

ball-room, or at the opera, had power 
instantly to dispel every feeling of en- 
joyment ; and then, totally regardless of 
what passed around her, or of the flatter- 
ing compliments addressed to her, her 
eyes were rivetted to the spot where 
he was, busied in the eager examination 
of those near him, in search of that 
form, those features, which had capti- 
vated him ; and often when she had 
observed him engrossed in conversa- 
tion with any woman, or even when 
merely paying the common attentions 
of civility, breathless with agitation, 
she has enquired who the favoured 
being was, as if in strange eagerness 
** most to seek what she would most 
avoid;" but still Lady Florence never 

M 2 



244 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

appeared ; her dreaded name was never 
mentioned. 

Although now, to all appearance, 
totally deserted by her husband, still 
he kept strictly to his engagement 
with her. Every possible indulgence 
and pleasure which money could give, 
were hers ; and in such outward at- 
tentions he even seemed occupied abo.it 
her. The horse she rode at Arlingford, 
although formerly his favourite hunter, 
was now considered as entirely hers, and 
without her even expressing a wish on 
the subject, had been brought to town 
for her exclusive use ; he had himself 
secured a box at the opera for her, 
after having ascertained in what part 
of the house she would prefer it ; and, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 245 

on their first arrival in town, he had 
again repeated his desire, that she 
should ask any and every one she 
liked to the house. In short, she was 
again and again enjoined to consult only 
her own happiness and enjoyment in 
every thing : kind words in the mouth 
of any other husband ; but, producing 
the painful conviction of her loneliness, 
they brought but tears into Emmeline's 
eyes, when hastily pronounced by Fitz- 
henry, with his hand on the lock of the 
door, in order that he might leave her 
the instant they were uttered, and so 
escape the possibility of thanks or com- 
ment. 

Wishing, however^ to show tliat she 
was sensible of his intended kindness, in 
the liberty he gave, and with a last faint 



246 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

liope, that by making his home agree- 
able, she might entice him to be more 
with her, Emmeline determined to en- 
deavour to collect society at her house. 
She took a favourable moment to inform 
Fitzhenry of her intention, and of the 
nisfhts for which she had made the invi- 
tations. He seemed much to approve of 
the plan, but said nothing as to his own 
attendance. 

On the day appointed for the first 
party, Emmeline, as was generally now 
the case, dined alone. During her soli- 
tary repast, she made firm resolutions 
that she would act upon the advice Pel- 
ham had given her at Arlingford — put that 
•mask on her feelings which he recom- 
mended, and adopt those manners of the 
world that he said Fitzhenry admired. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 247 

Emmeline had a sort of natural tact on 
all such subjects; and, had she been 
in the habit of doing the honours of her 
own house, during her whole life, she 
could not have acquitted herself better. 
All were delighted with her, and with 
the evening's amusement. It was not 
till towards the close of it, that Fitz- 
henry appeared. Long had poor Em- 
meline's eyes anxiously wandered to- 
ward the door, watching for his en- 
trance ; and when at last he came, it 
was not without difficulty that she con- 
tinued to perform her gay part with 
spirit ; but a momentary break in what 
she was saying — a rapid beating of her 
heart, and the deepened colour in her 
cheek, alone betrayed her agitation at 
his presence. 



248 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

He came up to her ; remarked how 
well the rooms were lighted ; compli- 
mented her on the disposal of the furni- 
ture — on her arrangement of the flowers : 
and, in return, the poor hypocrite played 
her part well. She carelessly asked 
his opinion as to the placing of the 
lamps and the pianoforte. Even at- 
tempted at rallying him on his absence ; 
and to all appearance no two people 
could be on an easier footing. 

The company were by this time be- 
ginning to clear away. As they dis- 
persed, Emmeline eagerly looked around 
for Fitzhenry. She thought he had no- 
ticed her more than usual, and she de- 
termined to follow up this little fancied 
success, by assuming a careless gaiety, 
which she certainly did not feel, but 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 249 

which she sometimes believed she would 
do well to adopt. When, therefore, she 
had performed her last act of civility to 
her last guest, she hurried back, to the 
spot where she had left him. But he 
too had disappeared. Alone she paced 
the now silent, empty rooms, lost in 
thought, and totally forgetful of the late- 
ness of the hour, until at length, th6 
entrance of Reynolds rousing her from 
her trance, she hastily retired into her 
own room — but not to sleep. — Various 
thoughts agitated her mind : sometimes 
even hope, ("albeit of late not a usual 
visitor,) forced itself in : Fitzhenry had 
certainly smiled on her ; he had ap- 
peared pleased ; had even seemed to 
take interest in her attempt, and she do 
termined to persevere. 

M 5 



250 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Emmeline counted the days to her 
next party, as a school-girl does those to 
her first ball ; for, on its success she again 
built flattering expectations for the future 
— expectations which perhaps to herself 
were hardly to be defined. " But at all 
events, I shall certainly see him," she 
thought, as with most excuseable care 
and anxiety she endeavoured to improve, 
to the best advantage, those personal at- 
tractions which nature had bestowed 
upon her. But in vain she decked her 
hair with the freshest flowers ; in vain 
she listened for, and anxiously watched 
the result of, each loud knock at her 
door. Every one she had asked, flew 
to her invitation, (such is the power of 
novelty in London,) all but him for whom 
the whole had been prepared. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 251 

Disheartened and dispirited, poor Em- 
meline almost resolved on seeking some 
pretext for putting off altogether her 
third entertainment; but a good hu- 
moured word of recognition from her 
husband, as they met in the lobby of the 
opera-house, the Tuesday before, again 
made her yield to the natural buoyancy 
of her disposition ; and Fitzhenry, hav- 
ing asked Pelhani and the Savilles to 
dine w^ith him on the day appointed for 
her party, his presence seemed thus se- 
cured. Ail now, therefore, appeared 
propitious to Emmeline. Fitzhenry him- 
self was, on that day, evidently more 
disposed for cheerfulness than he had 
been of late ; and the smallness of their 
party at dinner, obliging them to more 
intercourse than they had had for long. 



252 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Emmeline gave way to the exhilaration 
of spirits belonging to youth and hope, 
and, her cheeks again bright with the 
flush of enjoyment, she bore her part in 
the conversation with unusual liveliness. 
Emmeline was aware of this herself, and 
could not, moreover, help indulging in 
the flattering idea, that even Fitzhenry 
had (at least for that once) thought her 
agreeable. With a step made still more 
light than usual by the innocent exalta- 
tion of the moment, she gaily bounded up 
to the drawing-room with Lady Saville, 
to make the necessary prepai'ations for 
the expected company. Knowing how 
much Fitzhenry liked music, she had 
collected all the best Italian singers ; 
and, with her companion, Emmeline was 
still occupied in arranging the lights and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 253 

instruments, when Pelham and Sir 
George Saville joined them, but not 
Fitzhenry. Coffee came ; still he did 
not appear. Half fearful of what she 
might learn, but not able to bear the 
suspense any longer, she at length, with 
an anxious look, enquired whether he 
was gone out. 

" Oh no !" replied Pelham ; *' he is 
only answering a letter which he has 
just received ; he will be here directly." 

A flash of her own bright smile in- 
stantly re-illumined her features ; and 
afterwards, in the middle of one of 
Camporese's beautiful songs, it glanced 
again over her countenance, for she saw 
Fitzhenry enter the room, and, for an 
instant, caught his eyes fixed upon her. 
But the song over, and after the ge- 



254 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

neral stir and bustle that usually fol- 
lows, she looked for him in vain. The 
crowd was now every minute thicken- 
ing, and with difficulty Emmeline forced 
herself to address to each those com- 
mon-place remarks which always equally 
weary those who make them, and those 
to whom they are made. She restlessly 
went from room to room on some excuse 
to herself as well as others, but her 
search was vain — he was gone ! 

At once the bright scene totally 
changed ! although the music was beau- 
tiful, and the buzz of gaiety and happi- 
ness went round. Poor Emmeline, 
alone in the scene of enjoyment which 
she had herself created, was wretched. 
Gladly she at length saw her visitors 
depart, and the rooms gradually become 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 255 

empty ; for her spirits, which had been 
so unusually excited, were totally ex- 
hausted, and her only object now was, 
the conclusion of that evening to which 
she had looked with such bright expec- 
tation. Lady Saville and Pelhani re- 
mained the last. 

''Well, my dear Lady Fitzhenry," 
said the former, " I staid to the end 
purposely to congratulate you on the 
full success of your soirees; nothing 
could have gone off better than they 
have done ; every one declares that no- 
body understands the matter so well as 
Lady Fitzhenry. I wonder where you 
learnt the art," said she, as she looked, 
with a complimentary smile, into Em- 
meline'sface. On that face, tears were 
slowly, and almost unconsciously steal- 



256 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

ing down. "Good heavens! Lady 
Fitzhenry !" exclaimed Lady Saville, 
" what is the matter ?" 

" Nothing," said Emmeline, provoked 
at her weakness: "but however well 
I may do the honours of my house, it is 
a fatigue to which I am new, and per- 
fectly unequal. I have had a bad head- 
ache all day ; and I find the trouble of 
being agreeable so much greater than 
the reward, that however delightful my 
parties may be, I shall attempt them no 
more." 

Poor Emmeline spoke in the impa- 
tient tone of vexation and disappoint- 
ment — a tone so unusually heard from 
her lips, that Lady Saville looked at her 
astonished. 

"How very foolish !" she exclaimed, 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 257 

" when nothing of the sort, 1 am sure, 
could succeed better, and when you 
ought to be so pleased and flattered by 
the general pleasure you have produced. 
In your place, I should be quite de- 
lighted ; and then to give it all up 
merely because you happen at this 
minute to feel a little tired and ex- 
hausted, particularly when you seemed 
to enjoy it all so much yourself, as I 
am sure you did only an hour ago. 
What is it that has gone wrong to make 
you change your mind so suddenly?" 

Emmeline only shook her head in re- 
ply; but encountering Pelham's grave 
look, it recalled to her mind his coun- 
sels, and brushing away her tears with 
her hand, and forcing a smile, she said, 
as gaily as she could — 



258 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

''Well, we need not discuss the mat- 
ter at present. I will think about it ; 
but really, now, I must drive you away, 
and go to bed ; for I am quite knocked 
up ; and you see fatigue has already 
made a fool of me, as I dare say, if the 
truth was told, I cried like a child to 
think I had eaten my cake, and that these 
delightful parties were over." 

Lady Saville, taking her hint, was 
preparing to depart, when Fitzhenry, 
who, on returning home, had still seen 
some carriages in the street, and there- 
fore thought he could venture up stairs, 
entered the room. Lady Saville imme- 
diately went up to him. " Oh, Lord 
Fitzhenry ! do second me ; for I am 
trying to persuade your capricious, per- 
verse wife, to give some more parties ; 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 259 

for she says they don't repay her for the 
trouble ; that they exhaust her, and 
that she will have no more. Now have 
they not been particularly agreeable? 
and does she not play the part of lady 
of the revels to perfection ?" 

Emmeline, who, on her husband's 
entrance, had walked to the further end 
of the room, now began busying herself 
with a basket of flowers, forgetting that 
she could no longer have any excuse 
for the employment. As for Fitzhenry, 
he too seemed rather embarrassed by 
Lady Saville's direct questions; but 
soon recollecting himself — "I certainly 
think Lady Fitzhenry would do very 
wrong to give up what seemed to give 
herself, as well as every one else, so 
much pleasure." 



260 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Emmeliiie bent over the flowers to 
hide her face, which was crimsoned 
with pique and impatience, as she re- 
peated to herself — ** What gives me so 
much pleasure! and that is all I have 
gained by my last attempt, still more 
to deceive him as to my real character, 
and real feelings. He thinks I am to be 
satisfied with all this noise and empty 
show of enjojmient ; and that it will 
make up to the worldly fool, the insen- 
sible child, for the want of happiness !" 

Lady Saville returned to her charge, 
begging Emmeline would at once name 
a day, and that she would again endea- 
vour to secure Camporese for her. 

Forced to answer, and no longer able 
even to pretend occupation with the 
flowers, she hastily composed herself; 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 261 

and, quietly saying she was too tired 
then to think of the matter, held out 
her hand to Lady Saville, wishing her 
good night. 

The altered tone of Emmeline's voice, 
since he had last heard it, probably 
struck Fitzhenry, for he hastily raised 
his eyes towards her. Her countenance, 
her manner, all was changed ; the bright 
colour in her cheeks was gone ; the 
smile that had played round her mouth 
had vanished : Pelham's eyes too were 
fixed upon her, and Fitzhenry observed 
it. Again he glanced at them both, and 
then for some minutes seemed totally 
lost in thought, till Lady Saville, moving 
towards the door to go, and wishing 
him good night, he was roused from his 
reverie ; he offered her his arm, and 



262 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

both he and Pelham went down stairs 
with her. 

For a few minutes, Emmeline listened 
for Fitzhenry's return — she ahnost hoped 
he would enquire into the cause of what 
he might deem her ill humour : in short, 
at that moment, she felt she should be 
glad of any opening from him that could 
possibly bring matters to a crisis, how- 
ever painful that crisis might be ; for she 
felt as if it was impossible to go on en- 
during her present existence. But, after 
pacing the room for some time in nervous 
anxiety, which increased on hearing a 
footstep on the stairs, she was at length 
obliged to give up even that hope, as 
Reynolds ^alone entered the room, and 
immediately after, she heard the door of 
Fitzhenry's apartment close. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 263 

Convinced that she had now done all 
she could ; that she had battled with her 
fate as much as possible ; and, seeing 
that every exertion and endeavour to 
please and win him, only seemed to cast 
her further from him, she resolved to 
give over the vain struggle, and for her 
own sake, at least, endeavour in reality 
to be the frivolous, heartless being he 
thought her. And thus, in a sort of des- 
peration, flying from herself, and from a 
cheerless home, which only reminded her 
of her blighted youth and hopes, she fol- 
lowed Lady Saville to every dissipation 
that was proposed. The last, and appa- 
rently the gayest, at every amusement ; 
bright with false smiles and false colours ; 
poor Emmeline endeavoured to conceal, 
beneath excited spirits, an aching heart: 



264 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

but the labour was such, that it allowed 
of no respite. One day left to herself, 
her own sad reflections again rushed back, 
and with increased acuteness — all her 
disappointed, withered feelings, the suf- 
fering present, and the cheerless future, 
pressed upon her soul. To pause in the 
mad career of dissipation was therefore 
impossible. She danced, she laughed, 
she talked. All shyness, all feeling even, 
seemed to have vanished, and her eyes 
sparkled with that feverish dazzle, so 
unlike the bright sunshine of happiness, 
but so often mistaken for it by a thought- 
less, uninterested observer. How falsely 
do those of the world mutually pass sen- 
tence on each other ! Meeting, perhaps, 
merely in the gay resorts of fashion, each 
ndividual attributes to the other that 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 265 

worldliness and frivolity which belongs 
to the scene, but which they apply to 
the character — and how false such judg- 
ments are, those may declare, who by 
peculiar circumstances, or duty of some 
sort, are drawn into such amusements, 
when from natural disposition and taste 
they may be particularly little suited to 
enjoy them. 

Emmeline's looks, health, even tem- 
per, all seemed to suffer from the life 
she now led. Often, after an evening of 
apparent gaiety, on her return home, 
she was so agitated, and so ill, that 
many a night it was only by laudanum 
that she obtained rest. Jenkins repeat- 
edly observed how " My Lady " was 
changed ; that she never now seemed to 
know her own mind ; that she would 

VOL. I. N 



266 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

often dress for an evening's amusement, 
and then, when the time came, dismiss 
her carriage, and flinging herself, in all 
her finery, on her bed, would cry bitter- 
ly; till, like a child, she fell asleep 
from mere fatigue ; and then, next 
morning, she would laugh at what she 
called her nervous folly, and begin again 
her life of hurry and laborious amuse- 
ment. 

But poor Emmeline, made for better 
things, felt humbled at herself. Was 
this the life that a rational, accountable, 
immortal being should lead? Alas! was 
this the end of all those dreams of hap- 
piness which illume the mind, and warm 
the heart of youth ? Worn out in body 
and spirits, Emmeline longed for Arling- 
ford and quiet; and looked forward with 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 267 

something like pleasure to Easter, when 
she concluded Fitzhenry would propose 
going there. 

Amid all those who now buzzed and 
fluttered around her, one friend always 
followed her steps with interest, one 
friend she always met with real pleasure. 
That friend was Pelham. Althouoh he 
never, since the conversation at Arling- 
ford, had in the most distant manner 
alluded to the estrangement between 
her and her husband, yet she could 
plainly perceive, that he was well aware 
of their real situation ; and she could not 
help also observing, that, of late, Pelham 
and Fitzhenry were less cordial together 
than formerly, although both seemed still 
anxious, when they met, to carry on the 
farce of friendship. But Pelham came 

N 2 



268 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

much less often to their house than he 
used to do, and generally at those hours 
when Fitzhenry was most likely to be 
from home. This Emmeline every way 
regretted, she always had felt as if he 
was a link between them, and she had 
even vaguely imagined that he might 
some day have been the means of uniting 
them ; and, besides the dispiriting con- 
viction that thus, one by one, every hope 
to which she clung gave way, she could 
not help feeling painfully aware that it 
was Pelham's partiality to her, which 
had estranged her husband from him. 

One evening at Almacks, Lady Saville, 
with whom she had gone, being engaged 
dancing, Emmeline had sought a refuge 
from the heat and crowd in the tea- 
room, and Pelham had followed her. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 269 

Half serious, half jesting, he was attack- 
ing her upon the life she now led, and 
upon the impossibility of ever seeing her 
quietly, and the eternal hurry of pleasure 
and spirits in which he always found 
her. 

•' Why I only do like others," said 
Emmeline, with forced gaiety. 

*' Perhaps so," replied Pelham. " But 
you are not like those others whom you 
imitate and follow. I am sure that all 
this dissipation cannot satisfy j/o^/r mind, 
cannot make you happy." 

" Perhaps not," said Emmeline, her 
ibrced smile fading from her lips ; for 
happiness was a word which always 
grated on her heart, and sounded harsh 
in her ears. 

" But what can I do? — ilfauthurler 



270 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

avec les loups,'" added she, again endea- 
vouring to resume her gaiety. 

" This assumed levity cannot take me 
in," continued Pelham. " I am certain 
it is impossible but that all this frivolity 
and fatigue must wear out both your 
mind and body. How different you were 
at Arlingford ! how little you then seemed 
to anticipate pleasure from what you now 
enter into so warmly !" 

These were all home truths, which 
Emmeline could not answer, and she 
merely stammered out, that she had now 
no choice. 

" Indeed!" replied Pelham, warmly. 
" You wrong your friends when you say 
that." 

"My friends?" repeated Emmeline, 
sadly, " I have no friends to " and 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 271 

she stopped short, her own words, rous- 
ing from the bottom of her heart painful 
feelings, which she in vain endeavoured 
to smother by dissipation ; and which, 
by hiding them from others, she hoped 
to forget herself. She averted her head 
from Pelham, and fixed her tearful eyes 
on the ground. 

Apparently fearful of going too far, 
Pelham was also silent ; he looked at her 
with melancholy interest ; he could not 
help observing how greatly she was al- 
tered, how much she had lost of the 
graceful roundness of her form, and how 
evidently 

" Concealment, like a worm in the bud. 

Fed on her damask cheek." 

At that minute, Fitzhenry suddenly 
entered the room, and, hastily coming up 



272 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

t 

to Pelham, *' I have been looking for you 
this half hour," said he ; " I want to 
speak to you for a minute." 

Fitzhenry had spoken these words so 
quick that it was not till he ended, that 
the preoccupied look of his auditor 
seemed to strike him ; his eyes glanced 
from him to Emmeline, and there re- 
mained fixed. His sudden entrance had 
brought the blood into her face, but could 
not dispel from it the traces of emotion 
which were very evident ; and there 
was a contrast between the expression 
of her countenance, the listless neglect 
of her whole person, and the glittering 
trappings in which she was attired, that 
must have struck and interested any one ; 
and which arrested her husband's atten- 
tion so forcibly, that Emmeline blushed 
still deeper beneath his gaze. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 273 

This seemed to rouse him from the 
sort of dream in which he appeared to 
be lost; and suddenly turning to Pelham, 
" I stopped at your house, and there 
learnt you were here ; I had no idea you 
ever honoured such places with your pre- 
sence when you could possibly help it. " 

" Sometimes, when the spirit moves 
me," answered Pelham, carelessly. *' But 
what is it you have to say to me ?" 

** I have a message to you from the 
Speaker, with whom I have been dining," 
said Fitzhenry, as if suddenly recollect- 
ing his errand, and he drew Pelham aside 
for a minute. Emmeline then ventured 
to raise her eyes upon her husband, and 
could not help, with a sort of melancholy 
pride, comparing him to those around 
him, and exulting in his superiority of 

N 5 



274 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

look, air, and manner. When his con- 
versation with Pelham was over, he asrain 
turned towards Emmeline, and again his 
eyes were rivetted on her. 

" You have left off dancing, I think. 
Lady Fitzhenry," said he, as if he thought 
it necessary to say something, and hardly 
knew what; '' I thought you had liked it. 
Pelham, do you ever dance now ?" 

" It is some time since I was guilty of 
any thing so frisky," he replied. ** I 
should be afraid I might be thought not 
behaving myself with proper diplomatic 
gravity ; but as for Lady Fitzhenry, I must 
say that, in her, it is pure laziness, and 
therefore most reprehensible, for I have 
myself heard many a humble application 
made to her during this last half hour." 
" We take to ourselves the right to be 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 275 

fanciful and capricious, you know," said 
Emmeline, trying to smile. 

" Yes, and caprice is sometimes the 
only thing women are steady to," replied 
Fitzhenry; while an expression of satirical 
displeasure seemed to curl his handsome 
lip. 

Emmeline felt she no way deserved 
that severe remark, and indeed hardly 
thought he ever noticed her enough even 
to observe the faults she might have. 
But in his manner, just then, he was alto- 
gether so unlike himself, and had so 
much the appearance of offended ill 
humour, that she would have thought 
something particularly disagreeable had 
just passed between the two friends, 
except that she saw Pelham was, as 
indeed he was always, perfectly mild and 
composed. 



276 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

At that moment a very pretty woman, 
dressed in the height of Parisian fashion, 
came into the room ; and, after ac- 
knowledging Mr. Pelham with a fami- 
liar bow, addressed Fitzhenry. 

" How basely you have deserted me, 
and forgotten our engagement. I have 
been looking for you every where. The 

waltz is nearly over." 

*' Ten thousand pardons," said Fitz- 
henry rather embarrassed : "I am 
quite ashamed, but really I had entirely 
forgotten." 

" That does not mend the matter 
much," answered she, laughing, and 
glancing at Emmeline. ** You have, I 
think, already forgotten your foreign gal- 
lantry;" and, taking the arm he offered, 
they both went into the dancing- room. 

*' Who is that?" said Emmeline 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 277 

eagerly, as she followed them with her 
eyes. 

" It is Mrs. Osterley," replied Pel- 
ham. *' She is a Vienna acquaintance 
of ours, and just returned from abroad." 

Emmeline again breathed ; but, com- 
plaining of the heat of the tea-room, 
got up and went towards the door. 
Mr. Pelham smiled on her in compas- 
sion as he drew her arm within his, 
and suffered her to lead him which way 
she chose, and they soon found them- 
selves among the crowd of waltzers. 
Fitzhenry was then dancing with Mrs. 
Osterley, and when they stopped, it was 
close by Emmeline; though an inter- 
vening waltzing pair, also pausing in 
their giddy labours, hid her entirely from 
their view. 

" Who was that you were talking to 



278 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

in the tea-room when I went to claim 
you so inconsiderately?" said Mrs. 
Osterley to her partner. 

*' Don't you know?" answered he, 
rather embarrassed by the question, or 
rather by the manner in which it was 
put; " it was Lady Fitzhenry." 

*' Lady Fitzhenry! your wife! you 
surprise me ! what a very pretty woman 
she is! I had heard her so differently 
described ; she is an uncommonly inte- 
resting looking person, vr^aiment je vous 
enfa'is mon compliment.''' 

Fitzhenry bowed ; and Emmeline 
could see that the mantling blood had 
tinged even his forehead. 

" And from what I further heard," 
continued his gay companion, looking 
archly in his face, " I should have 
thought you were the last man to have 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 279 

been detected in a flirtation with your 
wife; though really, now I have seen 
her, 1 do not wonder she should have 
made you a little volage''' 

" I had gone in search of Pelham," 
said Fitzhenry, coldly, apparently much 
disconcerted by her remark. 

" Oh! is that the way of it?^^ re- 
torted Mrs. Osterley laughing: "well, 
I really cannot pity you ; it is but fair 
play, for you richly deserve it. But 
is Pelham really at last caught? Well, 
I shall be truly curious to become ac- 
quainted with the piece of perfection 
who has had power to overcome his 
impenetrable insensibility — pray do in- 
troduce me to your wife.'" And she again 
laughed more heartily than before. 

Fitzhenry did not, as she seemed to 
have expected, join in the laugh ; and. 



280 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

with a smile of contempt, she added, 
" Surely you don't think it incumbent 
upon you to play the English husband 
and be angry, for that would be taking 
a very unnecessary degree of trouble, 
I should think." 

Luckily, Pelham's attention had, during 
this conversation, been attracted another 
way, so that Emmeline had gently with- 
drawn her arm, and the crowd had soon 
divided them. Disgusted with Mrs. 
Osterley's levity, and fearful that Fitz- 
henry might perceive her, she drew back, 
although she would have given much to 
have heard his answer. She soon again 
saw them in the giddy round, and went 
to a seat which she observed to be un- 
occupied. 

She had not been there long, before 
Miss Selina Danvers flew up to her, with 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 281 

ecstasy in her looks, and a perfect par- 
terre of flowers in her head, and seizing 
her hand vehemently, " Well, my dear 
Lady Fitzhenry, here I am ! actually at 
Almacks ! and all owing to you, I am 
sure, I am more obliged to you than I can 
express. What an enchanting place it is ! 
But only think how abominably those 
odious lady patronesses have behaved ! 
After all, mamma has no ticket! Did you 
ever hear any thing like it? It is quite 
atrocious. I really thought I should have 
died with anxiety when we came to 
Willis's room this morning to hear our 
fate ; and my heart sank within me when 
I saw how full the street was of carriages, 
for we got into a regular string just like 
a ball — so delightful ! We were there full 
an hour and a half waiting, but I am sure 



282 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

it was well worth while, and I really 
believe 1 screamed with joy when I saw 
my ticket ; but, as I said before, there 
was none for mamma ; so then we had to 
drive all over the town to find a chaperon 
for me to go with ; at last we went to 
Lady Coddrington, and only think ! she 
had got one for herself, and none for her 
daughter ! Did you ever hear any thing 
so shocking ! And she was so cross and 
sulky about it at first, that she said she 
would not go ; but by abusing the lady 
patronesses, we got her into good- 
humour, and she agreed to take me ; 
but, between ourselves, she is a very 
disagreeable chaperon; for out of spite, 
I suppose, because her ugly daughter 
could not get a ticket, she won't try and 
get me a partner ; and, odious woman, she 



A. MARRIAOrE IN HIGH LIFE. 2S3 

came so late that the evening is ah'eady 
more than half over. I suppose you 
know all tlie men here, Lady Fitzhenry, 
don't you ?" 

" Very few dancers," said Emmeline, 
not feeling at all inclined to press Selina 
on any of her acquaintance. 

"Dear! .there is Mr. Moore!" ex- 
claimed the young lady, already in a 
flutter of expectation ; " and I do be- 
lieve he is coming this way ; and we 
danced constantly together at Arlingford, 
you know." 

That was true ; but dancing and divert- 
ing himself with the simple Selina at 
Arlingford, and selecting her as his part- 
ner at Almacks, were two very different 
things ; and after making her a distant, 
chilling bow, Mr. Moore sat down on the 
other side of Emmeline. Poor Selina's 



284 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

countenance fell. Moore went on talk- 
ing, sotto'voce, to Emmeline, till Selina 
could bear it no lonoer. 

*' Dear, Mr. Moore ! how come you not 
to be dancing ? I thought you liked it of 
all things !" 

" I may ask you the same question," 
returned he. ^ . 

*' Oh no, perhaps nobody has asked 
me," answered Selina, pettishly. 

*' That is quite impossible ; I will not 
suppose any thing so disgraceful to the 
taste and judgment of all the smart 
young gentlemen I see here," added he, 
carelessly, and then returned to his af- 
fectedly interesting conversation with 
Emmeline, who listened apparently quite 
unworthy of the honour conferred on her. 
Selina saw with mortification that no- 
thing was to be hoped from Mr. Moore. 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 285 

But just then, a foppishly dressed young 
man, coming up and speaking to Emme- 
line, Selina's spirits revived : she touched 
her arm, whispering, " Who is that? 
could you introduce me to him?" At 
first Emmeline paid no attention, but Se- 
lina's pinches became so urgent, that she 
at last was obliged to say: " Lord Wil- 
liam Vernon, will you allow me to intro- 
duce my friend, Miss Danvers, to you? " 
For a minute, an expression of dis- 
pleasure animated Lord William's un- 
meaning countenance : he made Selina 
a slidit bow with his head, as he took a 
hasty survey of her person ; and after say- 
ing something very uninteresting about 
the heat of the room, to Emmeline, and 
enlarging on the merits of a newly pur- 
chased cabriolet-horse, to Moore, he 
walked away. 



286 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Poor Selina bit her lip in vexation, 
and finding she did not thrive at all in 
her present situation, jumped up to see 
what could be done w^ith her cross cha- 
peron, whom she had spied in conversa- 
tion with a gentleman at the opposite 
side of the room. 

*' How in the name of wonder came 
Miss Danvers here 1 " exclaimed Moore, as 
soon as she had left them — " what could 
possess the lady patronesses to give her 
a ticket?" 

*' I applied for one for her," answered 
Emmeline. 

" I think that was rather a work of 
supererogation on your part," continued 
Moore. " You surely are not going to 
hamper yourself with that girl : you soon 
frightened away Vernon, trembling for his 
newly acquired dignity in the hierarchy 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 287 

of fashion; and I must give you notice, if 
you take to introducing Miss Selina Dan- 
vers about, even you, even Lady Fitz- 
henry, charming as she is, will be voted a 
bore. What business has that sort of girl 
here ? and how can she be so unreason- 
able as to expect to be asked ta dance ? 
it is perfect nonsense — she had much bet- 
ter stick to her Hampshire county ball ; 
there she may play un grand rule. Misses 
are really sad nuisances in society, un- 
less they sit quiet, and don't trouble one ; 
so take my advice Lady Fitzhenry. Good- 
nature is quite mauvais ton in London — it 
is a bad style to take up, and will never 
do. But it is impossible to sit still and 
moralize when Collinet is playing that 
waltz so delightfully ; will you take a 
turn or two with me ?" 

" I will resign the honour to Miss 



288 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Danvers," said Emmeline, laughing — 
" and luckily she is just coming this 
way ; so do the thing handsomely, and 
ask the poor girl, for she knows nobody 
here, and is dying to dance." 

" Oh, if you are really serious, I am 
off," said Moore, and hastily seizing his 
hat, which he had hid under the seat 
in preparation for his waltz with Lady 
Fitzhenry, he hurried away. 

Although little inclined to merriment, 
Emmeline could not help laughing — the 
smile on her countenance caught Pel- 
ham's eye, and he came up to her to en- 
quire what had amused her. Emmeline 
told Selina's sad tale. 

'' Poor thing!" said Pelham. " But 
this is a new character Moore has taken up, 
I think, for he set out much more wisely, 
with the determination to enjoy every 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 289 

amusement that came in his way, pro- 
fessing openly a love for dancing and 
gaiety of every kind : but fashion, or 
what is called, in its slang, being fine, is 
socatchingadiseasethat none can escape. 
It has taken the place of the small-pox ; 
and I think it would be a good plan if 
we could be inoculated for it, so as to se- 
cure having it mildly, and of the best 
sort. I don't know how you manage to 
be ichat and lohere you are in the world 
without it ; but pray don't follow Moore's 
advice on the subject — let us have one 
specimen of a good-natured London fine 
lady. By the bye, I too have some ad- 
vice to give you, which is, not to make 
up to that Mrs. Osterley : she was reck- 
oned at Vienna a tres mauvaise langiie, 
and was always making tracasseries. 

VOL I. o 



290 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

She has a gay, and apparently an 
artless manner, which at first takes one 
in. Fitzhenry never liked her, so you 
need not be acquainted with her; and 
I should really counsel you to avoid 
her. 

There was little necessity to give 
Emmeline that caution : what she had 
already heard, had not prepossessed her 
in Mrs. Osterley's favour in any way ; 
but at that minute, the two people of 
whom they were talking came up. 

'' Mrs. Osterley begs to be introduced 
to you. Lady Fitzhenry," said her hus- 
band, with an evident painful embarrass- 
ment of manner. Emmeline got up, 
and returned the salutation, though with 
a coldness which she could not over- 
come, but which did not seem at all to 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 291 

discompose the person to whom it was 
addressed. 

" As an old friend of Lord Fitz- 
henry's," continued Mrs. Osterley, " I 
feel I have a right to claim acquaintance 
with you, and I trust you will allow me 
to endeavour to improve it." And she 
seated herself by Emmeline, who again 
bowed in silence ; for never before had 
she felt so totally at a loss for some of 
those usual phrases which mean nothing, 
but which fill up the awkward pause, apt 
to take place after a first introduction ; 
and Fitzhenry no way helped her. He 
appeared to be completely discomposed ; 
and, under pretence of seeing an acquain- 
tance, removed to a distance. Mrs. Os- 
terley finding Emmeline did not speak, 
continued : — 

o 2 



292 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

"It is SO long since I have been in 
England, that I hardly know any one : 
quite a new set and generation have 
started up ; and my English acquaint- 
ances are merely those whom I have 
known abroad — by the bye, Mr. Pelham, 
are the Mostyns in town ? " 

" I believe they have left it," said he, 
coldly. 

„ Of course you know them," con- 
tinued Mrs. Osterley to Emmeline — 
" Mr. Mostyn is so particular a friend 
of Lord Fitzhenry's." 

" No, I have never met them," an- 
swered Emmeline, commanding her 
voice as well as she could, though she 
felt her face was to a great degree be- 
traying her feelings. 

" You surprise me," continued her 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 293 

tormenter. *' But I suppose you and my 
friend Lord Fitzhenry have been rural- 
izing, and sentimentalizing alone in the 
country, a la mode Anglaise, since your 
marriage, and I cannot wonder at either 
of you preferring that to the most agree 
able society," added she, with a compli- 
mentary smile. " After Easter, I suppose 
every body will be in town ; and I trust 
Lady Florence will then return among 
the number, for I really feel quite in a 
strange country. I am now so little 
used to the forms, and cold, stiff propri- 
eties of English ways, that, to tell the 
truth, I find London very dull and stu- 
pid, and was really delighted to-night, 
when I saw Lord Fitzhenry, to talk over 
delightful foreign days with him. Mr. 
Pelham, don't you find English society 



294 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

much changed for the worse ? I think 
my country folks are pleasanter any 
where than in their own land ; for, here 
they directly ])ut on their native buck- 
ram again, and are so prodigiously good 
and proper, that there is no living with 
them." 

" I can't agree with you," replied Pel- 
ham. " I am so stupid, as to like them 
better at home : abroad, they are too 
apt to cast off some of the restraints 
which the opinions of their own country 
oblige them to submit to, without adopt- 
ing those of the nations they visit. In 
short, the case is the same with manners 
as with religion ; — they cease to be pro- 
testants without becoming catholics; and 
they take advantage of the usual laxity 
of morals and principles of other coun- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 295 

tries, without acquiring that outward 
decorum of manner, which at least pre- 
vents such conduct from offending the 
innocent; without, in short, adopting 
that excusable hypocrisy, which a French 
author so justly calls rhommageque le vice 
rend a la vertu, an English woman rarely 
ceases to be virtuous, without becoming 
coarse; a foreigner may understand k 
metiei^ better, but my own opinion is — 
that there are few of my countrywomen 
much the better for a long residence on 
the continent." 

^' The present company always ex- 
cepted, of course," said Mrs. Osterley, 
bowing to him. " Mr. Pelham is no 
complimenter, as I dare say you find, 
Lady Fitzhenry ; for I believe you have 
the pleasure of being intimately ac- 
quainted with him." 



296 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

Fortunately for Emmeline, a new 
waltz just then began ; and Fitzhenry, 
to make up for his former negligence, 
came again to claim Mrs. Osterley as 
his partner, although seemingly against 
his will. As they went away together, 
Emmeline heard her say to Fitzhenry — 

" I am not sure I admire your Lady 
Fitzhenry so much on nearer view as I did 
at first sight. She is terribly English; so 
cold and distant — and I see already she 
dislikes me for being the reverse ; ct que 
je 71 ai pas Vhoimeur de lid plaire.^^ 

What Fitzhenry replied, Emmeline 
did not hear ; and, as it was now late, 
and that she was wearied both in body 
and mind, she begged of Pelham to ask 
for her carriage, desiring him to tell 
Lady Saville she would send it back for 
her, if she had not ordered her own. 



A MARRIAGE JN HIGH LIFE. 297 

They crossed the room in silence : 
poor Emmeline taking one last look of 
Fitzhenry, as he was still waltzing with 
Mrs. Osterley. 

" That is a spiteful little devil," said 
Pelham, who well knew whither Emme- 
line's eyes had wandered ; " and I again 
advise you to keep clear of her ; she 
hates both Fitzhenry and me ; for, the 
truth is, she tried to turn both our heads 
alternately, and succeeded with neither : 
Fitzhenry had too much good taste to be 
taken in by any thing so glaring.^' 

Emmeline made no comment, but 
sighed deeply. Her sigh was echoed 
by one close to her ; and, turning round, 
she saw poor Selina, cloaked up to her 
ears, following her hard-hearted cha- 
peron down the stairs which she had so 



298 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

lately mounted in such glee ; the even- 
ing to which she had looked forward 
so long, with so much ecstasy, already 
over — and having to her been produc- 
tive of nothing but mortification and 
disappointment. 

*' Good night. Lady Fitzhenry," said 
she, sadly : — " for you see I am going: 
but I am sure I don't care ; there is no- 
body here one knows, and though it is 
a ball, nobody loill dance: it is the 
oddest thing I ever saw. However, it is 
very well to come once, just to be able 
to say one has been at Almacks, for that 
sounds well ; but I declare I think it 
the stupidest place I ever was at, and I 
wonder how people can make such a fuss 
about it." 

The loud welcome cry of " Lady Fitz- 



A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 299 

henry's carriage stops the way," pre- 
vented any more of Selina's peevishness 
being heard, and Emmeline returned to 
her solitary home. But harmless, un- 
presuming, and innocent as she was, in 
absenting herself, she had left her cha- 
racter behind her ; and from that even- 
ing, (thanks to Mrs. Osterley,)all London 
talked of and laughed at the decided af- 
fair between Lady Fitzhenry and Mr. 
Pelham ; each narrator telling his own 
story, and inventing such facts as each 
found wanting to render it plausible. 
Emmeline, however, lost nothing in the 
good opinion of the fashionable world by 
this report, which was treated, by some, 
as an excellent joke; by others, as a 
thing of course ; and many of those who 
thus carelessly discussed the matter. 



300 A MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

and at once deprived poor Emmeline of 
her good name, might have ended their 
remarks, if they had had honest con- 
sciences, with Lady Saville's first words 
of praise to Emmeline : " She is really 
quite on a par with ourselves." 



END OF VOL r. 



LONDON : 

IB0T5ON AND PALMER, PRINTERS, SAVOY STREET, STRAND. 
