TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 



Printed by J. Darling, Lcadenhall-Street, Loiidou. 



THE 



TEADITION OF the CASTLE ; 

OR, 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOn OF 

THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THE 
HAMLET, 8cc. 



" Ob Erin, my country ! though sad and forsaken, 

In dreams I revisit thy sea-beaten shore; 

But, alas ! in a far foreign land I awaken. 

And sigh for the friends who can meet me no more." 



VOL. II. 



london: 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEA DE N H ALL-STKEET. 

1824. 






THE 

TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



CHAPTER I. 



.**^^*.*sr.*^r*sr^^^*^•*^»^*>»■** 



■Ere the bat hath flown 



liis cloister'd flight; ere to black Hecate's summons 
The shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hum, 
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there must be done 
A deed of dreadful note." 

Endeavouring, however, to dis- 
miss the ingratitude he had met with from 
his thoughts, Donaghue was conversing 
with Rosebud, after dinner, when an un- 
usual noise in the hall made him dispatch 
the corporal to inquire the cause. 

Whatever was the matter, however, the 
corporal, instead of coming back to ac- 

VOL. II. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

qua'nt them, soon seemed to take part in 
it himself, for his voice was shortly heard 
elevated above that of every other person ; 
and what appeared still more surprising, 
the tumult seemed approaching their apart- 
ment. 

On finding this, Donaghue started up, 
and throwing open the door, beheld the 
corporal, with his back to him, half-way 
up the stairs, opposing the advance of a 
small party of soldiers. — " What's the 
matter? What's the meaning of all this?" 
demanded Donaghue, advancing into the 
gallery. 

"Oh, nothing, please your honour!" 
replied Cormick ; " but that after denying 
your honour, I don't see what right these 
fellows have to come up ; and by the Lord 
they shan't, if I can help it! What, 
though I haven't got my arms about me, 
they shall find it's not such an easy matter, 
as they may imagine, to pass an Irishman 
against his will ;" and so saying, without 
further ceremony, he threw himself upon 
one of them, and, tripping up his heels in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

a trice, succeeded in wresting his firelock 
from him, and with which he was then 
proceeding to lay about him in every di- 
rection, when Donaghue interfered, and 
peremptorily commanding him to desist, 
again desired to know what all this meant? 

The party had, by this time, gained the 
landing-place; and he who appeared the 
head of it replied to this interrogation, by 
presenting a paper to the view of Dona- 
ghue, containing instructions for his arrest, 
by order of the Holy Inquisition. 

" Good God !" exclaimed Donaghue in- 
voluntarily, reading the paper aloud, " here 
must be some mistake ! In the first place, 
if I were even cognizable to such a tribu- 
nal as the Holy Inquisition, I have done 
nothing to provoke its vengeance ; and in 
the next, are you aware, my friend," ad- 
dressing the soldier, " that as a British 
subject and a British officer, I am not to 
be injured or insultecj with impunity?" 

" I am aware of nothing," cried the 
man, with the most immoveable expres- 
B 2 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sion of countenance, " but what my duty 
demands." 

" Then you must be rendered so," said 
the doctor, now in sudden indignation, 
losing the terror with which he had at first 
been overcome. " You must be made 
sensible, that an insult to a British officer 
is a thing that will not be passed over." 

" I am not so ignorant as not to know 
that," w^as the reply, but with a sneer; 
" it yet remains to be proved what right 
your friend here has to that title which he 
pleads for protection. We have positive 
assurance that he has none." 

" My God ! what treachery is here !'' 
exclaimed Donaghue; " who is it that 
can have been contriving to do me an in- 
jury, or rather on what account, for, stran- 
ger as I am here, how can 1 have provoked 
the enmity of any one !" 

" 'Tis no use, senor, your puzzling your- 
self on the subject, or rather trying to 
feign ignorance as to the cause of what has 
happened; the trick is stale, and won't 
pass. You are my prisoner, and may as 



TPADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5 

well accompany me, without further de- 
lay or resistance, since accompany me you 
must at last." 

" No," cried Donaghue, indignantly, 
*' I cannot, I will not give way to so un- 
just an order. I demand to be taken be- 
fore one of the magistrates of the place; 
and if I cannot satisfy him, 'tis then time 
enough to have recourse to force." 

" Whatever you are," said the soldier, 
with cold and even insolent solemnity, " it 
is evident you are a stranger here, or you 
would not have dared to insult the Holy 
Office by what you have suggested — ap- 
peal from it!" and he seemed to shudder at 
the thought ; and as if, after an offence 
so heinous, it would be eternal reproba- 
tion to have another moment's hesitation, 
he beckoned his comrades to advance and 
do their duty. 

" Then, by the Lord ! if they are desired 
to do their duty, I must do mine also," 
cried the corporal, and, rushing forwaixl, 
threw himself between them and his mas- 
ter. 



b TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Donaghue, apprehensive for his life, 
tried to push him aside, but in vain ; he 
was wrought up to madness, and was 
about braving the soldiers, when a sudden 
blow on the temple levelled him with the 
floor, and he was immediately bound and 
borne off. 

They were leading Donaghue after him, 
when Rosebud, pushing through them, in 
an agony of sorrow clasped him to his 
breast — " And oh, wo the day," he cried, 
" in which we entered this accursed place ! 
But it was all my doing — through my 
persuasion it was owing — and well my life 
shall pay ; for O'Brien, my dearest lad 1 
should evil betide you in consequence, I'll 
never survive you. But take courage! 
I'll raise heaven and earth to extricate you 
out of the dungeon of horrors into which 
they are dragging you !" 

" Come, come, senor, these invectives 
won't serve the prisoner," exclaimed the 
chief of the party; and rudely pushing the 
distracted doctor aside, they carried off 
Donaghue without further opposition. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7 

Donaghue most anxiously wished to 
know what had become of the corporal, 
but could receive no satisfaction. A car- 
riage was in waiting at the door, into which 
he was obliged to ascend, and the soldiers 
mounting on the outside, it drove off. 

It was dusk when it stopped at an im- 
mense pile of buildings, enclosed within 
fortified walls of a height that was terrific. 
The entrance was through a succession of 
long, black, vaulted gateways, each more 
dismal than the last, as if to give a hint of 
that progressive despair that here seized 
the sinking heart. 

On emerging from the last, the carriage 
rolled heavily over the hollow pavement 
of a silent court, and stopped before a gate 
of iron, in the centre of the building. The 
soldiers now dismounted, and a knock be- 
ing given on the gate, a wicket was open- 
ed, and a man in a black habit appeared 
at it. The prisoner was then motioned to 
alight, and, obeying, was handed over to 
this person, who, on his stepping within 



8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the door, immediately closed it, and all 
this without a word passing at any side. 

A chill came over the soul of Donaghue 
at the instant, that made his heart sink 
within him. Common dangers and com- 
mon terrors he could have braved, with as 
much steadiness as any one; but there was 
something in the undefined ones he ap- 
prehended here, a sepulchral stillness in 
the place, that made him almost think he 
felt the cold air of the grave blowing on 
him, that struck horror to his feelings. 
But he quickly rallied himself, yet not 
without almost regretting that he had not 
made a still greater resistance to the order 
that had dragged him here. Yet, after 
all, of what avail, but to have probably 
lost him his life, since he might have been 
sure that no one would have attempted to 
give him any assistance, whatever their 
real feelings might have been for him. 
To what he owed the predicament he was 
in he could not possibly conjecture; but 
he was not equally at a loss in surmising 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

to whom, feeling an internal conviction, 
that it was owing, either to the treachery 
of don Callan, or the stranger he had been 
the means of freeing; and now the, to 
himself, unaccountable dislike he had 
conceived to don Callan, recurred to his 
recollection, with a sensation of the most 
poignant regret, at not having obeyed 
the kind of warning it implied to shun 
him. Yet it was not his own fault that 
be had not done so ; and if ever he could 
have admitted the idea of fatality, it would 
have been in this instance. 

But his reflections were soon interrupt- 
ed, by being motioned to follow the man 
who had received him. As Donaghue 
obeyed the sign, he found himself advanc- 
ing into an immense hall, divided into long 
passages, or aisles, by rough stone arches, 
and through which, in different directions, 
several figures, all arrayed in black, were 
seen, by the faint light of a few glim- 
mering lamps, placed, as if at random, 
against the cold discoloured walls, glid- 
b3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing, but with steps so noiseless, that, to a 
disturbed imagination, they might well 
have passed for unearthly creatures ; and 
all this to strike terror into the devoted 
victim. — " Horrible institution !" thought 
Donaghue; " worthy alone, indeed, of 
demons, from the arts it has recourse to." 
In the centre of this apartment was an 
immense grating, fitted into the flooring, 
which was of black marble. Towards this 
Donaghue was conducted ; and here there 
was a pause, evidently, to him, for the 
purpose of letting him examine it. In- 
stinctively he looked down, and beheld a 
kind of dungeon beneath. Scarcely had 
he ascertained what he saw, ere the most 
dismal sounds of human suffering broke 
upon his ear. At the sound, several of 
the officials started forward, and, by their 
united efforts, raising the grating, a bier, 
with the body of a man stretched on it^ 
was pushed up, still working in the ago- 
nies of death. It was directly carried off; 
but almost instantly replaced by a mise- 
rable wretch, who, with shrieks that echo- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

ed through the place, was dragged for- 
ward from one of the recesses of the hall, 
and being placed on the bier, was bound 
to it with cords, and then let down into 
this infernal pit of torture. 

Hardly had he vanished from the view, 
ere the most appalling sounds issued from it, 
some of them resembling those occasioned 
by broad-wheeled waggons rolling over 
flint stones, and grinding them to powder ; 
and as they reached the ear of Donaghue, 
mingled with the shrieks of human suffer- 
ing, all the horrors of the car of Jagger- 
naut rushed to his recollection. The 
groans of expiring nature, in a field of 
battle, wrung his heart with anguish — the 
groans of expiring nature, under the hands 
of torture, sickened it with a feeling not 
endurable; a mist spread itself before his 
eyes, and he would have fallen, but that 
one of the officials, perceiving his change 
of colour, caught him timely by the arm. 
By this man his staggering steps were 
supported to a small dark room, at a dis- 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tance from the hall, and where, as soon as 
he revived, he left him. 

After remaining quiet herefor some time, 
Donaghue ventured to open the door, and 
by the glimmering light that pervaded the 
outer chamber, clearly perceived that the 
place where he was, was a kind of box, or 
closet, partitioned off from the other. The 
closeness of such a place conveying an idea 
of suffocation, O'Brien left it ; and advanc- 
ing to the narrow opening that admitted 
the light, which allowed him to see what 
it was, he beheld a large hall of great 
splendour. From the chamber where he 
was there was a descent of broad matted 
steps, and at the opposite end a similar 
ascent ; at the top of this was a curtain of 
black velvet, descending from the lofty 
ceiling to the floor, and on which an im- 
mense cross was worked in silver. Before 
this sat six inquisitors, in the superb dress 
of the Holy Office, and at a little distance 
from them their clerks, or secretaries, to 
take the answers or depositions of those 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13 

who were examined; three branches of 
silver, dependent from the dome, diffused 
an equal and brilliant light through this 
apartment, so that, notwithstanding its 
size, every object was clearly distinguished. 

But the attention of Donaghue was 
quickly diverted fi-om every thing else, 
by the unexpected sight of Cormick, led 
in between two officers. He looked wild 
"and haggard, but still as if more bewil- 
dered than frightened. His sight was a 
terrible shock to Donaghue, as he had 
flattered himself he was left behind ; and, 
on both their accounts, the detection of 
his error occasioned the greatest agitation, 
as he not only trembled to think of what 
might be inflicted on Cormick, but was 
also alarmed at the idea of his, perhaps, 
being betrayed into uttering what he ne- 
ver intended. But there was no alterna- 
tive but patience, and he endeavoured to 
collect himself, to listen to Avhat was to 
ensue. 

The corporal being brought forward, 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

one of the inquisitors, in a loud, harsh 
tone, ordered a book to be presented to 
him, that he might be sworn. — " Swear," 
he cried, " by the sacred symbol on that 
book — swear to reveal the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth ; and ne- 
ver, either directly or indirectly, by hint, 
word, or suggestion, reveal what you may 
either see or witness here, in any man- 



The corporal trembled, and hesitated to 
comply ; on perceiving which — " ^wear, 
wretch !" repeated the inquisitor, in a 
voice of thunder. 

" I — I will," stammered out Cormick ; 
" that is, provided your honours' reve- 
rences first satisfy me, that by doing as 
you want, I shall not — the Lord be our 
defence and shield ! — bind myself, in any 
way, to the devil !" 

" Peace, fool, and swear !" 

" Blessed saints guide and protect me !" 
said Cormick, as he kissed the book. 

His name, religion, country, and station 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

in life, were now demanded, and all his 
answers being given, and duly entered, it 
was asked whether he knew the nature of 
the accusation against him ? 

" No, how should I," was the reply, 
" when I don't know that there is any 
thing I can be accused of?" 

" Presumptuous wretch ! but if there 
were not doubtless daily sins and iniqui- 
ties to accuse you of, is there not the ac- 
cusation against you of having assaulted 
the servants of this Holy Office, whom it 
was your bounden duty to have obeyed 
with fear and trembling ?" 

" As to being my duty, that is one 
thing," said Cormick, coming a little to 
himself; " but as to obeying them with 
fear and trembling, that's the way in 
which, I am sure, they must be obeyed, 
whether one likes it or not." 

" This insolence again, and you shan't 
have the power of repeating it !" said one 
of the inquisitors ; " this is no jesting bu- 
siness, I promise you." 

Cormick gave what appeared to be an 



16 TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

involuntary shrug, and then endeavoured 
to assume a properly submissive look. 

" Are you not guilty," was demanded, 
" of the assault of which you have been 
just accused ?" 

" Why, as to that, your reverences, I 
don't know how that may be," said Cor- 
mick; " for, in the first place, I didn't 
know at first that the soldiers belonged 
to your reverences; and when I did, it 
was but natural I should stand up for my 
master." 

" Oh, it was your master, then, that in- 
stigated you to attack them ! That's right, 
proceed with the truth, and rely on ensur- 
ing safety at least to yourself" 

" My master !" exclaimed the corporal, 
in a tone of evident alarm — " he instigate 
me ! No, such were not my words or 
meaning." 

" Wretch ! this prevarication, after hav- 
ing sworn to speak the trutli ! Beware 
how you forget again the solemn oath 
you have just taken ! and, without far- 
ther hesitation, acknowledge all you 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 17 

know' of the crime your master has com- 
mitted." 

" Crime !" repeated Cormick — " crime ! 
crime is as distant from him as, I am a- 
fraid, heaven is from some of us here !" 

" What, insolent again !" exclaimed an 
inquisitor — " away with him !" 

" Stop, brother," interposed another; 
" let your just indignation be suspended; 
we will examine him a little farther, to 
endeavour to get the truth from him, ere 
we give him to punishment." Then turn- 
ing to Cormick — " To come to the point 
at once, know you aught, wretch, of the 
monastery of St. Francis ?" 

Cormick started ; then, evidently mak- 
ing an effort to appear collected — " Why, 
yes, your honours — that is, I — I have the 
pleasure of being acquainted with father 
Lawrence." 

*' And is that all ? is father Lawrence 
the only medium through which you 
know any thing of the convent ?" 

The corporal, it was now evident, be- 
came alarmed; it was plain to O'Brien, 



18 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that an idea of the prisoner there having 
been the occasion of what had since hap- 
pened, had occurred to him ; and that he 
hesitated in consequence what reply to 
give. Whilst dehberating, the curtain 
behind the inquisitors was a Uttle drawn 
aside, and a gUmpse of father Lawrence 
was caught, holding up a dagger in a 
threatening manner to Cormick. Again 
Cormick started, and — " Blessed powers !' 
he cried, " what's to be done !" 

"Have you not already heard, wretch?" 
was the reply, in a voice of thunder. 

" Yes, but then " And again the 

curtain, which had been slowly dropped, 
was raised, and the figure of the confessor, 
as before, or still more threatening, again 
presented to the view of Cormick. 

His distress now became great indeed. 
In short, he felt as if he had got between 
two fires, to escape one of which he must 
inevitably run upon the other ; clearly per- 
ceiving, from the knowledge it was evi- 
dent to him the inquisitors had obtained 
of the affair of the prisoner, honesty would 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

be the policy with them, he felt inclined to 
speak the truth ; but, from the conviction 
that if he did so, he should, inevitably, 
from the menacing looks of the confessor, 
and his having the power of obtaining ac- 
cess to this abode of horrors, fall a victim 
to his vengeance. In the most agonizing 
perplexity he rubbed his forehead; in- 
clined to be candid, yet convinced, if he 
followed bis inclination to be so, it would 
not be long ere the dagger of the confessor 
was lodged in his heart ; and still equally 
certain, if he were not, of being stretched 
on the rack of the Inquisition ere another 
hour. 

Something, however, he saw must be 
said, and accordingly — " Why, an' please 
your reverences, there was, to be sure, a 
man. But then, whatever we did — that 
is — that I did — was entirely out of good- 
nature ; and so " 

" Oh yes, we observe — whatever your 
master, as you say, did for him. But how 
was access obtained to this man? that's 
the question." 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

« Why, please your reverences but 

there he is !" exclaimed Cormick, at again 
beholding the confessor, with a more me- 
nacing aspect than ever, holding up a 
bloody dagger to him — *' Blessed saints! 
how can 1 satisfy both parties? Your re- 
verences desire me to disclose the truth, 
and the confessor tells me, every moment, 
if I do he'll murder me !" 

" The confessor ! there's no confessor 
here. But this is a trick — this is affecta- 
tion of madness. The truth this instant, 
or away with him to the question !" 

*'Oh, blessed St. Patrick!" cried the 
distressed corporal, " what's to be done ? — 

If your reverences will but look " He 

paused, under the sudden persuasion of its 
being useless for them to do so, from the 
conviction of the confessor, if it was not 
the devil himself that had assumed his 
shape, having some hiding-place to retreat 
to, and that, consequently, they must be 
still farther exasperated against him for an 
assertion that must then appear so false. 

" This is trifling beyond what was ever 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

before tolerated !" exclaimed one of the 
inquisitors, now rising in extreme indigna- 
tion ; " I protest against its being any 
longer permitted ! Officials, do your duty." 

At this dread command, two spectral 
figures, rendered still more hideous by 
their clinging garments of black, approach- 
ed to seize poor Cormick. He started 
back, as they attempted to lay hold of 
him ; all the horrible stories he had heard 
of the infernal place rushed to his recollec- 
tion. Death, in any common form, he 
could have met, perhaps with as much 
coolness as any one; but to die by inches 
— to be torn, mangled, dislocated— nature 
sickened at the thought, his brain reeled, 
and he fell senseless on the ground. 

In this state he was carried off, leaving 
Donaghue in one that may easier be con- 
ceived than described. With difficulty 
had he checked himself from rushing to 
his assistance; nothing but the conviction 
that the effort to render him any would 
be defeated, and that, by making it, he 
should probably accelerate his fate and his 



22 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

own, prevented him. What would that 
be? but he should probably know too 
soon. 

Nearly overpowered, he retreated to the 
place he had come from. He had not 
been here long, when one of the officials 
appeared with a lamp, and motioning him 
to follow, conducted him through several 
cold, cheerless, labyrinthian passages, to a 
wretched cell, containing a pallet, with a 
pitcher of water, and a small loaf beside it. 

O'Donaghue endeavoured to command 
himself, but when he observed his con- 
ductor about leaving him, the effort was 
vain ; rushing between him and the door, 
he eagerly demanded, was there no chance 
of his ever again beholding his unfortunate 
servant ? 

" No, none — not in this world ! never, 
but in hell, will you again see him !" was 
the reply, with a look that seemed to say, 
there was exultation in the thought of in- 
flicting torture; and pushing him aside, 
the wretch darted from the room, and se- 
cured the door. 



TUADITION OF THE CASTLE. 23 

" Demon !" exclaimed Donagbue ; " but 
all are fiends alike here ! fiends, wearing 
the semblance of human forms ! for none 
others could glut themselves with the in- 
fliction of unnecessary torture." 

His anguish, at the idea of the poor cor- 
poral's fate, was for some time hardly en- 
durable, aggravated as it was by the re- 
flection of being the cause of it; but at 
length he began to encourage hope, the 
last stay of the wretched, to trust that 
it was not as had been represented, 
that either to wanton cruelty, or misap- 
prehension, was owing the assertion that 
had so tortured him •, but supposing the 
worst, there was an end of further suffer- 
ing, and there was comfort in the thought — 
his brave and faithful Cormick was beyond 
the infliction of further tyranny *, and if 
he still lived, he was still under the care 
of an almighty and superintending Provi- 
dence, that, in a moment, could rescue him 
from the hands of his tormentors. 

Wonderful is the effect of Divine con- 
solation ! When all is dreariness and horror 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

within us, from the want of human consola- 
tion, what would become of us, if we had 
not this to turn and cling to? AsDonaghue 
gave way to these reflections, his mind be- 
came softened and calmed ; still, however, 
it was in a state that precluded repose, 
and he accordingly continued pacing the 
narrow limits of his cell, now and then 
stopping to gaze on the sky, which was all 
that he could see from the height of the 
narrow grating that supplied the place of 
a window ; but the faint light it emitted 
soon became overcast, through a coming- 
storm ; the wind rose to a hurricane, and 
torrents of rain shortly began to descend ; 
and Donaghue, being then in utter dark- 
ness, threw himself upon his wretched 
bed, where, by degrees, sleep stole over 
him, occasioning a short respite from pain. 



Sacred rest, 



Sweet pleasing sleep, of all the powers the best. 

Oh, peace of mind, repairer of decay ! 

Whose bulm renews the limbs to labours of the day." 

Vivid lightning, flashing across his 
eyes, roused him from this ; he had hardly 



!rilADItION OF THE CASTLE. 25 

opened them, when he fancied he beheld 
father Lawrence at the foot of the bed, 
with a dim lamp in his hand, earnestly re- 
garding him. Yet it seemed so improb- 
able that it should be him, that Donaghue 
knew not how to credit his sight, and, 
more than once, in consequence, rubbed 
his eyes, to be convinced they were not 
deceiving him, but still the figure of the 
confessor stood before him. — " Can it be?'* 
at length he cried, " or is it the vision of 
a distempered imagination ?" 

" No," was the reply ; " you imagine 
nothing that is not the fact; 1 am that 
basely deceived man, the confessor to the 
monastery of St. Francis, whom you, and 
your wicked servant, laid your plotting 
heads together to impose on, through hear- 
ing of my simplicity, and kindness of dis- 
position, and good nature. So heinous an 
offence as that of endeavouring to ensnare 
the unsuspecting and harmless could not 
escape punishment. Your wicked abet- 
tor, or agent, has already met with that 

VOL. 11. c 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fate his villainous imposition merited ; 
and, trust me, it will not be long ere you 
receive the same. Since, then, all in this 
world is over with you, my son, I have 
come, out of Christian charity, to exhort, 
and advise, and implore you, as you value 
your immortal soul, to endeavour to make 
your peace with the next world, by reso- 
lutely refraining from any thing that may 
be likely to occasion any further trouble 
to an innocent man, who, as you well 
know, was led, or rather drawn in, to do 
what he did, entirely out of pure benevo- 
lence. In short, to criminate me, while 
it could do you no good here, must, from 
the injury it might be the means of doing 
me, but incense Heaven still more against 
you ; let me therefore, for your own sake, 
conjure you to let nothing wring any con- 
fession from your lips respecting me; and, 
in return for your promise to that effect, I 
am now ready to accord you my forgiveness 
for the past, and assure you of my prayers 
for the speedy releiase of your sinful spirit. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

from that grievous purgation it must ex- 
pect in the next world." 

" I thank you, father," replied Dona- 
ghue, composedly, " for your offered con- 
solation, but cannot think of practising 
the deception that could alone obtain it 
for me ; since, if I promised to act as you 
desire, I should assuredly deceive you, as 
it is my fixed and unalterable determina- 
tion, should they attempt to insult or out- 
rage me farther than they have already 
done, in this diabolical place, to candidly 
state every circumstance that occurred 
since my arrival in Seville. It appears to 
me, that treachery has been employed to 
place me here, to fathom and discover 
which, there is nothing like truth ; and 
I would not indeed insult the Being I 
worship, by a fear that adhering to his 
commands would involve me in still great- 
er peril. Is it not to doubt his care, and 
justly to forfeit it, to suffer ourselves to 
forsake the broad road of integrity, for the 
crooked and winding ones of human sub- 
c 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tlety ? Let what will, therefore, betide 
either of us from the truth, that, and that 
alone, shall be spoken." 

" Wretch ! infatuated wretch !" cried 
the confessor, in extreme agitation ; " but 
since admonition will not avail, there is a 

way " and, as he spoke, he thrust his 

hand into his bosom. Donaghue compre- 
hending what he meant, and who, indeed, 
had all along been on his guard, instantly 
sprung from the bed. The confessor start- 
ed back as he did so, and, ere Donaghue 
could seize him, vanished from the room, 
leaving him again in utter darkness, for 
the storm had not yet subsided, and 

" Twas yet low ebb of night, wlien not a star 
Was twinkling in the muffled hemisphere; 
But all around in horrid darkness mov'd, 
As if old chaos were again return'd." 

He remained listening for some time 
with suppressed breathing ; but the mea- 
sured step of the watchful sentinel, pacing 
the ramparts of the prison, was the only 
sound he heard ; all was as 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 29 

" Still as the bosom of the desert night, 
As fatal planets, or deep plotting friends." 

After such a visit, however, it was not 
to be supposed he could think of remitting 
his vigilance; he accordingly continued 
in a state of watchfulness till the dawn of 
morning began to pervade the cell; he 
then again threv/ himself on the pallet. 

The day wore away without his seeing 
any one, and perhaps the terrible listless, 
ness it left him was more difficult of en- 
durance than downright positive pain 
would have been. The night advanced, 
and still no one appeared, and various 
were the conjectures to which this appa- 
rent forgetfulness of him seemed to give 
rise. He would at length, perhaps, have 
sought refuge from his weariness in 
sleep, but for the visit of the preceding 
night; but, in consequence of that, he 
conceived he should, probably, be provok- 
ing, or at least incurring, destruction, if 
he did not continue on his guard. He 
was accordingly pacing the cell, when 



so TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the door suddenly opened, and an official 
stood before him with a light. — " Oh, you 
are up !" said the fellow ; " well, so much 
the better, there will be no delay in your 
following me." 

Donaghue made no reply, nor asked 
any question; he had no doubt of his 
being now about to be brought before the 
inquisitors, and, with a silent prayer to 
Heaven for strength and constancy to en- 
dure whatever might ensue, proceeded to 
follow his conductor. They passed, Avith 
extreme celerity, through numerous gal- 
leries and chambersy till at last they be- 
gan to descend flight after flight of dark 
and noisome stairs, rendered so by the 
slimy damps that covered and hung about 
them. After proceeding till Donaghue 
thought they must be descending into the 
very bowels of the earth, he suddenly 
paused, and — " Surely," he said, " this is 
not the way to the hall of examination ! 
have the inquisitors any other place for 
examining prisoners ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 31 

" Come on," was the reply; " this is 
not a place in which questions are allowed 
to be asked or answered." 

Donaghue still believing it useless to 
resist, again moved on. He had not got 
much farther, when the air became so chill 
about him, as to make him shiver with 
cold. — " Whence can this cold vapour pro- 
ceed ?" he demanded of his guide, regard- 
less of the observation he had just made. 

" From Purgatory," was the answer, 
with a sardonic laugh. " No wonder you 
shake, for you are just on the point of en- 
tering a region of ice, in order to make 
still greater the contrast of that of fire." 

Donaghue involuntarily looked round 
him at the instant, and found himself at 
the entrance of a large cavern, evidently 
hewn out of the living rock. The roof 
was arched, and from the sparry substance 
of which it was composed, flashed with a 
thousand splendours, as it caught the rays 
of the torch. It seemed to rest upon un- 
equal pillars, so wrought and fashioned as 
to give the place something the look of a 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Gothic cathedral ; between many of them 
were deep trenches, and to many were 
affixed large rings of iron, too fearfully 
proclaiming the horrible purpose for which 
the place was intended. 

Donaghue shuddered, and from a suspi- 
cion that was now beginning to seize him, 
would have hesitated to advance, but that 
while he had paused to look round him,, 
the guide had hurried forward, and he saw 
if he did not hasten to follow, he should 
be left in total darkness ; he accordingly 
hastened to overtake him, and succeeded 
just as he had gained the entrance to ano- 
ther cave. But hardly had Donaghue set 
his foot within this, ere all the pictured 
fires of the infernal regions seemed to 
burst around him, accompanied by reper- 
cussions, that appeared as if they would 
shiver the place to atoms. For a minute 
Donaghue was unable to recover from the 
astounding effect which the scene had 
upon his senses. Looking then for his 
conductor, he perceived he had quitted it 
by a door at the further extremity, which 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S3 

he was then in the very act of preparing 
to barricade, while, at the same instant, 
the one by which he had gained admission 
slipped to, with a violence that seemed to 
declare human force would be unavailing 
to open it again. The horrible idea of 
suffocation instantly occurred to the ima- 
gination of Donaghue, and, with the velo- 
city of lightning, darting through the sul- 
phureous flames, burst open the door a- 
gainst the villain, as he had nearly closed 
it. — " Traitor !" he cried, grasping him by 
the throat, " I see what was intended; 

but " Then perceiving him making 

an effort to get something from his breast, 
he thrust his own hand into it, and drew 
forth a dagger — " But, by my immortal 
hopes, I swear," he cried, as he secured the 
weapon, " if you do not directly extricate 
me from the toil in which you have en- 
tangled me, and confess by whom it was 
you were induced to decoy me hither for 
destruction, this instant shall be your last!" 
" Spare my life, senor," cried the trem- 
c3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

bling caitiff, seeing there was no hope of 
being able to free himself from the hold 
of Donaghue ; " for your own sake, have 
mercy ! for, without a guide, 'twere vain 
attempting to extricate yourself from 
these dismal catacombs. We are now on 
a level with the Guadalquiver, and, ac- 
quainted as I am with all the intricacies 
of the place, in a few minutes, if you but 
hearken to my prayer, you shall be re- 
stored to liberty, and informed of all I 
have the power of disclosing. If inclined 
to do so, let us not tarry longer here, if 
you regard your safety, lest the influence 
of these mephitic vapours should prove 
fatal." 

" Conduct me then," said Donaghue, 
but still firmly grasping him by the arm ; 
" and beware what you do ; for I swear, 
should you make the slightest effort to 
disengage yourself from me, to raise your 
voice, or in any way let me think you still 
harbour evil against me, that instant this 
dagger,** and fire darted from his eyes as 
be spoke, " shall be sheathed in your heart 



!"• 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 35 

They went on, and, after various wind- 
ings, Donaghue began to feel reviving 
confidence within him, from the different 
air' he at last began to breathe. Hardly- 
had he noticed this, when they turned 
into a narrow passage, terminated by an 
iron door. Here they stopped, and the 
guide applying his force to the fastenings, 
in a few minutes it flew open, and the 
cold grey sky of early morn, with the 
Guadalquiver reflecting the soft shadows 
of the dawn, were given to the transported 
sight of Donaghue. 

Thus restored to life — to liberty, what 
was his adoring gratitude ! in adoration 
he could have thrown himself on the 
ground ; but it was requisite to learn the 
treachery that had been practised against 
him, in order that he might know how to 
be on guard; and accordingly checking, 
for the present, the impulse of his feelings, 
he turned to the wretch^ whom he still 
held, to demand the promised explanation 
from him. 

" On my soul, senor," began the caitiiF, 



S6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in reply, " all I know I'll tell you, but 
that is but little. Why, or wherefore, or 
through whose means, you were brought 
hither, I know not ; but that you have a 
bitter enemy in father Lawrence, the con- 
fessor to the monastery of St. Francis, is 
evident, and against him, therefore, I warn 
you. Through means of a friend here, 
he gained secret access to this place, for 
the positive purpose of effecting your and 
your servant's destruction, in one way or 
other, in consequence of your being ac- 
quainted with something which he con- 
ceived hostile to his safety. Your servant 
did not long survive his removal from the 
hall of examination. How he died, or ra- 
ther, by what means, it boots not now to 
say ; and there is every reason to imagine 
your fate would not have been much 
longer delayed than his was, had not this 
very day the Inquisition been again de- 
clared abolished by the Cortez, and an or- 
der been received from them for the en- 
largement of all the prisoners. Father 
Lawrence, still lurking within the walls,. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 37 

no sooner learned this, than, intent on 
your destruction, he consulted with his 
friend, and between them it was devised 
that you should be secreted till night, and 
then conducted hither, to be left to perish. 
I was chosen to be the instrument of this 
barbarous design ; that it has failed, you 
may thank yourself, or rather that Provi- 
dence, that, for the purpose of enabling 
you to frustrate, endued you with such 
courage and quickness. This, senor, is 
all, I again swear, upon my soul, I have 
to disclose to you. I have kept my pro- 
mise to you ; from the Holy Office, now 
no longer in existence, of course you have 
nothing further to dread, and, as a gene- 
rous cavalier, now restore me to that liber- 
ty io which I have restored you." 

Ere the request was well preferred, the 
hand of Donaghue had begun to slacken 
its hold, so completely subdued was he by 
the cruel and untimely death of the poor 
corporal — " My brave, my faithful Cor- 
mick!" he cried, with a quivering lip, 
" how does the idea of your fate damp the 



38 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. . 

joy of this blessed moment ! But if your 
freed spirit can look down, it must give it 
pleasure, I think, to see your memory em- 
balmed with tears, and know you must 
live for ever in the heart of a grateful 
master !" 

A little recovering from his emotion, he 
glanced towards his conductor, to say 
something by way of admonition to him, 
but he was gone. Slowly Donaghue pio- 
ceeded ; the alacrity of joy was deadened 
by sorrow ; yet gradually, as he advanced, 
his mind became soothed in a degree, and 
calmed by the influence of the gentle dawn, 
the soft flow of the river, the purity of 
the yet cool air, and the awaking music 
of the birds, all seeming to declare what 
the benevolent intentions of the Deity 
were towards man, and what a paradise 
even this earthly scene would have been to 
him, but for his own baleful passions. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 39 



CHAPTER II. 



" It is an employment worthy of a reasonable creatine, to 
examine into the dispositions of men's affections towards 
each other ; and, as far as one can, to improve all ten- 
dencies to good nature and charity." 

We shall now return to poor Rosebud. 
Though infinitely more inclined to follow 
the carriage which bore away poor Dona- 
ghue from him, with cries of despair, than 
to make any other exertion, yet the ne- 
cessity of some prompt ones for his friend 
was too obvious not to induce him to make 
a speedy effort for collecting his bewilder- 
ed thoughts. 

The first person he naturally thought of 
flying to was don Callan ; but where was 
don Callan to be found ? He had never 
exactly mentioned the precise situation of 
his castle, and unacquainted as every body 
appeared to be with such a person, the dis- 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tracted doctor soon found he might just as 
well set out in quest of a castle in the air 
as in quest of it. Deprived therefore of 
any immediate aid or consolation from 
him, the idea of don Alonzo de Guzman 
next occurred, and to him he accordingly 
bent, without delay, his agitated steps; 
but no sooner had he begun to introduce 
the purport of his visit, than the manner 
of don Alonzo, which had at first been 
frank and courteous, began to change ; his 
countenance altered — he grew shy — sud- 
denly pleaded business as an excuse for 
not pressing the doctor to prolong his stay, 
and finally acted in such a way as to cut 
off all hope of receiving any service from 
him. 

Reduced almost to despair by this, he 
now tried to recollect the names of those 
he had met at the Tertulia, and to as 
many as he could remember, he repaired 
the next day, but all acted uniformly like 
don Alonzo; a smile greeted him on his 
entrance, but no sooner was his business 
opened, than they seemed to shrink within 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 41 

themselves ; and poor Rosebud soon found 
that, in having a friend in the Inquisition, 
he had the plague-spot upon him, and 
might Qxpect to be shunned accordingly 
by all. 

What to do he knew not ; all he could 
decide on was, never to leave Seville with- 
out Donaghue — to make it his grave also 
if he died there. All his happy flow of 
spirits and confidence in himself forsook 
him ; he stole in and out of the inn, as if 
he had no right to be tolerated there; and 
indeed he every moment expected to be 
insolently turned out of it. At length, 
utterly overcome on the second night, he 
threw his exhausted frame on the bed, to 
try if he could obtain a short respite from 
pain, for since Donaghue had been drag- 
ged from him, he had not tasted sleep. 

Hardly had he closed his eyes, ere a per- 
son entered the room, that would have 
made him open them with a cry of joy, 
had he been aware of the circumstance. 
In a word, the information Donaghue had 
received of the death of the corporal was 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

false; but whether he was intentionally 
deceived or not remains to this day a secret. 

On the very night of his enlargement, 
Cormick, without having sustained any 
injury in the place, was also liberated, but 
somewhat sooner. His immediate inquiry 
was after his master; but he could hear 
nothing concerning him, or rather what 
he did hear, tended to induce a belief of 
his being no more; and from what has 
been already stated of his attachment to 
him, the agony excited by this belief may 
easier be conceived than described. 

In a state of mind that rendered it im- 
possible for him to rejoice at his own de- 
liverance, he returned to the inn, where, 
being a great favourite, nothing could ex- 
ceed the pleasure at seeing him again. 
Whilst receiving the congratulations of 
the people of the house, at his safe escape 
from all the horrors with which he had 
been threatened, he learned all that poor 
Rosebud had gone through ; and, in con- 
sequence, when, on entering his chamber, 
he found him asleep, could not bring him- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 43 

self to disturb him, though he felt that it 
would have been a relief to his bursting 
heart to have immediately claimed his sym- 
pathy. »Pity, however, prevailing over 
selfish considerations, he disconsolately re- 
tired to his own chamber, without makincr 
the slightest effort to wake him, and, me- 
chanically undressing, went to bed; but 
the restlessness ever attendant on real 
grief would not permit of his long re- 
maining in a quiescent state ; and accord- 
ingly, shortly rising, he again repaired to 
the doctor's apartment, to try whether he 
was yet awake. 

Now, though terror prevented any one 
from openly expressing commiseration for 
poor Rosebud, yet there were some that 
really felt compassion for him; amongst 
the number was don Alonzo, and in con- 
sequence he decided, since he could not 
administer consolation to him himself, to 
try and procure it for him through another 
person. Accordingly he sent for his con- 
fessor, and imparting to him his wishes, 
requested he might lose no time in calling 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on the unfortunate stranger, and trying 
what he could do for the alleviation of his 
distress. It so happened that his confessor 
was father Lawrence, and a more agree- 
able command he could not possibly have 
received, since, in the first place, he knew 
he should be well rewarded for obeying it; 
and, in the next, it promised to afford him 
an opportunity of ascertaining whether the 
doctor had any suspicion of his being in 
any way concerned in the fate of those 
whom he deplored, and who, by this time, 
the priest felt fully assured, whatever 
trouble their friends might experience on 
their account, would experience no more 
themselves. 

It was late when he got don Alonzo's 
message, and accordingly the night was 
somewhat advanced ere he arrived at the 
inn to obey his charitable directions. 

Without stopping to be told more than 
where the doctor's chamber was, he pro- 
ceeded forthwith to it, with a lamp, which, 
having deposited on a table, he was ad- 
vancing to the bed, when the apparition 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

of Cormick, as he believed, stood before 
him; and certainly a more terrific one 
could scarcely have been imagined. 

The corporal, whose eyes were steadfast- 
ly fixed on the confessor, in astonishment 
at what had brought him there, instead of 
dressing himself on quitting his bed, had 
merely wrapped a sheet round him, that, 
clinging to his form, and partly trailing 
on the ground, made him appear much 
taller than he really was, a thing by no 
means necessary, while round his head 
was bound an old silk sash of his master's, 
which he had accidentally found on a chair, 
and substituted in place of the nightcap 
he was too heartless to look for, and 
through several of the loops of which, from 
the tightness with which he had drawn it, 
his flesh protruded ; while several of the 
cords at the end hung over his face, pale 
and haggard with grief and recent agita- 
tion, appearing like so many streaks of 
blood, and giving it the look of being 
frightfully gashed and mangled. 

It has well been observed, that ** con- 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

science makes cowards of us all;" and no 
sooner had the priest beheld him, than, 
firmly persuaded it was his ghost come 
from the other world to reproach and tor- 
ment him for the part he had taken in 
sending him to it, he began to retrograde 
from him, till he reached the bed, when, 
making one plunge within the curtains for 
refuge, he fell plump upon the breast of 
Rosebud. 

It so happened, that at that very in- 
stant the doctor's disturbed fancy had re- 
presented to him his being in full chase of 
one of the inquisitors, and on opening his 
eyes, without being thoroughly awake, 
through the violence with which the con- 
fessor fell upon him, he instantly con- 
cluded, under the strong delusion of the 
dream, on seeing a figure in black, that it 
was the same he had been pursuing ; and, 
under this belief, starting from the pillow, 
he seized the confessor with one hand, and 
>vith the other began belabouring him in 
the most unmerciful manner, between 
every blow, or rather thump, exclaiming 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

— " Where are they, you villain ? Where 
are they — my friend O'Brien and his ser- 
vant? Restore them! — say what you 
have done with them ! — or, spite of your 
racks and wheels, I'll pull your Holy Of- 
fice about your ears, you hypocrite !" 

" I — I — I am not an inquisitor!" at 
length bellowed out the almost strangled 
confessor, by a violent effort extricating 
his throat from the gripe of the doctor. 

" Who the devil are you then ?" 

" The — the confessor to the monastery 
of St. Francis." 

" And what the devil brought you here, 
you porpoise ?" 

" I— I came out of Christian charity, to 
give you some ghostly advice and conso- 
lation." 

" Oh, you did; and to prepare me for 
it, you meant I should be pressed to death. 
By the Lord, you were never so near meet- 
ing the punishment due to your sins as 
you are now," and as he spoke, unable 
any longer to endure the dead weight of 
the confessor, he made an effort to heave 



48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him off the bed, in a manner that would 
have tumbled him from it, had he not 
caught at the bedpost. 

Having given himself a shake, to reco- 
ver a little from this violence, he was 
emerging from behind the curtains, when 
again the horrible apparition of Cormick 
met his view, and again he retreated with- 
in them, exclaiming as he did — " A vaunt ! 
I say, avaunt, thou wicked one! Come 
not to torment me before my time !" 

" What ! avaunt, out of my own bed — 
my own chamber!" cried the infuriate 
doctor ; and springing out of bed, he again 
fell on the unfortunate confessor. 

" Oh, have mercy !" roared the other, as 
he continued to pommel him ; " it was not 
you, it was the — the spirit I meant." 

The doctor followed the direction of his 
glance, and, notwithstanding his disguise, 
or rather the imperfect light in which he 
stood, instantly recognised Cormick; in 
the extravagance of his joy, he gave a 
whirl to the confessor, that brought him 
to the ground, with a force that, for a few 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 49 

minutes, completely stunned him, and 
rushing to Cormick, absolutely hugged 
him with delight. — "But where is he?" 
he suddenly demanded ; " where is the 
darling lad ? where is your master ?" 

A burst of anguish was the reply. The 
doctor wrung his hands, and then cover- 
ing his eyes, was about throwing himself 
on a chair, in an agony of sorrow, when a 
sudden exclamation from Cormick made 
him look up, and, with sensations that may 
be imagined, but cannot be described, he 
beheld Donaghue entering the apartment. 

Over the scene that ensued we shall 
pass ; suffice it, Donaghue was the most 
collected of the three, being prepared be- 
low stairs for the appearance of Cormick, 
while both Cormick and the doctor looked 
upon him as one risen from the dead. 

By the time their mutual transports had 
a little subsided, the confessor was begin- 
ning to recover from the stunning effect 
of his dash to the floor, which the corporal 
perceiving, gave a hint to the doctor, that 

VOL. IL D 



50 TRADITION OF THE CASTILE. 

occasioned him to draw back directly. If 
the sight of one ghost is terrific, what must 
have been that of two? In the very ex- 
tremity of his terror, the confessor roared 
aloud, as, on slowly rising from the floor, 
he beheld, near Cormick, the supposed spi- 
rit also of his master. The doctor, how- 
ever, whose feelings were rapid in their 
transitions, stepping out, prevented any 
one from coming to his assistance. On 
finding this, that his roarings were ineffec- 
tual, he made an effort to quit the room, 
but which was prevented by Cormick's 
darting, or, as it seemed to his disordered 
fancy, gliding, with his long trailing sheet, 
between him and the door; while — " No, 
no, father," he exclaimed, " this won't do ! 
you and I must have a little chat before 
you get off; that is, if you don't wish to 
have my troubled spirit still at your heels, 
for never will I return to the hole, let the 
cock crow es er so much, till you have 
confessed who it was that set you on to 
plan the destruction of my poor master 
and myself" 



TRADITION OF THE €ASTLE. 51 

" Oh ! oh ! I'll tell all I know," cried 
the confessor, dropping on his knees ; " it 
— ^it was a man calling himself don Pro- 
teus, but who, I think, must have been 
the devil himself, to set me on to do what 
I did." 

" Troth, likely enough !" cried the cor- 
poral ; " you black drones, in your hives, 
have so much idle time on your hands, 
that I shouldn't wonder if he busied him- 
self, now and then, in finding a little work 
for you ; and, faith, between ourselves, 
Lawrence, I don't think he could have 
found a person readier to do a snug job 
for him than yourself But was he to 
give you nothing for serving him ? did he 
act as generously by you as I did? You 
see, Lawrence, I have not lost my me- 
mory by the journey you sent me on." 

" Oh, yes, he gave me a large bribe." 

" That is, he lost a good many pistoles, 

and you picked them up. Well, go on 

with your confession, and then we'll see 

what absolution you'll be entitled to ; but 

D 21 



kv.-> 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I much fear, Lawrence, you must be put 
to a woful purgation !" 

" Oh, have mercy, and you shall hear 
all the truth ! He had got himself into 
some scrape with the government, and so 
he took sanctuary in our convent; but 
where he had not been above a day or 
two, when there was an application to 
give him up; on learning which, he offer- 
ed me I know not what, if I would favour 
his escape; but that no harm, innocent 
man as I was, might befall me, for aiding 
him, he proposed that a plan should be 
laid for making it appear that it was by 
means of another person it was accom- 
plished ; and so, after a little considera- 
tion, your master was fixed on, because, 
he said, he had an enmity to him ; so that, 
if any one was injured on his account, he 
preferred its being a person he had a dis- 
like to." 

" He did ! by the Lord, I wish I had 
been at his elbow at the time ! And so, I 
suppose, when you came to me, you were 
quite prepared?'* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

"Yes." 

" Oh, Lawrence, how I wish I had 
known that at the time, and what a dif- 
ferent reception you would have met from 
me ! it is not pistoles you'd have dropping 
then, but good heavy thumps on your 
shoulders! and what hinders me now?" 
cried the enraged ghost, darting towards 
him. 

The confessor instinctively retreated ; 
but when he saw the supposed spirit also 
of Donaghue approaching, as he imagined, 
to seize him, he lost the power of making 
any further effort ; his senses forsook him, 
and he was carried out of the room in 
strong convulsions. 

The doctor, who had not a little enjoy- 
ed the scene, attended his recovery, not, 
however, out of any charitable motive, but 
entirely to prevent his being immediately 
undeceived, that for one night, at least, he 
might be allowed to writhe under the ter- 
rors of a guilty conscience. A thousand 
boyish schemes were suggested for tor- 
menting him still further ; but which were 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

effectually put an end to by Donaghue's 
pointing out the absolute expediency there 
was for quitting the place immediately, 
since, with a priest for an enemy, he could 
not, notwithstanding the abolition of the 
Inquisition, think it was safe for them to 
remain any longer there ; such is the blind 
respect in which the priests are held by 
the people, and, of course, so great their 
influence — an influence derived from the 
Goths, in whose eyes, monks, priests, and 
bishops, were considered infallible, and 
through whose blind veneration for them, 
they, at length, became the only judges 
in civil, as well as in ecclesiastical matters. 
It was not natural to suppose, that ^ 
man of father Lawrence's disposition 
would not strive to revenge the rough 
treatment he had met with, exclusive of 
the wish he must have to rid himself of 
the dread he must be under of them, from 
knowing he was in their power ; and, in 
addition to which, it was not unlikely, 
that the villain who had made him his 
agent in the treacherous plot that had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

been carried into effect, might still be 
lurking in the city. 

I>onaghue explained all he thought to 
the doctor, and, in addition, revealed what 
he had hitherto been in ignorance of, the 
whole affair of the prisoner ; and, ere he 
had well concluded, Rosebud became even 
more impatient than he was for their de- 
parture. In a word, immediate prepara- 
tions were made for it, and ere another 
sun rose on the ancient spires of Seville', 
they were at some distance from it, all 
furnished by what had befallen them there, 
with sufficient for meditation and conver- 
sation. That don Callan was the villain 
who had planned his destruction, not a 
doubt remained on the mind of Dona- 
ghue ; but what the cause of his bitter en- 
mity to him was, was an incomprehensible 
mystery to him, such as he never expected 
to be able to fathom. 

After a pleasant journey and voyage, 
they at length beheld the white cliffs of 
Albion again. As they drew near them 
—"Well," said the doctor, "for a real 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

feeling of security, old England, after all, 
is the place! I love travelling; no one 
more delights in it than I do, or in adven- 
tures, that is, when they are all over, to 
have to talk of; but for a constant resi- 
dence, give me the place where we neither 
fear racks on one side, or stilettos on the 
other' — where the accusation of man against 
man is bold and open as his own nature. 
* England,' as some poet observes — I be- 
lieve Cowper, ' with all thy faults,' and 
what is there human without faults? * I 
love thee still !' I would love thee, were it 
for nothing else, but that the moment the 
slave sets his foot upon thy shore, the 
chains drop from his manacled hands. 
The region of liberty must ever be the re- • 
gion of virtuous and generous sentiments, 
and a peculiar Providence must surely 
watch over and bless the land that has 
been instrumental to restoring man to his 
natural charter." 

They landed at Falmouth, and thence 
set out for London, having some regi- 
mental accounts to settle there, before 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 57 

their return to Ireland. Rosebud was in 
no hurry to have them settled, so delight- 
ed was he whenever he found himself 
here, from the variety of amusements 
always to be met with. Long after 
the business was over that brought them 
there, he would have liked to delay, but 
that Donaghue, from the painful recollec- 
tions that were here revived, was unable, 
at least with any pleasure to himself, to 
participate in his amusements, and that 
there was an imperative necessity besides 
for his speedy return to Ireland, in conse- 
quence of the confused state of a property 
that had lately devolved to him by the 
death of a relation. He had promised to 
accompany Donaghue to Altoir-na-Grenie, 
and the latter, shrinking from the thought 
of returning thither without a companion, 
readily consented to proceed with him to 
Teghadovv, the name of his place, and re- 
main there with him till he was at liberty 
to do so. 



d3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER III. 



r-f^.f^.f^.f^d 



" Seeing too much sadness hath cong€alefl your blood, and 
melancholy is the nurse of frenzy; therefore they thought 
it good you hear a play, and form your mind to mirth 
and merriment, which bars a thousand charms, and 
lengthens life." 

The friends embarked at the Head. No 
sooner had they got on board, than Rose- 
bud, as was usual with him, set about 
seekhig out amusement for himself, and 
soon succeeded to his wish. The persons 
on whom he depended for furnishing it to 
him, were an English man and woman. 
Having introduced himself to them, he 
allured them to the deck, where Dona- 
ghue remained, being too good-natured to 
desire to have all the diversion to himself. 
" VorCt you please to take a chee7\ sir ?" 
said the lady, offering a vacant one, that 
stood by herself, to Donaghue, on hearing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 59 

he was the doctor's friend. " Tell, Mr. 
Wilkinson," addressing her own compa- 
nion, " I suppose ve shall soon be seeing 
Dublin ; I t;onder how far that there lake 
we are going to wisit is from it ?" 

" Upon my life, Mrs. Bentley, I have 
no ideer^ but I should suppose not far, 
as they say on board this, that every one 
that comes to see it comes this way." 

" You must know, sir," turning to Rose- 
bud, " I am the wife of a rich man, hving 
at Mile End, in Lunnon, and not being 
over well lately, the doctors adwised me 
to try what a little bit of a voyeege would 
do for me ; and having been to Margate 
and Ramsgate already, and all these there 
places, my husband says to me, says he — 
* By way of variety, my dear, I don't 
think but it would be pleasant for you to 
take a trip to ^ireland, and see the fine 
lake there, that some one was talking about 
the other night ;' and so consenting, as he 
could not come himself, on account of his 
business, for he is a great soap-boiler, you 
must know, sir, he settled that Jonathan 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Wilkinson, his foreman, this good man 
here, should come in his place, to take 
care of me ; and good care, I am sure, he 
will — Fbn't you, Jonathan ?" 

" Vy, I'll do my best, Mrs. Bentley ; 1 
hopes as how I have always as yet been 
found trustworthy ?" 

" ^y* yes, I must say you have, Jona- 
than. — But, as I was saying, sir," again 
addressing herself to Rosebud, " this here 
lake we intend on te^isiting — we, somehow, 
don't remember its name, or the patick- 
lars about it ; but perhaps, sir, you could 
tell us?" 

" Me, ma'am T' replied Rosebud, grave- 
ly ; " I am but a stranger, like yourself, 
to iJireland." 

" Dear heart ! veW, I suppose that's the 
reason we got so well acquainted in a mo- 
ment, for *tis natiral for people of the 
same country to get together." 

The doctor nodded assent, and in this 
way continued to divert himself the prin- 
cipal part of the way. 

As the packet floated over an unruffled 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 6l 

sea, towards evening, into the beautiful 
Bay of Dublin, what feelings and reflec- 
tions were awakened in the breast of Do- 
naghue, by the various objects that were 
presented to his view ! on his right was 
the Hill of Howth, which, running far 
into the Irish Sea, forms the bay on the 
north side ; to his left, the island of Dal- 
key, with a range of the most romantic 
scenery, rendered highly interesting by 
the historical recollections connected with 
many parts of it. He could not look at 
the peninsula of Howth, that, swelling 
into a lofty promontory, forms a grand 
feature in the scene, without reflecting, 
that on Benhedar, or the Bird's Promon- 
tory, its name in former times, stood the 
rath, or royal palace of Criomthan, me- 
morable in his day for several successful 
descents on the opposite coast, in the time 
of Agricola — that it was a seat of the 
Druids, and, in after times, distinguished 
by the exploits of the brave sir Armoricus 
Tristrem, the castle of whose noble de- 
scendant still stands upon the spot, con- 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

taining the sword with which the valiant 
chieftain gained the victory on the day 
that gives its name to the family. Nei- 
ther could Donaghue turn to the other 
side, without recalling the period when 
the fastnesses of the romantic mountains 
he viewed were the retreats of rival septs 
and of sequestered piety — when their 
echoes were now awakened by the war- 
cry of contending chiefs, now by the 
mournful chant of the pilgrim train. Be- 
neath the shade of the oaks, that once 
spread over the now sterile surface of the 
Bird's Promontory, the mysterious rites 
of the Druids were once performed, some 
of their altars still remaining in the se- 
questered glens of the peninsula; while, 
at the^ other side, the bed of St. Kevin, 
with the seven churches, were, in after 
times, the resort of the Christian devotee. 
Some way further on, Donaghue saw 
the spot in which his royal ancestor, the 
noble and the renowned Brien Boru, fell, 
after gaining the memorable victory of 
Clontarf; but no wonder he conquered. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 63 

for neither the physical strength, nor the 
spirit of Irishmen, in those days, was im- 
paired or crushed. A chief was then a fa- 
ther to his followers, nor fled to another 
land, forgetful of their claim upon his 
kindness, and took care not to squander 
what he wrung from their toil, or acquired 
through their valour. — " But now !" Do- 
naghue sighed at the melancholy contrast, 
and at the same instant a blush, the hec- 
tic of a moment, flushed his cheek, at the 
recollection of what he had been so near 
becoming himself 

From these, and such like reflections, 
he was at length drawn by the grand city 
opening to his view at the bottom of the 
bay, seated on a plain, with the Dublin 
mountains forming a noble background 
to the south of the river, and, uniting with 
the still loftier and more varied range of 
the Wicklow ones, forming the south side 
of the bay, the whole of them indented 
with small bays and creeks, and adorned 
with elegant villas and cottages, inter- 
mingled with little villages and towns. 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

While yet Donaghue was gazing on 
the interesting scenery, the sun sunk in a 
flood of glory, beneath the waves that 
seemed to be gently bearing him forward. 
As he sunk, a soft mist began to float, like 
a silver veil, over the landscape, giving a 
shadowy beauty to many parts of it, not 
to be described; while the hues that 
painted the hills, the purple lights that 
gradually faded into distance, with the 
crimson glow that long lingered on the 
summits of the mountains, formed, alto- 
gether, a picture not to be contemplated, 
even by the coldest bosom, without admi- 
ration. But like all else that is beautiful 
on earth, it at last began to change and 
die away; the shades of evening began to 
deepen and condense, and darkness would 
soon have obscured the scene, but for a 
rising moon, that " o'er the dark her sil- 
ver mantle threw, and in her pale domi- 
nion checked the night." 

How beautiful the reflection of her 
beams upon the rippling waves, and how 
finely did the pale and mournful lights 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

Donaghue conceived, harmonize with the 
wild, and now-apparently soHtary scenes 
that seemed receding from his view ! But 
at length the vessel floated into the Pigeon- 
house Dock, and the bustle and confu- 
sion attendant on the moment of disem- 
barking, put an end, for the present, to 
any further reflections on the part of Do- 
naghue. 

The name of the Pigeon-house, Mrs. 
Bentley concluded, was derived from its 
being a place for pigeons ; and, in conse- 
quence, observing, just after her landing, 
a heap of cannon balls, twenty-four pound- 
ers — " Fell," she cried, " 'tis a true say- 
ing, ' travellers see strange things.' Who 
would ever have thought that pigeons' 
eggs, in fl'ireland, were the size of my hus- 
band's head !" 

Having gone through the usual forms 
at the Custom-house, they were immedi- 
ately surrounded by a set of ragged men 
and boys, smacking their whips, and each 
pressing upon them his respective vehicle; 
one protesting he had the easiest jaunting 



66 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

car in Dublin, and another the most Hi- 
gint jingle ; one saying, if the party wasn't 
above six, he'd take them for tin tinpin- 
nies to town, and another for six, if they 
hadn't many trunks. Their wild looks, 
eager manner, and ragged appearance, at 
length began to alarm Mrs. Bentley ; and 
her terror was not lessened by one or two 
of them at length making an effort to get 
her on their car. 

After some consultation, or rather con- 
sideration, Jonathan thinking a jingle the 
safest conveyance of the two, Mrs. Bent- 
ley was handed into one, and the rest of 
the party followed; Rosebud having made 
it a point with Donaghue, that he would 
let him have his frolic out, by not object- 
ing to accompany these people, that he 
might see how they meant to proceed. 

They had scarcely got without the gate 
of the Pigeon-house Dock, when Wilkin- 
son, addressing himself to the ragged dri- 
ver — " Do you know this here place and 
country well ?" he cried. 

" Oh, botheration ! is it me you are ask- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 6? 

ing that? Ah, then it's myself that does 
right well ; for wasn't I bred and born in 
Stoney-batter?" 

" Did you," resumed Jonathan, " ever 
hear of any lake or lakes near Dublin?" 

" Lake ! lake !" repeated the fellow, as 
he scratched his head. " Ah, then, please 
your honour, whereabouts may it be ?" 

" I knows not, I am sure, nor can I 
tell; I never was in this here country be- 
fore, nor ever travelled further in my own, 
than, of a Sunday, to Highgate or Hamp- 
stead, in the regular stage-coach; but a 
captain of a ship told me as how there was 
a fine lake somewhere about here." 

The driver seemed to consider a few se- 
conds, then — " Ah, please your honour !" 
— but suddenly, " be yez all strangers in 
ould Ireland?" 

" Yes, all," replied the doctor, deter- 
mined to ascertain what his drift was in 
asking the question. 

Being satisfied upon that point — " If I 
wouldn't be laying a wager it's Crab Lake 
your honours mean," said the fellow. 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Upon my life, I am sure I don't know, 
nor can I tell ; but I was informed a lord 
had a house and fine grounds not far from 
it." 

" See if I wasn't right; faith and troth 
that's the very place. The wel of Charle- 
mont has a fine house, sure enough, near 
it, and iligint pleasure grounds." 

" I believe you count it a good ways 
from this here city ?" 

" I do, your honour, and always did, 
though many would say otherwise; but 
if it's a bargain your honour wants, I am 
the carman to get it from ; I'll take yez 
all for " 

" First say," interrupted Wilkinson, 
" how many days, with this one horse, 
and a sorry animal I must say it is, you'd 
be taking us to this here lake ?" 

" Days ! — days !" repeated the fellow, as 
if in utter astonishment. " Days, does 
yoUr honour say, to take yez all to Crab 
Lake? Days! How many days !" 

" I thinks I speaks plain enough," said 
Wilkinson. " As it is a long journey, by 



' TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

your account, and we wouldn't like to 
over-drive your horse, seeing as how I 
don't think he could bear it, I say, how 
many days would you be taking us to the 
lake we have come over to see?" 

" Faith and troth your honour is a kind- 
hearted gentleman, to feel so much for 
ould Darby. But days, did you say, I'd 
be driving you to Crab Lake ! that is all 
oUjezr 

*' Yes," said Rosebud, who had already 
made Wilkinson, to his and Mrs. Bent- 
ley's great joy, believe that he and his 
friend meant to accompany them in their 
excursion, " we are all of the same party." 

" Why," cried the fellow, " yez all 
seem to be so good-natured, that maybe 
I'd better leave it to yourselfs." 

" No, no, neighbour," said Wilkinson, 
" my way is always to make a sure bar- 
gain beforehand, then there's no gifum- 
bling and finding fault afterwards. I say 
again, therefore, what will you have to 
take us all, with this one horse, to the 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lake, every expence included, save our 
own entertainment at the different stages 
on the road ?" 

" Upon my conscience, and that's as 
good as my oath any day, 'tis a long bit 
of ground to Crab Lake; and then to 
drive yez all in this iligint manner !" 

Hardly were the words out of his lips, 
than down stumbled poor old Darby on 
his knees, to the no small terror of Mrs. 
Bentley — " Oh, we shall be killed ! we 
shall be killed !" she exclaimed, or rather 
soi'eamed out. 

" Ah, the sorrow fear of you, my lady," 
cried Mr. Pat Murphy, pulling up the 
poor beast again ; " this was only a trick 
of poor Darby's, becase he heard us mak- 
ing a bargain ; or else what do you think 
he was about?" addressing himself to Wil- 
kinson. 

" I knows not," replied Wilkinson, ex- 
tremely tvexed; " about breaking our 
necks, I suppose!" 

" Is it he, the creatshure ! Ah, then. 



' TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

sure such a thing never entered his head; 
did it, my ould boy ? But I'll be bound 
it didn't, for a better-hearted creatshure 
than ould Darby is nowhere to be met 
with. What I was going to say to your 
honour was, that if it wasn't a trick he 
was playing, it was going to pray, perhaps 
he was, that we might have a good jour- 
ney ; but perhaps your honour never saw 
a capal say his prayers before?" 

" A what !" cried Wilkinson. " I don't 
understand, hinist friend ; but if you mean 
a horse, no; nor I hope I never shall 
again." 

"By St. Patrick! but that's strange; 
and so your honours would be hiring me 
by the lump, as one may say. Well, that 
shall make no odds; and as I find yez be 
all strangers in ould Ireland, I'll be as 
cheap as I can, or as a poor man like me 
with thirteen children, and as many more, 
for aught that I know, to come, ought to 
be expicted to be ; ask what I will, I'm 
sure your honours will give me a trifle at 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the end of the journey over and above, 
with a comfortable bit now and then to 
on Id Darby. Well, here goes ; for the use 
of the iligint jingle, nine tinpinnieSy for 
ould Darby to draw it, tin tinpinnies, and 
for myself to drive it, tin more" 

" How much," gravely demanded Wil- 
kinson, " do all these tinpinnies make f" 

Murphy took from his pocket a bit of 
chalk, and marked on the shaft of the 
jingle, in streaks, as he thus proceeded: 
" For myself, as 1 look upon yez as all friends, 
being strangers in ould Ireland, there is 
till tinpinnies, for ould Darby the same, 
and for the iligint jingle, that has taken 
many a lady and gentleman to Donnybrook 
Fair, and the little Dargle of a Sunday, 
nine more, making, let me see, one pound 
eleven shillings, and twopence, or four- 
pence, I won't be certain which." 

" How many pence is in a tin pinny, as 
you call it?" asked Wilkinson. 

" Two fives, an please your honour." 

" Well then, friend, I can only say, by 



T?11ADITI0N OF THE CASTLE. 7S 

my calculation, I can only make two tens 
and a nine, one pound four shillings and 
twopence!" 

" Ah, then, your honour, how close we 
are to each other !" 

" How do you make that out ?" 

" Arrah! is there any more nor a tin- 
pinny or two between us ?" 

" I manage to make a difference of six 
shillings !" 

" Pooh ! that's because you reckon in 
the way of your own country, for every 
country has its own way, your honour; 
and, any how, what signifies the difference 
of six shillings? I, that am a poor man, 
think nothing about it !" 

" No, I dare say not, when it's in your 
own favour ; but " 

" Come, come," interrupted Mrs. Bent- 
ley, " nor vill we, friend, provided we find 
you civil and careful ; but I am growing 
cold, the night has changed so, and wish, 
therefore, you'd take us, as fast as you can, 
to some good inn or hotel, if you know of 
such a one, for the night." 

VOL. II. E 



74 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Do I ? ah ! then let me alone for that. 
Did you ever hear, my lady, of my coun- 
tryman, the duke of Wellington ?" 

" To be sure I did ! every one has heard 
of him ; vasn't the grand illuminations we 
had in Lunnun all on account of his great 
wictory ?" 

" Well, my lady, please the pigs, as my 
grandmother used to say, the Lord rest 
her soul ! you shall sleep in his hotel this 
night, where I'll stay myself, to help to 
wait on you, and be ready to start with 
yez early in the morning, on our long 
journey to the lake, and where yez will be 
sure of getting a good bit and sup ;*' and 
so saying, he now, in right earnest, beganr 
to drive forward, having all this time, till 
now, been doing nothing but driving 
them up one road and down another, into 
the Circular one, that goes, as its name im- 
plies, round Dublin, to the no small amuse- 
ment of the doctor, who was not a little 
diverted by his roguery ; for it is now to 
be understood, that Crab Lake is an insig- 
nificant little place, about a mile or two 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

from Dublin, on the north side, never 
thought of, and, perhaps, hardly known, 
to many of the natives. No wonder, then, 
that Mr. Pat should feel astonished at 
being asked how many days it would take 
to go there. But, much as the doctor 
was amused by his impudence, in taking 
advantage of their acknowledged igno- 
rance, to pass it for a considerable distance 
on them, he did not, of course, intend to 
let him carry on the joke beyond this 
night. 

Mr. Murphy, now finding it high time 
to come to the end of a stage, stopped, at 
length, at a poor miserable house, close to 
the banks of the Canal, holding out a scar- 
let daub, underneath which was written — 
"The Duke of Wellington." Murphy, 
bidding the party wait a bit, went in first, 
and, after stopping a few minutes, return- 
ed, accompanied by another man, who, 
stepping up to the side of the jingle, 
evinced himself the owner of the house, 
by welcoming the travellers into it, and 
beginning to assist them to alight, 
E 2 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The night, as Mrs. Bentley observed, 
had suddenly changed; it had got ex- 
tremely cold and wet, so that a comfort- 
able room was a thing very much to be 
desired; what their feelings, therefore, 
were, at the appearance of that into which 
they were ushered by their host, with no 
little ceremony and parade, such as, indeed, 
a good deal raised their expectations, may 
well be imagined. Every thing looked 
dirty and wretched, and there being hardly 
three whole panes in the two windows, the 
wind, that, in consequence, rushed in with 
violence^ almost instantly extinguished the 
candle, with which the landlord had pre- 
ceded the party. — " What the devil is the 
meaning of this?" cried Rosebud, now 
beginning to get himself into a passion, 
from feeling uncomfortable. 

" Have a little patience, your honours," 
said O'Shaughnessy, " and I won't be a 
giffy in doing something to keep that 
li^llish wind out !" So saying he retired, 
but presently returned with a light, and 
his arms full of straw ; depositing one in a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 77 

corner, that was screened, he proceeded to 
fill up the, vacuums occasioned by the 
broken glass, by thrusting handfuls of 
straw into the windows. 

In the mean time, Mrs. Bentley and 
Mr. Wilkinson had seated themselves, 
with mournful looks at each other, oppo- 
site to one another, at the fire-place. They 
had not long done so, when Jonathan, 
unconsciously stirring something at the 
bottom of the grate with his cane, a spark 
of fire issued from it, which he no sooner 
perceived, than, shivering with cold, he let 
drop his cane, and snatching up a snout- 
less bellows, that lay beside him on the 
floor, he set about blowing, what he con- 
ceived the cinders, with such vigour, as, 
in a moment, completely enveloped him, 
and every one else in the room, in a cloud 
of white ashes. Provoked, if not fright- 
ened, Mrs. Bentley was running out of it, 
when Wilkinson stopping her, called for 
the coachman, as he denominated the rag- 
ged carman ; and on his obeying his sum- 
mons, demanded, in no very complacent 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tone, what kind of a place that was he had 
brought them to ? 

" Is it this snug hotel of the duke of 
Wellington's your honour would be pleas- 
ed to be axing after ? faith, and its itself 
that is a comfortable place to be in, such a 
could wet night as this, barring the want of 
fire, and a bit of glass or two in the win- 
dows; but, stop, sure hasn't Ned been 
after just glazing them ? Och ! blessings 
on him, if he isn't a nate lad, I wonder 
who is !" 

" Do you call a room comfortable that 
has not a bit of fire in it, such a night as 
this ?" demanded Wilkinson, in a passion. 

" Botheration ! botheration ! if that be 
all your honour wants, you'll have it be- 
fore you ask for it ;" and off he flew. He 
soon returned, with a wooden coal-box, 
full of live fire, having thrown which into 
the grate, the box itself remained in his 
hands in flames. 

" You may as well," said Wilkinson, 
noticing this, " throw what you have in 
your hand after the fire." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

" Do, for God's sake, or you'll set fire 
to the house !" added Mrs. Bentley, 

** Ah, then, madam, does you all think 
I am mad, to go for to burn the man's 
household goods in such a way ?" 

" Why, what use is such a thing, after 
being so burnt?" 

" What use ! many a day he has got a 
worse singeing than this ; wait, your ho- 
nours, till I dip him in the pond without, 
and you'll see how well he'll look." 

On Murphy's re-entrance, after ducking 
the coal-box — " Well, what can we have 
for supper ?" demanded Jonathan. 

5« Why, please your honour, ould Ire- 
land is famous for bacon and greens, which, 
with a nice fat fowl, might, any how, may 
be, do for this night. — I hope you'll like a 
chicken, my lady?" 

Mrs. Bentley answered in the affirma- 
tive, expressing herself very well pleased 
and satisfied with the proposed supper; 
and Murphy withdrew, to give the neces- 
sary instructions to the landlord. 

The kitchen was opposite the parlour, 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and Rosebud happening to be, at the mo- 
ment, in the passage that divided them, 
but without being noticed by Murphy, 
from the hurry he was in, heard, in conse- 
quence, what followed between him and 
the landlord. — " In the name of St. Pa- 
trick," demanded the latter, " what could 
put it into your head to promise them 
people such a supper, when you know, 
for love nor money, we couldn't get a fowl 
out here?" 

" Botheration !" cried Murphy, " do 
you only make up a bit of fire, get the pot 
on, and leave the rest to me." 

The fellow soon returned, bearing in his 
hand an immense dunghill cock, the head 
of which he had wrung off, and instantly 
set about stripping it of its plumage. At 
Murphy's first entrance, O'Shaughnessy 
had not observed what he was about; but 
no sooner had he time to notice him, than 
he seemed to lose the power of motion, 
and stood staring at him with astonish- 
ment. At length, stooping down, and 
taking up some of the feathers to examine 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 

them — " Ah, then," in a voice indicative 
of regret and anger, he exclaimed, " is it 
after killing poor Judy Melany's cock 
you are !" 

" Hush !" cried the other, in a low tone, 
and attempting to close the kitchen door ; 
** burn the feathers, and who will be the 
wiser ?" 

" By my soul now, I am grieved and 
sorry for poor Billy ; man and boy, I have 
known him these ten years, at least ; and 
what's more, I never knew any harm of 
the poor crater. But what will Judy say, 
when she finds the lad gone, that was as 
good as a clock to her ? By St. Patrick, 
but it must be jaws of iron that will be 
able to get into the flesh of the poor ould 
crater !" 

" Come, come," cried Murphy, " what 
signifies grieving! do you finish picking 
him, and hand me a bottle of the lastj^o- 
teen, and if I don't, by a good dose, such 
as, I'll be sworn, they never tasted before, 
give such a stiffening to the jaws of these 
eS 



S2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

foreigners, as shall make them think Billy 
a chicken, no matter !" 

" Having got what he required, he pro- 
ceeded with it, with glasses, sugar, and 
warm water, to the parlour, and having 
made a strong tumbler of punch, handed 
it to Mrs. Bentley, with a recommendation 
to her to take it off directly, as the best 
preservative in the world against the 
rheumatic^ to which every one, not born or 
bred in Ireland, was subject on first com- 
ing to it, if they did not do similar to what 
he now advised. 

" Only think of that, Jonathan !" said 
Mrs. Bentley, as she accepted the glass. — 
" Thank you, friend, for your attention ; 
indeed I believe it was very necessary, as 
I feel a shivering all over me; but," ap- 
plying her lips to the glass, and taking a 
flip, " it appears to me very strong, though 
very good." 

** Ah, my lady, that's because you're not 
used to it ; when you take more of it, you'll 
think it weak enough." 

" Well, friend, since you recommend it 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

SO strongly, suppose you try your hand on 
a tumbler of it for me," said Wilkinson. 

Murphy required no urging, and Jo- 
nathan having tasted it, expressed himself, 
like his friend Mrs. Bentley, much pleas- 
ed with it — " Now that's down," he cried, 
" it has given such a glow to my whole 
body, as is mighty agreeable — I was so 
cold before ; a sure sign the rheumatism 
was coming on." 

" Ah, the devil a surer one !" said Mur- 
phy, mixing him another dose, which, 
from its strength, had nearly occasioned 
suffocation. 

At length supper was brought in. Jo- 
nathan's eyes sparkled with pleasure and 
delight, as he viewed the fine large fowl 
Mr. Murphy had provided for him. — " If s 
a mighty fine bird !" observed Mrs. Bent- 
ley, as he helped her to a wing. 

Rosebud and Donaghue declined any 
part of it, preferring bread and cheese, a 
circumstance that seemed to afford Wil- 
kinson great pleasure. — " I am inclined to 
think," he said to Murphy, who officiated 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as waiter, as he went on carving, " that 
you have brought us a capon, instead of a 
common fowl." 

" An', please your honour, which do you 
like best?" asked Murphy. 

" Oh, there's no kind of comparison be- 
tween them 1" 

" Yes, but which does your honour like 
best," again asked the other, who never 
in his life had heard of a capon before, yet 
did not like to discover his ignorance, 
" the capon or the fowl ?" 

" Oh, a capon, to be sure ! give me a ca- 
pon, any time, in preference; and, I must 
say, this is as fine a one, judging from its 
size, as I ever before saw." 

" See the luck I was in," said Murphy, 
with a voice of infinite satisfaction, " to 
order the very thing that was so agree- 
able !" 

Mrs. Bentley cut and tore, and tore and 
cut, to try and get the flesh off poor Billy's 
bones ; they appeared as loth to part as two 
lovers; but when, at length, she did sue- 
c^ed in getting a bit to put into her mouth* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

her jaws were fairly tired in the mastica- 
tion. Jonathan made a furious attack 
upon one of the old boy's legs, but he 
might as well have hoped to get his teeth 
into a horse's hide, after being well tanned 
and beaten ; and, at last, completely worn 
out with fatigue, they dropped their knives 
and forks, and literally rested on their arms. 
— " Doesn't it please you, my lady ?" ask- 
ed Murphy, advancing to the table. 

" Please her !" repeated Jonathan ; " why 
what the plague bird is it ?" 

" A capon, your honour ; what your 
honour is so fond of." 

" Then if it is, it is a devil of an old 
one ! I never met with such a one before !" 

" Arrah! and, upon my conscience, its 
laugh your honour makes me !" 

" I see nothing to laugh at," said Wil- 
kinson, extremely disconcerted. 

" Why then, perhaps, your honours 
likes the capons in your own country the 
best ?" 

" Yes, I believe we do indeed !" replied 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Wilkinson, with much indignation and 
contempt. 

" Because, in our country, they are so 
tender," observed Mrs. Bentley. 

" Ah ! that's what makes the difference 
between them," cried Murphy ; " in ould 
Ireland we never like our capons till their 
flesh gets a little firm, or hard ; indeed, as 
a body may say, by their getting a little 
ould." 

" Good gracious ! " exclaimed Mrs. 
Bentley, " what a difference in the two 
countries! why, in England, we always 
like the fowl of the same year." 

" Ah ! then that same country of yours 
must be an outlandish place, my lady; 
it's not tough mutton, I suppose, you'd be 
liking there, as we do here ?" 

" Come, come, friend," cried Wilkinson, 
who had resumed his knife and fork, ** you 
know how to play tricks upon travellers ; 
for, now that I begin to look at this bird, 
I am much inclined to think him an old 
dunghill cock." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 87 

" A capon, your honour." 

" A cock, I say ! and, by the Lord, 
here's his spurs half a yard long ! Why, 
he has crowed for the parish these ten 
years, I dare say." 

" Well, to be sure," said Murphy, " to 
see that some people will only see things 
as they like it themselves !" 

" Come, away with him !" cried Wil- 
kinson; "and, since we must make our 
supper of bread and cheese, let us have 
some good porter, I say, to wash it down, 
if this here country produces such a thing." 

The porter was got, and the rage of 
hunger being at last appeased, Wilkinson 
began to recover from the ill-humour 
which its being baulked in the first in- 
stance had occasioned. A glass or two 
more of the poteen making Mrs. Bentley 
sleepy, she, at last, demanded to be shewn 
to her chamber. Murphy, opening the 
door with the air of one of the first waiters 
in the kingdom, called, in a voice of au- 
thority, for the chambermaid. 

The call was obeyed by a girl without 



88 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

shoes or stockings, and with a rushlight 
in her hand. — " Chambermaid truly !" ex- 
claimed Mrs. Bentley, with a toss of her 
head, on seeing her ; " why, in my coun- 
try, the lowest pot-girl has shoes and 
stockings on." 

" Ah, my lady, the sorrow a bit the 
better they are for that ; that's what makes 
the girls in your country so saucy ; they 
are better fed than taught. I have a cou- 
sin who goes over every year to assist in 
getting in the harvest, and he says they 
don't care what they do there. Now this 
poor thing only thinks of her business, and 
if she doesn't like to be laying out much 
with the shoemaker, why who has a right 
to be angry ?" 

Mrs. Bentley retired; but her compa- 
nion, as yet, shewed no inclination to fol- 
low her example. He at last, indeed, be- 
tween a good fire and the poteen, seemed 
to feel himself very comfortable ; but his 
head was not long able to bear the strength 
of the latter, and, in a short time, in a 
manner that could hardly have been ex- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

pected from his appearance, as he had a 
good deal the look of a swadler, he began 
to bellow out for the waiter, boots, and 
chambermaid. 

Murphy, running into the room, de- 
manded of his honour if all was not right? 

" No, you rascal !" stammered out Wil- 
kinson ; " for I neither see boots, nor 
waiter, nor chambermaid !" 

" Arrah ! be asy, your honour ; don't 
be going on in this comical way ; how can 
you want boots, when they are on your 
legs ? The waiter, myself, is beside you, 
and the chambermaid you can have no 
business with here." 

"Why not?" 

" Because your honour is in your bed- 
room already." 

" How do you — make that — out?" a- 
gain stammered Jonathan ; " I — 1 see no 
bed here." 

" But you won't be long so ;" and so 
saying he disappeared; but almost in- 
stantly returned, with some trusses of 
straw, which, shaking out on the floor, he 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

threw some blankets over, and then, turn- 
ing to Wilkinson — " Ah, then it's snug 
all of yez will be together here; what 
wouldn't hundreds give to be as well off 
as yez all will be this could night, in this 
warm birth. Come, your honour, shall I 
help you off with your boots?" 

" You — you arrant knave," stuttered 
Wilkinson, " do — do you think we — we 
are beasts, to — to — to have a litter made 
— made up for us !" 

" Ah, then sure it can't be helped," said 
Murphy, in a coaxing tone ; " your ho- 
nour looks like a good-natured gentleman, 
and wouldn't be going, I am sure, to take 
the only bed in the house from the poor 
lady." 

Wilkinson paused, and began to consi- 
der — " Is — is it large enough for — for — 
two?" 

" Ay is it, for four." 

" Then— then I'll take a— a nap on it." 

" By my sowl, but you won't. Is it, 
let the Duke of Wellington lose its cha- 
racter by you! So come, botheration! 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 91 

there's a good bed for you. If yez be go* 
ing on in this way, how'U yez be up by 
cock-crow, to be setting out on this long 
journey we are going ?" and as he spoke, 
perceiving the state Wilkinson was in, he 
whipped him up in his arms, and, without 
further ceremony, laid him down on the 
straw, and covered him up with a blanket. 
Donaghue wanted not this finale to 
their adventures at the Duke of Welling- 
ton, to render him completely vexed and 
provoked with himself for having given 
way to Rosebud's whim. Exclusive of 
any consideration about himself, he felt 
sore that he should have given the slight-, 
est sanction to strangers being so deceived 
and imposed on. There was something 
unkind, inhospitable in it, that wounded 
his generous mind. Besides, it was doing 
an act of positive injustice to his country, 
to allow it to appear in such a light as a 
place where there was hardly civilization; 
and altogether he felt he should never be 
reconciled to himself, till he had done 
something to make amends for his indirect 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

connivance against them. In a word, it 
was settled between him and Rosebud, 
that, as far as possible, the amende ho^ 
norahle should be made them: and ac- 
cordingly, the ensuing morning, on Mrs. 
Bentley's insisting, the moment she ap- 
peared, on Jonathan's taking her imme- 
diately back to England, from so wild 
and savage a place, Donaghue interfered ; 
and by his mild and conciliating man- 
ner, prevailing on her to postpone her 
return till she had seen a little more of 
the country, a coach was sent for, in 
which the party was conveyed to the 
Hibernian hotel, with the size and situa- 
tion of which Mrs. Bentley was not 
only delighted but astonished, having no 
conception, from the previous impression 
made on her mind, of there being such a 
place in the capital. 

They did not, however, depart without 
Mr. Pat receiving a severe lecture for his 
roguery. Taking him aside, Rosebud 
protested he had the greatest mind in the 
world to take him before a police magis- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 93 

trate, an assertion however which was not 
strictly true, as his conscience would not 
have allowed him to punish him for what 
he had so much enjoyed, assuring him he 
would keep a watchful eye on him ; and 
if ever he found he attempted a like trick, 
or did not recompense poor Judy out of 
what the party might perhaps be induced 
to give him, for the depredation he had 
committed on her, he would make him 
do so. 

Pat cried and prayed, and finally plead- 
ed poverty, and his thirteen children, pro- 
testing, that as all the English were made 
of money, and got so much out of ould 
Ireland, through the means of those who 
deserted it, he had not thought there was 
any great harm in trying to get a little of 
it from them. 

Donaghue ordered a very handsome en- 
tertainment, of which the strangers par- 
took as his guests. Mrs. Bentley was 
quite charmed with his polite attention, 
and the excellent fare provided for her, 
with such attendance as she had not been 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

much accustomed to ; expressing it, as her 
opinion, that was there such a public- 
house, as she chose to style the hotel, at 
Mile End, it would have wast business 
indeed, particularly of an evening, when 
all the men from the docks were at leisure; 
and declaring that she had never ate a bet- 
ter dinner at the Ship, at Greenwich — the 
Green Man, at Barnet — the Plough, at 
Hampstead — the Fox and Goose, at Nor- 
wood — or the Bald-faced Stag, at Epping 
Forest; and, finally, it was very evident 
her sentiments had begun to experience a 
very favourable revolution with regard to 
the country. 

Though she and her companion were 
by no means people Donaghue could in 
any way assimilate with, yet for two days, 
in consideration of the past, he devoted 
himself entirely to them; on the third, 
they set out in the stage-coach for the real 
lake, with letters of introduction, from 
Rosebud, to some friends he had there; 
and as still further amends for his freak, 
an invitation, on their way back, to his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

residence. He and his friend soon after 
followed, accompanied by his attorney, 
Mr. Macdonnel, a very pleasant man, who 
proved a very great acquisition on the 
journey, from his perfect knowledge of 
every place through which they travelled ; 
there was not an old church, castle, or 
tower, with the history of which he was 
not acquainted ; and in addition to which 
amusement, he was able to give Donaghue 
a great deal of useful information concern- 
ing his native land. But the pleasure they 
derived from conversing was soon inter- 
rupted by a change in the doctor's hu- 
mour; he grew jealous — fancied himself 
neglected, and, in consequence, gave way 
to a petulance that had soon the effect of 
silencing Mr. Macdonnel. 

He could not have taken a more effec- 
tual way of punishing the other for this 
petulance; silence was, of all things, what 
the doctor could least endure, and accord- 
ingly, suddenly slapping Macdonnel on 
the back, he demanded what he was so 
deeply engaged in thinking on — " Though 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I think I can guess," he cried, " that it is 
by what items you can best swell out a 
bill of costs against some unfortunate 
client." 

" What's that you say about costs?" 
cried the other, with quickness, as if really 
roused from some deep study. 

" Ha ! how soon the mention of costs 
restored you to yourself, Mac?" 

" Why, doctor, without the hope and 
expectation of emolument, I don't see how 
any man could be expected to undertake 
business." 

" True ; but the hopes and expectations 
of you gentlemen of the law about emolu- 
ment, are, between ourselves, out of all 
rule and compass. Come, confess now, 
Mac — if you w^ere only paid the twelfth 
part of what you demand, would you not 
be paid well ?" 

** It is a rule in the courts," replied 
Macdonnel, with a good-humoured smile, 
" that a man is not obliged to answer any 
question that makes against himself But 
to be candid, ours is an unfortunate pro- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

fession, insomuch, that were I beginning 
my life again, and, of course, had still the 
choice of one, I should prefer any other to 
it. The rapacious, unprincipled conduct 
of a set of rascals, vultures in human form, 
or vampires, or whatever else you please 
to call them, laying themselves out to 
suck the very life-blood of those who fall 
into their hands, has occasioned a stigma to 
be cast upon it, that makes all in it to be 
indiscriminately suspected alike; but the 
legislature has at last, in a degree, taken 
up the matter; and I hope the time is not 
far distant, when, by rendering it not an 
easy matter for any but men of some pro- 
perty to enter it, it will be freed from such 
wretches, not only a disgrace to whatever 
they are attached to, but also to the very 
name of men." 



VOL. XL 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER IV. 



*' Time, thou mayest roll thy years along, 

Thy lessons silently unfuld ; 
The grave, the ga)?, the old, the young, 

Heed not the tale thou long hast told." 

" Ah, then, Cathala, my darling, do I see 
you again ! a little the worse for the wear, 
to be sure; but no wonder, for many a 
long year has passed since I turned my 
back on you ; but if Time has not spared 
you, yet still, hasn't he been kind in throw- 
ing a fine green mantle of ivy over you ; 
while your own, those whom you sheltered 
from many a storm, have let you tumble 
and decay, without doing a thing for you ; 
but no matter, we shall see if we cannot 
make amends for their neglect, and keep 
your old head up a little longer." 

Such was the apostrophe of Rosebud, at 
the sight of his paternal home; his com- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

panions smiled ; but still each with a look 
that seemed to say they understood what 
his feelings must be at the moment. 
Teghadow was an ancient castle, connect- 
ed with, and, no doubt, in former times, 
forming part of the extensive monastery 
of St. Cathala, the ruins of which evinced 
what it must have been in its days of ori- 
ginal splendour. Besides numerous cells 
and vaults, a great portion of the cloisters 
still remained, together with the chapel, 
that is, its east window and high altar, 
both adorned with beautiful sculpture, in 
high preservation, and sufficient of the 
walls to shew what it was; but the roof 
had given way, not however till the clus- 
tering ivy, that had gradually overspread 
it, had become so strong and luxuriant, 
as almost completely to supply its place, 
forming a perspective of green arches, in- 
expressibly beautiful ; beneath the solemn 
shade of which Donaghue was often wont 
to indulge his melancholy reflections, after 
taking up his abode at Teghadow, as if 
F 2 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he loved to listen to the " moping owl, 
complaining to the moon, of such as, wan- 
dering near her secret bower, disturbed 
her ancient solitary reign." Before the 
high altar w^as the tomb of the foundress, 
with a curious representation of herself, in 
a recumbent posture ; and altogether there 
was much here to awaken solemn reflec- 
tion, and interest the antiquarian, in the 
ancient grave-stones, with curious inscrip- 
tions, that were scattered about, imbedded 
in rank grass and weeds. 

It stood on an elevation, overlooking a 
narrow, wdnding glen, through w^hlch a 
river took its course; the glen was bound- 
ed, in the most romantic manner, by hills, 
rocks, and hanging w^oods; the rocks rose 
in various shapes, some from banks of 
wood, and altogether the scene w^as strik- 
ingly picturesque. There was, however, 
it must be confessed, more of beauty and 
romantic grandeur about Teghadow than 
of real comfort, having, as the doctor ob- 
served, been wofully neglected. The size 
of some of the apartments in the castle 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

however, as well as furniture they retained, 
proved its having once been a place of 
magnificence ; and much as the doctor af- 
fected to despise any thing of the kind, it 
was evident he took pride in pointing out 
the numerous portraits of his ancestors, 
that hung in the chief sitting-room. 

A few days after the arrival of the party, 
as Rosebud and his friends were convers- 
ing, one evening after dinner, on various 
matters — " There was a time, I believe, 
doctor," observed Mr. Macdonnel, rather 
suddenly, " when you would have sold 
your chance of the lands of St. Cathala a 
bargain?" 

" Why, yes, Mac, I believe so; for, 
with all your scheming, I believe you 
would hardly have had the modesty, had 
a chapman been referred to you for my 
title, to have induced him to believe there 
was any great chance of his succeeding to 
them during his natural life. At one time, 
Donaghue, there were no less than nine 
between me and the castle and lands of 
Teghadow. There were— but no matter 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

who there were, they have all vanished 
before me, without my exactly knowing 
how, and here I am, the last representa- 
tive of a family that was not altogether 
undistinguished in its day. What I went 
through, owing to the unkindness of those 

But it's no matter now, they are gone, 

peace be with them ! I bear no enmity to 
their memories; and instead of trying to 
excite your indignation, Donaghue, for 
Mac knows the family history already, by 
reverting to past grievances, will endea- 
vour to amuse you, by giving you some 
account of this here place, as our friend 
poor Jonathan says. 

" You must know then, that St. Ca- 
thala was a Druidess, who, soon after the 
arrival of St. Patrick in this country, was 
convertecT to Christianity, and founded 
this nunnery, of which she became abbess, 
and where she died. The place continued 
to flourish till the dissolution of religious 
houses, in the time of Henry the Eighth, 
when it shared the general fate. What 
the particular services of my ancestors 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

were, I cannot take upon myself to say ; 
but that they were of some consequence, 
may be fairly presumed, I conceive, from 
the anecdote that is to follow. On the 
suppression of monasteries, numerous were 
the suitors to Henry for grants of the lands 
belonging to them. On one of the days 
set apart by the king for taking into con- 
sideration the various petitions for these, 
sir Hannibal Rose, my ancestor, happened 
to be in waiting, and who, however he 
might have lent himself to advance the 
claims of others, had never yet been allow- 
ed, by his modesty, to advance one of his 
own ; I say, he was in waiting, when sud- 
denly the eyes of Henry became steadfast- 
ly fixed upon him, a circumstance that the 
capricious temper of his royal master did 
not render very agreeable to him, who, as 
we all know, was more feared for his bad 
actions than loved for his good ones. After 
undergoing this evident scrutiny for some 
minutes, with no very easy mind, he was 
motioned to approach the table at which 
the king was seated. On his obeying — 



104 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

* Sir Hannibal,' said the sovereign,/ how 
is it that you, who have fought, and bled, 
and pleaded for us, have allowed us to 
nearly forget your services, when the 
power of so annply rewarding them has 
occurred? I grant, however, that a king 
should never need to be reminded of what 
he owes a faithful servant ; from this mo- 
ment, therefore, consider yourself trans- 
planted into the rich lands of Teghadow, 
attached to the dissolved monastery of St. 
Cathala, in Ireland, on this one condition, 
that you henceforth allow the family name 
to be Rosebud, instead of plain Rose, 
though a name to be liked, if it was for 
nothing else but being that of a flower 
that always brings sweetness to your idea, 
and was the badge of two royal houses ; 
but I choose the addition of bud to the 
flower, having ever considered it an em- 
blem of the human heart, that however 
internally lovely, still needs kindness and 
favour to make it expand to full perfec- 
tion.' 

" Such, O'Brien, is the tradition pre- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 105 

served in our family. The royal grant 
was a noble one ; but I am sorry to say, I 
believe very little benefit will now accrue 
from it to your humble servant — a sad 
race has gone before me; but, hang care, 
let the worst come to the worst, I still 
have fifteen shillings a-day, and a bachelor, 
with some old walls to shelter him, may 
contrive to live upon that." 

" I wish we could say you were sure of 
half that out of Teghadow," observed Mr. 
Macdonnel, producing a rental ; " but 
what by mortgages here, and mortgages 
there, the property may almost be con- 
sidered a nominal one. However, there 
are some bond obligations, the judgments 
on many of which have not, as we call it, 
been kept alive ; so that, if you choose to 
take advantage of this circumstance " 

" For what?" interrupted Rosebud; 
" perhaps to be the cause of making some 
innocent people go without a dinner, that 
I may have a little more money to spend, 
perhaps on idle vagaries, or put up in my 
F 3 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

strong box. No, Mac ; as my agent, you 
are doing your duty to mention every 
thing to me ; but still, as a man not ut- 
terly contaminated by your honest profes- 
sion," and he laughed, " were I to profit 
by your hints, I am convinced you would 
deem me a scoundrel. We'll take an ear- 
ly opportunity of examining into every 
thing appertaining to Teghadow ; what is 
fair, that is, what my conscience makes 
me consider so, shall be allowed ; but, of 
course, nothing else, for I delight in 
the punishment and disappointment of 
knaves." 

" Very fair — very fair indeed." 
" And now," resumed the doctor, " put 
up your papers, my good fellow, and a 
truce for the present to business; I will 
give you a sentiment, old as the hills, but 
that appears apposite at the moment — 
' May the honest heart never know dis- 
tress!" 

Donaghue, now considering himself fix- 
ed for life in Ireland, naturally wished to 
attain a greater knowledge of the country 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

and the people than he had yet acquired : 
he almost blushed when he thought of its 
being yet to seek ; but he was not altoge- 
ther to blame; the strong and early preju- 
dice that had been excited in his mind 
against both, had prevented — but he check- 
ed himself whenever the reflection occur- 
red, from the consideration of the person 
who was to be blamed for the circum- 
stance. The present he conceived a fa- 
vourable opportunity for acquiring what 
he wished, and justice, both to himself 
and others, rendered him anxious for ; for 
how, without knowing the actual value 
of land, could he decide about his own 
property; or how, without a perfect in- 
sight into the characters of the natives, de- 
termine what confidence was to be reposed 
ill them ? He soon found that the infor- 
mation he was solicitous for was not quite 
so easy of attainment as he might at first 
have supposed — that, in short, the common 
Irish were not formed for evasion without 
reason, particularly when a stranger came 
among them, whom at once regarding 



108 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with suspicion, they, in consequence, an- 
swered in such a manner, so indirect and 
roundabout, as, according to his temper 
or motives for the questions addressed to 
them, were sure of either provoking or 
amusing him. 

Donaghue, however, persisted in what 
he had undertaken, feeling that if no other 
benefit resulted from it, it at least, at times, 
diverted his thoughts ; and there was often 
a weight of wo upon his heart, that ren- 
dered something of the kind necessary. 
In one of his long rambles one day by 
himself, for his companions were now very 
much engaged in business, a heavy shower 
drove him into a cabin for shelter. The 
family were all thrown into a bustle on 
his entrance, by their eagerness to provide 
his honour with a seat; a little white- 
headed boy was the person who succeeded 
in getting him one, which as Donaghue 
accepted, he threw him some halfpence, to 
lay out with a wretched old woman, that 
was passing at the instant with a basket 
of gingerbread. After a few observations 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 109 

to the woman, on the family by which she 
was surrounded, he proceeded, as usual, 
on entering such places, to address some 
inquiries to the man. — " Whose land is 
this you live on, my friend?" he began. 

The man, as if perplexed by the ques- 
tion, scratched his head for some time 
without replying ; and then — " His ho- 
nour's, honey ; who's else should it be ?" 

"What's his name?" 

"Ah, then, please your honour, is it 
squire Power you'd be asking about? 
Faith and troth, it's himself we haven't 
seen this many a long day." 

" Is it from Mr. Edward Power you 
hold your farm ?" 

" Arrah, Nelly, who is that ould man 
who comes here, and a black sight, I am 
sure, he is to us, looking after the rint ? 
sure it's not Michael Kelly, Patrick 
O'Shaughnessey, nor yet Tim Flaherty ! — 
Faith, your honour, there's so many of 
them coming for it, that we don't know 
what they are called." 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" How much land do you hold in your 
own hands ?" 

" That's, please your honour, how many 
barrels of potatoes I'll get out of it ?" 

" No, what number of acres do you 
rent, and, in general, men of your condi- 
tion ; and what do you pay an acre ?" 

" Oh, then, any how, it's we that are 
well taxed for the praties; what with the 
landlord's rint, and the money to that ould 
rogue of a proctor, and father INIurphy's 
dues, the devil a praty we eats that's not 
a lump of gould !" 

" Do you consider the ground about 
here good?" He was interested in the 
question, as it very much resembled that 
about Altoir-na-Grenie. 

" Is it, please your honour, the bog, or 
the mountain, or the midway ?" 

" No, I mean in general, what, one with 
another, may be considered worth an acre?" 

" Oh, as to that, please your honour, se- 
ven times more nor any body, that could 
help it, would give. There's a good bit 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

here, to be sure, and a good bit there ; but 
the devil a good bit they'll give any of us 
if they can help it, though they'll have the 
rint snug enough from us." 

Donaghue gave up asking any farther 
questions on the subject he was anxious 
about, convinced that the inquisitor-ge- 
neral himself would not have succeeded in 
obtaining a direct answer where he was. 

His attention was now attracted to the 
door, where the little boy to whom he had 
given the halfpence was striving, with a 
broomstick which he had got, and with 
which he was hitting them most unmer- 
cifully on the head, to keep out three pigs 
and a whole swarm of poultry, that, at- 
tracted by the steam of the hot potatoes 
the good woman was just pouring from the 
pot, into a large wooden bowl, for dinner, 
were endeavouring, with all their might, 
to make an entree. — " What's all this a- 
bout, my little fellow?" said Donaghue, 
rising, and going to him ; " how would 
you like to be struck on the head, in the 



112 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

way you are striking these unfortunate 
animals ?" 

" Sorrow take them !" said the boy, " if 
I didn't bate them this way, they'd be in, 
in spite of me, now that they smell the 
praties." 

" But why not put them up, in time, 
in their own place ?" 

" Eh !" said the boy, as if not well com- 
prehending him ; " sure there's no other 
place for them than " 

"Than this?" 

" Och, yes !" said the mother, " they 
come in at night, as nat'rel as the childer 
themselves." 

" Good Heavens !" exclaimed Donaghue, 
" and are you not afraid to let them be 
where your children are?" 

" Ah, sorrow bit ! it's not any harm 
they'd ever be thinking of doing them. 
There's old Grunty, that's as fond of them, 
as a body may say, as he is of his own." 

While this short dialogue was going on, 
the cock, despairing of getting in quietly, 
suddenly sprung up, and flew over the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 113 

boy's head, and the hens followed. The 
clamour and confusion that ensued, be- 
tween their triumphant notes of exaltation 
and attack on the potatoes, made Dona- 
ghue, after throwing some silver on the 
table, precipitately retreat from this scene 
of riot and wretchedness. 

But though Donaghue could not alto- 
gether obtain the information or acquire 
the knowledge he wished for, yet, as far 
as he could form a judgment, from what 
he saw and observed, he conceived the 
Irish, that is, the common Irish, by no means 
deserving of the character of thought- 
lessness and improvidence; that it is to 
the higher orders, men in the rank of his 
late father, such terms can, with propriety, 
alone be applied ; they, too often indeed, 
appearing to wilfully shut their eyes to 
the terrible consequences that must ever 
result from inattention to one's affairs; 
while those of an inferior description are 
patient of labour, frugal, thrifty, and in- 
dustrious; and though naturally choleric, 
yet cool, collected, and wary, in matters of 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

moment, particularly when their own in- 
terest was at stake. 

In tbeir superstition he was no ways 
concerned ; but he perceived, with regard 
to this, they were by no means behind 
hand with their neighbours, the Welsh 
and the Scotch, particularly the latter, as 
firmly believing in banshees, fetches, and 
the good people, as they style the fairies, 
as the others do in wraiths, brownies, and 
second sight. With regard to their bi- 
gotry, he conceived it a delicate matter to 
interfere in ; with all due deference to the 
opinions of others, he could hardly avoid 
thinking it a dangerous thing, without 
there was a positive hope and prospect 
of their complete conversion, to at- 
tempt to weaken a faith that kept them 
under the control of men of piety and 
learning, who, having an interest in the 
country, it was natural to suppose would 
exert their influence to render them good 
and peaceable subjects. He had heard of 
many instances of restitution and atone- 
ment made, through the power of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

priest over them, and this was a circum- 
stance that had great weight in making 
him view the matter in the light just 
mentioned. 

Rosebud, after some days close attention 
to business, got so completely sick of it, 
as suddenly to decide on postponing, to a 
future day, the further investigation of his 
affairs ; and, by way of making himself 
amends for what he had gone through, 
proposed a trip to Killarney, after which 
he promised to accompany Donaghue to 
Altoir-na-Grenie, and fix his quarters with 
him for the winter. Neither of his com- 
panions made any objection ; it was vaca- 
tion time with Mr. Macdonnel, and Do- 
naghue fancied he found relief in change 
of scene, and, besides, had long wished to 
see the romantic beauties of this place. 

The doctor, being a good-natured man, 
felt greatly for the wretchedness he saw 
about him, and which, from his long ab- 
sence from the country, struck him more 
forcibly than it had ever done before, and, 
in consequence, gave notice to the poor 



116 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tenantry, that if any of them required any 
thing of him, or had any complaint to 
make, they were to take advantage of the 
short stay he proposed making at Tegha- 
dow, to let him know. 

Three weeks passed away, and no one, 
either as suppliant or complainant, appear- 
ed ; and on the very morning they were 
setting off on their excursion, JMr. Mac- 
donnel was congratulating the doctor on 
the contented, satisfied tenantry he had, 
so unlike other landlords, when a whole 
troop of ragged, miserable-looking fellows, 
appeared advancing to the house. — " Good 
God, John !" demanded the doctor, with 
his usual quickness, of the servant who 
was in attendance at breakfast, and in a 
tone that evidently implied, had the hour 
been any other than it was, he certainly 
would have been alarmed by their appear- 
ance, " who are these men, or what can 
their business at Teghadow be ?" 

" They are your honour's tenants, who, 
hearing of your being about going, are 
come to pay their respects to you," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

*' Then do you go out, John," cried the 
doctor, not displeased at the compliment, 
" and give some whiskey among them, 
with my grateful thanks for this proof of 
their attachment, and an assurance, that, 
as soon as ever I return, I will see them, 
but Vv^hich time will not permit now, as 
the hour is late, and we have a long stage 
to go before night." 

That there was something more in their 
visit than Mr. John had chosen to inti- 
mate, Mr. Macdonnel was perfectly con- 
vinced, permission to ask being seldom 
neglected by an Irishman of their descrip- 
tion ; though it is a well known fact, they 
never, if possible, solicit a favour till such 
time as they conceive there may be some- 
thing likely to prevent its being duly 
weiglied ; at the scene that followed, there- 
fore, however he was amused, he was by 
no means surprised. 

On the doctor and his friends appearing 
at the hall-door, they w^ere received with 
loud cheers, much to the surprise of Rose- 
bud, who imagined these visitors had ei- 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther by this time retired, or were regaling 
themselves in the kitchen. Finding, how- 
ever, they had arranged themselves at 
each side of the hall-door, contrary to his 
expectations, he addressed a few words to 
them, expressive of the happiness he felt 
at finding himself the landlord of tenants 
so respectable, as to have no want or 
grievance to complain of, doubtless owing 
to their peaceable and loyal conduct; and, 
kissing his hand to them, was stepping 
after his companions into the chaise, when 
a pull by the skirt of the coat, that nearly 
brought him on his back, prevented this, 
and made him turn round, in extreme 
rage, to demand who the fellow was that 
had taken such a liberty with him ? 

" Ah, then, please your honour," cried 
the offender, a great, tall, gaunt-looking 
fellow, " it's the first time I was ever look- 
ed upon as a spalpeen, from my edication 
and manners. Faith, and it's myself that 
was always reckoned to do the thing, 
whatever it was, iligintly and ^mteelly. 
But look round, your honour, on the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 119 

handsome set of fellows that are waiting 
your honour's pleasure ; and when your 
honour's informed I am diligated by them 
to address your honour, I think you will 
acknowledge I cannot be the spalpeen you 
took me for, any how." 

'• Well, what am I to understand by 
this ?" demanded the doctor, but little ap- 
peased, being the last man in the world 
who could endure any undue liberty being 
taken with him, or being put out of his 
way ; " what is your pleasure, sir ?" 

" Och! oh hone! your honour, I hope 
the day may nivercome, when your faith- 
ful humble servant, or the likes of him, 
can brag that things are at their pleasure. 
As for myself, 'tis little that I want, or 
rather will ask, from your honour — al- 
though, blessed St. Patrick knows, how 
great my ?iiczssities are — for my business is 
chiefly about the craters here." 

" Why didn't you and they attend me 
within the specified time, sir? I gave due 
notice when I meant to depart; it was 
your business, then, if indeed you have 



120 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

any with me, to have come before, not 
when 1 am just setting off with my friends, 
and my steward has departed for Dublin, 
who alone could tell me whether I was 
right in paying any attention to you, be- 
ing totally ignorant myself about you all." 
" Plase your honour, there's a cure for 
all things, be they ever so bad, under the 
sun, save death, as, I dare say, your ho- 
nour well knows; so that the ignorance 
your honour bemoans I shall soon disperse, 
by the light I shall throw upon the seve- 
ral cases of these your honour's poor te- 
nants. But it's first niciss^ry to shew, 
and which I think I can do to your ho- 
nour's entire satisfaction, that it was not 
out of any perverseness on their parts, or 
a wish not to attend to the notice issued 
by the deputy, they did not come sooner, 
but entirely out of complaisance — * For,' 
says I to them, ' boys,' on hearing your ho- 
nour's kind message, ' it would be the 
height of ill breeding in us to break in, 
full gallop, upon his honour, with our 
complaints, when he is quietly intertain- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 121 

ing and enjoying himself with his friends, 
just as if we thought of ourselves before 
him ; so, instead of being guilty of such 
rudeness^ let us patiently wait till his ho- 
nour is on the wing, and then he won't 
mind a little interruption." 

" You are very much mistaken," said 
the doctor, by no means satisfied with this 
explanation ; " I must have been the best 
judge myself of the time I thought best 
to see or receive any of you ; I therefore 
hold your present conduct, in intruding 
upon me at such a moment, highly repre- 
hensible." 

" Ah ! then I hope not, your honour ; 
or, at least, that you won't continue to be 
angry at it, for we did all for the best, 
and the great king, Brien Boru, were he 
living, could do no more nor act to the 
bist of his judgment, more especially as, if 
there be any blame, it must all light on 
my showlders, since it was I that advised 
ivivy thing. On hearing that the chaise 
was come to take your honour away, the 

VOL. II. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

boys came crowding round me with the 
news ; so, says I — ' Boys, this is the mo- 
ment to take his honour flying ;' and off 
I brought them, undertaking to spake for 
them myself." 

" You were vastly obliging truly," said 
Rosebud ; " and pray, may I ask what 
you have to say for them ?" 

" Oh, your honour, that's soon explain- 
ed ! — Boys, give his honour three cheers, 
and then I'll begin." 

The boys obeyed, and their spokesman 
then taking a paper out of his hat, after 
looking at it for a moment — " Come hi- 
ther, Pat Kennedy," he cried, " and put 
your best leg foremost to his honour." 

Pat made a scrape, as he took off his 
hat with a sheepish air, and the other thus 
proceeded — '' Paddy, an please your ho- 
nour, has twelve childer " 

" I have thirteen," whispered Pat, giv- 
ing him a twitch by the sleeve. 

" Arrah, be asy, Pat ! how can you 
make that out ?" 

" Don't you know the way Biddy is in?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

" Och, botheration ! is it after reckon- 
ing your chickens you are before they are 
hatched? — Poor Kennedy, please your 
honour, has twelve childer, and another 
on the stocks, which he is in daily ixpec- 
tation of having launched. — Faith, Paddy, 
there are so many of you, I can't rimim- 
ber every thing — what is it you want from 
his honour?" 

Paddy hung his head, and said nothing. 

" Arrah, Pat, is it bashful you're get- 
ting? Come, spake out bouldly; don't 
you see his honour is only waiting to see 
what you want, to grant it, long life to 
him !" 

" Only lave, plase your honour, to take 
a little turf out of your honour's rick." 

" A modest request enough," said the 
doctor. 

" So off with you, Pat," cried the other, 
" and be sure you pray for his honour the 
longest day you have to live, for letting 
you have what you want so readily ;" and 
off scampered Mr. Kennedy. 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Ned Rooney's the next. — Arrdh ! 
where are you, Ned ? is his honour to be 
kept waiting all day for such spalpeens P 
— Och ! here is poor Ned, snug enough all 
the time alongside of me. — What's that 
you tould me you wanted, Ned, child ?" 

" Only a little grass for a cow, to give 
the childer a little milk with their praties." 

" Modest enough, as his honour says. 
Step aside, Rooney, and let Terence 
O'Loughlan shew himself to his honour. — 
Terry, boy, what's that you'd be after ax- 
ing for ?" 

Terence seemed abashed. 

" Ah ! then, Terry, any how, you are 
the last man of all the ^mants that I had 
any notion would be sheepish — a man like 
you, that has had the honour of spaking 
to his countryman, ^meral lViU\ngioi\\ 
didn't you present the gun, Terry, when 
the gineral tipp'd the cock of his hat to 
you ? Tell his honour how you and the 
other Kerry boys knocked the brains out 
of the Frenchmen's heads when they got 
tired of sticking them !" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

" I don't want to hear any of his ex- 
ploits," said the doctor, angrily ; " but I 
must observe, my friend, that you seem 
to be carrying on the war just as you 
please, and that, if not intending to knock 
out my brains, you are, at best, going on 
in a fair way to confuse and bewilder 
them, so that I mayn't know what I am 
doing." 

" Arrah! is it me, your honour " 

But an immoderate fit of laughter pre- 
vented him, for some minutes, from pro- 
ceeding in his vindication of his honesty. 
" Why then, upon my sowl, your honour 
made me laugh, you looked at that mo- 
ment so funny, just like your cousin Phe- 
lim, into whose shoes you have stepped ; 
he had just such a trick of curling up his 
nose when he was vexed." 

" Let me have no more of your tricks," 
cried Rosebud, still more angrily ; "I'm 
not to be losing the day in this manner. — 
What is it you want, Mr. O ?" turn- 
ing gruffly to the fellow for whom the 
spokesman had been just pleading. 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" O'Loughlan, plase your honour. — Ah, 
then, Terry, is it yourself that has been 
keeping his honour waiting all this time, 
to know what you want, and be hanged 
to you !" 

" I want only, plase his honour, a few 
barrels o^ praties ^ 

"Very well, Terry, very well!" pushing 
him behind, and dragging forward another 
man, a most miserable-looking ragged crea- 
ture — " Plase your honour, this is Andrew 
Denny, the best ball- player, hurler, wres- 
tler, jig-dancer, bird-catcher, and what not, 
in the barony — ain't you, Andy ? Oh, but, 
by the powers, Andy, how could you have 
the impudence to come before your law- 
ful landlord, his honour, in such rags and 
tatters, any how ?" 

" Why, then, upon my conscience and 
sowl, and that's as good as if I had bibled 
it, the devil another rag has Andy but 
what he has now on his own back." 

" Very fair, very fair. — Plase your ho- 
nour, that's honest enough of Andy ; you 
see he has put all the rags he could find 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

on his own back, to pay his rispicts to 
your honour, leaving his wife and childer 
quite naked. — But it's some covering, I 
suppose, Andy, boy, you'll be wanting 
from his honour, for the good woman and 
the gassoons T 

" Why no," replied Andy, " we don't 
much mind the back, so the belly is full." 

" What food do you want from me, 
Mr. Denny ?" 

" Turnips, plase your honour." 

" Turnips !" repeated Rosebud, in much 
surprise ; " what, is it to feed your wife 
and children on turnips?" 

" Oh ! plase your honour, let Andy alone, 
he knows well what he is about ; there's 
not a man on the estate lives better than 
Denny and his family, let what will suffer 
by it, the hares and the rabbits — don't 
you, Denny ?" 

Denny looked sly, and was quickly 

pushed back to make room for 

?* Hold ! hold !" interrupted the doctor, 
no longer able to command himself; " this 
is carrying the joke too far ; I'll allow no 



128 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

more of these fellows to be intruded on 
me. Yet, before I depart, I desire to 
know who it is that has taken the liberty 
of forcing so many of them on my notice?" 
" All fair, very fair, your honour ! Why 
then, your honour must know, that poor, 
and low, and dijicted, as I appear, yet still 
I am the legal discindant, in a right line, 
of Aod Dubh, called, by his familiar 
friends. Black Hugh, king of Leinster, 
whose mortal part rests from all the trou- 
bles and perplexities of this bad world in 
the chapel here of St. Cathala, his soul, I 
trust, in glory. It has often been hit in my 
teeth by the boys, what a spalpeen I was 
for not taking up arms to recover my king- 
dom. For preventing this I had many rea- 
sons. In the first place, my great ancestor, 
Aod Dubh, king of Leinster, preferring a 
heavenly crown to an earthly one, actually 
abdicated his throne, taking upon himself 
the poor habit of a friar, in a cell belonging 
to this monastery of St. Cathala; and in 
the next, I think it would be going against 
his intentions, if any of his discindants 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

thought proper to resume what he, for the 
sake of his sowl, deemed it better to resign. 
I was born to labour, and sure the morsel 
I earn with the sweat of my brow, is 
sweeter to me than a fine feast would be, 
if I thought it got at the price of the pre- 
cious blood of any one. Striving for 
greatness in this world, would, I know, be 
wicked, and hoping for it folly ; but for 
glory in the next I may labour, with every 
hope and assurance of obtaining it, if I 
but do my part in this." 

" Give me your hand, Hugh," said the 
doctor ; " I believe you are an honest fel- 
low, though an impudent one ; but your 
high descent excuses that. But is there 
nothing you require for yourself ?" 

*^ The saints best know what my nicis- 
sities are," replied Hugh ; " but it does 
not become me to specify. This much 
respict is due, I think, to my blood, not to 
put me on a level with these spalpeens, 
but leave it to my own discriMon to sup- 
ply them." 

" Royal sir !" said Rosebud, with a 
g3 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sneer he could not suppress, though not 
displeased with the fellow, " I shall con- 
sider my poor place honoured, if it can 
supply your wants, convinced that, with 
the usual generosity of exalted personages, 
in attending to them, you will not forget 
the rights of others. So good-by, Black 
Hugh; and, as the dons would say, to 
whom 'tis evident from your complexion 
you are allied, may you live a thousand 
years !" 

" I respectfully beg to set your honour 
right on one point — my name. Many ge- 
nerations ago, one of the c?2.yrmdants of 
Aod Dubh, finding his father l ad brought 
down the vengeance of Hen . en on the 
house, for taking up arms tr- recover the 
throne of Leinster, left his curse to any of 
his posterity who should give the name of 
Black Hugh to any of their children. My 
own father was a proud, overbearing man, 
and, in spite of all his relations, would 
give me the forbidden name ; but in a 
way, being also cunning, that, he has been 
heard to say, the devil himself couldn't 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 131 

take hould of it; I was therefore christen- 
ed Aod Hugh — Duhh Black-— FeYix Ma- 
carty !" 



CHAPTER V, 



■Who can paint 



Like nature ? Can imagination boast, 
Amidst her gay creation, hues like these?" 

On the arrival of the party at Killarney, 
the weather not being considered favour- 
able for a water excursion, they repaired 
to lord Kenmare's park, whence they had 
an enchanting view of the scenery. But 
we shall not attempt to particularly touch 
on what has already been so often and so 
well described : suffice it, the expectations 
of the travellers, highly as they were rais- 
ed, were more than answered by the union 
of the sublime and beautiful, the awful 
and the picturesque, they beheld here; 
and that they justly conceived it worthy 



132 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the closest attention of the philosopher, 
the naturalist, the bard — in short, of every 
description of men of taste. 

" Ornamented as the lakes are with is- 
lands, and encompassed by mountains, re- 
sounding with waterfalls, and reflecting 
on all sides the umbrageous trees and ever- 
greens that adorn its banks ; while the fer- 
tility of the rocks is truly astonishing, 
where the trees, too ponderous for their 
feeble roots, are often bent towards the 
earth, and flourish, thus distorted ; and 
equally curious the different species of 
shrubs, springing from the same decayed 
stock, which, no longer able to put forth 
leaves itself, serves as a nidus to others ; 
while the power of echoes is here, in par- 
ticular, shewn in an extraordinary degree, 
as they not alone multiply and reiterate 
the most common sounds, but swell them 
to an astonishing degree, particularly un- 
der what is called the Eagle's Nest, and 
from the foot of Glena'a, resembling a con- 
tinual cannonading, then dying away ; and, 
after a short period, the explosion is heard 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 133 

again, reverberating, from the opposite 
shores ; but when the music strikes, it re- 
freshes the ear with the softest melody, 
which is distinctly reechoed in harmoni- 
ous sounds from the opposite hills. In 
short, altogether, the lonely situation, the 
romantic forms of the rocks, the various 
fruits of the hanging woods, the stupen- 
dous mountains that surmount and limit 
the view, raise a combination of such de- 
lightful sensations as are not to be de- 
scribed." 

Long before this, it was concluded that 
Jonathan and Mrs. Bentley were on their 
way back from this here to that there 
country of their own, as they styled it. 
Our party therefore, in rambling about 
the park, were much surprised at encoun- 
tering them, with two other persons ; but 
it seems, at a little distance from the capi- 
tal, the stage in which they had taken 
their departure for the Lake met with an 
accident, which obliging them to return, 
just as they were entering Dublin, they 
met with a Mr. Wakefield, a linen-draper. 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in Ratcliff Highway, who had come over 
on business, and his wife, very particular 
friends of theirs, and who, by promising 
to accompany them on their excursion, if 
they would defer it a little, had induced 
them to do so. 

Rosebud, from the amusement he ex- 
pected to derive from the circumstance, 
was not sorry at the rencounter ; and hav- 
ing repeated the invitation previously 
given them to Teghadow, and extended it 
to their friends, they immediately became 
one party. 

After passing a few days very agreeably 
to all, the doctor having his joke, Dona- 
ghue his lonely ramble, and the others ex- 
cellent fare, they all prepared to set out 
for Teghadow. 

In the small village where they stopped 
for the night was a curious old church, po- 
sitively asserted to be built in the time of 
St. Patrick, and as positively that a kind 
of hollow in a stone, known by the name 
of St. Patrick's bed, in the upper part of 
one of the old towers, was occasioned by 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

the pressure of the saint's body, and who, 
from having made it his couch while so- 
journing in this part of the country, had 
communicated a virtue to it, that rendered 
it efficacious in the cure of almost all com- 
plaints. 

This marvellous story was no sooner 
communicated to Mrs. Bentley and Mrs. 
Wakefield, than one recollected being sub- 
ject to a pain in her shoulder, and the 
other to a toothach ; and, in a word, it 
was finally agreed that they should try 
the virtue of this miraculous couch ; but 
without letting their intentions be known 
to any one, save their own immediate com- 
panions. They were not, however, able 
to manage matters so secretly, that what 
they intended did not reach the ears of 
Rosebud, through the medium of the cor- 
poral, who, with his own servant, had at- 
tended the party to the Lakes, and it im- 
mediately suggested playing a trick, with 
the assistance of his informant. 

Night was fixed on for the experiment ; 
and as the hour approached for their re- 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pairing to the church, Rosebud, wrapping 
himself in a sheet, over which a quantity 
of beads was hung, with a mitre, made by 
the corporal, of stiff brown paper, on his 
head, and an ozier in his hand, in place 
of a crozier, preceded them to it, accom- 
panied by Cormick, and hid himself in the 
reading-desk. 

On the arrival of the ladies, attended by 
the husband of one and the friend of the 
other, as without them they feared ven- 
turing, a kind of altercation took place, as 
to which should first ascend to the blessed 
couch, it not being allowed that more than 
one should repair to it at a time; to end 
this, lots were drawn, and the lot falling 
on Mrs. Wakefield, she stepped forward, 
with apparent good resolution, to the little 
tower, accompanied by her husband, with 
a lantern, to keep watch at the foot of the 
stairs till her return. 

Hardly was she gone, ere — " What's 
all this about, Mrs. Bentley ?" demanded 
Wilkinson, internally grumbling at being 
kept from his rest, and not perfectly com- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 137 

prehending the affair ; " for I declares it's 
monstrous cold here." 

" Why, as well as I can make out, from 
these here people," replied the lady, " there 
was a conjurer once lived here, who made 
a bed, something likes the celestial bed, I 
suppose, that I once heard talk of in Lun- 
noUy that cures all manner of disorders by 
going into it." 

" What was his name?" asked Jona- 
than. 

" Why, they calb him St. Patrick." 

" Oh. he was a saint then instead of a 
conjurer!" 

" Oh, that's all one to these here wild 
Hirish, they don't know no difference be- 
tween them, being, as you see, not of the 
religion oiwe in England." 

" Is he dead or living?" demanded Jo- 
nathan. 

" Why, I protests I don't know that, 
as I never asked." 

"I wonder you didn't, Mrs. Bentley, 
for if he is living, God knows what he 
mayn't make you pay for coming here, 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

without knowing the usual price of ad- 
mission." 

" Fell, to be sure, so he may ; but I'll 
tell you how t;e'll manage ; t;e'll slip away 
just as quietly as we came." 

Hardly had she said so, when a rustling 
was heard behind them ; both stared, be- 
gan to tremble, and, without further ce- 
remony, retreated to the door, and effected 
their escape, leaving their friends to finish 
the adventure by themselves. 

Rosebud, stealing softly from his place 
of concealment, advanced towards Wake- 
field, as he stood shivering and shaking, 
with a lantern in his hand, at the foot of 
the tower, wondering what vagary this 
was of his wife, to come to a church at 
such an hour, for the lady had not thought 
proper to explain her reason to him. At 
the sight of such an apparition as Rosebud, 
he began instinctively to draw back, till 
he could get no further, being pent up in 
a corner, when, finding he was stopped — 
*' Who are you, for Heaven's sake?" he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

exclaimed, in a tone of terror ; " and what 
is your business with me ?" 

" Nothing in the shop way ; for my own 
country furnishes what you deal in, in 
Ratcliff Highway; but my name is St. 
Patrick, and I am come out of kindness 
to your wife, who is now above in the old 
tower, so give me the lantern, and do you 
go back to the inn, and regale yourself 
with a glass o^ poteen, while I have a little 
chat with her." 

Wakefield, who was a little thick-head- 
ed, and from never having troubled him- 
self much about the saints of his own 
country, could not be supposed to know 
a great deal about those of another, imme- 
diately concluded that the figure before 
him was an old sexton, whose name was 
St. Patrick, and who, from having heard 
of the frolic of the ladies, had come, as 
perhaps he conceived in duty bound, to 
keep watch in the church, while they re- 
mained, or in hopes of getting a little mo- 
ney from them, and, under this persuasion, 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gladly resigned the lantern, and retired, 
being extremely tired of waiting. 

"Philis! Phillis! I say, Phillisr cried 
the apparition, as he approached her, " what 
are you doing, stretched at your full length 
in my soft bed ?" 

Phillis, who, like the rest of the party, 
knew not who or what St. Patrick was, 
whether alive or dead, a saint or a sinner, 
sat up, in some little alarm, at this inter- 
rogation ; and having, in a mild, modest 
tone, explained what had brought her there, 
concluded by hoping it was no ofrence. 

" No; but my bed, Phillis, will be of 
no service to you, except you confess your- 
self to me, and promise to repent of all 
the faults I shall point out. You are a 
woman, Phillis ; six-and-twenty years have 
rolled over your head, and you are a fe- 
male still, and will continue one, I very 
much fear, to the hour of your death. 
You cried when you entered this world of 
wickedness, without knowing why, and 
it is a custom you have persevered in, to 
the great annoyance of your husband. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

When a child, you knocked your dolls 
about, and wished yourself a girl — when 
a girl, to be a woman — when a woman, to 
be married — and But, no, I hope no- 
thing more, Phillis. But come, if you 
hope to derive any efficacy from the virtue 
of my bed, you must answer these ques- 
tions. Are you envious ? Do you ever 
speak ill of your neighbour? Or are you 
ever cross, whimsical, and fretful to your 
husband, without rhyme or reason? and 
take my word for it, except you can say 
no in reply to them, as sure as my name 
is Paddy, you are not in the least better 
than others." 

Phillis coloured and hesitated, and seem- 
ed greatly perplexed, but still without 
making an effort to open her lips. 

" Oh, well, I see how it is," said the 
saint. " Silence gives consent. Oh, fie, 
Phillis ! I didn't think you, who looked so 
demure, were given to backbiting your 
neighbour and scolding your husband ; but 
you blush so, I perceive, there is some hope 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLF. 

of you, SO tell me what religion you pro- 
fess?" 

" I am, sir, one of the new lights." 
" New lights ! bless me, what do you 
mean? You cannot mean you are a gas 
light ! But come, I thought the light I 
introduced into this island many years ago 
sufficiently clear and bright to shew people 
the way they should go, without needing 
any other to guide them. Hearken to me, 
Phillis, and take the advice of a friend, by 
returning to the path it illumes, or, in 
other words, give up the tabernacle for 
your parish church. My light will never 
want grace, because it's the real light; but 
God knows whether so much can be said 
for the others, that are starting up every 
day in every corner, stolen and pilfered 
from me. But, hark! I scent," here he 
gave a loud cough, as a signal to the cor- 
poral, who replied to it properly, " the 
morning air, and hear the cock crow ! So, 
adieu, Phillis !" appearing to vanish from 
her view as he spoke, but very gallantly 
leaving the lantern behind him, that she 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

might find her way down the stairs, and 
out of the church, without risk to her neck. 

Rosebud was so much amused with the 
Enghsh party, that he made it a point with 
Donaghue, they should, for a few miles at 
least, occupy part of the coach with them, 
in which they travelled. Donaghue might 
have objected, but that just as they were 
setting off, they encountered a counsellor 
O'Reilly, an acquaintance of the doctor, 
living in the direction they were proceed- 
ing, and whose horse having got lame, oc- 
casioned a seat to be offered to him in the 
chaise. 

It soon became evident to the two gen- 
tlemen, from the titterings of the ladies, 
that they had some very amusing secret 
between them, which they only wanted a 
pretext to disclose. The doctor seeing 
this, and guessing what it was, soon fur- 
nished them with what they required, by 
inquiring whether he might ask what made 
them so merry that morning? 

" Oh dear, I'm sure I can't tell," gig- 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gled Mrs. Wakefield; " but Mrs. Bentley 
can." 

" Me ! not I indeed ; I shouldn't have 
thought of such a thing. You, who saw 
all, can best tell all." 

" Well then, doctor, did you ever see 
St. Patrick?" 

" No, ma'am ; I never had that plea- 
sure." 

" Dear, then I am sure you would have 
liked him wastly if you had, he's such a 
pleasant, respectable kind of old gentle- 
man." 

" And something like the doctor him- 
self, didn't you say?" said Mrs. Bentley. 

" Yes, only for his great long beard, like 
the tail of a cow, and the cap, with horns, 
on his head, and a dress like a white sheet, 
or a tablecloth, about him, but vich, I 
suppose, is the way the sextons in this here 
country dress, for the purpose of striking 
people with greater respect and w^eneration; 
and I must say it has that effect." 

" And pray where had you an opportu- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145 

nity of seeing this strange figure?" de- 
manded the doctor gravely. 

" Now don't for to be going to tell Mrs. 
Bentley, I desire you again," giggled Mrs. 
Wakefield, " for," affecting to blush, " I 
shall be so ashamed if you do." 

" Pooh !" cried her husband, " I dare 
say by this time every body knows where 
you were ; and if 'tis the custom to go into 
that bed, what the deuce signifies your 
having done so?" 

" Why, not to you, I dare say," retort- 
ed the lady, somewhat nettled by the tone 
in which he spoke ; " it seems as if 'tv»^as 
no odds to you indeed where I went, or 
with whom I staid, by your leaving me 
alone, in such a lonely place, with a strange 
man. I'm sure, if he wasn't a saint by na- 
ture, as by name, there's no knowing what 
might have happened." 

" Oh ! as to that, my dear, I saw he was 
too old to be afraid of him ; and, besides, 
I was shaking so with the cold, that I 
couldn't by no means have stopped no 
longer." 

VOL. II. H 



146 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" What are you two talking about ?" 
cried Wilkinson, with distended eyes; 
" sure you don't pretend you saw St. Pa- 
trick, whom I heard all about while I was 
warming myself at the kitchen fire, after 
coming back from the church !" 

" Pretend !" repeated the lady, with 
much indignation ; " well, I am sure, I 
can't but be obliged to you for that word, 
Mr. AVilkinson, meaning as much as that 
my husband and I don't tell the truth. I 
say I saw St. Patrick, and heard him too; 
and good advice he gives, telling me to go 
back to my own parish church, and not 
mind the Tabernacle no more; and telling 
me how they have been stealing grease 
and fat, and what not, from him, poor gen- 
tleman, for these new lights they are put- 
ting up every where." 

" Oh, you must have been dreaming, in 
that there hod kind of bed you lay down 
on !" replied Jonathan. 

" Well, so she may," said her husband ; 
" but, as to St. Patrick, I saw him myself." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 147 

" Well, if you did, it was a ghost you 
saw." 

" A ghost!" cried Mrs. Wakefield, 
again repeating his words ; " do you think 
I don't know the difference between a 
ghost and a man? didn't 1 feel him, as 
well as see him and hear him ? for when 
he was civilly putting down the lantern, 
by the side of the bed, that I might find 
my way out of that old ruinous place, my 
hand hit against his, and it felt just like 
any one's hand ; and did ever any one hear 
of a ghost having flesh on its bones ?" 

" Well, and how old might he seem ?*' 
asked Jonathan. 

" Why rather an elderly gentleman ; 
and, I dare say," added her husband, " but 
for his beard, he wouldn't look by ten 
years as old as he does." 

" Well, I believe if you were to take a 
great many tens off his age, besides one 
ten, it wouldn't make no great difference 
in his looks," observed Jonathan. 

" I don't know that, for, I must say, I 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

never saw a man, of his seeming age, brisk- 
er or nimbler." 

" His seeming age !" repeated Jonathan, 
in a tone of astonishment ; " why, Billy, 
do you know what you are saying ? But, 
come, come, don't be thinking of hum- 
ming us any longer in this way, saying 
you never saw a man of thirteen hundred 
years old brisker or nimbler ! it's not be- 
cause your w^ife has said a foolish thing 
you are to uphold her in it." 

" I declare I am going to faint !" ex- 
claimed Mrs. Wakefield, "I am — oh! oh! 
dear, dear, is there no one who will step 
forward to take my part against such a 
brute, to go for to sinuate 'tis all a hum 
what I have been saying of St. Patrick ! 
Surely, as a lady of honour, a respectable 
married woman, whose word would be 
taken at any shop in RatchfF Highway, I 
shouldn't be used thus." 

" ]My dear, don't wex yourself," said her 
husband. 

*' Yes, but I will ; and I'll never forgive 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 149 

you, if you don't prove and uphold your 
having seen St. Patrick yourself." 

" Well, my love, so I will." 

" No, I am not your love — I'll never be 
your love again, if you don't punish that 
savage, that bear there, who has had the 
audacity to give me the lie before such 
genteel company." 

" I protest I meant no offence," said Jo- 
nathan, somewhat alarmed by seeing 
Wakefield clench his fist, and cast a wick- 
ed look at him ; " I only meant to say it 
was morally impossible you could have 
seen a man of St. Patrick's age, being at 
least, as I have already said " 

" Oh dear ! oh dear ! how cruelly, how 
shamefully I am used !" again exclaimed 
the lady ; " to be contradicted again, 
without that poltroon, whom I once called 
husband, but never will again, not taking 
my part ! but I'll take my own, since no 
one else will ; I'll not suffer myself to fall 
to the ground without an effort to save 
myself;" and as she spoke she was mak- 
ing a dart at poor Jonathan, when one of 



150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the springs of the coach gave way, in con- 
sequence of a violent jolt over a rocky- 
part of the road, and the party were fairly 
tumbled upon one another within it. 
The chaise, of course, immediately stop- 
ped, and they were speedily extricated, 
without any personal injury, from their 
unpleasant situation. 

A good inn was close by, and here they 
ordered dinner, in order to give time for 
the repairing of the carriage. To fill up 
the interval, counsellor O'Reilly proposed 
taking them to view the pleasure-grounds 
of a gentleman in the neighbourhood, who 
had actually converted a once barren plain 
into a wilderness of sweets ; after which 
he must bid them adieu, he said, to cut 
across the country to his own residence, 
distant about ten miles, and whither he 
gave them a pressing invitation to accom- 
pany him, but which was declined. — " This 
place fully proves what wonders can be 
effected by money, aided by industry and 
perseverance," he said, as he conducted them 
through it, and still continued to expatiate 



TRx\DlTION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

on the various objects that came under 
their consideration, till they approached 
the margin of a beautiful lake, with an 
island in the centre of it, embellished with 
w^ood, a neat cottage, sheep, cows, and en- 
livened by inhabitants, all busily engaged 
at work, when, suddenly stopping, in a 
tone of the wildest astonishment — " Why, 
how is this 1" he exclaimed — " that island 
— that island was not there a week ago !" 

" Not a week ago !" repeated Rosebud; 
" why, man, are you serious ? If as you say, 
your friend, then, must have the lamp of 
Aladdin at his command, for nothing eke 
could have enabled him to place it there 
in such a time, and state of perfection." 

" By G — d I see how it is !" cried Mr. 
O'Reilly, with something of distraction 
in his manner, in drawing nearer to the 
edge of the lake, " that island was mine ! 
cattle, trees, cabins, and inhabitants, all 
mine ! and I am robbed ! actually robbed, 
by G — d ! this is one way of embellishing 
one's grounds, to rob another man of his 
property for the purpose .'—Holloa ! Darby, 



152 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I say !" to an old man on the island— 

" holloa, Darby, and be d d to you ! 

what brings my ground here? what, in 
the devil's name, has brought you here — 
and the cabins — and the trees — and the 
cows — and the sheep — and the " 

" Faith and troth, your honour," replied 
the old man, drawing as close to the wa- 
ter's edge as he could, " it must be by en- 
chantment, otherwise how could the land 
lave its own rightful owner in the lurch, 
and slip quietly away, with us all on it, to 
become the property of another? When 
we went to bed the other night, we were 
tinants of your honour, and when we got 
vip in the morning, we were tinants of 
squire O'Flaherty !" 

" You lie, you rascal ! you never were, 
nor ever shall be ! Take back my ground, 
you old villain, with all my property, or 
I'll have you hanged !" 

It appeared that a bog, on the estate of 
Mr. O'Reilly, had given way, and part of 
it, stocked and adorned as already describ- 
ed, been floated into Mr. O'Flaherty'a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 153 

lake, being intercepted by a sand-bank, 
on which it quickly settled, forming a 
most romantic island. Mr. O'Flaherty 
was, at first, very much pleased with th^ 
embellishment his lake had received ; but 
when he found the price at which it had 
been obtained, the bog, in its progress, 
having covered several acres of fine mea- 
dow land, he conceived he had infinitely 
more reason to grieve for its acquisition, 
than his friend, Mr. O'Reilly, had to de- 
plore its loss. 

When the fury of Mr. O'Reilly had aht- 
tie subsided, he could not help joining in the 
laugh, which his insisting on old Darby's 
taking back his land had excited against 
him. — " It's a match," said Rosebud, " for 
the assertion of a man of thirteen hundred 
years having been seen last night, brisk 
and nimble, and looking remarkably well 
for his years ; but the fact is, we are all 
apt, no matter what our country, to blun- 
der, when we speak without reflection, so, 
when we laugh at one another, let it not 
be done by way of ridicule." 
h3 



154 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The journey ended without any farther 
mishap or incident worth mentioning; 
and, after passing a few days within the 
truly hospitable walls of Teghadow, the 
English travellers departed, highly de- 
lighted with the entertainment experienc- 
ed there, and protesting, of all things, they 
should like to pay another visit to Jf ire- 
land, they had met with so much kindness 
and civility in it. 



CHAPTER VI. 



r**s#»*^.#^ 



" Oh, happiness! our being's end and aim, 
Good, pleasure, ease, content, w hate'er thy name ; 
That something still, which prompts th' eternal sigh, 
For which we bear to live, or dare to die; 
Which still, so near us, yet beyond us lies, 
O'erlook'd, seen double, by the fool and wise ; 
Plant of celestial seed, if dropp'd below. 
Say in what mortal soil thou deign*st to grow ?" 

On the departure of his English visitors. 
Rosebud, having leisure to look about 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

him, soon discovered that the king of 
Leinster had not been idle, neither his 
companions, during his absence, or allow- 
ed the permission granted to them to sup- 
ply their wants to remain a dead letter on 
record. The doctor, wild with rage, at 
what he termed their rapacity and roguery, 
summoned his steward, and demanded 
how he had permitted such proceedings? 

" Plase your honour, the business was 
done before my return from Dublin ; on 
discovering the depredations that had been 
committed, I instantly set about finding 
out the offenders. This proved no hard 
matter — each was ready to confess how far 
he was concerned in what had been done; 
but for which they pleaded — that is, that 
schemer. Black Hugh, as they call him, 
for them — that they had your honour's 
authority for the freedom they took with 
your honour's property." 

The doctor now became sensible of the 
imprudence he had been guilty of, in giv- 
ing such power as he had done, to a fellow 
with whose character he was totally unac- 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

quainted; but the consciousness that he 
was chiefly to blame himself could not 
prevent his finding fault with another; he 
attacked the steward furiously, accusing 
him of not having given him that proper 
information, on his arrival, that would 
have prevented or guarded him against 
what had occurred ; and finally concluded 
by commanding that rascal, that had so 
imposed upon him, to be sent to him im- 
mediately. 

This royal personage soon made his ap- 
pearance, perfectly cool and collected, and, 
with a smiling countenance, welcomed his 
honour back to the castle of his forefathers. 

The rage into which Rosebud was al- 
ready thrown by a knowledge of this 
man's conduct, was now augmented to 
such a degree, by what he conceived his 
brazen impudence, as scarcely to leave him 
the power to articulate. — " You — you — 
b — b — you black rascal, what a game you 
— you — you have been at in my absence !" 

** Och ! the sorrow one, whoever tould 
your honour such a thing of your humble 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

servant grossly belied him ! The devil a 
game was played at Teghadow, nor more 
nor. that, in the ball-court of St. Cathala's, 
since you went away." 

" What, do you intend to add mockery 
to robber}^ you scoundrel I I suppose 
you'll be telling me you were legally au- 
thorized, by your birth, to commit the 
depredations you and your rascally com- 
panions have done on my property ; but 
I believe you'll soon be convinced to the 
contrar}% soon find you'll not have the 
reason you imagined to congratulate your- 
self on having winged me so neatly, as you 
call it, flying; for I shall see, my friend, 
whether I cannot send your majesty, with 
your faithful followers, in order that you 
may be furnished with a genteel court 
elsewhere, on a distant voyage." 

" Well, to be sure, your honour can see 
if you like it ; but if your honour is only 
patient for a bit, I think I'll explain mat- 
ters to your satisfaction. When your ho- 
nour so generously granted the permission 
you did, says I — ' Here's great confidence 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

reposed in me,' for I took all upon my own 
showlders, * and if I don't see that it's not 
abused, to the injury of his honour, I am 
not the man I represented myself to be.' 
The best thing, therefore, thinks I to my- 
self, I can do, is, to let the boys have their 
full fling, by which means they'll be im- 
prist with gratitude for his honour's kind- 
ness, that sorrow bit of them ever after 
but will consider his intirist as their own, 
and scorn to aoa any thing more of him 
they don't honestly earn ; so away I let 
them go to work. — ' Well, boys,' says I, 
* you see what a generous landlord you 
have, how he has let yez all have your 
wants; and, after this, won't yez be un- 
grateful spalpeens if you don't do some- 
thing in return ?' So, with that, they all 
came crowding about me, and — * Arrah, 
Felix,' says they, ' what w^ould you be at ? 
if 'tis spilling our blood for his honour, 
won't we do it ?' — * Och, botheration,' cries 
I in return, * is it him, a loyal man, that 
has been fighting in the wars, that would 
be after wanting you to do that ! But is 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

there nothing else to be done, boys ? isn't 
all the hedges, and ditches, and fences, about 
Teghadow, torn, and tattered, and destroy- 
ed ; and wouldn't it be a ginteel, as well 
as a grateful return, in us, for his good- 
ness, to set heart in hand to repair and re- 
store them while he's away, so that, when 
he comes back, he may find a snug tight 
place of his own about him, and see that 
his kindness hasn't been thrown away 
upon a parcel of spalpeens ?" 

Mr. Felix spoke so plausibly, that, in 
spite of himself, as he proceeded, the ire 
of Rosebud subsided ; and when, on going 
over the ground, he really found that what 
he had stated was correct, or rather, allow- 
ed him to infer, he could not avoid think- 
ing himself amply repaid for what had 
been taken from him, and that Black 
Hugh had manifested no little shrewdness 
in the affair. 

A few days after, in looking over his 
steward's accounts, the detection of a great 
deal of dishonesty occasioned his speedy 
dismissal, to the great joy of the poor te- 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nan try, over whom he had been a complete 
tyrant. Rosebud had no sooner got rid 
of him than he thought of his friend Hugh, 
and finding, on sending for him, that he 
was fully competent to fill his place, im- 
mediately appointed him his successor. 

The necessity of revisiting his paternal 
home had never once been lost sight of by 
Donaghue ; but so many painful feelings 
were awakened when he thought on the 
subject, that, as long as possible, he wish- 
ed to put off the dreaded moment ; but 
a letter received just at this juncture from 
old Cormick, representing the imperative 
necessity there was for returning, without 
further delay, to Altoir-na-Grenie, if he 
did not wish to let every thing go to de- 
struction, some of the tenants, believing 
he never meant to come back, not caring 
what depredations they committed on the 
land, induced him to make up his mind 
without further hesitation on the matter; 
and accordingly the doctor, as previously 
promised, began to prepare for accompa- 
nying him, when, on the very eve of de- 



s 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

parture, some relatione of Rosebud, whom 
he could neither think of offending or dis- 
obliging, arrived, most unexpectedly, at 
Teghadow, to pass some time there with 
him, thus putting it entirely out of his 
power to keep his promise with Donaghue. 
Which was most disappointed, it would 
be impossible to say; however, it could 
not be helped ; and trying to derive con- 
solation from the hope of shortly meeting 
again, the doctor pledging his word that 
the moment he was at liberty, he would 
follow to Altoir-na-Grenie, they parted. 

Donaghue proceeded on his journey on 
horseback, attended by Cormick, the dis- 
tance to Altoir-na-Grenie not being too 
great to permit him to reach it before 
night. His heart sunk within him as he 
set out ; the idea of the cold, the dreary, 
the desolate home, that awaited him, chill- 
ed his very soul ; in vain his reason repre- 
sented to him, that the trials he groaned 
under were such as, in the course of na- 
ture, we must all expect — nothing could 
alleviate the anguish they awakened, for 



162 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

there was no hope of the forlornness they 
occasioned being ever relieved. In study, 
to be sure, he could take refuge from his 
dreary solitude, or the bitter thoughts it 
excited; but without a being to impart 
the sentiments, the ideas it gave rise to — 
good God ! would not this chilling consi- 
deration be sufficient to prevent his ob- 
taining any consolation from it ! 

A feeling of impatience would some- 
times occur at the view of his situation — 
the thought of being doomed to waste the 
bloom, the vigour, the glowing energies 
of youth, in inaction and obscurity ! But 
still, as it arose, it was checked by the re- 
flection of being himself the cause of what 
he had to deplore — that, but for his own 
folly, to call it by no harsher name, he 
might now have been possessed of the 
loveliest of her sex, of esteemed connex- 
ions, of social friends, of fortune, conse- 
quence, all that the heart of man covets or 
desires, or deems essential to felicity. 

But, essential to his interest as was his 
return to Altoir-na-Grenie, yet, had he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 163 

not been assured that Miss Erin neither 
then was, nor would probably be again in 
the neighbourhood, nothing could have 
induced him to return to it, since, after 
what had occurred, the thoughts of death 
were not so dreadful to his imagination 
as the idea of their ever meeting again. 
'Tis true, there was a fine seat, he under- 
stood, in it, belonging to her late uncle, 
and, of course, now to her father; but, 
judging of sir William Erin by the gene- 
rality of men of rank and fortune belong- 
ing to the country, he did not deem it 
very likely that he would relinquish the 
splendour and gaieties of the English ca- 
pital, where he had learned he now was 
with his family, for a residence in Ireland. 
But her absence from the neighbourhood 
made no alteration in the determination 
he had long formed, of keeping himself in 
utter seclusion whenever he returned to 
it. He knew how anxious his own im- 
mediate people were for his continuing 
amongst them at Altoir-na-Grenie, and he 
meant to make their absolute silence as to 



164 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his being there the positive stipulation 
for gratifying them. He certainly did not 
apprehend being inundated by civilities; 
what had occurred during his last stay 
there prevented any apprehension of the 
kind; but vulgar and impertinent curio- 
sity might be excited, and he shrunk from 
being an object of it. 

He tried to divert his thoughts, by pay- 
ing attention to the various objects that 
came under his view as he rode along. 
Autumn was already advanced, and had 
begun to shed her rich gleams over the 
varied prospect, and he endeavoured to 
amuse his mind, by trying to count and 
classify the colours which she employs to 
diversify nature, and distinguish her reign 
from that of the other seasons; but he 
made little progress, for his ideas would 
wander. The scenery too was on too 
grand and extensive a scale to come under 
the confined control of human calculation ; 
it was one indeed on which the mind could 
have dwelt with rapture, and there was a 
period when Donaghue's would have done 



THADITION OF THE CASTLE. l65 

so; but he was now in too perturbed, too 
disconsolate a state, to permit him to do 
so; dread and heaviness hung upon his 
soul, and a thousand times he wished he 
could have retarded his journey. With 
all the slowness of reluctance he proceeded; 
still he got on, and tow^ards the decline of 
day found himself near its termination. 

The last rays of the sun had, by this 
time, faded from the mountain-tops, and 
in all around, the coldness and the bleak- 
ness of the approaching season seemed al- 
ready displayed; at least, such were the 
melancholy feelings of Donaghue, that 
every thing seemed to wear a mournful 
hue to him. Slowly as he had previously 
been proceeding, he now tried to proceed 
more slowly, by every moment checking 
his horse, and making some pretext for 
entering into conversation with his atten- 
dant; in consequence, ere they had got 
much farther, sudden darkness fell around 
them ; and Donaghue, well aware of the 
road before them, began to regret what he 
had done, from the danger he feared it 



166 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

might be the means of exposing them to. 
— " What's to be done, corporal ?" he de- 
manded ; " would it not be better for us to 
alight, and seek shelter in a cabin till the 
moon is up?" 

" Och ! no, your honour, for that would 
be making it so late before we got home, 
for the moon won't be up till late to-night; 
besides, I could go every step of the "way 
blindfold ; and, indeed, 'tis all the same, to 
be sure, as if I were now, it's so pitchy 
dark." 

They accordingly went on, when, after 
advancing some way further, Donaghue, 
suddenly checking his horse — " We must 
proceed cautiously, corporal," he said, " for 
I hear a fall of water." 

'' Then we must be pretty near the en- 
trance of the pass, please your honour." 

" I rather think we have already gain- 
ed it, for my horse steps unsteadily, and, 
from his trembling, seems much alarmed." 

" That's because he is English, and not 
accustomed to the soft bogs of ould Ire- 
land. I'd recommend your honour to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 167 

alight, and exchange with me, when you'll 
be taken safe and sound, without fear or 
trembling, into the court-yard of Altoir- 
na-Grenie ; for this ould boy of mine, from 
being born and bred in Ireland, knows 
there's no use in expecting smooth roads 
every where, so he puts down his legs 
carelessly and bouldly, and is never sur- 
prised, wherever they may go; if it's a 
good bit he meets with, all is well — if a 
bad, to him equally so; and as to its being 
light or dark, 'tis all one to him, being 
quite blind. So, come, your honour, take 
him, and I'll warrant the Englishman 
won't be half so much afraid, when he 
finds he's following his friend; for, though 
they didn't seem to like one another at 
first, I think, somehow, they have got fond 
of one another lately." 

" No, thank you, corporal, I think I 
may venture to intrust my safety to my 
own horse." 

They continued to advance, when, sud- 
denly — " Hark ! hark, your honour !" ex- 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

claimed the corporal, " is not that a shot 
out of the king's great fowling-piece ?" 

" I think so." 

" And another — and another ! then we 
are not far from sweet Altoir-na-Grenie." 

Hardly had he announced this, ere the 
moon began to shew herself, rising above 
the summits of the mountains, and pre- 
sently after gaining the high arch of hea- 
ven, poured a flood of light and glory 
upon this nether scene, that was at once 
solemn and beautiful. Donaghue for a 
few minutes could not withdraw his eyes 
from the beauteous planet ; when he did, 
the ivy-capped towers, and ancient battle- 
ments, of Altoir-na-Grenie, appeared rising 
to his view. — " The lonely refuge for my 
sorrow," sighed Donaghue, as his eyes fell 
upon the dreary pile, and thought, with a 
mingled sensation of awe and melancholy, 
of the ages that had rolled over its ancient 
head, since first it was illumined by the 
chaste light that now partially fell upon 
it, and of the tales of suffering and of trial, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

if endued with the faculty of speech, it 
might be able to unfold. 

But his entrance within its gloomy gate- 
way obliged him to try and collect him- 
self. Nothing could exceed the rapturous 
joy of old Cormick and his wife at seeing 
him. — " And, now that you have come 
back, 'tis always to be staying here, I 
hope ?" cried the latter. 

Donaghue shuddered, and felt his very 
soul chilled at the thought. — " But she 
does not know my feelings — she cannot 
enter into them !*' he sighed ; " to her it 
must be the most delightful place in the 
world, for here she has her husband and 
her son, and she feels not the want that I 
do — the want of the bosom friend !" 

He started, on entering the parlour, 
from mistaking a dark great-coat that lay 
on one of the chairs, for the mourning 
cloak in which he had attended both his 
parents to the grave. — " Here I am," he 
cried, on being left a few minutes to him- 
self, while supper was preparing for him, 

VOL. II. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" returned to my home. But what a 
home ! without a being to sympathize in 
my feelings — what a contrast to that of 
past times, when I had the first, the most 
exalted of women, the tenderest of mo- 
thers, to receive me, sooth any care that 
might have obtruded, by her mild coun- 
sel, or check any impatience ! I thought 
at the moment I knew her value — I 
thought, from the persuasion of this, that 
I could not more affectionately love or re- 
gard her, and that, of course, whenever it 
was the will of Heaven to deprive me of 
her, I should be most unhappy; but I 
now find, that 1 knew not, in reahty, the 
value of the jewel I then possessed, because 
I never seriously calculated upon its loss; 
when I returned to her, it was with a cer- 
tain degree of delight — when I parted 
from her, my feelings were not equally af- 
fected with sorrow, because I bore in mind 
it was a loss I could repair, whenever I 
thought proper to come back to home. I 
have come back — but to what a home! 
without kindred to welcome me, without 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

friend to break in upon the dull monotony 
of my solitude, without hope, without 
prospect of revolving years changing my 
destiny — of to-morrow not being as to- 
day — and so on, till the grave yawns to 
ingulf me and my cares for ever !" 

Old Cormick, on whom the manage- 
ment of every thing had devolved at Al- 
toir-na-Grenie from the time of Donaghue's 
departure, lost no time, the day after his 
arrival, in laying a statement of his affairs 
before him. We shall not, at present at 
least, enter into a tiresome detail of these ; 
suffice it to say, that, on a close examina- 
tion into them, Donaghue found, that 
from the terrible manner in which the 
property had been managed, the valuable 
farms that had been let on leases, renew- 
able for ever, for a mere nothing, hardly 
seventy pounds a-year remained for him, 
out of this once splendid inheritance, that, 
through so many generations, had de- 
scended to him. 

How his father could have been induced 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to act in the manner he did — how so wil- 
fully to shut his eyes to the ternble con- 
sequences likely to accrue, from so entire- 
ly giving up his property to the manage- 
ment of others, filled him with the deepest 
astonishment ; for to this last circumstance 
it was clearly evident to Donaghue, all 
the ruin and distress that had been brought 
upon the family was owing. Had Cal- 
laghan, the steward, been living, he would 
have been tempted to have called him to 
an account for his, he was convinced, ne- 
farious conduct ; but he was gone to his 
dread account elsewhere, and all that re- 
mained for the unfortunate youth to do, 
whom his villainy had thus despoiled, was 
to endeavour to bear with fortitude and 
patience the evils he had brought upon 
him. And to what was he doomed by 
this detection of his villainy, but what he 
had before anticipated, seclusion from the 
world ; for all idea of reentering it was 
now indeed rehnquished, since he saw he 
could not mix in it in a manner suitable 
to his birth. But so subtle is the nature 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

of hope, SO unknown to ourselves does it 
lurk and linger in the innermost folds of 
the heart, that till this moment, it was 
now evident to him, from the withering 
pang he felt, he had indulged a delusive 
belief of not being positively compelled to 
the relinquishment he now saw inevitable. 

"But, your honour," said Cormick, sud- 
denly breaking in upon the deep abstrac- 
tion into which he unconsciously fell, 
" now that you have looked at the bad 
side of things, won't you turn to the good ? 
It will go hard with us, I think, if, with 
what remains of the land of Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and the stock upon it, we don't 
contrive to make matters comfortable." 

" The stock!" repeated Donaghue; 
" what stock ?" well aware that all that 
had been on the estate at the time of his 
father's death had been seized and sold — 
" I fancy, in mentioning my poor charger, 
and Terence's horse, all the cattle I possess 
is enumerated." 

" Pooh ! pooh ! no such thing, your ho- 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLK. 

nour; does your honour forget Billy, and 
Judy, and Nelly, and Caty, and " 

" Oh, nephews and nieces !" said Dona- 
ghue, answering in that kind of vague tone 
that manifested his being lost in thought. 

"Oh, no, your honour!" as if a little 
vexed, was the reply ; ** but the horses, 

and cows, and goats, and 1 give them 

these names by w^ay of distinguishing 
them from one another." 

" Well, and what have I to say to 
them ?" demanded Donaghue ; " they are 
not mine." 

" Oh, but they are !" cried the attached 
old creature, in a sudden transport of af- 
fection and grief, throwing himself at the 
feet of Donaghue, and embracing his knees; 
" they were bought out of the money 
earned in your honour's family, under the 
best of masters, the best of mistresses, rest 
their souls in peace and glory ! and they, 
and I, and mine, and all that we have 
amongst us, are your honour's." 

*' Now, now, I begin to comprehend 
you," said Donaghue, with much emotion, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

and forcing him to rise ; " some other 
time, my dear old man, we will talk fur- 
ther on the subject. My first concern must 
now be, to obtain the corporal a good si- 
tuation, for it would be a pity his youth 
should be wasted here. As I rather think 
my friend, Mr. Melville, has, by this time, 
returned from abroad, with his uncle, I 
shall write to him to-morrow about him: 
and now, my good friend, retire; it will 
be better for us both that you should do 
so at present." 

Donaghue turned aside to a window, to 
conceal the emotion that impeded his ut- 
terance; but the old man perfectly com- 
prehended what he meant, and, still more 
affected, instantly withdrew. 

The scene indeed had powerfully re- 
called to the harassed mind of Donaghue 
the affecting one that had taken place be- 
tween him and this faithful servant at the 
house in London, on the examination of 
his affairs there, while yet the corpse of 
his father lay unburied, under a hired roof, 
to protect it from indignity. He shud- 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

dered at the review, and was almost won- 
dering how he had been able to support 
himself under the horrors that there en- 
compassed him, when the door was thrown 
open, and the corporal almost rushed into 
the room. — " What's the matter?" ex- 
claimed Donaghue, a little surprised by 
his appearance, but at the same time has- 
tily turning to a table, as he spoke, where 
some papers were scattered, in order to 
have a pretext for avoiding his eyes, for 
not even by him did he like the traces of 
sorrow he was aware were still visible on 
his countenance to be seen — " What's the 
matter? Nothing unpleasant, I hope, has 
happened ?" 

" Yes, your honour, something very 
unpleasant has happened." 

" Indeed !" cried Donaghue, somewhat 
startled by this declaration, and involun- 
tarily raising his eyes to him. 

" Yes, your honour. It can't but be 
unpleasant to a servant, who has lived 
from the day he was born with one mas- 
ter, served faithfully, by day and by night, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 177 

by land and by water, in peace and in war, 
to hear, all of a sudden, that he is to be 
turned off, made over to another, tran- 
sported as it were." 

" Good Heavens ! Terence, what do you 
mean by this wild declamation ?" 

" Mean ! haven't I just heard, from my 
father, that you are going to write to Mr. 
Melville to get rid of me !" 

" Now, Terence, how unjust is that re- 
proach ! Are not you sensible, if I had 
the power of retaining you with me, that 
is, of rewarding you according to your de- 
serts, I never would part with you ? Since 
I cannot promote your advancement in 
life, I should consider myself guilty of 
very reprehensible selfishness, in taking 
advantage of your attachment, to keep 
you with me. My friend, Mr. Melville, 
will have a double motive for interesting 
himself for you ; the knowledge he has of 
you himself, and of my anxiety about you. 
Take my advice, therefore, my dear Te- 
rence," pursued Donaghue, in a concilia- 
i3 



178 TRADITION OF THE CA^LE. 

ting tone, and laying his hand on the 
shoulder of the corporal, " and do not de- 
cline his services. In accepting the com- 
fortable situation I make no doubt he will 
procure you, you know you are neither 
banishing nor transporting yourself from 
this; occasionally you can return to isee 
how we are all getting on here, and how 
happy shall I be, and how happy will your 
poor parents be, to hear, from your own 
lips, that you are getting on well !" 

The corporal attempted to speak, but 
emotion choked his utterance; the muscles 
of his features swelled, and at last tears 
gushed from him. He dashed them in- 
dignantly away — " And it is- — it is you, 
Mr. Donaghue," as he was in the habit 
of calling him in early days, he said, or 
almost sobbed, " that have forced them 
from me ; and I could almost say it was a 
shame for you, for you know how you ai'e 
breaking my heart by speaking in this 
manner. I can't, to be sure, stay in your 
house against your will; but if I must 
quit, no one shall know where I go. But 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

you won't," he cried, suddenly seeming 
to recover himself, " I know you won't," 
turning with quickness on his master; 
" and I am a man again. I want nothing 
but to be let to stay with you ; for isn't 
my pension, God bless the king who gives 
it me, fine wages for me ! — more nor I 
should want to spend! So say the word 
— say the word, my dear master, that I 
am not to be driven away, and Terence is 
himself again." 

Donaghue could contend the point nb 
further. Unutterably affected by this 
strong attachment, he extended his hand 
— " And here," he said, " is my pledge, 
that, except you wish it yourself, you shall 
never leave me." 

Terence fell on his knees, in a transport 
of gratitude, and kissed his hand; then 
starting up, he ran from the room to con* 
ceal the tears he could not suppress ; and 
thus the scene closed between them ; and 
Donaghue found himself formally installed 
the master of Altoir-na-Grenie, with his 



180 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

affairs investigated, and his establishment 
settled. 

The winter set in early, and with more 
than usual rigour; but hardy, vigorous, 
and strong, its frost nor its snows would 
have prevented the adventurous foot of 
Donaghue from scaling the mountain or 
traversing the vale ; but there was a heart- 
lessness about liim, that hindered exertion. 
Independently of the common feelings of 
humanity, he took no interest in any thing; 
his lands had passed away into the pos- 
session of strangers, and he knew not who 
might claim or succeed him in the ancient 
towers that screened him from the world. 
In short, all appeared a blank to him ; and 
the chilling sensation communicated by 
the circumstance deadened the natural 
energies of youth, and extinguished, in a 
degree, the fire and animation of a vigo- 
rous mind. He did not, however, suffer 
himself to give way to this kind of list- 
lessness, or feehng of inanity, without 
sometimes struggling against it. He tried 
to reconcile himself to the idea of solitude^ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

by reflecting on the -advantages that often 
accrue from it, the temptations it removes 
one from, the cares it exempts one from, 
and the leisure and opportunity it affords 
man to dive into his heart, examine the 
thread of his destiny, and see how it is 
that his own errors have served to tangle 
and perplex it ; but this was not all — in 
such a range of country, how agreeably 
might he diversify it ! if, in no other way, 
would not the leisure it would give him, 
to watch the changing seasons, to watch 
them gradually stealing upon one another, 
and deepening and blending into each 
other, serve to amuse it? How delightful 
to see the first timid flowers of the early 
year peeping forth, to enamel again their 
native soil — to feel the winds of spring- 
abroad — to hear the voice of the turtle 
again in the land ; to see the blossom suc- 
ceeded by the fruit — the bright foliage of 
summer varied by the russet tints and 
golden gleams of autumn — the mists of 
autumn giving place to the bright blue 
bracing skies of winter! Besides, who. 



182 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that has not a perfect knowledge of rural 
scenery, can ever do perfect justice to the 
works of the poet or the painter, appre- 
ciate their descriptions, or enter into the 
feelings that awaken their enthusiasm? 
But it was on books he chiefly depended 
for relief from inanity and care; he still 
fled to them as a refuge from both ; and 
from the effect they produced upon his 
mind, he felt that the man who is endued 
with a taste for intellectual enjoyments, 
can never be considered truly miserable. 

A long continuance of frost was suc- 
ceeded by wet weather ; the westerly wind 
began to blow, and dashing the clouds it 
wafted on the summits of the mountains, 
with the vapours brought from the vast 
Atlantic, their contents inundated the 
country. All now indeed was a scene of 
gloom and dreariness ; the amusements of 
pasturage and the labours of agriculture 
were suspended, while the mournful dash- 
ing of the waves along the coast, the por- 
tentous noises which every change of the 
wind, and every increase and diminution 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 183 

of the waters, raised in this now-lonely re- 
gion, full of echoes, and rocks, and caverns, 
completely hurt the spirits and affected the 
imagination. 

Donaghue now almost entirely shut 
himself in his castle, except when some 
tale of distress allured him abroad to see 
proper assistance administered ; but with 
such precautions, persisting in his deter- 
mination of not letting his residence at 
Altoir-na-Grenie be known, that none dis- 
covered or suspected from whom the se- 
cret bounty flowed, that brought unasked 
relief 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER VII. 



" Not unfamiliar to mine ear, 
Blasts of the night ! ye howl, as now 

My shudd'ring casements loud 

With fitful force ye beat. 
Mine ear has dwelt in silent awe, 
The howling sweep, the sudden rush ; 

And when the pausing gale 

Pour'd deep the hollow dirge, 
Once more I listen, sadly communing 
Within me — once more mark, storm-clad. 

The moon, as the dark cloud 

Glides rapidly away, 
I deem that the voice of spirits dwells 
In their mysterious moans; in solemn thought, 

Muse on the choral dance. 

The dead men's jubilee; 
Hark ! how the spirit knocks, how loud, 
Ev'n at my window knocks — again !" 

DoNAGHUE loved to speiid an hour or 
two in the library before he retired for the 
night. It served more to compose him to 
seek that rest that tired nature needs, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

the common road of life is dark and 
dreary. Tlie familiar objects of human pur- 
suit too generally raise the sordid and 
troublesome passions; but in the pursuit 
of study all is noble, liberal, generous ; it 
drives from the thoughts all those low and 
mean considerations which were, during 
the day perhaps, excited in the mind by 
the worldly occupations necessity forced 
upon it, and which low and vulgar minds 
set a consideration on. To the man of 
philosophical observation the world ap- 
pears as a theatre, in which the busy ac- 
tors toil and weary themselves for his a- 
musement ; he sees the airiness of many 
objects that are pursued with avidity — he 
is acquainted with the false shew that sur- 
rounds him — he knows how short and un- 
substantial are the good and evil that ex- 
cite all the ardour of pursuit and dislike, 
and can therefore derive a degree of plea- 
sure from reflection, of which they who 
are deeply, and even successfully, inte- 
rested in them can never participate. 
As Donaghue entered this apartment, 



186 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his heart ever grew lighter ; he was imme- 
diately lost in an ideal world, or wrapt 
in the perusal of works that point out the 
road to endless bliss hereafter. On open- 
ing the door one dreary night, liis ears 
were assailed by a kind of uproar in the 
room, and his light nearly extinguished. 
As he cautiously advanced, he perceived 
the noise that had surprised him was oc- 
casioned by the swinging to and fro of the 
numerous shades of his ancestors that hung 
upon the walls; judges, bishops, generals, 
admirals, senators, ladies, shepherdesses 
and their sheep, all appeared in dire com« 
motion ; the great wigs seemed to be in 
danger of being lost, truncheons shook, 
admirals trembled, ladies wavered, all, in 
short, all seemed to be reanimated, and de- 
termined on quitting the stations they had 
so long held ; but Donaghue, at no loss to 
surmise the cause of this general agitation, 
soon put an end to it, by closing the win- 
dow that had, by mistake, been left open. 
Donaghue could not help dwelling a 
little on the incident ; and — " How often, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

perhaps, in real life," thought he, as he 
seated himself at a table by the fire, " did 
the originals of these shades need a friend- 
ly hand to compose and lead them back to 
tranquillity ! and how much did the fu- 
rious agitation of the recent moment re- 
mind me of those furious agitations that 
are so frequently excited in actual life, by 
clashing interests and petty animosities !" 
His eyes wandered over the pictures-— 
" What a numerous race," he sighed, "have 
gone before me! The brave, the busy, 
the beautiful, now only glowing on can- 
vas, and threatening, as if in mockery; 
and are those painted shadows all that re- 
main of beings that but a few short years 
ago were full of life, of motion, and of 
spirit ! * Oh that my eyes could behold 
them, as they sit dim in the clouds ! Of 
what are the skirts of thy robes formed ? 
Are they gone on their blasts, like sha- 
dows of mist? Whence is the stream 
of years! Whither do they roll along! 
Where have they hid their many-coloured 
sides ! I look into the times of old, but 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

they seem dim to my eyes, like reflected 
moonbeams on a distant lake." 

Donaghue took up a book, but the hur- 
ricane without distracted his attention; 
the whirlwind was up in the wood, win- 
dows flapped, torrents roared, and the sea 
heaved its weltering billows with terrible 
fury against the rocks. The birds that 
nestled in the ivy amongst the old battle- 
ments and towers, disturbed by the storm, 
came, attracted by the light within, flap- 
ping their wings against the windows of 
the library, to try and force an entrance. 
An owl at length succeeded in making 
one; and flying straight towards Dona- 
ghue, perched on the table by him, where 
he sat quietly, apparently staring at him. 

Donaghue could not help smiling, as he 
viewed its solemn visage. — " And did one 
believe in transmigration," he cried, " might 
not one be tempted to imagine, from its 
looks, that its little body enclosed the soul 
of some grave judge or bishop? Well, sup- 
posing one did, which of my ancestors 
should I be led to suppose had his spirit 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

lodged within it? Why, certainly, from 
the resemblance I think I trace between 
their countenances, that grave judge's yon- 
der; and so, my lord," he said, " in con- 
sideration of our being, perhaps, indirectly 
related, allow me to shew you a little at- 
tention," attempting, as he spoke, to 
smooth its feathers, which the storm had 
a good deal ruffled; but hardly had he 
laid his hand on it, ere, seizing one of his 
fingers, it gave it a most inhuman squeeze. 
" Upon my word, my lord," said Dona- 
ghue, when he had a little recovered from 
the agony this occasioned, " this is a very 
bad return for my intended kindness to 
your lordship, and a wide deviation from 
the golden rule of, I presume, your for- 
mer days, that of doing to others as you 
would have them do to you. However, 
you may perhaps dislike any freedom ; I 
shall not, therefore, in any way, run 
the risk of offending again, but leave your 
lordship quietly to the enjoyment of your 
own reflections, as long as you think pro- 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

per to honour my poor castle with your 
sage presence." 

The bird blinked at him for a moment, 
as if paying all due attention to what he 
was saying, and then, hopping from the 
table, proceeded to seek for itself a snug 
corner in another part of the room. 

Donaghue resumed his book, but still 
his attention wandered; he laid it aside, 
and opened his desk, for the purpose of 
re-perusing some of Melville's letters, who 
all this time, as we believe has been al- 
ready stated, had been travelling about 
the Continent with his uncle. In looking 
for them, his eyes fell upon a roll of dusty 
papers, which, in searching in an old chest 
for some vouchers belonging to the castle, 
he had found a few days before, and on 
discovering they were not what he wanted, 
was on the point of throwing them back, 
when some words in them caught his at- 
tention, and excited just a sufficient de- 
gree of curiosity to decide him on looking 
over them at some future time. Besides, 
what an indignity to the fair lady, whose 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 

production they were, to treat them with 
that contempt ! for the writing was evi- 
dently that of a female. 

Donaghue was at this instant in that 
kind of desultory humour, if the expres- 
sion may be allowed, that incHned him to 
think there could not be a better time 
than the present for wliat he yet intended. 
Accordingly, untying the faded ribbon 
that kept them together, he began to un- 
roll them. This he soon found was requi- 
site to do with caution, for between damp, 
and time, and moths, they were indeed in 
a very fragile state, insomuch as in many 
places to be completely mutilated, and in 
others hardly legible ; and Donaghue could 
not help smiling at the idea of the roll be- 
ing just such a one as was fit to find in an 
old castle. To commence the regular pe- 
rusal of it seemed, at first, too serious a 
business, for the papers were numerous 
and closely written, and for some time he 
kept turning them backwards and for- 
wards in a vague manner. At length — 
" This is silly," he cried ; " without a clue 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

it is impossible to comprehend them ;" and 
so, seeking for the commencement, after 
passing over several faded lines, he regu- 
larly began as follows : — 



" You tell me you are wild for this 
wonderful ghost story, connected with an 
old castle, and that, in such a solitary place, 
I can have nothing better to do, than to 
sit down and gratify your curiosity by re- 
lating it. A pretty observation truly! 
Some twenty or thirty years hence, in- 
deed, if you made it, I might probably 
allow the justice of it; but now, with 
somebody that shall be nameless here, and 
a whole host of handsome young men that 
are come down to spend their Christmas 

in the neighbourhood But as I like to 

be good-natured, I will forgive your sau- 
ciness, and endeavour to oblige you, if I 
can. If I can, I say, for, in the first place, 
I don't know whether I shall have patience 
to go on ; and, in the next, as I have ne- 
ver before tried my hand at putting a story 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 193 

together, whether I shall please myself, as 
I proceed, in which, or either case, 1 shall 
stop short, but not to raise your expecta- 
tions with any intention of ever resuming 
it a^ain ; so that, if not gratified, you 
at least will not be teased by a story like 
the king of Bohemia's and his seven cas- 
tles, never ending, still beginning. By- 
the-bye, have you read the work to which 
it belongs? I ask you, because it is so 
recently come out; somebody brought it 
over from London to me, and I was so 
charmed — uncle Toby and corporal Trim 
have really got my heart between them ; 

and as to the story of Le Fevre But 

to begin my own : — 

" Well then, to commence it, as my old 
nurse used to do her wonderful ones in the 
nursery to me, of kings and queens, good 
fairies and bad, distressed princesses, wan- 
dering knights, and enchanted and enchant- 
ing bears — Once upon a time, there stood, 
not a hundred miles from Altoir-na-Gre- 
nie, an old castle, that, in its pristine days, 

VOL. II. K 



194i TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was said to have equalled it in strength 
and grandeur, belonging to the once roy- 
ally-entitled family of O'Connor. How 
this family fell, like their ancient castle, 
into decay, boots not here to mention ; 
suffice it to say, that in solitary poverty 
liere lived in the year — — — 

J5 

Here there was an hiatus of some lines. 
Passing over it, Donaghue thus resumed: — 

"The old man's feelings at his altered for- 
tune were aggravated by its having forced 
him to submit to a separation from his son. 
Unable to give him an independence in his 
own country, he was compelled to let him 
seek one abroad, by taking up arms under 
a foreign standard, his religion interdicting 
any thing of the kind in his own country. 
Young O'Connor entered into the service 
of Spain ; he married in that country, and 
became the father of a lovely daughter, 
who remained to console him for the early 
death of her amiable mother. 

*' Years advanced. Old O'Connor found 
himself on the verge of the grave ; his pil- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

grimage had become a grievous one, and he 
was not sorry at finding it drawing towards 
a close; but his heart sunk within him, 
at the thought of its ending without be- 
holding his son again ; for neither age nor 
sorrow had deadened its natural feelings, 
and we love to indulge the idea of our 
eyes being closed by the gentle hand 
cf affection. He wrote to his son, to im- 
part — — — — — 

^__^ 5J 

Another chasm here occurred, and, after 
glancing over several defaced lines, Dona- 
ghue took up the story again as follows : — 

" The circumstances that compelled 
O'Connor, on obeying his father's sum- 
mons, to give up his commission in Spain, 
were not so much regretted by him as 
might have been imagined ; the warmest 
affections of his heart centered in his na- 
tive country. Besides, he was not with- 
out a hope, that, through some important 
services he had had the good fortune to 
render the English government while 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

abroad, his disability to enter its service 
might be overlooked ; or, at least, that if 
it were not, some slight provision might 
be made for him or his child. A memo- 
rial to this effect was drawn up; but, alas! 
unbacked by interest, of what avail were 
the claims it modestly set forth for atten- 
tion ! and O'Connor's long estrangement 
from Ireland, together with the loftiness 
of his proud spirit, on his return to it, had 

prevented his seeking — — — 

)> 

Here was another blank. Donaghue 
hastily passing it over, sought for the next 
connecting line ; for, though at the first 
mention of a ghost story, he had been very 
near throwing aside the papers, yet, as he 
proceeded, he had found a little degree of 
interest awakened, even by the name of 
the family. 

" The disappointment to which he was 
finally doomed was aggravated by the tor- 
menting uncertainty in which he had been 
long kept. * Hope deferred maketh the 
lieart sick, and suspense racks the spirit.' 



tilADITlON OP THE CASTLE. 197 

Oh ! why will man be so cruel to his fel- 
low-man ! is it not enough to refuse, to 
dash the cup of expectation from the qui- 
vering lip of anxiety ! Why must the bit- 
terness of refusal be heightened by the in- 
sult of neglect — the barbarity of trifling ! 
We often treat one another in such a man- 
ner, that it is enough to make one imagine 
we did not remember we were of the same 
species, travelling to the same goal, and 
all liable to the same changes and chances. 

" But, to proceed without further ser- 
monizing — but, as I was in for it, I thought 
I might as well try my hand at this also. 
Irritated and despairing, rankling with a 
sense of unmerited neglect and contempt, 
he returned to his dilapidated home, to 
brood over his disappointment, and try if 
he could devise any plan for the future. 

^' But his was not the only discontented 
spirit in the neighbourhood ; there were 
others also that had wrongs to complain of. 
In short, arising was in contemplation, and 
to obtain the aid of men of his description, 
inured to camps, and acquainted with mi* 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

litary discipline, was considered a matter 
of essential importance by the party. 
They had had their eyes for some time on 
O'Connor; the moment of irritation was 
regarded as a favourable one for putting 
his sentiments to the test, and accordingly, 
whilst yet his soul was all in a tumult at 
the treatment he had received, an overture 
was made him to become their leader. 
His resentment, not allowed to cool, was 
too keen to permit him to reject it, and 
ere he well knew what he was about, he 
found himself engaged in a desperate bu- 
siness. 

** One of the chiefs with whom he was 
associated was a youth of the name of 
Brennan. To this youth nature had been 
infinitely kinder than fortune, and perhaps 
this very circumstance, the kindness of 
one but aggravated his impatience under 
the cruelty of the other. To a quick and 
intelligent mind, a countenance of strong 
expression, and figure of commanding 
grandeur, he united, from the manner in 
which he had been brought up, all those 



I'llADlTION OF THE CASTI.E. 199 

qualifications that were deemed essential 
for the adventurers in former days, and 
without which indeed it was decreed that 
no soldier should be received amongst the 
national defenders of his country — a poe- 
tical genius, and a foot so swift and light, 
:as to allow of his treading on a rotten stick 
without breaking it. But the enjoyment 
of all these gifts seemed marred by a 
brooding and repining spirit, a rankling 
:and indignant sense of individual wrong 
and national oppression. His grandfather, 
the descendant, or rather representative, 
of one of those old Milesian families, whose 
-estates were wrested from them, to be be- 
stowed on Protestant retainers of the go- 
vernment, could never speak on the sub- 
ject with calmness ; and having had the 
entire bringing up of the boy himself, 
through the early death of his parents, 
took care to imbue him with all his own 
inveterate prejudices and violent animosi- 
ties. No wonder, then, that he should 
disclaim, as he grew up, all allegiance to 
Q, government he deemed at once unjust 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and usurping, or wish to extirpate what 
he was made to detest, from a belief of 
being oppressive. Gradually he became 
moody and melancholy, a seceder from so- 
cial enjoyments, and a frequenter of wild 
solitudes ; but not for the purpose of in- 
dulging delightful musings, or having the 
spirit of poetry kindled within him, by 
the contemplation of the dread magnifi- 
cence of nature, but of brooding over ima- 
gined injuries, and meditating wild and 
terrific plans of revenge. What he medi- 
tated he at last began to systemize; and 
by the time O'Connor had returned from 
his unsuccessful suit, regular associations 
w^re formed, and nightly meetings held. 

"' The object he had in view rendered 
Brennan incapable of regretting the dis- 
appointment sustained by O'Connor, and 
the anticipations he indulged from it were 
shortly verified. Hardly, however, had 
O'Connor consented to unite himself with 
the party, than, like the seduced spirit, 
Abaddona, he repented; not so much, 
however, perhaps, from any alteration in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 

the feelings that had incited him to the 
measure, as a gloomy presentiment of the 
horrors likely to accrue from what was in 
agitation. Rendered desperate by fortune, 
these, perhaps, on his own account, he 
might have disregarded ; but in his fate 
he knew his daughter's involved, and for 
her sake he wished he had taken a little 
more time for consideration. But the die 
was cast, the Rubicon crossed, having 
bound himself by oath to the party, and 
in consequence become the repository of 
their secrets, he conceived himself bound, 
by every tie of honour and generosity, to 
remain attached to them. In every re- 
spect, indeed, he had committed himself 
too far to recede ; his daughter, at the in- 
stigation of old Brennan, had been remov- 
ed to his abode, and he felt aware that it 
concerned her safety to let no appearance 
of wavering or repentance be seen in his 
manner. Dark and distrustful, it was to 
a doubt of his fidelity indeed was owing 
the wish of old Brennan to have her com-^ 
k3 



202 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mitted to his care, though he made his 
granddaughter's anxiety for her company 
the pretext. 

" His abode, the remains of an old rug- 
ged castle, on a rocky hill, bare of almost 
every convenience, and exposed to all the 
fury of the ocean, was sufficient to chill 
almost any imagination. The heart of 
Morna sunk within her as she entered 
within its gloomy walls; but hurried im- 
mediately on her arrival to one of the 
wildest parts of the kingdom, how rough, 
and uncouth, and melancholy,* did every 
thing that she had as yet met with appear 
to her ! what a contrast to the scenes of her 
Ihfancy, to the balmy air, to the orange 
groves, to the monuments of ancient gran- 
deur, she had been accustomed ! The 
Arabian gardens of Granada had been the 
haunts of these days, ^atid she sighed to 

have left the land of her mother r— — 
»» 

Here was another chasm. Donaghue 
rapidly passed over it, and thus again 
caught up the story ; — 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

" Such was Morna, now in the first 
bloom of youth; indisposition, and the 
pensive gentleness of her soul, were visible 
in her countenance; her form was flexile 
as a reed ; her complexion announced her 
foreign descent, but it was still clear and 
variable ; her hair was black as the wing of 
the raven, and in the softness of her large 
dark eyes there was a charm that enchant- 
ed ; her accents were mild as her manners, 
the ear listened to them with pleasure; 
but when she sung to her guitar some 
Moorish ditty of her native land, atten- 
tion was enchained, and the soul, through 
every thrilling fibre, owned the power of 
her strains. 

" Brought up in the greatest simplicity, 
though so formed for admiration, she knew 
not her power to excite it ; but there were 
those who soon became sensible of it. Of 
the number was Roderick O'Brien, heir to 
the then proud owner of Altoir-na-Grenie. 
What he heard of the Spanish maid, as 
she was denominated in the neighbour- 
hood, inflamed his curiosity to behold her» 



204 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and having once beheld her, he felt it was 
essential to his happiness to do so again. 
But to gaze in silence, to follow like a sha- 
dow her devious footsteps, or listen be- 
neath her window for the strains that 
made him think her more than mortal, was 
not sufficient for a lover of the ardent and 
impassioned nature of Roderick. But how 
he managed matters to get introduced to 
her, and contrive that her rambles should 
no longer be solitary, it matters not to 
say ; suffice it, he did so, and that feelings 
began to be awakened in the gentle bosom 
of the lovely Morna, that tended not a lit- 
tle to console and reconcile her to what 
she had previously regretted. 

" But all this was without the know- 
ledge of her father. Though connected, 
there was a coolness between him and Mr. 
0*Brien. The latter, a proud, haughty 
man, had thought proper to slight the ac- 
quaintance of the poor soldier, on his re- 
turn to his native land; and in conse- 
quence of the resentment excited by this 
conduct, Roderick was well aware any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 205 

open attentions to Morna would have been 
interdicted. 

" Day and night were not more differ- 
ent, with regard to disposition, than this 
father and son ; but indeed, from all I 
have heard, the former bore no resemblance 
to any of the family that either preceded, 

or have since come after him, being all 

But no matter — where's the thread of 
my story ? If I suffer it to drop for any 
time, I fear I may find it as difficult to 
take up, as aunt Joyce a long neglected 
stitch off of one of her knitting-needles. 

" Well, as I was saying, this enchanting 
kinsman of mine, for a spirited lover is to 
me a most enchanting creature, found 
means, in spite both of this Montague and 
Capulet, to play the part of Romeo most 
delightfully to this gentle Juliet, insomuch 
that he was in great expectation of soon 
being able to prevail on her to let him try 
whether a friendly father Lawrence was 
not to be found, when she was suddenly 
borne away to old Brennan's. 

*' His distraction at the circumstance 



206 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was heightened by alarm about young 
Brennan ; he knew — — — 

Here time or damp had done another 
injury. Donaghue, still more impatient, 
eagerly looked for the next legible part, 
and thus went on. But ere we proceed, 
we shall premise, that it is not our inten- 
tion^ to particularly notice these chasms 
again, but leave it to the blanks they oc- 
casion, to point out to the reader when- 
ever they occur. 

" His fears," Donaghue again began to 
read, " were not ill-founded; Brennan 
loved the maid, with an ardour not inferior 
to his own ; and to secure her for his bride 
was not the least cause of the old man's 
anxiety to get her into his power, for his 
gi-andson was the object of his idolatry, 
and to promote his happiness and gratifi- 
cation the first object of his life. 

" Morna liked the sister of young Bren- 
nan, and did as much justice to him as she 
could ; she admired his bravery, his strong 
and masculine mind ; but she shrunk from 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2:07 

the thought of encouraging his love, and 
would have done so though her heart had 
not been irrevocably devoted to another; 
for there was a fierceness in his nature, 
that would have made her shudder at be- 
ing in his power. She tried to misunder- 
stand the looks with which he regarded 
her; but she was not long allowed to re- 
main dubious as to their meaning. She 
answered him with candour — promised to 
regard him as a friend, but refused to give 
the slightest hope of ever considering him 
in any other light. 

" Brennan smiled ; he wished to win 
her — to owe her hand to love; but the 
slave of ungoverned passions — - — 

" The teri'ified Moma would have ap- 
plied to her father for protection from this 
persecuting lover, but that she feared a 
complaint to him might be the means of 
involving his safety, for, in some way or 
other, it was evident to her he had com- 
mitted himself with these people. Yet to 
run the risk of being forced to become 



208 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" By indefatigable exertions, Roderick 
at length obtained an interview; but 
scarcely had they met, ere old Brennan 
appeared in sight; and terrified at the 
thought of his surprising them together, 
from the disclosure she dreaded being 
made to her father. Morn a fled precipi- 
tately from her lover. But she had not 
escaped the eagle eye of Brennan ; his sus- 
picions were excited by what he saw, and 
he followed her flying steps with all the 
agitation of alarm. Till now she had 
not known what it was she had to fear ; 
but his wild, or rather infuriate questions, 
now fully revealed to her the terrible truth, 
and she shuddered to think of the dangers 
that beset her father. In vain for some 
time she pleaded she could not have be- 
trayed what till then she was ignorant of; 
the old man would listen to no denial of 
what he accused her ; and the sudden en- 
trance of his grandson perhaps alone pre- 
vented her personally suffering through 
his brutal violence. At Length she indu- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTL£. 209 

ced a belief of not yet having disclosed any 
thing inimical to the safety of the party ; 
but further reliance on her, after the meet- 
ing that had been witnessed between her 
and Roderick, was out of the question, 
except her interests were henceforth ren- 
dered inseparable from those with whom 
she was now associated; there was but 
one way of accomplishing this, and it was 
decided, that, without further delay, she 
should become the bride of Brennan. 

" Morna shuddered, and drew back; 
she cast an imploring look on her lover,^ 
but passion had stifled generosity in his 
bosom; and the joy that kindled in his 
eyes, convinced her that any appeal to it 
would be vain. Trying, however, to curb 
his raptures, he took her in his arms, and 
strove, as he strained her to his breast, 
throbbing with the most tumultuous feeU 
ings, to calm her perturbation ; but no ar- 
guments, no persuasions, could do this; 
she protested against the measure thus re- 
solvedj but in vain; an obedient priest 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTL^. 

was at hand, and, spite of her resistance, 
commenced the ceremony. 

" Wild with despair, she shrieked aloud, 
and called upon her father; but her father 
was away, and there were none to aid her. 
The horror of her situation deprived her 
of her senses; the ceremony was suspend- 
ed, and after some fruitless efforts to reco- 
ver her, she was borne to her chamber in 
a state that almost precluded ail hope about 
her. 

" From a kind of stupor, she was roused, 
at midnight, by a terrible tumult. The 
plot had, by some means, been discovered, 
or betrayed, and the building was, in con- 
sequence, beset by a party of soldiers. 
Convinced, by this circumstance, of her 
having been guilty of the treachery of 
which he had accused her, the fury of old 
Brennan knew no bounds. Yielding to 
its savage dictates, he hastened to her 
chamber, determined, at least, on the gra^ 
tification of revenge — — — 

" But the efforts of his granddaughter 



I^UADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^ll 

Would have proved of little avail, such 
was the strength given by temporary mad- 
ness, had not her piercing cries reached 
the ear of her brother, where his unerring 
aim had already done terrific execution, 
in repelling the assailants. With one whirl 
of his sinewy arm he rescued the almost- 
expiring Morna from the savage gripe of 
her merciless enemy, and was bearing her 
away to a place of safety, when a ball came 
whizzing through the window, and laid 
him dead. 

" At this sight, the old man abandoned 
himself to despair. His yelling cries were 
terrific, as he threw himself upon the body, 
and, tearing his grey locks, he rolled him- 
self on the floor in agony. But though 
both the weeping witnesses of this agony 
participated in his feelings, neither had 
courage to approach him, till the enraged 
soldiers, setting fire to the building, made 
them tremble at the idea of another mo- 
ment's delay in it; but it was some time 
before his granddaughter could make him 
sensible of the danger they were in. When 



Sl^ TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at length she did, he raised himself on his 
knees, and, pushing her aside, seized 
Morna, with a suddenness that also brought 
her on her knees beside him. His demo- 
niac look and laugh, at the moment, made 
her instantly comprehend what his full in- 
tention was ; she saw he had determined 
on devoting her a victim to — — 

*' But the strength derived from despe- 
ration was insufficient to enable her to 
extricate herself from him. The flames 
fiad by this time reached the room ; the 
rafters crackled, and the fierce eyes that 
glared upon her were rendered more ter- 
rible from their reflection. She gave her- 
self up, and, uttering the name of her fa- 
ther, again sunk into insensibility — 

" On re-opening her eyes, instead of the 
scorching glow of the fire upon her cheek, 
she felt the pure breath of heaven blowing 
chilly on it. Her father had saved her. 
A rumour of the intended attack upon the 
dwelling of Brennan had brought him un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

expectedly to it ; and in the confusion that 
prevailed, he succeeded in getting into it 
by one of the secret passages, and bearing 
her away from the dreadful death that 
otherwise awaited. 

" But their mutual joy at their restora- 
tion to each other was of short continuance. 
— * The blood-hounds are upon us, my 
child !' he cried, as he raised her trembling 
frame from the grass, on which he had re- 
posed it. 

" His feelings, as far as regarded him- 
self, rendered desperate by fortune, he 
would probably have disdained any pre- 
caution for his safety, merely on his own 
account; but he w^as too well aw^are of 
what his Moma would suffer, should he 
attempt to brave his fate, not — — 

" But not so immediately could O'Con- 
nor think of a place of concealment, as of 
the necessity there was for seeking one. 
At length it occurred to him, that within 
his own desolate dwelhng he might be 
able to obtain a temporary refuge. There 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

were numerous hiding-places in it, not ex- 
actly known, he believed, to every one; 
and through one of these he flattered him- 
self he should be able to evade the keen 
pursuit that. he had no doubt would be 
made after him. 

Morna exerted herself to the utmost to 
drag her trembling frame along; but her 
imagination was too much disturbed not 
to expose her to continual alarms. Every 
moment she fancied she heard the shouts of 
pursuit, and at every plash in the bog they 
had to traverse, that it was made by some 
other foot than theirs. They reached the 
building, however, without molestation, 
and quickly passing through the upper 
chambers, descended to the ones they 
sought. What a shelter for Morna ! The 
damps of death seemed gathering on her 
pallid brow ; and surely, she thought, its 
pangs could not exceed those she then ex- 
perienced. But if, in imaginary security, 
this ancient habitation of her forefathers 
chilled her from its dreariness, how infi- 
nitely more so did it now, with her mind 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

impressed with terror ! All around it were 
frightful wilds and fastnesses, well adapted 
indeed to afford shelter, but a shelter 
which none but the most desperate — the 
outlaw or the rebel, could think of seek- 
ing. An uninterrupted succession of bogs, 
mountains, and morasses, was the only 
prospect, with a lonely lake, environed by 
stupendous cliffs, that, as it flowed along, 
seemed moaning at the neglect of its ro* 
mantic scenery. — — — 

" Through means of this faithful fol- 
lower, with whom O'Connor contrived to 
have a communication, they were supplied 
with what was just necessary for their pre- 
servation. But such a state was not to be 
long endured ; O'Connor urged his daugh- 
ter to repair to the neighbouring convent 
of Ursulines, founded in the eleventh cen- 
tury by one of his house, and where he 
was assured she would meet with the kind- 
ness and attention she required ; yet the 
only reply these entreaties received was 
by clinging still more closely to him. But 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she could procure him such a friend, if she 
durst but open her heart to him ; but she 
had heard his sentiments respecting the 
treatment he had received from the fa- 
ther, and how could she then speak of the 
son ? But to know she could serve him — 
could have him rescued from the horrible 
situation he was in — could procure him the 
assistance of a person whom nothing could 
coiTupt, and not do so, was impossible; 
and, in short, she watched for an opportu- 
nity of stealing out, and by means of — 

" To describe the rapture of Roderick, 
when, at length, he prevailed on O'Connor 
to accept his proffered friendship, and al- 
low him to conduct him and Morna to 
Altoir-na-Grenie, there to remain till it 
might be considered safe for them to at- 
tempt getting off to Spain, would be im- 
possible. 

" But the alarm that O'Connor and his 
friends were under about his safety was 
without foundation; in the papers that 
were seized, his name, fortunately, hap- 



TRADITION OF TttE CASTLE. 217 

pened not to be mentioned ; and whatever 
might be the enormities of the misguided 
unfortunate men with whom he had con- 
nected himself, that of treachery towards 
each other certainly could not be ranked ; 
so that, though suspicion attached to 
him, it never was brought sufficiently 
home to occasion him any trouble. That, 
however, it pointed at him, was quite 
enough to induce Mr. O'Brien to think 
himself fully justified in still declining any 
intercourse with him — he was an attainted 
man, he said, and therefore to be shunned 
by all who wished to be considered loyal 
and good subjects; and altogether express- 
ed himself in such a way about him, that 
had he been apprized of the shelter he 
gave him within his walls, he would not 
have permitted him to enjoy it long. In 
vain Roderick pleaded for him, and took 
his part; he reminded his father of the 
connexion that subsisted between the fa- 
milies, and that in consequence, from a 
feeling of pride, to say nothing of huma- 

VOL. II. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nity, he should give him his support and 
countenance. Mr. O'Brien, however, a 
stern, proud, avaricious man, as already 
hinted, saw things in a different light ; a 
connexion that could reflect no conse- 
quence, he was not by any means inclined 
to bestow the radiance of his countenance 
on; and, in short, he remained inexorable 
to all that his son could urge in behalf of 
his unfortunate kinsman. 

" How great was the despair of Rode- 
rick at this — cutting off all hope as it did 
of obtaining his consent to marry jSIorna ! 
and, without it, how could he think of 
wooing her to become his, when poverty 
for so many years might be their lot ! for, 
though the family estates were entailed, 
till the decease of his father he could not 
command a shilling. Suspense on such a 
subject was not endurable, and by an effort 
of desperation, he summoned sufficient 
courage to come to the point, and solicit 
the coveted consent. The result was what 
he had fearfully anticipated, a positive in- 
terdiction against ever thinking more of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 219 

Morna, and haughty, command not to ap- 
pear again in his presence, till he could 
assure him he had made up his mind to 
submission. 

" Resentful and indignant at this cruel 
obduracy to the wishes of an only son, and 
insensibility to the merits of one of the 
loveliest of her sex, Roderick would im- 
mediately have quitted the castle, but that 
he could not bear to absent himself from 
a place where he could sometimes see the 
object of his affections ; but the consola- 
tion derived from this idea was shortly cut 
off; O'Connor did not long remain in ig- 
norance of what had passed at Altoir-na- 
Grenie ; he heard of the quarrel between 
the father and son, and that, though re- 
maining under the same roof, they had as 
little intercourse or communication with 
each other as if separated by hundreds of 
miles, and accordingly decided, that, for 
the present, all further correspondence 
should be suspended between him and his 
daughter. 

LSI 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE", 

** From the moment of receiving thi^ 
intimation, the manner of young O'Brien 
altered ; all his cheerfulness forsook him ; 
it was evident to him from it, that there 
was an end of any further hope about 
Morna, and in conceiving her lost to him, 
he ceased to feel any further interest in 
life. This was the first trial his fortitude 
had ever met with, and he bore it like a 
petted child of fortune, who expected to 
go on without meeting with an adverse 
gale through the voyage of life. His na- 
ture was noble, but his passions were ar- 
dent, and he had never been taught to curb 
them— never reminded of the disappoint- 
ments we are liable to here, or that it is 
our duty to struggle against despondence^ 
and still remember that there is an all- 
wise, all-good, all-gracious Being, watch- 
ing over us, who, provided we do our part, 
will never forsake uSy nor even in this 
world suffer us to be severely afflicted, 
except it may be indeed to render us still 
more susceptible of the happiness awaiting 
lis hereafter. — — — — 



ts,aditiok of the castle. ^21 

** Roderick was sitting disconsolately by 
himself one gloomy evening, when his 
own faithful attendant, Phelim, entered 
the apartment; and — ' Ah, then,' said 
Phelim, w^ho was likewise his foster-bro- 
ther, * isn't this a poor case, that you 
should be sitting here by yourself, like 
some poor sinner doing penance, when 
there is such a power of company in the 
castle enjoying themselves and making 
merry?' for it is here to be understood, 
that Mr. O'Brien, to shew his utter disre- 
gard to the feelings of his son, made it a 
point of giving splendid entertainments 
every day — * Och! and it's myself that 
wishes the ould gentleman in the yellow 
silk morning dress would be paying you 
a visit, for it's then you might be after 
pleasing yourself (Phelim knew how mat- 
ters were) * Avithout thanking kith or kin.' 
— * The old gentleman in the yellow silk 
morning gown !' repeated Roderick, but 
evidently in a manner that proved it was 
unconsciously, * who is he?' — * Ah then, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sure, Mr. Roderick, is it yourself that's 
axing that?' cried Phelim; 'why, I thought 
every body in or about the castle, or be- 
longing to it, knew who he was — why, 
your own great ancestor, squire Dennis 
O'Brien, who, in the time of the Crom- 
wellian wars, fearing his castle being ri- 
fled, buried all his money and plate in a 
large pot underground somewhere here, 
and dying suddenly, without having time 
to say where, has ever since been troubled 
on that account, and must continue so till 
he makes the discovery ; but it seems he is 
determined on not making this, except to 
some person in want of the treasure ; for 
though he has been seen often and often 
in the castle, yet it has never been but at 
such times as it was known that some one 
belonging to it was in want of money, and 
then he always appears in the dress he used 
to wear of a morning, a fine yellow silk 
gown, with roses on it, with a crimson 
velvet cap on his head, and red morocco 
slippers on his feet, just as he is drawn in 
his picture ; and 'twas that that made me 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S23 

think you must know who I meant, for I 
thought you could not have looked at it 
so often as you have done, to be sure, 
without knowing who it was intended 
for.' — * His picture! what picture?' asked 
Roderick, again in. an abstracted tone. — 
' Ah then, Mr. Roderick,' again cried 
Phelim, ' is it joking you are ? Why the 
picture that hangs up in the library, just 
by the fireplace, and facing a window.' — 



Donaghue almost started, under the 
vague idea of having seen the picture this 
described somewhere in it; he eagerly 
looked up, and there, actually facing him, 
his eyes encountered it, the full sized por- 
trait of an elderly gentleman, habited ex- 
actly as the manuscript described, sitting 
in an easy chair, with a pointer at one 
knee, and on the other his hand, with a 
book, as if his reading had been suspended 
for the purpose of letting him observe 
something that had interested him, and ac- 
tually it seemed to Donaghue as if his 
eyes were bent down upon him at the 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

moment, with a look of earnestness and 
inquiry. Donaghue could not help smi- 
ling at the momentary effect the idea had 
upon him ; he gave another glance at the 
portrait, and resumed the manuscript. 



" Matters continued to go on in the 
same way ; every day the breach seemed 
to get wider and wider between the fa- 
ther and -son ; some of their mutual friends 
interfered, but to no purpose, for neither 
could be induced to cede the smallest 
matter to the other. 

" Roderick was sitting rather late one 
night by himself, moodily brooding over 
his blighted hopes of happiness, when the 
door behind him opened, and concluding 
it was Phelim, now indeed the only per- 
son with whom he had any communica- 
tion, he did not move; but when, after a 
minute or two, he found no one approach- 
ed, though he heard a low rustling sound 
in the apartment, he turned to see who it 
was that had entered, and beheld an el- 
derly portly-looking gentleman, habited 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 225 

in a yellow silk robe de chambre, with a 
crimson velvet cap on his head, and red 
morocco slippers on his feet. The castle 
was full of guests at the time, and it in- 
stantly occurred to Roderick, that this 
stranger was one of them, who, having in- 
terested himself in the difference between 
his father and him, had come to speak to 
him on the subject, as many other old 
friends of his father, not before known to 
him, had done. But, whatever he might 
have come for, Roderick was naturally too 
courteous not to receive him with compla- 
cence ; he rose, and invited him to take a 
chair by the fire. This the stranger de- 
clined, but with a pleasant smile, intima- 
ting by his gestures, for he spoke not, that 
instead of sitting with him, he wanted him 
to accompany him immediately from the 
apartment. Confirmed by this in his pre- 
vious idea — * Impossible !' said Roderick ; 
* I guess where you would lead me ; but 
there is no use, I am well aware, in going 
to my father, except I have made up my 
h 8 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mind to act as he wishes. This I can ne- 
ver do. My thanks, however, are not the 
les&tiue to you, for thus kindly interesting 
yourself about me.' 

" Still, however, as if not attending to 
this declaration, the stranger continued, 
by his gestures, to urge him to oblige him, 
but keeping receding all the time towards 
the door, followed by the other. At 
length, on his gaining it — * Stop, sir,' said 
Roderick, perceiving all was darkness 
without, and knowing there were several 
intricate passages in this direction, divided 
by steps, or narrow flights of stairs, * let 
me get a candle to light you.' No reply 
was made, and ere he could repeat the re- 
quest, the stranger had somehow vanished. 

" Roderick felt a momentary sensation 
of surprise at the circumstance ; it seemed 
to him as if he had actually faded from his 
sight, but this must be owing to the un- 
steadiness of the light that issued from 
the room, and without troubling himself 
farther on the subject, he returned to it 
As he reentered it — * Where can this cold 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

earthy vapour come from ?' lie cried ; * and 
see how it affects the candles — they burn 
blue!* He resumed his seat by the fire, 
and took up the poker, with an intention 
of stirring it, but his hand fell powerless 
by his side, and a deadly sickness came 
over him for a few minutes, accompanied 
by cold damps, such as he had never be- 
fore experienced. — ' Well, this is odd 
enough !' he said ; ' such a sudden attack !' 
But he thought no more about it ; and not 
liking to furnish Phelim with a new theme 
for conversation, who, notwithstanding the 
great regard he had for him, sometimes 
talked too much for the state of mind he 
was then in, nothing was mentioned to 
him of the visit he had received. 

" Well, the posture of affairs continued 
unaltered at the castle. Roderick at length 
became ill, and through absolute pining 
and vexation, took to his bed. He would 
allow no medical man to come near him ; 
and indeed the disease being seated in his 
mind, a visit of the kind could have been 
of no service ; nor did his father urge it. 



228 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

conceiving this illness was all a pretext to 
try and soften him. 

" The talkativeness of poor Phelim now 
got more fatiguing than ever to his mas- 
ter, who, besides, grew a little peevish and 
irritable, so that, whenever he could, with- 
out absolutely hurting his feelings, he 
contrived a pretext for getting rid of him. 
He had done so one night, by affecting 
sleepiness sooner than usual, but the mid- 
night hour struck without finding his eyes 
closed. As he lay despondently awake, he 
fancied he heard the door softly open, and 
a low rustling sound in the chamber, and 
imagining it was Phelim who had return- 
ed, in a sudden fit of irritation he was 
drawing aside the curtain to reprimand 
him for this disobedience to his orders, 
when he was not a little surprised at be- 
holding the stranger in the yellow silk 
morning-gown standing by the bedside. — 
* Good God, sir !' cried he, * is it you I be- 
hold?' raising himself, sick asiie was, up- 
on his elbow ; * what kind concern does 
this manifest about me T 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 229 

*VThe other smiled, and drawing back 
a little from the bed, motioned him to rise, 
and, as he had done before, to follow him 
from the chamber. — ' Impossible, sir,' said 
Roderick; ' don't you see the state I am 
in ? Yet, if indeed you come with any 

kind message from my father ' The 

stranger shook his head. — * Oh, then, I 
cannot indeed rise !' said Roderick, falling 
back on his pillow through the pang oc- 
casioned by the disappointment of this 
suddenly awakened hope. 

" Still, however, the stranger persisted 
in his silent importunities, as if bent on 
not taking a refusal, till Roderick became 
so displeased, that nothing but courtesy 
prevented his drawing the curtain between 
them. On a sudden a footstep was heard 
in the gallery. Roderick impatiently rais- 
ed himself on the pillow, for the purpose 
of listening whether it was Phelim's, that 
he might get him to light his visitor to 
his chamber; and while doing so, the 
stranger again seemed to fade away before 
his eyes, and immediately a heavy stupor 



230 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fell over his senses ; and when he awoke 
in the morning, all that had passed over- 
night seemed to him as a dream. 

" Some few nights after this, he took it 
into his head he should like to read a book 
of love poems that lay in the library ; and 
the whim had no sooner seized him, than, 
having already dismissed Phelim, he de- 
termined on trying to get them himself, 
convinced he should not, at such an hour, 
encounter any one there. Accordingly 
he got out of bed, and, putting on his 
night-gown and slippers, contrived to 
reach the apartment; and, securing the 
book, was about returning, when his eyes 
suddenly encountered the picture of squire 
Dennis O'Brien, in his yellow gown, as 
described by Phelim; and — * Good God!' 
cried Roderick, starting, as his eyes now 
fell upon it, * that picture is the identical 
image of my unknown visitor!' and a 
strange feeling came over his mind ; and 
while yet there was a shudder in his frame, 
he heard a low rustling sound in the room, 
and turning with quickness, beheld the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

strianger standing beside him, as if to give 
him an opportunity of comparing him with 
the portrait — — — — 

" Well, after all this, Roderick could no 
longer doubt having received a visit of no 
common kind, neither of the purpose of 
it; and — ' Since so wonderful an interest 
has been excited about me/ he cried, 
* why should I not avail myself of it? 
Could I get possession of this buried trea- 
sure of my ancestors, I should be able to mar- 
ry Morna, and would have her, and would 
marry her, spite of all opposition, though 
I should be obliged to raise a troop of 
hardy young fellows, like myself, to en- 
able me to carry her off!' And so being 
prepared, and collected, and determined 
how to act, should he ever behold the ap- 
parition again, the next time he did so, 
which was soon, he addressed it, with the 
usual adjuration, inquiring what had trou- 
bled his repose? 

" The spell being now removed from 
his lips, his mysterious visitant explained. 



232 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

by mentioning the hid treasure, which he 
could never rest till he had discovered; 
but the secret of which he was under a re- 
striction not to disclose to any one not be- 
longing to the family, or who was not in 
want, or worthy of it, and who had not 
the courage to follow him at the midnight 
hour, whithersoever he should lead, with 
a pickaxe, a shovel, and a basket, to dig 
for it, and bear it away. 

" A thousand times had Roderick said, 
what would he not undertake for his Mor- 
na ! and he was now called upon to prove 
the sincerity of this declaration. The en- 
suing night was settled, between him and 
the phantom, for this projected exploit; 
but what changes do a few short hours 
often occasion in human feelings — human 
affairs ! ere it came, wealth was no longer de- 
sired by Roderick, since wealth could no 
longer confer happiness on him. The first 
thing that was presented to his eyes the 
next morning, was a letter of solemn farewell 
from Morna, who, the preceding day, had 
taken, in privacy, the veil in the Ursuline 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Convent, thus terminating all further anx- 
iety in the mind of her father about her 
earthly weal, and removing, as she hoped, 
the only cause of dissension that existed 
between her lover and his parent. The 
farewell breathed the very spirit of her 
feelings ; it melted, while it strove to con- 
sole, and was accompanied by a present of 
those long dark tresses which he had so 
loved to see fluttering and waving about 
her, and which she desired him to keep, 
in fond remembrance of one who, it might 
be said, had died for him, for in renoun- 
cing the world, as she had done for his 
sake, was it not to a living tomb she had 
consigned herself? 

" Oh, there was agony in that thought 
to the lover ! better, better, he imagined, 
he could have borne to hear of her actually 
being laid within the earth, than to know 
that she still lived, but no longer for him ! 
He raved with all the extravagance of 
despair, and vowed not to survive her loss. 

" Night came ; but no longer was the 
purpose to which it was intended to have 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

been devoted remembered. The clock, 
however, had hardly struck twelve, when 
the apparition of his kinsman stood beside 
the bed ; but the visit was now a mockery 
to him, Roderick conceived, and he re- 
fused to rise. 

" The other continued to urge him for 
some time, by his gestures, but in vain. 
At length — * The wish to serve you is 
useless,' he cried. ' The means of giving 
happiness to others, if not to yourself, have 
been offered and rejected. Farewell! 
Once more you'll see me ; and as I then 
appear, you yourself will be in less tlian 
another devolving year !' — — 

" At last Mr. O'Brien became convinced 
of the danger of his son ; and when he was, 
what was his horror, his grief, and his re- 
morse ! How fervently did he then wish 
that past time could have been recalled ! 
How readily would he then have sacrificed 
all his prejudices, his ambitious hopes and 
plans, to save him ! but the fiat was gone 
forth, and another than Roderick was des- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

tined to succeed him in the possessions on 
which he so valued himself. 

" Roderick was drawing towards his 
end, when one night his heavy eyes were 
opened by a low rattling sound in the 
chamber. He gently put aside the cur- 
tain, to see what occasioned it, and beheld, 
exactly facing him, a human skeleton, lean- 
ing against a bureau. The words of the 
apparition, on its last visit, instantly re- 
curred to his recollection ; and if till now 
a hope of his recovery had lingered in his 
heart, it was now relinquished; for, spite 
of grief, of despair, of all that in our first 
frantic moments we may utter, there are 
few of us, I believe, when it comes to the 
point, such is the instinct of nature, but 
cling, with something of tenacity, to life. 

" In his last moments he revealed the 
appearance of the apparition to him. What 
credit his story met with then, I cannot 
pretend to say ; but if we may judge from 
the manner in which it has been handed 
down, through successive generations, I 
should suppose very implicit ; and indeed, 



S36 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

even at this day, there are some in the fa- 
mily, my aunt Joyce for instance, and one 
or two more old aunts and cousins, who 
would deem a doubt on the subject a kind 
of scepticism not to be forgiven. It is, in 
short, a general, as well as positive, belief, 
that the spirit of squire Dennis still trou- 
bles the castle, and will continue to do so till 
the discovery of the buried treasure ; and 
that he will yet assuredly be the making of 
some one of the family. Who this lucky per- 
son may be, of course cannot be surmised, 
since hitherto fortune has been sufficiently 
kind to all of the race, not to subject them 
to the fright of a visitation of the kind ; 
for I much fear, that not even a convic- 
tion of the motive that brought him, would 
be able to keep one from experiencing 
some little panic at the sight or sound of 
squire Dennis's yellow morning gown ; 
that I have laughed a hundred times at 
the idea of this, I believe I need scarcely 
say ; yet not to affect to be always wiser 
than other people, I will acknowledge, that 
4once — but remember it was but once — I 



TRAi)ITION OF THE CASTLE, 237 

did feel a little agitation at the recollec- 
tion of it. Papa had been uncommonly 
cross and ill-natured, at least so I thought 
then, in refusing to give me money for a 
new sack; to be sure I had just got two 
divine ones down from Dublin — but that 
was no matter, I saw a new one on Mrs. 
Blake, made of a silk I liked better — the 
sweetest silk, a bright garnet colour, with 
immense bouquets of natural flowers, 
orange lilies, white roses, and variegated 
carnations, thrown on it; and I quite long- 
ed, and made up my mind to get a dress 
of the same ; but no entreaties would do, 
though backed by mamma, who could not 
herself aid me, having had a long run of 
ill luck at cards ; so up I went to my cham- 
ber, completely in the dumps ; and there, 
as I sat bemoaning myself, the story of 
cousin Roderick coming into my head — 
* Well, I am sure,' I said to myself, * if 
there is any truth in it, now is the time 
to prove it ; for here, I am sure, is one of 
the family distressed enough to need a little 
kindness;' and hardly had I said so, when 



238 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Lord ! my heart beats now at the 

fright I got at the moment — I heard a low 
rustling sound in the closet within it. 
Without waiting to hear more, up I jump- 
ed, flew from the room, and making but 
one leap down the stairs, was very near 
coming plump upon the old butler, as he 
was passing at the moment to the parlour, 
with some of the supper-things ; if I had, 
Heavens! what a kick-up I should have 
caused there, by the smash I should have 
occasioned amongst the old china bowls 
and gilt glasses, that have been upwards of 
a thousand years in the family, I believe, 
like heirlooms ! However, this mischance 
I escaped ; but — * The Lord save us, Miss!' 
said Andrew, alarmed by my looks and 
manner, * what has happened ?' — ' Oh, no- 
thing,' I replied ; ' I only want Anty ;' so 
Anty w^as called ; but, like Andrew, catch- 
ing dismay from my looks, soon began to 
shew evident signs of disinclination to ac- 
company me up stairs. 

" On reaching my chamber, she drew 
back, to let me enter first ; but this I de- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 239 

clined, and forcing her before me — * Oh, 
there it is ! there it is !' I cried, starting 
back, on again hearing the noise that had 
just before driven me from it. — * The Holy 
Virgin protect us! what, Miss?' asked 
Anty, crossing herself; then, as if sud- 
denly recollecting herself, she desired me 
not to be frightened, as she was certain 
what I heard was the cat in the closet, 
which she had observed stealing slyly af- 
ter her into it, when she entered it to get 
my night-things ready for me against I 
went to rest; and there indeed was Miss 
Puss, playing hide and go seek amongst 
my fine silk sacks and petticoats. 

" Well, I have now given you the mar- 
vellous ghost story you were so anxious 
to hear, or what may be termed the Tra- 
dition of our Castle ; and having had pa- 
tience to pen it for you, shall take care 
that my labour be not thrown away, by 
availing myself of the first opportunity 
that occurs for sending it to you; and 
should not one offer before my leaving 
this, shall leave it in special charge with 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mamma, to forward it by the first that 
presents itself after my departure. My 
departure! methinks 1 hear you repeat, 
and where may your ladyship be steering? 
Why, the fact is, not to counterbalance 
good-nature by ill-nature, or, in other 
w^ords, gratify your curiosity in one in- 
vStance, but leave it ungratified in another, 
amongst other presents which a certain 
gentleman has lately been forcing on my 
acceptance, is a little gold ring, that I have 
at last promised to take from him the en- 
suing week ; and as it will operate like a 
spell in binding me to his fortunes, in fol- 
lowing them I shall be led from this, as he 
is, you know, a military man. 

" Seriously, I had some idea of coaxing 
you down to officiate as bridemaid; but, 
after all, at this inclement season of the 
year, to seduce you from the dear delights 
of Dublin, would, I thought, be cruel, 
more especially as I could not have enjoy- 
ed your company for more than a day or 
two, as almost immediately after the ce- 
remony we must leave this. Farewell, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

dear girl ; you shall hear from me as soon 



Here the manuscript abruptly closed, 
leaving Donaghue unacquainted with the 
name of the fair writer, whose request to 
have it sent to her friend, it should seem, 
had never been attended to, by its having 
been found in the castle. The name of a 
person, however, no longer in existence, 
he could feel no great anxiety about know- 
ing; and according to the course of nature, 
it could not be doubted that the person 
whose writing he had been reading, had^ 
long ere this, paid their debt to nature. 

Donaghue heaved an involuntary sigh 
at the brevity of human life, as he me- 
chanically rolled up the papers, and depo- 
sited them again in his desk — " And well 
may the poet say — * Son of the winged 
days, why buildest thou the hall ?' he cried, 
as he did so, " for scarcely have we entered 
upon the enjoyments of spring, ere win- 

VOL. II. M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ter comes to chill the genial current of the 
soul, and remind us that the next change 
will be one that will preclude another." 

The violence of the wind had by this 
time abated; but the low moaning sounds 
into which it had sunk, more affected the 
imagination of Donaghue ; for exactly as 
it now sighed and sobbed round the case- 
ments, apparently uttering the laments of 
deep sorrow and distress, had it wailed 
and whined on the night of his mother's 
death. 

The feelings awakened by what it re- 
called to memory, were too painful for 
passive endurance; he hastened from the 
library, to try if in sleep he could lose 
them. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" To trace the winding riv'let through the dale, 
That, on the mill-wheel, tries its wond'rous force ; 

Now smoothly glides, to fertilize the vale, 

Or, glist'ning, through the village takes its course." 

At length the adamantine chains of win- 
ter were broken, and the teeming buds 
and vernal gales of spring began again to 
gladden the senses. Donaghue, spite of 
the dejection of his spirits, could not help 
participating in the genial influence of the 
season, such is the renovating effect of 
renovated nature upon the human frame, 
and was almost insensibly led by it to re- 
new those active pursuits in which he had 
once so delighted ; he had indeed, by this 
time, begun to see the impropriety of any 
longer indulging in the listlessness that he 
had, for some time, given way to. It was 
m2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

our duty, he knew, as long as we were 
suffered to remain upon this mortal stage, 
to make the best use we possibly could of 
the faculties with which we were endowed ; 
and this, he certainly knew, could not be 
done if we permitted the frost of apathy 
or indifference to steal over them. Yet 
still he might have felt reluctant to emerge 
from the positive seclusion to which he 
had almost once decided on devoting him- 
self, but that, from the manner in which 
the winter had passed away, he had every 
reason to believe, that not the slightest 
suspicion of his being at Altoir-na-Grenie 
was entertained in the neighbourhood, 
and that consequently he need be under 
no apprehension of any one being on the 
watch to encounter him. 

The country about Altoir-na-Grenie was 
bold, picturesque, and highly interesting ; 
and not a little was the pleasure which he 
proposed to himself from ranging about, 
more especially, as with the greater part 
of the immediate neighbourhood he was 
unacquainted, from conceiving it unwor- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Q45 

thy of his notice during his first visit, and 
through the melancholy circumstances 
that had attended his second. 

He wandered about, as chance directed, 
and felt, that had he sooner known the 
romantic scenery in his vicinity, he would 
hardly have had resolution to refrain so 
long from viewing it. Seated sometimes 
by the side of a meandering stream, en- 
compassed by stupendous mountains, soar- 
ing above each other, until their tops were 
hid in clouds — there, where nature was be- 
held in her wildest attire, but grand and 
sublime in the extreme — there, where all 
was still nature, save a few straggling 
goats, hanging on the sides of the preci- 
pices, what sensations of mingled awe and 
tranquillity filled his mind! Or, when 
watching the gambols of the finny race, 
how soothingly did the hours steal away ! 
how still more so, when, undisturbed by 
harsher sounds than the water murmuring 
o'er its pebbly bed, or the sound of the 
breeze sighing amidst the foliage of the 
surrounding trees, he perused a favourite 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

author, or resigned himself all to thought ! 
At these moments his soul seemed all at- 
tuned to peace and harmony, and scenes 
that might otherwise have created disgust, 
from their loneliness, charmed and de- 
lighted. 

All this was very well during the day ; 
but when night again approached — when, 
after having indulged in the feelings and 
pursuits of an active and enthusiastic ima- 
gination, he was compelled to return to 
the solitary home, how did his heart again 
sink within him, and the feelings, so late- 
ly glowing, become chilled, at finding none 
there to whom he could impart what those 
feelings had been — on listening, but with^ 
out hearing any voice responding to his ! 

His looks still continued languid; exer- 
cise imparted an occasional glow to them, 
but content was wanting to render it per- 
manent ; and this he felt it impossible, at 
least for the present, to be. He could be 
patient, enduring, resigned — but to he 
content was out of the question, at least 
as he understood and defined the expres* 



TRADITION OF THE TASTLE. 247 

sion; for content, in his opinion, implied 
perfect satisfaction with your lot, such as 
precluded al"l wish for change ; and how 
could he be supposed to experience such a 
feeling at his ? Would it not indeed be 
a reproach to him if he did ? — a proof of 
an indolent, supine, inglorious spirit, sa- 
tisfied with obscurity and solitude, so the 
mere vulgar wants of nature were sup- 
plied ? No ; such a thing was not to be 
hoped, or imagined, or desired; and he 
only waited the return of his uncle, gene- 
ral O'Donaghue, from abroad, who w^as 
now daily expected on leave of absence, to 
consult with him as to some plan for the 
future; perhaps he might be induced to 
assist him in getting on active service 
again ; and whenever his spirits drooped, 
as was too often the case, he still tried to 
reanimate and buoy them up with the 
hope. That the idea had not at once 
struck him, he now felt surprised, not re- 
flecting that we cannot always immediately 
collect ourselves, so as to be enabled to see 
what is best to be done. 



248 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But the pleasure in which he had re- 
cently been indulging was nearly relin- 
quished, through the unexpected an- 
nouncement of the arrival of sir William 
Erin and his family, with a large party of 
friends, at Ashley Vale, the beautiful seat 
in the neighbourhood, distant a few miles 
from Altoir-na-Grenie, to which he had 
succeeded in right of his uncle. 

The unwelcome intimation was no soon- 
er received by Donaghue, than he was al- 
most induced, from the dread he had, after 
what had occurred, of encountering any of 
the family, to give up, as just hinted, the 
rambles from which so much relief and 
enjoyment were derived ; but when he re- 
flected on the utter ignorance in which all 
in the neighbourhood were of his being in 
it, he thought he need not inflict so severe 
a punishment on himself as relinquishing 
them would be; and finally, was deter- 
mined to persevere in them, by, perhaps, a 
hope of their being the means of furnish- 
ing him with an opportunity of now and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 249 

then catching a stolen glimpse of the love- 
ly Eveleen. 

But though nothing, as we have just 
observed, could be more terrible to his 
imagination than actually encountering 
her, or any of her connexions, yet, with a 
strange inconsistency — one however which 
was, perhaps, natural in a lover — he sud- 
denly began to act in a manner calculated 
to expose him to the risk of what he so 
much dreaded, by now beginning, when- 
ever he went out, to take the exact direc- 
tion to Ashley Vale instead of any other. 
He had often heard before of this magnifi- 
cent seat, which its late owner had spared 
no pains or cost in embellishing, under 
the idea that he was beautifying it for an 
only and a darling son, but without ever 
before having the slightest interest or cu- 
riosity excited about it ; but now, when 
the latter could no longer be gratified 
with safety, or at least without incurring 
the risk of what he so shrunk from, he 
felt a downright insatiable longing to 
view it, such as kept him continually ho. 
M 3 



250 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

vering about and wandering in its vicir 
nity. It is true, in the first instance, he 
had regarded it as one of those deserted 
seats consigned to decay and desolation, 
that it is melancholy to contemplate — now 
it was considered as the actual, the imme- 
diate abode of her, whose idea associated 
with it could impart a charm, an interest, 
to any thing. 

The sun was hardly risen one morning, 
when Donaghue, with his usual attendant 
and companion, a large Newfoundland 
dog, found himself at the Vale, near the 
edge of a romantic stream, hemmed in by 
verdant banks, here starting into hillocks, 
and there swelling into soft downs, over- 
spread with the finest turf The mists of 
early morn, still rolling away, and every 
moment revealing new beauties to his 
view — the shifting volumes of clouds they 
caused in the heavens, thai, as they still 
varied and dispersed, occasioned different 
masses of light and shade f > traverse the 
river in succession, excited -. degree of ad- 
miration in the mind of . > >naghue that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

fixed him to the spot. While he was ab- 
sorbed in contemplation of the scene, or 
rather, watching the winding vapours flit- 
ting from chff to cliff, as if in search of 
the clouds from which they were sepa- 
rated, a piercing shriek reached his ear, 
and eagerly looking to where it came 
from, he saw a female had fallen into the 
stream, from a rustic bridge at some little 
distance. The current, which was strong, 
and set in that direction, quickly hurried 
her to the other side of the bridge, and 
Donaghue darted forward to leap in there 
to her rescue. In his eagerness he stum- 
bled against the stump of a tree, and hit 
his ancle with such violence, that down- 
right agony for a moment took from him 
the power of moving, and when able to 
get on again, to his inexpressible horror, 
he saw she was within a few yards of a 
mill-race, into the vortex of which, if once 
whirled, nothing could save her. He run 
forward a few paces more, to be as near 
her as possible, and then plunged into the 
water; but his exertions could not have 



252 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

proved availing, she must have perished, 
so near was she to the fatal eddy, but for 
Neptune, who, on perceiving what had 
happened, had darted into the stream, and 
coming up with her just at the critical 
moment, contrived, by seizing her by the 
clothes, to keep her afloat till his master 
reached them. Though the stream was 
deep, it was not broad, and Donaghue 
soon succeeded in getting her to the bank, 
and dragging her up it. 

Her bonnet had fallen off in her plunge 
into the water, and her hair now com- 
pletely overspread her face. Donaghue 
threw it back to give her air ; but, as he 
did so — good God ! who can speak his 
feelings, his emotions, on discovering that 
it was no common stranger he had saved, 
but his Eveleen — the beloved, the adored 
Eveleen ! With a rapture that mocks de- 
scription, he clasped, he strained her to his 
breast, and — " Oh, my God ! my God !" 
he cried, with uplifted eyes, and all the 
fervency of adoring gratitude, " am I then 
still so much the peculiar object of thy 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 253 

heavenly favour, as to have been rendered 
instrumental to the preservation of this 
precious life !" 

But was her life preserved ? He laid 
his hand fearfully on her heart — he 
fancied he felt a slight pulsation, but it 
might only be fancy ; her lips were ashy 
white, her cheek was white, and cold as 
marble, and her eyes closed, as if the rigid 
hand of death itself had pressed the lids 
upon them. He laid her gently on the 
grass, with her face inclined towards it, 
and began chafing her temples, but not 
without exerting his voice to try if there 
was any one within hearing. Neptune 
too appeared anxious to ascertain this, as 
he kept running about, apparently in great 
agony, sometimes licking one fair lifeless 
hand, then the other, with dismal howls, 
that went through the heart of his master. 

Approaching voices were at length 
heard. The moment they met the ear of 
Donaghue, he involuntarily caught up the 
lovely object of his solicitude in his arms, 
as if fearful else of being deprived of her. 



254 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The confusion he was in prevented his re- 
cognising the voice of any one he knew ; 
what his surprise therefore was, when, is- 
suing from amidst the trees, he beheld 
lady Jane Morley, in company with lord 
Altidore, a young nobleman of consider- 
able property in this part of the country, 
may well be imagined. 

Her ladyship's was, evidently, not infe- 
rior; she uttered an absolute scream of sur- 
prise, and — " My God, O'Brien !" she ex- 
claimed, " is it you I behold ! I did not 
imagine you were in the neighbourhood. 
But how is all this ? what has happened ? 
Is Miss Erin dead ?" 

" Dead!" repeated Donaghue, with 
horror at the suggestion, and indignation 
at the tone in which the inquiry was made, 
" Heaven forbid ! But this is no time for 
questioning ; I beseech you to see if any 
one can be got to assist in conveying her 
to the house." 

" Well, but first tell me, how did all 
this come to pass ?" 

" I should conceive," said Donaghue, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

glancing at the dripping garments of Miss 
Erin, " the inquiry superfluous." 

" Oh ! now I comprehend it — she fell 
into the water, and you rescued her — 
quite an adventure indeed !" 

" My God ! I hope nothing serious will 
result from it," cried lord Altidore, at- 
tempting as he spoke to take the hand of 
Miss Erin, but which Donaghue prevent- 
ed by his suddenly drawing in her arm. 

" I fervently hope not," he said ; " but 
the best way of preventing the likelihood 
of what we fear, is to procure her imme- 
diate assistance." 

" What's to be done ?" cried lady Jane. 
" But wait — how lucky ! there's sir Wil- 
liam Erin approaching through the trees, 
with some of his people. — Give Miss Erin 
into my care, O'Brien, and for Heaven's 
sake run home and change your wet 
clothes ; she needs no further aid now from 
you, and 'tis ridiculous therefore to en- 
danger your health by remaining any 
longer as you are." 

Donaghue hesitated; he was loth to 



256 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

part with his lovely burthen ; but then, as 
he had by this time assured himself that 
she still breathed, to encounter sir Wil- 
liam, after what he had probably heard of 
him — his laugh, his sneer, his contempt — 
no, the thing was impossible, and he suf- 
fered lady Jane, who, all the time he had 
been thus considering, had been trying to 
force Miss Erin from his support, to at 
length succeed in drawing her from it, and 
effected his escape, just as he distinguished 
the voice of sir WilHam. 

The moment he was gone — " Here! 
here!" cried lady Jane to lord Altidore; 
" here — quick — take this insensible beauty 
from me, and, as you hope to profit by my 
wish to serve you, contradict nothing I 
shall say or intimate ; her being found in 
your arms will naturally induce a belief of 
your having been her preserver; and as 
that romantic fellow that is just gone does 
not visit at the Vale, you may have all the 
eclat of the affair, if you do not choose to 
undeceive the parties yourself." 

Lord Altidore had only time to nod ac- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 257 

quiescence to her suggestion ere sir Wil- 
liam appeared. What his sensations were 
at the state in which he beheld his daugh- 
ter, and the danger he learned she had so 
narrowly escaped, may easier be conceived 
than described. As soon as the shock his 
feelings met with had a little subsided, he 
hurried onward, to see that every thing re- 
quisite for her restoration was got ready 
against her reaching the house; but hard- 
ly had he left her, ere Miss Erin, heaving 
a deep sigh, recovered her senses. But 
not immediately did she make any effort 
to have this known ; she had seen, she was 
certain, Donaghue — by him she believed 
it was she was rescued, and conceiving 
that the palpitating bosom on which she 
felt herself reclining was his, she felt her- 
self in no hurry to raise her head from it, 
for the sentiments he had inspired, in spite 
of what had offended in his conduct, had 
suffered no diminution through time or 
absence, and this indulgence of her secret 
tenderness for him was not to be resisted. 
But hardly had a tint of returning life re- 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

visited her lips, than lady Jane, taking her 
hand — " Oh ! well," she cried, " all is safe 
now ; you won't give us the slip this time, 
my dear girl ! so come, exert yourself, that 
no further time may be lost in getting you 
to the house." 

Thus urged. Miss Erin raised her head ; 
as she did so, her eyes were involuntarily 
uplifted to the countenance of the person 
who supported her. She started as they 
encountered his, and — " Good Heavens !" 
she faintly exclaimed, and would instantly 
have disengaged herself from his arms, but 
he prevented her by a gentle pressure. 
Her looks wandered wildly round, as if in 
quest of some one, and again a faint excla- 
mation of astonishment escaped her lips. 

" What's the matter, my dear creature ?" 
demanded lady Jane, though too perfectly 
aware to have needed making the inquiry ; 
" you look alarmed !" 

" No — not — not alarmed," said Miss 
Erin ; " only — only surprised a little, for 
I thought — I imagined " 

*' Oh, well, no matter," artfully inter- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 259 

rupted lady Jane ; " some other time you 
can explain ; but really now I cannot ad- 
mit of another moment's delay. So, come, 
let me help to support you, as well as his 
lordship, and, between us both, we shall 
not be long in getting you to the house." 
Miss Erin almost unconsciously accept- 
ed her offered assistance. She was lost in 
wonder and perplexity : it seemed to her 
certain that she had seen Donaghue, and 
yet she was now led to believe herself 
mistaken in the persuasion. So positive 
was she of the fact of his being her pre- 
server, that not the slightest doubt was on 
her mind till the actual moment of her 
opening her eyes ; she had felt confident 
she had seen him on the opposite side of 
the stream, and to the surprise, the emo- 
tion, occasioned by his unexpected sight, 
for of his being in the neighbourhood she 
had not the least conception, was owing 
her life having been endangered; for, in 
the tumult of her spirits, she had started 
forward on the bridge, without recollect- 
ing the caution she had received about one 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the planks that was loose, and which 
turning up the moment she set her foot 
on it, precipitated her into the stream. 
But she found herself in the arms of 
lord Altidore, and how therefore could she 
persist in what she had imagined? If 
Donaghue had been her preserver, would 
he have resigned her to the support of 
another — would he have vanished without 
waiting to see her restored to life ? or, at 
least, if he had been, would there not have 
been some allusion to, or mention of 
him ? Yet it was strange, most extraor- 
dinary, that her vision had so deceived 
her ; but that it had was now evident, and 
with a deep sigh at the conviction, she 
suffered herself to be led onward. 

Ere the party reached the house, they 
were met by some of the servants, with a 
couch to convey her thither ; but she was 
now too well recovered to need this, 
though her nerves still continued in a state 
of agitation, that made the medical men, 
who were in waiting to receive her, 
give orders for having her immediately 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 261 

put to bed, and kept perfectly quiet for 
some hours. 

As soon as lady Erin had a little reco- 
vered from the shock sustained by hearing 
of the narrow escape of lier darling child, 
and the general bustle and confusion oc- 
casioned bv the circumstance had a little 
subsided, sir William repaired to the par- 
lour, where lord Altidore was detained by 
lady Jane, and eagerly approaching him — 
" Pardon me, my lord," he cried, extend- 
ing his hand to him, " for not having 
sooner come to express what I owe you ; 
but, till I heard the report of her medical 
attendants about the dear sufferer, and saw 
her mother a little composed, I had not 
the power to collect myself From this 
moment I must hope and trust there's an 
end of any coolness that may hitherto 
have subsisted between us ; since it would 
grieve me indeed if I were not allowed 
personal opportunities of evincing those 
feelings with which my heart must ever 
glow towards you." 

Lord Altidore bowed and smiled, and 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

protested, very truly, he had done nothing 
that merited such acknowledgments ; thus 
artfully taking care, that if the mistake 
into which sir William had been led, by 
the management of lady Jane, should be 
detected, he should not be accused of hav- 
ing said any thing to confirm it. 

But it is here necessary, ere we proceed 
farther in our story, that we should ex- 
plain a few particulars. In the first place 
then, lady Jane was again at liberty to act 
as she pleased, having quietly inurned the 
poor banker. The wealth acquired by the 
honour ;he had done him in taking his 
name, rendering any further addition of 
fortune unnecessary, she, in consequence, 
determined on now giving the full fling 
to inclination. Donaghue still maintained 
his empire over her heart, or rather, her 
passion for him had by this time become 
wild and extravagant, through the oppo- 
sition it had hitherto met, and accordingly 
decided her on letting no common obsta- 
cles impede her wishes. 

How great would have been her rap- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

ture, could she have persisted in believing, 
as vanity in the first instance had induced 
her doing, that the coldness with which 
Donaghue had met her advances after her 
marriage, had been the effect alone of rigid 
principle ! but her friends, the Miss Ma- 
gennises, good-naturedly undeceived her 
in that respect, inspiring her with the most 
malignant envy andjealousy of Miss Erin. 
But though she could not have avoided 
being hurt at the affections of her lover 
having wandered from her, for she would 
persist in fancying that the affections 
of Donaghue had once been hers, she 
would not have been so alarmed at the 
circumstance as she was, but for her know- 
ledge of the characters of sir William 
and lady Erin ; she knew they were not 
common ones, that, without being either 
romantic or enthusiastic, they were above 
being actuated either by sordid or illiberal 
considerations. In a word, that from their 
dispositions, it was not improbable, that 
if Miss Erin felt any responding senti- 
ment of regard for Donaghue, and it could 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

be ascertained he was not unworthy of 
her, their union would not be hindered by 
disparity of fortune. 

To prevent what she dreaded, vigilance 
was requisite ; but how was this to be ex- 
ercised, without becoming intimate in the 
house ? To become so, however, she con- 
ceived could be no very difficult matter, 
from the intimacy that long subsisted be- 
tween the Erin family and hers, owing to 
their belonging to the same neighbour- 
hood; and, in a word, on the arrival of 
the Erins in London from the Continent, 
she played her part so well, as soon to be 
considered a kind of confidential friend 
amongst them ; and on her expressing a 
wish to see Ireland again, had her father's 
ruinous and dilapidated mansion been in a 
state to accommodate her, to obtain an in- 
vitation to accompany them thither. 

V Well, all this was very well; she should 
now be on the spot to watch over the in- 
terests of her heart ; but still all her vigi- 
lance, her circumventing cunning, might 
be of no avail — Miss Erin's giving encou- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^65 

ragement to some other admirer was the 
only thing that could entirely calm her 
apprehensions, and this the young lady 
seemed by no means inclined to do. 

Amongst the numerous conquests she 
made was lord Altidore ; his rank, for- 
tune, and personal accomplishments, fully 
authorized him to enter the lists for her 
favour; but a coolness, founded on some 
long- existing feud between their families, 
subsisted between him and sir William, 
that forbid an attempt of the kind, more 
especially as he was conscious, from his 
then ignorance of the treasure he possess- 
ed in his daughter, of having given utter- 
ance to some very aggravating expressions 
with regard to the baronet. 

He and lady Jane were very intimate, 
and from knowing the terms on which she 
and his charmer were, he involuntarily 
made her the confident of, as he feared, 
his hopeless passion. Lady Jane no soon- 
er learned his sentiments, than she decided 
on trying what could be done to render 

VOL. II. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLK, 

him instrumental to the accomplishment 
of what she wished. If any one had a 
chance of rivalling Donaghue, she con- 
ceived it was him ; accordingly, she offered 
her services, but on the express condition, 
that he was solely to be regulated by her. 

What condition, what stipulation, was 
there to which he would not have readily 
yielded, for the sake of the promise she 
made him? he bound himself to all she 
required, and, as she directed, quickly fol- 
lowed to Ireland, after the departure of 
the family for it. His seat lay contiguous 
to the Vale, and the secret meetings be- 
tween him and lady Jane were, in conse- 
quence, frequent; but in vain they con- 
sulted on some method for bringing about 
the introduction he was so anxious for. 
Artful and confident as was lady Jane, 
still the baronet was so proud and so wary, 
that she was posed on the subject, and al- 
most despairing, when the unexpected in- 
cident connected with Donaghue furnish- 
ed her, as she conceived, with what she 
required. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^67 

How she made use of it, and succeeded 
in the hope it suggested, is already known. 
Introduced as the preserver of his daugh- 
ter, it was not to be imagined that sir Wil- 
liam would repel his lordship; and what 
interest might it not, viewing him in that 
light, give him in the eyes of a youthful 
and romantic being like Evcleen ? Should 
the error into which they were led be de- 
tected, still that detection could not pos- 
sibly, she conceived, be a means of depri- 
ving him of the footing he had gained in 
the family, so pleasant and conciliating 
were his manners when he chose to appear 
amiable. It should be her care, however, 
to guard against any thing of the kind. 
As yet she knew the family at the Vale 
had no suspicion whatever of Donaghue 
being in the neighbourhood. From tlie 
agitation he had evinced on learning the 
approach of sir William, it was evident to 
her it was his wish that they should still 
continue ignorant of it, and she deter- 
mined to take advantage, or rather thought 
N 2 



268 TRADITION OP^ THE CASTLE. 

it would be strange if she was not ena- 
bled, of this double circumstance, to keep 
them asunder. 

In the mean time Donaghue disconso- 
lately returned home, little aware of the 
plots, and plans, and designs, he was the 
occasion of The glow of tumultuous rap- 
ture quickly faded before the bitter thought 
of no more enjoying the society of Eveleen. 
Now he repented having so suddenly re- 
signed her to the care of another — then he 
rejoiced at having escaped the perhaps 
sneer of her father — now he regretted the 
way in which he had acted, from the con- 
sideration, that had he remained, it might 
have been the means of obliging sir Wil- 
liam to have paid him some such attention 
as might have furnished him with a fair 
pretext for novv^ and then making his ap- 
pearance at the Vale — then again, his pride 
made him exult at having done so, since 
any attention that was not voluntary he 
could not endure the idea of receiving. 
His conduct had left sir "William free to 
act as he pleased ; if, therefore, he chose 



TllADITION OF THE CASTLE. 269 

to make any overture for his acquaintance, 
it must, of course, gratify him, from know- 
ing it was his own choice. Yet, after 
what he had probably heard of him, the 

prejudice it probably had excited But 

then, when his daughter's preservation 
came to be considered, how, even by this, 
could he withhold from giving utterance, 
in some degree, to the feelings it must 
have awakened ? 

Donaghue at last thought it impossible 
but that he must do so, and giving way 
to the persuasion, sat watching the re- 
mainder of the day, in momentary expec- 
tation of receiving some intimation, at 
least of acknowledgment, from him. But 
minute after minute, and hour after 
hour, passed away, without bringing any 
thing of the kind, and the f^-verish 
restlessness of impatient expectation at 
length began to give way to the chill of 
disappointment; yet, hardly had it begun 
to pervade his feelings, ere he started at 
the terrible idea of the cause to which 
what he could not help resenting might 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

be owing ; Eveleen might be in danger — 
had not, perhaps, been brought to herself, 
or was likely to be so; and, in frantic 
agony at the thought, the corporal was 
summoned, and instantly dispatched to 
the Vale, to privately learn the truth. 

The tidings he brought back, with al- 
most the speed of lightning, relieved the 
tortured heart of Donaghue from the 
dreadful apprehensions that had so sud- 
denly suggested themselves to him. Miss 
Erin was not only in no danger, but so 
well recovered as to have been able to 
leave her chamber by dinner-time ; so, to 
whatever might be owing the inattention 
he had met with, it certainly was not to 
the cause he had feared. 

Well, there was comfort in that; yet 
how could he avoid a rankling sensation 
at the idea of there being to excuse, or 
justify it? Common complaisance, the 
common usages of society, to say nothing 
of any thing else, demanded that some lit- 
tle inquiry should be made after him, 
^ome little compliment should be paid; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 271 

but might not the omission be owing to 
the bustle, the confusion, attendant on the 
circumstance of the morning? Yes, it 
must be so — he would believe it was, and 
that the next morning would bring an 
apology, probably in person, from sir Wil- 
liam for it. 

But the next morning came, the noon 
advanced, and day departed, without 
bringing any visitor from the Vale, or any 
message from it, though the corporal en- 
countered the baronet, with lord Altidore 
and a large party, on horseback, at no 
great distance from the castle. — " Well, 
well, it may be all for the best," thought 
Donaghue, as, with a burning cheek, and 
irregular steps, he paced the library ; " why 
should I regret what may probably have 
been the means of saving me from addi- 
tional disquietude — from greater longings 
after that which is unattainable ? Had sir 
William's conduct been, perhaps, what it 
ought, might I not have been drawn 
into visiting at the Vale, and what but 
augmented wretchedness would have 



S5725 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

been the consequence ? Could I have had 
resolution to resist being in company with 
Eveleen, when I knew I had the power 
of enjoying it? Oh no, I feel I could 
not! let me not then regret or resent 
what I should rather rejoice at. Yet, to 
be treated with this pointed neglect— to 
have the memory of my mother so forgot- 
ten, as it must be ! else could not the friend 
of her youth have so slighted her son — 
ah ! that is a thought indeed tliat stings 
— and then to suppose that Eveleen, by 
her representation, has been the cause, in 
some degree, of this — but, no, no, no, I 
acquit her of any thing of the kind— kind, 
generous, benignant, she would not, she 
could not, intentionally, injure any one : 
besides, did I not— did not the angel, in 
that hour of irreparable offence to her, in- 
directly plight her word, that what then 
occurred should never transpire ? No, 
no, my Eveleen," he continued, distract^ 
edly striking his throbbing forehead, " let 
who will be cruel, or illiberal, or ungene- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 273 

reus, I will still persevere in believing you 
incapable of being so." 

But of any intentional unkindness or ne- 
glect, sir William and lady Erin were both 
as justly entitled, as the reader is doubt- 
less by this time aware, to be acquitted. 
Appearances, however, were against them, 
and by these he judged; for that they 
were allowed to remain in ignorance of his 
being the preserver of their daughter, was 
a thought that never once occurred. 

But they were not allowed to remain 
so. On the third morning after her acci- 
dent, as Kate, Miss Erin's maid, already 
known to the reader by the name of Caty, 
but which, on exchanging the service of 
Mrs. Burros for Miss Erin's, she chose to 
soften into that of Kate, was dressing her 
young lady, after breakfast, to pay some 
visits with lady Erin in the neighbour- 
hood, she kept such a muttering and grum- 
bling, that Miss Erin could not, at last, 
help asking what was the matter — " Has 
any thing happened, Kate," she asked, 
N 3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" to vex or perplex you ? you seem so dis- 
satisfied and disconcerted this morning." 

*' Och! no, ma'am," replied Kate, but 
with a flounce that contradicted the asser- 
tion ; " nothing in the world," and she 
began to tie some of her lady's ribbons, 
evidently in great agitation of spirits, 
" only that I think it a sin and a shame, 
and a burning scandal, for some people for 
to go to act by other people as they have 
done, robbing them of the thanks that are 
their due for risking their life." 

" And who has been guilty of this in- 
justice?" asked Miss Erin. 

" Oh, ma'am, perhaps it would be better 
for me not to tell ;" for Kate was not ex- 
actly sure of what the sentiments of her 
lady might be for lord Altidore. 

" And why so, if at least any injustice 
can be redressed ?" 

*' Why then, the truth is," said Kate, 
** it was not lord Altidore that saved your 
life, but " 

" Good God !" exclaimed Miss Erin, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

with the wildest emotion, ** not lord Alti- 
dore ! it was then — ~" 

" Mr. O'Brien !*' cried Kate. 

" And do you really tell me this — tell 
me that it was really he who saved me ?" 
said Miss Erin, dropping, through abso- 
lute tremor, on a chair. 

"Faith and I do," replied Kate; "it 
was he himself, and no one else ; didn't I 
hear the whole truth from little Paddy 
Byrne this morning, before ever I met the 
corporal with his story !" 

" Well?" cried Miss Erin, in a tone of 
involuntary interrogation. 

" Little Paddy came this morning to 
borrow one of my new caps for his sister, 
who is going to a dance this evening," re- 
sumed Kate; " and so, while I was pin- 
ning it up in paper for him — * Ah then, 
what a fright it was myself, Kate,* says 
Paddy, who is as cute and cunning as an 
old fox, * got the other morning, when I 
saw the young mistress near drowning !' — 
* You !' says I ; ' why were you by, child; 
when she fell into the water ?' — • Troth, 



276 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and I was,' said he, * though ne'er a 
one of them knew it, because I got so 
frightened at the big dog, I hid myself 
amongst the bushes, and saw O'Brien, of 
Altoir-na-Grenie, with his great big dog, 

jump into the river to save ' — * Tut, 

you fool !' says I, ' you mean lord Alti- 
dore.' — ' Indeed and I don't,' says he, * I 
know the differ betwixt them well enough, 
^d I'll take my davy of it, it was O'Brien 
saved her; and more nor that, he cried 
and bemoaned over her, and so did his 
big dog, till some fine lady came from the 
house, with lord Altidore, and then she 
forced Miss Erin out of his arms, and 
made him go away; and as soon as he did, 
she gave the young mistress to lord Alti- 
dore, and tould him they'd make belief to 
sir William that it was he had got her out 
of the water." 

" My heavens, what a thought !" ex- 
claimed Miss Erin, starting from her seat 
in irrepressible indignation. 

** Ay, no wonder you are vexed and 
angry, ma'am," observed Kate ; " I was in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 

a fine flustration myself when I heard it ; 
and then to get so affronted as I did on 
account ! Just after Paddy left me, I re- 
collected I had something to say to Judy 
Con ray, just opposite one of the park 
gates, so, as I was crossing the road to her 
cabin, who should I come plump upon but 
corporal M*Cormick, Mr. O'Brien's own 
man, and for the matter of that indeed, his 
foster-brother too — * So is that you, Mr. 
M'Cormick ?' says I ; ' what's the news 
with you this fine morning?' — ' I have 
none for praters,' says he, gruffly, and 
walked on. — * Praters !' says I, bawling 
after him ; ' very well, Mr. Terry, the 
next time I speak to you, I believe you'll 
give a civil answer.' — ' I never wish to 
speak to you,' says he, stopping short, 
* nor any one belonging to the unnatural 
crew you live with.' — * What's that you 
say,' cried I, going up to him, and I was 
going to threaten him, when plump it 
comes into my head, that all this crossness 
was about the trick that had been {^ayed 
about his master ; so, with that, altering 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

my tone, * Terry,' says I, laying hold of his 
arm, I'd lay you a tenpenny I know what's 
put you in this humour this morning.' — 
' Ah, don't be Terrying me,' says he, 
making as though he wanted to shake my 
hand off his arm ; * isn't my heart almost 
broke, through them in that great house; 
for isn't my jewel of a master in a fever 
that may be the death of him, for saving 
the life of a person that has never said so 
much as thank ye to him for his kindness!" 

" Good Heavens ! — so ill ! Of what base, 
what black ingratitude must he have ac- 
cused us!" exclaimed Miss Erin; and, 
without waiting to hear more, she flew 
from her own to her mother's dressing- 
room. 

Her ladyship's surprise and indignation 
at her communication fully equalled her 
own. Lady Jane was sent for, and in- 
formed of what they had heard. In a 
falsehood there was no danger of being 
proved, her ladyship had quite sufficient 
courage to persist; but when the truth 
must be discovered, she was always candid 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

enough to acknowledge it. Accordingly, 
finding that, from what had occurred, there 
would be no use in denying it in this in- 
stance, she at once affected surprise at the 
astonishment she witnessed, protesting 
that she had all along conceived it was per- 
fectly known that Mr. O'Brien was the 
person to whom the family was so much 
indebted on a recent occasion. 

" Oh, lady Jane," a little reproachfully 
demanded lady Erin, " how could you 
think so, when you never heard us men- 
tion him?" 

" Oh, really, because I thought you 
might have some sufficient reason for your 
silence about him." 

*' What ! for ingratitude, for thus slight- 
ing and ill-treating the son of my dearest 
friend! What reason could possibly be 
adduced, that could justify such conduct?" 
said lady Erin, as in much agitation she 
walked about the room ; " and I wonder, 
lady Jane, this did not occur to you, and 
convince you that our silence must be 
owing to some mistake." 



280 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Why, really so it might," rephed her 
ladyship, " but that I really thought sir 
William must have seen him, as it was 
not till he was close to us Mr. O'Brien 
begged me to let him resign Miss Erin to 
my care, he felt himself so chilled by his 
wet clothes." 

■* And why let him depart?" asked lady 
Erin again, in a tone of reproach. " Had 
you made him come to the house, he might 
have been saved from the illness under 
which he now labours." 

" My dear lady Erin, I really cannot 
help being a little surprised at the many 
whys arid wherefores you ask me ! Do 
you suppose that I have no nerves — no 
feeling ! that I could have been cool and 
collected at such a moment, when I saw 
this dear girl just rescued from a watery 
grave? I really was so shocked, that I 
neither knew what I did or said ; and to 
this, of course, is owing the idle story you 
have heard — one which, upon reflection, 
I am sure you must laugh at. God knows, 
I believe my faculties were never very in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

ventive ones ; but if they were, I am sure 
it is not at such an instant, and for a mere 
acquaintance like lord Altidore, I should 
have thought of exercising them. He is 
certainly a young nobleman I admire and 
esteem ; but still it is not to be supposed 
that it is for a person I am unconnected 
with, I could be induced to form any con* 
trivances, if indeed naturally inclined to 
them." 

What she said was plausible; and, in 
consequence, lady Erin began to feel vex- 
ed at having communicated to her the 
whole of what she had learned from her 
daughter; now that agitation had in some 
degree subsided, she wondered how she 
could possibly have given credence to the 
insinuation it contained against her; for 
what object could she possibly have, in 
imposing lord Altidore upon the family, 
as the person to whom they were under 
such an unreturnable obligation? There 
was but one end it could have in view, 
that of recommending him to the notice 
of her daughter; and how, unconnected 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as he was with her, could she be interest- 
ed in bringing about an union between 
them? 

Miss Erin was not at quite so great a 
loss to conjecture. In spite of her natural 
candour, she could not help feeling a slight 
suspicion of the integrity of lady Jane in 
this instance ; she had heard something of 
her attachment to Donaghue, and the re- 
sult of the intimation was an idea of the 
truth; but, for the present at least, she 
determined to confine this suspicion to her 
own breast. She knew she could not dis- 
close it to her mother, without probably 
exciting a prejudice against her ladyship; 
and so abhorrent to the native generosity 
of her soul was the thought of doing any 
one an injury, that she decided on letting 
nothing tempt her to run the risk without 
sufficient grounds. 

Anxious to lose no further time in evin- 
cing their sense of wliat they owed him, 
and the estimation in which he was held, 
on account of his mother, lady Erin sent 
for sir William, that she might get him 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 283 

to call on Donaghue immediately ; but he 
was gone out on a short ride. 

This was a lucky circumstance, lady 
Jane thought, as furnishing her with time 
to carry into effect an idea she had just 
conceived. Accordingly, hastening from 
lady Erin's dressing-roon^, she flew to her 
own, and, without a moment's delay, ad- 
dressed the following note to Donaghue. 



" To O'Donaghue OBrien, Esquire. 

" DEAR, DEAR DONAGHUE, 

" How impossible to speak what 
my disappointment has been, at finding 
no intimacy subsists between you and the 
icy beings here ! Had I earlier been aware 
of this, their invitation would, I believe, 
have been given in vain. Great, however, 
as is the pleasure I should derive from 
your society, I should be sorry to enjoy it 
at the expence of your feelings, as must 
be the case, were it in this dull mansion I 
had the happiness of it. Need I explain, 
or will not your own quick apprehension 



284 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

suggest, what I mean — that sir William 
Erin is, in short, a cold, calculating man 
of the world, too sensible of the prize he 
has in his possession not to be cautious 
and wary about those whom he allows to 
approach it, and to which caution and wa- 
riness you are to impute the shameful 
manner in which your recent conduct has 
been requited. At length, however, he 
and his formal lady have been rendered so 
sensible of the odious light in which this 
must make them appear, I won't say thro' 
whose reproaches or representations, that 
it has been agreed upon between them, 
he should pay you a visit this morning; 
would that 1 could accompany him ! but 
to propose such a thing, and I suppose 
lady Erin would become a petrifaction. 
Oh, Donaghue, how impossible — how 
very impossible, in this way, to do justice 
to the interest you have inspired ! but I 
trust you will yet let me contrive some 
other method of proving it. Adieu ! You 
must contrive to let me soon see you, in 
some way or other, for I have a thousand 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

things to speak to you of. Once more 
farewell! and believe me still, as ever, 
your devoted 

" Jane. 
" Ashley Fakr 



Donaghue's neglect, in letting his clothes 
dry on him, through the agitation he was 
in, brought on a cold, attended with fe- 
verish symptoms, that the increasing dis- 
turbance of his mind did not by any means 
tend to lessen. He tried hov/ever to keep 
up, and was languidly reading in the li- 
brary, when lady Jane's billet was receiv- 
ed. The feelings and determination ex- 
cited by the perusal of it were just such as 
she had foreseen, from her knowledge of 
his proud and lofty nature. Burning with 
indignation — proudly shrinking from the 
idea of any attention that was not the re- 
sult of voluntary inclination, he directly 
rung for the corporal, and gave orders to 
be denied to the baronet, should he call. 

Hardly had he issued these orders, when 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the library door was thrown open, and he 
heard some one advancing into the room ; 
it was not the step of Cormick, and, glan- 
cing to see who it was, he started with emo- 
tion from his chair, at beholding a stranger, 
whom he instantly concluded to be, nor 
was he mistaken, sir William Erin. 

So little, after the command he had gi- 
ven, was seeing him expected, that for a 
moment or two, through the confusion oc- 
casioned by surprise, he forgot the atten- 
tion due to him ; then recollectinfj himself 
a little, he was moving to place a chair 
for him, when sir William prevented him, 
by taking his hand.—" Mr. O'Brien," he 

said, " I am come to apologize But, 

good God !" starting, as he felt the burn- 
ing hand of Donaghue, " what a hand is 
this! I fear you have terribly neglected 
yourself May I ask, have you any me- 
dical advice?" 

Donaghue tried to smile, as he answer- 
ed in the negative. 

" You have been to blame then — very 
much to blame indeed," said sir William ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. £87 

" and But, excuse me; you shall soon 

know the reason of my leaving you thus 
abruptly;" and without further ceremony, 
he vanished from the room. 

Donaghue could be at no loss to con- 
jecture the cause of his abrupt departure; 
it was evident to him it was for the pur- 
pose of sending some medical man to him ; 
and determined to owe him no kind of 
obligation, he again rang for Cormick, 
and having severely reprimanded him for 
his inattention to his recent orders, strictly 
commanded, that on no account or pretext 
whatever, he should admit any other per- 
son to him that day. — " But, that's true," 
he added ; " who was it admitted sir Wil- 
liam?" 

The corporal looked confused — " I'll run 
and ask, your honour." 

" No; I think it was you that opened 
the library door for him." 

" But, plase your honour, it v/asn't I 
that opened the gate." 

" Well, take care that neither gate nor 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

library be opened again this day to any 
stranger." 

Yet but for the prejudice excited against 
sir William by the artful representation of 
lady Jane, Donaghue would not have dis- 
dained owing him a kindness, so prepos- 
sessing were his looks and manner, so ut- 
terly different from what he expected to 
have found him. His air and figure were 
noble and commanding, his countenance 
full of expression; it was one of those 
heads that the ancient painters have so de- 
lighted to copy, as indicative of high in- 
tellectual endowments ; the forehead high, 
the temples thinly shaded, the nose roman, 
the eyes piercing, and a great sweetness 
about the mouth; and, altogether, had 
Donaghue been left to his own unbiassed 
judgment, he would have pronounced him 
a very different character from what he 
was led to imagine him ; but as it was, he 
concluded this pleasing exterior to be but 
a specious covering to a cold, worldly 
heart, and accordingly did not permit it 
to have any influence upon him ; his forced 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 289 

notice he determined to reject, and in every 
way to shun and avoid that which was not 
the effect of gratitude or poUteness, but 
reproach and shame. 

The corporal was excessively discon- 
certed by the reprimand he had received, 
not so much on account of the anger it 
imphed, as of the determination to decHne 
society. Donaghue himself could not pos- 
sibly have been more indignant than he 
was at sir William's conduct in the first 
instance; but since the baronet had, at 
length, thought proper to wheel about, 
and evince an inclination to make amends 
for it, why reject his overture, and thus 
deny himself an opportunity of, perhaps, 
obtaining the young hai^e^ as Miss Erin 
was denominated, and of whose not enter- 
taining a secret partiality for his master 
Cormick could not be persuaded. — *' But 
because he hasn't a fortune like her own 
now, his pride won't let him try his chance 
for her; though there's none, I'm sure," 
pursued Cormick, " half so worthy of her, 

VOL. IL O 



290 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with the right Milesian blood he has in his 
veins, and that handsome face and figure he 
has of his own. Why, though our regiment 
was the handsomest at Waterloo, there was 
not a man in it, gentle or simple, to be com- 
pared to him ; and he to be going to shut 
himself up, like a hermit, here ! Musha ! 
I'm sure it would be as bad as murther to 
let him ; and so the devil a bit of me, if I 
ivas brought to a hundred court-martials 
for disobedience of orders, will be denying 
him ; but, however, not to be bringing an 
ould house about my ears, I'll manage 
nately and cleverly, just to keep out of 
the way when any body's coming. Och 
hone ! how easily matters could all be set- 
tled, if we had but hold of ould squire 
Dennis's pot of money, that we have all 
heard so much about — how I should like 
to hear the rustling of his ould silk gown 
some night on the stairs, coming to tell 
us where it was hid ! But, no fear of that, 
his ould bones are resting quiet enough in 
the churchyard, I'll be bound, without his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

ever dreaming how much we want a little 
of his money here." 

Hardly had he decided on evading his 
master's orders, when the physician and 
surgeon of sir William Erin made their 
appearance. Could he have brought him- 
self to exclude visitors, it certainly would 
not have been gentlemen of the faculty, 
for whom he had the highest reverence, 
and whose attendance he, just at this mo- 
ment, deemed absolutely essential at Al- 
toir-na-Grenie. Accordingly he conduct- 
ed them into the passage leading to the 
library, and then left them to announce 
themselves. 

This the physician took upon himself to 
do — " Be seated, be seated, Mr. O'Brien," 
he said, on the rising of Donaghue, to 
whom they were entire strangers, from 
his chair at their entrance, in no little sur- 
prise, and with no slight sensation of anger, 
at their appearance, after the peremptory 
orders he had just issued ; " invalids should 
never use ceremony to their medical 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

friends; and, between ourselves, give me 
the ready money, and let any one else 
have the other money that likes it better ; 
for, as my friend Demosthenes observes, 
* the root of education is bitter, but the 
fruit sweet ;' that is, the cost it occasions, 
and the fruit it produces. Now, thank 
the stars, the first was my parents', but the 
latter is mine. But, to introduce my self- 
know then, good sir, that I am doctor 
Foley, physician to sir William Erin, lord 
Altidore, sir Ulick Magennis, and a hun- 
dred other baronets, lords, and commoners ; 
and this gentleman here, my friend, or sa- 
tellite, for he is generally seen revolving 
round me, like a secondary round its pri- 
mary, surgeon Hogan O'SulHvan ; and 
that we have both done ourselves the ho- 
nour of calling on you, by the special di- 
rections of sir William Erin, to see and in- 
quire into the nature of the illness under 
which you labour at present, and consult 
and advise what is to be done for it." 

" Really, my good sir," said Donaghue, 
unable, notwithstanding his vexation at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

being thus intruded on, to suppress a snaile 
^t the coxcomical manner of the fellow, 
** you have given yourself a great deal of 
trouble about nothing, though, of course, 
I must be obliged to sir William for send- 
ing you; but you'll find there's nothing 
the matter with me but a cold," 

" A cold ! and what else would you de- 
sire us to find you afflicted with ? is it 
with the plague? A cold nothing! when 
a cold is the foundation of almost every 
disorder. A fig for the goodness of .your 
constitution, when that insidious innovator 
of one steals upon you, for it often comes 
in such a questionable shape, that we are 
not aware of our danger till too late. One 
friend meets another, and — ' How are 
you?' says he; * you look shockingly !' — 
* Oh, so so ! I have got a cold.' — * A cold ! 
oh ! is that all ? Take my advice, don't be 

slopping yourself with apothecary's d d 

stuff, but take some white-wine whey to- 
night, with a little nitre in it, and, my life 
on it, you will be as well as ever you were 
by to-morrow.' A few days after, some 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

one meets his man, galloping along like a 
race horse — * Holloa! John, whither so 
fast ? how is your master ?' — * Oh, God 
bless yon, sir, don't stop me!' — ' What, 
going for a doctor for him ?' — * Oh ! no, 
sir; he wouldn't have a doctor when one 
might have done him good ; he got a cold, 
and doctored himself, and now I am going 
for an undertaker, because poor madam's 
mind won*t be easy till all is over.' — But 
this is losing time, and I see no time should 
be lost, for your eyes and cheeks have all 
the brightness and hectic of fever. Your 
hand, my good sir. Bless me !" seizing it 
without having it given, " what a pulse is 
here ! — Come, Mr. O Sullivan, prepare your 
lancet ; nothing else, in the first instance, 
will, I see, do here." 

Donaghue tried to resist, but it seemed 
to no purpose ; the bell was rung with au- 
thority by Foley, and on the corporal 
making his appearance, he was command- 
ed to prepare the things requisite for the 
intended operation immediately. 

While waiting his return — " You 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

really should be happy in your mind, Mr, 
O'Brien," observed Foley, conceitedly, 
" when you reflect on the skill you have 
on your side. What says my friend Di- 
ogenes of an accomplished practitioner in 
his day ? and what he says, perhaps, might 
not be inapplicable to some in the present 
— * He did not come to his profession, as 
the saying is, with unwashed feet, but was 
also intimate with the poets, and had re- 
tained most of them in memory, and was 
versed in recitation, and the institutes of 
philosophy, not superficially.' But here 
comes your man — and now, my good 
friend, O'Sullivan " 

" Really this is making an invalid of 
me, whether I will or not," said Dona- 
ghue, drawing back. 

" Well, and what else are you ? I hope 
you won't pretend to say you are well, 
when a medical man tells you you are ill." 

" But I may be allowed to know what 
my illness requires." 

" By no means." 

"Nor 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

"No; grant me two propositions, and 
I shall prove it." 

" Not before I know what they are." 

" Will you admit, when the body is 
diseased, the mind may be affected ?" 

" Certainly." 

" Will you admit, when the mind is af- 
fected, it cannot be clear in its judgment?" 

" Assuredly." 

" Then that's your case at present — so 
to business, my friend," slapping O'Sulli- 
van on the back. 

Donaghue still appearing as if inclined 
to object — " Ah! then what signifies," 
cried the corporal, in an impatient tone, on 
whom indeed he, from time to time, dart- 
ed an angry glance, " giving me all these 
sour looks ?" fearful, if he held out much 
longer, his obstinacy would drive away 
these medical gentlemen in disgust, with- 
out his reaping any benefit from their visit 
— " It's myself that wonders how you can 
make such a piece of work about letting 
your friends take a little of your blood, 
when you never minded how much .your 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

enemies got. Often and often have I 
heard doctor Rosebud say, that let a body- 
be perverse when they may, they never 
should be perverse when they are " 

"What, is that mad Rosebud?" asked 
Foley, 

" Mad ! mad !" repeated the corporal, 
indignantly ; " if he is mad, I wouldn't 
swear that my neighbours are in their 
senses." 

" Ha ! that's very well for you indeed. 
I perceive, my friend, you possess the gift 
of pleonasm." 

Donaghue, now quite worn out, feeling 
himself really ill, and believing, notwith- 
standing the coxcombery of the fellow, he 
must possess skill, or he would not be em- 
ployed by sir William Erin, thought he 
might as well, without further hesitation, 
let his advice be followed. 

" And now, sir," said the doctor, as he 

prepared to take leave, after the operation 

was over, and he had told him how he was 

to be managed, " I leave you to rest. As 

o 2 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

my friend Euripides has it — * Oh sleep ! 
thou reliever of distress, how sweet thou 
comest in time of need! — oh, venerable 
oblivion of evils, and desirable divinity to 
the unfortunate, how good thou art!" 



CHAPTER IX. 



** Cease to lament Eve's fall with tearful eyes^ 
Her fall should make succeeding daughters wise ; 
Yet view the sex, e'en now they thoughtless stray^ 
Where wild imprudence points the devious way ; 
Art's abject slaves, capricious fashion's tools, 
The dupes of gamblers, and the sport of fools. 
Let conscious virtue o'er your heart preside. 
Control each thought, and ev'ry action guide; 
Then in your breast shall Eden bloom anew, 
And long-lost Paradise revive in you." 

Rest was indeed essentially necessary for 
a person who had suffered so much through 
agitation as had Donaghue, but it was 
sought in vain; he retired early to seek 
it, but his sleep was short and broken; 
and as he lay awake, meditating, his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

eyes involuntarily wandered over the vast 
extent of prospect his chamber command- 
ed, for his bed, by his particular desire, 
had been drawn close to the window. 

The night was stillness itself — not a 
breath disturbed the lightest leaf that com- 
posed the foliage of the various trees — not 
a sound was heard, save the low heaving 
of the waves on the shore, or, at times, the 
barking of the cabin cur, as now he was 
roused from his slumber by a benighted 
traveller, now bayed the moon, which 
shone resplendent in her meridian, and 
shewed the planets, the stars, and the 
whole face of heaven, without a cloud. — 
" How tranquillizing this scene !" sighed 
Donaghue ; " but 'tis in such scenes, in- 
deed, that tranquillity can alone be found ; 
and yet these I must forego, contrary to 
my wish of remaining where I could en- 
joy them as I pleased till the arrival of 
my uncle; for, after what has occurred, 
the secret of my being in the neighbour- 
hood being disclosed, how can I remain 
here, to be exposed to the intrusions of 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

impertinence, the insults of curiosity, and, 
worse than all, the supercilious attentions 
of forced complaisance! Yet, after all, 
whither can I betake me, that I shall not 
be liable to what I wish to avoid here? 
and how can I endure to rush amidst the 
noise and confusion of a populous city, 
without any interest in its pursuits or 
amusements, or to become the stare of an 
insignificant country village ! No, im- 
possible ! and, after standing the brunt for 
a little while of what is disagreeable here, 
may I not hope I shall be allowed to sink 
back into the solitude I at present covet?" 
Yet still he was terribly disquieted at 
the idea of the Erin family being actually 
in the neighbourhood. Since it was so, 
he almost wished, at times, that lady Jane 
had not opened his eyes to the real cha- 
racter of the baronet, since, if still in ig- 
norance of it, a transient pleasure might, 
at least, have been derived from their 
chance encounters. Still, however, nothing 
so deeply, so severely wounded his heart, 
as the detection of the error he had been 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

under, with regard to the real disposition 
of lady Erin; yet could his mother, in 
whose representation of her the error had 
originated, have been so utterly mistaken, 
after her long and intimate knowledge of 
her, as to have described her as she did, 
without just cause! and might not what 
had tempted him to beheve her judgment 
erroneous, have originated, after all, in 
some hint, some inadvertent expression 
from Miss Erin to his prejudice? The 
thought was too painful to be endured ; 
and letting drop the side curtain which he 
had raised, he endeavoured to take refuge 
from it in sleep. 

From this oblivion of care he was sud- 
denly roused, by fancying he felt the bed 
shook under him with great violence ; he 
started up, and, listening attentively, ima- 
gined he heard a stifled breathing in the 
apartment, which was very large, and 
quite remote from every other inhabited 
one in the castle. Drawing aside the cur- 
tain, he cast his eyes about, and by the 
light of the moon, which still shone bright 



302 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

into the room, he saw, or thought he saw, 
a figure gliding along the wall, at the fur- 
ther extremity. He instantly sprang from 
the bed ; but ere he had reached the spot, 
whatever it was he had seen had disap- 
peared. Admitting as much light as he 
could into the chamber, he eagerly exa- 
mined it and the adjoining closet, but to 
no purpose, no one was found lurking in 
either, and accordingly he was induced to 
believe his imagination had deceived him ; 
yet if ever he had seen or heard a human 
being, he thought he had done so at the 
moment ; and what was more, he had not 
been dreaming at the moment he was dis- 
turbed in any way that could have mis- 
led his fancy. 

The remainder of the night was passed 
in a state of watchfulness, so that his 
health was certainly not much amended 
by the repose it had afforded him ; and, 
in consequence, Foley, on paying him a 
visit in the morning, ordered him still to 
keep himself quiet. 

In the course of the day sir William 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SOS 

Erin paid another visit ; but Donaghue, 
in pursuance of the resolution of the pre- 
ceding one, availed himself of the pretext 
with which he had indeed furnished him, 
namely, illness, to decline seeing him. 

Great was the anxiety which his conti- 
nued indisposition excited at the Vale; 
and how soothed would have been the la- 
cerated heart of Donaghue, had he been 
aware of it ! but there was no one to im- 
part to him an intimation of what would 
have been so consolatory. Lady Jane was 
the only person with whom he had any 
kind of correspondence, and it was not her 
plan to mention any thing that could pos- 
sibly tend to bring him there; in the con- 
tinual billets therefore which she was dis- 
patching to him, to inquire after his health, 
she took care to make no representation 
that was not calculated to make him view 
the family at the Vale in an odious lightj 
and inspire him with the most rancorous 
feelings of dislike towards them. 

But though sir William by no means 
merited the character she gave him, there 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was a sufficient coolness about him to in- 
duce him to determine on thoroughly un- 
derstanding the disposition and character 
of Donaghue, ere he gave him any posi- 
tive encouragement to become intimate 
there. This determination originated not 
however in any selfish or downright world- 
ly consideration, but the natural anxiety 
of a parent for the happiness of a child, 
and that child an only one. With the ro- 
mantic wish that subsisted between the 
mother of Donaghue and lady Erin he had 
all along been acquainted, nor had the re- 
verse of fortune that the respective parties 
had experienced rendered him more averse 
to it now than he was before ; but ere he 
could be brought to evince any open ap- 
proval of it, he must be satisfied that Do- 
naghue was worthy of the treasure which 
the accomplishment of it would put him 
in possession of To ascertain this, obser- 
vation, and inquiries, and investigation, 
would be requisite; and lest the result 
should not be what he really hoped, both 
prudence and humanity demanded, he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 305 

conceived, that he should keep the young 
people as much asunder as possible, that 
the separation to which they might be fi- 
nally doomed should not be attended 
with any unnecessary pain; he had re- 
ceived a hint, that they did not view one 
another with absolute indifference, and 
this, of course, shewed the expediency of 
the precaution he had resolved on. 

That Donaghue was a highly prepos- 
sessing and interesting young man, he was 
perfectly aware ere he himself saw him ; 
but he was equally so, that he might be 
all this without being the choice he could 
approve of for his daughter. He trembled 
indeed to think of the pernicious effect 
which the example of a thoughtless and 
dissipated father might have had upon his 
morals, and determined again and again 
to be assured they had escaped the dread- 
ed taint, ere he gave any decided encou- 
ragement to his visits at the Vale. 

Lady Erin attempted not to oppose his 
determination, though her heart yearned 
with even maternal fondness to have Do- 



306 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

naghue with them, and evince her respect 
and affection for the memory of the mo- 
ther by attention and kindness to the son. 
Yet she was too well satisfied of the sound- 
ness of sir William's judgment, and the 
consequent propriety of what he had now 
decided on, to offer any opposition to it ; 
but she hoped — she trusted, that Dona- 
ghue would stand the test of investigation; 
that thus, by being proved worthy of her 
daughter, she might have the happiness 
of thinking, that through their means the 
son of her dearest friend was restored to 
his proper rank and expectations in life ; 
and on their daughter's account, abstracted 
from any considerations about him, she 
hoped this, for with the secret of her heart 
she was acquainted ; and though she had 
not a doubt that her well-regulated mind 
would enable her to overcome any favour- 
able sentiments for him, if assured they 
were unmerited, still she was certain a 
pain must attend the struggle with them 
that she wished her to be saved from. To 
have had a concealment from her mother 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 307 

indeed was a thought that had never en- 
tered the heart of Miss Erin, conceiving, 
as she would have done, to have had one, 
that she was guilty of a breach of filial 
duty and affection, and withdrawing her- 
self from the counsel and guidance of su- 
perior wisdom; but it was stipulated, that 
what she revealed concerning Donaghue 
should go no further; and lady Erin, who 
viewed what had offended in his conduct, 
and been properly and sufficiently resent- 
ed, she conceived, in the same light her 
daughter did, as the result of what reflec- 
tion was only wanting to subdue, felt no 
temptation to forget the stipulation. 

That a young man, followed, flattered, 
and admired, as he had been, should tran- 
siently have been led to entertain over- 
weening notions of his pretensions, she 
could hardly wonder; and what we can 
excuse, it follows must be forgiven. Such 
were the beings, liberal, just, and feeling, 
whom lady Jane represented as cold, cal- 
culating, and selfish ; and their mansion, 
the abode of elegant hospitality and ge^ 



3^08 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nuine pleasure, as the residence of d ill- 
ness and formality. 

Ashley Vale, the embellished seat of 
sir William's forefathers, was indeed a 
place well adapted for being the scene of 
elegant enjoyments, and worthy of being 
the residence of a person of taste and for- 
tune. We shall not enter into an elabo- 
rate description of the house, the dazzling 
whiteness of the stone of which it was 
built, its porticoes, pediments, or pillars, 
of the composite order, or noble ranges of 
apartments, furnished with all that was 
requisite for comfort and magnificence, 
with some of the finest specimens in paint- 
ing and sculpture of the ancient schools, 
but content ourselves with saying, it was 
a noble mansion, reflecting on all who had 
been employed in erecting or adorning it. 
Its site was a beautiful vale, fertilized by 
a fine piece of water, environed by hills, 
laid out in the most tasteful manner, and 
embellished with ornamental buildings. 
The first of these that particularly attract- 
ed the attention, was the banqueting- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 309 

house, containing a handsome, well-pro- 
portioned apartment for dining, and an- 
other for sleeping, with a sofa, within a 
screen of light covering, and both furnish- 
ed with statues and paintings. At a cor- 
ner of the lawn, in front of this building, 
was an Ionic dome temple, in ruins, from 
which the views were various and pleasing 
— some of water, surrounded with wood, 
others up to a Gothic tower, and some 
down upon a steep glen, with a mountain 
torrent rushing through it. 

Advancing up the hill to the right, you 
looked down upon a double cascade, one 
falling, to appearance, out of a cavern of 
rock, into a canal that, a little lower down, 
formed another, and was then lost to the 
view amidst the woods. Winding yet 
farther in the same direction, you mount- 
ed a little hill, with a tent on the summit, 
in a very picturesque and agreeable situa- 
tion; for you looked down upon a fine 
winding lake, the same that floated the 
valley before the mansion, nearly sur- 
rounded by a bold shore of wood. 



SIO TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

From this bill yon next visited the ro- 
mantic and extensive ruins of an old abbey. 
Returning from this, you descended to the 
valley, whence the view of the tent hill, 
with its rising woods, was exquisitely 
beautiful. From hence the walk rose 
upon the edge of the surrounding hills, 
which were covered with wood, and through 
the trees you caught many obscure views, 
that were extremely picturesque ; in one 
direction you looked down upon the lake, 
in another you caught a most beautiful 
view of the abbey, with the river mean- 
dering towards it, the whole encircled by 
an amphitheatre of hanging woods, of an- 
cient growth and varied foliage. 

Farther on, from a deep hollow of wood, 
you viewed an obelisk, rising from above 
the umbrageous shades at the opposite 
side; and hence again ascending, came to 
the Gothic tower, a tasteful building, com- 
manding various views, finely diversified. 
To the left you saw a tower, rising out of 
hanging woods; next to that a building, 
peeping over trees in a beautiful manner; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

then the ruined dome temple, besides a 
variety of other objects equally pleasing 
and picturesque. From hence you were 
led to the edge of a vast woody precipice, 
bounding the winding valley in which the 
ruins of the abbey stood, with a rapid river 
rolling through it, the views of which, 
through steeps of wood and romantic 
rocks, had a very fine effect. 

Winding from this again towards the 
house, after passing a Roman mount and 
Chinese bridge, you came to a prospect 
that formed a pleasing contrast to the 
wildness of this, that of some well- culti- 
vated grounds and gentlemen's seats, with 
a neat village, and the steeple of its rustic 
church ; and, upon the whole, Ashley Vale 
was well calculated to please the lover of 
romantic scenery, with its fine deep glens, 
its winding streams, falling in cascades, 
and the solemn grandeur of its woods ; 
and no one seeing it, or participating in 
its elegant hospitality, or varied amuse- 
ments, would have allowed the necessity 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of flying from Ireland, as a scene of sa- 
vageness and sterility. 

Fond of society, and not wishing to be 
continually forsaking home in quest of it, 
sir William had collected a large party of 
friends about him, who, when the mind 
sought to unbend itself, gave an agreeable 
variety to the passing hours. But, in al- 
lowing himself the enjoyments permitted 
by fortune, he never for a moment forgot 
that it was not granted solely for the pur- 
pose of his own personal gratification ; va- 
rious were the benevolent plans that were 
suggested, and carried into effect, for the 
relief of present misery, and the gradual 
improvement and amelioration of the con- 
dition of those about him. In many of these. 
Miss Erin was allowed to exercise her judg- 
ment; in particular, in the formation of a 
female school on the estate ; and the libe- 
ral and judicious plan on which she had 
this established, met with her father's high- 
est approval. 

In this manner he wished, or rather 
sought, to ascertain her judgment and real 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 313 

bent of mind; for, till positively put to 
the proof, by having the power of acting 
as we please, he knew it was impossible to 
form a decided opinion of them. Tlie 
moment for putting them to the test had 
arrived, and she bore it as a rational and 
accountable being should do, with no ex- 
travagant elation at the unexpected change 
in her prospects, or forgetfulness of there 
being higher aims in view than the pur- 
suit of pleasure, or adulation of a giddy 
multitude. 

Yet, while she never lost sight of the 
high responsibihty attached to our condi- 
tion here, her cheerfulness and vivacity 
were just what were natural to her period 
of life and situation; but where are either 
to be sought or expected, if not in a well- 
regulated mind, and the heart that is guilt- 
less of offence towards God and man ? 

Still, however, there were moments when 
she was more inclined to pensiveness than 
to either, strongly interested as she was 
about Donaghue, and uncertain as she 

VOL. II. p 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was of wliat her father's sentiments or in- 
tentions were respecting him ; for sir Wil- 
liam had made it an express condition with 
lady Erin, that she should enter into no 
explanation on the subject with her, lest it 
should be the means of giving rise to 
hopes that might never be realized, for he 
knew on what a slight foundation the hu- 
man mind, particularly the youthful one, 
is apt to build a fabric it likes on. 

Feeling what she did for Donaghue, it 
may naturally be supposed she repented 
her positive rejection of him ; but no, the 
offended pride and delicacy of her sex 
would not permit this ; but, having satis- 
fied these by the resentment she had evin- 
ced, she could not but wish that an oppor- 
tunity might be afforded her for proving 
that her indignation was not unappeasable, 
so thoroughly was she convinced of the 
superiority of Donaghue's mind, of his 
needing but a transient check to be awa- 
kened to a conviction of any thing that 
was reprehensible in his notions or con- 
duct, and so deep was the interest, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

what had befallen him, and all she had 
learned of him since their parting, had ex- 
cited in her mind. But she strove, as 
usual, to keep her feelings in subjection, 
aware that inordinate anxiety about any 
thing is a kind of wresting of our fate out 
of the hands of that watchful Providence, 
that best knows what will most essentially 
conduce to our happiness and weal. In 
short, she was all her fond parents could 
wish, and the more thoroughly they un- 
derstood her various excellencies, the more 
anxious, of course, they naturally became 
to ensure her felicity. 



CHAPTER X, 



" Oh ! she is all that painting can express, 
Or youthful poets fancy when they love.'' 

But though sir William Erin did not 

mean, at present at least, to deport him- 

p 2 



316 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

self in such a way to Donaghue, as should 
induce him to think he was a privileged 
visitor at the Vale, yet he by no means 
intended to slight him, or evince a disin- 
clination to his acquaintance. Owing him 
the debt of gratitude He did, such conduct, 
exclusive of any other consideration, would 
have been out of the question. Accord- 
ingly, as soon as he understood he was on 
the mending hand, he sent to request his 
company to dinner; but the invitation 
was unhesitatingly refused, to the great 
disappointment of Miss Erin, and the equal 
joy of lady Jane, who had done all in her 
power, indeed, to prevent its acceptance, 
by informing Donaghue, the moment she 
knew it was in agitation, that it was en- 
tirely the result of a battle between sir 
WiUiam and his lady, the latter feeling 
some little shame, from the regard she had 
professed for his mother, at the idea of his 
not receiving some little attention from 
them. 

But though Donaghue refused this in- 
vitation with all the internal disdain he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 317 

"Conceived it merited, politeness required, 
he thought, that he should return the visit 
of sir William, and leave his card for the 
ladies, after their polite inquiries after him 
during his indisposition ; and this he ac- 
cordingly did, at a time when he knew 
the family were out, with a determination, 
that as it was his first, so it should be his 
last, visit at the Vale. 

Every day he had some additional rea- 
son for regretting the arrival of the family 
there, since to that he imputed the disco- 
very of his being in the neighbourhood, a 
circumstance that exposed him to a good 
deal of what he had apprehended from it, 
several visits, as he conceived, of curiosity, 
and some invitations he found it difficult 
to decline, but which he nevertheless forced 
himself to do, hoping, by persisting in still 
refusing them, he should, at length, cease 
to be teazed with them, and allowed to re- 
main quiet in the retirement he chose. 

Amongst those who proved very trou- 
blesome was sir Ulick Magennis, partly 
through the suggestions of his lady, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

partly through the vapidness of his own 
mind, that occasioned him always to have 
a burthen of tediousness ready to bestow 
on any one who would let him. Her la- 
dyship had got her eldest hope provided 
for, major Mackenzie not having disap- 
pointed the expectations his gallantries had 
raised by not proposing for her; but the 
two other young ladies still remained on 
hand, and, in consequence, lady Magennis 
did not neglect any circumstance that held 
out a chance of getting them off. — " It 
would not be amiss," she observed to the 
baronet, " to just look in now and then 
upon Donaghue, since, if it could be as- 
certained that he could contrive to keep 
Altoir-na-Grenie, she did not know but 
that, as it was a thing she was positive he 
was himself solicitous for, she might be 
induced to consent to his allying himself 
with their family, even though not assured 
of general Donaghue, from his capricious 
temper, and perhaps yet meditating to 
marry himself, doing any thing more for 
him — since, though there would be no 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 319 

great fortune in the case, still, with such a 
residence as the castle, there would be 
something very imposing in appearances ;'* 
and sir Ulick, who, on all occasions, acted 
as if it was he, not she, that had vowed 
obedience at the altar, readily promised 
what she desired. 

But nothing so greatly disconcerted and 
agitated Donaghue, as the continual en- 
counters that began to take place between 
him and sir William Erin. At first he 
imputed these to accident; but when, at 
length, through various channels, he dis- 
covered that the baronet seemed to be em- 
ploying himself on nothing so much as on 
his affairs, by questioning every one close- 
ly that could give him the slightest infor- 
mation on the subject, he began to think 
he was wrong in his opinion ; and as he 
could only account for this conduct by 
ascribing it to an idle and invidious curi- 
osity, he, of course, became highly offend- 
ed and exasperated by it. 

These feelings of resentment and anger 
rendered him more peremptory than ever 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in declining all kind of acquaintance at the 
Vale; and to be better enabled to shun 
sir William, he relinquished the exercise 
he had begun to take on horseback, and 
resumed his solitary rambles on foot. He 
always set out with an intention of pro- 
ceeding in quite a contrary direction to 
the Vale, but, he knew not how it was, he 
certainly vseldom returned home without 
finding he had got into its vicinity, though 
assuredly he often entered upon it una- 
wares, from being utterly unacquainted 
with its extent and several parts of it. 

Hastily making his escape from the di- 
rect road one morning, he struck into a 
track altogether new to him, and hurried 
on till he found himself at a considerable 
distance, when he slackened his speed to 
look around him, and enjoy the scene. It 
was a delicious morning — all nature looked 
gay and cheerful — the songsters of the 
grove were in full chorus, the fleecy tribe 
Avere browsing on the verdant plains, while 
their young joyously skipped and frisked 
around them ; the generous kine lay ru- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

m in a ting, in readiness for the cheerful 
milk-maid, that tripped along, dashing the 
.sparkling dew off the wild field flowers, 
whilst the merry whistle of the plough- 
boy at a distance, shewed the contentment 
of a heart free from the intruding cares of 
those pursuing more exalted walks in life. 
The sun was sufficiently elevated to have 
touched, with its magic beams, many of 
the surrounding objects o'er hill, o'er dale, 
so as to have given a greater variety to the 
landscape. 

Such scenes, at such an hour, when the 
mind is generally buoyant, and conse- 
quently well adapted to receive those de- 
lightful impressions of nature, have almost 
a resistless effect on the spirits, in tran- 
quillizing and cheering them. The mind 
of Donaghue presently felt the influence 
of the present one, and, lost in the indul- 
gence of the pleasing feelings it excited, 
he continued following the winding course 
of a green lane, till he was suddenly 
stopped in his further progress by a rustic 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gate. After a little hesitation, he ven- 
tured to raise the latch of this, and enter 
the rich shrubbery it gave admission to, 
without knowing whose grounds he was 
advancing on. 

After proceeding some way through a 
profusion of intermingled shrubs and 
plants, he found himself on a sloping lawn 
of the finest verdure, bespread with forest 
trees of the most luxuriant growth, with 
honeysuckle trailed round many of them, 
and beneath the spreading branches of se- 
veral, rustic seats, completely sheltered 
from the sun. Various walks, intersecting 
each other, led to different parts of the 
grounds, and were kept in the nicest or- 
der, bordered by shrubs, plants, and a pro- 
fusion of flowers, that scented the morning 
air with the most refreshing aromatic per- 
fume, regaling the senses in a delightful 
manner. 

On advancing more immediately to the 
point of ground from which the slope 
commenced, Donaghue found he was on 
a hill of some elevation, commanding a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 323 

most extensive prospect. Beneath was a 
winding valley, watered by a fine clear 
stream, bounded on the opposite side by 
cliffs of rock and wood ; the rocks, in some 
places, were perpendicular, and the inter- 
mixture of wood, hanging in many places 
completely over the cliffs, had a most ro- 
mantic effect. 

Donaghue at length descending, pur- 
sued the course of the stream, as it swept 
through lawns and flowery meads, till it 
was suddenly stopped in its course by 
some rocks rudely rising in the midst of 
it, and against which it dashed, lashing 
them in all directions, as if indignant at 
the obstacles they opposed to its progress, 
and threw up a high spray, on which the 
sunbeams formed a perfect rainbow. 

While Donaghue stood involuntarily 
admiring the beautiful effect they pro- 
duced, he felt a sudden pull at the skirt of 
his coat, and turning to see what had oc- 
casioned it, beheld a little English spaniel, 
that he had two or three times before, in 
the course of his rambles, met and noticed. 



324 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and which now, by the joy it evinced at 
its recognition of him, seemed as if wel- 
coming him to some place to which it be- 
longed. 

Having played with it for some time, 
he was resuming his observations on the 
scene before him, when it kept such a 
barking, puHing him by the coat, and run- 
ning backwards and forwards, that Dona- 
ghue began to find this impossible, and to 
think at last that it had some other object 
in view than mere play. He had heard 
and read of sucli extraordinary instances 
of the sagacity of dogs, that it now occur- 
red to him this animal had some particular 
reason for wishing to allure him onward, 
as all along it had seemed anxious to do, 
and giving way to the surmise, he pre- 
pared to follow it, to its unbounded joy. 

Leaping, and skipping, and barking be- 
fore him, it led him on, through a succes- 
sion of winding walks, till, at length, it 
reached a little rustic gate, through the 
l>ars of which it crept, and then jumping 
up at the opposite side against the latch, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 325 

Seemed inviting him by this to enter. 
Donaghue's curiosity being now raised to 
the utmost, he could not refuse. Opening 
the gate, he found himself in a perfect pa- 
radise of sweets; a beautiful shrubbery, 
with a verdant mount in the centre, on 
which a grotto was constructed, formed of 
costly shells, wrought into fanciful de- 
vices, with doors of Gothic architecture, 
glazed with brilliant stained glass, and a 
roof of India bamboo, rising in the form 
of a cone. A clear stream ran purling 
over a bed of golden sand and shining 
pebbles round the mount, a Chinese bridge 
was throwrf over it, in front of the grotto, 
and the whole of the mount was laid out 
in sweeping walks, bordered with the 
finest and most fragrant flowers, inter- 
spersed with evergreens, amongst which 
the red berries of the arbutus, and the shin- 
ing leaves of the myrtle, were conspicuous. 
A peculiar serenity seemed to pervade 
the place ; no sounds were heard here but 
such as, Douglas says, were of a " stilly 
nature" — the murmuring of the rivulet 



326 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

over its pebbly bed, the soft sighing of the 
breeze, as through the foliage of the shrubs 
it wafted around the perfume of the flow- 
ers, and the sweet notes of the linnet and 
the goldfinch, as they hopped from spray 
to spray, apparently in conscious security ; 
and, altogether, Donaghue was convinced, 
from what he saw, that it was the elegant 
retreat of some accomplished mind. But 
who was the fair divinity of the place? 
for every thing here was indicative of the 
delicacy of female taste : he knew not in 
whose grounds he had intruded, and, of 
course, was at a loss to conjecture. 

Crossing the bridge, he approached the 
building, the door of which he had pre- 
viously observed lying invitingly open, 
and glancing in, without perceiving any 
one there, entered, to gratify his curio- 
sity by a view of the interior. He found 
it furnished with books, drawings, musical 
instruments, and costly China vases for 
flowers, with glasses to reflect the adjacent 
scenery, so that the landscapes of nature 
might be here said to be intermixed with 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 327 

those of art, several beautiful ones, evi- 
dently of the Italian school, ornamenting 
the walls, indicative of the exquisite taste 
of the person who had selected them. 

A book was lying open on a small ta- 
ble, with a ribbon, to mark where it had 
been laid aside. Donaghue casting his 
eyes on it, found it was " Thomson's Sea- 
sons," and the lines on which the ribbon 
rested the following : — 

" But happy they, the happiest of their kind, 

Whom gentler stare unite, and in one fate 

Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend. 

'Tis not the coarser tie of human laws, 

Unnatural oft, and foreign to the mind, 

That binds their peace, but harmony itself 

Attuning all their passions into love; 

Where friendship full exerts her softest povv'r. 

Perfect esteem, enlivened by desire 

Ineffable, and sympathy of soul ; 

Thought meeting thought, and will preventing will. 

With boundless confidence ; for nought but love 

Can answer love, and render bliss secure." 

Donaghue had hardly glanced over 
these lines, when the little dog that he 
had lost, soon after his passing the gate, 
dashed in, and began again skipping and 



328 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

jumping about him; in the midst of its 
extravagant joy at again finding him, as it 
seemed, a panel rolled back, and, to the 
utter surprise of Donaghue, Miss Erin 
stepped forward, and stood before him. 

It would be difficult, however, to say 
which was greatest, her surprise or his, or 
rather agitation at the moment, for she 
had no idea that he haunted the Vale, and 
he actually knew not that it was there he 
was; Miss Erin, however, was the first 
who recovered from her emotion, for his 
recent conduct had piqued her, and of- 
fended pride quickly enables us to collect 
ourselves; but poor Donaghue had no 
feeling of the kind, to render the assump- 
tion of indifference easy at the moment, 
and overwhelmed by the obtruding recol- 
lection of what had occurred in their last 
interview — a recollection that had made 
him ever since absolutely dread the idea 
of being ever again alone a moment with 
herj from the awkwardness he was con- 
vinced the circumstance would make him 
feel— had hardly power to stammer out an 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 329 

apology for what he now considered his 
intrusion. 

Miss Erin received this in a manner 
very unlike her usual gracious one; but 
she was hurt at his persistance in decli- 
ning to make any acquaintance at the Vale, 
and she could not now forbear shewing it ; 
it is true, if his doing so argued a now^ ut- 
ter carelessness about her, so it did also, 
notwithstanding the very contrary belief 
her ladyship had tried to create ; but still 
this could not prevent her being vexed at 
it, nor letting her manner now evince this. 

Donaghue, however, imputing to a very 
different cause thekind of supercilious smile 
with which she hearkened to his apology, 
with heightened confusion took a hasty 
leave, and was crossing the bridge, when 
Miss Erin, suddenly recollecting herself, 
and ashamed of the petulance she had be- 
trayed — the ingratitude her manner had 
evinced towards a person who had risked 
his life to preserve hers, and suffered so 
much on her account, who besides might 
have motives for acting as he did, and 



330 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

which she now indeed began, from his ex- 
treme agitation, to suspect to be the case, 
that, if known, could not fail to heighten 
the interest he had already excited, hastily 
called him back. 

He turned with quickness; but at the 
entrance of the grotto stopped, as if there 
to await her pleasure. Her pleasure ! ne- 
ver had she felt so confused ; her presence 
of mind utterly forsook her — she could re- 
collect no excuse for what she had done, 
and, in utter dismay at the construction 
that might be put on her conduct, her 
evident confusion, her sight grew dizzy, 
and she would have fallen, had not Do- 
naghue, as he saw her making a catch at 
a chair, rushed forward to catch her in his 
arms ; and — " Good God !" he exclaimed, 
in extreme emotion. He cast his eyes 
around, but there were none to aid him 
in her recovery ; again they were turned 
on her, and involuntarily, perhaps uncon- 
sciously, he strained her to his throbbing 
heart, as they rested on her bewitching 
countenance, where still a smile lingered 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 331 

round her beauteous mouth, as if loth to 
forsake what was the abode of smiles and 
graces. 

At length she began to shew symptoms 
of reviving, and was rising from his arms 
when lady Jane Morley rushed into the 
building. The party at the Vale break- 
fasted this morning in the grounds ; while 
it was preparing, Miss Erin repaired to 
the grotto, her favourite retreat ; and lady 
Jane was sauntering about, watching for 
lord Altidore, who was expected, and with 
whom she wanted a little private conver- 
sation, when she caught a glimpse of Do- 
naghue, following in the direction Miss 
Erin had taken ; and it instantly striking 
her that an appointment might have been 
made between them, she determined on 
ascertaining by ocular demonstration. — 
" What! another drowning affair!" she 
exclaimed, as she rushed in, more vexed 
than surprised at what she beheld. 

'' Oh, no ! nothing so bad as that," said 
Miss Erin, with a faint smile, and deep 
suffusion on her cheek, as she disengaged 



332 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

herself from the gentle hold of Donaghue, 
and seated herself on a sofa ; " only — only 
a slight indisposition." 

" Which this gentleman was luckily at 
hand to assist you in recovering from !" 
observed lady Jane, sarcastically. ** Well, 
how lucky some people are, by being al- 
ways in the way to render a service when 
one is wanting from them !" 

" Whoever has the happiness of obtain- 
ing an opportunity of being serviceable to 
Miss Erin, must certainly consider him- 
self fortunate," said Donaghue, with some 
severity, perfectly comprehending what 
her sneer implied, and highly exasperated 
at the confusion he saw it occasioned Miss 
Erin. She was indeed extremely discom- 
posed at what had occurred, from the con- 
struction she saw lady Jane seemed in- 
clined to put on it; for should she choose 
to persevere in believing the meeting not 
accidental, and, in consequence, rally her 
elsewhere about it, even though her father 
should acquit her of any thing clandestine, 
as indeed, from the confidence he reposed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SSS 

in her, she was convinced he would, yet 
he might not so readily be induced to be- 
lieve that Donaghue was not aware of 
what w^as likely to happen, and be led ac- 
cordingly to suspect him of some unwor- 
thy motive for refusing to visit openly at 
the Vale, while he privately frequented it. 
That he was capable of being actuated by 
one of the kind, she herself had not the 
slightest idea ; but her father knew him 
not so thoroughly as she did, and there- 
fore might not so readily admit the same 
belief. 

" Oh ! no doubt," cried lady Jane, af- 
fecting a laugh, in reply to Donaghue's 
irritative observation — an observation that 
roused all that was jealous — that was ma- 
licious in her nature ; " and chance seems 
lately very much inclined to befriend you, 
I think." 

" If I have had the good fortune of be- 
ing any way serviceable to Miss Erin now, 
I certainly am indebted to chance for it; 
for in approaching this, I neither knew 



334 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on whose grounds I was, nor whither I 
was coming." 

** Indeed ! How lucky that your in- 
stinct made you take the right direction !" 

" If I did take it," said Donaghue, try- 
ing to speak with carelessness, but every 
moment becoming more agitated, " it was 
not owing to my own instinct, but to that 
of this little creature," stooping as he spoke 
to caress the dog, that had renewed its 
friskings about him, and he related the 
incident about it. 

Lady Jane, after having hearkened to 
him attentively, affected a most immode- 
rate fit of laughter on his concluding — 
" Well, really, O'Brien," she said, " I give 
you credit for this story ; and this darling 
little animal," patting the dog, " much as 
I have heard of the sagacity of animals of 
the kind, the sagacity of this exceeds them 
all, for it seems to have implied a know- 
ledge of what would be agreeable." 

" Really, lady Jane," said Miss Erin, 
colouring violently, and rising from the 
sofa, on which she had been obliged, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 335 

through agitation, to repose her trembling 
frame for a few minutes, " you appear in 
a strange humour this morning." 

" Oh ! as to that, my dear, that is no- 
thing new, as my friend here, Donaghue, 
who knows me longer than you do, will 
tell you — won't you, Donaghue?' laying 
her hand on his arm, and looking up sig- 
nificantly in his face. 

Donaghue was so provoked with her at 
the moment, that he could with pleasure 
have shook her hand from his arm; but 
constraining his feelings — " It would be 
unpolite to contradict a lady," he replied, 
with a sarcastic smile. 

Lady Jane affected to push him away. 
— " You abominable creature !" she cried ; 
but suddenly turning to Miss Erin — 
" Pray, my dear, are we to have any 
breakfast this morning? If we delay 
much longer, we shall have the whole par- 
ty seeking about for us, under the appre- 
hension of our being spirited away." 

Miss Erin hesitated ; she knew not how 
to depart without asking Donaghue to ac- 



336 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

company them, and yet, wishing, as she 
did, to have nothing mentioned of the in- 
cident of the morning, she felt a reluctance 
at the thought. 

Perceiving her hesitate — " Oh ! very 
well," said lady Jane, " I see you are un- 
willing to leave this delightful abode, so I 
shall leave you and this gentleman to the 
enjoyment of a further tete-a-tete, which 
no doubt the sentimental turn of each 
will render extremely delectable !" and as 
she spoke, she made as though she would 
have quitted the place. 

" Good Heavens, lady Jane !" exclaimed 
Miss Erin, in a tone of alarm, and catch- 
ing her by the arm, *' how can you be so — 
so very strange !" and then turning to Do- 
naghue, was about forcing herself to give 
the invitation which she thought she could 
not avoid, when Donaghue, clearly per- 
ceiving by her looks and manner what 
was passing in her mind, saved her from 
all further embarrassment on his account, 
by suddenly looking at his watch, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 337 

pretending, from the lateness of the hour, 
that he must hurry away. 

The moment he was out of sight — 
" Really, lady Jane," said Miss Erin, " I 
wish you had not spoken as you did ; for 
your insinuations, I am afraid, may be the 
means of preventing Mr. O'Brien from in- 
dultrine: himself with occasional rambles 
here." 

" Afraid ! oh, are you, my dear ?" said 
lady Jane, emphatically. " Oh, then it is 
your wish to meet him here! Well, real- 
ly I don't wonder at it, for he certainly is 
handsome and agreeable, and a pleasant 
companion enough, he is so sentimental, 
as I have already observed, to pass away 
an hour or so in a grotto, or some such 
romantic retreat, conversing on subjects 
of taste or science, as, for instance, the 
loves of the plants, or " 

" Nay, lady Jane, I must beg there 
may be a truce to raillery at present, for 
I am serious in saying, I would not, on 
any account, it should be intimated or in- 

VOL. II. Q 



S3S TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sinuated that Mr. O'Brien had any parti- 
cular object in view in coming here, or 
rather, that his doing so was not the ef- 
fect of chance or accident, lest an errone- 
ous construction should be put on the cir- 
cumstance, by people that do not know 
him so well as you and I do." 

" Well, my dear, and how do you know 
that my knowing him as I do would be a 
means of preventing what you fear? But 
this is the error of all romantic minds, to 
suppose that whoever they admire must 
have no feelings in common with others. 
Why, to suppose what you seem to want 
me about Donaghue, and I should sup- 
pose that he walked about like the man 
in the moon, with his head under his arm, 
without knowing whither he was going; 
but, no, no, my dear, he is not quite so 
great a simpleton as that, I promise you. 
— But don't look so confused, child ; I am 
not going to insinuate that he came here 
on your account; you don't forget, I hope, 
that though superlatively lovely, and all 
that, you are not the only charming crea- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3S9 

ture at present at the Vale, or that Mr. 
O'Donaghue O'Brien was once one of my 
most devoted ; and that I have reason to 
believe, if I could forgive the outrage- 
ous manner in which he resented my 
marriage, I should again have him at my 

feet ; and so " 

Miss Erin almost started, and felt for a 
moment a sickening sensation, but it was 
only for a moment ; in the looks, the man- 
ner, the agitation, the silent language of 
Donaghue's eyes, every glance she caught 
from him, she read a refutation of what 
lady Jane would have insinuated, and 
could not help a transient sensation of con- 
tempt for the belief she would have im- 
posed on her. As soon as she had got the 
better of the slight emotion she had occa- 
sioned her, she returned to the point from 
which they had diverged, that of intima- 
ting a wish, that nothing might be said 
of Donaghue's having been met by them 
that morning; but lady Jane laughingly 
evaded any direct promise to that effect, 
Q 2 



340 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

being secretly determined on taking the 
first convenient opportunity for making 
it known to sir William, under the hope 
and belief of that very construction being 
put on the circumstance, from the man- 
ner at least in which she meant to men- 
tion it, that his daughter was apprehen- 
sive of; for notwithstanding all his libera- 
lity of sentiment, yet, as a w^orldly man, 
or rather a man of the w^orld, she did not 
think it would be difficult to awaken sas- 
picion in his mind, or induce a belief, that 
however Mr. Donaghue might decline vi- 
siting at the Vale, from the notice his at- 
tentions to the heiress must there attract, 
he had no objection to meeting her where 
they would escape observation : to induce 
this belief, to empoison his mind against 
Donaghue, by creating doubts of his open- 
ness and honour, and there was an end to 
all apprehension of his ever sanctioning 
his addresses to his daughter, without 
which she was convinced, whatever might 
be Miss Erin's attachment to him, she 
would never become his. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 341 

^ In entertaining this opinion, she was 
indeed right; but whatever might be 
her father's views for her, with regard 
to her final establishment in life. Miss 
Erin felt persuaded that it would not be 
want of esteem for Donaghne that would 
prevent his approving of him for her, if 
once he really became acquainted with 
him ; that is, if he obtained opportunities 
<5f really understanding and knowing what 
his sentiments, his understanding, and at- 
tainments were, the turn of his mind, and 
his favourite pursuits, and this persuasion 
made her indeed regTet Donaghue's so ob- 
stinately declining' every overture that had 
hitherto been made for any kind of inti- 
macy at the Vale; but though she could 
not avoid still regretting it, she no longer 
felt piqued or hurt by it, as had been the 
case in the first instance, since, from what 
had occurred in the recent interview, she 
could no longer ascribe the circumstance, 
as she had previously been tempted to do, 
to sullen pride, but to the melancholy na- 
turally attendant on what he had to de- 



342 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

plore, or to the embarrassing recollections 
being in her company could not fail, per- 
haps, of occasioning, or to both, perhaps, 
united; and under this idea she almost re- 
solved, should she accidentally encounter 
him again, to take advantage of the cir- 
cumstance to remonstrate with him on 
the subject of keeping himself so great a 
stranger at the Vale. 

But whatever was the effect of the re- 
cent interview on Donaghue, his mind 
was, for the present, diverted from dwell- 
ing on it, by the agreeable surprise he ex- 
perienced on his return home, at finding 
his friend, doctor Rosebud, just arrived 
there, and impatiently looking out for him 
to breakfast. 

We have passed over the numerous let- 
ters which the doctor wrote on the subject 
of his long detention from him ; the last 
threatened, that if he did not speedily get 
rid of his visitors, who, from their pro- 
tracted stay, seemed, in his opinion, to 
have come for the purpose of rendering 
themselves fixtures with him, he would. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 348 

in some way or other, destroy the old 
walls of St. Cathala, rather than be longer 
plagued with them. Malice indeed could 
not have contrived a severer punishment 
for him, than that of forcing him to be- 
come stationary for any particular time. 
He now had all the appearance of a great 
boy, just let loose from school, who thought 
he could never sufficiently enjoy his libe- 
ration from restraint; he inundated Dona- 
ghue with questions, raced over the castle, 
made himself perfectly acquainted, in less 
than three minutes, with the whole es- 
tablishment there, which, to be sure, was 
not a very difficult matter, being but 
small at present ; and while he shook hands 
with the master, winking at the man, said 
it should go hard if they had not another 
merry summer at least; but his mirth re- 
ceived a damp, when he found how en- 
tirely Donaghue had withdrawn from all 
intimacy in the neighbourhood, company 
and amusement being absolutely essential 
to him. With all his regard for Donaghue, 
he could not control his indignation at 



344 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the circumstance; and indeed it was his 
very regard for him that made him per- 
haps so angry at it, for what an injury 
might it not have been to him? since, 
with his personal advantages, he could not 
avoid believing that his continuing to keep 
up his usual intercourse with the world 
was all that could be wanting to restore 
him to fortune; and how provoking, there- 
fore, to think, that here, where there were 
blooming heiresses and rich dashing wi- 
dows, he should take it into his head to 
turn hermit! 

Donaghue tried to sooth him into good 
humour, by intimating his conviction, that 
his arrival would be no sooner known, 
than he w^ould receive the usual compli- 
ments from the gentlemen belonging to 
it, and have, in consequence, an opportu- 
nity of mixing in company as much as he 
pleased. 

The doctor, however, was not quite so 
sure of this as he seemed to be ; and being 
all impatience, from what he heard of the 
Vale, to become acquainted there, he 



l?RADlTION OF THE CASTLE, 345 

availed himself of his knowledge of one 
of the guests then there, sir Edward Sur- 
rey, a young baronet of some fortune, and 
colonel of a militia regiment, to call, ere 
he was well a day at Altoir-na-Grenie, in 
hopes, by so doing, to be introduced, with- 
out .any delay, to sir William. He was 
not disappointed in these; and sir Wil- 
liam was so amused with his manner, and 
so convinced besides, from his intimacy 
with Donaghue, that he could, if he 
pleased, give him that insight into his 
character and disposition that he wished 
for, that he gave him a general invitation 
to the Vale, which the doctor soon gave 
him reason to know he took as was meant, 
as one that was really given with a wish 
to be accepted. But nothing could in- 
duce Donaghue to accompany him there; 
and at length, finding arguments and en- 
treaties useless, the doctor gave up the 
point, exciTsing himself for leaving him as 
he did to go there, by the belief, that 
leaving him to uninterrupted solitude 
q3 



346 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

would be the best method that could be 
taken to cure him of his passion for it. 

The doctor was so pleasant and so ec- 
centric, that he soon became the very life 
and soul of the parties at the Vale, being 
the first to promote mirth, and the last to 
end it. He had hardly established him- 
self there an intimate, indeed almost an 
inmate, when preparations began to be 
made for an entertainment on an extensive 
scale, in honour of the birthday of Miss 
Erin. 

The wisest of men has said, " there is 
nothing new under the sun ;" and such 
indeed always appears to be the case, to a 
person satiated with the enjoyments of the 
world. This was a complaint, however, 
that few of those assembled on the even- 
ing of this day, before the hospitable man- 
sion of sir William, had to make, and their 
delight was in proportion at the entertain- 
ment provided for them. 

The house was crowded with all the 
fashion of the neighbourhood, and the 
grounds were thrown open for the tenan- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 34? 

try, and all such as, in their rank, chose to 
partake with them of the festivities of the 
evening. Two vessels, that, to give life 
to the scene, were generally moored op- 
posite the windows, were, on this occa- 
sion, hung with coloured lamps, and, with 
music, kept moving up and down the 
lake; the banqueting-house, the Ionic 
temple in front of this building, the Go- 
thic tower on a fine rising ground, the 
Chinese temple, looking down, from the 
summit of an isolated rock upon the 
valley, the seat that looked down upon 
the double cascade, the obelisk appear- 
ing above the umbrageous shades at the 
other side, and the extensive ruins of 
the abbey, were all studded and defined 
by various coloured lamps, producing a 
truly magical effect, such as absolutely 
spell-bound the lower classes, filling them 
with astonishment, as the work of abso- 
lute enchantinent. 

On the most convenient and agreeable 
spots before the house, Turkish tents, and 
large marquees, were pitched, each bril- 



S48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

liantly illuminated by numerous lights, 
suspended from the centre of each, so that 
the lads and lasses were seen to great ad- 
vantage, engaged in the merry dance, 
while their parents and friends, advanced 
in life, enjoyed the comforts of well-sup- 
plied tables, and amused themselves with 
tales of other times, when his honour's fa- 
ther and grandfather, with similar good 
cheer and Irish hospitality, entertained 
their friends and dependents, or in ex- 
pressing their wonder and astonishment at 
what they saw. 

- When the regular dancing ceased for 
awhile, the drones of their favourite in- 
strument were heard, setting off old and 
young to foot it on the sod, to the lively 
air of Patrick's Day in the Morning, oi' 
still more, perhaps, gratifying them by the 
soft expressive airs of Ellen a Roon, or 
Molly Astore. 

There was also a fair, which Miss Erin 
and her fair companions found great 
amusement from. The former, having 
made herself mistress of many little inno- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 349 

cent anecdotes of the young married peo- 
ple, and those who were about changing 
their state, was enabled to furnish hints, 
for she and her companions were the ven- 
ders, that rendered applications to them 
for their wares diverting, and long after 
furnished amusement to these unsophisti- 
cated children of nature. One received a 
rattle, to assist him to drown his good 
woman's tongue; another a string, to 
fasten the leg of a rambling spouse to the 
table ; and another a smooth ball, that still 
rolled away whenever he attempted to 
grasp it, to teach him patience, and so on. 
French horns, and other wind instru- 
ments, were heard at intervals, from the 
temples and other buildings, now exhila- 
rating the spirits with lively tunes and 
marches, then again thrilling the soul with 
the softest airs of melancholy ; now, as 
they gaily swelled upon the ear, intermin- 
gled with the tinkling sound of the cym- 
bal, and the deep reverberation of the 
drum, one might have fancied they heard 
bacchanalian groupes advancing ; then, as 



850 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

they seemed to die away, and sink within 
the woods, that melancholy herself was re- 
treating there for shelter. 

If this scene be filled up, with nearly 
five hundred persons, old and young, gen- 
tle and vsimple, all busily engaged amusing 
themselves in the way most agreeable to 
their respective tastes and inclinations — 
some walking, others dancing — some sit- 
ting, others standing in groupes — children 
playing hide and go seek among the tents, 
and numerous waiters running backwards 
and forwards, the reader may form a lively 
idea of the bustle and hilarity of it. 

The toys being all disposed of, and the 
fair over, the next step was, for the queen 
of the evening to present herself to the 
particular notice of her humble visitors, so 
that she might give them all an opportu- 
nity of gratifying their curiosity about 
her, and honour the son of some one of 
the tenants with her hand for one dance, 
an ancient custom on such occasions as 
the present, which she knew, if not &till 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 351 

adhered to, would cause great disappoint- 
ment. 

Lady Jane quite ridiculed the idea of 
it; but ridicule could not turn Miss Erin 
from any thing she conceived right ; and 
where, by a trifling condescension, so much 
pleasure could be afforded, she conceived 
she should be very much to blame if she 
could be laughed out of it. Accordingly, 
with a long train of ladies, she entered the 
largest of the marquees, and, with her 
companions, seated herself there. The 
men, immediately understanding what 
this was for, retired to a distance, to con- 
sult which was tlie properest person a- 
mongst them to claim the intended ho- 
nour. This, however, was not a very easy 
matter to decide, as the honour of dancing 
with the young hare was too great not for 
them all to be anxious in the extreme for 
it ; but as all could not have it, it was at 
length agreed that lots should be drawn 
for it ; this was done by putting strips of 
paper in a hat, and he who drew the 
longest was to be the fortunate person. 



S521 TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The lot fell upon a handsome young man, 
about twenty ; and that it had done so 
seemed to afford general satisfaction, Pat 
Dunnacarney being esteemed the best jig 
dancer in the barony, so that no doubt was 
entertained of the young hare being satis- 
fied with her partner. 

Mr. Dunnacarney approached Miss 
Erin with great modesty, and with cheeks 
suffused with a deeper shade of crimson 
than had perhaps ever before tinted them, 
with a rustic bow begged the honour of 
her hand for the dance. This was readily 
granted, and a merry jig being called for, 
to the unutterable delight of the lookers 
on, at least those who were of Pat's party, 
they commenced one. 

Nothing could exceed the applause 
which Miss Erin received — it was herself 
that knew how to do the thing genteelly ; 
but she wouldn't be an Erin if she hadn't 
nate limbs, and didn't make good use of 
them. 

It was expected that the rest of the la- 
dies would follow the example of Miss 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S5S 

Erin. No sooner had she resumed her 
seat, therefore, than Black Hugh, the de- 
scendant of the king of Leinster, and 
Rosebud's steward, as may be recollected, 
and who, through urgent business, that 
could not be settled without seeing him, 
had been compelled to follow his master 
to Altoir-na-Grenie, and, with some of the 
people belonging to that, had come to the 
Vale, with a meekness of look and man- 
ner not very usual with him, approached 
lady Jane, to solicit the same honour from 
her that Miss Erin had conferred on Mr. 
Dunnacarney, that of dancing a jig with 
him. 

" A jig ! and with such a savage !" and 
lady Jane, who was excessively discon- 
certed at being dragged into the marquee, 
amongst such a set of wretches, as she 
called them, distended her eyes as wide 
as she possibly could, with a stare of asto- 
nishment. 

" Don't you understand him ?" asked 
Miss Erin, stepping up to her. 

" Understand him !" replied lady Jane, 



354 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with a look of extreme disgust — " the sa- 
vage ! But really it is abominable to en- 
courage such freedoms, by coming amongst 
such creatures ! in clannish times it was 
all very well, when it was necessary to 
conciliate one's retainers for one's safety ; 
but now " 

" That there's no occasion for them, on 
that account they may go to the devil l" 
said Rosebud, to whom the scene in the 
marquee was too amusing not to have made 
him eagerly follow to it; " but, if you 
don't get up and stir your marrow-bones, 
do you know what they'll think of you ? 
either that you don't know how to dance, 
or that you are, as we vulgarly say in Ire- 
land, beef to the heels, like a MuUingar 
heifer, and so are afraid or ashamed to 
shew them." 

" I neither know nor care what they 
think," returned lady Jane, petulantly; 
" I shan't do what I dislike to humour the 
absurd whims of any one here, I assure 
you." 

** Oh ! if that be your determination," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 355 

said Rosebud, " I must try what I can do 
for my illastrious friend here;" so turning 
to Aod Dubh — " I beg your majesty may 
permit me." he cried, " as master of the 
ceremonies here, to introduce you to a 
partner; for, between ourselves and the 
post, the lady you have just asked," and 
here affecting to have lowered his voice, 
by inclining his head towards the ear of 
the king, " is not exactly made for dan- 
cing ; but here," presenting him to Miss 
Bond, " your majesty will have a partner 
that, I'll answer for it, you'll not find one 
of the Muilingar heifers." 

Miss Bond, now on a visit at the Vale, 
had, since her first introduction to the 
reader, been with her brother Bob, not 
only to London, but Paris; till her visit 
to the latter, the former had been her con- 
stant theme ; but no sooner was this paid, 
than, superceding the former completely 
in her opinion, nothing else was talked of, 
conceiving nothing more than the an- 
nouncement of her having been there 
wanting to make her be thought every 



356 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thing she could desire with regard to 
fashion and consequence. — " Oh dear ! oh 
dear!" she exclaimed, drawing back on 
this introduction to her, " when I was at 
Paris " 

" No king solicited your hand for the 
dance," interrupted Rosebud. 

" King ! king ! what king ? when I was 
at Paris, 1 thought I saw all the kings." 

" Did you see the one now before you ?" 

" No ; but then he might have been 
there for all that — what's his name?" 

" Aod Hugh Dubh Black, king of 
Leinster." 

" No, I don't recollect such a name a- 
mongst them— one would suppose he was 
a Russian, by the length of it." 
: " No, he's of foreign descent, but not 
quite so far North as that ; — but come, he 
waits your pleasure." 

Miss Bond, with great agility, now al- 
lowed herself to be handed forth, and, in- 
spired by what she had heard, went 
through the jig in a manner that gained 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 357 

her the universal approbation of the com- 
pany. 

cfrOn being handed back to her seat by 
her partner, she endeavoured to make room 
for him beside herself To be able to do 
this, she was compelled to encroach a little 
upon lady Jane, who occupied the same 
form. Her ladyship finding this, and not 
being by any means in one of the best 
tempers imaginable that evening, being 
extremely vexed that Donaghue, whom 
she thought, in such a party, she could 
have very well contrived to have kept 
from any particular communication with 
Miss Erin, had refused her pressing en- 
treaties to make one of it, turned sharply 
about, and demanded what she meant by 
pressing on her in such a manner ? 

" Nothing in the world," said Miss 
Bond, in a low tone, " only just, if not 
disagreeable to your ladyship, to get a seat 
for his majesty beside us." 

" What, for that savage !" exclaimed 
lady Jane; "why, do you suppose I am 
out of my senses, to allow such a fellow to 



358 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

occupy a seat with me?" and, as she 
spoke, she gave so violent a push to reco- 
ver the room she had lost, that, had it not 
been for his majesty of Leinster, poor lit- 
tle Miss Bond, who, as she greatly resem- 
bled a butterfly in fluttering, so she also 
did in lightness, would certainly have 
been precipitated to the ground. 

As soon as she had recovered herself — 
" Well, 1 declare," she cried, with a toss 
of her head, '* this is such conduct as I 
never before met with ! when I was in 
Paris, I never experienced any other treat- 
ment than " 

" I am sure," interrupted lady Jane, 
with a sneer, " your travels have been of 
very little service to you, when an Irish 
ploughman can pass on you for a king !" 

With the exception of this little Jracas, 
every thing passed off to the entire satis- 
faction of Miss Erin in the marquee ; the 
gentlemen danced with the country girls, 
the ladies, all but lady Jane, with the 
young farmers ; and Rosebud, in the most 
extravagant spirits, from the gaiety of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 359 

scene around him, was as much on the 
alert as any one else, proving himself, to 
use their own expression, quite as handy 
at the jig as any one present, having, more 
than once, tired down several of the girls. 

At length Miss Erin, conceiving quite 
sufficient was done for the gratification of 
the party there, took leave, and adjourned 
with her own to the house, where, as soon 
as she entered, regular dancing commenced. 

At a late hour a discharge of rockets w^as 
the signal for supper. Miss Erin led the 
way to the great hall, where the tables 
Were arranged. Of course it must be su- 
perfluous to say, they were furnished with 
every thing that was requisite for so splen- 
did an entertainment. Nothing but smi- 
ling countenances surrounded them ; for 
lady Jane, the only person who had, per- 
haps, throughout the evening, felt any 
thing like ill-humour, had, by tliis time, 
through the dint of flattery, which, come 
from whom it might, was always accept- 
able to her, recovered her temper. 

But, alas! how often is a sighing heart 



360 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

concealed under a smiling exterior! the 
fair, the amiable, and adulated idol of the 
evening — she, on whose very look and 
step admiration and attention hung — she 
was, or rather, would have been, a proof 
of this, had her feelings at the moment 
been known ; for she could not think of 
the absence of Donaghue from the festive 
scene, of which the assembled guests now 
reminded her more forcibly than before, 
without a sinking of her spirits she could 
with difficulty conceal. 

But let who would counterfeit cheer- 
fulness, it was not Rosebud ; for never in 
his life had he passed so delightful a night. 
He was now sitting by sir Edward Surrey, 
whom he very often amused himself with, 
by making him contribute to his pleasure. 
— " Do you perceive that person yonder ?" 
he suddenly demanded of the baronet, 
making him understand whom he meant 
by a motion of his head. 

" Yes ; is there any thing particular 
about him ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 36l 

" Particular! I have just begun to con- 
sider how he got into this company." 

" God bless me, you don't say so! why, 
isn't he a gentleman ?" 

" A gentleman ! you shall judge when 
you hear how I'll accost him by-and-by." 

" What, here! God bless me! attack 
him here! no, I hope not; it would be 
such a terrible thing to have any fracas, 
any commotion here — such an utter viola- 
tion of every rule of etiquette." 

" Oh ! leave that to my consideration," 
said Rosebud ; " when once my indigna- 
tion is raised, it never can be allayed until 
I have given it vent ; and see, he's coming 
this way." 

" Then I must beg," said sir Edward, 
making a movement to rise from his chair, 
" to leave this ; for, as I cannot be of any 
service, and I apprehend something se- 
rious may occur " 

" So do I," cried Rosebud, holding him 
firmly by the arm ; " and that's the reason 
I'll keep you here, for there's no knowing 

VOL. II. R 



362 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but that the services of a friend may be 
necessary ; and as I estimate you as one, and 
consider, besides, that I have a claim on 
yours, from being, as I may say, a military 

man, as well as yourself But here he 

comes, and now for it ;" and, as he spoke, 
he rose with much formality from his 
chair, and pulling himself up in his waist- 
coat, and giving a great hem, as if by 
way of clearing his throat — " So, sir," he 
said, turning full upon the stranger as he 
approached — " so, sir, I see you are here !" 

" So it appears," cried the other, with a 
good-humoured smile, and extending his 
hand; for, as it proved, he was an old 
friend of the doctor's. 

" No, sir," said Rosebud, waving his 
hand aside—" no, sir, excuse my taking 
the hand of a man I am about accusing, 
as I am you." 

" God bless my soul !" cried sir Edward, 
in an absolute agony, " was there ever such 
a man? — Doctor, I implore," twitching 
him by the sleeve. 

But the doctor only replying by a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 363 

" Pish," went on — " Yes, sir, you may 
stare, and look surprised, but it is the fact. 
Is it not well known, that, regardless of 
your birth, the consequence it gives you 
in society, the elegant resources with which 
your own mind furnishes you, you are 
every day seen mixing amongst the low- 
est of your species, the miserable and the 
forlorn, listening to their vulgar complaints 
with attention, and, if a smile can be ex- 
tracted from them, quite seeming to enjoy 
it ; that the felon in the prison, the men- 
dicant in his hovel, the ragged and the 
wretched, have to boast of your presence, 
while the fashionable and the gay are, per- 
haps, seeking it in vain; and that, from 
this terrible defalcation of taste, it is to be 
presumed that " 

" You are the same Rosebud you ever 
were," cried the other, slapping him on the 
shoulder ; " an oddity you were born, and 
an oddity you will die ; but, faith, so plea- 
sant a one, that I shouldn't care if we had 
a few scions from the same stock." 

"So you were in jest all this time!" 



364 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

said sir Edward ; " well, really, doctor, 
you are a very odd man !" 

" Well, if I am, I am not to be blamed 
for it, but nature ; for have you not heard 
my friend here just say that I was born an 
oddity? — But, permit me, Mr. Medhcott," 
turning to the stranger, " to present to you 
my highly-estimated friend, sir Edward 
Surrey." 

" Assuredly," said INIr. Medlicott, pre- 
senting his hand to the baronet ; " and as 
such, he may rely on it, that I shall place 
him, as my friend Sancho Panza says, ' on 
the very crown of my head." 



END OF VOL. II. 



Piinted bj J. Darling, Leadeuh all-Street, London 
