MATILDA; 



A TALE OF THE DAY. 



« Blush I not ? 
Can you not read my fault writ in my chpek 
Is not my crime there ? " 



LONDON : 
HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET, 



PRINTED EY J. liKEIlIiLL. RLPERT STKli:ET;,HA\M AKKET. 



PREFACE. 



If the Readers of the following pages 
expect " a novel," in the circulating library 
sense of the word, they will probably be 
disappointed ; and indeed the writer is by 
no means sure that they will not be disap- 
pointed, whatever it may be that they 
expect to find. But if the incidents of his 
tale should be deemed trite, and the cha- 

8t2'?96 



ly FREFACE. 

racters common, it will the more readily 
be conceded, that he may have heard of 
such things — that he may have seen 
such people. 

Perhaps it is the reverse of propitiatory 
to own, that these pages have been penned 
more with a view to divert their writer 
than any one else. Not that he professes 
himself indifferent either to the amusement 
or edification of any one who may choose 
to become his reader ; but he is unaffectedly 
diffident as to his powers of communicating 
either. Indeed, so strange does he feel in 
his new character of Author, that if any, 
the most easily pleased of his friends, should 
unconsciously be indebted to him for having 



PREFACE. 7 

" beguiled the tediousness and process of 
their travel," on leaving London, or helped 
them to wade through a long wet evening 
on first arriving in the country, such will 
be the utmost success he presumes to con- 
template. 



MATILDA, 



CHAPTER I. 

It was early in the month of July, when that 
most valuable department of the daily press, 
which is headed " Fashionable Arrangements," 
contained, among many other pieces of informa- 
tion, which, however intrinsically important, 
would not be so interesting to my readers, the 
two following paragraphs : — 

'' Lord, Ormsby (late the Honourable Augus- 
tus Arlingford,) is arrived at Mivart's Hotel, 
after an absence of two years on the Conti- 
nent/' 

" Lord and Lady Eatington will this day 
entertain a distinguished party at their splendid 
mansion in Grosvenor Square." ^ 
s 



MATILDA. 



That intelligence of this description should 
have attracted every eye, is not to be wondered 
at, when it is recollected, that, as the advance of 
the season had diminished the number of these 
events, the type in which they were announced 
had proportionably increased in size and import- 
ance ; and many an absent fair one, who had been 
prematurely hurried from chalked floors to green 
fields, had now no other resource than to make 
that a distant study which was no longer a pre- 
sent pleasure. But be this as it may, a little 
before eight, on the day above mentioned, the 
first carriage was heard to come clattering up 
South Audley-street, containing Lord George 
Darford and Henry Penryn ; two youths, most 
comprehensively described as " Young men about 
town."*' — " Very unlucky, my father wanting the 
carriage afterwards," said Lord George. — " I do 
so hate to be early. The half-hour introduction 
to a dinner, like the preface to a book, should 
always be skipped." 

" One might know one was too early, the 
fellow drives so fast," said Mr. Penryn, as they 
swung round the last corner, at the risk of anni- 
hilating a pensive nursery-maid, and all her 
'^ pretty ones, at one fell swoop." 



MATILDA. 



" I wonder who we shall have at the Eating- 
tons'?" continued he; '* they have been too much 
in the Pidcock line this year."" 

" Yes,"" said Lord George, " and that's 
another bore in being early ; for your human 
lion is not like his royal brother — the hveliest 
before he's fed." 

Stopping at the door at this moment, the 
length of time that elapsed before the thunder- 
ing announcement of their arrival produced its 
(usually instantaneous) effect, seemed to confirm 
their apprehensions as to the flagrant punctua- 
lity of their arrival ; and the tardy appearance 
of one liveried lackey alone, in red waistcoat and 
white apron, verified their worst fears. Many 
a felon has ascended the fatal ladder with less 
appearance of shame and contrition, than was 
painted in the countenances of these unhappy 
" young men about town," as they ascended the 
carpeted stairs, — about to expiate the offence of 
such unnatural prematurity of arrival ; and the 
deserts of Arabia would hardly have appeared 
more awful in their eyes, than did the soh- 
tude of the drawing-room, where they found 
themselves — literally first. Silence succeeded the 
shutting of the door, which was at length broken 



4« MATILDA. 

by Lord George ; whilst, by the help of the pier 
glass, with his right-hand, he arranged his flat- 
tened locks ; and, with his left, quelled the first 
symptoms of insurrection in his neck-cloth. 

" At least, we shall hear the lions all announced 
— we shall know who the inmates of the mena- 
gerie are to be to-day." Hardly had this conso- 
lation been suggested, when the door was opened, 
not by the regular ofiicer, the groom of the 
chambers, who scorned to be a party to so 
untimely an arrival, but by a mumbling footman, 
who muttered something that was meant to be a 
name, and disappeared ; having ushered in a 
young man, dressed in deep mourning. Our two 
friends regarded him with an unacknowledging 
stare, which the stranger repaid in kind, as he 
passed to a sofa at the further extremity of the 
room, and unconcernedly occupied himself with 
a newspaper ; whilst the two youths remained in 
the window-place, where they had nestled them- 
selves from a sense of solitude. 

In any other civilized country in the world, 
gentlcm^cn thus accidentally meeting, if they did 
not, like the lady in the Anti-Jacobin, " vow an 
eternal friendship," would at least, from the cir- 
cumstance of meeting in the house of a common 



MATILDA. 5 

friend, have been admitted to the local rank of 
acquaintances, and received the regular brevet 
allowances of nods, smiles, &c. But here we are 
more afraid of being involved in a bow than in a 
bad bet — of being obliged to acknowledge an ac- 
quaintance than a bill — and the most persevering 
dun is not so embarrassing as the face which, one 
is obliged to own, has acquired a legal title to a 
nod, from our having been incautious enough to 
incur acquaintanceship with the owner. 

There was something in the air and manner of 
the stranger, which it was impossible for the most 
unobservant not to remark as peculiarly distin- 
guished ; and from the tact which the usage of 
the world gives to every one in these matters, 
such would certainly have been the opinion of 
our two worthies, if their judgment had not been 
wilfully biassed by the conclusion which they 
logically deduced from having been every where, 
and knowing every body, — that " him whom they 
did not know they ought not to know ;"' and 
they would as soon have adopted the doctrine of 
the Preadamites, as have admitted, that any one, 
worthy to be ranked among the elect, had ex- 
isted prior to the commencement of their fashion- 
able millennium, just two years before. There- 



6 MATILDA. 

fore, expecting from the character of the Eating- 
tons that the party would be rather a mixed one, 
Mr. Penryn whispered to Lord George, — " I 
think it's the new actor : to be sure this man's 
figure looks better ; but then I only saw him in 
Richard the Third, with hump, and all that sort 
of thing.'' " No," said Lord George, " I think 
it's the composer — what's his name ? — I caught 
a glimpse of his head behind the piano-forte, last 
week, at Lady I.'s, as I squeezed half in at the 
door- way. You know he asks a hundred pounds 
a night, and the Eatingtons are famous for pay- 
ing in kind ; — turtle and champagne for notes — 
you understand." 

" I have it, George," retorted the other ; 
" look at his black coat — depend upon it, it's 
the Popular Preacher. I never heard him, to 
be sure ; but I'm quite certain it's he." 

The reader will be good enough to vmder- 
stand, that this colloquy was uttered chiefly to 
evince (to each other) the witty pleasantry of 
the speakers ; for I would not have it supposed, 
that thev were soio^norant of that onlv knowledge 
to which they even pretended, as not shrewdly to 
suspect, by his appearance, that the new comer 
was, in point of fact, one of themselves ; though 



MATILDA. 7 

they had hitherto, by some unaccountable acci- 
dent, happened not to have become personally 
acquainted with him. 

The door was now opened, and the Dowager 
Duchess of Dulladone and the two Lady 
Townlys were announced. The former situa- 
tion of Lord George and his friend was bliss, 
compared to that in which they now found them- 
selves ; for, besides the danger of being devoured, 
as they would have expressed it, by the two Lady 
Tow^nlys, to which their present unprotected state 
seemed to expose them, their misery was increased 
by the shame of having been convicted, by a dowa- 
ger duchess and her two unmarried daughters, of 
having arrived before them ; and the conscious- 
ness of having thereby forfeited their best claim 
to that admiration hitherto so lavishly bestow^ed 
upon them from that quarter : the young ladies^ 
idea of being " quite the thing," consisting in 
nothing so much as pre-eminent un punctuality. 

The stranger bowed shghtly to the duchess as 
she passed to his end of the room, which she an- 
swered with an inquiring curtsey, — her Grace''s 
eye-sight, which was none of the best, being now 
rendered more treacherous by the darkness of 
room. " Who is it ?" said she to Lord George, 
in a low whisper ; to which he replied, " Indeed 



8 MATILD.^. 

I don't know," — ^in a tone of voice all hut imper- 
tinently audible. At this moment their host 
and hostess appeared from an inner room — Lady 
Eatington employed with a half-drawn-on glove 
— ^his lordship applying a half-opened pocket 
handkerchief to his nose; both which actions 
were meant to signify rather reproachfully, than 
apologetically, " You have come sooner than we 
expected — but here we are." 

As we have introduced our readers to their 
house, we shall be expected to make them ac- 
quainted with the master and mistress; but 
Lord and Lady Eatington were those every-day 
sort of people of whose characters it is almost 
impossible to speak in affirmatives. Perhaps the 
two most positive characteristics of his lordship 
were, that he was a receiver of rents in the 
country, and a giver of dinners in town. To 
speak negatively, — he was — no politician — no 
farmer — no bel esprit — no connoisseur ; but the 
most distinguished of all these classes met at his 
house, to pronounce upon the merits of one of 
the best cooks in Europe : in consideration of 
which, every one, in accepting his invitations, 
wrote to him — " Dear Eatington, 

" Your's truly." 
And every one enfiled the crowd at Almack's, 



MATILDA. 9 

to squeeze Lady Eatington's hand when she first 
came to town. 

Her ladyship was naturally a very silly, and 
by education (so called), a very illiterate woman; 
but long habits of the world enabled her to con- 
ceal this ; and if she was seldom as well informed 
as her guests, she was always as well dressed as 
her dinners — which answered all the purpose. 

But how surprised were our young beaux, 
and our old duchess, to see, that whilst they 
themselves were casually recognised, the whole 
of the attention of both host and hostess was 
directed to the stranger ! As the arrival of 
fresh company made the conversation less con- 
strained, this was explained, though not to the 
satisfaction of Lord George and Mr. Penryn, by 
overhearing Lady Eatington telling the duchess, 
whose ears were almost as defective as her eyes, 
a long story, of which they caught — " Must recol- 
lect" — " Augustus Arlingford" — " long abroad" 
— " supposed early disap])ointment'''' — " recent 
death of his brother" — " now Lord Ormsby" — 
" very rich," &c. — which immediately produced 
from her Grace, in rather a high tone, meant to 
catch his lordship's ear at some distance, — " Ex- 
cuse my blindness, my lord — Letitia and Cecilia 
b5 



10 MATILDA; 

— Lord Ormsby — you must recollect Mr. Ai*^ 
lingford, though you were then very young — 
quite children." 

The reflections of Lord George and Mr. 
Penryn, upon their half-wilful mistake, were not 
very consolatory, as the former fame of Augus- 
tus Arlingford occurred to them in all its pre- 
eminence. Lord George now recollected that, in 
his first conference with his tailor, he had been 
strongly recommended the Arlingford collar, and 
that a part of his dress, about which he was very 
particular, had been called " A rlingford's." Mr. 
Penryn, too, had a disagreeable reminiscence, 
that whilst still at college, he lost a rouleau, when 
Mr. Arlingford's colt won the Derby ; and both 
distinctly remembered, that when they first came 
out, if any very well-looking young man appeared, 
all the oracles declared that he had " a look of 
Arlingford ;" and this was the man whom they 
had voted an awkward actor, a squab singer, or a 
methodist parson. 

From this time the cannonade at the street- 
door became almost incessant, and every possible 
variety of arrival was constantly swelling the 
circle, which, with truly English instinct, had 
formed itself round the place, where (strange to 



MATILDA. 11 

say) there was not a fire ; and many were the 
different ways of presenting themselves, which 
might be remarked :— First, The tender scion 
just budding in the first rays of fashion, who, 
after advancing desperately, and retiring awk- 
wardly from the circle, seemed anxiously to so- 
hcit a protecting nod from those around him, 
confirmative of the acquaintance he hoped he 
had made. Then came the well-established man 
of the world, who seemed carelessly to postpone 
the duties of recognition, till dinner and lights 
afforded him a more convenient opportunity of 
doing so. To him succeeded the " ci-devant 
jeune homme," whose " way of Hfe is fall'n into 
the sear — the yellow leaf;'' who, with outstretched 
hand, and perpetual " how d'ye do," went the 
round of the circle, not bating " an inch of his 
prerogative" of acquaintanceship. 

The sun, though this was the time of year when 
his hours are the most fashionable, had now com- 
pletely removed the light of his countenance from 
the party assembled; when, just as LordEatington 
had expressed the necessity of waiting for Sir 
James and Lady Matilda Dornton, the door 
was opened, and it was with great difficulty 
that the profoundest of her would-be admirers 



12 MATILDA. 

could distinguish, through the deepening dusk, 
the idol of the day — Lady Matilda Dornton. 

But there was one there, from whose eye no 
darkness could conceal that graceful form. Years 
had not effaced its impression, and change had 
not destroyed its interest. Through all his 
wanderings among the fairest of every clime, 
Lord Ormsby had still retained, as the beau Ideal 
of beauty, his early recollections of her, whom 
he had parted from with mutual vows of plighted 
faith — whom he now first met as the wife of ano- 
ther. 

Lady Matilda had already made Sir James'^s 
excuses, as " detained at the House,'' and was in 
her turn putting some indifferent question, when 
the mention of Lord Ormsby's name caught her 
quick ear ; and she knew that the dreaded mo- 
ment was arrived which, since his recent return 
to England, she had felt must soon come. Many 
of those who have already fixed upon Lady Ma- 
tilda Dornton as the heroine of this history, will 
be surprised to learn that she did not faint, nor 
did she in any way outwardly expose herself, as 
a true heroine ought to have done. But en re- 
vanche she certainly heard not a word that Lady 
Eatington, in reply to her question, told her about 



MATILDA. Ig 

*' her poor little boy's hooping cough ;""* consci- 
ous as she was, that her conduct to Lord Ormsby 
had been in violation of her former engagement^ 
and that her feelings were not in perfect harmony 
with her existing duties. 

I am very much disposed, at this particular 
time, to enter into some little explanation with 
my readers, in defence of my heroine (for such in 
fact she is), and to extenuate in her what I cannot 
quite excuse. But dinner being at this moment 
announced, every thing must be postponed for so 
important an event. All the little management 
which generally accompanies this announcement, 
was as usual put in action, but as usual the plots 
were rather negative than positive. Bores were 
avoided, — dowagers were shirked, — young ladies, 
if plain, were aUowed to march together in double 
file, — but nobody was particularly sought, — eti- 
quette preventing precedence from being usurped, 
even where it had been abdicated by its legiti- 
mate possessor. In despair at these symptoms, 
Lady Eatington, (who, if she had a fault as a 
dinner-giver, it was that of interfering too much 
in these matters) exclaimed rather loudly, " Lord 
Ormsby, take Lady Matilda Dornton." He hesi- 
tated a moment, and there was a pause among the 



14 MATILDA. 

by-standers. He felt it was awkward to ad- 
vance ; but as it was more awkward to decline, 
half a minute mere saw them arm in arm descend- 
ing the dusky staircase. Just by such uncertain 
light, — at such an hour,— had they parted two 
years before, but in how different a scene, — and 
with what different feelings. It was on the eve of 
his departure for the Continent, that he at length 
tore himself from her at the gate of Delaval Park ; 
whilst with looks that pierced the evening gloom, 
and gently-protracted pressure of the hands, their 
last words were " We part but to meet again.*" 
Noiv they had met to part for ever, — and with 
averted looks, linked for the moment by the forms 
of society — the white kid glove hardly touching 
the black sleeve — the constrained re-union of the 
moment seemed in mockery of the separation that 
they felt was final. 

Who has not often experienced, that even 
when the body has sometimes been most fettered 
and hampered by the restraints of society, the 
mind, as if in proud assumption of its indepen- 
dence, has made some of its wildest excursions 
through the boundless regions of past recollections, 
and fancies for the future ? Certain it is that 
both the lady and gentleman, whom we have left 



MATILDA. 15 

in the most embarrassing of all possible situations^, 
found their thoughts wandering, with a rapidity 
truly surprising, through the scenes of their early 
youth, — collecting, too, the most confused chaos 
of recollection, — many circumstances trivial at 
the time, — since forgotten, — but now presenting 
themselves in all the freshness of yesterday ; no 
two seeming to have the slightest connection, and 
resembling each other only in this, that the same 
actors were in each. — And all this passed with 
an unaccountable celerity, that seemed to mock 
the calculations of time, whilst they were descend- 
ing two flights of stairs, with hobbling dowagers 
before, and giggling misses behind. — Recalling 
their scattered thoughts as they entered the 
room, and shewing the most perfect self-command 
in the eyes of the world, it was impossible for the 
most attentive observer to discover, by the blaze 
of light which illuminated the dinner-table, more 
than a slight nervous convulsion about Lady Ma- 
tilda's lip, and as slight a contraction on Lord 
Ormsby's brow. Protracted silence would much 
have increased the embarrassment of their situa^ 
tion ; but, mostopportunely, Lord George Darford, 
who w^as anxious to repair the mistakes of the last 
half hour, had posted himself on the other side 



16 MATILDA. 

of Lady Matilda ; and availing himself of his ac- 
quaintance with her, fired a random shot between 
her and her neighbour, which was meant to open 
a communication between himself and Lord 
Ormsby ; — this had the desired effect. If there 
be a moment of the day when an Enghshman's 
reserve is vulnerable, it is when he has a soup 
plate before him ; and Lord Ormsby gladly seized 
the occasion of getting rid of a little of the super- 
fluous awkwardness of his position. An attempt 
at a conversational trio was the consequence ; and 
the former lovers, who had met as strangers, now 
found themselves addressing each other as com- 
mon acquaintances. But their situation, though 
not remarkable to any one, was by no means com- 
fortable to themselves, — when a slight commotion 
among the servants at the door produced the 
announcement of Sir James Dornton and Captain 
Coulson. 

Sir James was, in person, a man who might be 
of any age that was neither young nor old ; and 
as to general appearance, he was a man who 
might, if he chose it, have dropped into any 
vacant chair, at any table, without exciting a 
remark one way or the other. But such was not 
at all Ids idea of the situation in society of a man 



MATILDA. 17 

of fifty thousand a year ; and it was with horror 
that Lady Matilda observed him, with ostenta- 
tious punctilio, moving up the whole length of 
the room, with a sort of jerking strut, to make 
his excuses to Lady Eatington. Full well did 
she recollect Lord Ormsby^s talent for ridicule ; 
for next to their mutual admiration of each other, 
there had been no closer bond of union between 
them than the constant indulgence of a good- 
humoured species of quizzing, which the high 
spirits and quick fancies of both induced them 
reciprocally to vent on all around them. 

Lady Matilda knew Lord Ormsby had never 
before seen Sir James ; and it was with no small 
degree of uneasiness, that she observed his eyes 
open wider at the side view they caught of the 
Baronet as he stood by Lady Eatington's chair — 
his slight rotundity of form well harmonizing 
with a singular obtuseness of features. But when a 
rigmarole unnecessary apology, beginning with — 
" Your Ladyship will excuse" — ••' Parliamentary 
duties,'^ &c. ended with something about — " my 
better half" — she thought that she should have 
sunk into the ground, at the idea of Augustus 
having lived to hear her called better half. 

In the mean time, the general attention was 



18 MATILDA. 

diverted by the inquiries made of Captain Coul- 
son, who had quietly shpped into his chair, what 
they had done at the House ? — " Oh, — we di- 
vided ; we were a hundred and something — they 
were seventy-eight ; I know it, because I helped 
to count them as they went out. I betted young 
Turford, the new member, a sovereign, that he 
did not count them right ; he made it eighty- 
two. I suppose he counted the Serjeant at Arms 
four times." The Captain's laugh at his own 
wit was rather awkwardly interrupted by an in- 
quisitive gentleman asking what the question 
was ? — " Oh, it was something about a place, or 
some economical nonsense," — answered this faith- 
ful guardian of the public purse. The inqui- 
sitive gentleman now applied himself to Sir 
James, who readily undertook to explain, but 
soon got bewildered amongst — " Equalization of 
duties" — " the revenue increased by being dimi- 
nished" — " spirit of innovation" — " proper source 
of influence of the Crown," &c. ; and when the 
more frequent application of spoonfuls of soup 
had become inadequate to fill up the interstices 
of his ideas, and just as Lady Matilda, in a fur- 
tive glance at Lord Ormsby, perceived ttie dreaded 
curl of his lip, the Baronet was most providen- 



MATILDA. 19 

tially rescued by a prudent pensioner opposite, 
who, having retired to enjoy the fruits of an ac- 
tive political life, was never anxious, -wantonly, 
to enter on an unnecessary warfare, and there- 
fore interposed with an opportune — " Sir James, 
a glass of wine ;" which had the effect of turning 
the conversation. I am sorry to be obhged to 
state, that the party of which I have no^v de- 
tailed so much, was afterwards reckoned a failure, 
by most who had been invited to join it. Whe- 
ther I may have mentioned any causes for this, 
is for the reader to judge. I may, perhaps, in 
some degree, have explained why those who first 
met Lord Ormsby there, since his return, voted 
him not near so pleasant a fellow as Augustus 
Arlingford. I am obliged also to confess, that 
from some unknown cause. Lord Eatington's 
artiste did not that day maintain his usual repu- 
tation ; which may account for the silent sulki- 
ness of those " dainty spirits,'** (yclept wits,) 
who are apt to make the " feast of reason and 
the flow of soul" dependent upon the gratifica- 
tion of their grosser appetites. Certain it is, 
that immediately after coffee, the party separated 
with feelings of mental and bodily disappoint- 
ment. 



20 



CHAPTER II. 

" Noja piu iin miglio in dieiro che died in 
avanti'''' is an Italian saying, the application of 
which is certainly as just to a retrograde move- 
ment of one's mind in a book as of one's body in a 
carriage. Admitting this, I am nevertheless 
obliged to check a little the progress of my tale, 
whilst I go back for the purpose of picking up 
two or three stray events, which will be necessary 
to the carrying of my reader easily to his journey's 
end. I will promise, however, that if he will have 
a little patience with me, I will not needlessly 
linger by the way ; and that as much as possible 
it shall be merely " reculer pour mieux sauter^'' 

Lady Matilda Delaval, whom we introduced 
in the last chapter as the wife of Sir James Dorn- 
ton, was an only child, early left, by the death of 
both her parents, to the absolute guardianship 
of her uncle, who succeeded his brother in the 
Earldom of Wakefield, and the splendid domains 
of Delaval Park. — The person to whom the care 



MATILDA. 21 

of a lovely and helpless female infant was thus 
unhappily confided, had passed the first half of his 
hfe in the pleasures of unbridled dissipation, and 
now proceeded to devote the remainder as ex- 
clusively to the toils of political ambition. He 
had just succeeded in ruining the best of consti- 
tutions in his early pursuits, when the change in 
his situation, produced by the death of his bro- 
ther, enabled him to squander a princely fortune 
in attaining the objects of his later life ; and the 
period when Matilda entered her eighteenth year 
found her guardian v/ith one foot in the grave, 
and the gouty hose, the legacy of his youth, ap- 
propriately adorned with the glittering Garter, 
— the reward of his declining years. 

Matilda's father had passed the whole of his 
married life abroad. Of her mother, little was 
known, and nothing was ever said by her uncle. 
It was thought in the family, that she had been 
a foreigner of distinction ; and this supposition 
seemed in some measure confirmed by the peculiar 
character of Matilda's beauty; for in her was 
presented a rare union of those distinguished 
traits which we are accustomed to call purely 
national, — a truly insular delicacy of complexion, 
shaded by locks of raven black ; an eye of Ita- 



22 MATILDA. 

Han fire, quenched only when the ready tear fol- 
lowed an appeal to the feelings of the kindest 
heart that ever beat in female breast. That she 
could be the offspring of no mesalliance, was 
marked by her possessing, in perfection, that in- 
describable air, the effect of which we all feel, 
though we are at a loss to give it a name. We 
are, I am aware, accustomed to consider what 
the French call " Vair noble, ^^ as inseparable 
from great descent and high birth ; and this opi- 
nion we involuntarily maintain, in spite of Bour- 
bon brows, Austrian lips, and all the difficulties 
one encounters in attempting to recognize this 
mark of illustrious ancestry in the Royal repre- 
sentatives of the Houses of Nassau and Hapsburg, 
and the legitimate descendants of Charlemagne. 
But certain it is, that though in some, the highest 
born, the want of this may be peculiarly striking, 
it never graces those who come not of gentle 
blood ; and as certain it is, that there never was 
so striking a specimen of its matchless charm as 
was felt by all who saw Matilda Delaval. 

It was not in the every-day development of 
her talents, or the exercise of her feelings, that 
the singular disadvantages of her education were 
observable ; for she outstripped her instructors 



MATILDA. 23 

in the usual routine of accomplishments, and 
she had " a hand open as day to melting charity." 

But no mother's watchful care had destroyed 
the latent seeds of error in her guileless heart, 
and proportioned in her youth the strength of 
her principles to the warmth of her feelino-s. 
No example of domestic happiness had told her, 
widi the resistless power of habit, that woman's 
proper sphere is Home. In the succession of 
governesses whom Lord Wakefield had chosen 
for her, she was satisfied provided they knew 
their metier, and were neither vulgar nor fright- 
ful. And when he (as he called it) retired into 
the country, from the time that Matilda left the 
nursery, it was by every variety of needy flat- 
tery, and frivolous admiration, that she was sur- 
rounded. 

At one period, indeed, better prospects seemed 
opening upon her. Ormsby Castle was in the 
immediate vicinity of Delaval Park ; and Lady 
Ormsby, who resided here during the minority 
of her sons, was one of the most unaffectedly 
good women that ever existed. From her mild 
and affectionate precepts, Matilda could learn 
nothing but good ; from the society of her daugh- 
ter Emily, who was about her own age, she 



S4 MATILDA. 

could derive nothing but advantage. It was 
here, during the occasional visits of the sons to 
their mother, that the acquaintance between our 
heroine and Augustus Arlingford, which we 
have taken up at a later period, commenced. 
That this was not the least attractive part of 
the intimacy to Matilda, may be imagined ; but 
that it was the most beneficial, may likewise be 
doubted. 

But be this as it may, Lord Wakefield, who 
was never suspected of blindness to his own 
interest, or that of any one connected with him, 
marked the progress of the connection, and did 
not appear to disapprove of it. To this line of 
conduct he was not induced merely by the pos- 
session, on the part of Augustus, of a small 
collateral property which had descended to him 
as the second son, but by the contingency which 
seemed probable, from the state of health of his 
elder brother, then Lord Ormsby, that the mar- 
riage of Augustus and Matilda would bring 
about a very desirable union of the contiguous 
property of Delaval and Ormsby : for this elder 
brother had, from a puny child, grown to a 
sickly man, as weak in mind as in body ; which, 
added to his extreme shyness and dislike to 



MATILDA, 25 

society, rendered his ever marrying extremely 
unlikely. 

But there was a description of female society in 
which, as the shyness was not mutual, he found 
he got on very well ; and he ended with making 
his own legally, a lady, the right to whom had 
previously been disputed among many : An 
act which, like other acts for the enclosure of 
common land, does not always answer to the 
new proprietor. The immediate effect, however, 
was a change in the disposition of Lord Wake- 
field towards our hero. His lordship had pre- 
viously become rather averse to the connexion, 
from political differences. This new event very 
much altered the ultimate prospects of the 
younger brother ; and not anticipating that the 
happy bridegroom would, as afterwards hap- 
pened, die within two years without children, 
he determined that all intercourse between 
Matilda and her youthful lover should be at an 
end. 

About this time the temporary embarrassments 
of Augustus (who had been left with that un- 
fortunate modicum of younger brother's fortune, 
which is too much for a profession, and too little 
^r '^dependence,) materially assisted Lord 
c 



26 MATILDA. 

Wakefield's views : for an absence on the Con- 
tinent being indispensable to the arrangement 
of Mr. Arhngford's affairs, he left England, after 
taking that tender farewell of Matilda at the 
gate of Delaval Park, which has been before 
referred to. 

It is necessary here to state, in explanation' of 
what afterwards happened, that though Lord 
Wakefield was certainly a corrupt politician (if 
that term implies that self was the governing 
motive of his political conduct) ; yet had he been 
by no means successful in feathering his nest, 
having been as prodigal and wasteful in his own 
affairs, as in those of the nation. Twice had he 
been at the whole expense of unsuccessfully con- 
testing the county, by starting Sir Simon Tooley 
as a candidate for that honour, having no re- 
lative of his own to put forward. 

When, therefore, the bad times came, he found 
himself almost inextricably involved; suffering 
most severely at home from that agricultural 
distress, which he spoke, for two hours in the 
House of Lords, to prove did not exist. 

Mortgages, bonds, annuities, and every pos- 
sible species of pecuniary obligation, had been 
accumulated by him; and it so happened that 



MATILDA. 8? 

one of the very loan-jobbers whom in his public 
profusion he had most tended to enrich, also 
reaped the fruits of his private extravagance : 
— one of those fund-lords, as they have been 
called, who, in that revolution of property pro- 
duced entirely by the anti-revolutionists, have 
certainly become lords of the ascendant. 

When, therefore, old Smithson died, leaving 
all his wealth, and all his claims, to his nephew. 
Sir James Dornton, for whom, as one of his 
members, he had previously and easily procured a 
baronetage ; it was with feelings approaching to 
despair, that Lord Wakefield invited Sir James 
down, that they might attempt to come to some 
settlement. Judge then of his delight, when he 
first perceived that the baronet viewed his niece 
with a favourable eye. This he soon heard con- 
firmed from Sir James's own lips — for men of 
business are apt soon to come to the point in 
these affairs. Connexion, too, was of the utmost 
importance to Sir James, though beauty was 
not without its weight ; (as where is the man with 
whom it is?) Here then seemed a way out of 
all Lord Wakefield's difficulties; namely, that 
his only creditor should marry the heiress of that 
part of his property which was entailed. Ac- 



28 MATILDA. 

cordingly, with that inflexible perseverance with 
which he always undertook every thing in which 
his interests were concerned, he at once deter- 
mined to leave no stone unturned^ till he had 
effected his purpose. 

The prospect was in many respects unpromis- 
ing enough. Sir James was not a man to win a 
fair lady's heart. He had succeeded to all the 
purse-proud feeling of a nouveau riche, without 
the shrewd sense which would have enabled 
him to acquire a fortune for himself. But, as 
we hinted before, he was most passable, whilst 
quiescent ; and the presence of a man of whom 
he stood so much in awe, made him negatively 
much more agreeable, than he ever was after- 
wards. Lord Wakefield, too, was far too judicious 
a promoter of his interests, to allow him ever 
unnecessarily to plead his own cause. But 
still, when his Lordship himself, in his most 
statesman-like manner, first broke the proposal 
to his niece, its reception was any thing but 
favourable. Though he studiously avoided all 
allusion to her former attachment to Mr. Arhng- 
ford, the knowledge of which he had also care- 
fully concealed from Sir James, yet it was evident 
that, unless some material change were effected in 



MATILDA. 



Lady Matilda's feelings towards that person, the 
failure of his scheme was inevitable. The first 
advance towards this change was soon brought 
about, though in a circuitous manner, and through 
no very creditable channel ; whether accidentally, 
or at the instigation of Lord Wakefield, the reader 
must form his own opinion. 

It was about this time that a few of the ultra- 
loyal, hyper-religious, soi-disant well-disposed 
part of the community, conceived that they best 
established their claim to those self-created titles 
by polluting their Sunday morning's breakfast 
table with the most infamous publication that 
ever disgraced the press. Fathers of families, 
who would have thought their daughters' minds 
poisoned if they had casually at a theatre listened 
to a coarse expression of Shakspeare, systemati- 
cally submitted to their inspection a paper teem- 
ing with the grossest allusions and the most 
flimsily-veiled double entendres ; thus preparing 
their minds for the mornino: duties of that reli- 
gion which prays deliverance from envy, hatred, 
malice, and all uncharitableness, by the previous 
enjoyment of the most malignant calumnies on 
their neighbours, and abstracting their thoughts 
from the things of this world only to violate, with 



30 MATILDA. 

envenomed slander, the sanctuary of the tomb. 
It was in this veracious record of passing events 
that there appeared, in its usual style of vulgar 
ribaldry, the most unfounded reports of a supposed 
intrigue between Augustus Arlingford and a dis- 
tinguished female resident in Rome, whom to see 
is to admire. These might have been mere 
random shots ; for that the journal in question 
should wantonly attempt to defame and ridicule 
any one, against whom, for whatever reason, it 
entertained a prejudice, seemed only labouring 
in its vocation. But the use made of these para- 
graphs at Delaval Park looked as if they were 
not written without an object. The arrival of 
their favourite paper, which distance prevented 
from coming so appropriately on the Sabbath as 
in London, was always an event to most of Lord 
Wakefield's inmates. Weak minds, hke dis- 
eased stomachs, require unnatural excitement, and 
this black-begrimed and highly -peppered literary 
morsel was always devoured ^vith a most un- 
healthy appetite. It seemed also, that the para- 
graphs in which Mr. Arlingford's name was men- 
tioned, though never addressed to Lady Matilda, 
were always made the subjects of conversation 
within her hearing ; and they constantly led to 



MATILDA. 31 

the recollection of former frailties on his part, 
for some of which there was unfortunately but 
too much foundation : — till at last Matilda began 
seriously to believe that he was a monster of in- 
constancy, and that he had now forgotten her, 
as he formerly had others. At this time Lord 
Wakefield enjoyed the advantage of a most use- 
ful ally, in the person of Mrs. Mechlin, a bat- 
tered old female rake, but a woman gifted be- 
yond the generality of her sex, with the power to 
" make the worse appear the better reason." She 
was the only one of the guests of her uncle with 
whom Matilda lived on any terms of intimacy ; 
it being impossible for any one to see much of 
her, and resist the charms of her conversation. 
Her experience, knowledge of the world, and 
matchless tact, gave her considerable influence 
over her inexperienced friend ; all of which were 
exerted to bring about the projected marriage 
with Sir James; which, in putting Lady Ma- 
tilda at the head of a brilliant establishment, she 
flattered herself would also secure her a delight- 
fully imquiet asylum for her declining years. 

It was the gradual operation of all these dif- 
ferent causes which at last made Lady Matilda 
think that she was wrong in rejecting so disdain- 



m MATILDA. 

fully what appeared to all around her so very 
desirable. It must be recollected, that she had 
always been taught to consider marriage only 
as an establishment — a sort of snug place for 
life— of which the duties were easy, and the 
emolument certain. It is true that she had loved 
Augustus Arlingford with all the ardour of 
youth, but also with all the heedless inconse- 
quence of that giddy period. She had admired 
his fine manly figure, laughed at his jokes, wept 
when he went, and smiled radiantly at his return ; 
but the moment of their separation had been the 
first at which the idea of their ultimate union 
had been distinctly arranged between them ; and 
that this should now be, she felt was impossible. 
Is it to be wondered at, that, alternately threat- 
ened and cajoled by her natural guardian, art- 
fully persuaded by her only friend, apparently 
abandoned by her former lover, and (what per- 
haps had more effect than all) very little perse- 
cuted with the presence of her present suitor, she 
at last consented to give her hand to Sir Jame» 
Dornton ? 

If there be any among those who have trodden 
the weary ways of high life, who think either the 
wtuation or conduct of our heroine forced or 



MATILDA. 33 

unnatural, let them reflect a moment, and say, 
(granting that the combination of circumstances 
may be different,) which of the causes that led to 
the event described, could not be paralleled in 
the life of some one of their own female acquaint- 
ances. 

Hard, indeed, is the fate of many who an- 
nually throng the matrimonial market, as, at the 
regular return of Spring, young ladies come into 
season with the green peas, and go out with the 
strawberries. That the matronly merchants who, 
at this yearly fair, come to barter their fresh com- 
modities of beauty and accomplishments, in ex* 
change for situation and a settlement, should re- 
fuse to treat with those who can offer no other 
security than that doubtful bond, — ^love in a cot- 
tage, — does not seem unreasonable. But that 
they should measure, with such accuracy, the dif- 
ferent sizes of property, and weight of worldly 
dignities, so that " if the scales do turn, but in 
the estimation of a hair,*" their judgment is 
influenced by it, while manners, person, and cha- 
racter, go for nothing in the balance, does seem 
rather hard upon those whose interests, after all, 
must be what they have at heart. 

Nor is this all ; for the favourable testimony of 
c5 



54 MAtlLDA. 

a certain set being necessary to the fashionable 
reputation of a new beauty, the daughters are, 
upon first coming out, by their mothers'* own 
hand, inoculated with a fancy for " Detrimen- 
tals," — perhaps to prevent their catching it natu- 
rally ; and thus they become acquainted with 
the value of those agreeable qualities which are 
to have no weight with them one way or other in 
their decision for life. Nor are the truly unex- 
ceptionable young men, the objects of the un- 
wearied pursuit of these maternal managers, en- 
tirely without just ground of complaint ; for such 
is the anxious precipitancy of the latter, that 
before, by dancing half a dozen times, with a 
young lady, the former have satisfied themselves 
as to her merits in the varied figures of the ball- 
room, they are expected to have made up their 
minds as to her qualifications for the somewliat 
more complicated mazes of m.atrimony; and, 
accorcHngly, they are peremptorily asked whether 
their intentions are serious, whilst they are yet 
occupied in rounding off their first well-turned 
compliment. 

It is, indeed, wonderful, that connexions so in- 
auspiciously contracted, should so often lead to 
the mutual satisfaction of both parties. Perhaps 



MATILDA. 35 

it might be possible to afford a plausible solution 
of this difficulty ; but I have already broken my 
anti-digressive compact with my reader; and 
therefore hasten to resume the thread of my 
story. 

The day of the marriage was, indeed, a happy 
one for Lord Wakefield. Sir James, in consi- 
deration of the large fortune which Matilda 
brought him at once, and of the residue of her 
uncle''s property, which must come to her at his 
death, had cancelled all the pecuniary obligations 
which existed between them ; and, as Lord 
Wakefield left the party he had assembled at the 
marriage feast, where, in honour of the occasion, 
he had broken the forced habits of temperance to 
which he was now reduced, a new world of am- 
bition seemed opening to him, by the revival of 
his financial resources. It was but two hours 
after these delightful visions were dancing before 
his eyes, when the party below were alarmed by 
a violent ringing at his bell, and he was found 
suffering agonies with the gout in his stomach, 
which increased in violence, in spite of all the 
skill of his physician. On the table at which he 
had just been sitting, was a paper, apparently 
in his hand writing, which, as it might be of 



36 MATILDA. 

importance, was examined. It proved to be an 
unfinished letter to the Minister, which began — 

" My dear Lord, 

'' Hearing, from very good authority, that the 
precarious state of poor Lord Snugborough's 

health renders his life very*" uncertain, he 

would have added, — in all the presumptuous 
confidence of frail mortality ; — but it was a sen- 
tence he was doomed never to finish ; — the 
very post which was to have conveyed the ex- 
pression of his reversionary hopes, informed the 
Minister that the Noble EarFs own honours were 
at his disposal, for some equally greedy ex- 
pectant ; and poor Lord Snugborough continues, 
to this day, in the undisturbed possession of many 
well-earned dignities and emoluments. 

To Matilda^s feeling heart, the sudden loss of 
her only near relation, though he had never been 
a kind one, was nevertheless a great shock. As 
for Sir James, he vented his grief at his acces- 
sion to thirty thousand a 3^ear,-by announcing 
the fact to all his connexions, on paper with a 
black border of a most preposterous breadth. 

The principal effect of this change in their 
atuation certainly was, that the new-married cou- 



MATILDA. St 

pie saw considerably less of each other than th^y 
would otherwise have done. During their stay 
at Delaval, Lady Matilda was generally em- 
ployed in little charitable details for improving 
the comfort of those whom she considered as now 
dependent on her. Sir James, on the other 
hand, was occupied with many wholesome schemes 
for the improvement of the property to his own 
advantage. 

At length, the first levee of the year found 
them in town, where Sir James was presented to 
his Sovereign, with weepers on his hands, and 
the George and other insignia of the Orders of 
the late Lord Wakefield in them ; and was re- 
ceived with that well-known graciousness, which, 
whenever the illustrious Individual pleases, is 
personal, but which is purely official when 
lavished on a man like Sir James Dornton — 
a ministerial member, with six seats at his com- 
mand. 

From that time forward. Sir James was regular 
in his Parliamentary duty, of sleeping six hours 
every night at the House, till wanted to vote on 
questions which he would not have understood if 
he had heard ; whilst Lady Matilda, with a face 
and figure which commanded universal admira- 



S8 MATILDA. 

tion, and a manner which checked individual 
impertinence, shone forth " the glass of fashion, 
and the mould of form— The observed of all 
observers." 



m 



CHAPTER III. 



At the breaking up of Lord Eatington'^s dinner 
party. Lord Ormsby was tempted by the fineness 
of the night, (the rarest of all temptations in 
England), to wander about the streets, occupied 
by his own reflections ; when his desultory course 
was for a moment impeded by a brilliant equi- 
page, which, after swinging against the curb- 
stone past several doors, stopped with a sudden 
jerk at that of a splendid mansion, just before 
he arrived at the same point. The foot pavement 
was immediately fully occupied by the two foot- 
men, who proceeded with much needless bustle 
to the ceremony of unloading. He was involun- 
tarily stopped therefore, whilst this was effected ; 
and, as he stood on one side, completely veiled 
in that obscurity in which the capricious econo- 
my of gas still indulges five houses out of six, 
he thought that, by the partial light from the 
open door of the hall, he recognised a female 
form, in the lineaments of which, he could not 



40 MATILDA. 

be mistaken. It was indeed Lady Matilda Dorn- 
ton ; who, having deposited Sir James at Boo- 
dle's, was returning home. He fancied that, 
before exposing herself to the blaze of light from 
within, a hand hastily raised to her face chased 
away a lingering tear. He had just persuaded 
himself that this could be but fancy, when, in 
reply to a question from a servant as to the car- 
riage, a voice, every note of which vibrated on 
a responsive chord in his breast, answered, in a 
tone evidently of stifled emotion, '' No more to- 
night." She is not happy then, was the suspi- 
cion which crossed his mind as he passed on : 
and though he would have given the world to 
have made her so, it is certain that this ne\r 
view of the subject made him see, with a much 
less jaundiced eye, the outward advantages by 
wliich she was surrounded. As he pursued his 
wanderings, the idea often occurred to him, that 
this unhappiness might be connected with the 
meeting of that evening; but it was as often 
rejected, as the groundless suggestion of unwor- 
thy vanity, utterly unsupported by any thing in 
her past conduct. The result of these contradic- 
tory musings was, that when at length he found 
himself at his hotel, he gave orders that his 



MATILDA. 41 

travelling carriage should be in readiness next 
morning, to convey him to Ormsby Castle. 

When Matilda had dismissed her carriage, 
she ascended to her boudoir. Of all the happiest 
refinements of luxury, the result of so many 
centuries of progressive civilization, there is 
nothing like a lady''s boudoir. The outward 
ostentation of a splendid establishment, and the 
solid magnificence of the choicest table, are as 
nothing, compared to that union of attractions 
which here is found, all partaking of the deli- 
cacy of character of its fair proprietor; the 
privacy and seclusion adding to the value of all 
the luxuries with which it is crowded. Matilda's 
dressing-room was a matchless model of its kind. 
It is true, that the approaches to the inner reces- 
ses of this magic bower were, like fair Rosamond's 
of old, somewhat intricate; but the labyrinth 
was only formed by a redundancy of varied 
comforts, and the universal presence of orga- 
nized confusion. Whilst the toilet-table groaned 
with caskets, into which the mines of Golconda 
seemed emptied, and shone with glittering cases 
where all the perfumes of Arabia had been dis- 
tilled, around were scattered the various imple- 
ments for music and drawing, and the still more 



42 MATILDA. 

various articles commonly called nic-nackerings, 
the fruits of the frivolous ingenuity of every 
country, from China to the Channel. The walls 
were divided between mirrors, whose merit was 
multiplying for a moment, a form, otherwise 
unique ; and a few shelves of books, whose judi- 
cious selection proved, that the cultivation of the 
mind was here, at least, as important an object 
as the adornment of the person. 

As Matilda entered, she seemed the guardian 
genius of taste in this her favourite temple. 
Here her return had been most impatiently ex- 
pected by her attendant spirit, httle Ma'mseile 
Felicie. 

The fact is, that this was a night which had 
long been looked forward to, as being fixed for 
one of those forced exertions which the London 
season often makes in its old age, to keep itself 
alive ; and which frequently vent themselyes, as 
on the present occasion, in a fancy ball. Matil- 
da's costume was to be at once strikingly becom- 
ing and novel ; it had been chosen by her with 
her usual superior taste, and had been executed 
by the unrivalled liandicraft of her Parisian 
abigail. Felicie had been attentively admiring 
her own work, and now met her mistress, hold- 



MATILDA, 45 

ing in her hands in triumph a pair of the pret- 
tiest shoes in the world, compared to which, 
Cinderella's slipper would have appeared clumsy. 
These, as the dress required they should be in 
character, had been sent for expressly from 
Paris, and had miraculously arrived before the 
ball was over and forgotten ; and the national 
little French woman now proceeded to enlarge, 
v/ith much volubility, on the peculiar punctuality 
of her countrymen ; when she was struck, as if 
by a thunderbolt, at the sudden declaration of 
her mistress, that she was not going out that 
night. Recovering by degrees from the shock 
she exclaimed, " Mais done, Miladi est malade," 
with the protracted theatrical emphasis on the 
word done, which is meant to express the sudden 
discovery of an unwelcome explanation of a 
circumstance otherwise perfectly unintelligible. 
" No, I'm quite well," said Lady Matilda ; 
" leave me — leave me alone.'' Doctor Willis 
never left a patient with a shake of the head 
more expressive of his opinion as to the seat of 
the malady, than that given by Felicie, as, obey- 
ing the command of her mistress, she quitted 
the room. 

" Alone ! yes, I am alone — alone in the world^'* 



44 MATILDA. 

thought Matilda, as, seating herself at her dressing 
table, she buried her taper fingers in her beauti- 
ful hair, — discomposing its studied arrangement 
in a reckless manner, which would have confirmed 
Felicie's opinion ; whilst, pressing the palms of her 
hands firmly against her closed eyelids, she seemed 
anxious to exclude all outward consolation. Her 
thoughts wandered mournfully on past times, 
and what she was, and what she might have been; 
and the sad conviction pressed stronger on her 
mind than it had ever done before, that all the 
budding hopes of happiness, which she had che- 
rished in her youth, had been withered even at 
that altar where they ought to have ripened into 
maturity ; and that returning thence, her light 
spirit depressed, and her warm heart chilled, 
she had found the active exercise of her affec- 
tions end, where it ought to have begun. 
In the gay world an universal buzz of eager 
admiration followed her wherever she moved; 
but at home her talents were wasted — her accom- 
plishments unnoticed. At home, the playful ex- 
cursions of her buoyant fancy were checked, for 
want of a congenial spirit ; and the spontaneous 
ebullitions of her sensitive heart were smothered 
in the utter absence of kindred sympathy. 



MATILDA. 45 

As, oppressed with these reflections, she again 
raised her head from her hands, the first object that 
met her casual glance, was the brilliant and varied 
display of her open jewel-box. " I cannot talk 
to you,'" she ejaculated; "I cannot confide to you 
my feelings,— yet it is to you, to such as you, to 
such cold and senseless splendor, that I am wed- 
ded." The contemptuous expression of her eye 
suddenly changed, as she caught a ghmpse, amid 
all this ghttering finery, of one ornament, simple 
almost to plainness. It was a small locket that 
had once been Emily Arlingford's, — ^it had been 
an early gift from her to her friend, before either 
had completely grown to womanhood, and when 
first the duties of neighbourhood had completely 
melted into the pleasures of intimacy. It con- 
tained her own hair, and that of her brodier Au- 
gustus. In a playful moment, and with a girlish 
jest, she had taken it from her own neck to en- 
circle that of Matilda. Matilda had not lately 
seen it ; for Felicie, who thought it by no means 
worthy of the good company it kept, generally 
concealed it under some of its more splendid 
neighbours. But now she seized it Avith eager- 
ness, as it recalled, with the freshness of yesterday, 
ihe day when it was given. She did not raise it to her 



MATILDA. 



lips — a certain consciousness of feeling prevented 
her — ^but her eyes continued long riveted on it as 
by fascination. At last, a forced exertion of her 
better judgment convinced her, that nothing 
could be more injurious, or less correct, than the 
continuance of this state of morbid indulgence. 
She resolutely asked herself the question, why all 
her domestic discomforts had this night appeared 
so much more trying than ever ? and the answer 
was any thing but satisfactory to her conscience. — 
" No,*" she thought, " it is not by tender recol- 
lections of what once was, or by vain repinings at 
what is my lot, that I can hope to acquire strength 
for the performance of all the dreary duties I have 
undertaken. My best hope is, patient endurance, 
— my surest safeguard, universal indifference." 
Then, with an effort which had now become ha- 
bitual to her, she restored herself to that outward 
appearance of languid composure, which, except 
when exhilarated by the temporary excitement of 
a crowded room, had generally marked her de- 
meanour since her marriage. Hardly had this 
salutary change been effected, when a knock at the 
street-door announced the return of Sir James, 
which was presently confirmed by his creaking 
shoes upon the stairs. Sir James was just the 



MATILDA, 47 

sort of man whose shoes always creak. Liable 
as we all are to error, I would not judge too se- 
verely an occasional misdemeanour even of this 
serious description. But any poUtesse-iyolice 
magistrate in England would have convicted Sir 
James as an incorrigible creaker. 

Roused by these unwelcome sounds, and again 
summoning Felicie, Matilda hastened to put on 
the semblance of that repose, the reality of which 
the suppressed agitation of her feelings seemed to 
render extremely improbable. 



48 



CHAPTER IV. 



When Matilda the next morning entered the 
breakfast room, she found Sir James already 
seated at the table, and, by a certain important 
twist of his chair, evidently about to make some 
proposition to which he attached no small degree 
of consequence. When this was the case, he was 
apt, with a confusion of expression by no means 
uncommon, to invert the order of his discourse, 
whilst he seriatim propounded sundry w'eighty 
reasons for inducing him to do something at 
which no one could guess till the conclusion of 
an apparently interminable sentence. The sus- 
pence in which this kept Matilda, was in the 
present instance protracted by an incessant inser- 
tion of breakfast, which met his words on the 
threshold of his lips. 

" I have been thinking, that as we are not going 
abroad for a fortnight, and one should always be 
civil to country neighbours ; it is the duty of 
great landed proprietors, and I am above think' 



MATILDA. 49 

ing ill of a mail for his politics, particularly now 
we have by our firmness put do^vn the Radicals, 
(this coffee is as tasteless as Hunt's,) and the op- 
position is quite contemptible ; (some more but- 
ter, if you please ;) that we may as well ask Lord 
Ormsby to dinner/'' At this unexpected conclu- 
sion, Matilda involuntarily exclaimed, " Oh no, — 
by no means — it is not at all necessary." Sir 
James looked at her for a moment, evidently 
Surprised at the vehemence of the objection. 
" It is very odd that whoever I take a fancy to, 
you as surely have a dislike for. I thought you 
seemed very rude 'to him yesterday. But recol- 
lect, Lady Matilda, ' Love me, love my dog.' " 
There was something so ludicrous in the applica- 
tion of this saying, to an obligation on her part to 
like Lord Ormsby for Sir James's sake, that 
Matilda, although it was a serious subject to her, 
yet, with her naturally quick sense of the ridicu- 
lous, had some difficulty in suppressing a laugh, 
as she quietly answered that he had never seen 
Lord Ormsby until the night before. But he 
only rephed, that he had taken a fancy to him — 
that be had just come from abroad, and therefore 
could tell him many things he wanted to know 
^ Indeed, I asked him after dinner whether he bad 



60 MATILDA. 

had the springs of his carriage corded — and whe- 
ther they got good claret in Italy ; and I saw, by 
his answers, that he was a superior person."" 

Lady Matilda merely replied, that she did not 
mean to doubt that he would be perfectly com- 
petent to inform him on such points. 

" Aye,'' said Sir James, " and my sister, Mrs. 
Hobson, is just come to town from Manchester. 
She, you know, is going to take her girls abroad 
for the last finish, and we may have them the 
same day, and he may tell us all about it toge- 
ther.'' 

Matilda's dislike to the embarrassment of re- 
ceiving her former lover as a guest in her own 
•house, was not at all diminished by the prospect 
of having a vulgar family party to meet him. 
But there seemed no remedy, as Sir James pro- 
ceeded to sally forth to drop a preparatory card at 
Lord Ormsby's ; leaving Matilda to receive the 
Hobsons, who had arrived in town the night be- 
fore, and were expected to call ; — and saying, as 
he went out, — " You never saw my sister, Mrs. 
Hobson, — you must like her, — very nice woman. 
Connexion, not all I could have wished ; — in my 
mind, great difference between a warehouse, and 
a counting-house, — but Hobson's a warm man, 



MATILDA. Gl 

— "Hobson's a very good name at Manchester."" 
" Hobson a good name at Manchester !" thought 
Lady Matilda, " then what a pity that they ever 
brought it away, or did not borrow another for 
travelhng purposes."" And she prepared to re- 
ceive her guests. 

Miss Betty Dornton was some years older 
than her brother ; and having brought her charms 
to market at a time when the prospects of her 
family were not so extensive as they afterwards 
became, (old uncle Smithson having then formed 
only the nucleus of that immense wealth, which 
he afterwards scraped together ; and certainly 
having no intentions of bequeathing it in a lump 
to any one,) her marriage with Mr. John Hob- 
son was not at the time objected to. He was a 
steady, calculating foreman, in a large manufactory 
at Manchester. This situation he had gradually 
improved into that of a master of foremen ; and 
his small back lodging he had changed into the 
largest extent of staring brick front in Man- 
chester. 

Mrs. Hobson, at the time of her marriage, was 
a silly, showy, bustUng, chattering little body ; 
with a brisk figure, and brisker tongue, good 
humoured, illiterate, and vulgar. Twenty years. 



5^ MATILDJL. 

and more than half as many children, had rather 
taken from her briskness of figure — her person 
seeming to have kept pace with her fortunes, in 
increase ; but nothinoj had abated her activity of 
tongue, as Lady Matilda soon found to her 
cost, when the servant announced Mrs. Hobson, 
the Miss Hobsons, and Master Hobson ; the last 
a hobble-de-hoyish schoolbo}^ The three Miss 
Hobsons I shall not attempt to describe indi- 
vidually as to character, till the reader be- 
comes by degrees better acquainted with them. 
In their dress there was a sisterly sameness, con- 
sisting, as it did, of bright pea-green cassimere 
pelisses, superabundantly bebraided, and black 
beaver bonnets with pink linings. The only dis- 
tinction in their appearance, was, that IViiss Hob- 
son's round rosy face was — one can't say shaded, 
with small bright red corkscrew curls; whilst Miss 
Anne, from having rather a higher bridge to her 
jiose than was common in the family, had taken the 
Grecian line, and had accordingly drawn two long 
straight strips of sandy hair across her temples, as 
she thought a la madonna. The third, Jemima, 
was at that becoming age when young ladies' 
hair is neither long nor short. As to the con- 
versation of these Manchester graces, — being in 



MATILDA. 53i 

considerable awe of a person of whom the Morn- 
ing Post said so much as it did of Lady Matilda, 
they confined that to occasional verbal corrections 
of their mother's slip-slop, which their boarding- 
school education fully qualified them to give. 
As to Mrs. Hobson, she felt no such awe as that 
with which the name and fame of Lady Matilda 
inspired her daughters. Ever since her brother's 
marriage, she had persuaded herself that her own 
consequence was so much increased by the close- 
ness of the connexion, that she did not feelabashed, 
even in the presence of the cause of all that addi- 
tional consequence. So she waddled straight up to 
Lady jMatllda, in a scarlet velvet pelisse which made 
the sun hide his diminished head in the dog-days; 
and after a sisterly salutation, said, — (staring full 
at her,) — "Well, I'm sure Jem couldn't have done 
better." She then broke at once into the subject 
now always uppermost in her thoughts ; namely, 
the extraordinary circumstance of her being actu- 
ally about to go abroad. 

" Well," said she, " I hope that we shall all 
live as one family in foreign parts. To think of 
my going trapesing out of Old England! but 
my daughters must have the same advaantages 
as the Miss Tomkins's, though they did make 



54 MATILDA. 

old Tomkins a knight the other day. But an^t 
my brother a baronet ? to say nothing of you, 
Lady Matilda. Then Dr. Snook says, that Je- 
mima is rather pilmonary^ \ and that the air of 
Italy will do her good ; and to be sure, if it was 
not for fear of the muskitty's^ or bandittis, or 
what do they call them as attacks one there, I 
should like Italy well enough, and to see the 
Pope, and the Venus of Meddi— what is it, my 
dear?" (appealing to one of her daughters.) 
" Medici, Mamma," said Miss Anne. " Aye — 
Medici — and the Saint Peter's — but I don't think 
so much of that, because weVe got a Saint Peter's 
at Manchester. And that great cascade (Turny, 
or what do they call it.?) that Briggs — old Briggs 
of our town's son — shew^ed a fine picture of it, as 
he did there at our exhibition, with the water all 
so white, and the rocks so black, and the trees 
so green; very pretty it was, and httle Briggs 
himself sitting on a three-legged stool, with it all 
splashing about him, poor fellow ; — and then that 
Capital Colossus as the old Romans made. — 
" Coliseum, Mamma,"" said Miss Hobson ; and 
*« the Capitol," said Miss Anne, " is a building 
by itself." — " Very well, my dears, a building by 
itself, is it .? I thought it was in Rome — but Jem 



Matilda. 55 

ought to know, for I suppose thafs what they 
teach him at school." This changed the current 
of her ideas, and called Lady Matilda''s attention 
to a nuisance which the presence of more active 
annoyances had hitherto prevented her from 
observing. 

Of all the demands that the ties of connexion 
can make upon one's patience, there is nothing like 
the precocious introduction, into general society, 
of a genuine school-boy ; where, either by his 
uneasy awkwardness, he makes all who see him 
equally uncomfortable, or, by his pert self-suffi- 
ciency, causes a more active disturbance. — Sir 
James's saying, which he so aptly applied, of 
" Love me, love my dog," is nothing to the trial of, 
Love me, love my school-boy. It is true, though, 
that school-boys are, after all, (to use a metaphor 
peculiarly suited to the Hobson family,) the raw 
material of which the finished articles, most sought 
for in a drawing-room, must be manufactured. 
There are, also, two varieties in the species ; your 
private school-boy is much worse than your 
public : by private schools, being meant all, 
however large and however open, except two or 
three, where the scholars are more select and 
gentleman-like ; and which schools are therefore 
called public. And never was there seen a more 



5a 



MATILDA. 



regular specimen of the worst kind of school-boy, 
than that which met Matilda's eyes in the person 
of Jem Hobson, as he sat on the very edge of 
the sofa; his pale, shrunk, nankeen trowsers, 
liaving worked their way up his spindle leg, 
which was enveloped in a wrinkled cotton 
stocking; the collar of his new coat, and his 
black stock, alone, showing any embryo symptoms 
of incipient dandyism ; his sandy hair plaistered 
sideways with a wet brush, off his snubby, chubby 
face; and his hands occupied in studiously 
brushing, the wrong way, the nap of his shape- 
less hat. 

" Put your hat down, my dear Jem,'' said 
Mrs. Hobson. " He is Sir James's godson ; we 
reckon him very like him," appealing to Matilda, 
who, tliough she said nothing, could not deny the 
imputation. 

" I am sorry his uncle's out. I brought 
him here, as he is not going abroad with us, on 
purpose to see him, as it is right boys should 
know who they are to look to. Jem, I'm sure, 
will do something for his godson, little Jem, as 
we call him : perhaps, make him a Parliament- 
man ; it is as good a trade as any ; at least, I'm 
sure, so uncle Smithson found it. They say, he 
must make six ; so he may as well have one of 



jTatilda. 5^ 

his own kin as another. Who knows but, in 
time, Jem may live to be a — what was that great 
gentleman, who so civilly wrote to thank our 
people for kilhng the Radicals ?" — « A Secre- 
tary of State, Mamma,'' said Miss Hobson. 

" Ah ! Why should not Jem live to be a Se- 
cretary of State, Lady Matilda ? I can assure 
you," continued the fond mother, " that all 
pains have been taken with his speechifying; — 
Jem, suppose you let your aunt hear that speech 
that I say makes me think I hear you in the 
House of Commons.'"' Matilda submitted to 
this, as a minor evil to hearing the mother talk 
about him ; and Jem, who, with all his shyness^ 
preferred to his present state of awkward inac- 
tion, that exposure to which habit had hardened 
him, immediately prepared to comply ; and, 
throwing his hand stiffly up, like a way-post, 
began, " ]\Iy name is Norval,"- — in that gruffish 
squeak, and with that measured twang, which 
generally accompany such exhibitions. He was 
proceeding, with wonderful success; and had 
just arrived at the point where — 

** A baud of tierce barbarians, from the hills, 
Rushed, like a torrent, down upon the vale, 
Sweeping our flocks and herds," 

d6 



58 MATILDA. 

when the door opened, and in walked our two 
friends of the preceding evening, Lord George 
Darford and Mr. Penryn, who usually hunted 
time in couples, and meant to kill half an hour 
with Lady Matilda. Great, indeed, was their 
astonishment at the party they found assembled, 
and the exhibition they interrupted. Our young 
actor might have added — 

" Our shepherds fled for safety and for succour," 

for sudden was the flight this produced in the 
family; — Mrs. Hobson displaying to the still 
wondering eyes of the intruders, as she moved 
towards the door, the broad back of her splendid 
pelisse, whose unequally-worn texture shewed at 
once, tliat her velvet was English, and her habits 
sedentary. The young ladies followed in a clus- 
ter, stooping, shuffling, poking, and using every 
other means by which English young ladies of a 
certain class get out of the room. — Roscius, alone, 
" still hovered about the enemy" — till, with 
some difficulty, he had extricated his shapeless 
hat from under the feet of Lord George, who 
was, by this time, sprawling on the sofa ; and 
having achieved this, with a formal bow, which he 
had learnt at the same time as his speech, he left 
the room. 



MATILDA. 5fF 

^' What, in the name of wonder,''' said Lord * 
George, " is that young Esquimaux, whom we' 
found exhibiting; and who are his attendant 
squaws ?*" 

" That Lady was the sister of Sir James ; the 
others were her children;" Lady Matilda re- 
pUed, in a tone calculated to stop any further 
attempts at ridicule. 

" Quite manque, our party at Eatington's,"'"' 
said Mr. Penryn, thinking it right to turn the- 
conversation. " A Quaker's meeting would have 
been more lively," added Lord George. " I did 
not find it pleasant, certainly," Lady Matilda 
sincerely replied. — " Only think," said Mr. Pen- 
ryn, " of their asking, together, two rival pur- 
veyors of wit ; who, besides the natural jalousie 
de metier, had had a downright quarrel. Of 
course, as always happens, they got next each 
other; and were so occupied in shewing that 
they did not mind it, that they could think 
of nothing else. But there is nothing so pro- 
verbially unlucky as the lottery of a dinner- 
table. One is sure to get next the person one 
most wishes to avoid ; don''t you think so, Lady 
Matilda ?" 

This appeal was made at random, and without 



60 MATILDA. 

any consciousness of how conclusive a testimony 
she could bear to the justness of his proposition. 
But Lord George saved her the awkwardness 
of assent, by taking the allusion to himself. " I 
trust. Lady Matilda will not assent to a doctnne 
against which I must vehemently protest," said 
he, with a slight bow. " Oh ! you George 1 — 
Aye, I had forgotten," said his friend ; " but I 
don't think your other neighbour. Lady Matilda, 
seemed properly aware of the peculiar advan- 
tages of his situation ; I never was so disap- 
pointed in a man in my life as in Lord Ormsby.'' 

" We used to reckon him a very pleasant fel- 
low, before he went abroad," said Lord George ; 
" I recollect, when I first came out, no party was 
quite the thing, without Augustus Arlingford." 

The reader will probably observe, tiiat there 
is a little anachronism in this statement of Lord 
George''s ; and that his recollection of their pre- 
vious acquaintance had not occurred to him at 
the meeting of the evening before. 

" But," Mr. Penryn continued, " with all his 
fun, he had always an infernal sentimental twrn. 
Just before he went abroad, we all thought that 
he had got some little rural attachment — some 
Clarj, in the country." 



MATILDA. 61 

" Perhaps, then, after all," said Lord George, 
*' the constant swain is going to marry her ; for 
as I was coming to you, I saw him get into his 
travelling-carriage, at Mivart's." 

This intelligence, which was communicated 
towards the conclusion of their visit, was highly 
satisfactory to Lady Matilda ; not only because 
it relieved her from the immediate embarrass- 
ment of the intended dinner, which her acquaint- 
ance with the Hobson family had not rendered 
less formidable, but also on general grounds; 
for, however she might exert herself in pubhc, 
the experience of her feelings of the preceding 
evening, convmced her, that the less she saw of 
Lord Ormsby the better. 



CHAPTER V. 



Thanks to Mac Adam and a rapid succession 
of " first and second turn out," our hero found 
himself, towards the evening of the morrow, at 
the lodge gate leading to Ormsby Castle. 

Home is said to possess an universal attraction, 
felt by the traveller in all his wanderings, — "Who 
drags at each remove a lengthening chain ;" — 
and the return to the scenes of our youth, at 
whatever age, and under whatever circumstan- 
ces, is supposed to impart a till then unknown 
pleasure. But, like the seeds of all human pas- 
sions, however equally innate in the breast of 
all, its development is dependent on the habits 
of the person, and its growth proportioned to 
the strength of the charm by which it exerts its 
influence. 

The fanciful Gall may find the thieving boss, 
or bump, alike prominent on the cranium of the 
vagabond and the right honourable. On one, its 
impulse irresistibly leads to felony and the gal- 



MATILDA* 63 

lows ; on the other, at most, it can only tend to 
suspicion at the gaming-table, or stifled disgrace 
as a public defaulter. 

And so it is with respect to the universality of 
this attraction towards home. The returned 
seafaring apprentice, who pokes his way back 
to his indigenous garret in Wapping, can form 
but a faint idea of the proud sensations of Lord 
Ormsby, as he again entered the magnificent 
domains of his native place. On every side thou- 
sands of rival monarchs of the wood, with all the 
accumulated dignity of centuries, and all the 
freshness and gaiety of a young summer foliage, 
waved their outstretched arms at the arrival of 
their lord and master. 

Varied glades of verdant lawn conducted 
the eye where, from the summit of remote and 
apparently inaccessible crags, the wilder scions 
of the forest nodded their distant homage. The 
mountain stream roared its rude welcome from 
afar, which, at its nearer approach, was softened 
into the silent tribute of an extensive lake. The 
setting sun lent his oblique rays to ghtter through 
every branch, and sparkle on the surface of the 
waters, greeting our hero with a natural illumi- 
nation, compared with which the greatest artificial 



64 MATILDA. 

efforts of the tind, that ever victory bought, or 
faction extorted, were dreary and pitiful. It was 
thus that Lord Ormsby arrived at the mansion of 
his fathers, for the first time as its master. 

Let the landed interest grumble as they wiI^ 
at the depreciation of their property, the most 
successful stock-jobbing cannot give to " airy 
nothings, a local habitation and a name." Tlie 
honest pride in the hereditary possession of an 
English gentleman's seat, is a feeling which no 
mushroom wealth can buy. An old country 
place is a friend whose aspect no neglect can 
change, — a mistress whose beauties increase 
with age. All other companions, absence alienates^ 
caprice disgusts, perhaps whilst yet in youth 
— or as age advances, increasing infirmities ren- 
der as crabbed as ourselves, or death prema- 
turely tears from us. But this our inanimate 
mother meets us on our return, the last day the 
same as the first ; with all the freshness and kind- 
ness one left : the marks of our boyish fancy, not 
neglected or thrown aside, but cherished even 
as we imprinted them; only improved in one's 
absence into a lovely maturity. The statesman, 
who spurns all other domestic ties, yet owns this 
power of attachment tahis hereditary place ; and 



MATILDA* 65 

the greatest master of human nature who ever 
wrote, makes the most ambitious of men, King- 
killer Warwick, at the point of death, most 
lament 

" j\!y parks, my walks, my manors which I had."^ 

Happy the man who feels these enjoyments, 
and limits his other desires to giving, to all 
around who are dependent on him, cause to 
share in this feeling for the place of their birth. 
That such is the contented lot of many now 
living, there can be no doubt ; and yet they 
allow some of their own body annually to slan- 
der them by the monstrous absurdity of the 
assertion, that the slightest alteration in the game 
laws would drive them from the country. 

Do they mean that the continuance of an ab- 
surd, tyrannical, and, as it has been proved, 
most insufficient and abortive system, for protect- 
ing their monopoly in a healthy and manly 
amusement, is their only object in life ? Do they 
mean that they will abdicate all their gracious 
and peaceful prerogatives, as petty sovereigns, 
if they are not allowed also the truly Kingly 
Right of making war upon their neighbours ? 

But the fact is, that this is an idle threat. The 



66 MATILDA. 

country gentlemen will continue to reside on their 
estates, even though (which will never be the 
case,) there should not be one " coney, hare, 
pheasant, partridge, mallard, duck, tea], or 
widgeon, grouse, heathcock, or moorgame,"'"' left 
in the country : for they never will have the bad 
taste willingly to emigrate to a ricketty two- 
windowed lodging in a watering-place, with bad 
port, retailed by the dozen ; one fat joint of 
roasted meat, that offends their nose all the morn- 
ing, before its appearance, and their palate after- 
wards ; with a dark, dusty reading-room, for a 
resource, and that very unqualified semi-gentle- 
man sort of person, whom they so much abomi- 
nate, for society ; in preference to the indulgence 
of old-fashioned hospitality amongst their neigh- 
bours, and the management of their own con- 
cerns as an occupation. 

Whatever Lord Ormsby's abstract opinion 
was, upon this subject, it was not called into 
play upon the present occasion. As it was still 
early in the month of July, our hero had nothing 
but solitude to expect during his sejour here, as 
his mother had gone abroad soon after the un- 
fortunate marriage of her eldest son ; principally 
to avoid taking any decided step about a con- 
nection which, as it was irremediable, her kind- 



MATILDA. 67 

ness tempted her to forgive ; but which, she felt, 
her duty towards her daughter enjoined her, as 
much as possible, to avoid. 

He was received, at the hall-door, by Mrs. 
Brown, the old housekeeper, a sort of heir-loom 
in the family ; whose fondness for him had often 
shewed itself in his childhood, by first stuffing 
him with sweetmeats, and then unmercifully 
dosing away the mischief she had done. She 
now met him, not quite with that warmth of 
manner which the affection excited by his uni- 
form kindness would have led one to expect; 
but the fact was, that the joy which she felt, as 
a good-hearted old woman, was not a little alloyed 
by her professional regret, as an experienced 
housekeeper, that he had come a day sooner than 
she expected. This, however, having been ex- 
plained away, and an assurance given, that any 
want of due preparation was all owing to his own 
fault, she led the way to his mother's sitting- 
room. This, she said, she thought he would 
prefer, whilst he was alone, as it would remind 
him of old times. " You will find it pretty 
much as you left it," she said ; " for when your 
poor brother lost himself, (God forgive him !) 
and they were coming here, I locked it up ; for 



68 MATILDA. 

I could not bear that the like of she should be 
where my Lady used to sit.*" 

This disgraceful marriage had been a terrible 
thorn in the side of poor Mrs.. Brown, com- 
pletely identified, as she conceived herself, with 
the family dignity ; and it had added to the 
irritability of a temper, originally none of the 
best. Lord Ormsby, rather from thinking that 
he ought to say something, than from its being a 
subject which he wished to enter upon with Mrs. 
Brown, asked if his brother had ever lived much 
there. 

*' No, indeed," said Mrs. Bro\vn ; " they 
corned with all their low set, but only staid two 
nights; why, Heaven only knovvs." 

This was not quite the plain and simple truth ; 
as, besides Heaven, Mrs. Brown herself well 
knew why ; having been indeed the cause : for 
one of Lady Orm shy's servants having required 
the attendance of Mrs. Brown in a summary 
way, not very soothing to her self-importance ; 
calling out — " Your Alhstrcss wants you f"* — 
" Mistress., indeed V retorted the soured pur- 
veyor of sweets ; — " my Mistress ! more people^^ 
Mistress than mine, if all was tcld."' This having 
been inmiediately repeated to her Ladyship^ 



MATILDA. G^ 

slje had assaulted the housekeeper in a manner 
which shewed, that want of practice, since her 
elevation to the peerage, had not injured that 
easy fluency, in a dialect called slang, in which 
ladies of lier description often acquire a most 
astonishing proficiency. It being impossible to 
restore peace, her Ladyship's unhappy husband 
had bribed her, (which was the only sort of in- 
fluence he ever possessed over her,) to quit the 
castle ; to which arrangement she the more rea- 
dily agreed, as a country residence was not ex- 
actly what suited her best. 

In their way to his mother's room, Lord 
Ormsby and his guide passed throiagh a long 
gallery of family pictures ; the first of which, by 
Holbein, was a female, with little grey eyes, and 
sandy hair, combed straight back from the fore- 
head, and a stiff figure, amazingly squeezed, 
starched, and be-ruffed ; and on a tesselated 
pavement, at her little pinched feet, was written, 
" Lady Matilda Delaval, first Baroness Ormsby."" 
This had been early subject of merriment to the 
happy trio, which consisted of her twenty times 
great-grand-children and great-niece. Many 
were the jests at the pretended hkeness between 
her and her merry namesake ; and great the 



70 MATILDA. 

affected wonder, as to who should be the pendant 
on the vacant pannel at the other end of the 
room. The recollections which the sight of this 
picture painfully excited in the mind of Ormsby, 
seemed also to press strongly on that of Mrs. 
Brown, who had also, probably, speculated, in 
her way, upon the future occupant of the spare 
pannel. " You will find, in my Lady^s room, 
Mr. Augustus, (my Lord, I mean,) some music 
and drawing-books of Lady Matilda Delavars, 
(Dornton's I mean) ; I locked the door up, as I 
said, when that happened, without looking what 
was in the room. Perhaps you will find some 
way to return them to her, now she's married, — 
not quite as was expected, to be sure." And she 
stopped a moment, and gave something between 
a sigh and a wheeze ; caused, partly by the steep 
staircase they had been mounting, and partly by 
the recollection of the disappointment of long- 
cherished stewardVroom gossip, when they used 
to toast the union of the handsomest couple in 
the county — Augustus Arlingford and Matilda 
Delaval. On the floor, at the other end of the 
gallery, leaning against the empty pannel, was 
an open deal packing-case, sent by Annabella, 
Lady Ormsby, as she now called herself, con- 



MATILDA. 71 

taining her portrait, in the character of Diana, 
with Ormsby Castle in the back ground. Whe- 
ther the resemblance in feature was as striking 
as the choice of character was appropriate, was 
not easily to be decided; for where the head 
should have been, only appeared the inverted 
form of a well-shaped leg, naked to the knee : for 
when, upon opening the case, Mrs. Brown had 
discovered who its unwelcome inmate was, she 
had left her just as she had found her, turned 
topsy-turvy, with her head on the floor, and her 
heels in the air. This neglect, on the part of 
Mrs. Brow^l, of her usual habit of enforcing 
rigid discipline in the drill and deportment of 
every article of furniture, from a picture to a 
poker, was intentional ; conveying, as she thought, 
an insult, appropriately disgraceful, for her in- 
trusion amongst the immaculate inhabitants of 
the gallery ; and in this opprobious position she 
left her, to await the final judgment of her new 
master, which, she trusted, would be for the 
flames. But, on the present occasion, Mrs. Brown 
passed on in silence, leaving, to a future time, her 
appeal to his Lordship for his sentence upon it ; 
not wishing, unnecessarily, to enter on so hateful 
a subject, at their first interview. 

When she left Lord Ormsby in his mother's 



k-% MATILDA. 

room, he acknowledged to himself with pleasure, 
that it was indeed in the same state as when he last 
saw it. AVarmly attached to his mother and sister, 
many combined reminiscences of their presence 
were highly interesting to him; but what he 
most eagerly sought for was that collection of 
little things belonging to Lady Matilda, wliich 
Mrs. Brown had announced to him. One of the 
first that fell into his hands was a small drawing- 
book, which opened accidentally at a slight sketch 
of himself. The history of this sketch he well 
remembered. It was occasioned by some singu- 
larity in the shooting dress in w^hich he had ap> 
peared, and which struck Matilda and his sister 
Emily as fantastical. The costume was recorded 
with much quaint humour, but the face was any 
thing but caricature; and, though sketchy, was 
evidently the work of one who had found pleasure 

. '' to sit and draw 



His arched brows, liis hawking eye, his curls, 
In her heart's table.'' 

The surface of the di-awing was disfigured by 
five or six long slender pencil marks, which, in a 
moment of playful waywardness she had scratched 
over it, when asked to shew it to him for whom it 
was intended. 



MAllLDA. t^ 

How uncertain and irregular are the approaches 
to the seat of all human passions. Sometimes the 
most trifling circumstance will casually find its 
way, by a short cut, direct to the heart, when a re- 
gularly connected chain of sentimental associations 
wull in vain attempt an advance towards it. There 
was nothing tended more irresistibly, though 
against his better judgment, to revive former 
feehngs in the mind of Lord Ormsby, than this 
foolish trifle which he held in his hand, — connect- 
ing, as he did, the arch glance of the single-hearted, 
afl^ectionate girl who had drawn it, with the tear- 
ful eye of the cate-worn woman whom he had 
seen two nights before ; and contrasting the warm 
and friendly hand, which in a playful struggle he 
had endeavoured to prevent from destroying her 
performance, with that which coldly touched his 
sleeve as he handed her down Lord Eatington's 
staircase. Poor Matilda ! in a hasty moment, as 
she had scratched those feeble lines to efface his 
likeness from the paper, even so she had endea- 
voured to obliterate his image from her heart, and 
even so she had destroyed its value and rendered 
it unfit to be preserved. But in spite of her 
abortive efforts, the earlier impressions remained 
in all their former freshness, beneath. 



74? MATILDA. 

The next morning, the lawyers who were to 
meet Lord Ormsby from town on business, not 
being arrived, he determined on a ride for a ride's 
sake; and, mounting a favourite horse, he, oc- 
cupied with his own reflections, left the choice of 
the road a good deal to the animal, who in the 
exercise of his discretion took him through the 
grounds, and several miles of shady lanes, to the 
gates of Delaval Park, — at which he made a dead 
point. At this Lord Ormsby expressed his first 
symptoms of difference of opinion ; but the horse, 
who entertained a lively recollection of Lord 
Wakefield's corn-bins, had been lately unused to 
controul, and in his best days was a little bigotted 
in his own opinions as to the road to be taken — 
confirmed, too, in this instance, by the certainty, 
from all former experience, that he was indis- 
putably right, he thought proper to resist. Lord 
Ormsby was in general a temperate as well as a 
good horseman, but upon this occasion, perhaps 
from irritation at being unwilhngly detained on 
the spot where he had parted from Matilda, he 
corrected the animal with unnecessary severity, 
and then having carried, his point, as capriciously 
caressed him ; saying " Poor Orlando ! you and 
I must now turn our thoughts another way." 



MATILDA. 75 

Putting into execution this plan, of disciplining 
his own and Orlando's wayward inclinations, and 
wandering farther away from home, and into a 
part of the Delaval property with which he was 
not very well acquainted, he began to be rather 
doubtful of the road, when he saw approaching 
him his old acquaintance, Dick Boulby, whom he 
had known as Lord Wakefield's gamekeeper. 
Dick was passing him without notice, when Lord 
Ormsby stopped him, " What, Dick, don't you 
know me again ?" After looking at him a mo- 
ment, Dick exclaimed, " Why, if it beant Measter 
Agoostus Arlingford, why I be hanged if I warn't 
speering about you at that very moment.— You'll 
excuse my not knowing you again, Sir. I'm a 
bit over old to ken folks. Bad times sin' we met, 
my Lord you be now — " 

" Yes, but the times are getting better." — 
" Worse wid me — they canna get better — You 
might have made them better, and that were what 
I was a bethinking me about, when first I seed 
you. You were the best lang shot I ever met in 
all my days ; but this baronet, he dinna ken the 
trigger fra the cock, or may be whether shot 
came fra stock or muzzle." 

" Well," said Lord Ormsby, anxious to turn 



< O MAT! LDA. 

the conversation, " he may be a very good master 
for all that. But I had almost lost my way : 
you can tell me the best road back to Ormsby ; 
these lanes are rather crooked."" — " Crooked ! 
they be strait enuf presently. That Sir James 
he be going — (think o** that, Measter Arlingford !) 
to make a road through Delaval Park, strait as 
amy line in his father's ledger I — aye, and as 
black too. — A rail-road to carry coal, think of 
that. — AVhat wouM my lady's grandfather, auld 
lord, as I used to follow when he rode hawking 
tlirough whole range, have said when he went 
fetar-gazing, to have com'd wid his nose int' 
coal- cart ?'^ 

" But, I dare say it isn't so," said Lord 
Oimsby, " it's a false report." 

''- Over true," said Dick, " it were but yester- 
day I was at our l)est wood — that you know, 
where Mr. Scribbleton, my lord's secretary 
peppered your legs in the Battev.'. Well, I seed 
three chaps I did not ken, with poles and other 
sort of machines, I guessed might be new fang- 
led poaching tools ; so I went ti'd them, and they 
told I, they wair surveyors — come down fra Sir 
James to take elevation for line of rail-road. — 
They say, howsomdever, they mun wait for 



MATILDA. 77 

Parliament, and they canna do it without my 
lady's word ; and she. Lord bless her ! is auld 
lord's own grand-daughter ; she did a power of 
good last winter. I'll hear it fra her own lips 
l^fore I believe — Oh, Mr. Augoostus, she might 
have had power as well as will to help, but for 
this chap, — one canna make a silk purse out a 
sow's ear, as my auld woman says -^ but if you 
had " Lord Ormsby did not wish this compa- 
rison to be pushed further, or indeed the appear- 
ance of interfering in Sir James's concerns ; so, 
Jiaving learnt the best road from his old friend, 
he gave him something to remember him by, and 
gallopped home : and there for the present we 
must leave him.. 



7S 



CHAPTER VI. 

The 16th of July, the day appointed for the 
departure of the Dorntons for the Continent, 
at length arrived. The intermediate time, since 
we left them, had been employed by Sir James 
in overloading himself with cumbrous com- 
forts of every description, mostly patent portable 
articles — that is to say, they were just portable 
enough to stuff the carriages full of things other- 
wise unnecessary. And being ingenious patent 
contrivances, they had the peculiar recommen- 
dation for travelling, that they could only be 
repaired by the inventor. However, by dint of 
a great deal of packing, they were at length all 
stowed ; and Sir James and Lady Matilda 
took their places in the travelling chaise, and 
Mam'selle Felicie and her band-boxes in the 
Britchker behind. 

Partial as I am to Lady Matilda, and anxious 
that the gentle reader should pass as much of his 
time as possible in her company, I still do not 



MATILDA. 79 

think it would be shewing her to advantage if 
I were to induce him to travel bodkin between 
her and Sir James. I shall therefore rather 
propose to him, at least at starting, to take a 
place in the family-coach of the Hobsons, which, 
as stated in all the newspapers, left the Waterloo 
Hotel in Jennyn Street, two days previous to 
the last-mentioned departure. 

We must, however, first introduce some of 
the male members of the family, who have not 
yet been mentioned. Mr. Hobson, himself, was 
usually called Old Hobson. Not that he really 
was older than many very personable people in 
the world ; but his coat had a long waist and a 
short collar, he abominated trowsers, always wore 
long gaiters, never shewed his shirt collar, and 
his wig was the meanest of scratches. Besides 
this, he never laughed, and seldom spoke; and 
when he did, always in a short testy manner. 
These marks of age, more infallibly than any 
number of years, constitute a man old in the 
nineteenth century. 

People wondered why old Hobson was not a 
pleasanter old fellow. Every thing had gone 
well with him in the world ; but the fact was, 
that the situation into which his success had 
brought him, produced that constant contradic- 



80 MATILDA. 

tion between his actions and his inclinations, 
which caused his surliness. Conscious that he 
had made his own fortune, he was anxious to 
shew the extent of his merit to tlie world, by 
spending it with spirit ; and this desire was in a 
state of perpetual warfare with that penurious 
turn which had helped him to acquire liis 
wealth. 

This inward struggle was most apparent in 
uifles, as reminding him most forcibly of the 
little expenses he used to grudge in his hoarding 
days. He would at any time rather pay a coach- 
maker, than a postboy. On great occasions, 
too, — such as the tour abroad, — his anxiety to 
do the genteel thing laid him at the mercy of his 
family. — His dislike to the journey only vented 
itself in grumbling. — lie never ventured to offer 
direct objection, much less formal opposition ; 
but, as it was inevitable, comforted himself with 
doing his best to make it disagreeable. 

Such was the amiable being who now took his 
seat in his new travelling-coach, with his wife by 
his side, and three daughters opposite to them. 
In the rumble behind, were squeezed those two 
most hapless animals when abroad, a London foot- 
man and an English maid ; the latter of whom, as 
she complained herself, " did for all the ladies.'" 



MATILDA. 8| 

The barouche-seat in front was occupied by 
two much more important personages ; no other 
than our friend Jem's two elder brothers. The 
eldest, Tom, was what is called " in business ;" 
that is, he spent ail his time in amusing himself, 
whether as a pedestrian in poaching, as an eques- 
trian in tumbling off broken-down hack hunters, 
or in the vehicular line, in tooling the Manchester 
Mail the last stage into that town. — But though 
he was thus always occupied out of doors, in 
bringing down birds, throwing down horses, or 
driving down passengers, he was, nevertheless, 
all this while " in the house ;'' that is, his name 
did duty on many a bale of goods in large letters, 
— " Hobson, Rising, Hobson, & Co." w^hile 
his person was following these more agreeable 
avocations. 

It was with a view to settling Tom some- 
where abroad, to increase the foreign connexions 
of the house, that his father consented to his 
accompanying them. 

By his side sat a very different person, — his 
brother, Mr. Valentine Hobson ; christened Va- 
lentine, from his having been born on the 14th 
of February, the anniversary of that sapient 
saint. And, as it turned out, he had beea 
E 5 



82 MATILDA. 

appropriately enough named ; for mucTi of the 
mawkish nonsense, and sentimental stuff of his 
natal day, had instilled itself into his character. 
He was incurably addicted to scribbling amatory 
trash ; w^hich worst of all offences in old Hob- 
son^s eyes, had been attempted to be corrected 
by procuring him chambers in Lincoln's Inn, 
to study the law. But the remedy, strong as it 
may seem, had not been effectual ; for he had 
never even then had a lucid interval, in which 
he enjoyed, a temporary oblivion that " love,**" 
rhymed to " dove f ' " thine,"*' to " pine ;" " eye," 
to ^^ die ;" and that " heart,'' with a due sense 
of its own importance, monopohzed " dart," 
'« smart," "part," C7im multisaliis. This seemed 
desperate indeed ; but a fortnight at Paris 
having been known to effect wonderful cures in 
sentimental cases, he was now on his way to 
try that specific, and was going with his family 
as far as Calais^ With his mother he was a 
great favourite, as she declared she liked a man 
who knew all BelVs Letters by heart. 

This was the family arrangement, and thus 
they had all taken their places, — the hapless Jem- 
winking his red eyes at the hotel door. 
^ Good bye, Jem," said J\Iiss Hobson^ 



MATILDA. 83 

" Good bye, Jem," echoed Miss Anne. 

" Remember me to Miss Jones," said one. 

" And me to Miss Donking," said another. 

" And all of us to Bill Buckley,'' said a third. 

" Learn your multiplication table better^ 
boy," growled old Hobson ; and that was all 
the farewell the kind father took of him. 

" And stick to speechifying, and you'll be a 
great man," sobbed Mrs. Hobson, in a tone in 
which present distress struggled with feelings 
of confident anticipation. 

Poor Jem I at that moment he would have 
given up the prospect of all his mother's am- 
bitious plans for him at home — even the Home 
Secretaryship — for the smallest place in the 
foreign department, that he now saw before his 
eyes. 

At length the word was given, and the im- 
mense vehicle put in motion, not without much 
difficulty, and scraping, and scrambling, and 
after two or three abortive jerks; though the 
horses were four of Newman's best. 

Hardly was this effected, when '' Stop I stop!" 
cried Mrs. Hobson ; '' You must stop." 

*-' Aye, stop, stop here for good," said old 
Hobson ; " better late than never ►'* 



84 MATILDA. 

" No nonsense, my dear,*" retorted Mrs. Hob- 
son ; " but I have left behind, what I shall be 
dumb-founded without. Madame (what's her 
name'*s) Voyager's Manual Exercisey 

" Voyager exercise, you'll have enough of 
that in the voyage in the packet to-morrow," 
muttered her husband. 

But this was lost on Mrs. Hobson, who had now 
pushed as much of her person as she could 
through the open window, screaming " Jem." 
Jem, who thought that of course they had stop- 
ped for him, came grinning up, and was marvel- 
lously disappointed, when he was only sent back 
for a book. With such a messenger at such a 
time it needed hardly be added, that the book was 
returned missing; and the carriage was again, v/ith 
the same efforts, put in motion. But once started, 
there is no known weight that ever swung upon 
four wheels, which four English post horses will 
not take at the rate of ten miles an hour, provi- 
ded always that the boys have the necessary spur 
in the head, and these silver persuaders were 
upon this occasion unsparingly used by Tom 
Hobson. 

By dint of this, as they reached Blackheath, 
they overtook a Dover Safety Coach,— called 



MATILDA. 85 

safety, originally, probably from going faster, and 
carrying more passengers than was previously 
believed possible; and certainly havingsince earned 
the title, by being oftener overturned than any 
other. — " Blow me,'' said Tom to his brother, 
" if that an't our currier.''^ Then tapping the 
front window, " I say, there's cur currier^ — 
" Where's the cooreer f said Mrs. Hobson. — 
" Let's look at the curiare,'''' said Miss Hobson, 
as she thought with her best boarding-school 
accent. " I haven't seen the cjuom'la ,'''' added 
Miss Anne. " Damn the currier,'" said old 
Hobson. — " That's our curry ^"^ was echoed from 
John to Nanny on the rumble. 

"What a miserable half-begotten looking 
beggar he is," said Tom to his brother, from the 
front. '* He seems a helpless sort of chap," conti- 
nued John from the rear. ' ' Quite a poor cretur^'' 
rejoined Nanny ; and to be sure he did not look 
very happy and comfortable, bumping about in 
the seat of the basket, his little legs danghng in 
the air, and his short person elbowed into nothing 
by two fat old women, who talked unremittingly 
across him to each other, reckoning ihejvj'injieer- 
■mg man for nothing. The boys having gallopped 
by the coach to Tom's heart's content, — they 



80 MATILDA. 

arrived at Dartford, — where the expectations 
Tom had excited in the boys, were to be reahzed 
by old Hobson. This was rather a dilemma for 
Tom ; for his father, when what he had given was 
received with a remonstrating touch of the hat, 
and, " Please your honour, we came a merry 
pace," retorted, "Merry pace? racing, you rascals; 
think yourself very well oflP I don't set old Martin 
after you.'' But, Sir, the young gentleman — "" 
the boy was rejoining, w^hen Tom, tipping him a 
wink, made up deficiencies amply out of his own 
purse ; and Lunnon Bill bowing, and having said 
something in a satisfactory whisper to Dartford 
Dick, they again gallopped off, before the coach, 
the object of all Tom's anxieties, came in sight. 
Without farther adventure they arrived at Dover, 
where they spent their last English evening in 
a truly national manner, — eating and drinking, 
without intermission, during a continued succes- 
sion of dinner, tea, and supper ; the intellectual 
part of the entertainment consisting in Tom 
Hobson's having the courier in to laugh at his 
broken English. 

The next morning, betimes, they were sum- 
moned to tlie Steam Packet, — where the ladies 
immediately descended to tlie cabin, '' to prepare 



MATILDA. 8T 

for woe;'^ while old Hobson was unmercifully 
beset by that licensed tribe of extortioners, con- 
sisting of boat-men, ladder-men, custom-house 
runners, ostlers, porters, and a long et cetera, — 
'' Ah ! I knew, if I left England, I should pay 
for it," he said ; "but this is beginning rather 
soon ;" all the time fumbling the loose change in 
his breeches-pocket, the complete disappearance 
of which he would have thought utter ruin, 
though now going where it would be perfectly 
useless — he sneaked off in time, into some undis- 
covered hole, from which he was not extracted 
till they arrived at Calais. 

And now, tliat deafening clamour, and bewilder- 
ing bustle, with which sailors give to their ordi- 
nary duties the same importance as if the vessel 
were going to the bottom, were silenced ; the 
all-powerful voi<;e of the Captain summoned, 
from the cauldron beneath, a spirit, who rose half 
through the hatchway, like a devil in a panto- 
mime through a trap. The word was given; 
and the steam-boat began tickling old Neptune's 
sides with its claws. Part of the boards that 
covered one of the w^heels being open, Tom 
Hobson took his post there ; and being, as we 
have already seen, a great amateur of rapidity in. 



88 MATILDA. 

rotatory motion, was highly pleased with its 
exertions, and kept crying — " Eravo ! go it, my 
tulip ! spin along, my fine fellow ! bravo !"' till 
the whirl of the wheel communicated itself to his 
head ; and the sea acting equally upon both, he 
was soon incapacitated for further observations. 

Against the other paddle, in a pensive attitude, 
leant his brother Valentine, who having, amongst 
his other studies, read an Enghsh translation cf 
Corinne, thought it necessary, like Lord Neville, 
to take a pathetic farewell of the white cliffs of 
Albion; which tender feeling, as he was only 
going for a fortnight to Paris, his mother coun- 
try, however partial a parent, could hardly be 
supposed to reciprocate with any one of his 
numerous family. However, there he stood, 
leaning his fat face on his pudsy hand, and 
trying in vain for a rhime to cliff, — " whifF^"* and 
*• stifT^ being both unmanageable. At last his 
head was turned before his couplet, — and his 
patriotic sickness yielded to one of a less senti- 
mental description — his mal-du-pays being suc- 
ceecied by the mal-de-Ia-mer. 

Such was the disabled condition of the Plobson 
family, when their passage was concluded, (as is 
always the case.) in less time than it was ever 



MATILDA. 89 

done before, though in half an hour longer than 
they were told was expected, at starting. They 
now entered Calais harbour, and prepared to 
expose themselves to the gaze of the crowd 
assembled to criticise the last importations from 
the island of beauty. 

Nationality is a sort of generous illiberality, a 
dignified selfishness, the indulgence of which, so 
far from exciting self-reproach, one easily per- 
suades oneself is praise- worthy , as well as pleasing. 
The consciousness of monopolizing, within our 
sea-girt isle, a proud pre-eminence of beauty, is 
one of its most gratifying illusions. 

Yet I own, that in returning along the Dover 
road, I have been sometimes a little puzzled in 
my attempts to be struck with this, as, in passing, 
I have endeavoured to persuade myself, that a 
slouching gait, high round shoulders, thick 
waist, and thicker ancles, must belong to a lovely 
face ; and leaning forward to convince myself, 
ttie slight glimpse has not quite reahzed the 
expectations national vanity had formed. 

If such disappointment has sometimes been 
my fate, in spite of all my prejudices, of which 
I am proud, what must a Frenchman, whose pre- 
judices are certainly the other way, think (when 



90 MATILDA. 

he thinks at all) of the boasted beauties whom he 
daily sees scrambling and shuffling to their inn, 
with all the disadvantage of just recovering from 
that most unbecoming of maladies, of which a 
packet is the cause ? — their complexion (which is 
always their first attraction,) completely disco- 
loured ; their dress, (which is never their forte,) 
splashed and draggled ; displaying, in short, all 
the disfigurement, and none of the interest, of 
recent distress. Though Venus did first come 
from the sea, assuredly she never landed from 
a packet. 

We have, however, sent more favourable spe-. 
cimens than the present representatives of an 
English Venus, and her three attendant graces ; 
who, in the persons of Mrs. and the Misses Hob- 
son, with old Hobson, like Vulcan hobbling after, 
excited no small merriment, as they made the 
best of their way to Dessein's Hotel. 



91 



CHAPTER VII. 

The feeling which one experiences in the first 
change from an EngHsh to a French inn, must 
be hke that of a horse, who is suddenly taken out 
of a warm, close stable, and turned into a loose 
box. In the first, he is often cramped for room ; 
kept much too hot; plagued with superfluous 
care and attention ; never left enough to himself; 
and stuiFed beyond what he can eat. In the 
other, he has a fine, roomy, airy place, to walk 
about in, and nobody ever seems to trouble his 
head about him, or to come near him, except at 
random, to feed him, when they have nothing 
else to do. 

At any rate, if the comparison be not quite 
just, it is one which struck Tom Hobson, as he 
and his family were turned into a large, staring, 
out-of-the-way kind of room, and left to their 
fate. Minutes, that seemed hours, passed, and 
there was no appearance of any one taking the 
least notice of them. Mrs. Hobson,, on whom 



92 MATILDA. 

the discipline of the packet had entailed a most 
ravenous appetite, now became most clamorous. 
All in vain ; — at last she heard a footstep on the 
stairs, and salhed forth. There she caught a 
stray waiter, singing — " Partani pour la Syj'iey 
He was proceeding on his way, without attending 
to her, when hunger made her bold ; and though 
she had lost her " Manuel de Voyager^'' she 
screamed at him, as she thought, in the words of 
that useful publication, — " Je suis femrae, iljuut 
me manger.'''' The gargon stared a momerit, 
in astonishment ; when the truism contained in 
the first part of the sentence, not seeming to 
reconcile him to the obligation implied in the 
remainder, — he passed on — " Partant pour la 
Syr'iey Their case thus seemed quite despe- 
rate ; when first an authoritative voice was heard 
upon the stairs, abusing every body to the right 
and left ; of which the most audible words were, 
— '' Sacre ! de falre attendre ; Sacre ! Milord 
Hohson ; — une des plus r'lclies families d'Angk' 
terre ; — Sacre!'''' — and, to their astonishment, 
tliere appeared the figure of the much despised 
courier, sacreing into the room the identical 
garc^on. Leon's altered appearance, in " Rule 
a Wife and have a Wife,'' did not create greater 



MATILDA. 93 

feJirprise, nor, indeed, a more complete change 
in manner and deportment; nor v/as it easy to 
recognise the little, helpless, much - enduring 
being, in the shabby surtout and oil-skin hat, 
iii the arbitrary, bullying, swaggering hero, 
glittering in gold lace and scarlet, with shining 
yellow leather breeches, and clattering about in a 
commanding pair of boots. It was like the 
Emperor Napoleon, rising from a sous-lieute- 
nant of artillery, upon the extinction of the 
ancien regime^ into absolute power. 

Thus, after the short-lived anarchy of the 
steam-boat, Pierre had completely superseded 
all the former legitimate authorities of the Hob- 
son family. From that time forward, nothing 
could be done without him ; all Mrs. Kobson's 
almost unintelligible wants were obliged to re- 
ceive his sanction, before they could be satisfied.; — 
old Hobson's emi~de-vie and water could not be 
obtained v/ithout his approbation ; — Tom was 
obliged to resign, into his more efficient command, 
all future controul over the postillions ; — even the 
young ladies coiild not lay their heads on a 
downy pillow, unless it was procured by him ; 
and when Miss Hobson desired that she might 
liave deua gros matehts on her bed, he it was 



94 MATILDA 

that saved her from the danger to which an un- 
conscious substitution of one vowel for another, 
might have otherwise subjected her. The dinner 
was not only obtained at once by the exertion 
of his authority, but upon the whole gave asto- 
nishing satisfaction. True it is, that old Hobson 

began by d g the soup, as mere salt-water, 

with sea- weed floating in it ; by which he suc- 
ceeded, as usual, in making what, from recent 
recollections, was to all the party precisely the 
most unwelcome of similies. Some 3Iamieno7i 
cotelettes, too, excited much admiration; Mrs. 
Hobson wondering why they were wrapped up 
in paper ; and Tom, supposing that they were 
meant for them to carry in their pockets, instead 
of sandwiches. 

Dinner being finished, and the rain continuing, 
the party were again reduced to their internal 
resources for amusement ; and as the "detail of 
these is not likely to afford much gratification 
to my readers, I shall leave them, for the present, 
to pursue their journey, turning my attention to 
more important personages. 



95 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Sm James and Lady Matilda Dornton were 
left just about to start on a continental tour, and 
just about to become, for the first time since 
their marriage, entirely dependent on each other 
for society. 

^ La Bruyere says, " Le commencement et le 
declin de Vamoiir se font sentir egalement par 
Vembarras oil Von est de se trouver seuls^'' This 
is particularly applicable to those whose con- 
nexions are dependent, for their continuance, 
entirely on the will and pleasure of the heart, 
whose only link is love. But those whom worldly 
^'iews have united " for better and for worse," 
and who have made the state of the affections 
an after-thought, are apt to find, in the embar- 
rassment of a continual tete-a-tete^ no slight 
hints of the above kind, but a very disagreeable 
conviction impressed upon them; namely, the 
confirmed negative of love, or the impossibihty 
of loving. 



9<> MATILDA. 

This unpleasant discovery is, in well-regiila» 
ted families, almost indefinitely postponed. — Be- 
sides the perpetual bustle of the London season, 
which is always effectual ; even in a country- 
house, the dreaded dependence on each other 
may, for some time, be palliated cither by an 
idle sporting brother or two, an unmarried sister, 
who hangs a little on hand, a led captain, a fed 
chaplain, or a nameless dependent of some kind 
or other. But travelling is a desperate case ; a 
daily tete-d-tetc, side by side in a close carriage, 
is a powerful dispeller of all doubts or illusions 
on the subject of likes and dislikes. How many 
early friendships which have withstood the 
caprice and rivalry of school or college, has a tour 
through Europe dissolved ! The perpetual change 
of every thing else, varying climates, postillions 
with the different-coloured jackets of every state, 
new towns daily rising in the distance, arrived 
at, seen, and left behind again ; — all this gives 
a preternatural sameness to the eternal presence 
of one's post-chaise companion, which makes one 
feel at length, as Sinbad did towards the old man 
of the sea. 

How much worse was the situation of our 
heroine, whose travelling experience only con- 



MATILDA. . 97 

Jlrnied her former fears, as to the state of her 
feelings towards him, from whom the end of the 
jouraej was to bring do separation ! 

Lady Matilda had been gifted wicli extraordi- 
nary quickness of feeling, but with an almost 
imperturbable sweetness of temper united witli 
it. The first was sensibly wounded, qf finding 
with how perfectly unintellectual a comparsioii 
she was paired ; — the latter was not a little tried 
with perpetual ebullitions of vulgar selfishness, 
which, somehow unaccountably, the atmosphere 
of a- carriage, in travelling, seems singularly cal- 
culated to bring out and display. 

The day they landed in France, they bad 
attempted to reach St. Omer, and were not a 
little annoyed, upon arriving there, at finding 
the gates were shut. This is, no doubt, a highly 
praiseworthy precaution in the legitimate autho- 
rities of a great empire ; but, to the uninitiated, 
it does seem a little doub.tful, whether, in a time 
of profound peace, a Limoniere, or even a Ber- 
line en Poste, could overturn the governmentj 
or even take the town, though they should not 
arrive at the gates till a little after eight in the 
evening. Remonstrance and entreaty were, how- 
ever, alike in vain, and Sir James and Lady 

F 



98 MATILDA. 

Matilda were reduced to the necessity of passing 
the night in a wretched cabaret in the suburbs, 
where, but for the darkness, they would have 
seen it boasted on a board, that extended over the 
whole front, " Id on loge a pied et a cheval.''^ 

Here Matilda, jaded and dispirited, found 
herself in a long narrow strip of a room, whose 
two sides were equally divided between windows, 
against whose ill-closed casements the rain never 
ceased to patter, and doors which obstinately 
refused to shut, though most severely slammed at 
each entrance of the sabot-footed attendants. 
She threw herself into a little stiff-backed chair, 
and leaning on a ricketty table, her eye fixed 
upon two newly-laid logs of green wood, which 
shewed more affinity to water than fire, by sim- 
mering and weeping, instead of crackling and 
blazing; the only symptom of ignition being 
smoke, which in a body deserted the chimney 
for the room. Her attention was called for a 
moment to Sir James, who stood there, his 
usually vacant countenance only marked by that 
owlet look, which a sleepy traveller exhibits on 
first facing the light; and his discordant voice 
not softened to comfort her, but raised to abuse 
the neghgcnce of the servants, who, by mislay- 



MATILDA. 99 

ing his segars, had prevented him from adding 
that delight to her situation. With such a com- 
panion, in such a scene, Matilda felt that though 
the luxuries and comforts of life do not, in 
themselves, constitute happiness, their utter ab- 
sence to those who are accustomed to both, can 
very much aggravate misery. 

If in those marriages, of which there are so 
many, where mutual attachment is to be the 
effect, and not the cause of the connexion, men 
did but feel the necessity of bestowing, at least 
as much care in concealing for a time, faults of 
manner and of temper, as their vanity will still 
induce them to take, in hiding, if possible, de- 
fects of person ; if they were not so very hasty 
in stripping their character of those borrowed 
ornaments and artificial advantages, which it wore 
as that of a lover, — they would not then lose the 
opportunity, never to be recovered, of fixing 
affections, which, if not theirs already, must at 
that time be powerfully predisposed in their 
favour ; for whilst the feelings newly kindled at 
the altar are yet warm, and the inclinations 
malleable, an impression that lasts for life is easily 
stamped ; but a repulsive chill then given to the 
heart, it remains cold and insensible ever after. 



100 IfATILDA. 

I do not mean to state, that any temporarr 
management could have rendered happy the 
union of two persons so perfectly unsuited to eacli 
other as Sir James and Lady Matilda. Vulgarity 
was so strongly marked in his manners, and self- 
ishness so thoroughly ingrained in his character, 
that constant intercourse with him would have 
been scarcely endurable by any one with much 
less than Matilda's refined dehcacy of taste, and 
even more than lier natural sweetness of temper. 

Yet was Sir James what is called in the world 
'' A good sort of man."" No very high praise 
either, as it is a name which, in its very essence, 
implies the utter absence of the agreeable ; — a cha>- 
racter alike remote from the possession of those 
minor talents which constitute the charm of every, 
day society, or the endowment of those higher 
t^ualities which excite extraordinary admiration. 
A good sort of man is a man in easy circum- 
stances, who has therefore never been convictefl 
of dishonesty ; of phlegmatic temper, — who has 
therefore never been guilty of any violent out- 
rage ; — of mean abilities, — who has therefore 
never either in private wittily satirized his neigh- 
bour, or in public disturbed his country by his 
political ambition. A strange misnomer, a good 



MATItDA. lot 

sort of man. He may be a good man; he cer- 
tainly never has proved Inmself a bad one ; but as 
to being a good sort, specimen, or sample of a 
man, heaven defend us from a world peopled 
after such a pattern ! 

For six long days, through detestable roads, 
did Matilda swing side by side with Sir James, 
who, when he had nodded himself out of an 
uneasy nap, was generally occupied either in 
lidgetting for his snuff-box, or grumbling at the 
profusion of packages with which he had himself 
loaded the carriage. Their road the while lay 
through three hundred miles of unparalleled ugli- 
ness, even in that most uninteresting country, 
self-styled " La telle France^'' 

'' La belle France'''' has no more pretensions to 
beauty, than the majority of her daughters. 
Like manv of them, she has not a sinde ^rood 
feature in her face ; but unhke them, she does 
not even do her best by adventitious aid to de- 
serve the title she arrogantly assumes. The 
slovenly mother of a smart family, she shews 
herself boldly in all her unadorned ugliness ; her 
whole form w'rapt in one shapeless, unvaried yel- 
low gown every summer, which is changed iv^x 



102 MATILDA. 

her old brown suit all the winter. England, on the 
other hand, though her daughters are proverbially 
dowdy, is a very coquettish elderly gentlewoman. 
Not a defect but is carefully concealed — not the 
smallest beauty, but is made the most of — decked 
out in every variety of colouring, — verdure of 
the softest velvet, shaped in fashion's newest 
fancy, and flounced and furbelowed with woods 
and plantations, trimmed in the best taste of 
Mesdames Flora, Pomona, & Co. 

For six long days, as Matilda journeyed on 
through endless avenues and boundless plains, 
" If," thought she, " my way through life is 
to be like this, unvaried and uninteresting ; and, 
like this, straitened by such irksome marks of 
limitation, may the objects around hold out no 
stronger allurements than the sameness of the 
present prospect, to tempt a departure from the 
strict line of duty." 

Their route latterly had been rolling up and 
down in a smooth shapeless undulation, which, 
like a ground-swell at sea, though tame in itself, 
often betokens the neighbourhood of bolder breaks 
in the surface. In fact, the ridges had gradually 
become sharper and steeper ; and the majestic 



MATILDA. 103 

Alps in the distance had already begun to peep 
above their cloudy screen, at the pigmy intruders 
who were arriving at their outer gates. 

The scenery about Moray, a httle village at 
the foot of the Jura, is picturesque if not grand, 
and forms at least an appropriate outwork at this 
approach to Nature's stupendous pile. 

As the Dorntons descended the last pitch 
down to that village, which was to be their resting 
place for the night, Matilda beheld, for the first 
time in her life, real mountains ; as we can hardly 
dignify with that title any of those round 
punchy protuberances which we have in England. 
She was enthusiastic in her admiration, whilst Sir 
James only remarked that it was " devilish steep 
and dangerous." 

As it was yet early to stop, though too late to 
cross the Jura that night, she was anticipating 
with the first sensation of pleasure she had expe- 
rienced for some days, a solitary ramble with her 
pencil, leaving Sir James to superintend the 
preparations for dinner, and amuse himself with 
his segars, — when, as they drove up to the inn 
door, half a dozen voices which Matilda too well 
recollected, though habit had not yet rendered 
them familiar to her, exclaimed at once, " Law ! 



1C4 MATILDA. 

it''s my uncle and aunt, — How d'ye do, uncle ? 
How dVe do, Lady Matilda ? How d^e do, 
brother Jem ?" " Only think, our dickey-spring 
broke, and Tom has cut his face ; and the stupid 
blacksmith has made it much worse than it was 
before (that's the dickey) ; and Betsy has sprained 
lier ancle ; and Pa says that though it did look 
so thick, (that is the iron spring,) it v/as all good 
for nothing vrithin." 

This clear explanation of their calamity ac- 
counted for their being still detained here, but 
did not reconcile to Matilda the necessity which 
it entailed of her abandoning her solitary ramble. 
Sir James, she knew, was the more jealous of any 
inattention, on her part, towards his family, as 
he v/as liimself rather more ashamed of them 
than he would ever allow her to be of any thing 
of or belonging to him. It was also a tender 
subject with him, because once, when Matilda's 
intimate friend, Mrs. Mechlin, had been criti- 
cizing the dowdy appearance of the Hobson's, 
and wondering why they went abroad, our hero- 
ine had, in a thoughtless moment, said, that, 
judging from their dress and address, she should 
think they were hag-women travelling with sam-. 
pies of Manchester fashions and manners. 



MATILDA. 106; 

It is probable, that if. she had thought one 
inDinent before she spoke, her fancy would have 
suggested something better : — it is certain, that if 
she had paused at all, she would have been alto- 
gether silent on so delicate a subject. However, 
her friend had repeated it heedlessly to Sir James, 
as an excellent thing, and it had given prodi- 
gious offence. Sir James's own manner towards 
the Hobsons varied much, as it was alternately 
governed by a desire to impress them with re- 
spect for him, or other people with respect for 
them. 

Of, all sorts of pride, purse-pride, or tlie pride 
of purse (if one must not coi?i a word, even for 
one's purse), has the most influence upon every- 
day deportment. The object of all pride is, to 
make those around feel their inferiority ; to 
effect which, the purse-proud man is, more than 
any other, reduced to vhd voce assertions m 
society. Pride of family may silently vent itself 
in its sixteen quarterings on the pannel of a car- 
riage ; or, it may lie quietly on one's table, in a 
Debrett's Peerage, with a back like a youjig 
tumbler's, broken just enough to shew with ease 
what is required of it. Or, if it is rather the 
f5 



106 MATILDA. 

pride of recent rank than antiquity of descent, 
it is amply gratified by the direction on the back 
of a letter, or a brass plate on a front door. 

But the pride of purse is of a much more 
restless, obtrusive disposition ; it cannot satisfy 
itself with the possession of the outward advan- 
tages of wealth, for those are shared by the con- 
stant succession of needy spendthrifts, who, each 
in the course of his ephemeral existence, make as 
much outward shew. It is only, therefore, by 
an ostentatious and over-bearing manner in 
society, that the purse-proud man can succeed in 
his object of making himself disagreeable where- 
ever he goes 

There is, however, another distinguishing trait 
in this description of pride, that, amongst its pro- 
fessors there is much more subordination than in 
any other. A man who is proud of his family, 
will find some very sufficient reason why he is 
quite as good as another, who, nevertheless, num- 
bers several more quarterings ; but the wealthy 
man's pride depends so entirely upon calculation, 
— is so completely a matter of figures, — that the 
man of ten thousand a-year, however bullying to 
the man of two, would no more dispute about 



MATILDA. 107 

giving way to the man of fifty thousand, than he 
would think of denying the balance between the 
two sums, if he saw them upon paper. 

This it was that made old Hobson have so high 
a respect for Sir James. He was proud of his 
own exertions in having realized a good lump of 
money in a common way ; but he looked upon 
Sir James's enormous fortune with admiration ; 
as a monstrous fungus, which old Smithson had 
raised to a preternatural size, in the hot-bed of 
corruption. Strong as this feeling was, it seldom 
softened his manner so far as to shew what Sir 
James thought the proper degree of respect ; but, 
upon the present occasion, as the Dorntons en- 
tered, old Hobson forgot Sir James altogether. 
He had never seen Matilda before, and so true 
it is, that transcendent beauty will sometimes 
make an impression upon, apparently, the most 
impenetrable stuff, that, for a moment, his crabbed 
countenance relaxed into something approaching 
towards admiration, of which a parallel instance 
was never recollected, even by Mrs. Hobson, in 
her best days ; and, rising from his chair, he 
involuntarily muttered — " superfine I" 

It was soon arranged between the gentlemen, 
that as the inn boasted but one saloon, they should 



108 MATILDA. 

all dine together in it. This being settled, Lady 
Matilda retired to her own room, merely to escape 
for a moment from the family ]3arty, but under 
pretence of preparing for dinner. This excuse 
being taken literally by the Misses Hobson, they 
determined to do hkewise ; and summoning the 
unhappy Nancy, they all three put her services 
in requisition to make them smart for Aunt 
Matilda. 

Miss Hobson having, upon further inspection 
of the damage done, been found not near so much 
disabled as the carriage, acted as fuglewoman 
for the other sisters to dress by ; so that, by the 
time Lady Matilda returned to the saloon, by one 
door, still in the same pretty Parisian redingote, 
her bonnet only exchanged for the most be- 
coming, because the most unpretending of caps, 
the three sisters entered at the other, all in low- 
gowns, with satin petticoats, short sleeves, pink 
sashes, and white shoes. 

Closely following his sisters, came our friend 
Tom, his face not improved by sundry black 
patches, the consequence of his fall; but his 
neck, about which he seemed much more occu- 
pied, .shining in the unsulKed purity of his best 
starched cloth. Once before had he eeen Lady 



MATILDA. 109 

Matilda, when he called to pay his respects in 
London : but his introduction was not an aus- 
picious one ; for her Ladyship's groom of the 
chambers, who v/as a man of discrimination, 
having introduced him as — " The young man 
from Hamlet's, my Lady;" — she saluted hisn 
with—" Haven't you brought your little bill 
with you ?" — To whicli he replied — " Little 
Jem, you mean, my Lady; my brother Jem."" 

When they were seated, Mi's. Hobson beo'an : 
— " Well, I'm sure it's all very pleasant tra- 
velUng, to see people who can talk French so 
fast; and then the roads all paved and strait, 
like streets without houses ; whilst there they're 
making all Lunnon like a turnpike road, with 
buildings. I'm sure, Mr. Grumbleton told 
Hobson, he did'nt know his counting-house in 
Bishopsgate from his country-house at Hackney, 
now they were both equally muddy and dusty. — 
I'm sure you must like foreign parts, Lady 
Matilda.". ' 

" I am not," replied Matilda, '^ particularly 
fond of roads which follow the crow in his flight ; 
nor has the chaise-window shewn me much to 
admire in passing through France : but I have 
been very much pleased with all I have seen to- 



110 MATILDA. 

day — without compliment,'' she added, smihng, 
and rather amused at the unintentional flattery 
which her speech might be supposed to convey. 
'' Well, I admire all I have seen of foreio-n 
parts,'' retorted Mrs. Hobson." — " Yes," grum- 
bled old Hobson, " and the more you admire 
them, the more they laugh at you ; you'd better 
have staid at home; it's all very well for my 
Lady there, who can shew herself against any 
thing they can shew her."' 

All the Hobson family were in mute astonish- 
ment at the phenomenon of any thing so like a 
civil speech coming out of the mouth of its head ; 
though, perhaps, after all, it was only said to 
give additional bitterness to his attack upon his 
wife. She, however, seemed quite invulnerable, 
as she continued, — " Well, never trouble your 
head about all that, but send me some more soup, 
my dear." — " Here," addressing Xhejille who was 
waiting, — '' What is the girl staring at ? — Id, — 
what d'ye call her ? — Gargon, prenez mon plat." 
— The charge of staring was certainly well founded 
against la Jille, for she could not take her eyes 
off the profuse display of white necks and red 
elbows, on the part of the Miss Hobsons, of 
which she had never before seen the like; 



MATILDA. ni 

and, with that nice observation of manners and 
appearance with which French women of every 
rank are always endued, she was puzzled beyond 
measure, to account for the three " horreurs''' 
being seated at the same table with a person like 
Lady Matilda, whom one glance told her to be 
" mise a merveille. That the mere accident of 
travelling at the same time should have produced 
this union among English people, all her former 
experience told her was very unlikely, as she had 
often known, when two solitary Englishmen had 
arrived separately, that the last comer would 
wait, starving for want of his supper, in his bed- 
room, till the other had left the saloon, rather 
than sit down in the room with a man he did 
not know. 

The souhrette'^ speculations were, however, 
interrupted, by Sir James sending her to his 
courier for his English comforts, in a canteen as 
big as the trunk in which lachimo hides himself. 
Cocoa paste, essence of coffee, &c. were not very 
serviceable at dinner, but some Harvey's sauce 
was hailed with great glee ; though, as there was 
no fish, there arose some difficulty v/hether to 
apply it to fricandeau^ Jricasse, pcitc ineUe, or 
poulet roti. 



112 MATILDA. 

The sight of all these English comforts, how- 
ever, gave a new turn to Mrs. Hobson's feelings 
about the comparative merits of the two coun- 
tries. Her opinions were alv/ays as light) v 
formed as they were loosely expressed ; and so 
that she was but allowed to talk, she could be, 
alternately, equally voluble on both sides of any 
question. 

" Well, after all, there is nothing like Old 
England— where things are good, if they're dear; 
and there is great cheating in all their cheapness 
here. — What d'ye think? t'other night, when 
we were at that tov^n (what's it's name ?) where 
they all fought for ten years about one naughty 
lady (more shame for them !)" " Do you mean 
Troyes P" said Lady Matilda, smiling : " Yes, 
Troy — aye — when we were at Troy, I saw how 
cheap Champaigne was — so, thinks I, one may 
have Port for next to nothing — so I sent for 
som.e to make some bishop for my good man 
there— who is as fond of it as mother's milk-r- 
aye, for all you look so, you are ; — well, would 
you believe it ? they charged more than ever I 
payed for claret at the Bridgewater Arms, when 
I wanted a bottle or two on some great occasion ; 
now you see there was no reason in that at alU 



MATILDA. lis 

To be sure, such things as they call wine here ! 
they gave us a bottle the other night, they told 
lis was wine, though their own name for it was 
Saint Cider, I believe." " Saint Peray, mamma," 
said ]\Iiss Hobson : " Ah — well — perry or cider, 
it's all one, and not so good as Herefordshire — 
neither." 

As Mrs. Hobson was one of tliose persons who 
talk for talking sake, and precisely becmtse they 
bave nothing to say, — and as there is no reason 
whatever, in the nature of that kind of talk, why 
it should ever end spontaneously, — perhaps I had 
better put a forced stop to it at once, if it be 
only for the purpose of impressing my readers 
with a due sense of my moderation, in letting 
them off so easily, when I evidently have them 
at my mercy. Sparing them, therefore, for the 
present, any further echantillons of " Hobson's 
choice," I will only add, that our heroine retired 
early to her room, more than ever convinced, that 
no bodily exertions can be half so overpowering 
as those social eftbrts which labour to support the 
forced intercourse of uncongenial companions. 



114 



CHAPTER IX. 



The next morning, Pierre announced that all 
the skill of the marischal had only succeeded in 
rendering the dickey perfectly unserviceable, and 
that it was now impossible that it could be mend- 
ed short of Geneva. In this dilemma, the 
Dorntons could do no less than offer to take 
Miss Hobson with them, and let Tom share the 
Britchker with Ma'mselle Felicie. This arranofe- 

o 

ment, which gave general satisfaction to all the 
Hobson party, was proposed, by Lady Matilda, 
with that unaffected facility with which she 
always promoted any thing really good-natured, 
without considering its effect upon her own im- 
mediate comforts. 

Tom was delighted at first Avith his new com- 
panion, having been already long enough abroad 
to think that there was a certain '' Je ne sais 
quoi''^ about the appearance of Ma'mselle Felicie, 
which was a very good equivalent for beauty. 
Unfortunately however for him, the favourable 



MATILDA. 115 

impression was not mutual. Tom was v^ery 
much disfigured in his optics by his accident, 
and FeUcie was not as much taken with his black 
eyes as he was with hers. Then, too, though 
she had been occasionally obliged to muffle her 
tongue in English whilst in that country, she had 
been very glad to get rid of the incumbrance ; 
and upon starting for the Continent, she had de- 
termined to lay it all by till her return, with her 
own lumber, and her lady's old gowns. So that, 
at present, Tom's eyes and tongue being as 
unable as her's were unwilling to communicate, 
their intercourse was not likely to be very inte- 
resting. Besides all which, poor Tom completed 
his disgrace with his new companion, by unwarily 
stepping into one of her favourite band-boxes, 
just as they were about to start ; on which she 
muttered something about " gaitcherie •''' which, 
without understanding it, his guilty foot told 
him was not flattering, and he became affronted 
in his turn ; and from that moment their Ute-d-tete 
was as perfectly matrimonial as Sir James's and 
Lady Matilda's had been before the intervention 
of Miss Betty Hobson. 

The ascent of the Jura, never a very exhilirat- 
ing business, seemed most particularly tedious 



116 MATILDA. 

to all the different detachments of the party 
who were now crawling up it. But after leaving 
the highest post-house, upon a sudden turn of 
the road, there burst upon the bewildered gaze 
a prospect unparalleled in its rare union of the 
sublime and beautiful. 

Far above rose, in the lonely pride of utter 
desolation, the wildest regions of eternal snow, 
whose pointed peaks seemed to pierce the firma- 
ment itself. Down in the depths below, as the 
morning vapours dispersed, were caught partial 
glimpses of the glassy lake, over whose un- 
ruffled surface many a light sail skimmed, in the 
full confidence of summer security ; whilst the 
varied banks were enriched with all that could 
render delightful the scattered dwellings which 
imparted universal animation to the scene. 

Matilda clasped her hands in an ecstasy of 
silent admiration. Even if she could have com- 
manded cars wliich would have understood her 
feelings, words would have been wanting to 
express them. 

Miss Hobson only exclaimed, " Law ! what 
a way one can see, to be sure !'" 

Sir James, having with some difficulty edged 
himself to the front of the seat, dehberateiy 



MATILDA. 117 

put down the side window, poked out his head, 
and turning his back at once upon the ladies 
and the landscape, gave his undivided attention 
U) the arrangement of the drag-chain. 

Pierre had remained with the Hobson coach 
to perform the same service ; and seeing his 
master peeping out of tlie window, he called his 
attention to v/hat he was accustomed to consider 
one of the lions of the route, " See one Errand 
view, Serr ; there are des montagnes, tres af- 
freux — de m.ountains ver much frightened — and 
la has un pays tres riant — a contric which is 
ver laughable/' 

" Laughable,^' said old Hobson ; '' V\\ tell 
you what — I sliali think it no joke if I'm pitched 
to the bottom. So mind what you're at." 

Even this, vociferated in no gentle tone, did 
not disturb his three female companions from 
the gentle slumber into which they had been 
rocked by the lengthened ascent. 

If the reader will condescend to |>€ep for a 
moment into the Britchker, w^hich had been de- 
layed at the last post for horses, there he will 
find Tom so delighted at the rapid pace with 
which, the carriage being light, the postillion 
tried to catch his comrades in the descent, that 



118 MATILDA. 

he never once took his eyes off the bumping 
back before him. 

Mam'selle Fehcie, on her part^ having caught 
a distant glimpse of the town of Geneva, without 
paying the least attention to her companion, 
began, perhaps a httle prematurely, arranging 
her hair, settling her bonnet, and making sundry 
other Uttle coquettish preparations for her anti- 
cipated arrival. 

Nothing worthy of remark occurred to the 
travellers till they came within half a mile of 
Geneva ; when Miss Hobson suddenly exclaimed, 
" What a funny carriage, with two ladies, who 
look Hke English, and yet they don't. The 
post-boys will run over them." 

Matilda observed a charabanc, containing an 
elderly and a young lady, who, however great 
their general skill in coachmanship might be, 
had now their united attention occupied in a 
letter they were reading, and seemed, therefore, 
in some danger of the catastrophe hinted at by 
Miss Hobson ; and, as the postillions pulled up 
to avoid this, our heroine caught a glance of the 
strangers, just as their embarrassment was re- 
moved, and recognised, in the younger lady, 
the happy, cheerful face of her early friend, 



MATILDA. 119 

Emily Arlingford, which now beamed with 
more than its usual animation, as, almost im- 
mediately after the carriages had separated, she 
perceived Lady Matilda. 

" Dear Emily,'' thought Matilda ; " she is 
still the same, the same even in her affections for 
me."' And losing herself in reflections on the 
past, blended with anticipations of future pleasure 
in her society, and finishing with a determination, 
in which pride had some share, that to her, at 
least, she would make the best of her present 
situation ; she was hardly conscious when they 
stopped at the hotel, that they had entered the 
town of Geneva. 



120 



CHAPTER X. 



The state of Geneva has often puzzled me. 
I have not understood why this pigmy republic 
was allowed an apotheosis, v^hen the mighty 
spirits of Genoa, and of Venice, were laid for 
ever by the Holy men of Vienna. I was so 
dull as not to comprehend at first that it was 
a practical joke, on the part of those wicked 
wags, the confederated despots — that, like Field- 
ing's burlesque upon heroics in " Tom Thumb,"" 
— Geneva v/as intentionally left to bring liberal 
institutions into disrepute, by holding itself up 
a* an example of the consequential insignificance 
and petty policy of a free state. 

I give the royal jokers credit for their trick, 
though I have at length found it out. It is no 
doubt indispensable that a republic, to command 
respect, should be large enough to be inde- 
pendent — that its interests should be of so dig- 
nified and extended a nature, as to induce its 
active servants to sink petty personal considera- 



MATILDA. 121 

tions in their partnership in the common stock 
of glory and of power. To ensure a chance of 
this, it is necessary that the stake should be of 
a certain value ; — for no one was ever heard to 
devote himself enthusiastically to the duties of a 
vestry meeting. The boundaries of the state, 
too, should be felt as a defence, not as a restraint. 
The sea, as being most closed against attacks 
from without, and open to enterprise from 
within, has most appropriately marked the. limits 
of some of the mightiest modern republics — as 
Genoa, Venice, and Holland. 

To one who has ever bestowed a thought 
upon these things, there certainly is something 
irresistibly comic in the spectacle of a pocket 
repubhc, squeezed down in the very centre of 
overgrown empires, situated in a little watch- 
making, tea-drinking town, on an inland lake, 
with a few sail of pleasure boats. 

The poking one^s nose against a microscope 
all the morning, and scratching away at a barely 
perceptible piece of mechanism, is, no doubt, not 
the best way to acquire enlarged views of po- 
litical institutions; and gossiping every evening 
with half a dozen old women, over as many 

G 



122 MATILDA. 

cups of tea, is not the most perfect school for 
popular declamation. There is much in all this 
at which the muscles of the most rigid repub- 
lican might involuntarily relax, though it is at 
the same time a topic of triumph to every Ultra 
in Europe, as they chuckle over it with undis- 
sembled contempt. 

But the best joke does not always bear exami- 
nation. How much of all this ridicule applies 
to the form of government itself ; how much is 
caused merely by the petty limits within which 
it is confined ? Would a tiny tyranny be more 
sublime if a real legitimate king were established 
as the main-spring in this watch-making town, 
ruling despotically over every hand, whether in 
the service of the minutes or the hours ? There 
is not a Tory in England who has not quoted the 
famous answer of a gallant English aristocrat, 
who having, when a young man, been summoned 
before the Syndic for some offence, and desired 
to quit their territory in four-and-twenty hours, 
replied, " Magnifiques Seigneurs^ il ne me faut 
que trois minutes.'''' 

It does not seem to me that much of the point 
of this would have been lost, if it had been made 



MATILDA. 123 

to a Prince of Pimlico, or a King of Petty 
France or of Little Britain, if there had been 
such persons, instead of a Syndic of Geneva. 

But however this may be, there the conceited 
little republic is — set up by the Holy Alliance to 
be laughed at ; and it does its best, certainly, to 
render itself a government at once unnecessarily 
meddling and frivolously offensive. — Not that I 
have any objection to the despots laughing at 
their own hoax, provided they do not carry the 
joke too far; which, however, I cannot but 
think they have done, when they call upon those 
whom they have at least nominally constituted 
free, to refuse an asylum to those who have been 
unsuccessfully struggling for real liberty. This, 
however, is too serious a branch of the subject 
to be lightly touched; — so let us join in the 
laugh at the Genevese, — comforting ourselves 
with the reflection, that we are not obliged to 
take from the patient automaton makers at Vienna 
their discredited specimen of a rival manufacture. 
We need not look alone where their fingers 
point ; nor will the inquiring spirit of the age, 
in its search after those institutions best calcu- 
lated tp promote human happiness, be confined 
even to any quarter of the globe. If on the one 



124 MATILDA. 

side of Europe we see, in the creeping paralysis 
and premature decrepitude of Asia, the certain 
effects of a long course of despotism, on the 
other we behold, as a political prodigy, the Her- 
culean infancy of the free States in America. 
C'Jvilization rose with the sun in the East, and as 
surely will it set in the West. 



125 



CHAPTER XL 



Their first breakfast in Geneva had not long 
been despatched, and Sir James had only just 
left Matilda alone, whilst he went to settle some 
limizing for the day with his sister, w^ho was in 
the same hotel, when an eager voice was heard 
in the anti-room, — " Never mind, I'm sure she'll 
see me" — and in one moment more Emily Ar- 
lingford rushed into the arms of her early friend. 
Lady Ormsby following, " I must have my turn 
too, though I cannot run so fast ; — my legs are 
grown old and stiff— but my arms are not," srjd 
she, as she threw them round our heroine's neck . 

Lady Ormsby had more than the mere re- 
mains of beauty. Indeed, time had marked her 
much more lightly than many a gay grandmo- 
ther, who still enters the hsts as a rival to her 
daughters' daughters, and plays off her veteran 
batteries against a third generation of lovers. 
But there are many things in which the world is 
ready to take us at our own valuation. 



126 MATILDA. 

Lady Ormsby had evidently long abandoned 
all pretensions to beauty. Her dress, though 
never neglected, was never conspicuous. She 
would as soon have thought of flying as of flirt- 
ing ; and, therefore, she was only considered as 
a good-humoured, well-bred, cheerful chaperon. 
In truth, she had long ceased to wish to shine 
otherwise than with a borrowed light, or to 
excite any other admiration than that reflected 
back on her by the praises of her children. The 
greatest source of affliction to her, next to the 
death of her husband, had been the disgraceful 
life of her eldest son ; but she regarded the pre- 
sent Lord Ormsby with a mingled pride and 
fondness which almost amounted to admiration. 
He, however, was an eccentric planet, that only 
occasionally crossed her path, to dazzle and de- 
light. Her daughter Emily was the polar star, 
on which all her worldly hopes were fixed. 

Never was a daughter more worthy to en- 
gross a mother^s heart — never was that purest of 
earthly unions more perfect, cemented as it was 
by respect without restraint, and affection with- 
out blindness. 

When a ready flow of pretty nothings had 
given vent to the first ebullitions of pleasure, felt 



MATILDA. 127 

by long-divided friends at meeting again, Lady 
Ormsby said, " You must promise to come to 
us at our little villa on Thursday. I have not 
the pleasure of knowing Sir James ; but I can- 
not allow myself to feel as a stranger to any one 
connected with you. Besides, we Anglo-conti- 
nentals do not stand upon the same form as you 
have been accustomed to in London, where inti- 
macy consists in writing little lying notes of 
excuse, beginning, ' Dear Lady so and so," to 
every one of five hundred friends. We do not 
see people here through the same undistinguish- 
ing medium. Society abroad is like a telescope ; 
it allows one to pick and choose one's objects, 
and bring those one likes as close as actual con- 
nection could do.'"* 

" Yes," said Emily, " and one has here no 
tiresome duties of acquaintanceship; one may 
present the small end of the glass when one 
pleases, and so make distant acquaintances still 
more distant, till those on the verge of the social 
horizon need no longer be distinguished.**' 

Matilda, to whom this image of the glass had 
presented the pleasing, though fallacious, idea of 
excluding from the sight all those whose position 
was too close to be the subject of its influence, 



1 28 MATILDA. 

added, " And even with the large end one'^s sight 
is confined to what one wishes to see." 

" Then I'll have mine fixedly facing you^ till 
I quite stare you out of countenance. I cer- 
tainly had no glass at all yesterday,**' said Emily, 
'*' v\'hen I did my best to make you run over 
me ; but we were just returning from the post- 
office, and how could I be attending to any thing 
else, when I was reading a letter from my"" — She 
suddenly checked the animated tone in which she 
was speaking, and added, more quietly, — " from 
England.'"" Her eye at the same time wandered 
unconsciously from her friend, and fixed itself 
upon a hat of Sir James's, which, well brushed, 
and with gloves danghng from the brim, was 
evidently domesticated on a small table opposite. 

Matilda's eyes followed those of her friend, 
and this unwelcome memento of authorised in- 
trusion, contrasting with former circumstances, 
seemed to give a temporary check to both their 
spirits ; but Emily continued, — " I dare say you 
think me grown a terrible amazon, to manage a 
Iiorse by myself, and drive mamma without mas- 
cuUne help." 

" How should I think so," replied Matilda; 
" wlien you recollect the independent way in 



MATILDA. H9 

which I used to ride over from Del aval to 
Ormsby?" She suppressed a sigh, as she re- 
collected whose presence occasionally gave her 
confidence, and for whose offered accompaniment 
her casual fears had formed the best excuse. 

Lady Ormsby, by way of turning the subject, 
said, — " I do not think that you will find many 
people you know here. The annual flight of 
birds of passage from the north, has not yet 
taken place ; but your arrival tends more to 
mark the approach of the season, than ever one 
swallow did to make a summer. There are, by- 
the-bye, two new comers, whom you will meet at 
our house on Tuesday, Colonel Canteen and 
Mr. Tynte. You must have seen the Colonel ; 
he is principally famous as living to eat, instead 
of eating to live: a very formidable character 
in my small estabhshment ; nor, indeed, should 
I have ventured to ask him, if there had been 
any other pied-a-terre for him at present in the 
town. All reste^ he is every where, and knows 
every body ; is a good creature, and, come when 
he may, nobody minds him."" 

'^ And, go when he will, nobody misses him; 
I suppose,'' said Lady Matilda; " for that gene- 
rally follows from such a negative character^"" 

65 



ISO MATILDA. 

His travelling companion, the Rev. Mr.Tynte, 
is much more of a character/' said Emily. " You 
must have heard of him, as the great connoisseur 
and amateur painter. With him art is not second 
nature, but nature second art. The finest view 
would be to him uninteresting, unless it would 
make a good composition. I question whether 
he could not see, even you, without admiration, 
unless fortunately you reminded him of some 
famous Guido, or well-known Titian." 

« One must at best, then," said Matilda, " ex- 
pect to be rivalled in his good graces by the rich 
colouring of one's own gown." 

" You will meet only one other person," con- 
tinued Emily ; " a great friend of ours ; Count 
Santelmo, an unfortunate Itahan refugee. You 
must get his character from mamma : you re- 
collect of old her partiality for a liberaV 

" We saw much of him," said Lady Ormsby, 
'^ at a time w^hen family circumstances prevented 
our going out ; and I trust, that our society has 
contributed to soften the melancholy loneHness 
of his situation. He is, in my opinion, a man 
who, had his destiny been cast as a native of 
England, or the member of any free state, would 
have filled Europe with his fame. But his way- 



MATILDA. 131 

ward fate Is united with that of luckless Italy ; 
and here he is, a wandering exile, dependent, at 
present, upon the precarious protection of this 
little republic. After the manner in which Einily 
referred to me, you may think me, perhaps, 
partial, both personally and politically ; but mine 
is not the age when praise is hyperbolical." 

Matilda had not formed any such a conclusion 
from what had past ; on the contrary, there is a 
sort of freemasonry amongst women, which en- 
ables them to detect one another's feehngs, by 
signs imperceptible to us ; and there was some- 
thing in Emily's countenance, whilst Lady 
Ormsby was praising Count Santelmo, which 
made Matilda suspect that, at least in this in- 
stance, she had inherited her mother's partiality 
for a liberal. And this opinion was rather con- 
firmed as Emily proceeded. " It's very odd, 
Matilda, and shews how likenesses may exist, 
independent of similarity of situation, local asso- 
ciation, or family connexion ; — but there is some- 
thing in Count Santelmo, which puts me irre- 
sistibly in mind of you. There, now! that 
smile is so like him ! — And, then, when he 
has been reading Alfieri aloud to us, there is 
something in the tone of his voice that has offen 



1S2 MATILDA. 

brought back the recollection of you, and your 
favourite, Shakspeare. To be sure, you never 
used to break out quite so loud as he does some- 
times.'' 

Matilda's comment upon this was interrupted 
by the return of Sir James, who was introduced, 
in due form, to Lady Ormsby and Miss Arling- 
ford ; and Matilda saw, with some dread, that 
he was preparing a speech, of which he was, in 
due time, delivered, consisting of an assurance of 
the pleasure Lady Matilda and himself had 
derived from Lord Ormsby \s society in London. 
Lady Ormsby and Emily both looked a little 
surprised at his declaration ; and as Matilda felt 
that it must be conceived to imply rather more than 
the exchange of a few casual words, at an acci- 
dental meeting one day at dinner, she blushed a 
little, in spite of herself, as she added, in a hur- 
ried manner, though with an even tone, — " that 
tliey had once met Lord Ormsby at dinner at 
Lord Eatington's." 

It was a trying moment for Matilda, when 
thus obliged, for the first time, to mention liini 
with indifference, in the presence of those coi- 
nexions who knew so well on how different a 
footing they had once been. But such is the 



MATILDA. 133 

magic of a name, that the title of " Lord 
Ormsby'" passed easily as that of a stranger from 
her lips, when Augustus, or even Mr. Arliogford, 
might have " stuck in her throat."" 

The subject was now immediately turned ; and 
the conversation, vmder the influence of Sir 
James's presence, became common-place. They 
discovered, among other things, that '' the Rhone 
was blue ;" " tlie summer had been wet ;'' that 
" Geneva jewellery was cheap, but not good;"' and, 
having discussed these knotty points, they sepa- 
rated, after Matilda's promise had been confirmed 
by Sir James, that they would dine at Lady 
Ormsby's villa, on the Thursday following. 



1S4 



CHAPTER XII. 



On the day appointed for Lady Ormsby's 
dinner, the party, as proposed, assembled at the 
villa. -Matilda was very much struck with the 
manner and appearance of the young Count 
Santelmo, though the presence of so many 
strangers, and the embarrassment of communi- 
cating in a foreign language, prevented him from 
taking much part in the general conversation. 

Colonel Canteen, as will be expected from 
Lady Ormsby's account of him, did not waste his 
undivided attention on the intellectual part of 
the entertainment. But if he looked to the table 
for his piece de resistance, he furnished between 
whiles little entremtts of gossip, with whicli he 
was always particularly well supplied. He 
handed round several newly-reported marriages 
for general discussion ; informed Sir James, 
from the best authority, that there was at pre- 
sent no chance of a dissolution of parliament; 
and told Lady Ormsby that her son was returned 



MATILDA. 135 

to town from Ormsby Castle, — of which indeed 
she was before aware. 

Matilda the while was much amused with her 
neighbour, Mr. Tynte, whose eccentricities were 
those of a well-cultivated mind. She attacked 
him playfully for his preference of Art to Na- 
ture, and he defended his mania with much good 
humour, and with an enthusiasm half real, half 
assumed, which was highly entertaining. 

" I am not obnged,"' he said, " to confine my 
admiration within the every-day limits of vulgar 
vision — to acknowledge that sunshine is bright, 
or green fields look fresh. A painter's eye can 
derive interest from the wrinkled features of an 
old burgomaster, or add dignity to a groupe of 
boosing boors. There is no utensil, however 
servile its purpose, which in our hands may not, 
through the charm of colouring, become the means 
of administering to the refined~pleasures of taste. 
Now," added he, holding up a decanter of Bor- 
deaux, " I should desire no better food for the 
pallette than this." 

The Colonel, who from the other side of the 
table had caught part of this about taste, and, 
as he thought, palate, and who was himself 
agreeably surprised at widow's wine being so 



136 MATILDA. 

good, interrupted him — " Good food for the 

palate — indeed, I think so — how highly coloured 

it is !" 

" That is v/hat I was admiring,"' said Tynte ; 

" with some of these other bottles, what a good 

composition it would make.'"* 

" What !" in horror interrupted the Colonel. 

" Composition ! why its great merit is, that it is 

genuine.'' 

'' My dear Colonel,'' retorted the other, " you 

have not now to learn that our tastes are dif- 
ferent." 

" No, indeed," said the Colonel, seeing his 

mistake, "• I prefer a plain piece of varnished 
mahogany to the best painted pannel, and the 
maiden purity of a white cloth to the meretricious 
beauties of the highest coloured canvas." 

" But," said Tynte, again addressing Matilda, 
*' in this transitory life we ought to attach proper 
importance to the permanence of our pleasures. 
It would not be gallant to hint that the most 
perfect beauty will decay ; but you will admit, 
that the most glorious sunset in nature soon ends 
in darkness ; whilst mjj Claudes shine by lamp- 
light, and glow even in winter. There is too 
high authority for my taste, in a country where 



MATILDA. 13T 

the sovereign has a gallery, instead of a seraglio, 
of beauties." 

" I am convinced/' said Matilda, " that to 
you the animation of Hermione's statue would 
have been a cruel disappointment, and 

" ^Vould you r,ot deem it breathed, 

And that those lips did verily bear blcod ?" 

would have been uttered in despair." 

The Colonel, who became a little impatient at 
this lengthened discussion of a subject not quite 
in his beat, and anxious to bring back the con- 
versation within the more usual limits of dinner- 
table gossip, said to Lady Ormsby, " I think 
our friend Augustus was supposed at one time 
to have blended this taste for fine arts, and fine 
women, and to have been warmed, from his ad- 
miration of the cold marble, into a most fervent 
passion for tlie beautiful original. We thought, 
at one time, that La Venere Vincitrice had so far 
vanquished him, that he had forgotten England 
and all in it." 

This was a subject which I^ady Ormsby could 
never bear to hear mentioned with common pa- 
tience, though she knew it all to be an invention; 
she therefore replied with more warmth than 



138 MATILDA. 

was usual to her, " There never was the least 
foundation for that report. It was the most 
groundless piece of scandal that ever malice in- 
vented, or folly propagated. Poor Augustus ! 
I knew, from his letters at that time, that he had 
forgotten nothing in England. It would have 
been better for him if he had.'' 

As she uttered these last words, in a tone of 
strong feeling, her eyes involuntarily met Ma- 
tilda's, and both mutually read, in the uncon- 
scious expression of that momentary glance, 
much that each would have wished to have con- 
cealed. Lady Ormsby was annoyed at having 
been betrayed into any thing that sounded the 
least like a reproach on her young friend — which, 
if it had been ever so well deserved, her good 
taste told her ought never to have been even 
hinted at by her. She did not, however, know 
then how to mend the matter ; and the dinner 
having been concluded, she made the signal for 
leaving the table." 

But what a new light seemed suddenly to 
break upon Matilda ! Augustus Arlingford — the 
universally admired, all-conquering Augustus 
Arlingford, constant throughout to her, and 
suffering severely from her unaccountable fickle- 



MATILDA. 139 

ness, was an image which had never before 
occurred to her as within the extremest verge of 
possibiUty ; and yet all this seemed implied in 
Lady Ormsby'^s words, and still more confirmed 
by the confused and distressed expression of her 
coimtenance as their eyes met. 

Her first sensations at the discovery, (which 
were all that a few minutes' stroll on the lawn 
gave leisure for,) were of a mingled nature, and 
there was much certainly that was soothing to her 
feelings ; but yet she felt, that it was now more 
than ever incumbent on her, studiously to avoid 
his society, 

Matilda's mind was occupied, during the drive 
homewards, with a pleasing retrospect of the 
social party they had just left. — Her's were not 
feelings of gratified vanity, for there had been 
no room for display, — but of satisfied self-esteem, 
arising from the calm consciousness, latterly 
rather unusual to her, that this was an intercourse 
with minds and manners congenial to her own. 
Perhaps I must own there was one little ingre- 
dient mixed up with her recollection of the party, 
which gave zest to the pleasure she had expe- 
rienced, namely, the conviction which she had 
extracted from Lady Ormsby's words and looks. 



140 MATILDA. 

that Augustus had never viewed her with indif* 
ference. In vain did she attempt to argue her- 
self out of the pleasure she involuntarily derived 
from those words. " Ought I on any account to 
be rejoiced at such a discovery?" thought she; 
" my lot in life, if not quite of my own choice, 
is one for which I alone am responsible. If, too 
late, I feel impatient at the bondage into wliich 
I have sold myself ; is it any consolation to 
know, that, but for my own act, all might now 
have been after my heart'*s first wish ? If, in spite 
of myself, I sometimes give vent to fruitless re- 
pinings, ought I not to regret the knov.'ledge that 
they are shared by one deserving a better fate ?" 

She endeavoui'ed to persuade herself, that this 
i^asoning of her calmer judgment had chastened 
her feelings on the subject, and she turned to- 
wards her companion Sir James, and tried, by 
redoubling her usual efforts, to conciliate and 
Dlease, to induce him to think favourably of the 
coterie they had left. 

But this was no easy task. Sir James was not 
at all disposed to be pleased with any of the 
party. The fact was, that he always felt most 
at home in any society where merit was estimated 
rather by length of purse than by length of head. 



MATILDA. l^± 

Now, none of those they had that day met were 
•AV'orshippers of golden idols. jNIr. Tynte was 
much too high-flown to think of any thing so mat- 
ter of fact as pounds, shiihngs, and pence ; — to 
he sure, if a valuable collection of pictures had 
come toJ:he hammer, he might then have envied 
Sir James his almost unhmited power of ex- 
changing written paper for painted canvas ; but 
as it was, he contented himself with pitying him 
its a Goth, without a particle of taste. 

Colonel Canteen felt a respect only for that 
part of annual income which went in weekly ex- 
penditure, and would have valued a man rather 
upon his butcher's and baker's, than upon his 
tjanker's book. 

Sir James had, indeed, made two or three 
attempts to shew himself off to his two hostesses, 
by leading the conversation to subjects of vulgar 
ostentation ; but these endeavours had caused 
much suppressed amusement to Emily, the effect 
of which, Matilda had once detected ; and thou£:h 
mortified, she could not but own to herself, so 
just was the ridicule, that, under other circum- 
stances, she would herself have joined in the 
merriment. 

One of the great characteristics of society 



142 MATILDA. 

abroad is its freedom from the overwhelming 
influence of wealth. In that erratic English com- 
munity, which, like the gypsy tribe, is governed 
in all its wanderings by rules and regulations of 
its own, mixing as httle as possible with the 
natives of the soil, the supreme authority is oftener 
a matter of contest. It is generally, perhaps, 
vested in an aristocracy, in the best sense of the 
word ; but from nothing is it so perfectly free as 
from the dominion of a phetocracy. A mere 
man of wealth descends from his strong hold, 
when, leaving behind him '• all appliances and 
means to boot,'' he. puts himself on a level with 
the economical traveller. 

This Sir James began to feel, and was there- 
fore already dissatisfied with Genevese society ; 
and he gladly availed himself of an opportunity, 
which offered the next day — of being absent for 
a short time, on an excursion to Chamouni, an 
expedition, however, which he did not consider 
as at all suitable for Matilda to join in. 



145 



CHAPTER XIIL 



Tin<: morning on which Sir James left Geneva 
for Chamouni, was the most brilliant the summer 
had yet produced. Sunshine at Geneva, like a 
smile upon the face of a famous frowning beauty, 
is doubly prized, both for its rarity, and the 
magnificence of the charms which it illuminates, 
and to the perfect enjoyment of which it alone is 
usually wanting. 

The fineness of the day had persuaded Lady 
Ormsby and Emily to accompany Count San- 
telmo on the Lake immediately after breakfast. 
It was not yet mid-day when an English travel- 
ling carriage, that seemed " stained with the 
variation of each soil," marking that its inmate 
had not lingered by the way, turned out of the 
main road down the lane which led to the cam- 
pagne on the lake ; and after a handsome head 
in travelling cap had several times been thrust 
tlirough the window, as if making inquiries, the 
postillions finally stopped at the gate of Lady 



] 44< MATILDA. 

Ormsby's villa. The traveller jumped out, and 
was at the inner door before he was met by old 
Wilson, the house steward, who, after giving him 
a lengthened stare, exclaimed, " My Lord ! well, 
to be sure — to think of your coming upon us all 
like a little impromptu, as I may say !'"* for in his 
residence abroad, Wilson too had acquired a little 
foreign garnish for his tongue. Then altering 
his tone he added, " But nothing's happened 
amiss, I hope?"" 

*' No, nothing at all, Wilson," said Lord 
Ormsby, " only that I got away sooner than I 
expected, — that's all. But where's my mother ?'' 

" Why, her Ladyship is just stepped out for 
a little promenade, I believe, but if you will wait 
in here, I will fetch her myself/' To this Lord 
Ormsby consented, as he did not wish to have the 
family meeting under the restraint of a public 
walk — which was what he perhaps understood by 
Wilson's " promenade." He was left therefore 
to himself in the sitting-room, which opened into 
the conservatory. 

" What a happy life," thought he, as he first 
admired the room itself, and then the thousand 
little comforts with which its present mistress had 
adorned it. " Never idle, either of them, I'm 



MATILDA. 145 

siire/' he continued, as his eye wandered among 
various symptoms of elegant occupation, and at 
last rested on the instrument, — on the desk of 
which he was somewhat startled at recognizing, 
in a well-known hand writing, '' Matilda Dela- 
val,"" marked on the first leaf of his favourite 
" Ombra adorafa."^^ 

Full well he recollected the night at Ormsby 
Castle when she had thus marked that paper, 
and which had at the time drawn from him a re- 
mark upon her thinking it necessary thus to ap- 
propriate that which she had every way identified 
with herself. " Could she then be thus near to 
him ? Was it possible that on the very spot where 
h"e was then standing, she had been lately delight- 
ing his own family, with those tones to which he 
had never listened without rapture ? — No, he 
persuaded himself that these were all vain illu- 
sions, the offspring of a heated imagination ; and 
that a much more natural explanation was, that, 
like those little relics he had found at Ormsby, 
the music had formerly been left there, and that 
his sister had now been practising it."" 

He had nearly convinced himself that this 
must be the case, when he accidentally took up 
from another table a sketch book, with a pencil, 

H 



143 MATILDA. 

whose touch he well knew, left between the leaves^, 
at a half-finished view from the very windows of 
the apartment where he was seated. There 
could be no mistake here. " Her pencil was 
always left in the book/' This was apparently 
so trifling a circumstance, that none but a lover's 
recollection could have retained it as character- 
istic; but the view spoke for itself; and, as he 
took it to the window, and devoured it with his 
eyes, " she is then actually at Geneva,*" exclaimed 
hfi. 

That he was not more surprised at the disco- 
very, was what he could not account for. He 
had never owned to himself that the possibility 
of such a chance had had the least effect in deter- 
mining him upon this foreign expedition ; whilst 
it was so very natural he should be desirous to 
see his mother and sister, that that reason alone 
was quite satisfactory to one never rigid in self- 
examination of the motives of every action to 
which he felt inclined. 

Whilst still gazing on the sketch which he held 
in his hand, he was roused by a gentle tap at the 
farther window, by which the garden entrance 
passed which led through the conservatory into 
the room ; — and turning round, he caught the 



MATILDA. l^T' 

Isfst glknpse of a female form entering at the 
glass-door. Almost at the same moment a well- 
known voice exclaimed, whilst passing the conser- 
vator}^, " My dear Emily, Sir James is gone to 
Chamouni, and I can stay :"" — and the next 
moment Matilda stood in amazement before him. 

That moment was one made up of the purest 
inspiration of feeling, and was as little amenable 
to the dictates of preconcerted prudence, as the 
effusions of gifted genius are to the dogmas of 
art. "" 

" Augustus!" escaped from her lips, in a tone 
which thrilled the heart's core of Ormsby, and 
created an obhvion of all things present and past, 
save only the delights of that happy tim.e when 
it was " familiar to him as a household word,''" 
even from her lips. With her, too, the excla- 
mation had ai'isen from a momentary self-obli- 
vion. But instead of perpetuating, it caused it 
in an instant to pass away. Her feelings since 
her marriage had been so severely disciplined, 
and under such constant controul, that with a 
single effort she recovered the appearance of com- 
posure. Not that the impression was transient, — 
that it bounded lightly off, — that it was no longer 
r-etained when no longer shewn ; but as a rock, 



148 MATILDA. 

if dashed on the calm still lake before them, 
would with its first shock only cause outward 
agitation ; and whilst it sunk deeper and deeper 
within, and was imbedded for ever in the bosom 
of the waters, stillness would again have settled 
on their surface, — even so, Matilda conquered 
all external emotion, at a meeting which was not 
however without influence on her after-fate. 

With perfect calmness she began questioning 
Ormsby as to his unexpected arrival. But his 
feelings were much less tractable, — excited as 
they had been, not only by the exclamation of 
Matilda, but by the momentary expression of 
her lovely face, glowing with matchless sensibi- 
lity. It had seemed to him like the transient 
glimpse of another, and a better world. In vain 
he tried to force himself into common topics — 
to account for his being there, — to stammer out 
a common-place compliment on meeting her, — 
to bestow some hackneyed praise on her drawing, 
which he still held in his hand. At last he ex- 
claimed, " It'*s all in vain, — I may form resolu- 
tions in solitude, in a crowd I may maintain 
them ; but in a meeting hke this I can but be — 
myself ! Pardon this language, — this unwarrant- 
able, but involuntary trespass on your tranquillity. 



MATILDA. 149 

Pity and forget me !" then pressing her hand for 
an instant to his lips, he rushed into the garden. 

It had been a scene of such bewildering emo- 
tion, such unexpected interest — previously so 
utterly unforeseen — so rapid in its develop- 
ment — so abrupt in its termination, that Ma- 
tilda, wandering unconsciously forth, and finding 
herself again in her carriage, felt, when first 
roused by the servant inquiring for orders, like 
one awakened from the confusion of a dream ; 
but as hastily replying " Home, home," she 
threw herself back in the carriage, every thing 
that had passed recurred in all the agitating con- 
sciousness of reality, and her feelings now biu'st 
forth with a vehemence redoubled by previous 
restraint. 

Having reached the hotel unseen by any one, 
to remodel her previous arrangements for the 
day, became a difficult, but an indispensable 
task. She had settled to dine at Lady Ormsby's 
villa ; she had even sent her maid there with her 
dressing things. That she must constantly be 
liable to see Lord Ormsby as a common ac- 
quaintance, she was well aware; but to meet 
him at a family party in the absence of Sir James, 
she would have felt at any time to be awkward. 



150 MATILDA. 

jjerhaps incorrect, and, after the events of the 
morning, she felt it to be impossible. Slie was, 
however, rather puzzled how to give any reason 
for her absence but the true one. At length she 
dispatched a note to Lady Ormsby, excusing 
herself on the ground, that Sir James had en- 
gaged her to pass the day v/ith liis sister Mrs. 
Hobson ; and what is more, she magnanimously 
determined to act up to her own excuse, thus 
punishing herself with positive penance, as well 
as negative self-denial. 

The extent of this additicnal self-inilictioii 
can only be estimated by those who have felt the 
wearing irritation of vulgar gossip, upon spirits 
£ilready harrassed and oppressed. 



151 



CHAPTER XIV. 

The next morning, Matilda was surprised by 
an unusually early visit from Colonel Canteen. — 
It was soon evident to her, whilst he turned over 
the first common-place topics of a morning visit, 
that he was labouring with some suppressed 
gossip, to which he attached no small degree of 
importance. At length he began, — " I believe you 
were present the other day, when Lady Ormsby 
attacked me so violently for my allusion to her 
son's Italian attachment. Well, do you know,, 
it is all perfectly true ; even she must now allow 
that it is satisfactorily confirmed. He has been 
here, and he is gone again ! '' " Gone ! " said 
Matilda, by v/hom that last word alone was 
heard. " Yes, he''s gone ; but I thought you 
would first be surprised to hear that he was come,, 
for that, you know, was quite unexpected. Very 
unlucky that you missed him yesterday ; though,, 
to say the truth, he was not quite himself. But 
how could you sacrifice yourself to those Hob- 
go.ns?'' 



152 MATILDA. 

Matilda's answer to this inquiry was inter- 
rupted by the entrance of Lady Ormsby and 
Emily. She immediately perceived, by the ex- 
pression of both their countenances, that they 
were out of spirits. There would have been, 
probably, some little difficulty in introducing the 
topic which was uppermost in all their minds, had 
not the Colonel, who, the reader will perceive, 
was completely upon a wrong scent, been so 
proud of his supposed triumph as to begin almost 
immediately : — " Well, you see, Lady Ormsb}^ 
I was right : the bird has flown back to his for- 
mer cage : — we have lost him again. I told you 
that as long as the Simplon was open, we had no 
chance of detaining him." 

Lady Ormsby had known Colonel Canteen too 
long, and was too well acquainted with his 
peculiarities, ever to be seriously offended at any 
freedom Ivhich arose from his desire to appear an 
fait of all the tittle-tattle of society ; she there- 
fore answered him quite in a spirit of candour, — 
" Indeed, I w^as very much surprised at Ormsby 's 
sudden departure ; he would give no satisfactory 
reason for it; indeed, it seemed a subject on which 
he did not hke much to be questioned. Mar- 
shaDj his own man, told the servants that he had 



ik 



MATILDA. 153 

intended to stay much longer." — " Why," said 
the Colonel, " I don't suppose he's such a Don 
Juan as to make a confidant of his Leporello ; — 
mine, you may depend upon it, is the true way 
of solving the difficulty, — There was ' metal 
more attractive' elsewhere. Besides, if his ori- 
ginal intention had been to stay longer, what 
prevented him ? — He saw nobody during his stay 
but myself and Santelmo, who dined with you 
yesterday. Which of us, I wonder, frightened 
him away ?" 

Matilda pretended to be more than ever intent 
upon her work, but from under her eye she stole 
a glance at Lady Ormsby, and was relieved at 
seeing no mark of suspicion on her face. On the 
contrary, the good old lady almost immediately 
said, " He was not looking by any means well. 
If you had seen him, Matilda, you would have 
thought him dreadfully altered.'' 

It was evident from this, that Ormsby had not 
mentioned the meeting of the morning to his 
family ; and that they should not otherwise have 
heard of it was not surprising, considering that 
Matilda had stopped at the garden entrance, and 
that the servants were all occupied in searching 
h5 



154 MATILDA. 

for their mistress to inform her of the arrival. 
But, upon hearing from Lady Ormsby this evi- 
dent ignorance of what had happened, Matilda 
felt in a dilemma how to act. On the one hand, 
the usual ingenuousness of her disposition was 
averse from any thing like concealment ;- — on the 
other, it was apparent that Ormsby had been 
desirous that his mother and sister should remain 
m ignorance of her influence upon his actions ; 
and ought she not to have some regard for liis 
feelings, in refraining from the disclosure of a 
circumstance so flattering to her own vanity ? 

These two different impulses might have been 
so equally balanced, as to leave her decision 
doubtful, had not the presence of Colonel Can- 
teen determined her otherwise wavering opinions 
in favour of silence on the subject ; as she knew 
that, in his hands, such a confession would at once 
become matter of conjecture and inquiry, to 
which she did not feel equal. 

Emil}^, who had been searching about at the 
other end of the room, now turned the conver- 
sation, by saying, " Matilda, I wanted your 
sketch book this morning; meaning to copy 
that last view, by way of occupying myself. 



MATILDA. 155 

after we lost poor Augustus. But I could not- 
find it anywhere at the villa, nor can I see it 
here.^^ 

Matilda full well recollected in whose hands ■ 
she had last seen it ; but, concealment of the 
interview itself, of course, entailed equivocation 
about this particular incident in it. She there- 
fore only replied, "It was at your house when 
I saw it last." 

Soon after this, the visitors departed together. 
When Matilda was left alone, she could not 
help feeling rather dissatisfied with herself, for 
the concealment of her interview with Ormsby, 
True, her motives for it were most innocent, 
originating entirely in a desire to spare the 
feelings of one, for whom she would have made 
any personal sacrifice, but on whom she had 
hitherto been doomed to inflict nothing but pain. 

There is, to a naturally candid and ingenuous 
mind, something no less repugnant in the sup- 
pression of the truth from diose who justly 
claim our confidence, than in its wilful perversion 
to a casual acquaintance. And to one unused 
to the trammels of deceit, the intentional conceal- 
ment of a fact, implying a tacit denial of it, often 
leads to as much embarrassment and difficmty 



156 MATILDA, 

in its consequencesj as the support of a positive 
invention. 

The greatest disadvantage attending this un- 
lucky want of candour in the present instance, 
was, that it first accustomed Matilda's mind to 
couple Lord Ormsby's image with the necessity 
of concealment ; — that it first gave the unac- 
countable charm of forbidden pleasure to those 
wayward recollections, which, hitherto, so far 
from assuming the character of guilty pleasure, 
had been no less innocent than mournful. 



15T 



CHAPTER XV. 

When Sir James Dornton returned from 
Chamouni, he was loud in his lamentations at 
having missed Lord Ormsby, and expressed a 
determination to take the first opportunity of 
cultivating his acquaintance. It appeared im- 
possible, that he should be impeD^d to this 
solely by a desire to do that, which, for some 
reason or other, seemed disagreeable to Matilda ; 
and it is but justice to him to say, that it after- 
wards turned out that the real cause of his 
eagerness on the subject, was the interest he 
took in the projected rail -way, through his 
property, at Delaval Park; by which he ex- 
pected, that his income would in time be nearly 
doubled; and as, to facilitate that plan, Lord 
Ormsby's concurrence, as a near neighbour, was 
to a certain degree necessary, he thought, with 
a true vulgar feeling, that he could so far con- 
ciliate him by civility and attention, as to diminish 
the difficulty of obtaining his consent. 



158 MATI^LDA. 

In a few days, the little coterie at the villa 
returned to their daily habits of easy intercourse, 
in ^vhich Lord Ormsby's ephemeral appearance 
had been rather an incident than an interruption. 
It is hardly necessary to say, that the sketch 
book was never found; and the cause of our 
hero's sudden arrival, and as sudden departure, 
continued an enigma to ail but Matilda. 

Even Colonel Canteen had his confidence- 
in his own penetration on the subject a little 
shaken, by hearing from some of his numerous 
correspondents at Rome, that Lord Ormsby had 
not made that place his destination. 

Matilda now felt daily more and more inte- 
rested in the prospects and future fate of young 
Santelmo; and as progressive intimacy made 
her more acquainted with his character, she 
warmly sympathized in his sorrows, and was 
even inoculated with the enthusiasm with which 
he seemed devoted to the cause of liberty. She 
had latterly, however, felt rather uncom.fortable 
at his seeming to seek her society, in preference 
to that of Emily. This was casually explained in 
the course of one of their frequent conversations, . 
in a manner at which her friend could not have 
been hurt, though she might have been dis . 



MATILDA. 159 

tressed. " I was utterly ignorant of the charm 
of female society,"" said Saiitehno, " before the 
acquaintance of the inmates of these walls became, 
in my misfortune, an unexpected blessing ; — and 
a blessing I am still infatuated enouo-h to think 
it, though it has only raised — hopes I cannot 
even call them — but v/ishes, which can never be 
realized. Branded as my solitary fate is, with 
the curse of singleness and isolation, it should 
have been my duty to have avoided temptation — 
to have had especial care that sympathy should 
never shadow another's happier lot with the 
reflection of my misery." 

" You surely do not rightly estimate yourself," 
said Matilda; " so far from your fate being cast 
in a misanthropic mould, I think I never knew 
any one whose taste seemed more peculiarly 
fitted for the duties of domestic life." 

" You have only seen me," Santelrao con- 
tinued, " under the impulse of feelings, which, 
for the time, have been irresistible. But still my 
ruling passion is patriotism ; my fate is tied to 
the fortunes of my unhappy country. How, 
then, could I think of permanent domestic ties ? — 
how could I aspire to be the founder of a family — 
to undertake the duties of a husband and a 



160 MATILDA. 

father — when I could offer only perpetual pro- 
scription for a settlement — a dungeon for a 
dower — and slavery for an inheritance ?''"* 

'' But why view only the gloomy side of the 
question ?"" said Matilda ; " the spirit of the age 
is now working in your favour; the wishes of 
the good and liberal, of every country, are en- 
listed on your side ; and long days of happiness 
and independence are yet in store for Italy." 

" That some such latent hope is the spring 
that supports this otherwise burthen some ex- 
istence, I will not attempt to conceal ; yet, none 
but those who, like me, have their whole soul 
engrossed by the anticipation, are aware how 
very distant that day may yet be; — by how 
many conflicting difficulties it may yet be almost 
interminably delayed. — But I am growing in- 
finitely too political," said he, suddenly checking 
himself. 

" Oh, no !" said Matilda, " pray go on ; ever 
since my childhood, I have always felt an inte- 
rest in Italy, and all that relates to it, for which 
I am unable to account." Thus encouraged, 
Santelmo proceeded to discuss, more at length 
than he had hitherto done, his own and his 
country's prospects ; the course of which discus- 



MATILDA, 161 

sion was occasionally diverted by inquiries and 
observations on the part of Matilda, which her 
acute and cultivated mind brought to bear on a 
topic, in which her feelings were powerfully 
excited. 

I shall however give, for the sake of conti- 
nuity, Santelmo's uninterrupted reflections, such 
as they often occurred to him ; reminding the 
reader, that they are the opinions at once of an 
Italian, and of one who w^as an enthusiast on the 
jsubject on which he was speaking. 

" Italia hella^'' said he, " never perhaps so 
perfectly monopolized the exclusive affections of 
any other of her sons ; for I had never known 
a mortal mother's care. Allowed in early child^ 
hood to run wild about my grandfather's palace, 
the soft and gentle nature of Italy supplied the 
place of my lost parent. It was her sunny smile 
that first gladdened my heart ; it was her balmy 
breath that kissed from my cheek the tears of 
infancy. As years passed over my head, self- 
taught, I filled my memory with legends of her 
early greatness and renown, and inspirations of 
her poetical pre-eminence. Blinded by filial 
love and gratitude, absorbed in her former famej. 



162 MATILDA. 

and enwrapt in her ti'anscendent beauty, I wa» 
yet ignorant of her present moral degradation. 
At that time, under the protection of the mighty 
genius, Avho then ruled the destinies of Europe, 
her fallen state was never marked by outward- 
opprobrium ; on the contrary, with the consi- 
derate kindness of a partial protector, be dis- 
guised, as much as possible, her disgraceful sub- 
jection, flattered her little vanities, spent much 
in adorning and improving her appearance, and, 
what was most valued, allowed her a share in his 
glory. If she had ceased to be respectable, she 
was still, apparently, respected. 

" What a change in her situation, when, from 
the cherished and pampered favourite of a 
mighty man, she sank at once into the purchased 
slave of mean and sordid natures ; kept as the 
mere servile instrument of their pleasure; pik 
laged, insulted, despised, and brutalized ! Then, 
it was that I felt all the infamy of her degraded 
state — the prostitution of her beauties, by boorish 
strangers. Then it was, too, that better hopes 
had been excited, that even the much-respected 
England had held out deceitful expectations, 
tliat her disgracQ might be obliterated, and 



MATILDA. 163 

that she might be again restored to the so- 
ciety of nations, l^hus the bitterness of disap- 
pointment was added, as a consummation to her 
misery. 

'' Maddened at the indignities offered to my 
native laiid, whose injuries I resented as those of 
a parent, I willingly joined those who were 
united on the glorious principles of individual 
liberty and national independence. Unfortu- 
nately, indiscretions, provoked by acts of galling 
tyranny on the part of the Government, precipi- 
tated abortive attempts, which have themselves 
tended to postpone our ultimate success. But 
it is some consolation to think, that no prudence 
or discretion v/ould have guaranteed ]:ieL'sona{ 
security, under a Government with whom the 
mere suspicion of entertaining in silence and in 
secret certain opinions, is a positive crime ; and by 
whom the mere possession of popular qualities, 
undirected to any political object, is considered to 
compromise the safety of the State. 

" The failure of these premature insurrec- 
tions has been, with some friends, I fear, as 
well as foes, conclusive as to our incapacity for 
freedom. This opinion, I think, has been hastily 
and harshly taken up, without reference either to 



164 MATILDA. 

the peculiar difficulties under which we labour, 
or the unparallelied power to which we are op- 
posed. What instance can be produced of a na- 
tion succeeding in obtaining liberty in her first 
struggle for it ? and is it nothing, that we have to 
contend against the accumulated mis-government 
of centuries, which has produced and confirmed 
that very ignorance, in the body of the people, 
which itself incapacitates them for appreciating 
the advantages of a better state of things — thus 
seeming at first to perpetuate that reciprocal 
cause and efiect, which must for ever bar social 
unprovement ? But even in more favoured coun- 
tries, regeneration has not been the work of a mo- 
ment. Even England, who afterwards achieved 
the unique renown of the success of a bloodless 
revolution, had first to wade through the wild 
and turbulent violence of CromwelPs time, and 
at the Restoration again relapsed into servility 
and degradation, until at length her hour ar- 
rived. Fickle France, always in extremes, and 
charmed with novelty, sought at first with avi- 
dity (regardless of the means by which it was 
attained) the Utopian perfection of civil liberty, 
of which the shadow now is only held at the 
beck of the Bourbons. Is it nothing for us. 



MATILDA. 165 

Stigmatised as we have been, individually, as 
Italians, with a proneness to assassination, and 
denounced as a sect bound together by a vow of 
sanguinary extermination, that, in all our attempts 
not an outrage has been committed, not a drop 
of blood has been shed ? No Louis to the guil- 
lotine — no Charles to the scaffold. Where then 
are our proceedings censured ? Is it in that 
land of political fanaticism, where Sandt^s dagger 
was dignified with the plea of patriotism ? Or 
is this respect for the persons of sovereigns found 
fault with by the half- savage Serf of the Auto- 
crat, Vv^ho, when tyranny passes endurance, pre- 
fers the murdering the man to attempting the 
controul of his measures ? Perhaps the exces- 
sive mildness, the moral virtue of those concerned 
in the projected revolutions, was one cause of the 
failure. But this is an amiable error, which one 
can never regret. The people, however, have 
received sufficient warning not again to put their 
confidence in princes. If these arch deceivers 
should hereafter suffer from a recollection of 
their perfidy, their blood must rest upon their 
own heads. But Heaven avert such a calamity ! 
and may the next attempt, whenever it takes 



X6G MATILDA. 

place, if rewarded with success, be equally de- 
serving of it with the last ! I have very much 
under-rated our difficulties, when I have com- 
pared them with those previously existing in any 
former struo^sjle between the excited energies of 
the people on one hand, and the established au- 
thorities of the state on the other ; for against us, 
for the first time, has been arrayed an unheard- 
of confederation of sovereigns — a joint-stock com- 
pany for the propagation of despotism, — who 
reverse the benefits of modern mechanical im- 
provements, — perverting principles which have 
given preternatural powers to our physical exer- 
tions, to their own purpose of paralyzing mental 
energies. The members of this impei'ial partner- 
ship concern are imited for the suppression of 
the free agency of men, and for the reduction of 
human nature into a mere engine of brute force, 
to be governed by a touch of their pigmy fingers. 
In furtherance of which plan, they at once crush 
the least appearance of opening liberty, beneath 
the overwhelming weight of their military ma- 
chine of a milhon-man-power. 

" There is much in all this to abate our con- 
fidence, but nothing to justify despondency; 



JCATir/DA'; ^ ligY 

fr*,r in proportion as the pliysical force opposed 
to us is greater than any previously known, the 
ittteilectual powers enlisted on our side are more 
than ever developed ; and the Spirit of the ±\(re' 
hovers over our heads, scattering, in ail comers- 
of that soil cultivated by knowledge, the certain 
seeds of future freedom. But the present gene- 
ration, alas ! may pass away before the fruit is 
ripe. Engaged as I am, in a cause hke this, of 
Avliich the future issue is doubtful, the present 
danger alone certain, am I in a condition to 
form domestic ties ? No — never shall a wife of 
mine be condemned to tread in the faltering foot- 
sleps of La Confalonieri, who, having flown to 
the Fountain Head for mercy, found tliere no 
manly sj/mpathy in a woman's sorrows ; for even 
after her husband's sentence had received that 
partial remission, in which, if life could hardly 
be said to be spared, death at least was not m^ 
dieted, — Bhe was denied the consolation of 
knowing it, and with the aggravated agony, 
excited by the dread of arriving too late, was 
made by the Holy Man of Vienna to retrace 
her painful pilgrimage: a penance, doubtless, 
for her heroicai exercise of conjugal devotion ! — 
No — my die is cast, — my fortune has been 



168 MATILDA. 

sacrificed — my home has been abandoned — my 
heart and soul are devoted to the cause of 
freedom ! And whilst I struggle, I must have 
nought to distract me; if I fall^ I will leave 
none to regret me/' 



1C9 



CHAPTER XVI. 



Matilda's happiness in the society in which 
she was Rving at the villa was before long inter- 
rupted, hy the increasing restlessness of Sir 
James, who, without having any particular ob- 
ject in vieW;, became, from feeling himself of no 
particular consequence v/here he was, anxious 
for change of place, without its ever occurring to 
him that he might possibly go farther and fare 
worse. This impatience had increased, too, since 
the recent departure of the Hobsons, as he missed 
his daily dose of flattery and attention, which 
was always administered to him by all that fa- 
mily. Tom Hobson had all along voted Geneva 
a stupid spooney sort of a place; his sisters 
sympathized in his feelings ; the mother longed 
for something new to talk about ; and though 
old Hobson had such a general ^slike to loco- 
motion, that he would always rather remain 
where he was, wherever that might be ; yet^ as 
we ol?5erved on a former occasion, bis opinigu 
I 



170 MATILDA. 

upon family arrangements always rather shewed 
itself in word than in deed. 

Matilda's objections to moving were two-fold, 
as she disHked leaving Lady Ormsby as much as 
following Mrs. Hobson. But it was evident, from 
Sir James's manner of announcing his plan, that 
opposition would be in vain. She therefore 
took an affectionate leave of both mother and 
daughter, and a most friendly farewell of San- 
teimo, in w^hom, after his account of himself, she 
had felt a redoubled interest, though of a more 
melancholy description, as she was compelled to 
separate it from that she felt for her friend, with 
wliom it had previously been her delight to think 
he was likely to be united. 

Our travellers quitted Geneva for Milan, by 
the Valois, and the Simplon. Having always 
felt delighted myself at getting out of La Valois, 
I shall certainly not think myself justified in de- 
taining my readers in it, or offending their ears 
with its guttural German patois, or their eyes 
with its goitres; and, as I am not composing 
imaginary travels, but recording a true tale, — 
not describing the character of countries, but of 
persons, I do not think it necessary to retail over 
again the thousand times told wonders of the 



MATILDA. 171 

Simplon — that extraordinary effort of industry 
and art. 

The Simplon is only one of the many bonds 
with which Napoleon has bound the rebeUious 
and aspiring Alps down to the permanent controul 
of dieir mother earth. It was perhaps the par- 
tial success with which he here contended against 
the elements, in this which had formerly been 
one of their strongest outworks, that afterwards 
made him fool-hardy enough to dare their utmost 
power in the very centre of their frozen regions, — 
a temerity which ultimately cost him his empire 
and his life. Here, however, in spite of his sub- 
sequent defeats, his power is still acknowledged ; 
and long after the generation which alternately 
flattered and reviled him shall have passed away, 
his memory will live in gigantic monuments 
carved in the solid Alps. 

Immediately on the descent to Duomo d'Ossola, 
Italy does not at once meet you with all her win- 
ning smiles, but seems at the first introduction to 
maintaiii some reserve of her charms ; nor is it 
till you arrive at the little Borgo of Baveno, on 
the borders of the Lago Maggiore, that she 
breaks forth in all her unrivalled brilliancy of 
bearaty. 



J72 MATILDA, 

It was late when the Dorntons arrived at 
Eaveno ; and when, leaving Sir James in the inner 
room smoking his segar, and grumbling at the 
heat, Matilda stepped out upon the balcony-, the 
prospect before her was softened, not obscured, 
by the shadows of a summer's evening ; and its 
loveliness was enhanced, rather than hidden, by a 
transparent veil of silvery moonlight. If that 
brilliancy, which an hour before would Imve 
dazzled the eyesight, was somewhat subdued, it 
was only to give their due share to the enjoy- 
ment of the other senses ; whilst the softest of 
breezes, rippling the surface of the waters, j iist 
enough to give varied animation to the beams 
of the rising mcon, came fraugl t with all th« 
fragrance of that sweetest of gardens, Iscla Bella ; 
at the same time regaling the ear with the distant 
sounds of one of the native melodies of this land 
cf music. 

As Matilda's eye wandered in admiration of 
ail above and below, the lucciole of the earth 
seemed to emulate the stars of the sky in the uni- 
versality of bespangled illumination. 

" 'Tis wonderful,'' thought Matilda, " that all 
this should not strike me as new, — that I should 
.*vitertain an indistinct idea of having sometime 



HAl-ILDA. 173 

seen it before. Often in trifles our wayward 
memory mocks us with a faint shadow of previous 
recollections; but that I, whose earliest remem- 
brances are confined within the narrow ami 
remote bounds of Delaval Park, upon first ar- 
riving in Italy, and expecting only the unaccus- 
tomed charm of a nev/ and brilliant acquaintance, 
should experience the more endearing feelings of 
restoration to an early friend — is most strange/' 

She was still endeavourincr in vain to account 
for this inexplicable circumstance, when she wds 
suddenly summoned to supper by her husband, 
—who, instead of admiring any thing, was only 
complaining of being equally hot and hungry. 

The next d^^, betimes, they found themselves 
in all the bustle of the gay and crov/ded streets cf 
Milan. When Sir James had sought out the 
Hobsons, he found them enoao-ed with a new 
acquaintance, whom all the young ladies consi- 
(5lered a great catch. This was one Walter 
Woodhead, Esquire; who, upon coming of age 
in a few months, would succeed to a fine estate 
in the County Palatine of Chester ; and a most 
unsophisticated specimen he was, from that 
modern Bceotia :— a fine fat-headed home-brewed 
young fellow, who, if he could stand the vulgar 



174 MATILDA. 

test of knowing chalk from cheese, it was almost 
the only thing he did know ; being, au reste, as 
heavy, as strong, and as rich as one of his own 
Cheshires. To him the Hobsons had been in- 
troduced by his traveUing tutor, the Rev. Mr. 
Simperton, whom they had formerly met acting 
as a sort of spiritual master of the ceremonies at 
the balls at Buxton and at Blackpool, in the course 
of their different summer excursions from Man- 
chester. Mr. Simperton was now travelling with 
his young charge, almost a solitary instance of 
the old bear-leader system ; guardians and pa- 
rents having at length discovered, that to cou- 
ple a young fellow with a man twice as old as 
himself, but who knows not half as much of the 
ways of the world, is not the best mode to ini- 
tiate him into life. 

But if Mr. Simperton filled the situation, he 
did not at all, either in stiffness or austerity^ 
recal the character of that almost obsolete class. 
He by no means meant to be a millstone round 
his pupil's neck, but rather a sort of bell-collar, 
which might chime in with its own gingling 
vivacity, at the frisks of him to whom it was 
attached : and the heavy mass to which he was at 
present tied, seemed rather to require sotne such 



MATILDA. 17J 

exhilarating accompaniment. Mr. Simperton 
was certainly turned of forty, but a studious 
attention to appearance tended at first sight to 
conceal that fact. 

When, upon the entrance of the Domtons, he 
made the sign to his pupil to conclude their 
morning visit, he might have been taken for the 
younger man of the two, but that the well-made 
light pepper-and-salt coat, which he had substi- 
tuted for clerical black, served, as his brother 
parson Tynte would have said, to recal the colour 
of a certain grey mixture on his head. His 
partially gjizzled locks were now, however, ad- 
mirably arranged in carefully careless curls, so 
that the set of coat and his crop seemed of equal 
importance. 

" Only think," said Mrs. Hobson to Lady 
Matilda, as their other visitors left the room, 
*' how pleased the girls were to see our old friend 
Simperton again ! I could not believe my eyes, 
when we first found him, rowing about on Lake 
Margery^ there, in a little linen jacket and a 
straw hat big enough to make a bonnet." 

It was evident that the acquaintance of these 
two beaux was a great event to the Hobson girls. 
Poor Miss Hobson, however, was for the prbgeut 



1T6 MATILDA. 

incapacitated from partaking of her share of 
the advantage ; for she was really seriously indis- 
posed, though not with a malady of a very inte- 
resting description. The fact was, that being, as 
her fiery locks betokened, rather of a warm tem- 
perament, and suffering more severely than the 
others did from the heat of the weather, she had 
overdone her desire to 

" Bid the winter come, 

To tlnust his icy fingers in !ier maw." 

In short, sweet Betty Hobson was now suffering 
from what Mrs. Hobson called ^'mur bettisy She 
had, in the course of frequent visits to the Risto- 
ratore, used no discretion in the quantities in 
which she had inserted " Grammelate, gelate, 
Sorhettiy Limonati ;''"' and, strange to say, cold on 
her stomach had produced heat on her face, pre- 
senting a singular mixture, like a volcano in 
winter ; only that here the ice was internal, and 
the outward head was, as usual, cro^vned with its 
natural warm and glowing colouring. 

In consequence of this calamity. Sir James 
having determined upon inviting one of his 
nieces. Miss Anne was the favoured person who 
was to accompany Matilda in her first visit to 
La Scala. 



MATILDA. 177 

At Milan, la Scala and existence are synoni- 
mous. It does not speak highly for the heahhfifl 
energies of a people, when an opera is their ex- 
clusive business, not their occasional amusement; — 
when they always postpone realities for represen- 
tations, and can in a theatre prefer sound to sub- 
stance, and desert Alfieri for Rossini. But though 
one may regret, one cannot wonder at this, when 
even as a stranger one feels that there is some- 
thing in the air of Italy which gives a peculiar 
charm to music. The same singers, and even the 
same sounds, have not the same effect when heard 
elsewhere — 

" That strain again ! it had a dying tall. 

Oh, it came o'er my ear like the sweet south/ * 
That breatlies upon a bank of violets, "'■* ' 

Stealing and giving odour." '^■^i 

This speaks the same feeling in regard to the 
mystic influence produced by the soft and sooth- 
ing union of harmony and of climate. - 

Absorbed as Matilda was in her attention 
to one of the most perfect performances that this 
unrivalled establishment had ever given, the opera 
was concluded, before, in looking round the mag- 
nificent area, she perceived that she herself was 
i5 



178 MATILDA. 

an object of general attention to the crowded 
cjrcle. Her own eye, unaccustomed to the com- 
-parative obscurity of a foreign theatre, could but 
imperfectly distinguish any one. But to those 
whom nightly habit had famiharized the doubt- 
ful gloom, quite enough was discernible to 
"circulate a general inquiry concerning the dis- 
'tii^guished and beautiful stranger. 

Any sensations of involuntary satisfaction at 
this universal admiration in Matilda, were sud- 
4enly checked by the sight of one object in an 
'opposite box, the internal light in which re?i- 
dered its inmates plainly visible. It was the 
figure of a man, whose attention a lady was 
endeavouring, with much animation, to engross, 
but whose eyes (and they were the eyes of 
Qrmsby) were intently fixed upon herself. 

It was well that she had this little preparation 
for what afterwards occurred; for, tov/ards the 
'end of the ballet, the door of her box opened, 
and Sir James, followed by Lord Ormsby, 
^entered. 

An opera box is, perhaps, of all places in the 
•world, the best fittied for the necessary operation 
'of undergoing an awkward or embarrassing 
interview. The doubtful light — the diviv^^ 



MATILDA. 179 

attention — the confused noise — are all highly 
favourable to the assumption of artificial, or the 
concealment of real feelings. But though pos- 
sessing, in perfection, this advantage of situa- 
tion, and somewhat assured, by observing that 
Ormsby himself was perfectly composed, and 
very different from when she saw him last, yet it 
required all her exertions to appear outwardly 
unmoved, when Sir James began, — *' I have 
been telling Lord Ormsby, Matilda, that you 
regretted, as much as I did, the not having seen 
him at all, as he passed through Geneva."* 

It had been entirely out of consideration for 
Ormsby, that she had originally omitted all men- 
tion of that meeting; 3^et, for the world, she 
v«'ould not he should have known that such had 
l)een her conduct. To a man of Sir Jam^s''s 
character, she could not have been expected to 
volunteer unnecessary confidence, yet she could 
not help feeling guilty when thus convicted of 
intentional concealment. Oppressed as she was 
with this sensation, she w^as reheved at having 
something else to say, when Sir James, in an 
audible whisper, prompted her — "Won't you 
ask him to dinner.^'' She almost unconsciously 
repeated the invitation. 



180 MATILDA. 

The balkt being now concluded, Sir James, 
taking his niece himself, left Lord Ormsby to 
hand Matilda to her carriage. In descending, 
he said, — " Do not entirely deprive me of your 
society, and I will promise to deserve it better 
than when last we met ; but, for God^s sake, let 
me owe nothing to the constraint of your iaie 
echoed invitation."" 

" Oh ! pray come though,'"' said Matilda, m a 
hurried voice ; " I have much to tell you of youf 
mother and Emily f and thus it was their 
renewed intimacy began. 



181 



CHAPTER XVII. 



" More know Tom Fool than Tom Fool 
knows/"* is a saying whidi, in its usual modern 
application, is much more flattering to the 
notorious individual than it probably was in its 
original sense. For instance, what person at all 
repandu in the world, has ever dropped for the 
first time into society of an inferior cast, that he 
has not at once found his new friends perfectly 
acquainted with all the m^ost minute particulars 
of his conduct and connexions — that he has not 
been immediately gratified with the most recent 
intelligence of the welfare of some distant rela- 
tions, of whose existence he would previously 
have himself been doubtful — that he has not had 
recalled to his recollection some common-place 
unimportant incident of his own early life, which 
he had till then forgotten ? Those who are thus 
opening with him a fresh account of acquaintance- 
ship, seem anxious to support the credit side of 
it, by scraping together every sort of doubtful 



182 MATILDA. 

claims. Having gossiped with a second-cousin, 
— domiciliated at Bath or at Cheltenham, is con- 
sidered an undeniable passport to intimacy ; and 
as they admit of no statute of limitations, the 
having seen their new victim as a child, or at 
school, is put forward as an outstanding bond 
for the future. 

Few ever experienced more varied attacks of 
this kind than did Lord Ormsby, when, upon 
first arriving at Sir James Dornton's apartments, 
he found, besides Lady Matilda, the party then 
assembled, consisting of Mrs. Hobson, Miss Anne 
Hobson, Mr. Tom Hobson, and ]\IessieursA'Vo«xI- 
liead and Simperton. Miss Hobson was still 
not presentable ; and old Hobson was completijig 
her discomfort by sulking at home, under pre- 
tence of keeping her company. 

Sir James was still fussing himself in the 
dining-room about the arrangement of the dinner, 
as he was as yet too little of a finished cosmo- 
polite to understand, that a five-franc-a-head 
rxiramble, at an Italian hotel, can never be drille<l 
into quite the same martinet discipline as a well- 
organized three-week-bespoken banquet in Lon- 
don. Nor, indeed, is it at all necessary that it 
should, when people give the dinner for the sake 



MATILDA. 18S 

of the party, not make the party for the sake of 
tlie dinner. 

When Lord Ormsby entered the room, Walter 
Woodhead and Tom Hobson were looking out 
of the window, criticizing the driving of the 
j^Iilan coachman, whom they laughed at unmer- 
cifully, for taking the wrong side of the street. 
Mrs. Hobson and Lady Matilda were conversing 
on one of the sofas ; if that could be called con- 
versation, which consisted exclusively of active 
infliction on one side, and patient endurance on 
ilie other. Mr. Simperton, on another sofa, was 
gaying soft things to Miss Anne, not on his own 
account, but as proxy for his pupil, — between 
whom and the young lady he was anxious, for 
reasons which will afterwards appear, that there 
should exist a mutual good understanding ; in 
the advancement of which plan, he displayed a 
perfection of tact, which might have had its effect 
upon a more refined taste than that of Migs 
Anne ; as, in puffing his pupil, he was eloquent 
in the praise of the beauty, not of his person, but 
liis place; and the cultivation, not of his mind, 
but his estate. 

Two congenial spirits, like Ormsby and Ma- 
tilda, brought suddenly into contact with such 



184 MATILDA. 

an unsuitable set as this, would, in ordinary cir- 
cumstances, have found their best resource, and 
surest defence, in exclusive attention to each other. 
But from this they were, of course, debarred, by 
the peculiar awkwardness of their relative situa- 
tion : so that Lord Ormsby soon fell an easy 
prey to Mr. Simperton ; who, rising from his 
seat, accosted him with a sweet smile^ and, " the 
temperature's intensely tropical to-day, my Lud^ 

Perceiving, by the tone and manner of Lord 
Ormsby 's assent to this affectedly-turned truism, 
that he was not awL*re whom he was addressing, 
he continued, with the same smile, " My name, 
my Lud, is Simperton of Sydney — had the plea- 
sure of meeting your lordship when resident at 
Cambridge, in statu pifpillari, at the rooms of my 
much-valued friend. Doctor Droning, — who, if 
he had not unfortunately soon been removed 
to a better place, would before now have been 
happily promoted to the Bench. Poor Doctor 
Droning! Your Iz^lship and I had both an 
irreparable loss in the Doctor." 

Lord Ormsby, smiling a little at Mr. Simper- 
ton's seeming to think, that though the Doctor 
was in a better place, still he would have been 
best as a bishop, proceeded to assure him, 



MATILDA. 185 

that to himself, personally, the Doctor's loss had 
not been so perfectly irreparable as it otherwise 
might have been, from the simple circumstance 
of his never having been in his company but that 
once, when he was vice-chancellor. 

Hardly had our hero recovered from this 
attack, when he was assailed by Mrs. Hobson, 
with, " May I make so bold as to ask, my Lord, 
whether you still let the jetty deux play at 
Ormsby Castle, as we see when we went tour- 
ing there ? I thought 'em vastly fine ; but my 
good man can't bear to liear them named, be- 
cause the gardener wetted him to the skin. Tom 
said, because he only gave him a shilling™ but 
Fm sure you wouldn't approve of such doings." 
Without waiting for Lord Ormsby's ready dis- 
claimer of any share in old Hobson's ducking, 
she continued, *' Perhaps you may recollect 
coming into the library for a book when we was 
all looking at the picturs. I'm sure our Betty said 
you were the best worth seeing — but I won't 
make you vain. Yes, and we see you again as 
we wks driving aw^ay — you was riding with a 
fitrange lady ; and Tom, who w^as sitting on the 
bar, had told the boy to spin along, and the 
chaise did jingle, to be sure, and we came clat- 



186 MATILDA. 

tering behind you, and the road was narrow, and 
the lady's horse reared frightfuLto see, and a 
proper rage you was in with the postboy ; and 
the boy told us afterwards it wasn't the Honour- 
able Miss Arlingford neither. I wonder who it 
was ! Do you recollect who it was ?*" 

To this she received no direct answer ; for she 
had at last touched upon an incident which had 
not escaped the memory of her new acquaint- 
ance; and full well did both he and Matilda 
remember who that lady was. 

Tom Hobson now coming up, began his at- 
tempt to ingratiate himself, in a manner as 
strikingly characteristic as either of the pre- 
ceding. 

** Uncommon nice bit of horse-flesh, I may 
eay, my Lord, that tit of yours as won the cup at 
Manchester last spring. I talked it all over 
before witli your man Bill Jenkins, and he told 
me he thought as how he could do the trick. 
Prime fellow, Bill — I like him vastly.*" 

" Really, Sir,'' said Lord Ormsby, half-laugh- 
ing, " I don't know whether I ought to be most 
grateful for your friendly feeling towards my 
horse or my groom." 

" Can these, then, be the connexions of Ma« 



MATILDA. 187 

tiida,'' thought Lord Orinsby, in the only mo- 
ment of respite that they allowed him before the 
entrance of Sir James, — who immediately began 
a hundred elaborate apologies for the dinner, 
expressing fears that it would be very bad, and 
excuses for having asked him when he had not a 
maison monUe. In vain did Lord Ormsby assure 
him that, at least as far as he was concerned, his 
imeasiness was unnecessary ; for that he was pro- 
bably more used than any other of the party to 
the scramble of an Italian pic-nic. 

Matilda, of course, fell to Lord Ormsby*s 
share as a neighbour at dinner. Since the last 
timev/hen at Lord Eatington's such had been 
their relative situation, their feelings of mutual 
interest had certainly not abated ; but the embar- 
rassment which they then experienced, was in 
the present instance much diminished. And as the 
paucity of common topics among the party assem- 
bled, caused the conversation to be only occa- 
sionally dribbled out in no easy flow, they found 
themselves almost imperceptibly conversing, witli 
much of the ease, if not the confidence, of former 
times. 

Towards the end of dinner, this was inter- 
rupted by Sir James, whoj when a httle warmed 



188 MATILDA. 

with an incessant fire of bottomless bicchieri of 
champagne, began to shew that most infalhble 
mark of a vulgar mind — the knowing no medium 
between form and familiarity. We have seen 
him needlessly punctilious in his formal apologies 
for the dinner ; and he was now as unceremo- 
niously famihar — in bantering his new guest in a 
manner which a man of the world would have 
known that nothing but intimacy could sanction. 
At first, indeed, he only commenced with, 
** When we met you in town, Lord Ormsby, I 
had no idea that you meant so soon to return 
upon your travels. — Pray, how did that hap- 

" Vm afraid I can only plead a truant di.spo- 
sition, good my Lord,"" said Lord Ormsby; 
" and that we Anglo-Italians, like dram-drinkersj 
can never resist just one, drop more. It ia a taste 
that grows more inveterate from every indul;^ 
gence." ..... 

" Oh," said Sir James, '' I dare say that's ail 
just so, but we can give a better guess than that. 
We know pretty well what brings you. so often 
across the Alps ; — we've heard that thcj-e?s^ lady 
in the case.'' ^^^ ^^^ _, 

Lord Ormsby almost started, from tti^Q. cg^r 



st*iousTiess that, in this last instance, Sir James had 
stumbled upon something hke the truth, though 
in a very different sense from vvliat he intended. 
He only, however, repUed, *'that he was quite at 
a loss to know to what he could allude." 

*' Oh, you remember, Matilda, don\ you,""' 
said the Baronet, " all they used to say about 
Lord Ormsby and the Lady at Rome .?" 

Matilda pretended she did not recollect. 
*' Weil, that's very odd," said Sir James, " for 
I'm sure when I first went down to Delaval 
Park, in your uncle''s time, one used to hear of 
nothing else.^ — It was in every body's mouth. 
For my part, I could not make out why they ail 
occupied themselves so much about it." 

A -new light flashed upon Lord Ormsby 's mind 
on hearing this, the effect of which was strength- 
ened by his knowledge of the cliaracter of the late 
liOrd Wakefield, and the evident embarrassment 
that he remarked in Matilda at Sir James's allu- 
sion to that time. He now was convinced, that 
the whole report was concerted for the sake of 
alienating from him Matilda's affections; and 
though he was justly impatient at the Baronet's 
vulgar impertinence, yet he could not but be 
jeratefui to him for having thus involuntarily 



190 MATILDA. 

given liim the explanation of his former mistress*^ 
apparently unaccountable fickleness. 

And fatal indeed this intelligence proved. It 
enabled his imagination to represent Matilda, not 
as an easy changeling, but as the victim of con- 
summate artifice. It restored her character to all 
its original faultless charm, and thus removed 
the only feeble barrier which Ivis reason had ever 
been able to oppose, to the daily increasing 
power of that resistless passion, against which he 
was still in vain endeavouring to contend. 

Sir James would have thought that he had 
foresworn his birthright as an Englishman, if he 
had, under any circumstances, foregone that most 
civilized and gallant of our customs, by which we 
daily prove to the fair sex, when they put us to 
the trial, that we prefer the worst of wine to 
the best of company. But a little Italian Mar- 
chese, M'honi Sir James had, somehow or other, 
picked up, and to whom no one had addressed a 
word, and wlio had not understood a syllable of 
what was addressed to any one else, followed the 
ladies as a matter of course ; and Lord Ormsby^ 
profiting by his mistake, soon afterwards left the 
room, as he did not feel particularly anxious 
either to discuss politics with Sir James and Mr. 



MATILDA. 191 

Simperton, or sporting with Tom and his friend 
Woodhead. 

The Baronet and the Parson, therefore, those 
temporal and spiritual pillars of the state, re- 
mained reciprocating church and king principles 
in the most orthodox duet. Though it is but 
justice to them to say, that they joined to the 
most unbounded admiration of their own govern- 
ment, the most undisguised dislike of that under 
which they were then living, and to the establish- 
ment of which their friends at home had mainly 
contributed. But so it is, that however bigoted 
a thorough-paced Tory may be at home, I never 
kfiew but one EngUshman who was not a Liberal 
abroad. 

Tom in the mean time was puffing off the 
courier, Pierre, to his friend Woodhead. — " By 
Jove,^' he said, *'a fellow who, when I saw him 
iii England, I should liave said was a spooney, 
who looked as if, had you taken and turned him 
twice round, he would not have known where he 
was ; and now he shall ride against time witli any 
man in Europe, I don't care who." 

There were very few subjects in the world 
tiiat would have provoked the phlegmatic Wood- 
bead into a contradiction, much less an argu- 



192 MATILDA. 

ment ; but this was exactly the one most hkely to 
produce that effect. The spirit of Nimrod was 
roused in him, when he heard a foreign chap set 
up as a crack horseman. He therefore quietly 
objected, that he could not be compared to young 
Coverdale, who won the Great Steeple Chase last 
year! 

" Steeple Chase !" said Tom ; " I'll bet Pierre 
sees more steeples in one day than Coverdale has 
in his life. But 1 11 tell you what he shall do, 
that will beat all your Barclay matches hollow, 
ril back him for five hundred, to ride a hundred 
miles a clay^ all the year around^ 

*' Done !" said young Woodhead, with (for 
him) most unusual energy of manner. 

At this awful monosyllable, Tom was, as he 
would himself have expressed it, rather taken 
aback. The offer had been mere bully on his 
part ; he v/as not at all sure of his man, and had 
little expected, from any thing he had previously 
seen of Woodhead, that he would have turned 
so sharply upon him. But, in one respect, he 
had underrated the young squire, whose intel- 
lects in the more negative department, were not 
so contemptible. Thougli they did not enable 
him to execute much himself, they gave him a 



MATILDA. 19S 

pretty good idea of what was impossible for any 
one else to execute. Therefore, when Tom pre- 
tended to laugh it off, as a joke, Woodhead 
claimed it seriously as a bet. 

The dispute growing loud, disturbed the poH- 
ticians, who interfered to quash it at once ; and 
for fear it should be renewed, they proposed 
adjourning to the ladies. There they found 
Lord Ormsby, who, after he had patiently -sub- 
mitted to every variety of frivolous question and 
observation from Mrs. and the Miss Hobsons, — 
all interlarded with, — " Sir — my Lord, I mean,"' 
was at length allowed quietly to establish himself 
by the side of Matilda, at the piano-forte. 

The words of a song are, generally speaking, 
proverbially a matter of indifference ; so com^ 
pietely are they a mere vehicle for music, that, 
-like the carriage which brings our friends to 
dinner, they seldom excite our observation. Many 
a Miss apostrophises her music-master by the 
hour, as, ^' Ben mio i''^ — " Unico speme delta 
mia vita .'" — utterly unconscious that she is 
expressing herself at all tenderly. And in the 
majority of singers, one can no more decide, 
from the expression, that the topic may be more 
interesting than the Catch of — " Jolly, joUy six- 



194 MAtlLDA. 

pence," — than from the pronunciation, that it 
may not be Hebrew. 

But the language of love, in its lyric garb, 
though it falls perfectly powerless on the ear that 
boasts no kindred affinity, has, when it harmo- 
nises with existing feelings, a resistless attraction. 
So thought Lord Ormsby, as he hung enraptured 
on every note of Matilda's, who sang with an 
expression peculiar to himself, and equal to her 
musical execution. And as he joined her in an 
impassioned duet, he felt it a relief to be allowed, 
even in song, to give utterance to those heart- 
felt sentiments, which, in prose or in his own 
person, he dared not whisper. 

In a word, this was a day, marked by the 
final abandonment, on his part, of any attempts 
to resist the indulgence of a passion, which, if 
hopeless, could only tend to his own misery ; if 
successful, must insure the utter ruin of its 
object — whose welfare he Avould have vowed was 
far dearer to him than his own. 



195 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



Day passed^ after day, and week succeeded 
week, and still found Lord Ormsby habitually 
frequenting Lady Matilda's rooms in a morning, 
and her opera-box in an evening. Nor was there 
any thing in their easy intercourse calculated to 
excite observation in others, or uneasiness in 
Matilda herself. For such is the happy con- 
struction of society abroad, that between persons 
at all of the same set, the effort is required, not 
to meet, but to avoid meeting. The growth of 
intimacy is there natural, spontaneous, and unre- 
strained, like that of the luxuriant vegetation of 
the happy cUmate itself. Society does not there 
require to be forced, as in the hot-houses of 
London ; where, with various devices of pruning 
and grafting, constant care of nailing down one, 
and cutting another, acquaintanceship is some- 
limes brought to an artificial perfection. 

But though the style of society in which they 
ihen lived, prevented Matilda from feeUng any 



196 MATILDA. 

impropriety in the mere act of daily seeing Lord 
Ormsby, yet there were some circumstances 
which gradually opened her eyes, as to the pru- 
dence of such habitual indulgence. Involunta- 
rily, she found herself most frequently practising 
those pieces of music which he had most ad- 
mired; till, whilst she herself thought that she 
sung nothing else so ill, every indifferent indivi- 
dual observed how much the most perfect in 
them appeared both her taste and execution. 
Unintentionally too, she found herself copying 
over and over again, in miniature, a favourite 
picture of his; still thinking that she had never 
3^et hit the expression, though her table was 
covered over with accurate fac-similes of it. 

I have said, that, in Matilda's education, the 
influence of fixed principles upon conduct had 
never been inculcated. She was the creature of 
impulse, and of feeling, guided only by an 
innate sense of right, and protected by the most 
sensitive feminine delicacy. She now felt dissa- 
tisfied with herself, though utterly unconscious 
of any thing incorrect, even in thought. 

In the mean time, the intimacy was constantly 
encouraged by Sir James, who was flattered by 
shewing off, as he thought in his train, so dis- 



MATILDA. 197 

tinguished an individual as Lord Orrasby. Be- 
sides which, he never lost sight of the solid 
advantages he thought might be derived in his 
own county, from maintaining the connexion. 

Still Matilda became anxious to move ; and 
as the autumnal stream of babbling English was 
flowing South, the Baronet willingly consented 
to proceed to Rome. 

Who shall attempt to analyse the sensations 
excited by Rome— unique and unaccountable as 
they are — felt even by him most disposed to 
laugh at the hyperbolical enthusiasm of the clas- 
sical pedant ? — Rome is still Rome. Though 
Cardinals are not Consuls, and the last dying 
embers of spiritual despotism are smouldering on 
those hearths where were kindled the first sparks 
of civil liberty, — still is it the Eternal City. And 
why ? — Why should those monuments of the 
olden time, seen here, cause an impression felt 
no where else ? — Local situation cannot cause it. 
Ruins are most impressive when abstracted and 
isolated ; whereas here they are defiled with all 
the daily filth of incongruous inhabitancy. — It is 
not mental association ; — for what are, or were, 
in point of fact, the objects of our admiration ? 
The Cohseum, that stupendous undertaking, 



198 MATILDA. 

for the mere gratification of savage cruelty, and 
brutal barbarism ; — Temples, those favoured 
abodes of ignorance and idolatry ; — ^and Baths, 
the works of men only known for mental imbe- 
cility, or moral depravity, who have thus immor- 
talized themselves by these monuments of their 
physical indulgences. 

But he who should argue by the hour to prove 
absurd the feeling excited by Rome, would not 
be able to defend himself from full participation 
in it, if, in the middle of his argument, he 
caught the fii*st glimpse of the dome of Saint 
Peter's. 

With so contradictory and inconsistent an 
animal as man, the very incongruities I have 
mentioned, do but increase the excitement, and 
heighten the effect. There is nothing like unto 
Rome after all. Even to those who have no che- 
rished recollections of its former state — to whom 
the first page of the Latin Grammar is beyond 
their ultima Thule of classic lore — to those 
whose only pursuit is amusement — Rome pos- 
sesses peculiar attractions. In the morning, it 
is pleasanter far to feast one's eyes on the 
choicest collections of the beau ideal, left in the 
immortal galleries of genius, than to sit in a club- 



MATILDA. 199 

room, spelling over the dull realities of the day. 
At nio-ht, it is sweeter far to see the silver moon, 
with her uncertain light, partially illumining the 
beautifully broken outlines of the CoHseum, 
than to catch the angular glare of painted lamps, 
through the dense and dizzying vapours of Vaux- 
hall. — The eye can no more hesitate in its choice, 
than can the ear between the marrow-bones and 
cleavers of London, and the vespers of Saint 
Peter"'s. 

But, of all the delights of Rome, that which 
afterwards leaves the most cherished recollection 
is the genial glow which climate, or some other 
indefinable cause, here throws over society. 
Here cold reserve melts away, political preju- 
dices are softened, all the kindher feelings are 
cultivated, and intimacy spontaneously ripens. 

This was delightful to Matilda, who was pecu- 
liarly formed to be the ornament of a select 
circle. — Since her marriage, with the exception 
of the short sejour at IVIilan and Geneva, she 
had only alternately exchanged the vortex of 
London, for the cheerless languor of an unso- 
cial domestic mtnage. Here, however, she 
found herself surrounded by admiring compa- 
nions, who were free alike from the two extremes 



200 MATILDA. 

of inactive ennui, or restless care, which hold 
divided empire over London society. Here 
were principally found persons of cultivated 
minds, who seemed united upon the principle of 
avoiding every topic which could be subject of 
annoyance to themselves, or each other ; and 
who, skimming ever the surface of life alone, 
found every where around them subjects of inte- 
rest, which their refined taste enabled them fully 
to appreciate. 

In such a society, the arrival of so gifted an 
individual as Lady Matilda Dornton, could 
not be viewed with indifference ; and her house 
soon became the never-failing point of attraction 
for the evening coterie ; though this preference 
was put to a severe test for Anglo-Romans, by Sir 
James, whose dignity required a larger mansion 
than could be found in the immediatevicinity of the 
Piazza di Spagna, which is the English quarter 
at Rome. He therefore had taken a large Palaz- 
zo in a distant part of the town ; and hither the 
elite of English society nightly migrated, to 
pay their adoration at the shrine of their new 
divinity. 

Nightly was Matilda's salon filled with all 
that was most distinguished then in Rome ; not, 



MATILDA. 201 

as at a London rout, stuffed and choaked like 
an overgrown American forest, but more like a 
pleasure ground, where the most favoured pro- 
ductions of every climate were carefully disposed 
to the greatest advantage. 

One, however, there was constantly there, as 
a matter of course, whom Matilda could well 
have spared. The reader may recollect a certain 
Mrs. Mechlin, who was mentioned as a constant 
inmate at the late Lord WakefiekFs, and who 
had been mainly instrumental in promoting the 
marriage between Lady Matilda and Sir James ; 
to effect which, she had not been very scrupulous 
in her assertions with regard to Lord Ormsby. 
Recent circumstances having given Matilda more 
accurate insight into the real state of the case 
upon that subject, it is not to be supposed that 
slie felt very grateful to Mrs. Mechlin for her 
conduct upon that occasion. But still she had 
known Matilda from childhood. She miglit, too, 
have been mistaken herself, in what she had 
positively asserted. She was also supposed to 
be very much straitened in her circumstances. 
All this induced the kind heart of our heroine, 
to give her, upon her unexpected arrival at 
k5 



202 matildj\» 

Rome, a much warmer welcome than she de- 
served. 

Mrs. Mechlin had undertaken the journey,, 
determined that the absence of Matilda from 
England should not be the means of depriving 
her, for a whole year, of all the advantages in 
society, which she meant to appropriate to 
herself, from the splendid marriage, of which 
she considered herself in a great part the 
authoress. How she had contrived to effect so 
long and expensive a journey, remained a 
mystery ; as it was well known that it was only 
by extraordinary expedients, and by annual 
dependent visits for ten months out of every 
twelve, that she contrived to keep up appearances 
in London for the other two. In fact, she was 
obliged to connect the end of one June to the 
beginning of the next May, with a long string 
of country cousins, in order to make both ends 
meet. She therefore rather suggested, than 
accepted the offer, of making the Dorntons' 
palazzo her home, during her stay in Rome. 

Sir James, who was always open to flattery, 
was easily taken with her winning ways, and 
die soon became an immense favourite with him : 



MATILDA. 203 

the advantages of which favour she knew full 
well how to turn to the best account. Matilda, 
on her part, certainly did not renew the intimacy 
with her former friend, with exactly the feelings 
towards her, which in early youth she had enter- 
tained. She was, it is true, almost angry with 
herself for distrusting her ; but though Mrs. 
Mechlin was always particularly observant of 
all the outward appearances of propriety, still 
now that Matilda had acquired more knowledge 
of the world than she had then possessed, she 
could not help having her doubts as to the cor- 
rectness of the conduct of her somewhat passee, 
but still showy-looking friend. Nor, indeed, 
upon reflecting on several circumstances which 
had made little impression at the time, could 
she think that her intimacy with Lord Wake- 
field had been entirely above suspicion. 

Still the fascinating manners, and easy lively con- 
versation of Mrs. Mechlin, made her by no means 
an unwelcome addition to any small society. 

One evening, about a fortnight after the 
Dorntons had established tliemselves in their 
palazzo, the usual self-invited inmates had made 
up the evening party ; for " circle" I will not 
call it, as that implies form, all of which was 



204! MATILDA. 

absent. It was a constellation of beauty and 
talent, where shone many a social star, brilliant 
in its own sphere, yet gladly revolving round 
our heroine, when within the orb of her superior 
attraction. Here too, were mingled, in easy, and 
even friendly conversation, the banished Con- 
stitutionalist from Cadiz, and the willing slave 
from the Crimea, — all alike anxious to forg-et 
every thing that was distant and disagreeable, in 
the pleasure that was present. 

On a fauteuil, drawn close to the sofa, where 
were seated Matilda and Mrs. Mechlin, was 
posted our friend Colonel Canteen, the male 
gossip of Geneva, who had arrived the day 
before. One of the first subjects of conversation 
he chose, was, " I wonder, Lady Matilda, what 
has become of Ormsby ? I have not seen any 
thing of him since his apparition at Geneva. To 
be sure, I have not been in the way of knowing 
much, for I came via Genoa and Florence; and 
Tynte chose to delay us a fortnight at Lerici, 
))y catching a fever in sketching the Bay. I 
was, indeed, most properly bored there, though 
I must say the fish in the Gulf of La Spezzia 
is quite particular. But v;here Ormsby has 
hid himself ail this time, I can't conceive." 



MATILDA. 205 

" We saw Lord Ormsby frequently at Milan,*' 
said Matilda. 

" Well — I wish he would drop in upon us 
here some of these days,'' said the Colonel, " and 
give us the light of his countenance in not quite 
such a Will-o'-the-Wisp style as he did at 
Geneva." 

" I can't say I think," said Mrs. Mechlin, 
^* that Lord Ormsby would be any improvement 
to our party. He is no great favourite of mine. 
His whole life has been too much in the Will-o'- 
the-Wisp style, as you are pleased to call it. He 
once huno; out his deceitful lio-hts on much too 
serious an occasion," looking attentively at Ma- 
tilda as she spoke. " I don't soon forgive those 
who wrong my friends. I should be very sorry 
to see him." 

Hardly had Mrs. Mechlin concluded, when 
the door opened, and the Roman Servitore di 
Piazza having attempted something which he 
meant for an English name, but which might as 
well have been wild Indian, the object of the late 
conversation himself entered. 

Matilda advanced to meet him, not with in- 
difference certainly, not perhaps without a strag- 
gle with inward emotion, but with little apparent 



S06 MATILDA, 

embarrassment of manner. The usual inquiries 
produced the necessary replies, that he had 
arrived that afternoon, had inquired her resi- 
dence, and hastened to pay his respects; any 
further conversation between them, which might 
have been rendered awkward by the eyes of all 
being inquiringly directed towards the stranger, 
was for the moment interrupted by Mrs. MechHn, 
with her sweetest smile ; — - 

" Dear Lord Ormsby, I am delighted to see 
you ! what a time it i& since we met ! I am so 
glad to see 3^0 u again."" 

Nor was this warmth entirely assumed, though 
so completely at variance with the sentiments we 
have just heard her utter. It was, as she said, 
long since they had met, and she could not help 
at once feeling that he was looking uncommonly 
handsome ; and any woman who, like Mrs. 
Mechlin, retained all her former greedy appetite 
for admiration, mth an increasing fear that she 
might soon be put on short commons in that par- 
ticular, must be naturally eager to assert an early 
claim to a share of the fresh food for conquest 
that had just arrived. 

Matilda's manner towards Ormsby during the 
rest of the evening was in no respect sufficiently 



MATILDA. SOT 

marked to be observable by indifferent spectators, 
but was felt by him to be studiously colder, and 
more constrained, than it would have been to a 
common acquaintance, who had in the same man- 
ner unexpectedly arrived. This forced reserve, — 
the most truly feminine, and at the same time 
the most unequivocal, if not the most obtrusive 
mark of increasing interest, more especially where 
a sense of duty is struggling with irresistible im- 
pulse, is, it is strange to say, almost always mis- 
construed by the man who is the object of it ; and 
suph was the mistaken impression received by 
Ormsby, who left Matilda that evening, with the 
conviction that he was avoided from indifference, 
and half muttering between his teeth something 
about " cold unfeeling coquette," as, with a vague 
indefinite feeling of universal jealousy, he recalled 
the unmeaning smile of one man, the affected 
hand-shaking of a second, the studied compli- 
ment of a third, and the evident admiration of 
all. 



CHAPTER XIX, 



After passing a sleepless night, in ingeniously 
tormenting himself with the idea that Matilda 
had too plainly shewn by her manner that she 
never wished to see him again, Ormsby, never- 
theless, rose sooner than if he had slept soundly ; 
and, earlier than even a certain -welcome would 
have justified a morning visit, he found himself 
tlireading the somewhat intricate streets which 
separated his lodging in the Piazza di Spagna 
from the palazzo, which latter, as we have before 
s-tated, w^as in a distant part of the town. 

Utterly unconscious of whom he met, or what 
he saw, he had almost arrived at his journey's 
end, when he was suddenly stopped by Sir James 
Dornton, who was sallying forth thus early on 
business. 

" Delighted to see you, my dear Lord,"" he 
l>egan ; " very good of you to do me the honour 
of a call last night, — very sorry that I happened to 
have gone to tlie opera with Baron Joulterdolt the 



MATILDA. 209 

Hanoverian. I have several things I wished to talk 
to your Lordship about. Perhaps you would have 
no objection just to step this way. I was going 
to the gunsmith's close by for a minute." Lord 
Ormsby hesitated a moment. — This was not at 
all the sort of expedition which had induced him 
to come out so early ; and he began an excuse, 
" Why, I was just intending,"-— when a certain 
inward consciousness prevented his owning to 
Sir James that he had been meditating a visit to 
Matilda. He therefore turned to accompany the 
Baronet. 

Upon what trivial, and apparently inconse- 
quent circumstances do the most important 
events sometimes seem to have depended ! The 
heedless choice between two indifferent alterna^ 
tions, seems afterwards to have determined the 
fate of Ormsby and Matilda. 

Sir James was one of those, who, upon setting 
out on a tour of Italy, had thought it necessary 
to provide himself with a pair of Manton's hair- 
trigger pistols, calculated to take the most infal- 
lible aim at the most minute mark, as an appro- 
priate defence against a whole population of 
brigands, who, if they attack at all, always pop 
at you on all sides from behind stone walls, 



SIO MATILDA. 

without ever shewing themselves. However, Sir 
James felt quite safe with his pocket protectors ; 
and, one being a little out of order, he had been 
very uneasy till it shduld be mended. He had 
therefore himself taken them to a neighbouring 
gunsmith and sword maker, who had the reputa- 
tion of also furnishing arms to his enemies, the 
brigands, upon a much more wholesale scale; 
though this of course was unknown to the 
Baronet. 

Sir James was pretty well versed in that patois 
of good society in England, which is called French ; 
but of Italian he knew not one syllable, and 
seemed perfectly satisfied with his ignorance. It is 
not tlierefore to be wondered at that this circum- 
stance, joined to a natural confusion in the mode 
of expressing himself, rendered the directions with 
which he had left his pistols perfectly unintelli- 
gible to the Roman shopkeeper. But as there 
is nothing to which an Italian will not assent for 
the sake of a job, he had received all Sir James's 
incomprehensible orders with an " Jh i capisco 
bene, eccellenza — nonpense — si Signore — non c' I 
duhhio^' ^c. Accordingly, the pistols had been 
left there in perfect security that all that was 
wanted would be done ; and to reclaim them was 



MATILDA. 211 

the object of the present visit. At the com- 
mencement of the scene which ensued, Lord 
Ormsby remained at the outer door, with his 
back to the shop, his eyes unconsciously fixed on 
the only corner of the palazzo which was \asible 
from thence ; his thoughts wandering still fur- 
ther from what was passing around him. He 
was therefore no witness to Sir James's indigna- 
tion, when the shopkeeper, with a self-satisfied 
'' Eccole;'' presented him with what had been 
his pistols, now hardly to be recognised ; — the 
unrivalled beauties of Manton's best workman- 
ship having been contaminated by a forced mes- 
alliance with the Roman's own clumsy handi- 
craft. 

After Sir James had vented his complaints in 
mingled French and Enghsh execrations, all of 
which the Italian bore with imperturbable com,- 
placency (a calmness probably induced by the 
certain expectation of the concluding question of 
his customer), in despair he was at length 
obliged to inquire, " Combienf This was pro- 
bably the only word of French of which the 
shopkeeper had an intuitive knowledge ; and he 
immediately replied, with characteristic impu- 



S12 MATILDA. 

dence, " Ah, come viiole — niente — solamente dud 
scudi.''^ 

" What the Devil !" said Sir James, in irre- 
strainabie EngUsh. 

" Dieci,''^ repeated the Italian, holding up all 
the fingers of both hands in pantomimic expla- 
nation. 

Sir James, who, from the increasing difficulty 
of communication, began to think " action much 
better than speech,*" now seized hold of one of 
the pistols, by way of having possession on his 
Bide of the dispute. 

^^ Ah! questi no,'*'' said the Itahan, retaining 
the butt end in his grasp. 

Sir James's temper, which was none of the 
most enduring, was completely overset by this 
resistance, and having got undisputed hold of the 
other pistol, he dealt a stunning blow with the 
butt end on the skull of his antagonist. This 
rash act attracted the attention of another party, 
a w^ild-looking savage mountaineer, a brother of 
the shopkeeper, who had hitherto remained in 
the back of the hottega, occupied most inoppor- 
tunely in polishing and sharpening a couriers 
couteau d^ chasse, whicli had been left for that 



MATILDA. 21S 

purpose. He was one of those " Children of the 
Sun, with whom revenge is virtue ;'■* and here 
was a case in which the indulgence of that pas- 
sion was more the effect of spirit-boiling tempera- 
ment, of veins effervescent of liquid fire, than the 
cold-blooded and calculating instance given by 
the dramatist, whose sentence I quoted. 

The first object that caught Lord Ormsby's 
glance, when, roused by the noise, he turned 
suddenly round, was this infuriated being, in the 
jict of rushiqg forward, — the deadly weapon in 
his hand, as, newly polished, it glittered in the 
sun, but yielded in brilliancy to the flash of his 
fiery eye. Already had he seized his victim, and 
a single second v/ould have closed for ever Sir 
James's earthly career, when the arm which was 
in the act of descending was suddenly checked 
with a strong shock, and fell powerless beneatk 
Ormsby's vigorous grasp. 

The ruffian immediately closed with his new 
antagonist ; and, as Ormsby was collecting his 
strength to hurl him indignantly away, the assassia 
changed his hand, shortened his hold of the wea- 
pon, and twice stabbed him in the side. Our 
hero grasped him convulsively for a moment, and 
then as involuntarily relaxing his hold, tottered 



S14 MATILDA. 

and fell without a groan on the floor, which was 
soon flooded with his blood. 

Whilst the first impulse of Sir James was of 
course to rush towards Lord Ormsby, the ruffian 
took advantage of that opportunity to escape. 

Our hero's case seemed desperate. From a 
faint struggle at respiration it was evident that 
he still breathed ; but it seemed impossible but 
that life must issue in the stream which continued 
to flow in torrents from his wounds. At this 
moment the courier, whose knife had been used 
as the murderous instrument, happened to enter 
the shop to reclaim it, and being recognised by 
Sir James as our friend Pierre, he was eagerly 
applied to for assistance by the Baronet ; whose 
presence of mind had completely abandoned him 
in this sudden crisis. 

Pierre possessing that sort of smattering of 
surgery which many of his profession have, suc- 
ceeded to a certain degree in staunching for a 
moment the wounds ; when he suggested the pro- 
priety of removing him if possible at once, and 
even before the arrival of the surgeon. To 
carry him home to the Piazza di Spagna was 
impossible, from the distance. " To my house, 
to my house next door," said Sir James ; and 



MATILDA. ^1$ 

leaving the courier to superintend the removal, 
he determined at once to set off to the police to 
give the information that might be necessary for 
the apprehension of the culprit, without its ever 
occurring to him, that it might be as well first 
to prepare Lady Matilda for the unexpected 
shock of seeing a dying man brought to her 
house. 

Matilda had risen that morning, internally 
satisfied with her own conduct, yet in spite of 
herself gratified at the certainty of seeing Ormsby. 
NotAvith standing all her cause for care, her natu- 
ral buoyancy of spirit played upon her sunshiny 
countenance, as she lightly bounded down one 
of two parallel flights of the marble stairs, which, 
divided by a wall, led from her apartments to 
the court below. At that moment the melan- 
choly procession, headed by Pierre, was ascend- 
ing the lower flight, with their apparently lifeless 
burthen ; and on reaching the central landing- 
place, such was the heart-rending revulsive shock 
Matilda was fated to receive. 

No words can describe the peculiar and pro- 
tracted sound of her agonizing scream. Even 
the base rabble who assisted in bearing the body, 
groaned in sympathy as they felt it thrill through 



S16 MATILDA. 

their veins. It had the power, too, — (far beyond 
the utmost effort of surgical skill, or physical art,) 
to dispel for a moment the death-like lethargy of 
its bleeding object. His livid lips faintly qui- 
vered, and for an instant he half unclosed hi* 
glassy eye, as Matilda sunk senseless by his 
side. 

When the surgeon who had been sent for had 
dressed Lord Ormsby's wounds, and went to 
Matilda to intimate that all hope was not 
completely lost, he found her gradually recover- 
ing the shock she had received ; but there was 
still such a wildness in her manner, as she reso- 
lutely demanded to see his patient, that, as Sir 
James was not at home, and there was nobodf 
who had any right to controul her, the medical 
man did not feel himself authorised to refuse. 

Upon entering the apartment, taking Ormby's 
cold and clammy hand within hers, and fixedly 
gazing on his motionless features, she resisted all 
attempts at removal, with an unvarying repeti- 
tion of " No, no, not yet :"* so that upon the re- 
vival of nature^s efforts, when he shewed signs of 
returning animation, his eyes first opened on that 
loved form whose beauteous grief betrayed aii. 
intensity of interest, the inestimable knowledge 



MATILDA. 217 

of which he felt cheaply purchased at the price he 
was then paying for it. 

Whether in virtue of this " medicine for a 
mind diseased," or his natural strength of bodily 
constitution, the surgeon before he left him made 
an unexpectedly favourable report ; upon re- 
ceiving which, all Matilda's sense of propriety 
returned; she consigned the care of him to a more 
appropriate nurse ; and had retired from the 
room before her husband came home from his 
long and unsatisfactory search after justice. 



sm 



CHAPTER XX. 



We have of late, gentle reader, rather dropped 
tlie acquaintance of the Hobson family. But 
though it would be hard to expect, now that you 
a^e better acquainted with their characters, that 
you should submit to continuing on an intimate 
footing with them, yet they are too nearly con- 
nected with one, in whose fate I am particularly 
anxious that you should be interested, for me to 
allow you altogether to cut them. 

On the morning in which you were first made 
acquainted with their arrival in Rome, by the 
interference of their courier Pierre, in the gun- 
smith's shop, the female m-embers of the Hob- 
son family were, as usual, assembled in rather 
a dark, dingy-looking salo?ie of an old-fashioned 
palazzo, — armed with netting-needles, paper, 
cutting scissars, tambour-frames, and sundry 
other ancient and primitive weapons, generally^ 
employed in all amazonian attempts to kill time. 
But old Father Time made a very good fight of 



MATILDA. SI 9 

it "v^ith them ; and they had already shewn, by 
sundry yawns, how much, in spite of all their 
efforts, they felt his power, when they were 
relieved by the arrival of two auxiharies, who 
had of late freciuently been very useful in ena- 
bling them to get the better of a troublesome 
half hour or two. — These were our Milan 
acquaintances, the Rev. Mr. Simperton, and 
his pupil, young Squire Woodhead. Mr. Sim- 
perton, as has been hinted before, was very 
anxious to cultivate the intimacy cf the Hobson 
family ; which fact must now be explained to 
have arisen from its having occurred to him that 
a wife with twenty thousand pounds, would be 
a very pretty addition to his present income, 
arising from a small college living, the tithes of 
which he considered as quite inadequate, even to 
wash his surplice and buy his sermon. This 
gilding of the matrimonial pill, reconciled him 
to swallowing even such a bouncing bolus as 
Miss Betty Hobson. 

But could he also persuade his pupil to pay 
due homage to the charms of the younger sister, 
Miss Anne, what prospects might then be open 
to him ! — In meditating on this, indistinct vi- 
sions floated before his eyes, in which were 



S20 MATILDA. 

traced the festive board at Woodhead Hall, at the 
bottom of which, he was himself bending over a 
well-filled tureen, with a bottle of iced cham^ 
pagne at his right hand. Then he saw himself 
on a picked hunter, in the hunt uniform, of a 
clerical colour, and the buttons cut in horn. 
Mere remotely, but still contingent on the con- 
nexion, he thought he felt his buck-skin breeches 
covered with a short black apron, and his thin 
waving locks concealed under a snug bush wig. 

With such anticipations, it is not to be won- 
dered at, that, on their way to the Hobsons 
that morning, he had exerted all his eloquence 
to persuade his docile pupil, that he ought to 
(what is called) pop the question to Miss Anne 
Hobson. He had reason to think, too, that his 
success had been complete; and indeed, so far 
as a complete acquiescence on the part of his 
docile pupil, in the propriety of his immediately 
making his proposals, so it had. But this was 
easier said than done ; or rather, it was easier 
thought than said ; for Mr. Woodhead had the 
misfortune to be a very shy man ; and though 
there was nothing very appalling in the appear- 
.ance of Miss Anne Hobson, yet there is a certain 
gtrtificial awe, with which even the boldest of 



MATILDA. 221 

men, for the time, regard her whom they are 
about to invest with the power of refusing them. 

Circumstances were, however, rather favour- 
able to the recovery of Mr. Woodhead's self- 
possession. Mrs. Hobson was generally the 
most desosuvree of the party ; as, after the bustle 
of travelhng had subsided, she found much 
fewer congenial occupations at Rome than at Man- 
chester, and had already begun inflicting upon her 
family her daily dose of habitual wonderment 
about trifles ; — " I wonder why it never snows 
here !" " I wonder when the Pope will die !"* *' I 
wonder where the letters are !" 

This species of unimportant admiration, furnish- 
ing very constant employment to those who have 
little either to do or to think about, had at length 
left Mrs. Hobson nothing else to wonder about, 
but where Mr. Hobson could he? She had 
accordingly quitted the room to investigate that 
important matter, and Mr. Simperton had been 
received by Miss Hobson, with that pretty play- 
ful petulance, which is traditional among all 
boarding-school Misses, as the proper purgatory 
with which they ought to torment an anxious 
admirer. This he had submitted to with the 
prescri])ed patience of an humble suitor, and to 



U2^ MATILDA. 

such unfounded attacks as — " Indeed, I don't 
know whether I ought to speak to you at all, 
when you cut me dead at Duchess Torionia's 
last night. I saw you, Sir, Philandering 
away."' 

In vain, for some time, did the Reverend Phi- 
lander protest against so unfounded an imputa- 
tion, till the young lady, thinking that she had 
tormented him the legitimate length of time, 
according to the most recent marhle-covered 
maxims of the Minerva press, he was again 
reinstated in favour, and they retired to the 
Avindow, where they leant out, in conversation, 
leaving Mr. Woodhead to vent his feehngs, per- 
fectly unrestrained by interruption. But it was 
in vain that the latter gentleman attempted to 
begin ; nor did Miss Anne, who was, notoriously, 
the silent one of the family, at all assist his 
embarrassment. He sat on the edge of the 
sofa, looking out of the corners of his heavy, 
lack-lustre eyes, at the monotonous movements 
of his mistress's netting-needle; till, at length, 
from behind a well -rolled pocket-handkerchief, 
which he had stuffed almost into the cavity of his 
open mouth, he mumbled, " It is very warm. 
Miss Anne." 



MATILITA. ^SS 

*' Very," — sharply retorted the young lady. 

*' It is warmer here than in Cheshire,*" after a 
pause, he resumed. 

" Is it .?" said she. 

" You never were in Cheshire, were you P'' 
inquired the lover. 

" Stockport'^s Cheshire, Sir ?"" said Miss Anne. 

" Oh ! but that's not like my Cheshire," said 
the young gentleman, with more animation. — 
** Now, I wish — I should be very glad — I should 
like very much — I — if — " 

This sounded a little like coming to the point, 
though Cheshire did not seem the obvious short- 
cut to it. But, as yet. Miss Anne was fated to 
continue in ignorance as to " what he wished — 
what he should be very glad of — what he should 
like very much ;" — for, at this interesting nio- 
ment, the squire was interrupted by the entrance 
of Tom Hobson, evidently in great tribulation. 

" Here's a rare go ! By Jingo, this is a pretty 
country to live in V 

" What's the matter?'' said the couple on the 
sofa. — " What's the matter?" — echoed the couple 
from the window. 

" IVIatter ! — blow me tight ! — why weVe all 
going to be murdered; and half of us are already." 



^M MATILDA. 

At this awful announcement, the ladies gave 
something between a squeak and a scream ; and 
the gentlemen asking for further information, 
Tom continued, — " Why, Lord Ormsby and 
uncle Dornton have been attacked by banditti in 
disguise, here in the very town; and they've 
settled my Lord's job for him ; and uncle's very 
bad indeed; and if Pierre had not killed two 
with his own hand (I saw his knife all bloody,) 
they were going to have murdered all the Eng- 
lish they could find." 

" But is any body really dead ?" said Simper- 
ton, who thought that he could detect something 
like exaggeration in Tom's confused account. 

" Oh ! yes ; I'm sure Lord Ormsby 's dead ; 
for I joined some gentlemen that were talking 
about it ; and Sir George Dowercourt, that used 
to ride about with my Lord, at Milan, was saying 
how the barony and the estates all went to Miss 
Arlingford ; and what a great catch she would 
be." 

This interruption of Woodhead's tete-a-tete, 
as may be expected, put to flight the few scattered 
ideas that it had cost him such pains to collect ; 
and postponed, for the present, his proposals to 
Miss Anne Hobson. 



MATILDA. S25 

It will suffice to inform the reader, without 
detaining him longer in their society, that, a very 
few days afterwards, these proposals were brought 
to a successful issue. The locale, at length 
chosen by Woodhead, was a singular one. It 
was in that octagon closet of the Vatican, appro- 
priated to the Apollo Belvidere, that the Squire 
told his tale of love, in strains which certainly 
shewed no symptoms of having been inspired by 
the divine influence of the presence of the god of 
poetry ; and there, whilst averting her eyes from 
that master-piece of manly beauty. Miss Anne 
Hobson cast a tender assenting leer on the 
clumsy, cart-horse carcase of her future husband. 
A few days afterwards, the Rev. Mr. Simperton, 
with a proper Protestant disregard of the Popish 
mummery around him, took the opportunity of 
the Vespers of Saint Peter's, to offer his vows at 
the shrine of Miss Betty Hobson ; which, being 
most graciously received, the double union was 
arranged to his heart's content. 



l5 



2£6 



CHAPTER XXI. 

For many days, Lord Ormsby"'s condition 
continued to be one of extreme danger. — The 
struggle was long and doubtful, between an ex- 
cellent constitution, and wounds which in most 
cases would have been decidedly fatal. 

It was also no small aggravation to Matilda's 
misery under this protracted suspense, that she 
was doomed every day after dinner to hear her 
husband and Mrs. Mechlin discussing, with the 
utmost sang f void, the chance of his ultimate 
recovery ; — Sir James illustrating with scraps of 
superficial medical science his ov/n opinion, that 
nothing but a miracle could save him ; — and Mrs. 
Mechlin carrying her speculations still farther into 
futurity, by wondering, if he died, who would 
marry Miss Arlingford, and regretting that Lady 
Ormsby was not exactly the mother calculated to 
shew her off to the best advantage. 

Upon the first day after the dreadful event, 
an express had been sent off for Lady Ormi?by 



MATILDA. 2^7 

and Emily, who were still at Geneva, having 
been detained there by the opinion of Lady 
Ormsby's physicians, that the air of Italy, par- 
ticularly in the summer, would be very injurious 
to her health, though Httle doubt was entertained 
that, immediately on the receipt of this intelli- 
gence, they would hasten to watch over the fate 
of their beloved Augustus. Distance, however, 
interposed an unavoidable delay; and, in the 
mean time, the patient's case had taken a favour- 
able turn ; and though dreadfully w^eakened, and 
presenting but the shadow of the fine manly 
form which so lately shone conspicuous, in all 
the pride and plenitude of 3-outh and health, yet 
he was now able to be moved on a sofa into the 
next apartment, which happened to be the one 
previously used as jMatiida's morning room. 

Sir James had by this time begun to be rather 
bored by staying so much at home as he had 
thought it right to do during the period of 
Ormsby's extreme danger ; and he now became 
impatient to continue the regular routine of sighi- 
seeing, which had been interrupted ; and in this 
desire he was warmly seconded by Mrs. Mechlin, 
who was constantly rising in favour with him, as 
^e continued to administer daily increas'mg doses 



228 MATILDA. 

of flattery, in a shape more undisguised than she 
would at first have ventured upon, till she had 
well ascertained how little fastidious his taste was 
for any thing in that line. 

As Sir James could not but be aware, that 
leaving Lord Ormsby entirely alone, in his pre- 
sent state, would be the height of inhospitahty, 
and, under the circumstances of the case — of in- 
gratitude, the expedient that naturally occurred 
to him and his female friend was, that Matilda 
should remain at home with him. — This at first 
our heroine opposed, from a feeling that it might 
appear odd in the eyes of the world, and that it 
certainly was incorrect in itself ; yet, at length, 
a little piqued by her former friend, Mrs. Mechlin, 
in the sweetest manner, but at the same time 
pretty plainly giving her to understand, that 
they could do just as well without her ; and not 
a little touched by Ormsby's helpless condition, 
she became involuntarily engaged in the daily 
exercise of all tlie endearing offices and tender 
attentions of a kind-hearted female, towards one 
whom, she discovered to her cost, sickness and 
suffering had only invested with a stronger in- 
terest, and rendered more than ever dangerous. 

This liad continued for some days, when Lady 



MATILDA. 229 

Ormsby and Emily arrived, long after the dreaded 
crisis was happily past, and when our hero was 
slowly but certainly recovering ; having travelled 
as quickly as the distance allowed, and much 
more expeditiously than the state of Lady 
Ormsby's health rendered at all prudent. 

When relieved from the painful suspense in 
which she had been absorbed on the journey, she 
felt severely for some days the effect of over- 
exertion ; and during that time, of course, 
Ormsby was not deprived of the attendance of 
his former nurse. But when Lady Ormsby was 
again restored by rest and ease of mind, she 
became anxious that Emily should make the 
most of the short time that she remained in 
Rome, to see all those sights which she might 
not for a long while have another opportunity of 
visiting, as the physicians were unanimous in 
opinion that she must herself leave Rome, and 
travel northwards before the warm weather set 
in. However attractive, therefore, Matilda's 
daily attendance had now become to her, she 
could no longer avoid abandoning it in a great 
degree to Lady Ormsby's more appropriate care, 
in order that she might herself accompany her 
young friend Emily in her morning rambles. 



£30 MATILDA. 

But though, on this account, much which 
•would ctlierwise have carried conviction to Lady 
Ormshy's mind, as to the dangerous growth of 
improper feelings between her son and Matilda, 
was concealed from her observation, yet there 
was still enough, particularly in Ormsby's man- 
ner, to alarm her anxious and affectionate mind 
on the subject. This will be best explained by 
mentioning the substance of a conversation, 
which she introduced with Matilda on the eve of 
her own departure from Rome, which departure 
she was at length most reluctantly compelled no 
longer to postpone, as she felt that tlie increasing 
heat of the weather was bringing on a return of 
her old complaint ; and she knew that her life 
was too precious to her daughter Emily to justify 
any hesitation in taking all proper precautions for 
its prolongation. 

It was tliat period of the afternoon, when 
Ormsby's still protracted debility rendered a 
short repose daily necessary. Emily had been 
induced to accompany some friends for the last 
time to Saint Peter's ; whilst Lady Ormsby 
and Matilda were left alone together. Lady 
Ormsby had dropped her work, and was looking 
at IMatilda with an expression of intense interest » 



MATILDA. SSI 

^hich at length excited our heroine''s attentioi), 
who, tenderly kissing her respected friend's 
anxiously contracted brow, said, '* Dear Lady 
Ormsby, why look so piteously on me ? re- 
proachfully I had almost said, only that I feel 
I have done nothing to deserve it ; and I am 
sure that reproach undeserved never escapes 
even in look from you.'' 

" In those,-' said Lady Ormsby, " who feel 
a mother's care, without a mother's privilege, 
the eye will sometimes hint a fear, when the 
tongue dares not express a warning." 

" Now I am sure," said Matilda, " that 
though unconsciously, I have done something 
wrong, something, I am afraid, to prevent your 
loving me as you once did, or you would not 
liesitate to tell me of it ; for all the good I ever 
learnt (little enough, alas !) came from you." 

" My own Matikla, never can I love you 
less ; nor can my only daughter ever be dearer 
to me. The subject at which I hinted, and all 
the difficulties and delicacies of which for your 
sake I will brave, is one which to me more than 
any other person in the world is most difficult — 
most delicate. True, I was formerly your only 
monitress; and you still retain too grateful a 



232 MATILDA. 

recollection of my early services in that respect : 
for though I have nothing to reproach myself 
with in the principles I then inculcated, yet was 
I much to blame in some of the indulgences I 
then allowed in practice. I did it for the best ; 
but, unconsciously, selfishness was, perhaps, at 
the bottom of my conduct. It was the darling 
wish of my heart, that in my declining years I 
might see two beings, almost equally dear to 
me, and who appeared formed for each other^ 
happily united." 

Matilda made no reply, nor even raised her 
fixed and downcast eye; but a few scorching 
tears, which chased each other down her burning 
cheek, — were the silent witnesses how little these 
feelings had been effaced from her heart." 

Without pointedly remarking Matilda's emo- 
tion, I^ady Ormsby affectionately pressed her 
hand, and continued, " In a prudential point of 
view, the encouragement I certainly then gave 
to the first appearance of a partiality, which 
might, as it afterwards has unhappily turned 
out, be the source of misery instead of bhss, was 
open to censure. But it may be some excuse, 
that I had once known the perfection of domestic 
happiness myself. True, the period allowed 



MATILDA. 



me was brief; indeed, I had long felt that my 
own career was closed. Every selfish feeling of 
pleasure was buried with him, for whom alone 
I had Uved. But when I saw in^ Augustus, his 
father's self revived, and in you, dear Matilda, 
tenfold more of personal charm and intellectual 
attractions than I, even in my best days had 
ever possessed, was it to be wondered at, that 
I should anxiously wish to have my old age 
cheered by the reflected happiness of those so 
dear to me ? But why should I refer to those 
times, which are better forgotten, as they can 
never be recalled ?" 

" Oh, no ! — for heaven's sake talk on," said 
Matilda ; "let me, if possible, live them over 
again in thought. They are all of happiness I 
shall ever know." 

"No, my dear child," said Lady Ormsby; 
" it was with very different intentions than to 
revive useless repinings, that I have ventured to 
speak to you on this subject, which, as I said 
before, I do with the greatest difficulty. God 
knows how I love Augustus, and what pain it 
has always given me to thwart him, even in 
trifles. — With what pride, too, could I now 
retail his just praises by the hour ! — I feelj that 



I!34 MATILDA. 

your presence has preserved his life. I also 
feel, that your loss might end it. And yet, I 
am compelled to tell you, that you ought to 
part." 

" Oh ! no, dear Lady Ormsby," said Ma- 
tilda ; " Why must we part ? I am sure, that 
not a word has ever passed between us, that 
you might not yourself have heard — ^not a sen- 
timent you could have disapproved." 

" Ask your heart," said Lady Ormsby, " if 
you may venture so to vouch for its feelings. 
As yet, you are innocent in word and deed ; but 
are you so in thought ? Does not this excessive 
unwillingness to part, itself prove that there is 
one for whom you are indulging a preference 
inconsistent with your duties as a wife." 

*' A wife!" said Matilda; "Yes, I am a 
wife; and all I have suffered, all I ever shall 
suffer, is a just punishment upon one, who, 
having loved Augustus Arhngford, could ever 
marry another. Forgive me, dearest Lady 
Ormsby," said she, checking herself; " it is 
very wrong of me to talk thus. 1 do not mean 
to complain of the consequences of my own 
folly ; but you know not all I endured before I 
could be brought to be false to Augustus — to 



MATILDA, ^5 

myself. — The artful incidental confirmations of 
his pretended fickleness — the offended presence 
of my only relation — the absence of any real 
friend — and the insidious persuasions of one who 
then wore the semblance of friendship, and in 

whom I then implicitly confided : — all these 

but why/' continued she, after a pause, " why 
should I attempt to extenuate my infatuation ? — 
Excuse, indeed, it is worse than none, — that I 
then knew not the real character of him to whom 
1 have tied myself for life ; for, whatever his 
merit might hcivc been, I now feel thai I should 
still have lived to regret a fate, of which the 
blame, as well as misery, must rest with myself." 
" Not entirely," resumed Lady Ormsby ; 
** those who first neglected, and then perverted 
such a charge, have much to answer for. I do 
not underrate the difficulties in which you were 
placed during my unlucky absence from the 
country. I only regret that the choice you inad- 
vertently made, should be one which has increased, 
a hundred fold, those dlfliculties. But why 
dwell on this part of the unhappy subject ? What 
1 am anxious that you should be made aware 
of, and my chief inducement for venturing to 
talk with you on the subject at all, is, that even 



236 MATILDA. 

in such a cheerless lot as yours, there are conso- 
lations to be looked for, in the serene evening of 
life, from higher sources than those of this world. 
I never like to speak of myself ; and it is most 
of all painful to do so on the subject which I am 
now about to mention to you : but I, too, have 
had my trials, though they were very different, 
and, I will own, (which is much for me to do,) 
very inferior to yours. Yet, through them all, 
1 was supported by the strength of early rehgious 
impressions. You must have heard that I was, 
when very young, married to poor Ormsby. 
He was then the gayest of the gay. No man 
more recherche, but no man more libelled. He 
was called a vaurien, — a roue, — and every thing 
that was dissipated and unsteady. You may 
imagine, that my marriage with him was much 
disapproved by all the more serious part of my 
family ; but I had confidence in his affection ; 
was my own mistress ; and consented to become 
his wife. To say that he never gave me unea- 
siness, would be to conceal the truth. Had I 
taken the line that would have been prescribed 
by some over-rigid moralists, I should never 
have possessed any influence over him, and his 
preference would probably have perished with 



MATILDA. ^(^ 

the first transport of his passion. But I entered 
into all his tastes and pursuits, without ever 
neglecting any of my own more serious duties ; 
till I gradually obtained his confidence, and suc- 
ceeded in shewing him, that it was not incom- 
patible to be at once both gay and good. At 
length, upon religious subjects, his mind gra- 
dually assumed a more healthy tone ; and when, 
in the hey-day of happiness, a cruel fever deprived 
me suddenly of his adored presence, I had, at 
least, the consolation of thinking, that, through 
my means, his mind had been as much prepared 
for his untimely end as any of us frail mortals 
can presume to pretend for ourselves, or to hope 
for others. This reflection, which has alone 
supported me through the dreary pilgrimage 
which succeeded to that short allowance of hap- 
piness, I again repeat, I owe to the benefits of an 
early religious education. This advantage was 
denied to you ; and I own, that, when I con- 
sider the peculiar hardships of your married lot, 
Ormsby's impetuous passion, and your too 
tender hearts, I tremble for my children."*^ 

" Oh ! dear Lady Ormsby,'' said Matilda, 
" think not that I can ever do any thing that 
can render me unworthy of you and of Emily.'" 



$S3 MATILDA. 

" My dear affectionate child,'* replied Lady 
Ormsby, " warmly as I feel for you, and sensi^ 
ble as I am that your partiality for us is sincere 
and heartfelt, I should wish that your security 
rested on a.Jirmer basis. It is not the approba- 
tion of any female friend, however valued, that 
can protect you from danger so imminent. That 
protection must be sought from higher sources. 
That your mind may be prepared to receive it, 
will be my constant prayer ; and — " 

The further admonitions of this excellent 
woman were here interrupted by the still feeble 
voice of Ormsby, summoning them to the next 
room, as his usual repose had been shortened by 
his anxiety to see as much as possible of hi$ 
mother, on this her last day ; which anxiety, 
unfortunately, prevented Lady Ormsby from 
having any further opportunity of renewing those 
exhortations, which might have been most useful 
to Matilda ; and, therefore, with a hurried and 
affectionate farewell, and a heart full of too-well- 
founded fears, she was obliged to leave her to 
her fate. 



2S9 



CHAPTER XXIL 



Too truly had Lady Ormsby foreseen the 
gadiering dangers of Matilda's situation. A9 
Ormsby gradually recovered, it was doubly dif- 
ficult to see, unmoved, the reviving lustre of those 
speaking eyes, which seemed brightening only 
to gaze on her, or to hear without emotion the 
swelling tones of that melodious voice, whose 
restored power seemed given but to add to the 
fervour of his impassioned admiration. It was 
hard to turn from this, to the petty peevishness 
of him to whom alone she ought to listen with 
delight, or to the vacant stare of that unmeaning 
face on which alone she ought to look with iove> 
Delightful was the dream in wliich Ormsby 
and Matilda were now indulging, but of which 
they neither looked back to the origin, nor 
foresaw the end. But from this intoxicating 
pleasure they were soon to be awakened, hy 
that which had latterly added to their enjoy- 
ment, but which also warned them of its end, — 



240 MATILDA. 

namely, Ormsby's recovery ; which seemed no 
longer to leave any excuse for his delaying to 
quit Sir James's palazzo, and return to his own 
lodging. It was settled, indeed, that he should 
do so, after the first airings which he was per- 
mitted to take. 

This excursion it was arranged should com- 
prise a ramble in the Pamphyli Doria Gardens, 
which the temptation of real spring weather in- 
duced all the party to be desirous of exploring. 

Sir James, who was always impatient at being 
thwarted in trifles, expressing his vexation that, 
on so fine a day, he should have to wait for 
Matilda, (who had made an engagement on that 
morning to sit for her bust,) Mrs. Mechlin im- 
mediately suggested that Sir James, Colonel 
Canteen, and herself, should start at once on 
their rambles, and leave Lord Ormsby (who 
ought not to remain out so long) to call for 
Matilda at the sculptor's, and meet them at the 
Gardens. 

To this Ormsby could not consent more 
readily than did the Baronet; and Matilda, 
being already from home, was not a party con« 
suited. When Ormsby alone, therefore, attended 
her at the sculptor's, she certainly did not think 



MATILDA. S41 

it-necessary to volunteer any fictitious objection to 
an arrangement in which her opinion had never 
been asked. To the PamphyU Doria therefore 
they went, and there they were left long to loiter 
alone on this, the last day wliich remained to 
tliem of that unrestrained intercourse in which 
circumstances had recently permitted them to 
indulge. 

The time and place seemed not only pecu- 
liarly to harmonize with the state of their mutual 
feelings, but to be even emblematical of the 
deceitful dangers of their relative situation. It 
was one of those delicious days when Nature^s 
jself seem.s new ; and here, on this favoured spot, 
whose refined solitudes are purposely elevated 
above the grosser cares of the lower world, its 
sunshiny smile tempts a lingering stay, and 
soothes into oblivion of all but the present plea- 
sure. But, alas ! malarious deadly poison hovers 
ill every balmy breath that whispers love, and 
destruction lurks beneath the budding hopes of 
each opening flower. 

Matilda and Ormsby had lingered long near 
one of those lonely fountains w^hich adorn some 
of the varied vistas of the Gardens. Even in his 
eyes she had never looked more lovely. The 

M 



24® MATILDA. 

simple attire to which, as best suited to a sta^ 
tuary'^s classical taste she had confined her 
morning's toilet, was pecuUarly calculated to in- 
vest her perfect form with an almost aerial grace ; 
whilst the tranquil indulgence of the softer feel- 
ings of her nature gave a matchless expression of 
tenderness to her angelic features. Eut as she 
bent her eyes towards him who occupied all her 
thoughts, and met his adoring gaze, she felt sud- 
denly struck with the change which liis recent 
severe illness had made in his fine manly beauty ; 
and it recalled her mind from the calm enjoy- 
ment of the present moment, and enforced the 
recollection, of how much of their late re-union 
they had owed to sickness and to suffering, — 
how, in his sunken eye and faded cheek, the 
traces of the melancholy origin of their transitory 
pleasure were left to survive the advantages they 
had derived from so unwelcome a cause. 

Touched wilh these reflections, as she leant on 
the marble balustrade, and shook, as she struggled 
for composure, her purposely-averted head, a few 
drops which had gathered in her full dark eye 
fell unbidden, — mingling, in their sullen fall, 
with the playful patter of the merry fountain 
over which she was bending. 



MATILDA. g4S 

Neither this agitation, nor the attempt to con- 
ceal it, were lost upon Ormsbj ; who said, as he 
gently pressed her hand, and leant forward so as 
to catch a glimpse of her still averted features, 
" Can Matilda seek for sympathy in her sorrows 
from these babbling waters, and deny her con- 
fidence to one in whom siljnce cannot be mis- 
taken for insensibility ?" 

As, in silent reply to this, she slowly turned 
upon him her swimming eyes, and dropping her 
head on his arm, wept bitterly, Ormsby could no 
longer contain himself. 

" Beloved Matilda," he said, " all further 
restraint is impossible. Think not that I can so 
long have beheld, unmoved, all your unmerited 
misery. — Can one who adores you — who feels 
alike the matchless power of all those blended 
charms whose perfect union fancy's wildest flight 
could not reach — can such an one bear to see your 
beauties wasted on a being as incapable of esti- 
mating their value as he is unworthy of retaining 
their precious possession ? When I thought the 
misery of separation was all my own, in silence 
did I drag the oppressive load of anguish. But 
when I see, that whilst you are lost to one who 
lives but in your happiness, that happiness itself 



^IA'^< MATILD.^. 

is ihe daily sacrifice of circumstances which ought 
not and need not to have existed, I can no longer 
withstand that irresistible impulse, that attractive 
sympathy, which from earliest youth marked us 
for each other. Mine you must be, — mine alotie 
—mine for ever.'*'' 

'• Hold, in mercy hold, Augustus," said Ma- 
tilda ; ** it would be vain to deny that the love I 
once vo-^v^ed to you has never been another's. — 
J'vents have been fated to revive feelings, Vvhich 
alas f had neyer been effaced ; — my hom.e, ever a 
cheerless one, lias been by you rendered doubly 
drcarv, for my peace of mind is broken — my self- 
( stecpi lost. — Tliat I may not be deprived of all 
ihnt is left of consolation and innocence, 1 feel that 
^Ve must part; yes, this very hour. Leave me, 
in pity leave me !" 

*• Never,'" said Lord Ormsby ; " our guilt, if 
i^nilt there be, rests on their heads who conspired 
V)y base unwortliy arts to separate us — to separate 
those whose mutual vows had in all but form 
united them. Those bonds which hold you now, 
forced in falsehood, and rivetted with wanton 
cruelty, and for mere worldly views, can never 
force asunder hearts which the purest passion liad 
previously cemented.^** 



MATILDA. 245 

*• Di) not, clear Augustus, condescend to argu- 
ments, the shaUow sophistry of Avhich cannot 
deceive even my warped and wilHngmind. Wiiat 
livails it, how happy we once might have been ! 
What is, alas ! matters more. I am now the 
wife of anotlier. If I cannot in spirit fulfil uU 
the various duties of that station, I must to tlie 
letter obey the obligations I have contracted. In 
the guilt of their utter abandonment the world 
will not, and ought not, to admit fancied disdnc- 
tions. Think you that 1 could ever endure (o 
exchange approving smiles for scornful sneers ? 
Little could I bear the conteniptucus avoidance 
of the virtuous — still less the cold and forced 
endurance of an unfriendly family circle. Your 
saint-like mother, and the dear, innocent Emily, 
— could I bear their just reproaches — not tlie 
•less cutting because clothed in kindness ? — Oh, 
Augustus, I shame to think that we so long have 
parleyed on such a subject. Beheve me, okiv 
only safety is in separation." 

'• First, one moment, hear me,''' said Lord 
Ormsby, with a violence of emotion which, Husli- 
ing his cheek and s])arkling in liis eye, superseded 
for the moment all traces of recent langour. 
** Never can I survive such a sentence — 'twould 



246 MATILDA. 

have been but merciful to have spared me this 
last pang, inflicted by a conviction of that insen- 
sibility which could alone have dictated such cold 
calculations ! Why was not the moment when.I 
met you wounded, allowed to be my last ? 
Why have you banished that bright vision on 
which my eyes could have closed in peace? 
Why efface the recollection of that impassioned 
sympathy which then endeared death itself?'*' 
** Merciful heaven !'' interrupted Matilda, ** this 
violence will kill you.'* 

She had been checked in her attempt to leave 
him, by the apprehensions excited by the sight 
of his ungoverned passion; and her alarm in- 
creased, as she beheld the fleeting flush of excite- 
ment succeeded by a death-like paleness, and 
caught his hand just as the support of the balus- 
trade alone prevented him from faUing pros- 
trate. 

This sight revived her tenderness. 'Twas 
now impossible to leave him ; and, avoiding the 
agitating topics which had been so hurtful, they 
were still seated on the grassy slope, she anxiously 
watching his reviving colour, — when they were 
seen from the terrace above by the rest of the 
party. The custode who was shewing the won- 



MATILDA. 247 

ders of the gardens was the first to observe 
them ; and, with that poetical feeUng peculiar to 
the lower class of his countrymen, was struck 
with so appropriate a groupe in so beautiful a 
scene. 

" Ah, che coppia hella ! semhra degna d' un 
tal pai-adiso /" exclaimed he. " Hum ! more 
like the first tempter, or a snake in the grass," 
muttered Mrs. MechUn, as, speaking half toiier- 
self, she nevertheless directed the attention of both 
the Baronet and Colonel Canteen to the tite-a-Utc 
on the bank below. 

" What was that .^'" said Sir James, who, as it 
has been mentioned, did not understand one 
word of Italian. " What did the man say ?" 

" Oh, nothing," said Mrs. Mechlin, *' only 
this pastoral Pistrucci was inspired by this garden 
of Eden to improvvisare a paraphrase of Mihon. 
He has found, it seems, an Adam and Eve 
there : — 

" The loveliest pair 
That ever since in love's embraces met.'* 

I am at best but a bad hand at a quotation. — 
There is something, 1 know, about sons and 
daughters, which don't signify — ^but 



248 MATILDA. 

" Undci a tnfi of shade, that on a giecn ,. 

Stood \^hisptling soft ; by a fVesh fciDitaln side 
'i'hey sat them down." 

Tliaf s appropriate enough, you must own."" 

" It's all d d nonsense,"*' said Sir James, a 

little sharply, and much to tlie astonishment of 
his female companion, who could not but be a 
little surprised at any appearance of emotion on 
his part, at her playful allusion to a flirtation 
which had long been so obvious to her scandal- 
seeking eyes, that she had given him credit for 
fashionable indifference on the subject ; other- 
wise, though not ever partial to Lord Ormsby, 
nor so fond of Matilda as formerly, she would 
have been the last to have risked anything that 
might by possibihty tend to an escalandre, which 
would endanger the permanence of an establish- 
ment that was so convenient to herself 

But if jealousy is sometimes " light as air,*'"* 
it is also as unaccountable as the v»ind, as to 
" whence it cometh."'"' From an unintelligible 
calm upon the subject of Matilda's and Ormsby "*s 
intimacy, Sir James seemed suddenly as cause- 
lessly agitated by arising storm of passion, with- 
out any apparent provocation ; and, when they 
joined them on the green below, and he was 



MATILDA. 249 

informed by Lady Matilda, that the invalid had 
suffered much from over-exertion, he could myt 
contain himself sufficiently to return a tolcmbly 
civil answer ; but, hurrying Matilda away iindci- 
pretence that it was late, and they had long been 
looking for them, he insisted upon Mrs. Mechlin 
and Colonel Canteen accompanying them Iiob)!- 
in his carriage, and left Ormsby alone m the 
other to find his way to his solitary lodgingSo 



M 5 



250 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



Heavily hung the hours, as Matilda, with- 
out the accustomed charm of Ormsby's society, 
was left a prey to Sir James's increasing peevish- 
ness, which was doubly irritating to a mind not 
entirely free from feelings of self-reproach as to 
her recent conduct. On the morning immediately 
succeeding the scene which was last described, 
being somewhat relieved by the temporary absence 
of Mrs. Mechlin, who was gone with a party to 
Frascati ; she had, in the course of her solitary 
rambles, sought in Saint Peter''s an escape from 
the world, and from herself. 

It is just at that hour when all is bustle and 
business without, that these splendid solitudes 
are most imposing. In the interval of the pomp 
of fixed religious observances, nothing is heard 
from aisle to aisle but the muttered prayer of th? , 
lonely penitent. 

I have said that jMatilda's religious education 
had been neglected. Her family had form.criv 



MATILDA. S51 

been Catholics. Her uncle was the first who, 
for political purposes, had renounced the creed 
of his fathers. Left in early infancy to his 
exclusive management, she had been ostensibly 
brought up in the tenets of the Church of Eng> 
land; but, though Lord Wakefield always 
declaimed with the redoubled zeal of a convert 
xipon the inseparable union of Church and State, 
Matilda observed, that he found in practice this 
union utterly incompatible ; for not only did the 
State entirely monopolize his attention six days 
in every week, but even cheated the Church out 
of its seventh, as business was a never-failing 
excuse for neglecting the duties of that day. 

With this example constantly before her eyes, 
and no better principles instilled into her mind, it 
is not surprising that the time Matilda had spent 
with her governess at her parish church had not 
been so profitable as it might otherwise have 
been. 

But though, from her defective education, 
religious impressions were not powerful enough 
to operate as an effective controul upon her ccn^ 
duct, yet had they always strong hold upon her 
imagination ; and she never entered this solemn 
sanctuary without reverential awe, ror left it 



2^2 MATILDA. 

without feelings purified and chastened, and a 
mind elevated by salutary reflection. 

Far be it from me to underrate the peculiar 
purity of our reformed worship, or the simpli- 
city of its energetic eloquence, — which, disdain- 
ing alike unmeaning mystery or ostentatious 
mummery, trusts alone to reason and to truth. — 
But it may perhaps admit a doubt, whether, by 
thus rejecting the adventitious aid of the imagi- 
nation. Protestantism may not, in avoiding scru- 
pulously the chance of leading astray, at the 
same time have somewhat limited its means of 
persuading to right. That is a most praise- 
worthy practice, vvhich collects the Protestant 
parish to periodical devotion and rational prayer, 
where every religious exercise may be tried by 
the test of reasoning ; and where, though the 
congregation are carefully and devoutly attired all 
in their best^ the Church itself is scrupulously 
stripped of all extraneous ornament, lest the 
eye should divert the mind from its abstraction. 
But perhaps it may not be a less acceptable 
sight, to behold the splendid temple of Saint 
Peter's, always open to the poorest and the 
meanest, who, without any attention to their 
own outward appearance, may at once lose the 



MATILDA. 253 

consciousness of their grovelling cares, in the 
feeling that here, even in the centre of one of 
the most magnificent works of men, they may, 
on an equality with the highest and the proudest, 
in their own words, and at their own time, offer 
up their voluntary vows. And if the grand 
monuments of art around work upon the out- 
ward senses of the devotees, and the imagination 
should therefore have its share in exciting the 
feelings of religion, the want of the comparative 
purity of the source from whence those feelings 
are derived, may perhaps be compensated, by 
the greater numbers over whom its power may 
extend. 

But let us return from this, perhaps unneces- 
sary digression, and attend our heroine in her 
solitary ramble. As, occupied in her own reflec- 
tions, she wandered round the still deserted 
aisles, her attention was attracted by the figure 
of a monk, who, in an attitude of fixed devotion, 
was kneeling before an altar, over which was 
represented the Adoration of the Magi. She 
hardly knew why she remarked him. There 
was nothing peculiar in the garb of his order. 
His bold determined features, and strongly- 
marked countenance, might be merely charac- 



S54 MATILDA. 

teristic of his country, which of course she sup- 
posed to be Itahan. Yet was there an expression 
of suffering, not unmingled with self-reproach, 
which seemed to individuahze the peculiar inte- 
rest his appearance excited. — Little, however, 
was Matilda prepared for the extraordinary effect 
that was produced on the monk, when, as she 
repassed the spot where he was kneeling, his eye 
for the first time met hers. The change that 
this produced in his whole deportment, was so 
sudden and appalling, that she could only attri- 
bute it to insanity ; and turning hastily away, 
she was hurrying from him, when she found, not 
without trepidation, that he followed her with 
increasing eagerness. Still greater was her sur- 
prise, when, as he approached, in a tone of 
earnest entreaty, he addressed her in English, — 
" Lady, one moment turn ! Matilda, I implore 
you." 

Though considerably alarmed, her presence of 
mind did not desert her, as she demanded to 
know what one of his order could want with her, 
and how he, a stranger, knew her name ? 

He answered, *' That which I gave at yonder 
font, I needs must know again. Nay, more — 
though I grieve to speak it, Delaval is or wa« 



MATILDA. ^55 

your name. — Better than yourself I know 
you." 

Matilda was perfectly bewildered at this inco- 
herent, yet convincing manner, in which he proved 
he was not a perfect stranger to herself and family ; 
and she could only reply, by inquiring when he 
had seen her before. " "'Tis long,"" answered he, 
" that I have in vain prayed for the blessing this 
hour has brought. At length my prayers are 
heard. If you are still as pure and free from 
worldly pride as when you first received the 
name by which I but now ventured to address 
you — if you are in mind as in person, as perfect a 
prototype of her in whose arms I last beheld you 
— then will the tale I have to tell enhance your 
happiness, whilst it mitigates my misery. But 
if, as much I fear" — 

At this moment, the monk was interrupted by 
the distant chaunt of a priestly procession, which 
was approaching the spot where they were stand- 
ing. He seemed to dread being seen engaged in a 
conference which was probably contrary to the rules 
of his order, and advancing for one moment close 
to Matilda, he muttered, " I dare no longer 
stay ; but by your love of justice I conjure you, 
meet rae here to-morrow at dusk. ^Yhat your 



£56 MAtILt)A. 

present lot is, I know not. If there is one who 
as a right claims your confidence, suspend it but 
a few short hours, till my singular tale is told. 
Till to-morrow's dusk be silent, and be secret. 
Chasten your heart from love of pomp and pride ; 
for I can give, and I can take away— can enrich 
your heart, and beggar your hand." 

One lingering look he cast upon his astonished 
companion, as, dfawing his cowl closer round 
his head, he was lost to her amongst the crowd 
which accompanied the coming procession. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



Whilst Matilda slowly left the church, and 
indeed, during the whole of her drive home- 
wards, she in vain endeavoured to form some 
probable conjecture, as to the character of the 
strange being with whom she seemed so unac- 
countably connected, or as to the nature of the 
communication he had promised. Sometimes she 
half persuaded herself that it was a maniac, who, 
availing himself of some accidental acquaintan«:e 
with the name of herself and family, owed the 
rest to his own disordered imagination. But, on 
the other hand, the singular reserve which it has 
been remarked always appeared on the part of 
her uncle, as to any inquiry respecting the inci- 
dents of her early life, had always struck even 
her unsuspicious mind as extraordinary, and had 
served to keep alive a conviction, that there was 
s'jme family secret which had been concealed 
from her. She therefore determined to conijjly 
with the request of the mysterious monk for 



S58 MATILBA. 

another interview ; and she was still revolving 
in her mind the best means of effecting it at 
the hour he had mentioned, and without sus- 
picion ; when, upon her return home, her thoughts 
were diverted into another channel by the com- 
munication, on the part of Mam'selle Felicie, of 
another equally unexpected event. 

" Oh, Miladi ! of all the world, who think you 
shall be arrived ?" — " Who, Felicie ; Madame 
Hilas, with my gown ? Have I kept her 
waiting ?" 

" Oh, no, Miladi !— of all the world, the guard 
of the chase, at Delaval." 

"Who, pray?" 

The — Bah ! — the what's-you-call gamekeeper, 
Monsieur Boulby." 

Strange as it may seem, Felicie's intelligence 
was literally true. Old Dick Boulby, seeing, in 
despair, that from the progress rapidly making 
in the new rail-road, the utter destruction of 
Delaval Park was inevitable, unless prevented by 
higher authority than any he had it in his power 
to exert, and his own snug lodge, in which he 
had been born, falling one of the first sacrifices 
to the new improvement, had formed the resolu- 
tion of finding out his master and mistress, where- 



MATILDA. 259 

ever they might be ; though he had never in his 
life been further from Delaval Park than to the 
neighbouring quarter-sessions, to assist at the 
prosecution of a poacher. Yet, in execution of 
his plan, he proceeded, per coach, to London, 
and hearing there that Sir James was at Rome, 
he availed himself of the facilities for the fur- 
therance of loco-motive propensities, provided in 
Piccadilly ; where, with a single stroke of the 
pen, a traveller is booked indifferently for Naples 
or for Knightsbridge. 

Once started, he was faithfully handed from 
courier to courier, like a bale of goods ; and he 
now stood before Sir James, even as he had left 
Delaval Park, — a figure more strange to Roman 
eyes than any the carnival had produced, — in 
green plush jacket, red waistcoat, and corduroys : 
the only change liis dress had undergone con- 
sisting in his cumbrous white beaver having been 
exchanged for a light jean travelling-cap, at the 
instance of his companion, the courier, whose 
nose the former had sorely incommoded during 
his uneasy slumbers. 

We may pass over the first astonishment of Sir 
James at this unexpected arrival ; and also his 
insinuation, that the old fool must have been 



260 MATILDA. 

mad, to presume to trouble liini at such a distance, 
on such a subject. At last, however, provoked 
at the pertinacity with which Dick Boulby 
argued upon the profaneness of destroying *' our* 
old place, his master desired him, somewhat 
sharply, to hold his tongue. 

" Haud my tongue ! — Like enough I've corned 
all this way to haud my tongue! — Haud my 
tongue! — Like enough Fve sit ten days, cheek 
by jowl with a Mounseer, mumchance, just 
thinking about nothing but how I'd tell you a 
bit of my mind, to haud my tongue at die end 
oa't ! — Lord ! Lord ! I thought no good would 
come of your taking my Lady out of old Eng- 
hnd. But even in these here outlandish parts, 
I\'e never seed any thing like that piece of work 
youVc making in our park.'"* 

*' Come, Sir," said Sir James, " if you are 
t ) be allowed to remain in my service (which is 
a favour you don't deserve) you must learn to 
treat your master with more respect." 

" licmain in your service ! How can I re- 
main ? — when you wo'nna keep your park, how 
C'Ui I be your park-keeper? — How can I l)e 
your game-keeper, when all't'game you'll have 
left will be black game, in shape of coal-carts ?— 



MATILDA. ^61 

After opening lodge-gate, man and boy, tbese sixty 
years to my Lord's friends, do you think as I 
will take money at your toll-house? — Lord! 
Lord ! to think how things have turned out I 
Ah !" added he, with a kind of despairing head- 
shake, " if my Lady had but married Lord 
Ormsby (as we all hoped,) this would never have 
happened." 

'* Lord Ormsby," said Sir James, hastily ; 
what's that you say about Lord Ormsby ?" 

" Why, if 3^ou mun have the truth, when she 
were to ha' married Lord Ormsby (then the 
Honourable Augustus Arlingford,) there was'na 
two opinions in all the country side ; auld and 
young were ready to shower blessings on their 
handsome heads. But when ?jou corned, and 
we were all told you had plenty of pelf in your 
pocket, tho' we never seed ony of it, we shook 
our heads, and partly mistrusted how it would 
be." 

" Do you mean," said Sir James, " that you 
insolent bumpkins presumed ever to suppose 
that Lord Ormsby was ever going to marry 
Lady Matilda?" 

" Presumed to suppose ? — I Idike that. Why, 



263 MATILDA. 

be that news to you ? Why, I thought every 
fool knowed that." 

The violence of the various emotions which 
this unexpected communication excited in Sir 
James, was too powerful for utterance, and he 
turned in silence away for a moment ; when at 
the same instant, IMatilda entered, and not ob- 
serving the Baronet, kindly welcomed the early 
friend of her childhood ; and the pleasure he de- 
rived from the sight of his hereditary mistress, 
in a moment restored the somewhat ruffled se- 
renity of the ancient dependant. 

" You must be very much fatigued with such 
a tremendous journey," kindly inquired Lady 
Matilda. 

" Thank you, my Lady ;— why it has made 
my old bones dance rarely. I doubt if I'se ever 
loike to get a chair to sit still wid me again. If 
I do but try a moment, they all go wabble- 
wabble, noddle-noddle, like that great leather 
case as IVebeen swinging in this week past." 

Any further account of Dick Boulby's journey 
was suspended, by Sir James, in a voice of sup- 
pressed passion, desiring Matilda to follow him 
into the next room. 



MATILDA. 



" So, Madam V Sir James began ; " you have 
so long escaped detection that you have probably 
been flattering yourself there would be no end to 
the perfect security with which it suits you to 
combine the substantial advantages of my wealth 
and station, with the less solid sentimental plea- 
sures of your early passion." 

" Sir James," said Matilda with dignity, " I 
am at a loss to conceive your meaning, while thus 
degrading yourself by insulting me." 

" Well, Madam," said Sir James, " I am con- 
tent to abide by your own answer to one or two 
questions. Was Lord Ormsby once your ac- 
cepted lover ? and if so, why was the fact, con- 
cealed from me? and what defence can you 
make for your late encouragement of him .?" 

Matilda calmly replied, " Now that your in- 
quiries, however the same in substance, are strip- 
ped of their offensive coarseness, I will readily 
answer them to the best of my power. True it 
is that long before I knew j^ou, a gpowing parti- 
ality between Lord Ormsby and myself was en- 
couraged by both our families. Circumstances 
however intervened, which put a final period to 
all thoughts of that connexion ; and at the ear- 
nest instance of my guardian, I was induced to 



§64 MATILDA. 

listen to your addresses. It was then my uncle's 
special command that no mention should be made 
of mv previous half-formed engagement. Whe- 
ther right or wrong, it certainly was in opposi- 
tion to my own wish at the time that I then 
obeyed his orders on this point. Since our mar- 
riage I will be judged by yourself, whether you 
have ever encouraged those terms of unlimited 
confidence, which could alone justify me, at any 
later period, in unnecessarily reviving a subject 
in which not alone my own feelings were con- 
cerned, but those also of another, towards whom 
my conduct had not been entirely free from re- 
proach. As to j^our last accusation, that of hav_ 
ing latterly encouraged Lord Ormsby's attentions 
— a moment's reflection must have called to your 
recollection how perfectly unfounded it is — on 
the contrary, how studious my avoidance of him 
had for some time been ; indeed, so much so, as 
to excite your own observation. And as to the 
circumstance which latterly led to the renewal of 
our intimacy, — common gratitude to him might 
have made you remember how httle share I had 
in its origin. "*' 

There was a calm air of offended dignity about 
Matilda, as she thus answered her husband's vio- 



MATILDA. 265 

lence, which seemed to stagger even his suspi- 
cions ; and at this moment they were interrupted 
by the entrance of Sir James"*s own servant, with 
whom curiosity was a constitutional vice, and who, 
hearing this domestic storm, could not resist a de- 
sire to find out the cause, and therefore took the 
first opportunity to intrude himself — ^holding in 
his hand, as his excuse, the very sketch-book which 
Lady Matilda had missed at Geneva. 

" Lord Ormsby''s servant, my Lady," said he, 
" left this book with some other things of his 
Lordship's. Angelo says, it was lost that day 
that your Ladyship met Lord Ormsby at the 
villa near Geneva, and he supposes his Lordship 
took it by mistake." 

" What ?" said Sir James, almost breathless 
wdth rage, — " you met Lord Ormsby at Geneva, 
and never mentioned it to me ? Is it so ?" 

''It is," said Matilda. 

" Then are all my suspicions confirmed. Pre- 
pare, Madam, to leave Rome before sunrise. The 
horses at five o'clock, Clarke." 

On this he left the apartment, and Matilda 
did not again see him till the carriage was at the 
door. 

When thus left alone, that high spirit which 

N 



266 MATILDA. 

had supported her under the late trying scene, 
did not survive the necessity for its exertion ; 
and she abandoned herself, without further effort, 
to all the despair which her present gloomy pros- 
pects seemed inevitably to entail. She had 
justly repelled the imputation of habitual and 
practised deceit, which Sir James's utter igno- 
rance of her character could alone have induced 
him even in passion to insinuate ; yet she could 
not deny to herself, that the suspicion of her 
criminal attachment was but too well founded, — 
feeling, as she did, that of all the circumstances 
which rendered this sudden and disgraceful de- 
parture from Rome odious to her, that for which 
alone she grieved was the separation from Ormsby. 
I am anxious to dwell as little as possible on 
the painful details of this part of my story, — the 
leading events of which I shall therefore record 
as concisely as possible. At five the next morn- 
ing, Sir James, in obstinate execution of his 
hastily-formed determination, hurried his unhappy 
wife away from Rome, regardless of the effect 
which such a precipitate and unexplained departure 
might have, in giving credit to reports injurious 
to her character or to his own honour ; and dur- 
ing their tedious journey to Florence, Matilda 



MATILDA. 867 

had to submit to every species of ill-treatment, 
short of actual violence, which a vulgar mind and 
unfeeling nature, under the irritation of supposed 
injury, could inflict. 

As soon as Lord Ormsby discovered that the 
Dorntons had so abruptly quitted Rome, he 
madly followed ; and it was just one week from 
their last eventful meeting in the Pamphyli Doria 
Gardens, that, at the conclusion of a stolen inter- 
view at the Villa Strozzi at Florence, Matilda, 
unable any longer to bear the barbarity of her 
husband, or to resist the ardour of her lover, 
faltered out her faint consent to an immediate 
elopement. 

A few hours brought them to Leghorn ; where 
they embarked for Naples ; and, as the vessel 
receded from the shore, they felt that this speck 
on the surface of the waters contained all that in 
the wide world was left to either of them. 

Thus in an unguarded moment, by this one act, 
liad one of the most virtuous of her sex fallen 
from the topmost heights of rank and reputation 
down to the level of the most wretched outcasts 
from society. Born to be the representative of 
an ancient name and family, she was now re- 
duced to borrow from courtesy a doubtful appel- 



MATILDA. 

lation. She had exchanged the eager seeking of 
would-be acquaintances, for the studied avoidance 
of former friends; and, what alone to her sensitive 
mind added tenfold anguish to all these humiH- 
ations, she was doomed to feel that she deserved 
them. 



269 



CHAPTER XXV. 



TiiuTH compels me tc admit, that that self- 
inflicted punishment, which is the usual concomi- 
tant of guilt, did not in this instance immedi- 
ately follow Ormsby's and Matilda's fall from 
virtue. If this admission should be considered 
dangerously at variance with the strict moral 
doctrine on the subject, let the reader only sus- 
pend his judgment till my tale is told. 

During the whole of their prosperous flight, 
light and buoyant as the bark that bore them 
were the hearts of the fugitives, and boundless 
as the bright expanse of sunshiny waters around 
seemed their happiness. At the conclusion of 
the voyage, they exchanged the comparative con- 
finement and restraint of their vessel, for ever- 
varied rambles through the lonely environs of 
Sorrento ; where, in that most beautiful corner 
of the most beautiful bay in the world, they had 
taken a villa for the summer. Here, whilst days 
untold swelled into weeks, and weeks that passed 



270 MATILDA. 

unheededmade up months, — eternal as the smihng 
skies above, and fruitful as the teeming earth on 
which they trod, still seemed their love. But 
not more certain was the revolution of the sea- 
sons, than this delicious dream to have an end. 

The first thing that at all awakened them, 
even so far as to allow either recollections or an- 
ticipations in the least to interfere with the all- 
engrossing present, w^as the receipt of a pacquet 
of letters, which one of their servants brought 
across the bay from their banker at Naples. Of 
these I shall transcribe two. The first was from 
Lady Ormsby. 

" If I have so long delayed writing, it was 
literally that I knew not how to begin. My 
heart is too full to allow me to write about any 
thing which I do not feel, and how can I dwell on 
that which alone occupies my mind ? If your 
conduct has shewn how little influence I retained, 
reproaches will not now restore it. If your own 
hearts do not tell you how much you have made 
me suffer, it would be no consolation to me to 
detail my humiliated feehngs. I was a foolish vain 
old woman. I loved the world but for its praises 
of you both. If I could now, by avoiding it, escape 



MATILDA. S71 

its sneers, the sacrifice to myself would be small 
indeed. But a paramount duty towards a daugh- 
ter who deserves every thing from me, prevents 
such a step, and, at the same time, precludes me 
from holding open or constant communication 
with you whilst living as you now are. My 
sole object, therefore, in writing to you now is, 
to let you know, that in sickness or in sorrow, 
my children will still find an affectionate mother 
in 

" Emily Okmsby."" 

The other letter was of a very different cha- 
racter. It was from Mrs. Mechhn, and dated 
Florence. 

" My dear Matilda — How could you take so 
imprudent a step ? You completely mistook the 
management of Sir James. You should have 
flattered— not have brusquhd him. With proper 
treatment, such a husband would have been as 
bhnd as love itself ; and a husband's protection 
is, under any circumstances, a very great conve- 
nience. Sir James, they say here, has doubts 
about trying for a divorce ; as, from the singular 
manner in which your fortune was settled, the 



212 MATILDA. 

lawyers tell him, that he would lose it by doing- 
so, and that he may otherwise keep it. Harry 
Wordsworth, who is here, as affected as ever, 
and making as many bad jokes, says, the Baronet 
is the luckiest man in the world ; for that most 
men who marry heiresses reverse his lot — lose the 
land, and keep the lady. You will be glad to 
learn, that all the women here are ready to kill 
you for carrying off Ormsby, as his was a beauty 
che hajattojicrore, last time he was here. Don't 
mention my writing to you, my dear, as you 
know it might hurt me rather in the eyes of 
some people ; and Prudence is always my motto. 
But you may depend upon my telling you any 
thing that I think will interest you. By-the-bye, 
long muslin sleeves are much worn. The creptes 
still continue. Harry Wordsworth says, what with 
stiffened locks and starched sleeves, it is hard to- 
tell a beauty from a bishop. 
" Your's ever, 

" Caroline Mechltk."^ 

The first of these letters, which was addressed 
to Ormsby, he was very anxious to conceal from 
Matilda ; well knowing how much pain it would 
give her, — peculiarly sensitive as she would b& 



MATILDA. 



273 



to any censure from one she valued so highly as 
Lady Ormsby. Having therefore finished his 
mother's letter before Matilda had spelt through 
Mrs. Mechlin's more illegible scrawl, he thrust 
it, without comment, into his pocket ; and when 
Matilda, having at length finished her own letter, 
questioned him about his, he w^as occupied with 
some less interesting contents of the pacquet ; the 
accumulated directions on whose overloaded 
backs proved that they had followed him from 
Rome to Florence, and again from Florence to 
Naples. 

One of these was from his lawyer, stating that 
his interests would suffer materially, unless he 
could, for very particular' business, return to 
England before Trinity Term. Thisy of course, 
was now entirely out of the question. Another 
was from his land agent, as to renewing leases 
on Lady-Day, and cutting dawn a wood before 
the sap was up ; a third from a club acquaint- 
ance, giving an account of ail the gossip of the 
gay world, and assuring him he was much missed 
in England ; again, another from a political 
friend, asking his opinion as to bringing on a 
question of the first importance, in which he liad 
formerly taken a leading part. 
n5 



274 MATILDA. 

Not one of these subjects of interest could, for 
one moment, enter into the smallest comparison 
with the all-engrossing happiness he felt in pos- 
sessing Matilda. But it is hard to find that 
man who, as a matter of abstract choice, and 
unhesitating preference, would willingly abandon 
for ever the world and all its attractions. Woman, 
warm-hearted, self-sacrificing woman, will often 
view all the manifold vicissitudes of fortune, only 
as reflected through the medium of one beloved 
object. But with man, love rarely is, and still 
more rarely ought to be, the sole exclusive 
business of life. 

Ormsby had, in early youth, mingled much 
in the gayest and busiest scenes. All resources 
lose their zest upon constant repetition ; but he 
was not one of those who mistake a temporary 
repletion of the pleasures of society, for a growing 
distaste towards them, nor had it ever entered 
into his contemplation to make positive vows 
of giving up the world. But, accident had re- 
newed his acquaintance with Matilda, the recol- 
lection of whom he had never ceased to cherish. 
His first passion had been revived with all the 
fervour he had formerly felt in the freshness of 
youth. The apparent impracticability of the 



MATILDA. 275 

pursuit, had, perhaps, contributed to the exclusive 
eagerness with which, sacrificing every other 
consideration, we have seen him devote himself 
to it. It is no less justice to him, than to Ma- 
tilda, to say, that so far from possession having 
abated his love, it had but increased its ardour ; 
and had it been their lot to have been honourably 
united in the eyes of the world, no matrimonial 
couple had ever closed even their honeymoon, 
much less completed, as they had now done, three 
whole months, with more certain symptoms of 
the permanence of their mutual happiness. But a 
woman like Matilda, who has sacrificed every thing 
for a man — who has rendered herself alike unfit 
for society, or for solitude — avoided by others, and 
avoiding herself, — such an unhappy female has 
a tie upon him for whom she has done all this, 
of a much stronger nature than those of common 
married life. A virtuous wife adorns the most 
brilliant lot, and is the solace of occasional re- 
tirement ; but a fallen companion entails an 
abandonment of all the pleasures, and many of 
the duties, of active life. Her protector's con- 
flicting obligations are such, that it is almost 
impossible for him adequately to fulfil any of 



S76- MATILDA. 

them. She must be all in all to him, or he is 
worse than nothing to her. 

And such, as yet, had Ormsby been to Ma- 
tilda. But when this pacquet of letters at once 
opened to him, as it were, the social budget, 
— shewing him all the various claims the world 
still had on him — the validity of which he had 
formerly acknowledged, and of the incompati- 
bility of which, with his present situation, he 
could not but be sensible, — the serenity of his 
recent enjoyment, which had owed its existence 
to the oblivion of every thing but present hap- 
piness, was not a little disturbed. 

As they pursued their usual evening stroll 
through the vineyards, whose ripe burthens 
overhung the sloping banks, and almost touched 
the waters, INIatilda could not but remark how 
much absorbed he was in his own reflections ; 
and she at length thus broke tlie unusually 
protracted silence. 

" How I do hate letters ! True, I hardly 
ever had a pleasant one. Strange as it may 
seem, I do not think that I ever in my life 
received one from you, Ormsby." 

^' Po you wish me to give you a speedy 



MATILDA. 27T 

opportunity of experiencing that pleasure ?" said 
Ormsby, smiling. 

" Oh ! do not talk so, even in jest. I cannot 
bear to contemplate such a thing as possible. 
Besides, positive pleasure, I think, can hardly 
be said to be derived from the receipt of a letter. 
It is at best, but a slight alleviation of the pains 
of absence — a poor apology for the living pre- 
sence. What, compared to the ever-varying 
sympathies of uninterrupted intercourse is it, 
when the heart only beats its formal and 
periodical response to the postman's knock ? 
What security can we ever feel, that the interval 
which has elapsed before the receipt of written 
communications, may not have reversed all of 
good that they contain — that affections may 
not liave cooled — that health may not be im- 
paired, even whilst we are dwelling with delight 
upon the assurance of their continuance .?'" 

" True," said Ormsby ; " and though letters 
may 

*' Waft a sigh from Indus to the Foie,"^ 

yet what is such a sigh, compared with one felt 
by the actual senses — distilling its rich balm 



278 MATILDA. 

upon the heart, and breathing its low, sweet 
music upon the ear ?" 

" And if, when only written," continued Ma- 
tilda, " the most endearing terms lose half their 
charm, how much are the reproaches of those 
one loves aggravated, when they thus receive a 
poignancy, which no affectionate look or manner 
interposes to soften, and a permanence which 
no soothing, or submission, can interfere to ob- 
literate ? The displeasure of our friends is 
doubly powerful on paper.'' 

" It is indeed," said Ormsby, removing at 
the same time his hand from its grasp of his 
mother's letter, which he had still held in his 
pocket, doubtful whether he should shew it to 
Matilda. 

" The odious Post," said Matilda, ** enables 
all these most disagreeable intruders to annoy us 
with their sentiments, however we may succeed 
in excluding their persons." 

" But at least," said Ormsby, " we may put 
an end to paper persecution, without committing 
murder. If a Neapolitan August do not furnish 
us with a fire to which we can condemn them, 
here, at least, are waters of oblivion for them ;" 



MATILDA. S79 

— and taking Matilda's letter, with all his own 
except his mother's, he scattered them in scraps 
into the sea ; upon whose smooth unruffled sur- 
face, mingling as they fell, the frivolous flip- 
pancy of Mrs. Mechlin long floated, undistin- 
guished from the stiff" business text of the lawyer, 
the rounded periods of the politician, the equally 
diffuse dandy, and the concise, cramped commu- 
nication of the country agent. 

The spot on which this little incident occurred, 
was the loveliest of all the lovely scene around, 
and, for this reason, had often been the limit of 
their evening ramble. The beautiful banks of 
the little inlet, on one side of which they were 
seated, were crowned with a profusion of myrtles, 
acacias, and other sweet plants, which irresistibly 
tempted to linger within the precincts of the 
double enjoyment of their fragrant shade. — The 
vineyard path on the other side of the bay, tra- 
versed only by the light-hearted peasants, as 
they returned from their work, carolling some 
of the wild and gay melodies of their native 
dialect, gave occasional animation to the scene, 
without at all interfering with its secluded charm. 
On the broad extent of waters beyond, the 



280 MATILDAr 

setting sun had marked his track of hquid fire, 
such as no pen, and the pencil only of Claude, 
can describe. 

I know not whether it was from the peculiar still- 
ness of the atmosphere, and the more than usually 
glass-like surface of the sea, (which will sometimes 
convey sound to an almost incredible distance,) 
but it was the first time Ormsby had remarked, 
that from hence they could catch the " busy hum 
of men," and the rumbling of the carriages, on 
the evening Promenade at Naples. There was 
something in his tone and manner in making this 
observation, which struck Matilda's sensitive 
mind as implying a wish to be there ; — and in a 
moment her part was taken. — " Ormsby,'' she 
said, '-' you wish to change the scene. — For 
myself, Heaven knows with you I could remain 
for ever in this earthly paradise; — that is, with 
you wholly and entirely, in mind as well as per- 
son. But never through mistaken kindness 
attempt to disguise from me any desire you may 
have ; for if you are but happy, all places are 
the same to me. I can have no wish, no hope, 
but to please you ; and my worst fear is to be 
felt as. a constraint on your inclinations." 



MATILDA. 281 

Ormsby warmly protested, in reply, that he 
had no wish for change — that no one could 
be happier than he. And so at the moment 
he felt. But in a Aveek they had removed to 
Naples ! 



282 



CHAPTER XXVI. 



" I NEVER can bear so public a promenade as 
the Villa Reale,"' said Matilda to Ormsby, one 
of the first evenings after their arrival at Naples. 

" My dearest love," replied he, "let me 
entreat you not to take up so absurd an idea. 
You will distress me beyond measure, if you 
adopt habits of utter seclusion. It only requires 
a little resolution at first. — You will only have 
to cherish and maintain that indifierence you 
formerly felt, for those whose prejudices may 
induce them to avoid you. But all whose notice 
you would really wish to seek, will make allow- 
ance for the peculiar circumstances in which you 
were involved ; and in time, as my wife, I shall 
hope to see my Matilda restored to that society 
of which she is formed to be the brightest orna- 
ment. But if, on the other hand, you are 
resolutely bent on shutting yourself up, you will 
only make me miserable as well as yourself." 

" Dear Ormsby, though I am not convinced 



MATILDA. 

by your arguments, (in which I think you mis- 
taken,) yet am I moved by the effect you 
threaten, and of which you alone can judge. — 
Make you miserable indeed ! No, never will I 
hazard any thing that can tend to that. — If it 
must be so, to the Chiaja let us go."' 

Ormsby, grateful for this concession on her 
part, was in high spirits, and exerted himself to 
dissipate the awkwardness which for the first time 
she felt at the universal admiration her appear- 
ance excited. 

The latter end of the summer, or beginning of 
Autumn, is perhaps the season when there are 
fewest English at Naples ; so that they had 
passed from one end to the other of the prome- 
nade, without meeting many of their country- 
men, or any with whose faces they were ac- 
quainted. But, on one of the benches at the 
further end of the walk, Ormsby discovered a 
figure, stretching his laz}^ length along, and de- 
vouring an English newspaper, which he recog- 
nised to be that of his old acquaintance Harry 
Wordsworth, whose arrival in Italy, it may be 
recollected, was notified in Mrs. Mechlin's letter 
to Matilda. 

Harry Wordsworth was one of those, whose 



284 MATILDA. 

universally acknowledged position in society it is 
extremely difficult to account for. He was the 
younger brother of a not very good family, Avith 
a smart figure, and pleasing, though not hand- 
some features ; in saying which, we have pretty 
nearly summed up all the advantages which he 
really possessed, though not one hundredth part 
of what he had successfully assumed the ere- 
dit of. 

He was as poor as younger brothers usually 
are, yet denied himself no luxury ; — professed 
never to do any thing he did not like, yet was 
reckoned the best-natured creature in the 
world ; — superficial, almost illiterate, yet could 
talk ad captandiim on any subject; — in short, 
without much either of fancy or feeling, a rat- 
tling merry manner with men made him pass for 
an uncommonly pleasant fellow, and a soft insi- 
nuating address w^ith women gave him the repu- 
tation of being only troj) ahnahle. 

How he came to be thus far from the scene of 
all his glories, and at this unfashionable time of 
year, we must allow him to explain for himself, 
as far as may be convenient to him. 

Ormsby having known him all his life, and 
been always accustomed, as a matter of course. 



MATILDA. S85 

to reciprocate the prescribed degree of warmth of 
manner upon meeting him, which was perfectly 
compatible with utter indifference as to ever 
seeing each other again, accosted him with, 
" Harry, how are you ? what brings you 
here?" 

At which Harry started up with, " Ormsby, 
my dear fellow, how goes it ? " and then turning 
towards Lady Matilda, with whom he had a 
very shght acquaintance, changed his manner to 
his most interesting drawl, and accompanied, 
" delighted to see you^^^ with a protracted squeeze 
of the hand. — Then turning again towards 
Ormsby, and holding up the newspaper he had 
been reading, " Well, Ormsby," said he, " so 
you are going to win the St. Leger, after all ? '' 

" Non capisco" said Ormsby, '' though I 
suppose you say that figuratively, for I know- 
most of your metaphors are in that line." 

" Figuratively ? — quite the reverse — I Uterally 
speak by book ; to prove which, I'll back your 
Comus filly against any thing."" 

'' Come, my dear Harry, you're the first that 
ever brought Tattersall talk to the Villa Reale. — 
The fact is, that I had forgotten I possessed 
such a thing as a Comus filly ; I have not seen 



MATILDA. 

or heard any thing of her smce she was running 
about the paddock at Ormsby. But you've ex- 
cited my curiosity. What have you heard about 
her?" 

" Only what will make a man of me again," 

said Harry ; " that d d Derby floored me 

completely. She has beat the first favourite, at 
York, August, — holding up the newspaper, — 
' Lord Ormsby's bay filly by Comus, first. — 
The Comus filly took the lead, made strong 
running, was never headed, and won easy ; — 
two to one on Mr. Leggings Pandemonium, who 
was beat early in the race.^ — So Pandemonium 
may go to the devil. The Comus filly will bring 
me home again ; and if she brings me home she 
shall take me home, and that presto^ as they say 
here, you may depend upon it. — But only think 
of your being such an unworthy favourite of 
fortune as not to recollect that you had a Comus 
filly ! — well, if she wins the Leger, you must 
christen her Matilda, and then you'll no longer 
have any excuse for forgetting her."" 

There was something in this last sally of 
Harry Wordsworth's which grated unpleasantly 
on the feelings of both his hearers, particularly 
on those of Matilda, to whom, in her present 



MATILDA. 287 

delicate situation, the idea of her name being 
made a common bye-word was most odious. The 
fact was, that Harry Wordsworth had rattled on 
inconsiderately, not from positive embarrass- 
ment, for of that, at no period of his life had he 
ever been accused, — but from more awkwardness 
than he had often experienced ; which arose from 
a certain degree of uncertainty he felt, as to how 
he might be received by his old friend Ormsby, 
owing to his having found it convenient to fix the 
Sunday instead of the Tuesday after the Derby, 
as the day of his departure for the Continent ; — 
to which change in his original intention, some 
did not scruple to say, that he was impelled by a 
desire to avoid the intervening black Monday at 
Tattersairs. He had tact enough to perceive, 
that his free allusion to Matilda's name was not 
very favourably received, and therefore turning 
the subject, and ratthng on, he continued, — 

" But upon my word, Ormsby, you are getting 
to live so much abroad, you'll soon forget the 
difference between White's and Boodle's; and 
you'll be utterly unable either to discuss budding 
beauties at the one, or growing crops at the 
other." 

" My good fellow," said Lord Ormsby, *« ab- 



MATILDA, 

surd as that may appear to you, I have heard 
some people talk about quite as important mat- 
ters, which they quite as little understand. — 'Tis 
a showy superficial age. Our ancestors' sohd 
ingots of knowledge, too heavy for most heads to 
carry, we have spread out into gold-leaf gossip, 
which glitters over the whole surface of society." 

Matilda wishing to return to her carriage, 
Ormsby and Wordsworth now separated; the 
former, upon the whole, not much pleased at the 
meeting. The fact was, that Harry Words- 
worth's manner was one to which habit had once 
familiarized Ormsby ; but thus unexpectedly 
recurring on the sudden, removed from all the 
associations which had conspired to render him 
agreeable, it left the general impression of an 
unwelcome intrusion. 

The next morning, when Ormsby had strolled 
out, and Matilda was occupied with her music, 
Harry Wordsworth popped his black, curly head, 
round the partly open door, and said, — " At home, 
fair lady ?^^ — in an easy, confident tone, which 
rather conveyed — " Here am I !'' than, " are you 
there .?" 

Matilda's manner had always been one pecu- 
liarly calculated to repress impertinence ; and 



MATILDA. S89 

certainly its repulsive power was never more 
exerted than during the tete-a-tete which fol- 
lowed the arrival of this self-admitted visitor; 
but all her coldness was wasted upon the easy- 
intruder. He lolled, by her side, upon the sofa ; 
and whilst conversing on indifferent subjects, 
occasionally fixed his eyes, with an expression of 
undisguised admiration, upon her beautiful face ; 
then -pressed her, with hyperbolical enthusiasm, 
to delight him by continuing her singing ; and 
when, rather than listen to his rhapsodical en- 
treaties, she calmly complied, he leant over her, 
and passed his arm round the back of her chair, 
with an air of (to her) offensive familiarity. 

Much of this was habitual mannerism with 
him ; and arose from his being, what is com- 
monly called, a cool hand. But it struck Ma- 
tilda, who was previously not much acquainted 
with him, as personal to herself, and arising from 
that want of respect which was the consequence 
of her present situation. Bitter were the reflec- 
tions which this conviction gave rise to, and so 
-strong was their effect upon her nerves, that she 
had some difficulty in keeping up that appearance 
of composure which she was very anxious to 
maintain ; when Ormsby's entrance relieved her 
o 



S90 MATILDA. 

from her unpleasant situation. Wordswortli 
soon after departed, after having coolly invited 
himself to dine with them the next day. 

Ormsby was evidently in high spirits. " I told 
you, Matilda, tliat there was little doubt you 
might, if you chose, soon be restored to society ; 
that there was discrimination enough in tlie 
world to make allowances for your peculiar situa- 
tion ; and that, after the divorce, you will gra- 
dually, but generally, be received again.'* 

" Dear Ormsby, I have seen nothing, certainly, 
to alter my opinion, that it will be impossible, 
even if I had the hardihood, to make the effort." 

" Well ; only let me tell you what happened 
to me this morning. I don't know whether I 
ever mentioned to you a cousin of mine — Mrs. 
Laceby. She is the wife of Admiral Laceby, 
who is commanding our fleet off the Island of 

. She is the most rigidly strict person I 

almost ever heard of, and is generally supposed 
to possess every Christian virtue but charity. 
She once quarrelled with my poor mother ; as 
even she, excellent as she is, offended some of her 
prejudices. Well, judge of my surprise, when, 
upon meeting her this morning, she accosted 
me immediately, — ^aid that she had only landed 



MATILDA. iS91 

yesterday from the Island of , and had 

heard, by accident, that the female part of my 
family were here. She hesitated a moment, and 
seemed to me to avoid mentioning you by name ; 
but ended by saying, that relations ought to 
forget all that was past ; asked me where I lived ; 
and parted, saying that she should call here to- 
morrow." 

" I suppose," said Matilda, " that it must 
have been her, then, that Mr. AVords worth 
meant, when he said, he wondered how I, and 
my strange relation who was here, would get on 
together. He would not tell who she was ; but 
laughed, and said, he had no doubt she would 
call upon me." 

Though the character given of Mrs. Laceby 
was not such as to make Matilda anticipate much 
pleasure from her acquaintance, yet, certainly, 
her feelings, recently wounded by what she con- 
sidered Wordsworth''s impertinence, were soothed 
by the attention implied in her intended visit. 



S92 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

Okmsby had engaged himself to go on the 
following morning to look at a house, the situation 
of which they thought they should prefer to 
that which they at present occupied. Matilda 
was therefore left alone to receive the expected 
visit of Mrs. Laceby. 

From any awkward sensation of embarrass- 
ment in society, Matilda had always been pecu- 
liarly free; an exemption, the natural consequence 
of intuitive good breeding, and habitual usage 
of the world. But with her situation, her feelings 
had altered. Confidence, however the appearance 
of it may occasionally be brazened forth, cannot 
really exist without self-respect. Matilda's loss 
of caste had been too recent, and her sense of 
shame v/as too acute, to enable her successfully 
to assume the appearance of that ease she no 
longer felt ; and she had literally worked herself 
up into the most uncomfortable Btate of ner- 
vousness, whilst awaiting Mrs. Laceby's dreaded 



MATILDAr. ^9S' 

Visit. Listening to catch the first sound of each' 
successive carriage wheels, as they bowled along^ 
the smooth lava flag stones, they seemed to her 
to advance with unnatural rapidity ; and she 
gave a gasp of relief, when, though hardly trusting 
her ears, she was convinced that each had actually 
passed her door. 

" How can I bear to meet," thought she, 
" a. woman whom Ormsby described as pos- 
sessing every virtue, but charity; when it is 
only the active exercise of that one in particular, 
that could render endurable her presence to a 
poor fallen creature like me ? I shall have to 
submit to the contemptuous condescension of 
one who, even whilst she for some family reasons 
stoops to notice me, will think it necessary to 
mark, that the interview is disagreeable to hei\ 
by making it so to- me. I think I see her before 
me, shrinking, as from contamination, at the 
slightest approach on my part. I can fancy, but 
too well, her severe voice, stiff figure, and con- 
strained conversation. Would it were over."' 

Whilst conjuring up these unpleasant images, 
a carriage actually stopped at the door ; and after 
a delay that seemed interminable to Matilda, her 
ItaHan servitore entered, and announced a lady, 



5!94 MATILDA. 

whose name, he said, he could not pronounce, 
but which resembled that of my lord. 

" Now for it,'' thought she ; and she rose to 
receive her dreaded visitor. But great was her 
surprise when, instead of the stiff-starched figure, 
and forbidding features, which she had attributed 
to Mrs. Laceby, she beheld a form, if any thing, 
too well rounded, — handsome, though rather 
coarse features — a complexion which, if entirely 
natural, was brilliant indeed — and a dress far 
from unbecoming — though showy, almost amount- 
ing to tawdriness. 

Matilda had hardly time to make these obser- 
vations on the appearance of her new acquaintance, 
before, instead of meeting her with a cold re- 
pulsive manner, she extended both hands, and 
kissed her cheek rather cordially than delicately. 
At first Matilda knew not, whether to distrust 
her own eyes, or to discredit Ormsby's descriptive 
powers, and was half inclined to believe that 
there must be some mistake ; when she was re- 
assured by her visitor, who began, " I knew that 
you would be at home, as soon as you heard that 
it was I. I was determined to call on you, 
because I feel for your situation ; and connected 
as we are, I have made up my mind to take you 



MATILDA. 295 

in hand ; for however ill I may think that I 
have been used by your Lord Ormsby, and 
some of the family, forget and forgive is my 
motto ; and if I can be of any use to you, you 
may command me. I will introduce you to any 
society that I know of, if you like." 

" Oh, by no means," answered Matilda ; '' I 
neither can expect nor wish that. But I can 
assure you, that I am more grateful than I 
can express for this attention ; which I am aware, 
however, that I can only owe to that kindly 
feeling towards Ormsby, which all in the remotest 
desfree connected with him cannot but have." 

" Quite the contrary, I assure you, my dear," 
said her visitor ; " much more for your own 
sake than his. I have an old crow to pick with 
him, as well as with his old methodistical motliev." 
Though Matilda had been prepared to liear 
Mrs. Laceby speak with dislike of Lady 
Ormsby, from the former quarrel, — of which 
Augustus supposed, from her unforgiving nature, 
she still retained the recollection, — yet she could 
not help being much astonished to hear the 
epithet methodistical applied to such a person. 

She, however, rephed, " I was sorry, indeed, 
to hear, that you liad had some differences with 



S96 MATILDA. 

Lady Ormsby, which had induced you to quarrel 
with her.'''' 

" I quarrel with her ! She quarrelled with 
me. It was all her nonsense. Lord bless you ! 
I'm as easy to come on with as an old glove.'' 

At least, tholight Matilda, Mrs. Laceby is 
not an elegant woman. Satisfied with the repu- 
tation of the higher virtues, she neglects the 
minor graces of society. But her manner to- 
wards me, though somewhat abrupt, is infinitely 
more conciliatory than I had been led to expect. 

Her new acquaintance now left the chair where 
she had been sitting, and, throwing herself on 
the sofa by her, said, '' What a love of a govm. 
that is you have got on, my dear ! do let me 
send my maid to take the pattern. I declare, 
it is quite killing." 

Matilda opened her eyes in mute astonishment, 
at the idea of a notorious prude, not only choos- 
ing to seek her society, but volunteering to copy 
her appearance. 

" Well ! don't stare so, my dear, as if I had 
asked something very extraordinary. I don't 
pretend to say that I shall look so well in it as 
you do. Oh, now you are going to say that you 
meant no such thing. But I can't stay to hear 



3HATILDA. 297 

yo-j give the lie to your countenance. I must 
leave you now ; but I'll introduce you to ail the 
people I live with here. I don't know many 
Enghsh, except a few men ; but I'll make you 
acquainted with the Contessa Franca Vita, la 
Marchesa Bellocchi, and some more of my Ita- 
lian friends. I have not many beaux to lose, or 
else I ought not to bring you into my society ; 
for those pretty peepers, from under their long 
dark lashes, will play the very deuce with the 
men, I can tell you.'' 

With this, and the same warm salute with 
which she had entered, she left the room. 

" How strange and unaccountable," thought 
[Matilda. " I have often heard, that living niucl) 
abroad is supposed to bring about extraordinary 
changes of manner ; but to this extent I could 
not have believed it possible. Iii no one respect 
is she as described by Ormsby, except in her 
rooted antipathy to Lady Ormsby. She is very 
disagreeable, I think, though not in the way I 
had expected. I had much rather have been 
lectured than fondled, by such a person." 

When Ormsby returned, she did not dwell 
much upon the subject to him ; as, having taken 
a dislike to her new acquaintance, she could not . 
o5 



S9S MATILDA. 

speak of her with pleasure ; and Ormsby evi- 
dently being anxious that she should cultivate 
the intimacy with his relation, she rather avoided 
the only subject on which they had differed. 

Harry Wordsworth having excused himself 
from dining with them, as cavalierly as he had 
invited himself, Ormsby and Matilda, after a 
short repast, followed by a long evening ramble, 
returned home about dusk, when the servant 
gave Lord Orm.sby a note, which, upon opening, 
he found to be, from ]Mrs. Laceby, the contents 
of which, at first, he could not comprehend. It 
began : — " Mrs. Laceby presents her compli- 
ments to Lord Ormsby, and scarcely thinks it 
necessary to inform him, that it was from mis- 
taking the person at present residing here, and 
caUiiig herself Lady Ormsby, for the Dowager, 
that she was led into the error of inquiring where 
he lived, and promising a call. Mrs. L. makes 
the less apology for this strange mistake, as she 
is sure that Lord O.'s good sense must have pre- 
vented him from supposing for one moment that 
IMrs. L.^s regard for her own character could 
have allowed her to take any notice of the female 
who she now understands is at present residmg 
under his protection.'' 



MATILDA. S99 

*' Whom, in the name of wonder, then, can 
you have seen this morning ?" said Lord Ormsbj, 
at once irritated and annoyed at the unexpected 
contents of this note. 

" The Lady that was here this morning,'' said 
the servant, " is waiting for you upstairs in the 
drawing room Avith Mr. Wordsworth." 

Lord Ormsby ran up stairs before Matilda, 
and, upon opening the door, found his brother's 
immaculate widow, Arabella Lady Ormsby, 
lounging familiarly on the sofa with Harry 
Wordsworth, who had been an old acquaintance 
of her*s before she descended quite so low as she 
had done previously to her sudden elevation to 
the Peerage. 

" Well, my good fellow,'' said Harry, " how 
late you are ! We have been waiting here for 
you, to give us some tea ; and now we shall miss 
the Opera." 

For one moment Ormsby felt be^vildered at so 
singular a situation; but in another his resolu- 
tion was taken, and addressing the fair Arabella, 
he said, "If your Ladyship would allow me one 
minute's private conversation with you, it may 
perhaps spare your feelings, as well as those of. 



SOO MATILDA. 

this Lady," pointing to Matilda, who then en- 
tered the room. 

"Oh, don't let me interfere with family 
secrets,'' said Harry Wordsworth, carelessly; 
" I'm for the Opera — a rivederia, Signora,"*' said 
he to Matilda, and left the room. 

But Ormsby still motioned his sister-in-law to 
follow him into the next apartment, and they left 
Matilda alone; who, though from not knowing 
who the Lady was, did not comprehend the whole 
extent of the dilemma ; yet, upon reading Mrs. 
Laceby's open note, which Ormsby had left upon 
the table, perceived that there was some strange 
mistake, which could only end in mortification 
to her. 

She was not left long in suspense; for the 
gentle Arabella soon rushed again into the 
room, evidently in a state of great indignation, 
screaming out—" Should be careful with whom 
she associates ! — Indeed, she should have thought 
of that before she went off with you. I shouldn't 
do her so much harm as you have, I take it. 
I'd have you to recollect, that I am an honest 
woman, and have a situation in society. I should 
Hke to know who would suffer most by the old 



MATILDA. 301 

saying of — ' Birds of a feather flock together.' 
I was your brother's lawful wife ; and if I had 
any children, they would have cut you out. But 
v/hat will your brats be, if you have any ?" 

Lord Ormsby interrupted this tirade, by lead- 
ing her gently, but firmly, to the door, and call" 
ing Lady Ormeby's carriage. 

" Well," said she, as she left the room, " you 
shall repent this — you, and your lady who stands 
crying there. I won't bemean myself to call her 
what she is." 

Bitterly did Matilda feel this, the first of those 
mortifications to which, even in a worldly point 
of view, her unhappy situation constantly ex- 
posed her. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

In vain did Ormsby endeavour to efface the 
hmniliating impressions which were left on the 
sensitive mind of Matilda by the interview 
which has just been described. 

" How can you allow yourself, my dearest 
Matilda" said he, "to be so mucli moved by 
the vulgar ebulUtions of that odious creature ? 
That one like her should be blind to the obvious 
distinction between a single, almost pardonable 
error, and habitual vice, is not to be wondered 
at ; nor is it surprising, that she should endeavour 
to reduce you to her own degraded level. Her 
violent temper it was to be expected would ex- 
plode, when reminded of that difference between 
you and her, which either her depraved feelings 
prevented her from perceiving herself, or her 
impudence induced her to expect would not be 
apparent to others.'' 

" Strange instruments,'"* answered IMatiida, 
sliaking her head, " are sometimes made use cf 



MATILDA. bub 

to open oar unwilling eyes to our real situation, 
and to remove the veil with which passion for a 
time has obscured our powers of self-estimation. 
O, Ormsby," added she with emotion, " ail that, 
that odious woman conveyed in her own disgust- 
ing language, is but too, too true."** 

" Why will you say this ? '"* said Ormsby, 
half provoked : " when she presumed to draw a 
comparison between her own infamous self, (who 
was at one time as low and as base as the un- 
happy wretches who starve in the streets,) and a 
delicate and refined creature like you, who liave 
only sought a refuge from intolerable oppression, 
under the protection of him to w^iom 3^ou had 
plighted your first faith, from whom you had 
been separated by unworthy artifice, and to 
whom you will soon be united by indissoluble 
ties. 

" Would that day were come,'"* said Matilda. 
" To all the painful publicity attendant on the 
divorce would I wiUingly submit, if by a patient 
endurance of shame 1 might purchase an escape 
from sin. — For though, dearest Augustus, whilst 
those bright eyes beaming with love are before 
me, I own my guilty pleasure is great ; yet in 
the few moments of refiection vour devoted 



SG4 MATILDA; 

kindness leaves- me, . bitter is the remorse with 
which I feel, that it is a life of sin that we are 
leading,. She said but too truly — that woman. — 
Her present situation is more respectable than 
mine." 

" I cannot bear to. hear you countenance such 
an absurdity,"" said Ormsby, ..a little pettishly. 
" How can you couple respect and. her ? Ycu 
little know how shamefully she abused my poor 
brother's confidence ; and I dare say, if it was 
w^crth inquiring about, that we should find her 
present course of life as infamous." 

"Maybe so," replied Matilda ; "if bhe 
abuses the advantages with which she has been 
unworthily invested, her reproach is the great er.f 
But can you not,, without being offended, make 
allowances for bitter regret on my part, at being 
obliged to own to myself that I am reduced to a 
situation in which her proffered acquaintance can- 
not be considered as an insult ? " 

" Offended with you . I can never be," . said, 
Ormsby, at once softened. "If there was any 
irritation in my manner, it was only at your ob- 
stinately refusing to do justice to yourself. Look 
cheerful again, and you at once restore my 
serenity." 



MATILDA. 305 

'^ Indeed, efforts to appear cheerful are never 
wanting on my part,'' Matilda replied ; "for I 
cannot but be sensible of the great sacrifices you 
have made for me, and the claim which that 
gives you to every exertion of mine, to repay you 
with as much domestic comfort as a poor guilty 
creature, on whom the canker remorse is con- 
stantly preying, has it in her power to impart.'' 

Orrasby knew not what to say. He took two 
or three hasty turns about the room, and then 
stood for a moment on the balcony, not knowing 
whether he should easiest soothe and comfort her 
by contending the point farther, or by admitting 
the justice of her self-reproaches. 

At last, taking his hand kindly, whilst she 
struggled to repress her tears, she continued, — 
" Forgive me if I distress you ; — but one thing 
that woman said which sunk deep into my heart. 
My shame will not end with my own wretched 
existence. — Oh, Augustus — I cannot bear to 
think that I live but to entail infamy on inno- 
cence, — that a few short months will produce a 
living stigma to perpetuate reproach. Let me 
then, whilst I can, revel with all a mother's 
fondness in those instinctive caresses which I may 
receive in the ignorance of infancy ; for the first 



306 MATILDA. 

dawn of intelligence must teach my child to 
blush for her who gave it birth/"* 

This was a subject which could not but make 
much impression on Ormsby. — He was not with- 
out family pride ; on the contrary, though it 
was never offensive or obtrusive, he possessed 
it in a degree almost amounting to a weakness. 
He had often paced up and down the long gal- 
lery at Ormsby Castle, and taken a strange plea- 
sure in stud;)4ng all the noble daubs with which 
it was lined, and in summing up all the illustrious 
links by which, without a single flaw, the ancient 
barony had been handed down through successive 
centuries. He had been unable to keep within 
any moderate bounds his indignation at his 
brother's disgraceful mamage. It was impossible, 
therefore, that any image more gaUing to his 
feelings could have been conjured up, than that 
of his and Matilda's first offspring stigmatized as 
illeojitimate, and wanderino^ an unacknowledn-ed 
outcast from the mansion of his forefathers^ 
whilst his own name and family would be extinc^ 
with him, and the ancient property of his house 
pass away to collateral strangers. — Oppressed 
with this idea, however anxious he was to miti- 
gate Matilda's distress, he knew not liow to begin. 



MATILDA. SOT 

or what consolation to offer, when he hmiself felt 
as poignantly the full force of her regrets. He 
therefore only bit his lips in silence, whilst he 
allowed her uninterruptedly to continue. 

" ^lore than any thing else in the world have 
I often envied your mother's feelings of maternal 
pride in you and Emily. Often have I wished 
that, in my declining years, I might have such a 
son and such a daughter, and have thought that 
if one alone was allowed me, I should not know 
w-hich to choose — whether to experience the con- 
stant care and respectful attention of an attached 
girl, or to feast my ears from afar on the widely- 
spread praises of a beloved and admired boy. — 
But now it is but a choice of evils — whether a 
son shall suffer all the mortifications of forfeited 
rank, doubtful situation, and disputed name ; or 
a daughter be exposed to other as bitter humili- 
ations, — suspicion of character, and avoidance of 
connexion ; and that either shall know that they 
owe all this, which renders their existence irksome, 
to the sin and shame of their parents." 

" Oh, too much of this, dear Matilda," said 
Ormsby ; " I cannot bear to think of it. —But it 
is yet possible that such a calamity may be averted. 
— ^I am in daily expectation of hearing from Lon- 



308 MATILDA. 

clon, that the proceedings prehminary to the 
divorce have been commenced. It is nothing but 
Sir Jameses sordid unwiUingness to part with your 
fortune, which has so long delayed it. It is a 
subject of much too delicate a nature, for one to 
attempt to enter into any arrangement ; otherwise 
how gladly would one facilitate the proceedings 
by removing his objection. 'Twasa strange will, 
that of your uncle." 

" It was indeed," said Matilda, glad to avail 
herself of the relief of her excited feehngs which 
a change of subject offered; — " and strange and 
mysterious seem to have been some of the occur- 
rences of my early life. — I mentioned, I believe 
casually, an extraordinary interview with a stran- 
ger monk, which happened the day previous to 
that in which I was hurried away from Rome. 
His half-hinted communications with respect to 
my family, which, when interrupted, he promised 
to complete on the morrow, made a strong im^ 
pression upon my mind at the time, though 
almost immediately superseded by the more agi- 
tating events which followed. I > cannot say how 
much I now regret having, I fear for ever, lost a 
clue to some disclosures of importance with re- 
spect to my, family ; which, without being able 



MATILDA. S09 

to assign any rational reason for it, I have never- 
theless always unaccountably anticipated." 

" Do you not think," said Ormsby, " that this 
very predisposed excitement of the imagination, 
which you acknowledge, laid you open to the 
<irtifices of some impostor, who, availing himself 
of a little superficial knowledge of your family, 
meant to work upon your credulity for his own 
ends r 

" I admit,'" replied Matilda, " that yours is the 
rational way of interpreting it, to which the 
common sense of any but an eye-witness would 
naturally lead. But there is an unimpeachable 
truth in manner, which must be seen to be 
believed ; and this it was which carried conviction 
to m.y mind. — Had you heard him speak of my 
mother, you would have felt that there was no 
lono-er room to doubt that he had known and 
valued her, of whose presence her unwortliy 
daughter was deprived before she knew her irre- 
parable loss. — ' If,"* said he, ' you still are pure as 
her in whose arms I last beheld you.' Alas ! I was 
so then. — I must not however think of that," con- 
tinued she, checking herself. " He then seemed to 
hint at some communication which he had it in 
his power to make, which would require from nie. 



310 MATILDA. 

if not fortitude to bear, at least disinterestedness 
thankfully to receive." 

'* Most thankfully should we receive it,"' said 
Ormsby, " if, by discovering any flaw in the dis- 
position of your fortune, it tended to remove the 
delays of which that alone is the cause, in the 
proceedings for the divorce. You have not yet 
quite removed my incredulity as to this strange 
adventure being any thing more than a stale trick 
on the part of some impostor ; but at the same 
time I must acknowledge that my early recollec- 
tions of my mother's remarks with some of her 
neighbours soon after the death of vour father, 
would rather tend to confirm the suspicion that 
there was some mystery attending your birth.— 
It was never accurately known who your mother 
was, any more than that it was believed she was a 
foreigner, to whom your father had become at- 
tached during his residence abroad, when a warm 
climate had been recommended for the benefit of 
his heakh. Some surprise, I have also heard, 
was excited by your uncle's sudden and unex- 
plained absence from England about that time ; 
more particularly as it was ascertained that he had 
not attended his brother during! his last illness. 
All this gave rise to much gossip in the country 



MATILDA. 311 

at the time, coupled with many other circum- 
stances which I have since forgotten, though I 
was then j ust of that age when children are allowed 
to hear every thing, from its being erroneously 
supposed they cannot understand it ; and when 
they pick up any story, not only in its original 
shape in the drawing room, but also the second 
edition enlarged and embellished in the nursery. 

This latter part of the conversation, with its 
reference to past times, had so far tended to tran- 
quillize Matilda's mind, as to render her more 
fit to receive the visitors by w^hom it was now 
interrupted, who were no other than Harry 
Wordsworth and Colonel Canteen. 



312 



CHAPTER XXIX. 



. Colonel Canteen had but lately arrived at 
Naples, where he had, in the course of his first 
walk, accidently met with Mr. Wordsworth, 
with whom he had that sort of standing acquaint- 
ance, which in England had for years remained 
stationary at the silent exchange of nods in the 
streets, and newspapers in the clubs. — This, 
however, was quite enough to lead to constant 
companionship at Naples ; and the Colonel hav- 
ing heard from Harry where Ormsby and 
Matilda were domiciliated, proposed a call there 
together. Colonel Canteen, as we have hinted, 
was a great gossip as well as goui'mand — equally 
increnious in the invention of scandal or of sauces, 
— and always anxious to have a finger in the pie, 
in tracasserie as well as patisserie. But he was 
withal, a very high-bred gentleman, rather punc- 
tilious perhaps, and somewhat of the vieille 
cour. His manner, therefore, towards ]\Iatilda 
upon this their first meeting since the elopement. 



MATILDA. 313 

was scrupulously respectful, and to her sensitive 
mind, formed a pleasing contrast with the free 
and easy familiarity of Harry AVordsworth ; 
which latter, after all, was natural to the indivi- 
dual, but which she could never persuade herself 
did not proceed from an impertinence, which 
he might think her present doubtful situation 
sanctioned. Colonel Canteen was very anxious 
that she should go to San Carlos, to hear a new 
opera of Rossini's, which was there divinely sung 
by a constellation of talent rarely united in any 
theatre. — This proposal was warmly seconded by 
Harry Wordsworth, who, fixing his large lan- 
guishing eyes upon her, drawled out a protracted 
^' Do — pray." In spite, however, of this addi- 
tional inducement, she at first positively declined 
it, from a dishke to appearing in public. — But 
when her two visitors were supported by Ormsby, 
who plainly shewed that he should be hurt if she 
did not go, she could no longer resist, and gave 
an unwilling consent. 

Fond as she was of music, it so happened that 
she had never seen an opera in any of the first- 
rate estabhshments of Italy, since she left Milan. 
There, it will be recollected, she was so occupied 
with the performance, on her first visit to La 
p 



314 MATILDA. 

Scala, that it was long before she observed the 
admiration which her appearance excited among 
those better accustomed than she was to the 
comparative darkness of an ItaUan Theatre. 
San Carlos was equally obscure; but from the 
moment she entered the house, she could not 
help fancying that from every box the finger 
of scorn was pointed at her, and every whisper 
with which the performance was occasionally inter- 
rupted, she fancied was telling her tale of shame. 

^' Surely those are my old friends, the Olin- 
skis," said Ormsby ; " Madame Olinski still look- 
ing as young as either of her daughters. — ' Les 
Graces de la Pologne^ they are called ; for they 
live, as well as dress, like three sisters. I must 
just go and see them.'' 

Matilda followed him vsdth an anxious eye out 
of the box. Jealous she could not be ; — yet she 
did not like to find him so very happy to recog- 
nise any women ; nor was she much pleased that 
Colonel Canteen and Mr. Wordsworth should 
hear him, before her, express himself so warmly 
in praise of what, by his own account, seemed 
not exactly a reputable family. — What he had 
said was probably spoken lightly, but it dwelt 
heavily on her heart. 



MATILDA, 315 

Such was the unfortunate situation of her box, 
that this was fated to be a night of mortifications; 
for Ormsby had hardly disappeared, and she 
was still occupied with her own disagreeable 
reflections upon it ; — Colonel Canteen was telling 
her a long story, to which she was attempting 
to appear to listen ; — Harry Wordsworth, who 
was sitting opposite to her, was making his opera 
glass perambulate the house ; when from the 
next box, immediately behind Harry^s chair, a 
preposterous pink hat, overloaded with an infinity 
of feathers, was poked round, and Matilda 
plainly perceived the fine dark eyes of Arabella 
Lady Ormsby, staring full upon her; and in 
a moment afterwards, a well-rounded arm, all 
bedizened with bracelets by the dozen, tapped 
the unconscious Mr. Wordsworth's averted 
shoulder, and its owner addressed him with 
" Ah, Harry — you seem in the wrong box there 
with my would-be sister, but as yet not sister 
in law^ any more than in love." 

Then beckoning him closer to her, and speak- 
ing in a pretended whisper, but loud enough for 
Matilda to hear, (and affectedly, as if to conceal 
her meaning, addressing him in Italian — of a 
superficial smattering of which she was more 



316 MATILDA. 

vain than it deserved) she added — " Che s:a il 
tuo dovere di far geloso quello mio maladetto 
fratdhr 

" Tace '. tace!^' said Harry, whose hitherto 
matchless assurance sunk abashed before tl^e 
superior impudence of his female friend : — So 
true it is, that no masculine brass is at all a 
match for a well-bronzed woman. 

Here was a striking instance of this ; for to 
avoid still plainer hints as to what his conduct 
should be, Harry Wordsworth was obliged to 
leave the box. The front place which he had 
left was immediately occupied by the colonel, 
who, not finding that Matilda reciprocated con- 
versation very readily, was glad to place himself 
where he could command a view of the house ; 
' and peeping into the next box on the opposite 
side to that from which the gay widow had shewn 
herself, he suddenly exclaimed, " Why, I'm 
sure that's the admiral. How d'ye do, Admiral ? 
When did you arrive? How d'ye do, Mrs. 
Laceby ?''' 

These inquiries were answered by a precise- 
sounding female voice, which asked, in return, — 
'^ Are you alone, there. Colonel ?" and a long, 
i^Iiin neck, which seemed unused to bending, was. 



MATILDA. SIT 

with some difficulty, made to insert itself into the 
box, and to display a most severely angular set 
of features, appropriately crowned wdth a rigidly 
mathematical sort of toque. It was but the 
apparition of an instant ; for when ]\Irs. Laceby's 
little prim grey eyes met those of Matilda, who 
was studiously sitting, rather concealed, this 
severe censor withdrew with horror, and the 
curtain was, at the same time, offensively pulled 
more closely round her, as if to preserve her 
from the dangers of contact to which such a 
neighbourhood had exposed her. 

" I must just go and speak to the A-dmlral,'' 
said Colonel Canteen ; " I have not seen him 
for such a time. Excuse me for one moment. 
Lady Matilda," he added, and left the box. 

When our heroine was thus left alone, in vain 
she endeavoured to keep her eyes fixed on the 
stage, and to confine her attention to the music. 
She could not help, occasionally, stealing a peep 
into the Olinskis'' box opposite, where Ormsby 
^emed to have been most cordially received by 
both mother and daughters, and where she could 
see that he was endeavouring to make hmiself 
particularly agreeable. Nor could she prevent, 
occasionally, overhearing scraps of the conversa- 



318 MATILDA. 

tion which was passing on each side of her. On 
the one, there seemed nothing that concerned her 
in particular, as the widow was only flirting 
pretty freely with some young Italians, who 
appeared to be in her train ; but in the intervals, 
when the conversation on that side was rather 
soft than loud, she could distinctly hear the shrill, 
harsh voice of Mrs. Laceby, elevated as if in 
indignation, and pronouncing her name with a 
contemptuous intonation, whilst she repeated 
her opinion of — " hardened creature" — " appears 
in public" — " no sense of shame;" — a sentence 
against which Colonel Canteen seemed, in vain, 
endeavouring to protest. 

Mrs. Laceby was one of those who literally 
feasted upon the feelings of her neighbours. 
With her the discovery of vice in another was 
equivalent to the practice of virtue by herself. 
Proud of her own unimpeachable correctness of 
conduct, whilst she anathematized the weaknesses 
of others, she considered herself quite at liberty, 
by neglecting the amiable in manner, to render 
virtue odious, and her home disagreeable ; and 
as long as she relentlessly denounced those whom 
passion had induced to desert their domestic 
duties, she considered herself quite justified in 



MATILDA. 319 

giving her own husband daily cause to wish, in 
vain, that she would follow their example, and 
leave him in peace. 

From all that Matilda that night both heard 
and saw, she felt but too sensibly the difference 
there was in her's and Ormsby's situation. True, 
they were at present, in every respect united ; 
and she had never, for a moment, had the least 
reason to doubt his affection ; on the contrary, 
his devotion had seemed only to increase with 
the continuance of the connexion. But should 
any thing happen to dissolve that connexion, 
how different upon the one and the other would 
be the consequences of separation ! From his 
reception that night by the Olinskis', she per- 
suaded herself that he would not only be restored 
to his former place in society, but that he would, 
be perhaps more than ever recherche from his 
temporary seclusion. But what, on the other 
hand, would become of her ? From what had 
that night passed on each side of her, she per- 
ceived, that if deprived of his protection, she 
should be exposed to every species of contumely ; 
— that the two extremes of her own sex, differing 
in every thing else, could unite, at least, in 
annoyance to her; — and, that from men, she 



320 MATILDA. 

would only have to choose between contemptuous 
neglect and still more insulting attentions. 

The pain which these reflections gave her, 
did not make the time appear to pass more 
quickly, whilst in her solitary box she wa? 
impatiently awaiting Ormsby's return. She felt 
additionally hurt, too, that he should be so slow 
in perceiving that she was alone. Ifc was no 
longer in the front place in the Olinskis' box, 
which he had at first occupied, and she had 
therefore concluded that he was on his return 
to her ; and had been every moment expecting 
the door to be opened by him, when she ob- 
served that Madame Olinski was still talking 
with considerable animation to some one in the 
back of the box ; and this person's head being 
for a moment advanced, she perceived it to be 
Ormsby, who was still there. This discovery 
was almost too much for her harrassed spirits; 
particularly as the curtain dropped before Ormsby 
returned, saying, " What a short ballet ! I had 
no idea it was so near over, or I would have 
returned sooner." 

" Short, did you think it ?''"' she replied ; " to 
me it appeared to last for ever.'' " Have you 
been long alone ? *" added Ormsby. " I saw the 



MATILDA. S21 

Colonel still with you when I made a move to 
return to you some time back ; but Madame 
Glinski insisted upon my not leaving them so 
soon, and they are so entertaining." 

^latilda did not feel equal to making any com- 
ment upon their encomium at the time it was 
made, as they were at that moment descending 
the crowded staircase ; but after they were in the 
carriage on their return home, Ormsby again 
resumed, " Indeed, I don^t any where know such 
}>leasant people as the Ohnskis." 

^' Dear Onnsby,'"* IMatilda replied, in a voice 
of stifled emotion, " Are you sure that it is not 
the contrast to the life you have been lately 
leading, which makes you think so ? Any one 
would appear pleasant after your poor Matilda, 
who can no longer boast that easy flow of spirits 
which is derived from a mind at ease, nor has yet 
attained the hardened feelings which habit may 
perhaps some day or other give her." There was 
something in the plaintive but uncomplaining 
tone of this gentle appeal, which sensibly touched 
Ormsby. High spirits, a natural turn for society, 
and the first renewal of a former agreeable, 
though not' valuable acquaintance, had led him 
for a moment into something very like neglect of 



MATILDA. 



Matilda; but not only was the ardour of his- 
affection for her unabated, but he had at all times 
a most peculiar sensibility to self-reproach at 
having wounded the feelings of others. This 
made him suffer severely from the conviction that 
she had felt his conduct as neglect. 

" Can you then suppose that all the frivolous 
amusement of all the OHnskis in the world, could 
compensate to me for causing one moment's unea- 
siness to my own Matilda 'f"^ Thus he fervently 
exclaimed, and thus he truly felt ; — and the warn- 
ing he then received, made him from that time 
more than ever scrupulous in his exclusive devo- 
tion to her. 



CHAPTER XXX. 



It may perhaps be objected to my heroine, 
that she seems at this time only to have been 
rendered acutely sensible of the degradation of 
her situation, when brought actually in contact 
with the contempt of the world ; and that at other 
times she appears to have enjoyed intervals of hap- 
piness. But let it be recollected, how long she 
had been a stranger to kindness or attention at 
home, and that now she was engrossed by the 
exclusive devotion of one whose whole business 
seemed to be to endeavour to conceal from her 
every reality but the consciousness of being be- 
loved. But as each of these successive incidents 
served to rouse her better feelings, her sense of 
shame and remorse became more and more acute, 
and the intervening gleams more broken and 
disturbed. 

In pursuance of his desire to alleviate the in- 
evitable desagremens of Matilda's situation, and 
prevent her attention from dweUing upon the 



S24 MATILDA. 

mortifications which might follow every attempt 
to mingle again in society, Ormsby proposed a 
party to Paestum. To this Matilda willingly ac- 
ceded, and Colonel Canteen and Mr. Wordsworth 
also begged to be allowed to accompany them. 
The drive from Naples to Paestum was delightful, 
it being just the season when such an excursion 
is most enjoyable. The first September rains 
were just over, and the cloudless brilliancy of the 
sky was restored, with that renewed freshness 
w^hich the long continuance of dry weather had 
previously destroyed. 

The pre-arrangement of a party of pleasure is 
not in Italy, as it is in England, offering a certain 
premium for disappointment. In England, the 
long expected morning is sure to be ushered in by 
a faUing glass and lowering clouds; and after a 
doubtful debate of " To be, or not to be ?"— when 
the devoted victims at last desperately determine 
to persevere, — parasols are exchanged for um« 
brellas, the gay holiday garb is shrouded in the 
thickest cloaks, and with funereal faces they start 
in pursuit of painful pleasure ; probably on a 
water party, — with as much of that element above 
as below them,— and adding the certainty of 
beins drenched to the chance of being drowned. 



MATILDA. 525 

Bat in Italy the rain descends at stated periods, 
does its duty? and then is no longer a matter of 
speculation or of dread. 

Upon arriving at Passtum, whilst Matilda 
stopped to take a hasty sketch, the three gentlemen 
strolled througli the ruins ; where their attention 
was attracted towards the remains of a very sub- 
stantial luncheon, which shewed that there was 
also another party there, and- which some empty 
porter bottles seemed to mark as English. 

" One can track the haunts of one's country- 
men, like the encampments of the Indian tribes, 
by the bones of the victims they have devoured," 
said Ormsby, pointing to some well-cleaned 
drumsticks and pinions. 

" We are grown a dreadfully locomotive po- 
pulation," said Harry Wordsworth ; "all our 
cits now desert the Thames for the Nile, shoot 
the cataracts instead of London Bridge, and 
instead of a chop at the Red House, pic nic 
among the pyramids. But this has been a most 
ravenous tribe, by the havoc they have made. 
Look at ail these sacred shrouds, from which 
these mangled remains have been cruelly torn,^' 
added he, collecting, between the tips of the 
fingers of his French gloves, almost a file of 



326 MATILDA. 

Galignanrs Messengers, which had served as 
covering to the profusion of food that had 
been dispatched."' 

" Do you remember,'*' said Ormsby, " Dr. 
Johnson's indignation at ' the feehngs of that 
man, whose patriotism would not gain force on 
the plains of Marathon, or Avhose piety would 
not grow warmer among the ruins of lona."* 
What would he think then of those who could 
pick chicken bones under the pillars of the 
Temples of Paestum ? 

" Why," said Harry, " that in all proba- 
bility they had that sort of philosophy which 
constitutes happiness ; according to the French- 
man, who says, 'pour bien jouir de la vie, il 
Juut avoir im mauvais cosur et un hon estomac.'' " 
" This is all very fine," said Colonel Canteeil, 
who had been a silent, but not an inattentive 
listener to a conversation in which eating formed 
so principal a feature ; " but," added he, '' one 
cannot consent to stai^e upon stones. These 
pillars would be rather hard of digestion, how- 
ever well they may do to ruminate upon." 

At this moment, distant tittering and giggling 
announced the approach of the party, whose 
previous proceedings had excited so much at- 



MATILDA. S£7 

tention, and, at the opposite angle of the building 
from that where the gentlemen had been standing, 
and nearer to the spot where Matilda was seated 
sketching, appeared a number of ladies and 
gentlemen, whose gay attire, merry tones, and 
confused chattering, seemed to shew that they 
were enjoying that excess of excitement, which 
English people only experience at a genuine 
junket. A disagreeable impression, too, was 
made upon Matilda, that amongst this confusion 
of tongues, there were some voices that she had 
heard before; and this was painfully confirmed^ 
when she distinguished, elevated above the rest, 
the shrill tones of Mrs. Hobson. 

" Well, you may say w^hat you please, but 
this temple, or house, or pest-town, or whatever 
you call it, is only fit for the lazarettos to live 
in, with nothing but their pillows for walls." 

" Paestum, Ma'am," said Mrs. Simperton on 
her right ; and '^ Lazaronis you mean, Ma'am," 
said Mrs. Woodhead on her left. " And the 
Lazaroni," added Tcun, " have only walls for 
pillows, instead of pillows as you call them^ for 
walls." 

At these unwelcome sounds, Matilda drew 
her veil closer on the side from which they came. 



SiJeS MATILDA. 

and continued intent upon her sketch book. 
But at the same time Miss Jemima Hob son, 
who was a bit of a romp, and was still of that 
innocent age, when a happy ignorance both of 
the manners and the morals of the world is at 
least supposed, cried out " Oh ! look ! here's a 
lady drawing! I must just run and have a 
peep ;" then, skipping close up to our heroine, 
she exclaimed, " Law, mamma ! if it a'nt aunt 
Matilda V At this dreaded recognition, Ma- 
tilda's pencil dropped from her hand, whilst her 
head sunk closer to her book. 

" "What !'' cried Mrs. Hobson ; " come here, 
child." 

" Come here, Jemima," said l\Irs. Simpertoii. 

*' Come away, directly," re-echoed Mrs. 
Woodhcad ; and all the females of the family 
imm.ediately skuttled away, followed by their 
attendant beaux. 

" And is it come to this?'' thought -Matilda, 
as she trembled in every joint. " Must I hide 
my head abashed, in the presence of a woman 
whose gross vulgarity of mind, as well as of 
manners, I used to despise and ridicule ? But it 
is as it should be. Self-respect, once forfeited, 
the rest follows of course. Oh, my God!" slie 



MATILDA. 329 

exclaimed, bursting into an agony of tears, 
" How am I fallen — how debased."*' 

When the Hobson party passed Lord Ormsby 
and his friends, there was a little awkwardness 
of deportment as they hurried by. Mr. Sim- 
perton stopped an instant, and his natural ser- 
vility towards any great man, struggling with 
his sense of propriety, he hesitatingly addressed 
Ormsby ; — " I hope your Ludship will not at- 
tribute any thing in our conduct to intentional 
disrespect, or spontaneous slight ; but your Lud- 
ship must be aware, that in persons of my cloth, 
some attention to appearance is required." 

For a moment. Lord Ormsby eyed this ob- 
server of appearances from head to foot, as he 
stood opposite to him, nearly two thousand miles 
from his cure. It was hard to say, whether his 
' cloth' was marked by his broad-brimmed white 
beaver, his sky blue neckcloth, or his light jean 
jacket, tight nankeen pantaloons, and buff boots. 

" You are, no doubt, quite right. Sir, to act up 
to your own ideas of attention to appearances,'"* said 
Lord Ormsby, and passed on towards Matilda, after 
telling his two friends that he would return to 
them : for he imagined that she might have been 
discomposed by the suddenness of the meeting 



S30 MATILDA. 

with the Hobsons, and he did not wish that they 
should witness her distress. 

The Hobson party in the meantime prepared 
to depart. Old Hobson was not there, as he had 
insisted upon being left behind at Naples, though 
utterly helpless there by himself ; because, in his 
business days at Manchester, he had always 
refused to be included in any junketing expedi- 
tion. Squire Woodhead had driven his lovely 
bride in a new phaeton, which he had sported 
upon their marriage ; and Tom, emulous of the 
charioteering fame of his friend, had undertaken 
to act as toolsman to Mr. and Mrs. Simperton, 
his mother, and youngest sister, in a hired cara- 
tella, drawn by two rather unmanageable half- 
broken Calabrian poneys. 

Tom was a little out of humour at this preci- 
pitate departure ; and his notions of decorum not 
being very distinct, he would willingly have com- 
promised all the female propriety of the family 
(which had induced them to avoid Lady Ma- 
tilda) for the chance of being noticed himself 
by any of the gentlemen of her party ; a dis- 
tinction he much desired, from what he consi- 
dered such " tiptop first-rates." 

" What an escape we have had," said Mrs. 



MATILDA. S31 

Simperton. " What would they have said in 
the archdeaconry, if they had known that Je- 
mima had been just going to speak to her ?" I 
don't think that Mrs. Philpotts would have 
spoken to me if she had spoken to her — would 
she, Mr. S. ?'' 

" Fudge !'' muttered Tom, as, mounting the 
box to follow his friend, who was already under 
weigh, he vented the rest of his spleen in a cut 
at one of the Calabrians ; who replied at once 
with a grunt, a squeak, a caper, and a kick. 

" For Heaven's sake, take care, Tom,'' said 
Mrs. Simperton; " you would not surely frighten 
me in my situation." But Tom, whose iron 
nerves left him very httle regard for the fanciful 
apprehensions of any one, however interesting 
the situation by which they were caused, perse- 
vered, without heeding this pathetic appeal, in 
an intemperate conflict with his refractory steeds ; 
which soon gave the rest of the party cause to 
share in Mrs. Simperton's (no longer affected) 
alarm. 

Matilda's spirits having been completely upset 
by this unexpected meeting with the Hobsons^ 
and the pleasure of the party consequently de- 
stroyed, Ormsby became anxious to return, and 



332 MATILDA. 

Harry Wordsworth and the Colonel having suc- 
ceeded in getting the carriage ready nearly as 
soon as the other party had effected their depar- 
ture, they followed on the same route. After 
they had proceeded a little distance from P^stum, 
Harry Wordsworth remarked, that the tracks of 
the carriage before them, instead of keeping 
straight in the middle of the road, had gone waver- 
ing and serpentining backwards and forwards like 
a fanciful scroll on a paper border. Hardly had 
he made the observation, when the postilions gave 
a yell of delight at something that seemed to 
amuse them just as they came to a place where 
the road was narrow, and the ditch was wide, 
— and, deposited in the latter, they descried the 
whole Hobson family. Their postilions, who 
enjoyed the joke uncommonly, pvissed them at 
full gallop, when Matilda exclaimed, " Oh, stop ! 
stop, for Heaven's sake ! they may be hurt — may. 
be killed." 

To persuade their drivers to stop was not the 
work of a moment ; but when it was effected, 
Matilda begged Colonel Canteen to return and 
see if any of the other party were hurt, and if so, to 
offer them the use of her carriage to convey them 
to the nearest house. The Colonel gladly under- 



MATILDA. S3S 

look the comiTiission, aiid upon arriving there 
addressed Mr. Simperton, Avho, though much 
discomposed, seemed to have been uppermost in 
the scramble : " The lady I am with begged I 
would express her 'regret at the accident, and 
her hope, that should any be much injured by 
it, they would accept the loan of her carriage 
to convey them where they w^ould have assistance. 
You will perfectly understand, that the deli- 
cacy- of her situation prevents her appearing 
herself, to oifer any personal assistance, which 
she would otherwise liave been most happy to do." 
*' What i'"^ said Mrs. Hobson, as she rose with 
dignity from the ditch, — " What, indeed ! no, 
tell her that / am not ashamed so shew my face — 
/ don t want to be white-washed — my hands are 
clean:' The Colonel could hardly help smiling 
at observing how far her present appearance 
practically confirmed these assertions ; which will 
be best imagined by recollecting that the ditch 
was deep, and the rains had been recent and 
abundant. The well-bred messenger w-as, how- 
ever, disgusted at the rude manner in which his 
well-meant embassy had been received ; and 
finding that none of the party seemed seriously 
the worse, he retired, and communicated to 



334 MATILDA. 

Matilda only so much of the substance of the 
answer, as a man of the world could reduce into 
civil terms. And this was the last Matilda ever 
saw of the Hobson Family. 



SS5 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

It was not many days after the expedition to 
Paestum, that Matilda had one evening sought, 
in the neighbourhood of the Camaldole Convent, 
a spot where, un soothed by the consolations of 
Ormsby, she might for a time abandon herself 
uninterruptedly to her own bitter reflections ; — a 
melancholy indulgence, in which she had latterly 
often taken a strange pleasure. As she leant 
over a low wall, from which is seen one of the 
finest and most varied prospects in the world, 
all nature's brilliant loveliness was wasted on 
her, whose eyes, intently fixed on vacancy, con- 
veyed no other impression but that all was dark 
and dreary within. 

She at length turned to depart, — when the 
first outward object that succeeded in attracting 
her attention was the figure of the monk of Saint 
Peter's, who stood before her. — He seemed in no 
haste to break that protracted silence which 
followed this recognition. At last he began: 



^6 MATILDA. 

" Something of this I had heard, and much I 
feared. Hadst thou been thus when last I saw 
thee, thou mightest have passed unheeded by. — 
Happy even then thou didst not seem, or thou 
hadst not looked so like thy suffering, saint-like 
mother. But she never looked as thou lookest 
now." 

" Oh no, I trust in Heaven she never had the 
cause !" Matilda said. 

" She never had,"'"* the monk replied ; " for I 
know too well from whence such desolation of 
appearance, such utter wretchedness must come. 
Those who have reaped the bitter harvest of 
remorse, know too well the disfiguring furrows 
that it leaves. But fallen as I see thou art, how 
can I hope that the tale I have to tell, which 
requires high-minded self-sacrifice to bear, will 
not be rejected by thy unworthy ears .^" 
- *' Nay," replied Matilda — " though I am little 
prone to palliate my offences, yet do not think 
that any worldly sacrifice would be difficult to 
me. Did you but know my unhappy story" 
''Hold," interrupted the monk, "I ask not 
thy confidence : my duty is to force my own on 
thee. Why should I listen to the sad recital of 
your guilt .^— I am too old to indulge idle curi~ 



MATILDA. 337 

osity — too forlorn to offer comfort — too abject to 
give advice. But to be brief, and to the point : 
I coiise to teil thee that Delaval and its ample 
domains are not thine by right." 

*' Most welcome news!" cried Matilda, whose 
thoughts immediately turned towards the eiFect 
which this discovery might have in facihtating 
tlie divorce. 

'- I am glad to hear that exclamation," conti- 
nued the monk ; " for then I need only hint the 
outlines of my tale, and give at once the ample 
proofs of its truth into the hands of one by whom 
it appears that they will be thankfully received. 
Of myself it is not necessary to say much, except 
that mj name is Mortimer, — that I am descended 
from one of the younger branches of an ancient 
English Cathohc family, whose reduced means 
obliged them to have me educated in a foreign 
university ; from whence, merely from the absence 
of any other mode of providing for me, I was de- 
signed for the priesthood. It was impossible 
that any destination more at variance with my 
natural disposition could have been devised. 
But my rehgion excluding me from any of the 
active and honourable professions in my own 
country, my patriotic feelings prevendng me from 
a 



338 MATILDA. 

serving against her, and my family pride making 
me despise the drudgery of a counting-housey 
there seemed no alternative ; and having taken 
the necessary vows, I became, in due time, but 
whilst still very young, an inmate in the house of 
your grandfather, in the character of family priest 
and confessor. It is no vanity now to say that I 
soon grew to be a great favourite with all the 
family ; but it is some shame to add, that in the 
situation I then filled I found the dissipated cha- 
racter of the last Lord Wakefield most congenial 
to my own. I was his constant companion, and 
in the course of a career of profligacy I con- 
tracted large pecuniary obligations to him. Even 
in his early days of apparently heedless dissipa- 
tion I had reason to know that he cherished 
deeper designs, and that ambition even then had 
charms for him. The ill health of your amiable 
and excellent father seemed to hold out prospects 
of his being able to indulge these extended views ; 
and whilst I was the chosen companion of that 
father in his last toin- abroad, I blush to say that 
I was a secret spy upon his actions, devoted to the 
interests of the younger brother. 

" When Lord AN'akefield, who mixed little in 
the world, became enamoured of the beautiful 



MATILDA. 339 

daughter of a noble Milanese, all my artifices 
were exerted in vain to prevent that union; 
which was stolen and secret, from the insuperable 
objections entertained by her family against him 
as an Englishman ; though in this instance those 
objections were not strengthened by any differ- 
ence of religion. This marriage seemed a death- 
blow to the hopes of my patron ; who wrote, ac- 
cusing me strongly of neglect of his interest, and 
threatening me with that ruin which the extent of 
my pecuniary obligations to him made it at any 
time in his power to effect. But during the preg- 
nancy of your mother. Lord Wakefield, v/hose 
health had appeared perfectly re-established, 
suddenly sickened of a fever. Almost from the 
first, his life was despaired of; and then it was 
that he made that disposition of his property 
which left every thing that was in his own power 
absolutely to his posthumous offspring, male and 
female : much however, in case of the child 
proving a girl, necessarily accompanied the title. 
The guardianship was left to the mother if she 
survived, and in case of her death, to the uncle. 
" This uncle, upon hearing of his brother^s 
death, hastened to the neighbourhood, where he 
remained concealed, but in constant communica- 



340 MATItBA. 

tion with me ; whilst the unhappy widow, an 
exile from her own home, awaited the event of 
her confinement. 

<^ When in due time the unfortunate Rosalia 
was delivered of twins, I was the wretched instru- 
ment used by Lord Wakefield to conceal the fact 
that the boy was born alive ; and I presented you 
alone to your moth^'s longing arms. It was 
not long that she enjoyed even this consolation ; 
for not many months afterwards she sunk broken- 
hearted into an untimely grave, and you were 
committed to the exclusive care of your uncle. 

«' From this moment Lord Wakefield's con- 
duct towards me changed. He hated me, I be- 
lieve, for the services I had rendered him ; and 
when, after lingering abroad two or thi^e years, 
he returned to England, he would not hear of my 
accompanying him, but made me an allowance 
conditional upon my remaining in Italy, and su- 
perintending the concealment of the rightful hew, 
who was consigned to the care of a peasant. 

" Upon the breaking out of the war, this allow- 
ance became irregular; and when at length it 
completely stopped, nothing but the dread of the 
infamy which would attend my share in the busi- 
ness prevented my starting for England, in order 



MATILDA. 841 

to upbraid Lord Wakefield and disclose the 
whole. ^1'* bstiBv/jp, 3aK'd nwo i^d ,moi1 'i ^' 

" But though this I dared not do, I could not 
bear to see the noble child, who was born to a 
far different fate, degraded by menial toil. And 
that discovery which I had not the courage to 
make complete, I communicated in part to his 
maternal grandfather. Count Santelmo, — by whom 
he was gladly acknowledged." ^t\^Jmifxlti(fi : tj 

" By whom did you say .?" cried Matilda, with 
breathless eagerness. 

" By Count Santelmo," repeated the monk. 
V*? Merciful powers ! he is then my brother V 
she exclaimed ; " and there is one in the world 
whom I can love without sin."" 

" Thou knowest him, then ?'''' cried the monk. 
" Tlien, let me conjure thee, hasten to do jus- 
tice and make restitution, in order that those 
empty repinings, and that barren repentance, 
which for years have embittered my cloistered 
privacy, may at length take the substantial form 
of real atonement. Then may I hope to close 
my eyes in peace ; and, by disinterestedly offering 
to resign that which, backed by the proofs I 
have to give, the law might in time force frgm 



S42 MATIL»ii, 

thee, thy errors may be obliterated too, and tfiy 
faults forgiven.'^ 

" I trust," said Matilda, *' that under no 
circumstances should I desire to retain by arti- 
fice, that which was not mine by right. But in 
this instance I will not pretend to take the merit 
of a sacrifice. Situated as I am, it will be more 
than a relief to be rid of the burthen of my inhe- 
ritance ; and that which to a stranger I would 
gladly resign, I shall even rejoice in transfer- 
ing to one, whose happiness, if I am not mis- 
taken, it will contribute to ensure." 

" Something," replied the monk, " I had 
imperfectly learnt of the difficulties of his latter 
life ; and this had made me more than ever 
anxious to unburthen myself of those painful 
disclosures ; for whilst I heard that he continued 
in the tranquil enjoyment of his maternal inheri- 
tance, I was the less eager to cause the confusion 
which must arise from reversing the present set- 
tlement of the property. But I can never bear 
to think of his wandering about an unacknov/- 
ledged exile, when it is in my power to restore 
to him country and fortune, of which I unjustly 
deprived him. Here, therefore, without hesitation. 



MATH.DA. 343 

I resign into your hands those proofs of the truth 
of my tale, which you will find in this pacquet 
of written communications, between me and 
your uncle, whose hand-writing you will recog- 
nise. — I give them to you, I repeat, in the most 
perfect confidence, from the little I have seen 
of you, that you will make that use of them 
which justice requires ; as my monastic vows and 
habits of seclusion would render it inconvenient 
for me to take an active part in the business. — 
Should any further information be required, I 
shall be found here at the same hour to-morrow.^' 
Saying this he slowly departed, and Matilda 
hastened to communicate to Ormsby the strange 
disclosures of this eventful morning. 



;^" 2M 



CHAPTER XXXII. *^'** 



Upon heaiing from Matilda these strange and 
unexpected discoveries, Ormsby became most 
eager to lose no time in probing them to the 
bottom, and obtaining, if possible, further proofs 
from the monk, in confirmation of the story he 
told. In pursuance of this object, he himseif 
kept the appointment which Mortimer had made 
for the morrow, on the same spot, and at the 
same hour, and he then succeeded in obtaining 
a skht of some other documents in the hand- 
writing of the last Lord Wakefield, which, for 
liis own satisfaction, the monk still retained in 
his possession. He also learnt the name rjid 
residence of the " Fattore," in the neighbour- 
hood of Genoa, on whose farm the yo\mg 
Santelmo had, in concealment, passed the first 
years of his infancy, till restored to his grand- 
father's family ; also the direction of the priest 
who solemnized the private marriage betAveen his 
parents, and who was now the piincipal of a 



MAXILDA. 345 

ynonastery on the Piedmontese side of the Alps. 
There were also the names of several distin- 
guished families whom Mortimer had formerly 
known, as resident upon the borders of Pied- 
mont and the Milanese, in which neighbourhood 
the Santelmo property was situated, and who, 
if still living, must recollect many circumstances 
connected with the supposed marriage and sub- 
sequent death of the unfortunate Countess Rosa- 
lia. All these, and more than these confirma- 
tions, Ormsby's experience told him would be 
necessary, in order to convert the moral convic- 
tion he himself felt of the truth of the story told 
by [Mortimer, into that legal proof which could 
alone be serviceable to Santelmo. 

Our hero's abstract love of justice would have 
induced him to think lightly of any trouble or 
difficulties which might attend his endeavours 
to restore to an injured individual his birthright, 
when chance seemed to have confided to him 
the means requisite for attaining that object. 
But other motives were certainly not without 
their share, in causing him to make that sacrifice 
of his feelings and his inclinations, which he was 
afterwards induced to do, by his eagerness to 

' a 'JtJJi.: . . ^ O - , ; 



346 M'ATILDA, 

effect the reinstalmeRt of Santelmo in the property 
of his fathers. 

However Sir James Dornton might delay his 
proceedings for the divorce, from a sordid desire 
to make his profit from some speculations he had 
undertaken on the Delaval property, before he 
should be obliged to relinquish it, yet there 
seemed no doubt, from the publicity of the 
elopement, that the divorce would follow sooner 
or later. But that it should be sooner, and not 
later, was of the utmost importance to Ormsby ; 
who could not bear the idea that it might be 
delayed till after the birth of that child whom 
Matilda must now, before many months elapsed, 
bring into the world. He looked forward w^ith 
horror to the idea of perpetuating reproachful 
distinctions even in the bosom of his family, and 
seeing his first, perhaps his favourite child, ille- 
gitimatized, and supplanted by ail those who 
might come after him — his younger brothers by 
blood, but superiors in rank 

Distracted with this idea, which his kind nature 
and his family pride united to render painful, he 
knew^ that the establishment of another rightful 
claimant to the Delaval property would mainly 



MATILDA. 347 

contribute to accelerate his object ; and that for 
the timely acknowledgment of that claimant's 
right, it was necessary his own personal exer- 
tions should be used without delay, in accumu- 
lating the proofs of which he had received the 
clue. 

Feeling all this, yet could he not resolve to 
make the effort to leave Matilda in her present 
situation. To prevail upon him to do so, all her 
influence was used, and in a manner which her 
disinterested nature led her to believe would be 
most effective. 

" Till now I could never have believed that 
any combination of circumstances could have 
reconciled me to your absence, much less induced 
me to urge it. But it is time to reject all selfish 
considerations. There are those to whom we 
have done much wrong, to whom we may now 
jnake a tardy reparation. 

" Let hone imagine, that, by the criminal indul- 
gence of their passions, they injure themselves 
alone. Your excellent mother, and the innocent 
Emily, — to them we have brought shame and 
sorrow, instead of the comfort their kindness 
merited ; but we still have it in our power to 
ensure their happiness. I have often regretted 



S48 MATILDA. 

to you the attachment between Emily and San- 
telmo, which his condition rendered hopeless. 
Let us then not lose a moment in removing 
the only objection that could exist to the 
union of two beings every way farmed for each 
other/"" 

" You cannot be more anxious than I am for 
such an event," returned Ormsby ; " but here, 
at least, there is no cause for such breathless 
haste, as to force me from you even now. Sure of 
each other, wliat can prevent the timely accom- 
plishment of their wishes ?" 

'* Oh, Ormsby," answered Matilda, " we, at 
least, cannot blind ourselves to the dangers cf 
delay. Had worldly objections never interposed 
to part us, how different had been our j:iresent 
situation ! And if Emily will not be exposed to 
those fatal artifices which were used to separate 
us, yet think how much more hopeless than your's 
could ever be, is Santelmo's condition ; — a 
banished wanderer upon the face of the earth, 
with no ties of country or of family— his ardent 
Tiatiire burning with a sense of wrong, which it is 
too probable will, ere long, hurry him headlong 
into some desperate design. Should we, then, 
lose one moment in caving liim from impending 



MATILDA. S49 

ruin, and restoring him to that happy position in 
society which is his by right — where his love of 
liberty may find an ample, though peaceful field 
for the exertion of its energies, and his kindlier 
affections meet their just reward ?''"' 

Mov^d by arguments such as these, seconded 
as they were by his own anxiety to omit no ]X)s- 
sible means of accelerating the divorce, Ormsby 
admitted that he ought, at all hazards, to exert 
liimself to procure the necessary proofs, in confir- 
mation of the birth of iVIatilda's brother. And 
as it was evident to both, that she was not at 
present in a state to accompany him in a long 
and harrassing journey, their temporai-y separa- 
tion was inevitable. She had, however, a par- 
ticular dislike to being left alone at Naples, — the 
ceaseless bustle and exuberant gaiety of which, 
was most distasteful to her in her present state of 
mind. Nice occurred to them both as a tranquil 
retreat, in which she might await his return ; and 
an opportunity of a conveyance thither, by sea, 
occurring at that time, they gladly availed them- 
selves of it ; and Matilda left matchless Naples, 
not only without regret, but with a sense of dis- 
gust at the recollection of many of the miseries 



350 MATILDA. 

to which so uncongeniai a residence had exposed 
her. 

Striking was the contrast which the place of 
their destination furnished upon their first arrival. 
Instead of an ever-varying chaos of sounds, the 
eiFervescence of the reckless mirth of the most 
mercurial population in the world, all around them 
seemed now hushed into a preternatural stillness. 
The very climate was soft rather than brilliant, — 
as if partaking of the subdued tone most con- 
genial to its sad office, of soothing the suiFerings 
of invahds, and delaying where it cannot even- 
tually prevent the progress of lingering— often 
hopeless disease. 

In a small and secluded villa, within a short 
distance from the town, Matilda was established, 
previously to Ormsby's departure; which, knowing 
to be inevitable, they neither of them wished 
should be delayed. Ormsby had already written 
to his man of business, in England, enclosing 
copies of the late Lord Wakefield's letters, and 
explaining the extraordinary disclosures to which 
they referred ; also mentioning the other confir- 
matory testimony which he was about to obtain. 
He was not without hopes, that these circum- 



MATItDA. Ml 

.stances, when hinted in a circuitous manner to 
.Sir James'*s advisers, might make them anxious 
for the sake of his character, that the proceedings 
.for the divorce sliould have the precedence of 
these other discoveries, and should not appear 
contingent upon the loss of Lady Matilda's 
fortune. 

It was settled that Ormsby should, in the first 
instance, embark in a felucca for Genoa, and from 
thence should proceed to the Santelmo pro- 
perty? and endeavour to collect the best evidence 
of the marriage of the mother, and birth of 
twins, which the clue, furnished him by Mor- 
timer, might enable him to procure. He 
intended also, if possible, to see Santelmo him- 
self, before his return to Nice. 

If it would have been difficult to decide whose 
anguish was most acute at the moment of sepa- 
ration, there was little room for doubt with 
whom the exclusive influence of that feeling; 
would be most lasting. In all separations, doubly 
hard is the lot of that one who is left behind ; 
as change of scene does not more irresistibly tend 
on the one hand to weaken and obliterate at each 
repetition one constantly recurring regret, than, 
on the other hand, the identity and continuance 



35^ MATILDA. 

of all inanimate objects -around serve to sustain 
and cherish the recollection of that which is gone, 
and from which alone they derived their charm. 

But besides this, there were particular cir- 
cumstances in Matilda's situation which ren- 
dered constantly increasing the uneasy restless- 
ness caused by Ormsby's absence. In vain she 
attempted to distract her attention by the 
enjoyment of the beauties of nature, to which 
her mind had been always }3eculiarly alive, and 
which here abounded in every variety, even 
within the limits of her solitary rambles. Still 
tlie idea of Ormsby''s absence absorbed her whole 
soul.-—" He has then left me, and I am alone,**"* 
triumphed over every attempt to stifle it with 
other thoughts : — " Far, far different is my situa- 
tion from that of a virtuous wife, who, however 
with affectionate fondness she may regret the 
temporary absence of her husband, yet consoling 
herself witli the consciousness of the performance 
of her own domestic duties, looks forward with 
certainty to his stated return. But what right 
have I to indulge any such prospective security ? 
True, he left me with the protracted embrace of 
ardent affection, but 'with what confidence can I 
anticipate the undiminished v/armth of his feel- 



MATILDA. S5S 

iiigs on his return ? That he should desert me, 
I do not fear; his goodness of heart and liis 
honour will aUke prevent that ; yet, have I not 
cause to dread that absence? May not reflection 
conspire to remove the delusions of passion, and 
ms.y he not then see me such as 1 am, — a poor 
fallen guilty creature ? In vain would his kind- 
ness attempt to conceal suoh a consequence of our 
ill-starred separation ; quick as lightning could I 
detect the least diminution in his love, the con- 
sciousness of which would kill me ; and if my 
fears are well founded, all I hope is, that I may 
be spared the last pang of knowing that they 



.-^i-w mil ^n' 



oiatiife«' 



a54 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 



There is something peculiarly melancholy in 
the reflections excited by an Enghsh burial 
ground in a foreign land. The sight of so many 
whose career has been abruptly closed, even in 
the midst of a transitory tour of pleasure, fur- 
jiishes the aptest illustration of the uncertainty of 
pur worldly pilgrimage ; and the long list of those 
who, buoyed up by youth and hope, had vainly 
sought here a secure asylum from the attacks of 
a treacherous disease, shows the nullity of all 
human efforts to avoid the decrees of a Superior 
Power. Reason rejects the idea, that when the 
nobler part of man is relieved from " this flesh 
which walls about our life," the freed spirit should 
condescend to waste a thought on what part of 
the world dust to dust returns ; yet is it a weak- 
ness inseparable from our frail natures in their 
present imperfect state, that some of the noblest 
and best have been known to feel, even in their 
last moments, the keenest anxiety as to the fate 



MATILDA. S55 

of their remains; and the desire that we may 
repose with our fathers is so universal, that we 
cannot contemplate our countrymen's foreign 
cemetery without something of the compassion 
excited by a sentence of eternal exile. 

Matilda's state of mind inducing her rather to 
court than avoid sorrowful impression, she had 
often wandered in the English burial ground; 
and feeling as lost to society as any of those 
who reposed around, had occupied herself in 
deciphering the sculptured expressions of the 
world's esteem, which she had already forfeited, 
and the praises for the performance of those 
duties which she had abandoned. 

In one of these sad rambles, she somewhat 
abruptly met an English lady in deep moumingj 
who, as she passed, made a sort of doubtful 
attempt at recognition. At the moment, though 
iMatilda had some recollection of her face, she 
could not recall her name. The lady was 
not young, nor regularly handsome, but with 
a pleasing, though sorrowful expression of 
countenance, and a complexion of . unnatural 
fairness. After she had passed, Matilda sud- 
denly recovered the remembrance of who she 
was, and where she had seen her. " It is the 



$56 MATILDA. 

Mrs. Sydney, whom I met the year before my 
marriage, and with whom I was then particularly 
pleased. In spite of her melancholy manners, 
which, my uncle said, were intolerable in society, 
she was always reckoned such a pattern of every 
virtue, that even then, I felt awed in her com- 
pany ; and must I now be exposed daily to her 
reproving gaze ? I had but one comfort left-— 
that here, at least, I was perfecdy unknown, 
and unmolested in my solitude." 

These, and other reflections of the same de- 
scription, had, in the course of her next day's 
ramble, more than usually oppressed her ; and 
her harrassed spirit was relieving itself in tears, 
when her arm was gently touched, and turning 
round, she perceived Mrs. Sydney, who in a 
soothing tone addressed her, 

" We are here, Lady Matilda, the only living 
creatures who are known to each other. It 
were hard if we did not endeavour to mitigate 
our griefs by sharing them." 

Matilda was at first so overcome with the 
unexpected and unwonted kindness of this 
salutation, that she could not at once enter into 
that explanation, which she considered due to 
cne, whose notice of her she thought could only 



KATItDA. 0X* 

arise from an ignorance of her present situation. 
At last she faltered out :— -.vi mm .o^^tin'it'iy 

"I was, even when last we met, unw^orthy 
the notice of one so good as you ; but how in- 
finitely more so I have since become, if you have 
not heard, your goodness cannot conceive." 

'' Whatever I may have heard — what I see 
is — tliat you are unhappy ; — which is all that I 
will recollect: — for there can be no stronger 
bond of union than misery, to one who has led 
tiie life that I have done." 

' " Nay ; but still," said Matilda, " you can- 
not know all. Let me entreat you to guess the 
worst, and spare me the pain of explaining my 
present condition; for it is impossible that one 
whose notions (forgive me whilst I say it) were 
considered only too strict and rigid for the 
present forms of society, should knowingly stoop 
to associate with an outcast hke me. Even 
your spotless reputation might suffer from my 
contaminating touch." 

" I have no such fear," returned Mrs. Sydney; 
*' to successful vice — fashion never made me 
bov/ my head ; nor shall the world and its in- 
consistent censure now induce me to avoid one 
to whom I may be of service ; — a sinner, perhaps. 



S58 MATILDA. 

but I am sure not a hardened one," she added, 
pressing Matilda's hand, and looking kindly in 
her face, as she led her through a little gate into 
the garden which surrounded her villa. 

" Am I then, at last, to find a friend, and 
such a friend .?" said Matilda, much affected, as 
she returned the pressure of Mrs. Sydney's 
offered arm. 

" Think not," continued Mrs. Sydney, " in 
the contempt I expressed for the justice of the 
opinion of the world, that, however, in the per- 
formance of a duty, I might consent to endure 
it, I should ever have the idle Quixotism 
w^antonly to brave it. But I feel that I have 
stood its test in the most trying situation to 
which a woman can be exposed ; and I believe, 
many-tongued scandal never accused me even 
of levity.'' 

" Oh, no," replied Matilda, " I have always 
heard your correctness of conduct cited as 
unquestioned ; and that too, by those with whom 
such praise was not entirely unmixed with an 
attempt at ridicule." 

« Well, then," said Mrs. Sydney, " it is 
not now that I am to be deterred, by any over- 
anxiety about my own reputation, from en- 



MATILDA. 359 

deavouring to soothe and serve one in whom I 
am sure the sense of right is not destroyed: 
it is not now that I can hesitate in making the 
attempt to awaken a timely repentance ; when, 
having lost all that rendered life valuable, I 
have a consciousness, unmingled with regret, 
that I myself do but linger a moment longer on 
the verge of the grave." 

Matilda started at these mournful words. " 'Tis 
very true," quietly replied Mrs. Sydney ; " I 
feel it here," she added, touching her breast; 
" and you may trace it here," pointing to her 
cheek, in the brilliant hue of which, the hectic 
flush could not upon inspection be mistaken for 
the bloom of health. 

Matilda sighed ; for she could not deny the 
indications of her new friend's danger. 

" 'Tis no less true, that I have no cause to 
regi-et it. The only connexion which death has 
not already dissolved, is that which unkindness 
has interrupted and broken." 

" Were you then unhappy in your married 
life ?'' interrupted Matilda ; " was your's a con- 
strained union with one utterly un suited to 
you.?" 



S60 MATILDA. 

''• On the contrary," said her friend, " as much 
misery may sometimes be produced by yielding 
to the illusions of passion, as by attending ex- 
clusively to worldly views. — Mine >vas a love 
match. Mr. Sydney had all that could captivate 
a young and inexperienced girl ; but as a husband 
—he never was a kind one. — His temper was not 
proof against the constantly increasing difficulties 
of a straitened income, and his vanity could not 
withstand the artifices of one of the most de- 
signing of our sex. He left me for a wealthier 
and handsomer woman. Since then, cruel losses 
in my own family have made me an heiress ; and 
I liave placed at his disposal the principal part 
of that fortune I have acquired ; but, I have 
ceased even to wish for his society. Fondly 
attached to my family, I for some time enjoyed 
the calm consolation of their reciprocal affection ; 
but one by one, all that rendered life valuable, 
have been removed ; and I have been left alone 
in the world. — Oh, Lady Matilda, of the mani- 
fold afflictions to which human nature is exposed, 
there are few greater than being bcrn to see all 
those nearest and dearest to you fall successive 
victims to that cruel disease which, lurking in 



MATILDA. 361 

our frames, frequently under the outward show 
of health and beauty, delights most to prey on 
those whose youth and yet unblighted hopes made 
existence precious. I was born of a consumptive 
family ; from our excellent mother we inherited 
this fatal bane. We early lost her, — soon after 
my father (who was in the army,) was killed in 
the beginning of the French war. To my 
brother we v/ere all accustomed to look with 
mingled love and admiration, as our natural pro- 
tector. — He ^as a fine, ardent, high-spirited 
creature, with that sanguine temperament which 
is not an unusual concomitant of this disease. 
In the midst of the confident indulgence of pro- 
spective plans for us and for himself, he fell its 
first almost unconscious victim. Why should I 
pursue this subject farther ? My last and favorite 
sister, the one nearest my o"vvn age, but two 
months since was standing where you do now, 
eagerly anticipating our return to England. — 
When I m.et }^ou yesterday, I had been weeping 
over her grave.*" 

Mrs. Sydney paused to recover herself, and 
having made a strong effort to do so, continued : 
" You will perhaps think that selfishness was the 
actuating motive which induced me to obtrude 



862 MATILDA. 

myself upon you ; for in my lonely and djring 
state, what are the world and its prejudices to 
me, in comparison with the acquisition of a 
friend ? but if I hope to receive comfort, so do 
I also trust that it may be in my power likewise 
to impart some. — Forgive me, dear Lady Ma- 
tilda, when I say, that gladly welcoming as I do 
in you the evident symptoms of regret for past 
errors, I trust I may be enabled to lead your 
thoughts to that source which has been my true, 
constant, and only consolation in all my miseries ; 
and from whence comfort ma}^ be poured upon 
your sorrows, and blessings upon your repent- 
ance."" 

From this day Matilda and Mrs. Sydney be- 
came inseparable companions. Our heroine, so 
far from being distressed by the association with 
one who seemed to have so much reason for 
melancholy, gradually succeeded in attaining that 
calm composure which was the characteristic of 
her friend. — Her mind again became ahve to the 
beauties of nature, and she was induced again to 
avail herself of her pencil and sketch-book, in 
those pauses in their rambles which her own 
situation and the weakness of her friend rendered 
alike necessary to both. 



MATILDA. 363 

In the mean time her mind was reheved by 
hearing constantly from Ormsby of the successful 
progress of his inquiries relative to Santelmo ; 
and also by learning that the proceedings for the 
divorce had been commenced, and were going on 
without any fear of further delay. 



364 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Ormsby's absence had been unexpectedly pro- 
tracted, by the difficulty he had found in accumu- 
lating from so many different quarters, and in a 
foreign land, the conclusive proofs of Santelmo's 
birth, and in tracing his identity through the dif- 
ferent situations of his early hfe. But at length 
Matilda received from him the glad tidings that his 
disinterested labours had been brought to a suc- 
cessful termination, and that the evidence he had 
obtained was such as could not be resisted in any 
court of justice. He added, that, as the speediest 
mode of returning to her, he should embark in a 
felucca at Genoa, and again should have the 
inexpressible dehght of beholding her on the day 
immediately succeeding that in which she re- 
ceived the letter. In conclusion, he congratulated 
himself on the intelligence he had received from 
England, that Sir James Dornton's divorce bill 
had already passed one branch of the Legislature, 
and that, therefore, almost immediately upon his 



MATILDA. 



365 



return he should have it in his power to make her 
irrevocably his. 

"I am aware," said her friend, Mrs. Sydney, 
upon this intelligence being communicated to her, 
"I am aware that, in the minds of many excel- 
lent persons, very considerable doubts are en- 
tertained as to the propriety of these marriages ; 
but, in my humble opinion, it is contrary to the 
benevolent principles of our religion to place any 
one in a state of irreclaimable sin. Many I know 
of those who have been thus redeemed, have 
afterwards been irreproachable as wives and mo- 
thers ; and, in your particular case, I trust that 
the salutary interval of solitary repentance may 
have so chastened your mind, as that you will be 
properly prepared solemnly to undertake these 
new duties." Matilda bowed her head in humble 
acquiescence. 

The morning of the day on which Ormsby 
was expected was serene and brilliant ; it was one 
of those extraordinary efforts of nature, which, in 
that delicious climate, defying the calculations of 
the calendar, charm one with a feeling of sum- 
mer security even in the midst of winter. Ma- 
tilda had persuaded her friend to accompany her 
to the farther extremity of the terrace which 



S66 MATILDA. 

faces the sea ; and on the smooth and sunny 
horizon her eye had long been fixed, endeavouring 
to catch the first ghmpse of the expected vessel. 
But there was not, on all this wide expanse of 
waters, even one white wave to be seen which for 
a moment she could mistake for a shining sail. 
Still it was early, and the kind efforts of Mrs. 
Sydney to calm her impatience were for some 
time not entirely without success. Yet hour 
passed after hour, and still he came not. At 
length the sun, which had played on the rippled 
surface before them, had now retired in its daily 
course to glitter on the still snowy summit of the 
Alps behind them ; and the short hectic cough 
of Mrs. Sydney, which this cliilly change aggra- 
vated, reminded Matilda of the danger of indul- 
ging in the selfish pleasure of longer detaining her 
there. She insisted, therefore, on her imme- 
diately leaving her, and returning home. 

When deprived of her companion, Matilda's 
impatience, of course, increased. " With so fair 
a wind," she thought, " he might have been here 
before now." As she uttered these words, she 
started at a sudden gust which, rustling in the 
fallen leaves, carried them before her in a sort 
of whirlwind, to a considerable distance. In her 



MATILDA. 



367 



present state of nervous excitement, even so 
triflins: an incident for a moment checked that 
bounding sense of happiness which she had pre- 
viously in vain endeavoured to repress, though 
her reproving conscience told her, that the plea- 
sure she anticipated was a forbidden and guilty 
one. But this transitory uneasiness again sub- 
sided with the momentary agitation of the passing 
breeze which caused it; and yet a little while 
she indulged the unbroken hope of the expected 
meeting. 

Left alone to revel uninterruptedly in the en- 
joyment of her excited feelings, she now eagerly 
sought a remote promontory, from which she 
thought she might command a more distant 
prospect of the course he must come. But when 
at length she did reach that point, wide and wild 
enough was the scene that met her view, yet far dif- 
ferent from that which she had fondly anticipated. 

Those alone who have actually experienced the 
awful manner in which, without the least warn- 
ing of impending danger, tremendous squalls sud- 
denly burst upon the Mediterranean, can form 
any adequate idea of the almost miraculous change 
which now took place in the appearance of all 



368 MATILDA. 

things around, and of the accumulating horrori!^ 
which abruptly presented themselves to the anxi- 
ous eyes of our heroine. Heavy rolling clouds 
were collecting on all sides — their darkness and 
gloom aggravated by the struggling rays of the 
setting sun, which were making a last effort to 
pierce through their increasing density. 

As she reached the rock she had so anxiously 
sought, the extensive waste of waters were still 
discernible, yet not, as an hour since, just rippling 
their otherwise unbroken surface, but " curling 
their monstrous heads'" to meet the lowering 
vapours from above. For a moment she stood 
rooted to the spot, unmoved even by the violence 
of the gale, which blew with peculiar force around 
the point. A cold chill ran through her veins. 
Even as suddenly as the outward appearance of 
all around had been sadly changed, the fond 
hopes she had so lately cherished yielded to an 
overwhelming sense of impending evil. The low 
hollow murmur of distant thunder lingered like 
the knoll of death upon her ear. She pressed 
her hands upon her breast, and rushed wildly 
down upon the beach. Utterly unconscious was 
she how long, with feelings of mental agony far 



MATILDA. 369 

superior to any sense of personal suffering, she 
wandered in the neighbourhood of that dreary 
point. 

It was only in the aggravation of her fears for 
him in whom self was utterly absorbed, that she 
felt the pelting rain which drenched her light gar- 
ments; it was only as it impeded her clearer 
view of the boundless ocean, that she regarded 
the heavy spray which dashed unceasingly against 
her delicate frame. But it was no fleeting form 
assumed by the ever-varying spray, — it was no 
fancied creation of her troubled spirit, when, 
almost within reach of the shore, rising upon the 
darkness before her, a light sail met her eye. One 
moment she caught it, as waving wildly in the 
wind, it flapped heavily over the heads of those 
from whose controul it had broken. It was but 
a moment, and the last appalUng scream of 
human misery struck upon her ear, as it swept 
sadly by— mingled A\ith the howhng of the tem- 
pest. 

Those whose career had been thus abruptly 
closed, were not more unconscious of all that fol- 
lowed the harrowing sound of their expiring 
agonies, than was the poor sufferer who had been 
fated to witness them ; for almost lifeless, drenched 
r5 



370 MATILDA, 

with the rain, and her arms outstretched towards 
the sea, extended upon the beach, the unfortu- 
nate lady was found by her anxious friend, — who 
had till now in vain sought her from the begin- 
ning of the storm, which she knew was so calcu- 
lated to excite her well-grounded fears for the 
safety of one on whom her whole happiness 
depended. 

It was with the greatest difficulty that when 
assistance had been procured, Matilda could be 
prevailed upon to quit the spot on which she 
had been found. Her senses had suffered from 
the shock she had experienced ; and they were 
only partially restored, to endure the pangs of a 
premature labour. Long and doubtful was the 
struggle ; and it was late in the following day, 
when the almost unconscious mother strained to 
her broken heart a female child, whose untimely 
birth and delicate appearance did not promise a 
longer continuance of life, than could be hoped 
for its evidently dying mother. 



371 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



On the morning on which, as Ormsby had 
announced to Matilda, he intended to embark at 
Genoa, he received a letter from his mother; 
with whom, during his inquiries concerning Sant- 
elmo, he had been in constant communication. 
She wrote to inform him that she had arrived 
with her daughter and Santelmo at Turin, — that 
she felt unequal to a longer journey at present, 
but that she was very anxious to see him. This 
had determined him to alter his plans, and to 
proceed at first to Turin, and thence by the Col 
de Tende to Nice ; determining that no unneces- 
sary delay should interpose to prevent his imme- 
diate return to Matilda, and hoping that by 
using extraordinary dispatch in travelling, and 
only allowing one day for the arrangement of 
every thing with his family at Turin, he mi^ht, 
from the greater certainty of land conveyance, 
still arrive at Nice as soon as he could have done 
in the manner he had intended. 



37^ MATILDA. 

Though in this he had been disappointed, and 
had been obliged to submit to a day's delay, yet 
his kindness of heart had in part reconciled him 
to it, by the happiness it had enabled him to 
confer on others. 

He had succeeded in arranging every thing for 
the immediate marriage of Santelmo and Emily ; 
and it had been settled that when that event 
should have removed the only obstacle to it. 
Lady Ormsby should follow him, to be present 
at the time of Lady Matilda's confinement. At 
Turin he had also received the account of the 
divorce bill having finally passed the Legislature ; 
so that the pleasure he anticipated from again 
beholding Matilda was enhanced by all the agree- 
able intelligence with which he should have it in 
his power to cheer her. 

After he had descended the last hill into the 
valley of the Var, he could not help looking out 
in expectation that she might have come thus far 
to meet him, — forgetting that he had led her to 
expect his arrival from quite a different quarter. 

Before the carriage had reached the villa, his 
eager eye had sought her well-remembered win- 
dows. — " Good God ! they are closed ! What 
can it mean ? " he cried, as, rushing to the door, 



MATILDA. 373 

he there was met by Mrs. Sydney, with whom 
he was previously unacquainted, but whose face 
of anxiety seemed to confirm his worst fears. 
His heart sickened with vague apprehensions; 
and faltering out the name of Matilda, he at- 
tempted to pass at once to her room. Mrs. 
Sydney gently detained him ; — saying, " Thank 
God, you are come ; but welcome as it is, it must 
be broken gently, and by degrees to her ; every 
thing depends upon your not appearing too sud- 
denly." 

" For heaven's sake," cried Ormsby, " torture 
me no longer. What has happened to my Ma- 
tilda ?" And overpowered by the sudden revul- 
sion of feeling, he sank into a chair, and covering 
his face with his hands, sobbed like an infant. 

" Let me entreat you to calm yourself," said 
Mrs. Sidney. *' Lady Matilda is better now — 
rather better. If you are already so overcome, 
how will you ever bear to see her ?^'* 

" See her !" exclaimed Ormsby, starting up, 
" this moment will I see her ! Fool that I was, 
to linger here and lose another instant of her loved 
presence ! Nay, in pity tell me then the worst 
at once. What has happened?" added he, as 
Mrs. Sydney again laid her hand upon his arm 



374 MATILDA. 

to draw him back. Many were the interrup- 
tions Mrs: Sydney experienced, and agonizing 
were the sufferings of Lord Ormsby, as the sad 
tale of the night before was gradually disclosed 
to him. Yet even in these moments of intense 
suffering, his generous mind was susceptible of a 
grateful feeling for the genuine kindness displayed 
by Mrs. Sydney. How does sorrow at once 
excite affection for those who share it with us ! 

" Generous, excellent friend that you have 
been," said Ormsby. '' Leave me— return to my 
Matilda — tell her that her poor Ormsby lives, 
and is restored to her. — Oh that, indeed, the 
bottomless ocean had engulphed me — ^'twould 

have been merciful if but it cannot be — she 

is young and healthy — she will recover — say that 
you think she will." 

Mrs. Sydney pressed his hand mournfully, 
and anxious to give a new direction to a mind 
that seemed almost maddened with the bewil- 
dering emotions of the morning, she pointed to 
the bed at the further end of the room, where 
the little infant lay sleeping. 

" My poor child," he cried, " what a wel- 
come have I given thee on thy first arrival in this 
world of sorrows ! Heaven preserve thee from 



MAtiLIJA. 3^75 

that misery, which, much I fear, must be thy too 
sure inheritance !" 

When Mrs. Sydney entered Lady Matilda's 
room, she found her supported by pillows in her 
bed — the windows opened wide — ^her beautiful 
hands clasped as in prayer — and the big tears 
chasing each other down her colourless cheek. 

" Dearest friend," she said, " I have been 
very — very faint — but soon I shall meet my love 
again. I feel it here," pressing her breast, — 
" and most grateful to my heart is the sensa- 
tion of death. Nay, look not so — for I shall see 
him — God is merciful — a broken and a contrite 
spirit will he not reject." 

" Dearest Lady Matilda," interrupted her 
friend, " do not give way to these agitating anti- 
cipations of death. I know there is no cause 
for alarm. But Lord Ormsby you will see, and 
that soon." 

" He's here — he's alive — he is not lost — I read 
it in your eyes. — Ormsby, my love — Oh my God, 
let me live to see him again !" cried Matilda, 
as, exhausted by the effort, she sunk fainting on 
the pillow. 

It was in Ormsby's arms that she was restored 
to consciousness ; it was from his trembling 



876 MATILDA. 

hands that she received the restoratives her 
weakened frame required ; and even the stern, 
relentless hand of death was for a moment stayed 
by the renewed energies that strongest of human 
passions inspired; and for a time nothing was 
felt save the all-engrossing happiness of their 
re-union. 

" My child — our child — -Ormsby, have you 
seen it ?" said Matilda, as Mrs. Sydney placed 
the infant by its mother's side. 

" Dearest child !" said Ormsby, kissing it, — 
" Oh my Matilda, what a treasure it will be to 
us ! how will our happiness grow with its 
growth." 

" Our happiness ! — Oh Ormsby — give me air 
— I am very faint — ^but do not leave me." 

" Leave you ! — Oh that I had never left you 
for one moment ! — ^liow could any thing persuade 
me to tear myself one instant away from my only 
treasure ?" 

" Say not so — Do not now repine, my love — 
I trust that good has come out of this evil — 
Ormsby, I feel that I am more fit to die, — nay, start 
not. — Had I basked ever in the sunshine of thy 
presence, many sad and salutary reflections had 
been withered and lost. Then think of the dear 



% 



MATILDA. STt 

Emily — her well-merited happiness is cheaply 
purchased even by death." 

" Is there no advice?" said Ormsby; "pray 
compose yourself — you wear your gentle frame — 
these emotions are too much for you." Ormsby 
said true. — She was now utterly exhausted ; but 
it was not with the pleasurable emotions she had 
experienced only too late. If any thing could 
have prolonged her fleeting existence^, it would 
have been the happiness she now enjoyed. But 
her spirit was fluttering on the verge of eternity, 
and a few hours must see it wing its inevitable 
flight. 

" And is there then no perfect love in this 
world ?"" sighed Mrs. Sydney; "must these dear 
ones part, just when they might in innocence 
have together lived to repent their past trans- 
gressions ? But thy will be done ! — Oh that 
instead — a being so sad and lonely as myself had 
been fated to leave them behind me !" 

There were moments during the remainder of 
the evening when Matilda''s eye shone so bril- 
liantly, and her voice sounded so sweetly, that 
Ormsby and Mrs. Sydney almost indulged a hope 
that she might be spared to them ; but the 
medical man conceived it his duty at once to 



378 MATILDA. 

check such vain and fruitless expectation. He 
solemnly assured them that she could hardly live 
through the night, and that he much feared 
the child too could not survive. 

Matilda overheard, in part, this opinion ; and 
pressing the unconscious infant to her breast, 
she exclaimed, " Oh ! 'tis too much to hope, 
even from infinite mercy, that my sins may so 
far be pardoned that I may be rendered even as 
this innocent."" 

" Nay," said Mrs. Sydney, " remember with 
confidence, that the same Divine authority from 
which we learn, that of such is the kingdom of 
Heaven, tells us that there is even more joy over 
one sinner that repenteth." 

Through all that wretched night, Matilda's 
life was only prolonged by the constant circula- 
tion of air through the apartment, and as the 
darkness and damp gradually dispersed, the 
shades of death seemed to gather and thicken 
around her devoted head. The refreshing fra- 
grance of earliest morning played in vain about 
her livid lips, just struggling to emit the last 
mortal breath that would ever mingle with the 
rival sweetness of the air. The first rays of the 
rising sun shone unseen upon her glassy eye, 



MATILDA. 3T9 

about to close for ever against the reviving light 
of day, — it closed — and the sufferer and her 
sufferings were no more. 

When Ormsby awoke from the stupor of 
despair to the full sense of his utter desolation, 
he found that his helpless infant had also closed 
its ephemeral existence, and that he was thus 
utterly bereaved at once of every outward trace, 
of every living record of his late guilty con- 
nexion. 

After a time, he sought some relief to his 
feelings in active service in the cause of the 
Greeks ; but even in the most eventful moments 
of his after-life, that would sometimes obtrude 
itself, which was never absent from his solitary 
pillow, — the image of his poor Matilda, as, 
heart-broken and repentant, he had seen her 
on the evening preceding the fatal catastrophe 
which had left him alone in the world. 



TINIS. 



Printed by J. Brettell, 
Rupert Street, Haymarket, London, 
